**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 3073 (1967): Assessment of Surface Roughness [PGD 25: 
Engineering Metrology] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 3073 - 1967 
(RMfflrmtd 1996) 

Indian Standard reaffirmed 



ASSESSMENT OF SURFACE ROUGHNESS 



MAR 2006 



Ninth Reprint NOVEMBER 2000 
( Inoorpondng Ameadneatt No. 1, 2 and 3 ) 



UDC 620.179.118 : 539.211 



O Cof^lght 1981 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 7 February 1968 



IS 1 3073 -1967 

Indian Standard 

ASSESSMENT OF SURFACE ROUGHNESS 

Engineering Metrology Sectional Committee, EDC 43 

Chairman 

Dr K. N. Mathi-r 
National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 

Members Representing 

Coi. V. P. Bajaj Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri S. N. Adhikari ( Alternate) 
SiiRi R. S. BiR Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri M. Ranoashai {Alternate) 
Shri H. Bulorin Motoi Industries Co Ltd, Bangalore 

SiiRi P. S. Sankralingam ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Chamarajan Jyoti Ltd, Caroda 

Shri A. I). Ghate Poona Gauge and Tool Co, Poona 

Shri A. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri S. P. Goyal Indian Enginecrinc^ Association, Calcutta 

Shri L B. Guha Jay Engineering \Vork$ Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri B. N. Gcpta Engineering Association of India, Calcutta 

Shri P. N. Gitta Heavy Machine Building Plant, Heavy Enginecrina 

Corporation Ltd, Ranchi 
Shri M. P. Klmaraswamy Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 

(CSIR), Durgapur 

Shri R. V. Ramachandran ( Alternate ) 
Shri Pren: Prak\sh National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri P. C. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. D. Puri Central Scientific Instruments Organization 

(CSIR), New Delhi 
Shri K. Raohunathan Ministry of Railways 

Dr a. Ramachandran Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 

Shri R. Krmhnan ( AllernaU ) 
Shri S. Ramachandran Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. Ramajayam Ex-Ccll-O India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. B. Salunke The Accurate Engineering Co (P) Ltd, Poona 

Shri W. H. Siddiqi The Praga Tools Ltd, Secunderabad 

Shri D. R. Narayana ( Alternate ) 
Shri C« R. Sonalkar Indian Machine Tool Manufacturers* Association, 

Bombay 
Shri M. V. Patankar, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member) 

Director ( Mech Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. Chandrasekharan 

Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ), ISI 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 110002 



ISi 3073. 1967 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Surface Roughness Subcommittee, EDO 43 : 4 

Convener Rrpresenting 

Shri Prem Prakash National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Msmhers 

Shri P. C. Jain ( AltemaU to 
Shri Prem Prakash ) 
Shri R. S. Bir Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri M. Rang ash ai ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. Bulgrtn Motor Industries Co Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri P. S. Sankaralingam ( Alternate ) 
Shri L B. Guha Jay Engineering Works Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri P. N. Gupta Heavy Machine Building Plant, Heavy Engineering 

Corporation Ltd, Ranchi 
Dr a. Ramachanoran Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 

Shri V. Venkataraman Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Durgapur 
Shri M. P. Kumaraswamy ( Alternate ) 



ISi3073-1967 

Indian Standard 

ASSESSMENT OF SURFACE ROUGHNESS 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 22 September 1967, after the draft finalized by the Engineering 
Metrology Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

0«2 There are various methods of evaluating the roughness of a surface, out 
of which the most prominent ones today are the ' M ' and the ' E * systemi^i 
The * M ' system, also known as the Centre Line Average Method (CLA) 
or the Mean Line System, expresses the arithmetical average departure of 
the actual surface both above and below a mean line, within a specified 
sampling length, and in a plane substantially normal to the direction of the 
surface. Tt\is system was developed and is used in U.K. A similar system, 
based on the mean line but expressing the departure of the actual surface as a 
root mean squared (rms value ) was in use in USA; but this has been dis* 
carded now in favour of CLA value. 

0.3 The ' E ' system also known as the envelope method, has been developed 
in Germany and is, of late, being increasingly used. This system expresses 
the arithmetical average departure of a surface both above and below a 

* mean ' curve. This mean curve is developed from what is known as a 
' contacting envelope ' by displacing it to a position where the areas enclosed 
by the profile above and below the mean curve are equal. The contacting 
envelope, in its turn, is obtained by rolling across the surface a sphere, with a 
radius * r ' which is normally 25 mm. The locus of centre for this circle is 
displaced towards the surface by an amount equivalent to ' r *. This curve 
now obtained is called the ' contacting envelope \ 

0.4 The '*M ' system is a more useful and a satisfactory means of controlling, 
at the point of production, the consbtency of results from a process when the 
production parameters have been established. However, the * M ' 
system has a limitation that it is unable to control the functional qualification 
of a surface when associated with a machine process. On the other hand, the 

* E * system is more easily applied to the surface finish instruments based on 
the interference type and also the definition of the ' E ' system peak to peak 
measure is superior to the ' M * system. 

0.5 Although it is quite possible that the * E ' system will be more widely 
accepted in the foreseeable future, the Sectional Committee responsible for 



18:3073-1967 

the standard decided to adopt the * M ' system for the following reasons: 

a) The * M ' system is fairly widely used and all the instruments 
for measuring surface roughness available in the country are 
designed to measure in this system. 

b) The *F/ system is still in its early stage of development and allhough 
a few designs of instruments for evaluating the parameter defined 
in the * E ' system have been developed, the measuring instruments 
dcsinged for ' E ' system are not as easily available as the corres- 
ponding instruments in * M ' system. 

0.6 The objects of this standard are to provide, firstly a defined basis for a 
simple numerical assessment of the roughness of a surface under conditions 
which will ensure reasonable consistency between the results obtained from 
different instruments designed to measure the same characteristics of the 
surface, and secondly a series of recommendations which it is expected may 
help in preventing undesirable growth of conflicting practices in the use of 
terms. 

0.7 This standard, being based on the * M ' system, gives the preferred 

* /^a * values for specifying surface roughness. I'his value is very useful for 
comparison of various surfaces obtained by similar operations but this value 
does not indicate the limits of irregularity. The peak to valley value 

* Ihux' is recognized as the most direct of all surface roughness values and 
is perceived by looking at the profile and by touching the surface. The 

* ^Afax ' value is useful in identifying surfaces for comparison and record 
purposes. However, in view of there being no hxed relation between * /?« ' 
and * Rmox * values, provision for specifying * /?A/«f* ' values in drawing has 
been excluded from this standard. 

0.8 This standard lays down the essential information which shall be 
provided in statements relating to surface roughness but, being primarily 
concerned with the evaluation of surfaces, the requirements by which 
surface roughness is to be indicated arc excluded. This standard neither 
attempts to define what degrees of surface imperfections are acceptable for 
any specific purpose, nor it is concerned with the other surface qualities, such 
as lustre, appearance, colour, corrosion resistance, wear resistance, hardness, 
and absorption characteristics, any of which may be governing considera- 
tions in specific applications. 

0.9 It shall be realised that investigations are still being conducted in the 
field of the surface roughness and there is yet limited surface phenomena in 
engineering prdctice. For this reason, the present standard has been ex- 
pressed in simple terms to serve an immediately useful purpose. 

0.10 Recojinizing that many of the users of this standard are not directly 
concen\ed wiih the more academic aspects of the subject, this standard is 
devoted exclusively to mandatory and innnediately essential requirements* 



IS: 3073 -1967 

General information and guidance on surface roughness assessment is given 
in Appendix A. The user who is not well coversant with the subject is 
advised that there are limitations in making numerical evaluations of 
surface characteristics and it is recommended that a careful study of 
Appendix A be made before putting this standard into practice. 

0.11 While preparing this standard assistance has been derived from: 

Draft ISO Recommendation No. 221 Surface roughess. International 
Organization for Standardization. 

B.S. 1134-1961 Centre-line-average height method for the assessment 
of surface texture. British Standards Institution. 

0.12 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS: 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1,1 This standard relates to: 

a) terminology and parameters to be employed in statements relating 
to surface roughness, 

b) preferred values of surface roughness for grading of surfaces, 

c) standard sampling lengths to be used in graphical procedure and 
instrument construction, 

d) instruments and methods to be employed in the quantitative 
assessment of surface roughness, and 

e) information to be given in statements relating to surface roughness 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following terms and definitions 
shall apply. 

2.1 Real Surface — Surface limiting the body, separating it from the 
surrounding space. 

2.2 Geometrical Surface — Surface prescribed by the design or by the 
process of manufacture, neglecting errors of form and surt.ice rinij;hnoss. 

2.3 Effective Surface — Close representation of a real siii faee obtained 
by instrumental means ( Fig. 1 ). 

^Rulei for rounding off numerical values ( revited ). 

5 



IS:3073-19€7 



ROUGHNESS 
SPACING 




SECONDARY TEXTURE (WAVINESS) 

LAY( DIRECTION OF DOMINANT PATTERN) 



PRIMARY TEXTURE 
(ROUGHNESS) 



PROFILE 



WAVINESS SPACING 



GEOMETRICAL 
SURFACE 



GEOMETRICAL 
PROFILE 




-EFFECTIVE PROFILE 
Fio. 1 Surface Characteristics 



2*4 Surface Roaghness — All those irregularities which form surface 
relief and which are conventionally defined within the area where deviations 
of form and waviness are eliminated. 

2.4.1 Primary Texture ( Roughness ) — The irregularities in the surface 
roughness which result from the inherent action of the production process. 
These are deemed to include traverse feedmarks and the irregularities with- 
in them ( see Fig. 1 and 2 ). 




m^m^Hi^f^^^ii^ 



PRIMARY TEXTURE (ROUGHNESS) A 
SECONDARY TEXTURE (wavincss) B 



ERROR OF FORM C 

Fio. 2 Surface Texture Representing the Combined Effects of 

Several Causes 



2.4.2 Secondary Texture ( Waviness ) — The component of surface rough- 
ness upon yhich roughness is superimposed. Waviness may result from such 
factors as machine or work deflections, vibrations, chatter, heat treatment or 
warping strains ( see Fig. 1 and 2 ). 

2.5 Real Profile — Contour that results from section of the real surface 
by a plane defined with respect to the geometrical surface. The plane 
sectioning geometrical surface may meet the plane at an angle a which may 
have any value up to 90*. 

2.6 Geon&etricml Profile — Contour that results from section of the 
geometrical surface by a plane defined with respect to this surface. The 
plane sectioning geometrical surface may meet the plane at an angle a which 
may have any value up to 90*. 

2.7 Effective Profile — Contour that results from section of the effective 
surface by a plane defined with respect to the geometrical surface. The 
plane sectioning geometrical surface may meet the plane at an angle a which 
may have any value up to 90*. 

2.8 Reference Line — A line chosen by convention to serve for the 
quantitative evaluation of the effective profile. 

2.9 Lay — The direction of the predominant surface pattern, ordinarily 
determined by the production method used ( see Fig. 1 and 7 ). 

2.10 Traversing Length — Length of the profile necessary for the evalua- 
tion of the surface roughness parameters. 

NoTi — The travening length may iackide one or more lampling lengths. 



IS : 3073 - 1967 

2.1^1 Sampling Length, I — Length of profile necessary for the evaluation 
of the irregularities to be taken into account ( see Fig. 3 ). This is measured 
in a direction parallel to the general direction of the profile. This is also 
called the ' Instrument Cut-Off* in regard to measuring instruments. 




/ ^ Sampling length 
m s= Mean line 
p =» Effective profile 
RMax = Maximum height of irregularity 

Fio. 3 Sampling Length 



2.12 Spacing of the Irregularities — Mean distance between the more 
prominent irregularities of the effective profile, within the sampling length. 

2.13 Mean Line of the Profile, m — Line having the form of the geometri- 
cal profile and dividing the effective profile so that within the sampling 

length the sum of the squares of distances ( T^, T2 Tn) betwe n effective 

profile points and the mean line is a minimum ( see Fig. 3 ). 

* 

2.14 Centre Line of the Profile — The line parallel to the general direc- 
tion of the profile for which the areas embraced by the profile above and 
below the line arc equal. When the wave form is repetitive, the mean 
line and the centre line are equivalent. 

Note — The difftTcncc between * Mean Line * and * Centre Line ' is always present in 
the casr of practical investigations, because true repetitiveness does not rcsuh even from 
the most carefully controlled manufacturing process which, in theory, should produce a 
repetitive pattern ( for example, turning). In view of its insignificance in relation to 
other errors of measurement of surface geometry by index, the nuan line and the centre 
line may be considered to be equivalent for practical purposes. 

8 



istSMs-itfy 

2.15 ArithmeticAl Mean Deviadoa from the Mean Uae of Ike 

Profile, /?, — Average value of the ordinatcs ( r„ T^ T^) from the 

mean line {see Fig, 3). 

The ordinates are summed without considering their algebraic signi: 
Approximately: 



where n is the number of divisions over the sampling length /. 

2.16 Ten Point Height of Irregalaritiee, /?,— Average difTcrcncc between 
the five highest peaks and the five deepest valleys within the sampling 
length measured from a line, parallel to the mean line and not crossing the 
profile {see Fig. 4). 



R MAX 




Fio. 4 Ten-Point Height Assessment op iRREOULARrriES 

247 Maximnm Height of Irregnlarity, Rmu — Distance between two 
lines parallel to the mean line and touching the profile at the highest and 
lowest points within the sampling length ( see Fig. 3 and 4 ). 

S. PREFERRED VALUES FOR R^. /t. AND SAMPLING LENGTHS 

3.1 The preferred values for R^ and Rn shall be selected from Tables 1 
and 2. 



3.2 SaaapUng Length — For mftasuring surface roughness, the value of 
the sampling length / shall be seler.tf d from the following scries: 

0-08, 0-25, 0-8, 2-5, 8, 10 and 25 mm. 



Btson-itfy 



TABLE 1 ARITHMEIIGAL MEAN DEVUTION it., i^in 
(Ooitftll) 



0-025 

005 

01 

0-2 

0-4 

0*8 



1-6 
3-2 
6-3 

12-5 

25 



TABLE 2 TEN POINT HEIGHT OF IRIIEGULARITIES A., Fm 

{CUuutSA) 

005 0-4 3-2 25 

01 0-8 6-3 50 

0-2 1*6 12-5 100 

3.3 Selection of Sampling Lengths — Sampling lengths suitable for 
difiercnt types of machined surface are given in Table 3, and for non- 
machined surface in Table 4. Where a range of value is given, the shorter 
value will generally be suitable for the finer and the longer for the coarser 
grade of a given process. 



TABLE 3 



SUITABLE SAMPLING LENGTHS FOR VARIOUS 
MACHINING SURFACES 



Process 



Suitable Sampling Lbnqths, mm 



Milling 


_ 


__ 


0-8 


2-5 


8 


10 


^ 


Boring 


— 


— 


0-8 


2-5 


8 


10 


— 


Turning 


^^ 


— 


0-8 


2-5 


— 


— 


— 


Grinding 


— 


0-25 


0-8 


2-5 


m^ 


-. 


-i^ 


Planing 


— 


— 


— 


2-5. 


8 


10 


25 


Reaming 


— 


— 


0-8 


2-5 


— 


— 


— 


Broaching 


— 


— 


0-8 


— 


-j- 


— 


. — 


Diamond boring 





0-25 


08 


» 


.^ 


.» 


.^ 


Diamond turning 


.— 


0-25 


O'B 





-. 





_ 


Honing 


00 


0-2.^ 


oa 


— 


— 


— 


*— 


Lapping 


GO 


0-2-> 


00 


— 


— 


— 


— 


Supcrfmishing 


0-8 


0-25 


0-8 


— 


..^ 


-. 


.. 


Btifling 


— 


— 


00 


2-5 


— 


— 


.— . 


Polishing 


— 


— 


0« 


2-5 


— 


— 





Shaping 


— . 


— 


0-3 


2-5 


8 


10 


.«« 


Spark machining 


~ 


""" 


0-8 


_ 


■■" 


— — . 


■~ 



10 



ISs3073-lM7 



rjmM% SUITABLE SAMPLING LENGTHS FOR TYnCAL 
NON4MACHINED SURFACES 

(antff3.3) 



Sampling Lengths, mm 



SumniiiK 

Drawing 

Extrusion 

Moulding 

Clcctro-poUshing 



0-8 


2-5 


0-8 


2-5 


0-8 


2-5 


08 


2-5 


0-8 


2-5 



4. DETERMINATION OF H. 

4.1 The Aji values are preferably determined as mean results from the 
measurement of several sampling lengths taken consecutively along the 
profile. These may be determined graphically in accordance with 4.2 
or by direct reading instruments (iw 5.1.3). The direction in which the 
measurement is made should, in general, be approximately at right angles 
to the ' lay ' if the surface texture has a directional quality ( see Fig. 1 ). 

4*2 GmpUcal Determiaatioii ofR^ Values — The following procedure 
shall be observed in determining R^ values from graphical recordings. 
It will be assumed for the moment that the surface is nominally flat, 
and that the record is produced in rectilinear co-ordinates in which a 
truly flat surface is represented as a straight line. It is necessary to first 
determine the mean line of each successive sampling length of the record, 
(lit Fig. 5). 




Fio. 5 Dbtbricination of thb Centre Line Avbraob 
FROM A Trace 

4.2.1 Any straight line XX is drawn parallel to the general course 
of the record oVer the sampling length. The direction, but not the actual 



II 



IS 1 3073 -1967 

position of this line can usually be determined with sufficient accuracy by 
the eye. Where the texture has a distinguishable periodicity, the sampling 
length shall be a whole number of wavelengths, even though this may not be 
a standard sampling length. The sum of all the areas pi, p^y etc, and ^i, 
78, etc, arc then determined cither by measuring ordinates or by the use of 
a planimctcr, throughout the chosen sampling length, and the algebraic 
sums of these areas are calculated and divided by L: 



7 — sum of areas p — sum of areas q 



4.2.2 The resulting value gives the distance between the line XX 
and the required centre line YT which can be drawn parallel to XX, 
The sums of the areas r„ r^ etc, will then be equal to the sum of the areas 
J,, J,, etc. Lastly, the arithmetical sum of all the areas r and s is determined, 
and 

, __ sum of areas r -f sum of areas s 1 OO P 
^^ L ^ "NT 

gives the value of /f which is the /?. value expressed in microns where r,, 
In , ^1,^2 , etc, are expressed in square millimetres; L = the repre- 
sentation of the sampling length, in millimetres, as measured on the record; 
and M = the vertical magnification of the record. 

4.2.3 If the profile under examination is not nominally straight, or if the 
nature of the recording instrument is such that the record is produced on a 
curved base line, the j^. value could still be determined, by a similar proce- 
dure, in relating to a mean line of appropriate curvature or alternatively by 
first developing the record so that the base line is straightened. Some 
instruments, when operating on a curved surface under appropriate condi- 
tions, will produce records in which the nominally curved base line is 
automatically straightened. In other cases, profile records may be made on 
plastic replicas taken from curved surfaces and flattened out ( set A-7 )• 

4.2.4 Some recording instruments operate in such a way that the recording 
pen moves not in a straight line, but in an arc of a circle. This slightly 
distorts the geometry of the record but docs not affect the determination of 
the Aft value, which could still be carried out in the manner mentioned 
above. 

5. INSTRUMENTS 

5.1 Measuring instruments of the stylus type employed for the determina- 
tion of surface roughness shall comply with the following requirements. 

S.1.1 Stylus — For graphical recording instruments, a stylus having a 
nominal tipped radius of 0*003 mm may be used. For the determination 
of A« values, with direct reading instruments, a stylus tip with a nominal 

12 



ISt3073.1967 

radius of 0*012 5 mm be used. The variation in the tip radius of the stylus 
shall be within 30 percent of its nominal dimension or 0*003 mm whichever 
is greater. 

The shank may be conical or pyramidal, and in either case the 
included angle of the cone shall not exceed 90*. 

The maximum force between a stylus and a surface under test shall not 
exceed that given by the following: 

Maximum force ( grams ) =0*016 X (tip radius in microns )^ 

5.1.2 Skid — If a single skid is employed, its radius in the direction of the 
traverse shall be not less than 50 times the sampling length. If two opera- 
tive skids as shown in Fig. 19 are used, their radii shall be not less than 
8 times the sampling length. 

5.1.3 Electrical Integrating Instruments — Electrical integrating instruments 
giving direct scale-and-pointer indications of /?» values take, in effect, an 
automatic average over a succession of sampling lengths determined by the 
cut-off of the instrument. 

5.1.3.1 Circuit construction — Instruments of the electrical type shall 
be constructed so that the speed of traverse divided by the frequency cut-off 
is equal to one of the standard sampling lengths given in 3.2. More detailed 
information is given in Appendix A. 

5.1.3.2 Transmission characteristics — It should be noted that at the 
ends of the cut-off range, the transmission does not fall to zero abruptly 
but falls off gradually. The cut-off shall be assessed at between 70 and 
80 percent of the maximum transmission as shown in Fig. 6. 

The preferred rate of attenuation shall be equivalent to that produced 
by two RC networks with equal time constants in series. This describes 
a system in which the straight part of the attenuation curve has a maximum 
slope of 12 dB per octave. 

6. STATEMENTS OF SURFACE ROUGHNESS 

6.1 The following information shall be given in statements relating to 
surface roughness. 

6.1.1 Surface Roughness Values — These shall normally be expressed as the 
/2a value in microns ( (Am ). If a single /{« value is stated it is understood 
that work with any R^ value from zero to that stated is acceptable. 

6.1.2 Limiting Values — When both minimum and maximum R^, values 
need to be specified these shall be expressed as follows: 

Example: 

R; ,«:g or alternatively - /?. 8-0 - 16*0 

6.1.3 Sampling Length ( Instrument Cut-Off) —The sampling length shall 
be indicated in parenthesis following the roughness value. 

Example: 

/?, 8-0 ( 2-5 > 

13 



ISt3l 

100 


»73. 


1967 


























" fev 


'^ 


1^ 




'^^ 










OB 








x^. 




\ 


^. 


\V 










1 








V^ 






\). 


Y> 










^ao 








\ 


^ 




%>. 


, X 


^ 








«A 








> 


^ 




i 




/\ 




--. 




VI 










V^ 




\ 


^^ 


V^ 








1- 










Y 


^ 




\\ 


V 
















\j 


'\ 




w 


> 


















V 


i 


* vV 






^ 
















V 


\ 








5[ 














^ 


?A 








^ L 
















% 








vj 


















^i\ 




L 




J 


















Y 




A 




4 
















^ 7 


\ > 


A 




i 


V 


?«. 














\ 


(\ 


v\ 




) 


3i 


6 " 

UJ 
















\\ 


V 






1;^. 


















%. 


\ 






•^ 


IL 
















^^ 






^. 


^ 


»( 












i 1 1 


^<aa 


"^ 




< a = 




K)2 


•03 


0-05 0-< 


37 0-1 


•2 


•3 


•4 04 


7 t 


\ 


3 


k 5 6 76910 tj 



WAVE LENGTH IN mm 

Fio. 6 Transmission Characteristics 

6.1.4 Lay — It is sometimes necessary to specify the direction of the lay, 
in which case it would be defined as shown in Fig. 7, and expressed in 
accordance with the following example: 
Example: 

R^ 1 '6 Lay Circular 

Unless otherwise specified, the implication is that the surface rough- 
ness shall be measured across the direction of the lay. 



STRAIGHT 



>m>^^* 





STRAIGHT ARCUATE 

CRISS CROSS 
Fio. 7 DqtECTioN of Lay 

14 



CIRCULAR 



IBt3073.19i7 

$AS Process — When it is necenary to limit the production of a turfiice 
to the use of one particular process, the process shall be stated ( s§t Tables 3 
and 4| and Appendix A ). 

6.2 Surface Roughness Symbols 

6.2.1 /2a should be considered as the main surface roughness criterion in 
practice, 

€•3 Ittdicadoii of Surface Rooghuoss on Drawings — The methods 
of indicating surface roughness on drawings shall be as given in Section 5 
of IS : 6%.r972*Thc roughness grade numbers, namely, Ni to N12 shall be 
defined in the manner indicated below. The relationship between the 
roughness grade numbers and the commonly used and generally accepted 
system of indicating surface roughness by symbols is also given below for 
guidance. These symbols are cl;^isified mto five groups. The maximum 
permissible value for roughness in each group is that of the coarsest grade 
of each one of these groups, namely, Nil, N9, N6, and N3. 



RouoHNin Grade 

Number 


RouoHNEis Value, R% 
|Ain 


Roughness 
Symbol 


N12 


50 


#^w 


Nil 
NIO 


25 
12-5 


7 


N9 
N8 

N7 


6-3 
3-2 
1*6 


VV 


^ N5 

N4 


0-8 
0-4 
0-2 


VV7 


N 3 
N2 

N 1 


01 

0-05 

(M)25 


V777 



6.4 To obtain an approximate idea of the surface roughness that can be 
achieved from various production processes. Table 5 may be referred to. 



•Code of practice for general engineering drawings ( second revishn ). 

IS 



lSiM73-1967 



TABLE S SURFACE ROUGHNESS EXPECTED FROM MANUFACTURING 

PROCESSES 
(c/ous* e.4) 



SI 
Na 


Manufacturing 
Process 




1 


Sond casting 




















5E 


Z 


Z 


^ 


50 






2 


costing 














0'» 


^ 


^ 


^ 


6.3 












3 


Ott costing 














0.8 


S 


s 


3.2 














4 


High prtssurt 










OOig 


z 


EZ 


32 
















5 


Hot rolling 
















2 


5^ 


a 


fe 


Z 


d 


50 






6 


















1'6 


^ 


2 


Z 


3 


25 








7 


Extrusion 











.6C 


Z 


z 


z 


S 


3s 










100 


- 


8 


Flomo cutting. 
Sowing & C7?i>plng 




















6*3 


z 


Z 


M 


fe 


9 


Rodiot cut-off sawing 
















*E 


^ 


Z 


6.3 










10 


Hond grinding 






, 














6'3 


^^ 


^ 


25 












11 


Disc grinding 
















|.6 


H 


z 


d 


S 


25 








12 


Filing 










0>25E 


z 


s 


s 


z 


z 


22 


25 








13 


Ploning 
















|.6 


z 


^ 


s 


22 


V< 


50 






14 


Shaping 
















1*6 


^ 


z 


^ 


S 


25 




•- 




J5 


Drilling 
















1.8 


z 


z 


fe 


a? 


5 




16 


Turning & Milling 










0-32E 


z 


E 


z 


d 


^ 


z 


25 


17 


Boring 












0.* 


EZ 


z 


z 


r 


6.3 












18 


Rtoming 












0-4 


^ 


^ 


z 


3-2 














19 


Broaching 












0< 


S 


z 


z 


3.2 














20 


Nobbing 












0-1. 


Z 


sz 


z 


3.2 










— 




21 


Surfoct grinding 







■oejES 


Z 


m. 


Z 


z 


z 


35 










22 


Cylindrical grinding 







•063E 


Z 


Z 


7L 


zs 


z 


3s 












— 


23 


Honing 


0- 


025 


7///A 


Z 


TZl 


0.4 
















— 


24 


Lopping 


0O12 


Z 


7?S2 


30.16 


















25 


Polishing 




0- 




>*EZ 


i 


.16 






















26 


Burnishirg 




o*04pte 


s 


s 


s 


0.8 


















27| Suptrfiniihif»9 


0^16^ 


7^ 


Z 


30 


•32 








1 













16 



ISt3073.19e7 

APPENDIX A 

(ClatdsesOAO, 5.1.3.1 and 6.1.5) 

GENERAL INFORMATION AND GUIDANCE ON THE 
ASSESSMENT OF SURFACE ROUGHNESS 

A-1. GENERAL 

A«l*l The following clauses contain information and guidance on some of 
the more important factors affecting surface roughness measurements and 
are intended to supplement and explain some of the reasons for the require* 
ments of this standard. 

A-2. GENERAL REMARKS ON SURFACE ROUGHNESS 

A-2.1 Whereas the shape and size of a component are usually specified as 
though its surface could be perfectly smooth and of simple geometric form, 
in practice the manufactured surface always departs to some extent from 
absolute perfection. The imperfections take the form of a succession of 
hills and valleys which may vary both in height and in spacing, and result 
in a kind of texture which in appearance or feel is often characteristic of the 
machining process and its accompanying defects. 

A*2«2 The departures from a truly smooth surface may arise from a variety 
of causes and m'\y be of several kinds. There will be a certain texture or 
* roughness ' in the form of a succession of minute irregularities which result 
directly from the particular process, for example turning, grinding, or 
lapping, employed to finish the surface. In general, the finer grades oi 
surface roughness, those produced by abrasive process, such as lapping or 
honing, tend to be irregular and hon-directional in character; surfaces 
produced J^y straight and cylindrical grinding tend to have irregularly 
spaced but directional roughness; while the roughness on surfaces produced 
by single point cutting tends to be both uniformly spaced and directional. 
In the case of machined surfaces there may be, in addition to the characteristic 
roughness produced by the tool, more openly spaced components of roughness 
resulting from faults in the machining operation. In practice, the complete 
roughness commonly represents a combination of irregularities of various 
kinds and magnitudes arising from several different causes. The individual 
effects of the separate contributing factors cannot always be readily dis- 
tinguished. 

A-2»3 A complete study of surface roughness would involve the measurement 
and analysis of all its component elements and an assessment of the effect of 
the resulting combined texture on the functioning of the part. In view of 
the complex nature of the problem such an idea is incapable of attainment in 
ordinary routine workshop control by any method yet devised. What is 

17 



1813073-1967 

immediately desirable, therefore, is a practical method of assessment, the 
result of which can be readily compared with a specified requirement of 
quality, preferably on a numerical basis. 

A-2.4 In general, each manufacturing process has its own characteristic 
surface roughness and it is this that enables a sur&ce adequately to be defined 
by a single number in conjunction with the name of the process {see 6). 

A-2.5 The problem of surface roughness measurement is essentially one of 
geometry and the fundamental definitions are therefore expressed in geo- 
metrical terms, whatever short-cuts may he taken in practical methods of 
assessment. Of the later, probably the simplest is the provision of a series of 
sample surfaces, of appropriately graded texture, produced by specified 
processes, with which the surface of the actual product could be directly 
compared by sight or touch. Such comparisons, however, are essentially 
qualitative rather than quantitative and in any case the grading of the samples 
themselves shall have been determined by independent measurement. 

A-2.6 Basically, the measurement of surface roughness presents a problem in 
three-dimensional geometry, but in practice it is reduced to one of two- 
dimensional geometry by confining individual measurement to the profiles of 
plane sections taken through the surface. In some cases, where the roughnes 
is non-directional in character, it may be immaterial what plane is chosen 
for the purpose, but it shall not be forgotten that, where the texture has a 
directional quality, quite different results may be obtained from measure* 
ments made in difierent planes ( see A«4 ). 

A-2.7 The standard practice, unless otherwise specified, is to make the 
measurement in a direction approximately at right angles to the direction of 
the predominant surface markings or May ' ( see Fig. 2 and 13 ). In special 
cases measurement in other directions may also be necessary. 

A-2.8 The process of measurement is thus reduced to one of analysing the 
form of the profile revealed by a plane section through the surface. Various 
in truments are available for this purpose. Most of these provide a magnified 
record of the profile such as is shown, for example, in Fig. 8. Some provide, 
in addition, a direct reading on an indicating meter of the mean height of the 
departures from a reference surface. All types of instruments are subject to 
certain limitations which have to be taken into consideration in formulating 
any statement relative to the specification and measurement of surface texture. 
The more important of these are discussed briefly in A*5. 

A-2*9 It is, therefore, necessary to specify conditions with which the instru- 
ments shall comply in order that different types should give consistent results. 
It is also necessary that the sections of the profile record considered ( sampb'ng 
lengths ) should be identical in length with the meter cut-off value associi. .ed 
with electrical integrating instruments. This, in effect, excludes from the 
measurements those components of roughness having spacings exceeding the 
prescribed meter cut-off ( see 5.1 ). 

18 



LS: 3073- 1967 




HEIGHTJ 



Ratio of Magnification, Vertical : Horizontal «» 50 : 1 
Fio. 8 Typical Surface Finish Chart 

A-2.10 The determination of more widely spaced irregularities is referred 
in A-6. 

A-2.11 It is not possible to state any specified value for spacing which could 
be regarded as forming a definite line of demarcation betwron roughness 
and waviness. The scale of each of these features will depend on the class of 
work and the manufacturing process employed. For this rea<;on this 
standard includes a series of alternative standard instrument cut-oH' values 
from which the most suitable for any particular case mav be selected 
( see 3.2 and Tables 3 and 4 ) . 

A-2.12 Similarly, no theoretical value could be assigned to the maximum 
spacing which should be included in measurements of waviness. As the 
spacing increases, however, waviness tends to become merged in more 
general errors of geometric form and it is necessary in practice to set some 
limit in ortier to define the measuring range of instruments intended for the 
measurement of waviness. 

A-2.13 As may be seen from Table 3 it has been found that an instrument 
cut-off of 0*8 mm is generally satisfactory for the majority of fine engineering 
work. An upper limit of 25 mm is commonly accepted as suitable for most 
waviness measurements. 



A.3. NOTES ON SURFACE PROFILES AND THEIR 
MEASUREMENT 

A-3J Profiles — The shape of the hills and valleys which consucute 
surface roughness can best be studied in a cross-section normal to the surface. 
An example of a trace of the cross-section of a short length of ground surf;:cc 
as obtained with a stylus instrument is shown in Fig, 8. 

10 



Bi 3073- 1967 

A-3.1.1 Since the irregularities of the surface which it is desired to 
examine are minute in depth, it is necessary for graphical representations of 
them to be shown to a considerable degree of magnification for example up to 
50 000 times or even greater. It will be appreciated that to the same scale 
of magnification, even so short a length of surface as 0*1 mm would require 
a graph as long as 5 metres which would be quite unmanageable. For- 
tunately, the pitch of successive irregularities is usually much greater than 
their height and it is therefore customary for instruments used for obtain- 
ing graphical representations of surface profiles to have different magnifica- 
tions for the vertical and horizontal scales, the former being usually from 
50 to 300 times the latter. The extent to which this alters the appearance 
of the trace will be seen by comparing the true trace of a short length of sur- 
face taken at the same vertical and horizontal magnification as shown in 
Fig. 9, with its condensed version shown by the small section * A ' of Fig. 8. 




Fig, 9 Portion A of Fio. 8 wrrn Horizontal Magnification 
Extended to Equal the Vertical Magnification 



A-3.1.2 The two principal quantities to be noted on the graphs are the 
height of the irregularities ( which may be measured jn various ways, for 
example, total height values or average values ) and the separation of their 
crests. The latter is referred to as the spacing; but when the irregularities 
are comparatively uniform in shape and size, as in Fig. 10 and are repeated 
at regular intervals, the distance between the successive peaks may be des- 
cribed as the pitch, or dominant spacing. It is essential to realize that the 
* roughness ' of a surface, in the ordinary sense of the word, involves both the 
size and shape of the irregularities. 

A-3.1.3 A great variety of very different surfaces may exhibit the same 
height of departure from the nominal profile, consider, for example, * a ' to 
' f ' in Fi^. 11; * a ' represents the profile of a perfectly smooth flat surface 

20 



ISt3073-1967 




Fio. 10 Typical Diamond Turned Surtacb 

— — iHyfa. 





i 



mmm'^mw///////w/M 



\=150 




0*003 



\«0*08(NOT IN PROPORTION) 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fio. 11 Various Profiles Havino the Same Height of 

Depaeturb from the Nominal Profile 

21 



15:3073-1967 

of, say, 1 50 mm long, ' b ' shows the same length of surface, concave to the 
extent of 0*003 mm, and successive figures indicate waves of 1 50 mm, 50 mm, 
B mm, 0'08 mm pitch respectively, but all except *a' have the same height of 
0*003 mm. The first three surfaces, namely, * a * to * c ' though two of them 
have errors of geometric form, would appear smooth, but as the spacing 
changes the quality of the surface changes. This would be noticeable to 
the eye although the same height of wave has been maintained in each of 
the diagrams. The errors of ' b ' to ' d ' would be practically undetectable 
in surface texture measurements and would need to be determined by 
ordinary metrological methods. 

Those of * d * and * f ' would be revealed by a waviness recorder and by 
normal surface roughness measurement respectively. Consider also the 
difference between the various forms shown in * a ' to * e ' in Fig. 12 all of 
which have both the same spacing, and the same total height, but vary in 
character. 




Fig. 12 Various Profiles Having the Same Spacino and 
Same Average Height 



A-3.1.4 It is not suggested that all^ or^any, of these diagrammatic forms 
are likely to occur exactly in practice, bul approximations to most of them, 
as well as many other more complicated forms undoubtedly do. The func- 
tional properties of such differing surfaces may vary greatly and hence arises 
the impossibility of expressing the compieU roughness characteristic of a 

22 



I8tS07S«19t7 

surface by meant cxf any tingle number. It is for this reason that it is neces- 
sary in principle, in any statement of surface roughness requirements, tr 
specify the process of mamubcture which serves to produce the type of rougii- 
neVy as well itf the R^ value which serves to denne its quality or grade. 

A-3.2 MMftwtttMt 

Af3.2.1 Sur&ces commonly met with in practice are usually not so simple 
in type, but often represent combined effects due to several contributmg 
causes. Consider, for example, Fig. 2 which shows diagrammatically surface 
containing roughness A, waviness B and imperfection of shape C. If the 
measurement is confined to a short sampling length La of the surface, the 
value obtained for the total height will be //a ( total height being considered 
here for reasons of demonstration ). This is a measure of the roughnesb 
neglecting the occasional deep scratches; it is nominally the same for ail 
parts of tne surfisce and it neglects the irregularities of greater pitch al* 
together. As the sampling length is increased, however, the height will 
eventually increase until» for a length Lb, it reaches a new value M, which 
takes into account the waviness, but which still ignores errors of geometrical 
form. Finalist for the whole surface, if such a measurement were prac- 
ticable, sampling length Lq would give a value He including all irregulari- 
ties and errors. 

A«3«2*2 Thus, various values could be obtained for the value of the sur&ce 
according to the length of surface selected for measurement. It might seem 
that the length of surface which most fairly expresses the quality of the 
surface roughness is the greatest, that is la That this may not be so is 
demonstrated by Fig. 13 of which ' A ' represents diasranmiatically a finely 
ground shaft which is slightly barrel-shaped while * B ' r^resents a more 
coarsely ground shaft which is firee from errors in shape. The. total heights 
are the same, but the shafts, are obviously far firom being identical in quality. 



.^zmm^/. 



0*OOSmm 




tOOOSmm 



Fio. 13 SunTAOB Textures Having the Same Total Heioht 
BUT Differing Errors of Nominal Profile 

kA3LA An obvious method of measiu-ing the roughness ' A ' regardless of 
the irregularities ' B * and * C ' is to limit the measurement to a sufficiently 



23 



Ilt3073.1967 

short length of the surface. In the case of the finer surfaces, however, this 
length becomes very small — of the order of 0*1 mm, and the difficulty is 
then encountered that even within a relatively small area of the surface the 
measured value over a sampling length may vary considerably from point 
to point. Such variations shall not be confused with true variations of texture 
in different parts of the surface, as they are merely the incidental result of the 
method of analysis and have to be smoothed out. This could be done, as 
shown in Fig. 14 by taking as the true value the mean of a number of obser- 
vation. 

The observations may conveniently be taken in a row along a short 
length of the surface. Thus, if the roughness does not exceed some given 
spacing, say 0*1 mm the graph may be divided into successive sections Zj, £|, 
^3, etCj each 0* 1 mm long and the average height of each section found separa- 
tely. Taking the mean value from a few ( say five ) consecutive sections will 
usually sufhce to eliminate, the effect of variations between the individual 
sections. The clTect of this procedure is to eliminate from A in Fig. 14 
the more widely spaced components of the texture and to measure only 
those components the spacing ofwhich is less then O'l mm, as shown in the 
modified profile, B in Fig. 14. 



- I, I, 1.3- 




D Vr/y V\/V¥v^|VVr\/^^y 


y\vv\lliv^ Vi/v I \ryY^^ Y^ry 



Fig. 14 Analysis of Surfagb Roughness Chart by thb 
Elimination of Longer Spacing Errors 



A-3.2.4 It is clear, therefore, that, in order to obtain consistent results 
from surface roughness measurements, the instrument cut-off shall be speci- 
fied as well as the manufacturing process and the /?« value. It is for this 
reason that the use of standard instrument cut-offs is essential. The instru- 
ment cut-off selected for this purpose should be sufficient to give a satisfactory 
average of those components oi the texture which it is desired to control, 
but not so great an to include other components of wider spacing. The 
instrument cut-off 0'8 is considered to be suitable for a large proportion of 
ordinary engineering work ( see Tables 3 and 4 ). 

24 



IS: 3073 -1967 
A*4. NOTES ON THE DIRECTION OF MEASUREMENT 

A>4.1 When the surface roughness has a directional quality, measurement 
taken in diflerent directions across the surface may differ simply because 
of the change in the effective spacing of the crests, as revealed by 
different sections. For example, consider Fig. 15 in which the horizontal 
lines represent successive ridges in a simple uniformly spaced texture and the 
short lines A, B, C, etc, represent a succession of equal instrument cut-ofis, 
taken in different directions. 





T 


1 


r 


^ 




a| 


b/ 


C,-' ^-'-^ th- 


H 


1 


/ 


Y ^ 




L 






ULU 


8 


C D 




A 


1 H 



Fig. 15 Influence of Di'iectign of Measurement on the 
Effective Spacing of Profile Crest 

A-4.2 The usual direction of measurement is shown by a line A at right ang- 
les to the lay. A slight error in direction such as that represented by the line 
B is not likdy to affect the measured average height materially. As the 
inclination of the direction of measurement increases, however, the number 
of ridges spanned by the sampling length diminishes, until at D only one 
complete spacing is included in the measurement. Beyond this point 
the limitation imposed by the instrument cut-off comes into play and the 
full value of the average height is not recorded. In the extreme case, at E, 
where measurement is made parallel to the lay, a minimum result would be 
obtained. 

A-4.3 On multidirectional textures, distinction may be made between an 
irregular pattern ( for example lapping, honing, super-finishing ) 2tnd a 
periodically recurring criss-cross pattern ( for example end milling, plane 
milling and cup wheel grinding ). On the latter the determination of R 
values is more difficult and may require the use of greater sampling length 
than would normally be used for similar grades of roughness [see A-6). 

25 



IStS073-1967 

A-4.4 Where for any reason measurement is required in some particular 
direction other than that at right angles to the lay this should be specially 
indicated on drawing. In these instances due regard should be given to the 
need to select the appropriate instrument cut-off. 

A-5. NOTES ON INSTRUMENTATION 

A-5«l The proper application of technique of surface roughness measure- 
ment require a knowledge of the mode of operation and the limitations of the 
instruments employed. The importance of making sure that electrical 
instruments are not misused by applying them to surfaces for which their 
instrument cut-offs are inadequate will be apparent. When nothing is 
known about the specimen, the first safeguard against this misuse is by 
having a good look at the surface before taking a reading; dominant spacing 
can often be seen and measured directly with a scale. A single touch with 
a flat oilstone if permissible, may reveal unsuspected spacing. A trace could 
then be taken, using an appropriate device for generating the datum. Some 
electrical instruments could be provided with means for varying the instru- 
ment cut-off, and with these an expeditious safeguard lies in taking a second 
reading using a longer cut-off; if there is no material increase in the reading, 
it could be assumed that no significant irregularity just beyond the range of 
the first cut-off is present on the surface. 

A-5.2 The Pick«Up 

A-5.2.I Most instruments in general use for the measurement of surface 
roughness are designed to respond to the irregularities of the surface through 
the agency of a stylus, which rests on the surface and is traversed across it. 
Movement is measured relative to a selected datum. The datum most 
commonly used is provided by a skid which has a relatively large radius of 
curvature in the direction of the traverse. This also rests on the surface 
but follbws its general contour, riding over the crests of smaller irregularities 
without responding to them individually. These movements of the stylus 
normal to the surface, measured relative to a datum corresponding to the 
path followed by the skid, are remrded by the instrument. 

A*«5.2.2 There are two limitations on the response achieved by the stylus 
and skid device. Firstly, it is not possible for the stylus \o have a mathema- 
tically sharp point, but could be finished with a small but finite radius. 
The profile of a stylus having a rounded tip as shown by the thin outline at 
A in Fig. 16. It is evident that such a stylus would just reach to the bottom 
of the valley in the profile immediately to the right of it. At the actual valley 
in the surface being deeper, the stylus could not have penetrated to its full 
depth. In fact the record itself affords no evidence of the non-existence of 
fine deep scratches in the actual surface. The behaviour of the stylus in 

mng over a surface with sharp grooves and ridges is illustrated in Fig. 1 7. 

lie fiiU depth of the groove is reduced by an amount, b ( see Fig. 17 ) in the 

26 



ISt3073.1M7 

recorded profile, and the trace is also smoothed out over the sharp comers 
and crests. Apart from the reduction in total depth, however, these defects 
of reproduction would be practically unobservable in the ordinary record 
with the horizontal scale compressed relatively to the vertical scale, as in 
Fig. 8. Further, in an average reading, the loss in the valley may be fully 
offset by the gain resulting from the apparent rounding of the crests. 




Fio. 16 Relationship of Stylus Point to the Actual Profile 

OF the Surface 




Fig. 17 Behaviour of the Stylus wren Traver^no 
Ridges and Grooves 

A-5.2.3 Fortunately, experience shows that errors due to the finite radius 
of the stylus are not so serious as might at first sight appear and that the 
irregularities on most surfaces tend to be relatively shallow, as compared 
with their spacing, so that the records obtained from them are not, in fact, 
usually subject to serious limitation from this cause. It is desirable, none« 
thcless, that the stylus should be as sharp as practicable. A nominal radius 
of 0*003 mm for the tip of the stylus is specified for profile recording instru- 
ments while a nominal radius of up to 0*012 5 mm may be acceptable for 
instruments giving average readings only ( see 5.1 ). 

A-5.2.4 Furthermore, if the radius of the skid is too small, it will tend to 
ride up and down over the peaks and valleys, representing the components 
of wide spacing in the texture instead of correctly following a path parallel to 
the general contour of the surface. Consider Fig. 16. It A A represents 
the skid on a surface which includes a series of openly spaced ridges, it 
will rise and fall through a distance </ as it traverses the surface, and the 
record may be falsified to this extent. The magnitude of the error intro- 
duced into the record depends on the position of thef stylus in relation to the 

27 



ISi3073-1967 

skid. If the stylus is located so that it touches a valley when the skid is at its 
lowest point, the depth of the recorded wave-form will be reduced by an 
amount equal to d, but if the stylus is located at a point half a spacing ( or any 
odd multiple of half a spacing ) ahead of or behind the lowest point of the 
skid, as indicated by the vertical lines, S, S' in Fig 18, then, as could be seen 
from the diagram, the depth recorded will be increased by an equal amount. 
Any intermediate condition may of course occur with various differences 
in the actual form of the record produced. 




Fio. 18 Relationship of Skid to Wavelength of Texture 

A-5.2.5 Some instruments have two skids, both touching the surface with 
the stylus acting midway between them. The chances of meeting extreme 
phase conditions are then reduced and in practice such instruments operate 
satisfactorily with skids having a smaller radius than is needed for the single 
skid {see Fig. 19). 



o 



y/)M'//, 



S-»- 



-ir 



y /my///A 



Fio. 19 Stylus Agtino Midway Between Two Skids 

A*5«2.6 For closely spaced textures, errors due to the skid can safely be 
neglected. The risk of inaccurate recording of more widely spaced features, 
however, increases as the square of the spacing and sets an effective limit 
on this form of datum device. For spacings too great for the skid, two other 
devices are possible. One is to use a guide in the form of a shoe, with a 
highly polished &ce shaped to conform to the general contour of the surface. 
The other is to use a guiding mechanism in which the datum for the stylus 
movement is constrained to follow a path conforming to the nominal profile 
of the surface, independently of any actual contact with it. 



28 



15:3073-1967 
A-5.3 Electrical Measuring Instraments 

A-5,3.1 Some electrical instruments could provide both profile graphs and 
average numbers, but there are many types destined mainly for the workship 
which provide meter readings only. 

A-5.3.2 To ensure a high degree of fidelity, a recording instrument should 
have the sharpest stylus tJiat is practicable, combined with adequate means 
for providing the datum, and a recorder responsive to sustained displace- 
ment of the stylus. An instrument with a stylus tip dimension in the order of 
0001 mm, a skid of long radius or a shoe sliding on the surface, or a skid 
sliding on a reference surface in combination with a modulated carrier 
pick-up and amplifying system, can generally give adequate performance. 
Recording instrum'^nis having generator type pick-ups ( for example, moving 
coil and piez(^ pick-up ) tend to respond to velocity rather than amplitude and 
may give a false impression of the surface. 

A«5.3«3 Integrating instruments on the other hand should be designed to 
exclude tjje wider spacings and ijansmit tothe meter only the spacings coming 
within the instrument cut-oif. This is generally accomplished by making 
use of tiic properties of electric wavc-'ilters, which, broadly, are able to 
transmit or reject alternating currents according to their frequency. 

A»5.3.4 It will be clear that if the pick-up is traversed across the surface 
at constant speed, each spacing ( if recurrent ) will give rise to a definite 
frequency which will be equal to the speed divided by the spacing. Thus, at 
a speed of 3 mm per second, a spacing of 3 mm will produce fundamentally 
an alternating current of 1 cycle per second, while spacings for example of 
09 mm, 0*3 and 0'03mm will produce currents of 10, 30 and 100 cycles per 
second respectively. If the wave-form is other than sinusoidal, there will 
appear, in addition to the fundamental frequency, alternating components 
of higher frequency than the fundamental. These components could be 
accounted for by a well-known mathematical proposition known as Fourier's 
theorem, which shows that the form of any recurrent profile could be expres- 
sed as the sum of a series of pure sinusoidal components of appropriate 
amplitudes. The fundamental wavelength is that of the profile, and the 
wavelengths of the other components arc successive simple fractions there of, 
for example 1 /2, 1 /3, 1 /4, 1 /5. The integrating instrument, in effect, resolves 
the form of the profile under examination into its sinusoidal components, 
shifts these components by means of the wave filter and rccombines those 
which pass through it in such a manner as to produce, automatically an 
alternating current representing the irregularities coming within the 
instrument cut-off, this current being finally integrated by the meter. 

A-5.3.5 Thus, if the whole profile of Fig. 2 were examined by an instrument 
having a instrument cut-off equal to Za> the alternating current emerging 
from the filter and passing to the meter would look lubstantially like the 
curve A in this figure, that is, it would represent the roughness or primary 

29 



IS: 3073 -1967 

texture alone. If the instrument cut-off were equal to Lb, the current pas- 
sing to the meter would have the shape of A and B added together. 

A-5.3.6 The wave-filter may consist of a group of resistances, condensers 
and /or inductr.nces serving no other purpose than to form the filter, or of 
elements already having some other part to play, for example value coupling 
circuits or even the pick-up itself in the case of piezo devices, which could 
be so proportioned as to attenuate below the cut-off frequency. If the 
instrument is to have a instrument cut-off of, say, 0*8 mm the filter circuits 
are designed to transmit to the meter all frequencies higher than those 
produced by 0*8 mm spacing at the intended speed of traverse, and to attenu- 
ate all frequencies corresponding to a wider spacing. 

A-5.3,7 Although it is usual to speak of the cut-off as though it occurred 
abruptly, in practice the transmission falls off gradually. What have become 
standard transmission limits for three cut-off values are shown in Fig. 6. 
Considering the upper limit for 0-8 mm cut-off by way of example, the 
electrical circuits transmit uniformly ( that is, without substantial change in 
relative amplitude ) all wavelengths up to 0*25 mm. Wavelengths of 0*5 
mm are slightly attenuated to 90 percent of their true value, wavelengths 
2*5 mm are attenuated to 25 percent and so on. This rate of attenuation 
would be provided by two resistance capacitance valve couplings of equal 
time constant in series and having a maximum rate of attenuation of 12 dB 
per octave. As the effect of a small amount of attenuation on the reading is 
negligible, it is practical to rate the cut-off not at the wavelength for which 
attenuation first begins to occur, but at some greater value, and the curve 
shown has been considered to have an effective cut-off at about 0*8 mm, 
where the transmission is 80 percent of the full value. In order to meet 
certain types of specifications where the cut-off is rated at 70 percent transmis- 
sion, 5.1 .3.2 permits the cut-off to be assessed at between 70 percent and 
80 percent of the maximum attenuation. 

A-5.3.8 A complete and precise specification of transmission involves not 
only the wavelength range, but also the phase characteristics and rate of 
attenuation at the ends of the range. However, it appears in practice that, 
in reasonably designed instruments, the influence of the latter factors is 
of secondary importance. Therefore, having regard for the still tentative 
state of the art, it is considered that a specification of the nominal wave- 
length cut-off alone will sufRce for a further period. 

A-S.3.9 It is convenient to express thecut-off in terms of spacing rather than 
frequency because it is the spacing that is a basic characteristic of the sur- 
face^ the resulting frequency depending on the speed of traverse which may 
be anything the instrument designer chooses as being suitable for the pick- 
up. Traversing speeds employed normally range from 0*3 mm to 25 mm per 
second. It is clearly important to operate pick-ups at the designed speed. 
In the case of motor driven instruments this will be ensured automatically, 
but in the case of manually operated pick-ups the proper speed must be 
stated and observed. 

30 



IS ! 3073 - 1967 

A-5.4 Optical Interference Instruments 

A-5,4.1 In these instruments interference fringes are formed between an 
optical flat forming a reference surface and the irregularities of the surface 
to l)e examined. The fringes are viewed through a microscope. In one type 
of instrument, the optical flat is held on or just above the surfa'''', and single 
or multiple reflection fringes arc formed directly between the two. In 
another, the optical flat is mounted within the instrument and a virtual 
image of it, seen directly or through a second objective, is formed on the 
surface by a semi-reflecting mirror. In some designs the optical flat within 
the instrument is provided by a metallized patch formed on one of the 
surfaces of the microscope objective. 

A-5.4.2 The distance between two adjacent fringes corresponds to a 
change in the separation of the surfaces of the half wavelength of the light, 
which for green light is approximately 0*000 25 mm. The irregularities 
seen along each interference fringe correspond to the surface unevenness, 
and the extent of the irregularities may be estimated or measured as a pro- 
portion of the distance between the adjacent fringes. 

A.6. NOTES ON MEASUREMENT OF SURFACES HAVING 
GREATER SPACING OF IRREGULARITIES 

A*6.1 While the majority of siu^faces that have to be measured in normal 
engineering practice have irregularities of less than 2 mm spacing, greater 
spacings could be found, especially on milled and planed surfaces, and in the 
domain of waviness. 

A-6.2 When the surface is smooth and sufliiciently reflective ( in which case 
the search will be mainly for waviness ) direct interference methods could well 
be used, but in other cases stylus methods are likely to be the most conve- 
nient. 

A-6.3 For absolute measurement, the stylus shall traverse a sufRcient length 
of the surface relative to a datum the errors* of which are small compared with 
those of the surface, and this ha3 been accomplished by using an optical flat 
as a reference surface. 

A-6.4 The greater spacings, however, often tend to be repetitive, so that 
a serviceable datum could be provided by a shoe or suitably spaced systetfi of 
skids sliding across the surface itself. For example, in the Tomlinson 
Waviness Recorder, the whole mechanism is carried on a shoe about 40 mm 
square having a central hole through which the stylus passes, while instru- 
ments having suitably spaced skids are used for recording waviness on gear 
teeth. 

A»6,5 Sometimes it is useful to ignore the more closely spaced irregularities 
and this could be accomplished either by using a sufficiently large radius for 
the tip of the stylus or ( in electrical instruments ) by means of a wave filter. 

A-6.6 In principle, instruments to give /?» readings could be designed as 
well for the wider as for the closer spacings, but in practice, the assessment 

31 



Bt9t7S-lM7 

being determined mainly from graphs and the profiles tending to be repeti- 
tive, the total height measure is generally used ( set Fig. 8 ). The relative 
magnitude of total bright and /{« value, the former from 3 to 7 times the 
latter for the kind of profiles here considered, should be remembered when 
contrasting waviness assessed in the one way and roughness assessed in the 
other, 

A-7. THE USE OF PLASTIC REPLICAS 

A-7J In one group of methods cellulose acetate strip ( cine film ), or sheet of 
greater thickness, is softened with a solvent such as acetone and pressed 
against the surface under sufficient load until set. The solvent could have a 
small percentage of cellulose acetate dissolved in it to fill up residual im- 
perfections in the sheet. These replicas set in a few minutes and after 
removal from the surface soon harden sufficiently to permit about 80 percent 
fidelity to be secured using a lightly loaded stylus. 

A*7«2 More recently developed materials, capable when correctly used of 
approaching 100 percent fidelity, are found among the synthetic resins. 
xYktMt materials are marketed under various trade names. Generally 
a powder and a liquid have to be mixed in the correct proportions and 
poured on to the surface from which the replica could be removed and use^ 
as soon as it has set. Some sort of waif, for example a ring of modelling 
clay, may have to be erected on the surface in order to contain the mixture; 
and setting may take from 10 minutes upwards according to material and 
temperature. 

A-7.3 The test of whether a replica process will give a good enough reproduc- 
tion for a given application should be checked by comparing the profile 
graph of a sample part with that of its replica. It is important to make 
sure that exactly corresponding portions of^the sample and of its replica are 
compared. This could often be accomplished by scribing a cross on the 
trace and letting the stylus pass through the intersection. If the stylus 
passes to one side or the other, two marks on the graph, one from each arm 
of the cross, will appear, from their separation in two separated traces the 
necessary lateral movement to reach the intersections ( where they will 
merge into one ) could soon be found. 

A-7.4 When replicas of the finer surfaces,are wanted, it is as well to check the 
process not only on the surface itself but also on an optical flat. Any ir- 
regularities which appear in the replica shall be attributed to the replica 
process, and indicate the limit of smoothness for which the process is suitable 
Random fiiults such as air bubbles could generally be neglected, but svste* 
matic irregularities resulting for example from the use of a filler or nrom 
shrinkage dfects normally are reasonably small compared with the irregula- 
rities to be reproduced. It has been found that the residual granularity, 
wavinesi and setting time of the synthetic resins can be considerably 
affected by the wetness of the mix. 

32 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



HMdquMrt^n: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELH1 110002 
Telephones: 323 0131. 323 8375, 323 9402 
Fax : 91 1 1 3234062. 91 1 1 3239399 



CBntral Laboratory : 

Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahlbabad Industrial Area, Sahlbabad 201 01 

Regional Otficas: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELH1 1 10002 

♦Eastern : 1/14 CIT Scheme VII M. V.I.P. Road. Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 

tWestern : Manakalaya. E9. Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East). 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branch Officaa:: 

'Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 

^Peenya Industrial Area. 1st Stage. Bangalore-Tumkur Road, 
BANGALORE 560058 

Gangotri Complex. 5th Fk>or. Bhadbhada Road. T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 

Plot No. 62<63. Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 

Kalaikathir Buildings. 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 

Plot No. 43. Sector 16 A, Mathura Road. FfiJR\DABk5 121001 

Savitri Complex. 1 16 G.T. Road. GHAZIABAD 201001 

53/5 Ward No.29. R.G. Barua Road. 5th By-lane. GUWAHATI 781003 

5-6-56C, L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road. HYDERABAD 500001 

E-52. Chitaranjan Marg, C-Scheme. JAIPUR 302001 

11 7/41 6 B. Sarvodaya Nagar. KANPUR 206005 

Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore 



Telegrams : Manaksanslha 
(Common to all Offices) 
Telephone 



Road, 



8-77 00 32 

323 7617 
337 66 62 
60 38 43 
235 2315 
832 92 95 

550 13 48 
839 49 55 

55 40 21 
40 36 27 
21 01 41 
8-28 88 01 
8-71 1996 
54 1137 
20 10 83 
37 29 25 
2168 76 
23 89 23 



Seth Bhawan, 2nd Fk)or, 
LUCKNOW 226001 

Patliputra Industrial Estate. PATNA 80001 3 . 26 23 05 

T.C. No. 14/1421 . University P. O. Palayam. THIRUVAf4ANTHAPURAM 695034 6 21 17 

Inapadlon Offleoa (With Sale Point) : 

Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A, West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, 52 51 7i 
NAGPUR 440010 

Institution of Engineers (India) BulMing 1332 Shiv&|i Nagar, PUNE 41 1009 



*Saies Office is at 5 Chowringfiee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, 
CALCUTTA 700072 

t Sales Offkse is at Novelty Chanr)bers. Grant Road. MUMBAI 400007 

tSaies Offk:e is at 'P Block. Unity Bu dmn. Nnrnshimaraja Square. 
BANGALORE 560002 



32 36 35 

2'* 10 85 

309 65 28 

222 39 71 



Printed at Piintogniph, New Delhi (INDIA). 



AMENDMENT NO. 4 DECEMBER 1986 

TO 

IS : 3073-1967 ASSESSMENT OF SURFACE 
ROUGHNESS 



( One more sampling length suitable Tor diflferent types of machined 
surfaces was included in Table 3 of this standard through Amendment 
No. 3. Inadvertently the values were wronglv represented which bavo 
now been rectified through this amendment, f 



( ( Page 10. Table 3 ( see also Amendment No. 3 ) ] — Substitute 
the Tollowing for the existing table: 



TABLE 3 8UITABI.R SAMPLING LRNGTIIS FOR VARIOUS 






MACHINING SURFACRS 






Paocess 




Sun 


AOLB Samplino Li 
08 2S 


iNQTHi. mm 




Milling 




_ 


8 10 


^^ 


Boring 


.^ 


.— 


0-8 




8 10 


— 


Turning 


.~ 


— 


08 






— 


Grinding 


m^ 


023 


08 




i» — 


— 


Planing 


m~^ 


«. 


— 




8 10 


2S 


Reaming 


.^ 





8 




-.. -~ 


— . 


Broacbiog 


•^ 


«. 


08 


-i- 


*-~ — , 


— 


Diamond boring 


•^ 


025 


08 


— 


— — 


— 


Diamond turning 


.-^ 


0-2S 


08 


— 


.-. _ 


— 


Honing 


008 


025 


08 


— 


•«. •« 


— 


Lapping 


008 


0-25 


0*8 


.^ 


-. -«> 


— 


SuperAnishing 


OOS 


25 


8 


— 


-. 


— 


Buffing 


.» 


^. 


08 


25 


-» -» 


— • 


Polishiog 


.» 


— 


08 


23 


-i. 


— 


Shaping 


«» 


-« 


08 


2-5 


8 10 


— 


Spark machioiog 


— . 


■~ 


08 


""" 


mmmm mm» 


"■* 



(BOC43) 



Printed, at Piintognph. New Ddhi (INDIA). 



