RT HAF IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 
Indian Standard [ Superseding IS 1476 (Part 1) and IS 15750] 


aa ar atra — Terra sitt 
uar faterat 


SITT 1 ATA SÜTÜ 


Household Refrigerating 
Appliances — Characteristics and 
Test Methods 


Part 1 General Requirements 


ICS 97.030; 97.040.30 


O BIS 2021 


anda Ar ST 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SEERNE TH AMT, ag faset — 110002 


liz MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2021 Price Group 14 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWORD 
This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Refrigeration 
and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


These household refrigerating appliances, which are factory-assembled and cooled by internal natural convection 
including mechanical and absorption type (direct cool) or forced air circulation (frost-free) was earlier covered in 
two separate standards that is, IS 1476 (Part 1) and IS 15750 respectively. 


The standard on direct cool refrigerator that is, IS 1476 (Part 1) was first published in 1959 followed by the 
revisions in the years 1971, 1979, and 2000. The standard on frost-free refrigerator that is, IS 15750 was published 
in 2006. 


This standard supersedes IS 1476 (Part 1): 2000 “Performance of household refrigerating appliance — Refrigerators 
with or without low temperature compartment: Part 1 Energy consumption and performance” and 
IS 15750 : 2006 *Household frost-free refrigerating appliances — Refrigerators cooled by internal forced air 
circulation — Characteristics and test methods — Specification”. 


In the light of the development taken place at the international level, the technical committee decided to make a 
composite standard on refrigerator to cover the requirements of both direct cool and frost-free refrigerators. 


This Indian Standard is published in three parts. The other parts in this series are: 
Part 2 Performance requirements 
Part 3 Energy consumption and volume 


In this revised standard various larger capacities, construction, and design which have been introduced in the 
Indian market have been covered. In addition to include new types, design, and capacities, the energy consumption 
limits of refrigerators covered in the earlier version of IS 1476 (Part 1) and IS 15750 have been modified. 


The standards have been largely rewritten and updated to cope with new testing requirements, new product 
configurations, the advent of electronic product controls and computer-based test-room data collection, and 
processing equipment. 


For the purpose of this standard only climate class T refrigerating appliances are covered. 


This standard is based on IEC 62552-1 : 2015 ‘Household refrigerating appliances — Characteristics and test 
methods — Part 1: General requirements” issued by International Electrotechnical Commission (TEC). Following 
additional requirements have been added: 


a) Materials, design, and manufacture; 

b) Testing the air tightness of door or lid seal(s); 

c) Testing the opening force of door(s) or lid(s); 

d) Testing the durability of hinges and handles of door(s) and lid(s); 
e) Testing the mechanical strength of shelves and similar components; 

f) Ice-making test (if applicable); 

g) Test for absence of odour and taste; 

h) Safety requirements; 

j) Packing; 

k) Designation; 
m) Instructions for use and maintenance; 

n) Schedule of tests; and 

p) Criteria for ECO mark (optional requirements). 


x 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


Contents 


SCOPE 

REFERENCES 

TERMS, DEFINITIONS AND SYMBOLS 

CLASSIFICATION 

MARKING 

TECHNICAL AND COMMERCIAL PRODUCT INFORMATION 
INSTRUCTIONS 

MATERIALS, DESIGN AND MANUFACTURE 

TESTING THE AIR TIGHTNESS OF DOOR OR LID SEAL(S) 
TESTING THE OPENING FORCE OF DOOR(S) OR LID(S) 


TESTING THE DURABILITY OF HINGES AND HANDLES OF DOOR(S) 
AND LID(S) 


TESTING THE MECHANICAL STRENGTH OF SHELVES AND SIMILAR 
COMPONENTS 


WATER-VAPOUR CONDENSATION TEST 
ICE-MAKING TEST (IF APPLICABLE) 

TEST FOR ABSENCE OF ODOUR AND TASTE 
SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 

PACKING 

DESIGNATION 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE AND MAINTENANCE 


SCHEDULE OF TESTS 


VEX A TEST ROOM AND INSTRUMENTATION 


ANNEX B PREPARATION OF AN APPLIANCE FOR TESTING AND 


GENERAL MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES 


ANNEX C TEST PACKAGES 


ANNEX D DETERMINATION OF COMPARTMENT AVERAGE AIR TEMPERATURES 


Page No. 


11 


11 


27 


28 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


> 


> 


Z 


> 


> 


NNEX E DETAILS OF IDENTIFICATION SYMBOLS 


NNEX F ITEMS TO BE INCLUDED IN THE TEST REPORT 


YNEX G WINE STORAGE APPLIANCE 


NNEX H CRITERIA FOR ECO-LABEL FOR REFRIGERATORS 


NNEX J COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


LIST OF FIGURES 


Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 


Fig. 
Fig. 


Fig. 


Fig. 
Fig. 


Fig. 
Fig. 


Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 


LIST OF TABLES 


— 


© GO — DN FW WN 


10 
11 


12 


13 
14 


15 


16 


17 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 


Table 1 
Table 2 
Table 3 


Illustration of Selected Definitions 

Identification Symbol for a Four-Star Compartment 

Star Identification Symbols for Frozen Compartments (Except Four-Star) 
Marking of Load Limit 

Linear Dimensions (Example: Top View for Upright Type) 

Example of Opening and Closing of External Doors 

Test Position for Sliding Components Which Have no Limiting Stop 
Verification of Parameters to be Kept Constant 


Partitions to Restrict air Circulation and Ambient Temperatures Sensor Positions ... 


Examples of Appliances with No Spacers Where Rear Clearance is Specified 


Air-Temperature Measuring Points-Unfrozen Compartments with 
Plate or Concealed Evaporators and Effective Height and Width Examples 


Air-Temperature Measuring Points — Fresh Food, Chill and Cellar 
Compartments—Examples of Generic Compartments with Crisper and 
Convenience Features 


Air-Temperature Measuring Points — Low Height and Small Compartments 


Location of Temperature Sensors within Upright Frozen Compartments without 
Refrigerated Shelves and with Height Equal to or Less Than 1 000 mm 


Location of Temperature Sensors within Upright Frozen Compartments without 
Refrigerated Shelves and with Height Greater Than 1 000 mm 


Location of Temperature Sensors within Upright Frozen Compartments with 
Refrigerated Shelves and with Height Greater Than 1 000 mm 


Location of Temperature Sensors within Chest Freezers (1 of 2) 

Location of Temperature Sensors within Chest Freezers (2 of 2) 

Location of Temperature Sensors within Drawers and Bins 

Location of Temperature Sensors When Mirror Image is Applicable 

Details of Identification Symbols for Four-Star Compartments 

Details of Identification Symbols for Frozen Compartments (Except Four-Star) 
Standard Bottle for Evaluation of Bottle Capacity 

Temperature Measurement Points (Packages) 


Climate Classes 
Type Tests 
Acceptance Tests 


Page No. 


41 
43 
43 
47 


48 


Indian Standard 


HOUSEHOLD REFRIGERATING APPLIANCES — 
CHARACTERISTICS AND TEST METHODS 


PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Indian Standard (Part 1) specifies the essential 
characteristics of household refrigerating appliances, 
cooled by internal natural convection or forced air 
circulation, their rated voltage not exceeding 250 V, 
50 Hz a.c., and establishes test methods for checking 
the characteristics. 


1.2 The tests defined in this standard are meant to assess 
the fundamental design and operation of a refrigerating 
appliance. 


1.3 For the verification of the performance of a 
refrigerating appliance of a given type it is preferable, 
wherever practicable, that all the tests specified 
be applied to a single unit. The tests can also be 
conducted individually for the study of a particular 
characteristic. 


1.4 Refrigerating appliances conforming to this 
standard are classified into T class instead of four 
climate class. The range of ambient temperatures in 
which the appliances are intended to be used, and for 
which the required storage temperatures are to be met 
is specified in Table 1. 


NOTE — The climate class in India is considered a T Class. 


1.5 This standard shall be read in conjunction with the 
requirements given in Part 2 and Part 3 of this standard. 


1.6 The requirement of ECO Mark criteria is given 
in Annex H of this standard. The requirement of 
ECO Mark is optional. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below: 


IS No/ISO No. 
2:1960 


302-1 : 2008 


694 : 2010 


1060 (Part 1) : 
1966 


10617 : 2018 


IS 16656 : 2017/ 
ISO 817 : 2014 


IS/ISO/IEC 17025 
: 2017 


IS/IEC 60730-2-9 
: 2011 


17550 (Part 2) : 
2021 


17550 (Part 3) : 
2021 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


Title 


Rules for rounding off 
numerical values (revised) 


Safety of household and 
similar electrical appliances: 
Part 1 General requirements 
(sixth revision) 


Polyvinyl chloride insulated 
unsheathed and sheathed 
cables/cords with rigid and 
flexible conductor for rated 
voltages up to and including 1 
100 V (fourth revision) 


Methods of sampling and test 
for paper and allied products: 
Part 1 (revised) 


Hermetic compressors — 
Specification (second revision) 


Refrigerants — Designation 
and safety classification 


General requirements for 
the competence of testing 
and calibration laboratories 
(second revision) 


Automatic electrical controls 
for household and similar use: 
Part 2 Particular requirements, 
Section 9 Temperature sensing 
controls 


Household refrigerating 
appliances — Characteristics 
and test methods: Part 2 


Performance reguirements 


Household refrigerating 
appliances — Characteristics 
and test methods: Part 3 Energy 
consumption and volume 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


3 TERMS, DEFINITIONS AND SYMBOLS 


For the purposes of this standard, the following terms, 
definitions and symbols in addition to those given in 
IS 302-1 shall apply. 


3.1 General Terms and Definitions 


3.1.1 Refrigerating Appliance — Insulated cabinet with 
one or more compartments that are controlled at specific 
temperatures and are of suitable size and equipped for 
household use, cooled by natural convection or a forced 
convection system whereby the cooling is obtained by 
one or more energy-consuming means. 

NOTE — From the point of view of installation, there 


are various types of household refrigerating appliance 
(free-standing, wall-mounted, built-in, etc.). 


3.1.2 Refrigerator — Refrigerating appliances intended 
for the storage of foodstuff, with at least one fresh food 
compartment. 


3.1.3 Refrigerator-Freezer — Refrigerating appliance 
having at least one fresh food compartment and at least 
one freezer compartment. 


3.1.4 Refrigerating Appliance Technology 


3.1.4.1 Frost-free refrigerating appliance — 
Refrigerated appliances in which all compartments are 
automatically defrosted with automatic disposal of the 
defrosted water and at least one compartment is cooled 
by a frost-free system. 


3.1.4.2 Direct cool refrigeration — Refrigerated 
appliances in which cooling is provided by internal 
natural convection and the evaporator(s) is (are) 
defrosted by manual defrost. 


3.1.5 Freezer — Refrigerating appliance with only 
frozen compartments, and at least one of which is a 
freezer compartment. 


3.1.6 Wine Storage Appliances — Refrigerating 
appliance that has no compartment other than one or 
more wine storage compartment (s). 
NOTE — An appliance containing any compartments which 
do not fulfil all requirements as specified for wine storage 


compartments under Annex G shall not be categorized as a 
wine storage appliance. 


3.1.7 Built-in Appliance — Refrigerating appliances 
intended to be used whilst fastened in an enclosure 
or secured in a prepared recess in a wall or similar 
location. 


3.1.8 Foodstuff — Food and beverages intended for 
consumption. 


3.1.9 Rated — Value declared by the manufacturer. 
(for example volume, energy consumption, usage, etc.). 


3.1.10 Normal Use — Operation when the refrigerating 
appliance is subject to a range of different conditions 
that could occur during use including operation in a 
range of: 


a) Indoor temperature including those defined in the 
storage test specified in Part 2 of this standard; 


b) Different humidity levels; and 


c) User related actions, such as door openings (which 
may be regular, infrequent or a mixture thereof) 
and the additions and removal of foodstuff or other 
stored items. 


3.2 Definitions Relating to Refrigerating System 


3.2.1 Refrigerant — Fluid used for heat transfer in 
a refrigerating system, which absorbs heat at a low 
temperature and at a low pressure of the fluid and rejects 
heat at a higher temperature and at a higher pressure of 
the fluid, usually involving changes of state of the fluid. 


3.2.2 Condenser — Heat exchanger from which heat 
in the refrigerant is rejected to an external cooling 
medium (usually the air surrounding the appliance). 


3.2.3 Evaporator — Heat exchanger which absorbs 
heat from the compartment to be refrigerated and 
transfers this to the refrigerant. 


3.3 Compartments and Sections 


3.3.1 Compartment — Enclosed space within a 
refrigerating appliance, which is directly accessible 
through one or more external doors, which may itself 
be divided into sub-compartments. 


NOTES 


1 The requirements for the compartment types are specified in 
Table 2 of Part 2 and Table 1 of Part 3. 


2 Throughout this standard, unless otherwise specified, 
‘compartment’ shall be taken to mean compartment and/or 
sub-compartment as appropriate for the context. 


3.3.2 Sub-compartment — Permanent enclosed space 
within a compartment which has a different operating 
temperature range from the compartment within which 
it is located. 


3.3.3 Convenience Feature — Enclosure, or a container 
(either fixed or removable by the user), in which 
suitable storage conditions are provided for designated 
types of foodstuff. 


NOTE — These conditions may be different from those of the 
compartment in which it is located. 


3.3.4 Variable Temperature Compartment — 
Compartment intended for use as two (or more) 
alternative compartment types, for example a 


compartment that can be either a fresh food compartment 
or freezer compartment and which is capable of being 


set by a user to continuously maintain the operating 
temperature range applicable for each compartment 
type claimed. 
NOTE — A compartment intended for use as a single type 
but that can also meet additional types, for example, a chill 
compartment that may also fulfil zero-star requirements is not 
a variable temperature compartment. 


3.3.5 Freezer Compartment — Compartment that 
meets three-star or four-star requirements. 


NOTE — In certain instances, two-star sections and/or 
sub-compartments are permitted within the compartment. 


3.3.6 Fresh Food Compartment — Compartment for 
the storage and preservation of unfrozen foodstuff. 


3.3.7 Cellar Compartment — Compartment for the 
storage of foodstuff at a temperature that is warmer 
than that of a fresh food compartment. 


3.3.8 Pantry Compartment — Compartment for the 
storage of foodstuff at a temperature that is warmer 
than that of a cellar compartment. 


3.3.9 Chill Compartment — Compartment for the 
storage of highly perishable foodstuffs. 


3.3.10 /ce-making Compartment — Compartment 
specifically for the making and storage of ice. 


NOTE — An ice-making compartment is classified as a zero- 
star compartment or a frozen compartment. 


3.3.11 /ce-mould — Form in an automated icemaker 
which is automatically filled with water and from 
which the ice cubes are manually ejected. 


3.3.12 Ice Cube Tray — Removable tray which is 
manually filled with water and from which ice cubes 
are manually ejected. 


3.3.13 Zero-star Compartment — Compartment in 
which the temperature is not warmer than 0 °C that 
can be used for the making and storage of ice but is 
not suitable for the preservation of highly perishable 
foodstuff. 


3.3.14 Wine Storage Compartment — Compartment 
specifically for the storage and maturation of wine. 


NOTE — Temperature requirements for wine storage 
compartment are specified in Annex G. 


3.3.15 Unfrozen Compartment — Any of the following 
compartment types: zero-star, chill, fresh food, cellar, 
wine storage or pantry. 
NOTE — Although ice making compartments and zero-star 
compartments operate below zero, they are configured as 


uniform compartments for energy and performance tests in this 
standard. 


3.3.16 Frozen Compartment — Any of the following 
compartment types: one-star, two-star, three-star, 
and four-star. 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


NOTE — Frozen compartments are classified according to 
temperature (see 3.3.16.1 to 3.3.16.4). 


3.3.16.1 One-star — Compartment where the storage 
temperature is not warmer than —6 °C. 


3.3.16.2 Two-star — Compartment where the storage 
temperature is not warmer than — 12 °C. 


3.3.16.3 Three-star — Compartment where the storage 
temperature is not warmer than — 18 °C. 


3.3.16.4 Four -star — Compartment where the storage 
temperature meets three-star conditions and where the 
minimum freezing capacity meets the requirements of 
8 of Part 2 of this standard. 


NOTES 


1 Incertain instances, two-star sections and/or sub-compartments 
are permitted within a four-star compartment. 


2 Any two-star section in the compartment shall not exceed 
20 percent of the total compartment volume. 


3.3.17 Two-star Section — Part of a three-star or 
four-star compartment, which is not self-contained that 
is which does not have its own individual access door 
or lid and which meets two-star requirements. 


NOTE — Any two-star section in the compartment shall not 
exceed 20 percent of the total compartment volume. 


3.3.18 Vegetable Drawer or Crisper — Convenience 
feature provided primarily to retard dehydration of 
fruits and vegetables. 

NOTE — A vegetable drawer is usually considered as a 


removable convenience feature but is normally left in situ for 
testing purposes. 


3.4 Physical Aspects and Dimensions 


3.4.1 Top-opening Type — Refrigerating appliance in 
which the compartment(s) are accessible from the top 
(usually via a lid). 


3.4.2 Upright Type — Refrigerating appliance in which 
the compartment(s) are accessible from the front. 


3.4.3 Overall Dimensions — Space taken up by the 
refrigerating appliance that is height, width and depth 
with doors or lids closed. 


3.4.4 Space Required in Use — Space taken up by 
the refrigerating appliance (height, width and depth) 
necessary for normal use with doors or lids closed, 
including space necessary for air circulation and any 
handles as shown in Fig. 5. 


3.4.5 Overall Space Required in Use —Total space 
taken up by the refrigerating appliance (height, width, 
and depth) necessary for normal use with doors or lids 
open, as shown in Fig. 5. 


3.4.6 Volume — Space within the inside liner of 
the refrigerating appliance, or a compartment or 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


sub compartment as determined in Part 3 of this 
standard. 


3.4.7 Shelf — Horizontal surface on which foodstuff 
can be placed. 
NOTE — A shelf can be formed by one component or 


by components fitted side by side, which can be fixed or 
removable. 


3.4.8 Load Limit — Surface enveloping a storage space 
and intended for the storage of foodstuff or other items. 


NOTE — A load limit may be a natural obvious feature or a 
marked line. 


3.4.9 Storage Plan — Arrangement of test packages 
within a refrigerating appliance when testing specific 
aspects of performance in accordance with this 
standard. 


3.5 Terms and Definitions Relating to Performance 
Characteristics 


3.5.1 Energy Consumption — Energy used by a 
refrigerating appliance over a specified period of time 
or for a specified operation as determined in accordance 
with Part 3 of this standard and is measured in watt 
hours (Wh) or kilowatt hours (kWh). 


3.5.2 Average Power Consumption — Average rate 
of energy consumption of a refrigerating appliance as 
determined in accordance with Part 3 of this standard 
and is measured in watts (W). 


3.5.3 Storage Temperature — Temperature which the 
refrigerating appliance is capable of maintaining in 
accordance with the stipulation given in 6.5 of Part 2 
of this standard. 


3.5.4 Target Temperature — Reference compartment 
temperature which is used for determining energy and 
average power consumption defined in Part 3 of this 
standard. 


NOTE — Target temperatures are air temperature as explained 
in Annex D. 


3.5.5 Defrosting 


3.5.5.1 Automatic defrost — Defrosting where no 
action is necessary by the user to initiate the removal of 
frost accumulation at all temperature-control settings 
or to restore normal operation, and the disposal of the 
defrost water is automatic. 


3.5.5.2 Manual defrost — Defrosting that is not an 
automatic defrost. 


3.5.5.3 Cyclic defrost — Automatic defrost system 
where the refrigerated surfaces which cool a 


compartment (usually an unfrozen compartment) in an 
appliance are automatically defrosted and defrosting 
occurs during each cycle of the refrigeration system. 


NOTE — Cyclic defrost systems do not have a defrost control 
cycle. 


3.5.5.4 Variable defrost — Automatic defrost system 
designed to minimize energy consumption which 
adjusts the time intervals between successive defrosts 
under normal use to better match the actual frost load on 
the evaporator by assessment of an operating condition 
or conditions other than, or in addition to, elapsed time 
or compressor run time. 

NOTE — Demand defrost, (directly measuring the frost on the 


evaporator and defrosting accordingly) is a form of variable 
defrost. 


3.5.6 Stable Operating Conditions — Conditions in 
which a refrigerating appliance mean temperatures and 
energy consumption comply with the relevant stability 
requirements as defined in Part 2 or 3 of this standard 
as applicable. 


3.5.7 Steady State — Stable operating conditions that 
meet the criteria as specified in Annex B of Part 3 of 
this standard. 


3.5.8 Ambient Temperature — Measured temperature 
in the space surrounding the refrigerating appliance 
under test. 
NOTE — The ambient temperature for each test type is 
measured as specified in Annex A of this Part and its value is as 
specified in Part 2 and Part 3 of this standard as applicable for 
the particular test. 


3.5.9 Control Event — A change in the operating 
conditions which include but are not limited to: 


a) starts, stops or speed changes of compressors; 


b) changes of baffle position, fan operation, or other 
modulating control or device; 


c) changes in operation of the refrigerant circuit; 
d) defrost heater on and off; 
e) icemaker operation. 


3.5.10 Frost-free — Automatic defrost system to 
prevent the permanent formation of frost on a remote 
evaporator or evaporators. 


3.5.11 Temperature Control — Device that is intended 
to automatically regulate the temperature within one or 
more compartments. 


3.5.12 User-adjustable Temperature Control — 
Temperature control intended for adjustment by 
the user to vary the temperature within one or more 
compartments within a refrigerating appliance. 


3.5.13 Temperature Control Setting — Setting of a 
user adjustable temperature control selected for the 
measurement of energy or performance in accordance 
with this standard. 


3.5.14 Cooling Time — Time taken for a specified load 
in a fresh food compartment to be cooled as defined 
in 7 of Part 2 of this standard. 


3.5.15 Cooling Capacity — Rate at which a specified 
load in a fresh food compartment can be cooled as 
defined in 7 of Part 2 of this standard. 


3.5.16 Freezing Time — Time to freeze in a freezer or 
freezer compartment a set amount of load as defined in 
8 of Part 2 of this standard. 


3.5.17 Freezing Capacity — Rate of heat extraction 
by the refrigeration system from a load in a freezer or 
freezer compartment as defined in 8 of Part 2 of this 
standard. 


3.5.18 Ice- making Capacity — Quantity of ice the 
refrigerating appliance is capable of producing in an 
automatic ice maker in accordance with 9 of Part 2 of 
this standard. 


3.5.19 Temperature Rise Time — Time taken, after 
the operation of the refrigerated system has been 
interrupted, for the temperature to increase a defined 
amount when tested as specified in Annex C of Part 2 
of this standard. 


3.5.20 Ballast Load — Combination of test and 
M-packages already at storage temperature and in the 
freezer or freezer compartment when the light load is 
added during the freezing capacity tests. 


3.5.21 Light Load — Combination of test and 
M-packages at ambient temperature that are loaded 
into a freezer compartment during the freezing 
capacity test. 


3.5.22 Processing Load Efficiency Test — Test in which 
a specified water load is introduced to the appliance to 
determine how much extra energy is needed to cool it 
down (and, in frozen compartment, to freeze it). 


NOTE — See Annex G of Part 3 of this standard. 


3.5.23 Processing Load — Energy equivalent of a user 
processing load in Wh/day. 


3.5.24 Load Processing Efficiency — Ratio of 
additional energy used by the refrigerating appliance to 
cool a specified processing load to the calculated heat 
energy removed from that processing load. 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


3.5.25 Processing Load Recovery Period — Time taken 
to reach stable operating conditions after introduction 
of the specified load for the processing load efficiency 
test. 


3.6 Operating States (as shown in Fig. 1) 


3.6.1 Temperature Control Cycle — Definitive 
repetitive swings in temperature caused by operation 
of a temperature control device (on/off or otherwise). 


3.6.2 Defrost Control Cycle — Period commencing 
at the end of stable operating conditions prior to the 
initiation of an automatic defrost and terminating at a 
like point prior to the next automatic defrost. 


NOTES 


1 The commencement and finish points of the defrost control 
cycle prior to automatic defrosting shall be: 


a) For a refrigerating system with on/off cycles, the period 
commencing at the end of the last regular temperature 
control cycle, for example the end of last off period; 


b) For a refrigerating system without on/off cycles but 
with regular temperature cycles, at the last power/speed/ 
cooling change that relates to a regular temperature 
maximum; and 


c) For a refrigerating system without on/off cycles and 
without regular temperature cycles, at the end of stable 


temperature operation. 


2 Cyclic defrost systems do not have a defrost control cycle. 


3.6.3 Defrosting Operation — Period from the 
initiation of a defrost control cycle until the initiation 
of the refrigeration system cooling after defrosting. 


3.6.4 Defrost and Recovery Period — Period form 
the initiation of a defrost control cycle until stable 
operating conditions are established. 
NOTE — For products that do not reach operating 
conditions for example that have a temperature that is 
continually decreasing after a defrosting operation, the 


defrost and recovery period could be equal to the defrost 
control cycle. 


3.6.5 Recovery Period — Period from the end of the 
defrosting operation until the end of the defrost and 
recovery period. 


3.7 Symbols 
TMP temperature measurement point 
T temperature 
t time 
i subscript representing a certain sensor 
location 


TEMPERATURE 


POWER 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


DEFROST AND 
RECOVERY PERIOD 
DEFROSTING RECOVERY 
OPERATION PERIOD TEMPERATURE 
, CONTROL CYCLES 
| 1 
COMPARTMENT pr | 
TEMPERATURE l | ! 
PRIOR TO DEFROST ú | 
LI 
LI 
I 
Av 
= Y 
AY 
I 
| | | 
DEFROST CONTROL | ! I 
CYCLE TE ! 
LI 
T | | 
DEFROST HEATER | 1 
PRE-COOL A OPERATION I 
PRIOR TO | 
DEFROST Ni 
1 | 
| 1 


EXAMPLES OF 
COMPRESSOR 
START-STOP 


CONTROL EVENTS 


TIME EXAMPLES OF COMPRESSOR 
START-STOP CONTROL EVENTS 
Instantaneous | Integrated | Instantaneous Average | Time Averaged Maximum 
Temperature | Time Average Compartment Compartment | Compartment 
Value Temperature* Temperature? Temperature” | Temperature‘ 
(im) (a) (ma) 
Fresh food Ti im T; na = 
Frozen food (f) Ti 2 Te - TT TT 
Zero star (z) T, Tin Ta T ma — 
Pantry (p) Ti Ts T T å — 
Cellar (c) T. Toa T Dona — 
Chill (cc) Toa Tuan Ta Tasa Z 
Wine (w) T Tas Tu Ti — 
Ambient (a) T. Lå T. T na — 


2 The integrated time average temperature is obtained by integrating the instantaneous temperature values over time and dividing it by 
the time period. 


b The instantaneous average compartment temperature is the arithmetic average of all instantaneous temperatures values measured in 
the compartment at one time. 


“ The time averaged compartment temperature is the integrated time average of the instantaneous average compartment temperature or 
the arithmetic average of the integrated time averaged temperatures (both methods give the same result). 


d The maximum compartment temperature is the maximum temperature of any M-package during the test period (for performance 
requirements, see Part 2 of this standard). 


Fic. 1 ILLUSTRATION OF SELECTED DEFINITIONS 


3.8 Temperature Classification — The temperature 
classification for refrigeration appliances are defined as 
SN, N, ST, and T as per the temperature ranges given 
below for each class: 


a) SN (Subnormal/Extended temperate) suitable for 
use under ambient temperature range of 10 *C to 
32*C; 

b) N (Normal) suitable for use under ambient 
temperature range of 16 *C to 32 *C; 


c) ST (Subtropical) suitable for use under ambient 
temperature range of 16 °C to 38 °C; and 


d) T (Tropical) suitable for use under ambient 
temperature range of 16 °C to 43 °C. 
NOTE — These abbreviations are conventional because they 
are regulated by international standards for the refrigeration 
equipment and do not depend on a market or a country of 
production. 


4 CLASSIFICATION 


Refrigerating appliances conforming to this standard 
are classified into one (or more) of four climate 
classes. The range of ambient temperatures in which 
the appliances are intended to be used, and for which 
the required storage temperatures are to be met 
(see Table 2 of Part 2 of this standard), shall be as 
specified in Table 1. 


Table 1 Climate Classes 
( Clauses 1.4 and 4 ) 


SI No. Description Class Ambient Temperature 
Range 

"E 

0) 2) (3) (4) 

1) Extended temperate SN + 10 to +32 

ii) Temperate N + 16 to + 32 

iii) Subtropical ST + 16 to + 38 

iv) Tropical T + 16 to + 43 

5 MARKING 


5.1 Rating Information 


The following information shall be marked in a 
permanent and legible manner on the appliance: 

a) Manufacturer”s name, trademark, or identification 
mark; 

b) Type of refrigerating appliance (for example, 
“refrigerator”, with the designation being prefixed 
by the term “frost-free” 1f applicable); 

c) Serial number and/or date of manufacture, which 
may be coded; 

d) Total volume (alternatively, the volume for each 
compartment type may be listed); 


e) Country of manufacture/origin; 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


f) Designation and mass, in gram, of the refrigerant 
(see IS 16656/ISO 817); 


g) Information relating to the energy source; and 


h) Letters indicating the climatic class or classes 
(SN, N, ST, T); 

Items a) to h) should be visible when the refrigerating 
appliance is in its position of normal use. Other 
marking should either be readily visible in normal use 
or when the refrigerating appliance is away from a wall 
or after the removal, without any tool, of a flap or grille, 
etc. Climate classes that are wholly covered by other 
climate classes do not need to be noted. 


5.2 Identification of Frozen Compartments 


When identified, four-star compartments shall be 
identified by a symbol readily visible from the front, 
externally or internally, in accordance with that shown 
in Fig. 2. 

Additionally, in the case of a two-star section in an 
identified freezer compartment, the standard two-star 
symbol (see Fig. 3) shall be placed to clearly indicate 
this section. 


XXX 


For further details, see Fig. 20. 


FIG. 2 IDENTIFICATION SYMBOL FOR A FOUR-STAR 
COMPARTMENT 


For further details, see Fig 21 
Key 


1 one-star compartment symbol 
2 two-star compartment symbol 


3 three-star compartment symbol 


Fic. 3 STAR IDENTIFICATION SYMBOLS FOR FROZEN 
COMPARTMENTS (EXCEPT FOUR-STAR) 


When identified, one, two, or three-star frozen 
compartments or cabinets shall be identified by a 
symbol as shown in Fig. 3, readily visible from the 
front, internally. In the case of a two-star section in 
an identified three-star or four-star compartment, the 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


two-star symbol shall be located so that it clearly 
identifies the two-star section. 


The symbols shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 shall not 
make use of more than two colours or exhibit more 
than two contrasting surface finishes. The colour (or 
surface finish) of the large star shall be different from 
that of the three other stars. For the purpose of this 
requirement, white and black are considered as colours. 
There shall be no marking or decoration anywhere on 
the refrigerating appliance which could be confused 
with the four-star compartment identification symbol 
shown in Fig. 2. 


5.3 Load Limit Lines 


Load limit lines are permitted only in relation to freezer 
volumes and three-star frozen storage space in cabinets 
or compartments with an independent external door. 


No load-limit line is necessary within the space of 
any cabinet or compartment suitable for three-star 
storage if: 


a) no space is acknowledged as being unsuitable for 
three or four-star storage; or 


b) the load limits are determined by the particular 
construction (baskets, containers, flaps, etc.); or 


c) the load limits are determined by natural load 
limits (see Fig 1B given in Part 2 of this standard) 
and the loading conditions are specially described 
in the instructions. 


In all other cases, the limits of three or four-star 
storage space shall be indicated in a conspicuous and 
permanent way by a load-limit line or lines in the form 
shown in Fig. 4. 


The manufacturer should avoid, as far as possible, the 
provision of storage spaces outside the load limits and 
outside any two-star compartment or sections. 


5.4 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


5.5 ECO Mark 


The product conforming to the requirements of 
this standard (Part 1) may be marked with an 
ECO Mark provided it meets all the requirements given 
in Annex H of this standard (Part 1). 


6 TECHNICAL AND COMMERCIAL 
PRODUCT INFORMATION 

6.1 General 

Whenever technical and commercial product 


information is supplied, all declared performance data 


(together with the relevant measurement units) shall be 
in accordance with this standard. 


6.2 Determination of Linear Dimensions 


Linear dimensions shall be measured to the nearest 
millimetre. 


The overall dimensions shall be measured as the height, 
width, and depth of the rectangular parallelepiped, 
whose base is horizontal, within which the refrigerating 
appliance is inscribed to include the complete appliance 
except for the handle, the protrusion of which, if any, 
is to be specified separately (see Fig. 5). The height 
shall exclude the feet if these are fitted at the time of 
installation. 


The space required in use shall be measured as 
the height, width, and depth, including the handle, 
increased by the space necessary for free circulation 
of the cooling air when the refrigerating appliance is in 
service (see Fig. 5). 


The overall space required in use shall be measured 
as the height, width, and depth, including the handle, 
increased by the space necessary for free circulation 
of the cooling air when the refrigerating appliance 
is in service, plus the space necessary to allow the 
opening of the means of access to that minimum angle 
permitting removal of all removable parts such as 
containers and shelves, including a drip tray that has 
to be removed and any water container that has to be 
emptied manually (see Fig. 5). 


7 INSTRUCTIONS 


Every refrigerating appliance shall be accompanied on 
delivery by instructions for its installation, use, user 
maintenance, and safe disposal. 


Instructions should include the following where 
applicable: 


a) The installation requirements (best location, 
levelling, connections to energy source, 
connection — if required — for water supply or for 
defrost water); 


b 


wm 


The space required in use and the overall space 
required in use with sketches showing the 
refrigerating appliance dimensions and minimum 
clearances required with the means of access 
(open and closed); 


c 


ma 


For a refrigerating appliance which is intended to 
be built-in, the recess dimensions together with 
any additional ventilation requirements; 


d 


= 


The limit values of the range of ambient 
temperature for the rated climate classes and a 
warning that if the refrigerator operates outside 
the climate class (ambient temperature range) 
for which it is rated then it may not be able to 
maintain satisfactory internal temperatures; 


DEPTH 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


FROM 100 TO 150 


“EDGE DENOTING 
LOAD LIMIT 


¡DA 


60* \/ 


TYP 


Jen 


All dimensions in millimetres 


FIG. 4 MARKING OF LOAD LIMIT 


OVERALL SPACE 
REQUIRED IN USE 


OVERALL DIMENSIONS SPACE REQUIRED IN USE 


DEPTH == 


WIDTH 


SPACE NECESSARY FOR 
FREE CIRCULATION OF AIR 


FIG. 5 LINEAR DIMENSIONS (EXAMPLE: Top VIEW FOR UPRIGHT TYPE) 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


e) Operating instructions (starting and 
stopping procedures, use of the various 
controls — temperature-control devices, fast-freeze 
switch, indicator lights, air circulation and defrosting 
control, water and ice dispensers etc.); 
The care required for best performance, such as: 
1) loading the refrigerating appliance, especially 
when there are sections with different star 


ratings within the same compartment and 
when no load-limit lines exist; 


2 


wa 


the arrangement of food for storage, in particular 
the need to avoid cross-contamination; 

3) the arrangement of food for storage and 
for freezing, where applicable, particularly 
including advice that food to be frozen is not to 
be placed in direct contact with food in storage 
and, if appropriate, that it could be necessary 
to reduce the quantity to be frozen if freezing 
every day is anticipated; 

4) in the case of refrigerating appliances with 
chill compartment, a statement to the effect 
that some types of fresh vegetables and fruits 
are sensitive to cold, and that therefore they 
are not suitable for storage in this kind of 
compartment; and 


5) 


the placing of ice-cube tray(s) in order to 
achieve optimal ice-freezing. 


g) The user maintenance and cleaning of the 
refrigerating appliance; 


h) For manual defrost products, any precautions with 
respect to defrosting and damage to stored food 
during this process; 

j) The action to be taken when the refrigerating 

appliance is switched off and taken out of service 

temporarily or for an extended period (e.g. 

emptied, cleaned and dried, and the door(s) or 

lid(s) propped ajar); 

k) The necessity that, for doors or lids fitted with 

locks and keys, the keys be kept out of the reach of 

children and not in the vicinity of the refrigerating 
appliance, in order to prevent children from being 
locked inside; 


m 


x 


Removal of doors and lids on disposal to prevent 
entrapment; and 

n) Recovery of refrigerant and recycling of 
components on disposal of the refrigerating 
appliance. 


8 MATERIALS, DESIGN AND MANUFACTURE 


8.1 General 


Appliances shall be constructed in such a manner as 
to ensure adequate performance and durability in 
use. Their performance in use is checked by applying 
a series of relevant tests. This clause defines some 


10 


characteristics which are not tested but to which the 
attention of the manufacturer is drawn. 


8.2 Materials and Finishes 


Materials used inside the appliances shall not transmit 
odours or taste to food. When testing in accordance 
with 15, the mean value of the individual results 
during each evaluation for odour and taste shall not 
exceed mark 1. Materials used inside appliances shall 
not contaminate food placed in contact with them nor 
transmit poisonous substances to food. They shall be 
resistant to the action of moisture and food acids. 


All surface finishes shall, for the purpose intended, 
be resistant to impact, sufficiently hard, colourfast, 
smooth, easily washable, and resistant to damage by 
moisture and by food acids. 


8.3 Thermal Insulation and Air Tightness 


The thermal insulation of the appliance should be 
efficient and permanently maintained. In particular, the 
insulating material shall not be subject to shrinkage and 
shall not allow, under normal working conditions, an 
excessive accumulation of moisture. 


No running water shall appear externally when the 
appliance is subjected to the water vapour condensation 
test (see 13 and Annex D of part 2 of this standard). 


When the door or lid is closed, there shall be no 
abnormal ingress of air into the interior. 


A strip of paper shall not slide freely when door or lid 
seals are subjected to the air tightness test specified 
in 9, 


8.4 Doors, Lids and Fittings 


Hinges and handles shall be strong and resistant to 
corrosion. 


External doors and lids of fresh food storage 
compartments and chill compartments cellar 
compartments shall withstand 10000 openings and 
closings without deterioration which may be prejudicial 
to the air tightness of the appliance when subjected to 
the durability test of 11. 


In the case of frozen food storage cabinets, food freezers 
and appliances with the food freezer compartment and 
the frozen food storage compartment, if any, having a 
separate access door or lid, the hinges and handles of 
the door or lid of that compartment (or cabinet) shall 
withstand 10 000 openings and closings. 


The fastening system shall be such as to enable the door 
or lid to be easily closed and opened. It shall be efficient 
and capable of maintaining its proper function. 


For appliances having any compartment or section 
with a volume equal to or greater than 60 |, it shall be 
possible to open the door or lid of that compartment 
from the inside with a force not exceeding 70 N when 
subjected to the test specified in 10. The volume of 


any compartment (or cabinet) or section shall be 
determined when all shelves, partitions, and other 
internal components removable without the aid of a 
tool have been removed. 


8.5 Shelves and Containers 


Shelves, containers, and similar components shall 
have adequate mechanical strength. Those used for 
storing food shall withstand the loading test specified 
in 12 without showing such distortion that they could 
no longer fulfil their intended function. In particular, 
sliding or revolving components shall be capable of 
their full movement when loaded. 


Shelves, containers, and similar components which are 
intended to be removable should be easily removable. 


8.6 Disposal of Defrost Water 


A means shall be provided for completely collecting 
the defrost water in an external receptacle wherein the 
defrost water is evaporated. 


The defrost water receptacle should have adeguate 
volume and should have adeguate evaporating means. 


Any drainage system shall be designed to ensure its 
proper function. It shall be easily accessible for the 
clearing of any blockage, and shall be designed so as to 
prevent any undue ingress of air into the food storage 
compartment(s) (or cabinets). 


8.7 Refrigerating System 


8.7.1 The mechanical operation of the appliance should 
not give rise to undue noise or vibration. 


8.7.2 The design of the condenser should be such as to 
reduce to a minimum the accumulation of dust. 


8.7.3 The evaporator shall be so designed or protected 
so that it will not suffer any damage during the normal 
use of the appliance. 


The heat exchange surfaces shall be made of 
corrosion-resistant material, or shall be finished with 
a corrosion-proof, non-poisonous coating, resistant 
to temperature changes and alternating frosting and 
defrosting. 


8.7.4 The means of adjustment of temperature control 
devices, 1f intended to be adjusted by the user, should 
be readily accessible, and their function shall be, such 
as to enable the appliance to meet the requirements of 
the performance tests. 


8.7.5 Pipes and connections to moving or resiliently 
mounted parts should be arranged so as not to generate 
noise, neither to touch nor to transmit vibrations to 
other parts, and should be so designed as to prevent 
failure due to fatigue. All other pipes and connections 
should be securely anchored, where necessary. 


8.7.6 Suitable means should be provided to prevent 
water condensed on cold parts from affecting the 


11 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


operation of the unit or its controls, or from causing 
any other damage to the appliance and its surroundings. 


8.8 Supply Cord 


The length of the supply cord shall be at least 1.5 m 
when measured from entry point of the refrigerator 
to the point of entry of the cord into the plug. It shall 
conform to IS 694. 


8.9 Compressor 
The compressor shall comply with IS 10617. 


8.10 Temperature Sensing Controls (Thermostat) 


The temperature sensing controls shall comply with 
IS/IEC 60730-2-9. 


8.11 Temperature Sensing Controls (Thermostat) 
Setting 


The temperature sensing controls (thermostat) setting 
should be such that when set at any one point, it should 
not cut-in before the system is balanced under any 
operating conditions. 


9 TESTING THE AIR TIGHTNESS OF DOOR 
OR LID SEAL(S) 


9.1 The purpose ofthis test is to ensure that the gasket(s) 
of the door(s) or lid(s) of the appliance adequately 
prevent(s) any abnormal ingress of the surrounding air. 


9.2 Procedure 


The ambient temperature shall be between + 16 *C and 
+ 43 °C. The appliance shall be switched off and shall 
be in equilibrium with the ambient temperature before 
carrying out the test. 


A strip of paper 50 mm wide and 0.08 mm thick and of 
suitable length shall be inserted at any point of the seal, 
and the door or lid shall be closed normally on it. The 
verification of the thickness of the paper used shall be 
in accordance with IS 1060 (Part 1). 


The seal shall be assessed by checking that the strip of 
paper does not slide freely. 


The most unfavourable points may be found by 
inspecting the area around the seal with the appliance 
closed and illuminated from the inside. This test shall 
be carried out both before and after the mechanical 
durability test (see 11). 


9.3 Test Report 


The test report shall indicate whether the tightness of 
the door or lid seal(s) meets the requirements of 8.3. 


10 TESTING THE OPENING FORCE OF 
DOOR(S) OR LID(S) 


The purpose of this test is to check that the door(s) or 
lid(s) can be opened from the inside. Compliance shall 
be checked by inspection and by the following test. 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


10.1 Procedure 


The ambient temperature shall be between + 16 °C and 
+ 43 *C. The appliance shall be switched off and be in 
equilibrium with the ambient temperature. The door or 
lid shall be closed for a period of 1 h, after which an 
“opening” test shall be carried out under the following 
conditions: 


The opening force of 70 N shall be considered as being 
applied to the inside of the door or lid of the appliance 
at the midpoint of the edge furthest from the hinge axis 
in a direction perpendicular to the plane of the door or 
lid. 

The method of measurement shall be one of the 
following: 


a) By applying the force at a point on the outer 
surface of the door or lid corresponding to the 
internal measuring point (for example, with the 
aid of a suction pad); and 


If the handle of the door or lid is at the midpoint of 
the edge farthest from the hinge axis, by applying 
a force to the handle, the value of the force 
required to open the door or lid from the inside 
being determined by proportional calculation 
from the distances of the handle and of the internal 
measuring point from the hinge axis. 


This test shall be carried out both before and after the 
mechanical durability test (see 11). 


b 


x 


10.2 The test report shall indicate whether the opening 
force of the door(s) or lid(s) meets the requirements of 
8.4. 


11 TESTING THE DURABILITY OF HINGES 
AND HANDLES OF DOOR(S) AND LID(S) 


The purpose of this test is to check the durability of the 
hinges and handles of door(s) and lid(s). 


11.1 External Door(s) 


11.1.1 Test Conditions/Preparation 


The ambient temperature shall be between + 16 °C and 
+ 43 °C.The appliance shall be switched off. The inner 
door(s) shall be loaded as specified in 12.1.2. The door 
shall be opened at least 459 from the cabinet reference 
wall before it starts closing. 


11.1.1.1 Opening sequence (see Fig. 6) 


The movement of the door shall be controlled from 
an angle of 0° to an angle of opening between 5° and 
15%, followed by a free movement of the door, the 
controlled movement being approximately sinusoidal. 
The opening of the door shall take place in the first 
quarter of the period of the cycle. 


12 


11.1.1.2 Closing sequence (see Fig. 6) 


The movement of the door shall be controlled from the 
angle of opening of 45° to an angle between 40° and 359, 
followed by the free movement of the door and its closing 
as in normal use. 


The number of cycles per minute shall be 20 to 25. 


a) For compartments with an internal temperature 
T > —6 °C, external doors and lids shall withstand 
100 000 opening and closing operations without 
deterioration which could be prejudicial to the air 
tightness of the door or lid. 


b 


wm 


For compartments with an internal temperature 
T <—6 °C, external doors and lids shall withstand 
30 000 opening and closing operations without 
deterioration which could be prejudicial to the air 
tightness of the door or lid. 


11.2 Test Report 


The test report shall also indicate whether the hinges and 
handles meet the requirements of 8.4 and whether the 
seals meet the requirements of 8.3. At the end of the test, 
there shall be no visible damage to the hinges, doors, or 
lids of refrigerator/refrigerator compartment. 


12 TESTING THE MECHANICAL STRENGTH 
OF SHELVES AND SIMILAR COMPONENTS 


The purpose of this test is to check the mechanical 
strength of the components used for storing food 
(shelves, containers). (see 8.5) 


12.1 Procedure 


The ambient temperature shall be between+16 °C and 
+43 °C. 


12.1.1 Food Freezer Compartment (or Cabinet), 
Frozen Food Storage Cabinet and Low Temperature 
Compartments (if Applicable) 


After the storage test (see 6 of Part 2 of this standard), 
and with the appliance switched off, the behaviour of all 
loaded shelves, baskets, and containers and their supports 
shall be examined. 


All sliding or revolving shelves and containers shall 
be moved, without modification of their load, to the 
halfway position, A/2, of their permissible course 
(see Fig. 7), except that if stops are provided which limit 
the movement to less than the half-way position the 
components shall be moved to their stop. They shall be 
left in this position for 1 h then returned to their initial 
position. 


If the manufacturer has stated in the instructions for use 
that some shelves or containers slide out for maintenance 
or transportation, but must remain in a definite position 
in normal use, they shall be considered as fixed and the 
checking shall be carried out in the position as for the 
storage test. 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


6 
Key 
I Door Opening 4 Pusher 
2 Door Closing 5 Taut Cable 


3 Angle of Opening 6 _ Slack Cable 


Fic. 6 EXAMPLE OF OPENING AND CLOSING OF EXTERNAL Doors 


A= PERMISSIBLE COURSE 


Fic. 7 TEST POSITION FOR SLIDING COMPONENTS WHICH HAVE NO LIMITING STOP 


13 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


12.1.2 Fresh Food Storage, Chill and Cellar 


Compartments (if Applicable) 


The appliance shall be switched off, with the door(s) 
open. 


The components to be tested shall be loaded in turn with 
80 mm diameter cylindrical weights of 1 000 g, but of 
only 500 g in the case of components above which the 
clear height in normal service cannot exceed 150 mm. 
Components that are specially designed to hold eggs 
shall not be loaded. 


The weights shall be placed with their axes vertical 
and in such a way that the maximum possible number 
is accommodated without one weight being placed 
over another and without overlapping the edge of the 
component under test. 


In the case of door shelves, the diameter of the weights 
may be changed, if necessary, to adapt them to the 
shape of the shelves, provided the load per unit area is 
the same. 


The applied loads shall remain in position for 1 h. 


13 WATER-VAPOUR CONDENSATION TEST 


The purpose of this test is to determine the extent of 
condensation of water on the external surface of the 
cabinet under specified ambient conditions. 


The test method, test conditions, and the compliance 
are given in Annex D of Part 2 of this standard. 


14 ICE-MAKING TEST (IF APPLICABLE) 


The purpose of this test is to check the claim, if any, for 
the ice-making capability of the appliance. 


NOTE — This test does not apply to automatic ice-makers. 


14.1 Procedure 


14.1.1 Ambient Temperature 


The ambient temperature shall be + 43 °C and shall be 
controlled within the tolerances specified in Annex A. 


14.1.2 Preparation of the Appliance 


The appliance shall be installed in the test room in 
accordance with Annex A and set up as in service in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. The 
means of access (doors or lids) shall be kept closed 
during the test. 


The temperature sensing controls (thermostat) shall be 
set in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 
When no instructions are given, the thermostat position 
shall be the same as that for the storage test specified in 
Part 2 of this standard. 


The cellar compartment, if any, shall be as small as 
possible (if the volume is adjustable), with temperature 


14 


control devices (flaps, etc.) set in the position in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions or the 
same as that for the storage test. 


14.1.3 Measurements 


After stable operating conditions have been attained, 
the ice tray(s) shall be filled with water up to 5 mm 
from the top and placed in the appliance at the 
position recommended by the manufacturer at the 
commencement of a defrosting cycle. 


If a sub-division is provided specifically for making 
and storing ice and is not removable without the use of 
tools, the ice trays shall be placed in that sub-division. 
The water temperature at the moment of placing the ice 
tray(s) in the appliance shall be + 30 °C + 1 K. 


The ice tray(s) shall be examined for complete freezing 
of the water after an interval equal to the ice-making 
time stated by the manufacturer has elapsed or as 
estimated from the stated ice-making capabilities of the 
appliance. 


14.2 Test Report 
The test report shall contain the following information: 


a) Quantity, in kilograms, of ice produced in a 24 h 
period or the time, expressed in hour and minute, 
necessary to freeze the water in the ice tray(s) 
supplied with the appliance; and 

b) Whether the requirements in accordance with 
Part 3 of this standard are met with regard to ice 
making tests. 


15 TEST FOR ABSENCE OF ODOUR AND 
TASTE 


The purpose of this test is to check that materials used 
for the internal components of the fresh food storage 
compartments and cellar and chill compartments, if 
any, will not impart either taste or odour to food. 


15.1 Procedure 


15.1.1 Ambient Temperature 


The ambient temperature shall be between + 16 °C and 
+ 32 °C. 


15.1.2 Cleaning 


The appliance shall be cleaned prior to the test in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and 
afterwards with pure water. 


15.1.3 Temperature Sensing Controls Setting 


The appliance shall first be operated for 48 h, with the 
temperature sensing controls (thermostat) and other 
control devices set in a position which will give the 
following temperatures: 


a) Fresh food storage compartment: 
tm t4°C 2K; 
b) Cellar compartment: 
+8 °C <t < 414 °C; and 
c) Chill compartment: 
-3°C St <+3%C. 
15.1.4 Samples 


The analytical samples and check samples respectively 
for each compartment shall be: 


a) 100 ml potable water; and 


b) A slice of fresh unsalted butter of dimensions 
75 mm x 35 mm x 5 mm. 


From each of (a) and (b), at least six samples are 
necessary to serve as analytical samples and at least six 
to serve as check samples. 


The analytical samples shall be placed in petri dishes 
and the check samples in glass containers, the latter 
being hermetically sealed. Prior to the test, all petri 
dishes and containers which are used for the test shall 
be cleaned with timing nitric acid and subsequently 
washed with distilled water until the complete absence 
of odour is obtained. 


The analytical samples of water and butter shall be 
placed uncovered in the fresh food storage, cellar and 
chill compartments. 


The check samples in the hermetically sealed glass 
containers shall be placed close to the analytical 
samples. 


15.1.5 Test Period 


The analytical samples and the check samples shall be 
left in the operating appliance with the door(s) closed 
and at the specified temperature conditions for 48 h. 


After 48 h, the analytical samples shall be covered. 
Then the analytical samples and check samples shall 
be removed and warmed up to approximately 20 °C by 
leaving them in the test room. 


15.2 Examination of Samples 


15.2.1 Conditions 


Examination shall be made about 2 h after removal of 
the samples from the appliance and shall be carried out 
by at least three expert assessors familiar with the test 
method. Each expert assessor shall receive: 

a) two analytical samples of water; 

b) two check samples of water; 

c) two analytical samples of butter; and 

d) two check samples of butter. 


The identity of the samples shall not be made known 
to the expert assessors. Examination for odour shall be 
carried out before examination for taste. 


15 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


The samples of water shall be examined prior to the 
samples of butter unless a separate examination by 
different expert assessors takes place. 


The examiners shall record their remarks, independently 
of each other, in writing. 


15.2.2 Evaluation 


The evaluation of the analytical samples shall be carried 
out with reference to the following scale: 


a) Mark 0: No foreign odour or foreign taste; 
b) Mark 1: Slight foreign odour or foreign taste; 


c) Mark 2: Definitely perceptible foreign odour or 
foreign taste; and 


d) Mark 3: Distinct foreign odour or foreign taste. 


If the requirement in accordance with 8.2 is not clearly 
met, the test shall be repeated. The following provisions 
shall be made for the second test: 


a) Cleaning of the compartments; 


b) Operation of the empty appliance for one week; 
and 


c) Temperature adjustment in the fresh food storage, 
cellar and chill compartment for the second test 
for absence of odour and taste. 


16 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
The refrigerator shall comply with the safety 
requirement given as per the following of IS 302-1: 

a) Protection against acess to live parts (see 8); 

b) Power input and current (see 10); 

c) Heating (see 11); 


d) Leakage current and electric strength at operating 
temperature (see 13); 


e) Moisture resistance (see 15); and 


f) Leakage current and electric strength (high voltage 
after humidity) (see 16); 


17 PACKING 


The refrigerator shall be packed in such packages, which 
are made of recyclable or bio-degradable materials. At 
least 80 percent by weight of the packaging material 
to be recyclable or bio-degradable and identified by 
proper symbol. 


18 DESIGNATION 
The refrigerator shall be designated according to the 
following: 


a) Type (for example, single door or double door, 
frost-free refrigerator, food freezer, etc.); 

b) Operating principle (compression); 

c) Class (tropical, T); 

d) Rated total volume, either in cubic decimetre or in 
litre; 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


e) Rated total storage volume, either in cubic 
decimetre or in litre; 


f) Rated storage volume of the food freezer 
compartment, and the star classifications(s); 


g) Rated storage volume(s) of any frozen food, 


storage compartment(s), and any ‘two-star’ 
section(s), if applicable; and 
h) Pull down time, in min. 
19 INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE AND 
MAINTENANCE 


19.1 Every appliance shall be accompanied on delivery 
by the manufacturers” instruction manual for its use 
and maintenance. The instructions shall include, in 
particular, the following information: 


a) Installation requirements (best location, levelling, 
connection - if required for defrost water, 
connections to energy source); 


b) Overall space reguired in use (see 3.4.5), with 
sketches showing the appliance with the means of 
access open and closed; 

c) For appliances which are intended to be built in, 
the recess dimensions together with any additional 
ventilation reguirements; 

d) Operating conditions 
procedures); 


(starting and stopping 


e) Instructions for use of the various controls [such 
as temperature sensing controls (thermostat) (s), 
fast freeze switch, indicator lights, air circulation 
and defrosting control(s)]; 


Limit values of the range of ambient temperature 
for the climate class for which the appliance is 
designed and the fact that the internal temperatures 
may be affected by such factors as the location 
of the appliance, ambient temperature and the 
frequency of door opening. If appropriate, a 
warning shall be given that the setting of the 
thermostat or other temperature control devices 
might have to be varied to allow for these factors; 


a 


g) Care required for best performance, such as: 


1) Loading the appliance [especially when 
the storage volume of the food freezer 
compartment (or cabinet) or any ‘three-star’ 
compartment(s) (or cabinet) is smaller than the 
corresponding gross volume and when no load 
limit lines exist]; 


2 


— 


The use of baskets and where appropriate, a 
warning on the risk of poor performance when 
the baskets are not used; 


3) The arrangement of food for storage, in 


16 


particular the needto avoid cross contamination 
4) The arrangement of food for storage and 
for freezing, where applicable, including, in 
particular, advice that food to be frozen shall not 
be placed in direct contact with food in storage 
and if appropriate, that it may be necessary 
to reduce the quantity to be frozen if freezing 
every day is anticipated; and 
In the case of appliances with chill 
compartments, it should be stated that some 
types of fresh vegetables and fruit are sensitive 
to cold; therefore, they are not suitable for 
storage in this kind of compartment. 


5) 


h) Maintenance and cleaning of the appliance; 


j) Fact that effervescent drinks should not be stored 
in food freezer compartments (or cabinets) or in 
low-temperature compartments (or cabinets), and 
that some products such as water ices should not be 
consumed too cold; 


k) Need to not exceed the storage time(s) 
recommended by the food manufacturers 
for commercially quick-frozen food in food 
freezer and frozen food storage compartments 
(or cabinets); 


m 


= 


Care required with regard to frozen food in storage 
in the event of an extended non-running of the 
appliance (interruption of power supply or failure 
of the refrigerating system); 


n 


wm 


Action to be taken when the appliance is switched 
off and taken out of service temporarily or for an 
extended period, for example, emptied, cleaned and 
dried, and the door(s) or lid(s) propped a jar; and 

Necessity that, for doors or lids fitted with locks 
and keys, the keys should be kept out of the reach of 
children and not in the vicinity of the appliance, in 
order to prevent children from being locked inside. 


p) 


Manufacturers are free to provide any additional 
instructions if required. 


20 SCHEDULE OF TESTS 


20.1 Type Tests 


The tests specified in Table 2 shall constitute the type 
tests and shall be carried out on a sample selected 
preferably at random from regular production or from 
the finished stock. Before commencement of the tests, 
the refrigerator shall be visually examined and inspected 
of components, parts and their assembly, constructions, 
mechanical hazards, marking provision of suitable 
terminals for supply connections, earthing and the screws 
effectiveness and connection. The external surface finish 
shall be even and free from finishing defects. 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


20.2 The acceptance tests shall be as provided in the constitute as routine test as per IS 302-1: 


Table 3. a) Leakage current test — The leakage current shall 
20.3 Production Routine Test not exceed 3.5 mA at rated voltage (see 13.2); 


Each refrigerator shall be subjected to the routine tests b) -Earthi m test (see A-1); and 
at the manufacturer's works which shall be carried out €) Electric strength (see A-2). 
without loading the refrigerator. The following shall 


Table 2 Type Tests 
( Clause 20.1 ) 
SI No. Tests Clause Reference 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Marking 
ii) Design and construction 
iii) Air tightness of doors or lid seals 9 
iv) Force of opening of doors and lids 10 
v) Durability of hinges and handles of doors and lids 11 
vi) Mechanical strength of shelves and similar components 12 
vii) Ice making test 14 
viii) Test for absence of odour and taste 15 
1x) Safety requirements 16 
x) Storage test 6 of Part 2 of this standards 
xi) Cooling capacity test 7 of Part 2 of this standards 
xii) Freezing capacity test 8 of Part 2 of this standards 
xiii) Automatic ice making capacity test 9 of Part 2 of this standards 
xiv) Pull down test 4.6 a) of Part 2 of this standard 
xv) Wine storage test 4.6 b) of Part 2 of this standard 
xvi) Temperature rise test 4.6 c) of Part 2 of this standard 
xvii) Water vapour condensation test 13 and 4.6 d) of Part 2 of this standard 
xviii) Measurement of volume 4.8 and Annex H of Part 3 of this standard 
xix) Determination of Energy consumption 6 of Part 3 of this standard 


17 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


Table 3 Acceptance Tests 


(Clause 20.2 ) 
SI No. Tests Clause Reference 
0) (2) 6) 
1) Marking 5 
ii) Air tightness of doors or lid seals (door seal test) 9 
iii) Force of opening of doors and lids 10 
iv) Durability of hinges and handles of doors and lids 11 
v) Mechanical strength of shelves and similar components 12 
vi) Water vapour condensation test 13 
vii) Ice making test 14 
viii) Test for absence of odour and taste 15 
x) Storage test 6 of Part 2 of this standards 
xi) Cooling capacity test 7 of Part 2 of this standards 
xii) Freezing capacity test 8 of Part 2 of this standards 
xiii) Automatic ice making capacity test 9 of Part 2 of this standards 
xiv) Pull down test 4.6 a) of Part 2 of this standard 
xv) Temperature rise test 4.6 c) of Part 2 of this standard 
xvi) Measurement of volume 4.8 of Part 3 of this standard 
xvii) Determination of Energy consumption 6 of Part 3 of this standard 
xviii) Door seal test 9 
xix) Thermostat function test 8.11 
xx) Protection against electric shock 8 of IS 302-1 
xxi) Input and current 10 of IS 302-1 
xxii) Heating 11 of IS 302-1 
xxiii) Leakage current and electric strength at operating temperature 13 of IS 302-1 
xxiv) Moisture resistance 15 of IS 302-1 
XXV) Leakage current and electric strength (after humidity treatment) 16 of IS 302-1 


18 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clauses 3.5.8, 14.1.1 and 14.1.2 ) 
TEST ROOM AND INSTRUMENTATION 


A-1 SCOPE 


This annex specifies instrumentation accuracies 
and test room characteristics required to carry out 
measurements and tests for the determination of the 
performance and energy consumption of refrigerating 
appliances in accordance with the procedures in Part 2 
and Part 3 of this standard. 


A-2 INSTRUMENTS, ACCURACY AND 
PRECISION OF MEASUREMENTS 


A-2.1 General 


Laboratories shall have procedures in place to ensure 
that all measurement instruments are operating correctly 
and are regularly calibrated in accordance with good 
laboratory practice laid down in IS/ISO/IEC 17025. 
Rounding off shall not be done other than as and where 
specified in the relevant parts of this standard as per 
IS 2. 


A-2.2 Electrical energy consumption 


Measurements of energy consumption shall be made 
with an expanded uncertainty (k = 2) of less than 
2 percent or 8 Wh whichever is the larger value. Daily 
energy consumption shall be recorded to the nearest 
1 Wh or better. Energy shall be recorded at least 
each minute or at each control event. Recording of 
instantaneous power and power factor in addition to 
energy is recommended. 


NOTE — For a normal distribution this coverage factor k 
corresponds to a 95 percent confidence level. 


A-2.3 Humidity 


The humidity of the test room shall be measured and 
recorded at a point which is representative. Where 
a humidity range is specified the accuracy of the 
measuring instruments shall be such that the result, 
expressed as percent relative humidity, shall have an 
overall uncertainty of measurement of not greater than 5 
percent. Where a one-sided humidity limit is specified, 
the accuracy of the equipment shall be sufficient to 
establish that the permitted limit has been met. 


A-2.4 Length 


Measurements of length shall have an expanded 
uncertainty (k = 2) less than 1 mm or 0.5 percent 
whichever is greater. 


All lengths shall be recorded to the nearest I mm. 
A-2.5 Mass 


The measured mass shall have an expanded uncertainty 
(k = 2) less than 5 g. 


19 


A-2.6 Temperature 


Temperature data shall be recorded at equal measuring 
intervals not greater than I min. 


Unless otherwise specified, the expanded uncertainty 
of measurement (k = 2) shall not be greater than 0.5 K. 
All temperature measurements shall be recorded to the 
nearest 0.1 K or better. 


Temperature transducers shall be inserted either into 
M-packages (see Annex C) or into the centre of solid 
masses made of brass or tin-covered copper having 
masses of 25 g + 5 percent and a maximum dimension 
of 18 mm. Reference to a temperature sensor in this 
standard means the metal mass. 


The masses should be kept clean to keep the emissivity 
coefficient low. 


Connections from the temperature sensors shall be 
arranged to minimise additional air leakage into the 
compartmenis. 


A-2.7 Time 


Calculated values of test duration, made up of the 
difference between time recorded at each sampling 
period, shall have an expanded uncertainty (k = 2) not 
more than 10 s or 0.1 percent, whichever is the greater. 
The time recorded for each sampling point shall have 
a resolution of 1 s or better. It is not a requirement 
of this standard to identify events that occur during 
(within) each sampling interval. However, use of an 
event recorder to identify the time of events within a 
sampling interval may improve data quality, especially 
where the product has relatively short control cycles. 


A-2.8 Voltage and Frequency 


The measured voltage and frequency shall have an 
expanded uncertainty (k = 2) smaller than 0.5 percent. 
Energy data shall be recorded at equal measuring 
intervals not greater than I min. 


A-3 GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS 


A-3.1 General 


A number of parameters shall be kept constant as well 
as be kept close to a target value during the test, for 
example, ambient temperature or supply voltage as 
required in A-3.2.2 and A-3.3. Verification of these 
parameters involves the following (see Fig. 8): 


a) The average value over the time period of interest 
shall be determined and shall be within a first given 
tolerance of the target value: Target-Toll < Average 
< Target + Toll; and 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


VERIFICATION 
CRITERIA 
AVERAGE +20 | 
TARGET + TOL 1 20<TOL 2 
AVERAGE 
I AVERAGE - TARGET I < TOL1 
AVERAGE - 2 0 | 
TARGET 


TARGET - TOL 1 


TIME —— 


o Standard deviation 


Tolerance from the target value 


Parameter fluctuations are constrained by requiring that 2 times the standard deviation is smaller 
than a given tolerance (Tol2) which means that 95 percent of the measurement data points have 
to be within this tolerance (assuming a normal distribution of the parameter of interest). This is 
independent of sampling frequency. 


FIG. 8 VERIFICATION OF PARAMETERS TO BE KEPT CONSTANT 


b) The standard deviation over the time period of 
interest shall be determined and shall be smaller 
than a second given tolerance: 2 o < Tol2 . 


A-3.2 Ambient Temperatures 
A-3.2.1 Sensors 


Ambient temperatures are measured using copper or 
brass masses (see A-2.6 and A-4.5). 


A-3.2.2 Temperature Stability 


During any period to obtain product stabilisation and 


b) 


For products rated for multiple climate classes, 
tests need to be performed at the extreme ambient 
temperatures only of all the relevant rated classes. 
Testing details are specified in 6 of Part 2 of this 
standard. 

EXAMPLE: For refrigerating appliances rated T, tests are 
performed at+ 16 °C and at +43 °C; 

For determination of energy consumption as 
specified in 6 of Part 3 of this standard: 


+ 32°C for all refrigerating appliances. 
NOTE — This test at+ 16 °C is under consideration; 


during the subsequent test period, the following shall c) For assessing the temperature rise time, freezing 
be valid for each of the recorded ambient temperatures capacity, cooling capacity and automatic 
sensors 7 and T: ice-making capacity of all refrigerating appliances, 
a) The time averaged value shall be within + 0.5 K of as applicable and specified in 7 to 9 and Annex C 
the test ambient temperatures specified in A-3.2.3; of Part 2 of this standard: 
and +25°C for all classifications of refrigerating 
b) Two times the standard deviation shall be smaller appliances; 
than 0.5 K. d) For assessing the pull-down performance test as 
The vertical ambient temperature gradient as specified specified in Annex A of Part 2 of this standard: 
in A-4.5 shall not exceed 1 K/m. + 43 °C for all refrigerating appliances; and 
e) For assessing the water vapour condensation test 


A-3.2.3 Temperature Values 


Tests shall be carried out under the following ambient 
temperature conditions: 


a) For assessing the storage temperatures: 


+ 16 °C and + 43 °C for class T refrigerating 
appliances. 


20 


as specified in Annex D of Part 2 of this standard: 
+32 °C for class T refrigerating appliances. 


NOTE — In India climate class T has been considered. 


A-3.3 Electricity Supply 
The test voltage and the test frequency shall be as follows: 


a) The rated voltage not exceeding 250 V and rated 
frequency of 50 Hz; and 


b) Where a voltage and frequency range are specified, 
the refrigerating appliance shall be tested at the 
mean of the rated voltage range and the highest 
rated frequency. 


For check testing purposes the total harmonic distortion 
in the voltage supply shall be not more than 3 percent and 
its value shall be included in the test report. The source of 
the electricity supply shall be described in the test report. 
During each test the following shall be valid for the 


recorded voltage sampled at each sampling period at the 
point of connection: 


1) The time averaged value shall be the test 
voltage+ I percent; 


2) Two times the standard deviation shall be smaller 


than 1 percent of the time averaged value. 


) 


During each test the following shall be valid for 
the recorded instantaneous supply frequencies at 
the point of connection; 
3) The time averaged value shall be the test 
frequency+ percent; and 


4) Two times the standard deviation shall be smaller 


than 1 percent of the time averaged value. 


a 


A-3.4 Power Supply Other than Electricity 


Refrigerating appliances other than those for electric 
power supply shall be tested under supply conditions 
corresponding to the information marked on the 
appliance. 


A-3.5 Multiple Power Supply 


Refrigerating appliances that are equipped for operation 
on energy sources other than or in addition to mains 
power should be tested at each of the supply conditions 
indicated on the appliance. 


A-3.6 Humidity 


Unless otherwise specified for specific performance 
or energy tests, the relative humidity shall not exceed 
75 percent. For tests at 10 °C ambient temperature this 
relative humidity limit does not apply. For energy tests at 
an ambient temperature of 16 °C, the test result is invalid 
if the measured ambient relative humidity exceeds 
75 percent during the test and condensation is visible as 
droplets or running water (as interpreted in accordance 
with Annex D of Part 2 of this standard). 


A-4 TEST ROOM CONFIGURATION 


A-4.1 General 


The appliance shall be installed in a test room setup as 
follows: 


21 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


A-4.2 Platform 


Each refrigerating appliance shall be placed on a wood 
or wood product, for example, plywood or reconstituted 
wood sheeting solid-top platform painted dull black 
and open for free air circulation under the platform. 
A suspended floor meeting the other specifications 
of a platform is considered to be a platform. As an 
alternative to black paint, a wooden platform or floor 
may be covered with a low emissivity dark coloured, 
non-glossy, smooth, impermeable surface, such as 
linoleum. 


The bottom of the platform shall not be less than 
0.05 m above the test room floor and shall extend at least 
0.3 m beyond all sides of the refrigerating appliance 
under test, except at the rear where the platform shall 
extend to the rear wall or partition. 


A raised platform is not required where the test room 
floor is made of wood or wood product, where there is 
insulation below the floor and the surface temperature 
of the floor remains within 1.5 K times of the lower test 
room temperature gradient sensor. The floor surface 
temperature shall be recorded at a representative 
position throughout the test to check the validity of this 
requirement. 


A-4.3 Rear Wall or Partition 


The surface behind the appliance shall be rigid, vertical 
and made of wood or wood product and painted dull 
black. This surface shall be continuous, extend not less 
than 0.3 m to each side of, and above, the appliance. 
The surface may be fixed to the wall of the test room 
with a gap of > 0.03 m or be in the form of a fixed 
partition within the test room. 


A-4.4 Side Partitions 


Where the unit under test has a fan forced condenser, 
shielding shall be included, where applicable to ensure 
that hot condenser exhaust does not directly affect any 
adjacent product under test. Side partitions are not 
required for testing units with a front exhaust. 


Where a product has any type of hot wall condenser 
at the back and/or side, a continuous wood or wood 
product partition painted dull black, parallel to each 
side of the appliance and fixed on the platform at least 
0.3 m from the sides of the appliance shall be used. The 
partitions shall extend at least 0.3 m above the appliance 
and shall be at least 0.3 m deep. Where necessary, for 
example, where there are side-wall condensers, the side 
partitions shall be extended so they are deep enough 
to shield any adjacent appliance under test from direct 
radiation from the condenser. 


Some products may have both wall condensers and 
fan forced condensers, so both of the above rules need 
to be applied in this case. Products with fan forced 
condensers may have side partitions fitted for testing if 
the test laboratory chooses to do so. 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


A-4.5 Sensor Location 


The ambient temperature sensors shall be located at 
two positions, TMP,, and TMP,, on each side of the 
appliance under test. The height of the temperature 
sensors above the platform shall be 0.9 m + 0.1 m or the 
height of the appliance under test + 0.1 m, whichever 
is lower. The depth of the temperature sensors from the 
rear partition shall be 0.3 m + 0.1 m. The side clearance 
of the temperature sensors shall be 0.3 m + 0.1 m from 
the refrigerating appliance. In the case where a side 
partition extends forward of the ambient temperature 
sensor position or where an external wall forms the side 
partition, the relevant ambient temperature sensor shall 
be located on the appliance side of the partition and, 
where necessary, shielded from any radiation from the 
appliance. The clearance of the ambient temperature 
sensor to any partition or fixture shall be at least 
25 mm. 


To assess the temperature gradient, two additional 
sensors in the test room shall be located at a height of 
0.05 m above the platform and at a height of 2 m above 
the platform (not shown in Fig. 9) in a position that is 
representative of ambient conditions in the test room. 


Ambient temperature sensors shall be shielded from any 
sources or sinks of radiant heat which differ from the 
measured air temperature in the test room by more than 


22 


5 K, including conditioning equipment, external windows 
or appliances under test. 


A-4.6 Test Room General Configuration 


The refrigerating appliance shall be placed or shielded 
from any sources or sinks of radiant heat which differ 
from the measured air temperature in the test room by 
more than 5 K. Sources or sinks of radiant heat could 
include conditioning equipment, external windows or 
other appliances under test. 


Air circulation in the test room shall be such that the 
specified ambient temperatures are obtained within 
the limits of the specified tolerances. The refrigerating 
appliance under test shall be shielded from any air 
currents with a velocity above 0.25 m/s. During test 
room operation, after installation of the appliance but 
without it necessarily running, a check, of the air velocity 
measurement at the centre of all accessible appliance 
walls, including the top at 0.3 m distance would satisfy 
this requirement. 


The air circulation in the test room shall not interfere with 
the normal air circulation created by the refrigerating 
appliance. 


The test room configuration for a single appliance is 
illustrated in Fig. 9. 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


= 0.3 o E 
f E — = 


NAN MAAANAN 


SINISIN NONINO NINININI NONONONO NONON 


LL 


Zg< 


SIDE PARTITION 


FREE AIR 
REAR PARTITION NNN MOVEMENT 


* SEE A- 4.2 REGARDING INSULATED FLOOR OPTION 


** SEE A- 4.4 REGARDING REQUIREMENTS AND 

DIMENSIONS FOR SIDE PARTITIONS ( IF ANY ) 
*** SEE A. - 4.5 REGARDING REQUIREMENTS FOR 
PLATFORM TEMPERATURE SENSOR HEIGHT 


TEST ROOM FLOOR & WALL 


OPTIONAL GRILL 


AE ALL DIMENSIONS IN METRES 


FIG. 9 PARTITIONS TO RESTRICT AIR CIRCULATION AND AMBIENT TEMPERATURES SENSOR POSITIONS 


23 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 3.5.7 ) 


PREPARATION OF AN APPLIANCE FOR TESTING AND GENERAL MEASUREMENT 
PROCEDURES 


( Normative ) 


B-1 SCOPE 


This annex specifies requirements for preparing an 
appliance for testing and test conditions to be complied 
with when determining its performance and energy 
consumption in accordance with Part 2 and Part 3 of 
this standard, as applicable. 


B-2PREPARATIONANDSET-UPOFAPPLIANCE 


B-2.1 General 


The following requirements for preparation of an 
appliance for measurement or testing shall be met, 
except where specifically varied in Part 2 or Part 3 of 
this standard. 


B-2.2 Running in of New Appliances 


For verification testing, prior to commencement of 
its first average power consumption measurement, 
the appliance shall have been run in for at least 
12 h compressor run time. Non-compressor based 
appliances shall be operated for at least 12 h prior to 
energy consumption measurements. The “run-in” may 
be made at any convenient room temperature or it may 
be part of any temperature stabilisation section of an 
average power consumption measurement. 


B-2.3 Installation of the Appliance in the Test Room 


B-2.3.1 The appliance shall be installed in a test room 
with measuring instruments as specified in Annex A. 


B-2.3.2 Rear Clearance 


For the determination of rear clearance, the following 
dimensions are defined as illustrated in Fig 10: 


a) Dimension A: the distance from the rearmost 
projection of the appliance (including any spacer 
fitted) to the test room wall (or simulated wall 
behind the appliance); and 


b 


wm 


Dimension B: the distance from the rear plane of 
the appliance to the test room wall (or simulated 
wall behind the appliance). The measurement 
shall be taken at the lowest point of the rear plane 
whether or not the rear plane is vertical. 


The rear plane of the appliance is the largest flat 
surface at the rear of the cabinet shell excluding any 
local features, namely stack condensers or protrusions 
associated with brackets or the compressor. 


24 


The appliance shall be assembled and located in the test 
room in accordance with the following rules: 


1) The appliance shall be assembled in accordance 
with the instructions (including any spacers 
that are to be fitted, assembled or activated at 
the time of installation); 


2) In plan view, the rear of the appliance shall 
be positioned parallel to the test room wall or 
simulated wall behind it; 


3) Ifrear clearance is not specified, the appliance 
shall be located with the rearmost projection 
against the test wall (Dimension A = 0 mm); 
and 


4 


— 


If clearance is specified, the appliance shall be 
placed in the test bay in accordance with the 
rear clearance instructions except where the 
distance from the rear plane of the appliance 
to the test wall (Dimension B) specified is 
> 51 mm. In this case the distance shall be 
adjusted such that either Dimension A = 0 mm 
or Dimension B = 51 mm. 


If spacers that are to be fitted, assembled or activated 
at the time of installation result in the distance from 
the rear plane of the appliance to the test wall 
(Dimension B) being equal to or more than 80 mm, 
then the spacers shall not be used. Where fitting rear 
spacers conflicts with any relevant dimensions in 
the manufacturer’s literature, the smallest clearance 
specified shall be used. Where spacers are fitted, they 
shall be treated in accordance with the above rules. 


Where no clearance is specified for appliances that 
require space behind for the lid operation, etc. such as 
a chest freezer, the rearmost position of the lid during 
opening to a vertical position shall be considered the 
rearmost projection of the appliance. 


For portable refrigerating appliances and freestanding 
absorption-type appliances in which refrigeration 
is effected by an absorption process using heat as an 
energy source, the manufacturer’s specification for 
the rear clearance shall be followed. If no spacers are 
defined, the distance between the rearmost projection 
and the wall shall be 20 mm or less. 


B-2.3.3 Built-in Appliances 


Appliances intended to be built-in shall be built-in 
in accordance with the instructions provided and in 


WALL 


RECESSED CONDENSER 
NO SPACERS 


EXTERNAL CONDENSER 
NO SPACERS 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


WALL WALL 


NO EXTERNAL CONDENSER 
NO SPACERS 


Fic. 10 EXAMPLES OF APPLIANCES WITH No SPACERS WHERE REAR CLEARANCE IS SPECIFIED 


accordance with the requirements set out below. 
Rear clearances shall be as set out in B-2.3.2. 


Refrigerating appliances intended only to be 
built-in or placed under a counter or under a worktop, 
or between cabinets (under-counter types), shall be 
built-in or placed in a test enclosure painted dull black. 
The enclosure shall be made of wood or wood product 
(for example, plywood or reconstituted wood sheeting) 
in the range 15 mm to 25 mm thick. If a manufacturer 
requires a facia door, 1t shall be fitted. 


The inner dimensions of the test enclosure shall comply 
with the instructions. 


If a range of dimensions are given, then the smallest 
values shall be used. If this data is not given, the inner 
dimensions of the test enclosure shall be as follows: 


a) The inner depth shall exceed by 20 mm to 22 mm 
the overall depth of the refrigerating appliance; 
b) The inner width shall exceed by 4 mm to 6 mm 


the overall width of the refrigerating appliance; 
and 


25 


c) The inner height shall exceed by 2 mm to 4 mm 
the overall height of the refrigerating appliance. 


If necessary, the test enclosure shall be provided with 
ventilating openings according to the instructions. 


The refrigerating appliance shall be built-in or placed 
in the test enclosure according to the instructions. 


If the refrigerating appliance is provided with spacers, 
strips or other special means of solid or resilient 
material for closing the gap between the contours of 
the refrigerating appliance and the cabinet or enclosure, 
these means shall be used accordingly. If such means 
are not provided, the gaps between the test enclosure 
and the refrigerating appliance shall be left open. 


To prevent airflow, the junction between the sides and 
back of the test enclosure shall be in close contact and 
sealed if necessary. 


B-2.4 Combined Appliances 


An appliance combined with an appliance other than 
a refrigerating appliance shall be subjected to the tests 
and measurement while they are combined, but with 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


the other appliance operating at the lowest possible 
user selectable energy consuming conditions, including 
“off” or not functioning. 


B-2.5 Setting Up 
B-2.5.1 General 


The appliance shall be set up in accordance with the 
instructions, except where these conflict with the 
requirements of this standard. All packing materials 
such as skid boards, base packers, pallets, etc. are to 
be removed. 


Exceptas follows, all internal fittings including drawers, 
bins and containers supplied with the appliance shall 
be put in position. Any specific variations in any test 
procedure specified in Part 2 or Part 3 of this standard 
may override B-2.5.1 a), b), c), or d). 


a) In the case of a frozen compartment, any ice 
cube trays having no specific subdivision to 
accommodate such trays shall be removed. All 
other ice cube trays shall be placed in position; 


b) Where a shelf has a convenience feature that 
attaches to it, the shelf and convenience feature 
shall be located in a position that is anticipated 
to have the least impact on temperature sensor 
positioning and result; 


c) Any trays, bins or containers that have no 
dedicated position(s) shall be removed; and 


d) For requirements for shelves in relationship to 
temperature sensor locations see Annex D. 


B-2.5.2 Variable Temperature Compartments 


Where the compartment is a variable temperature 
compartment type (that spans the operating range of 
several compartment types), it shall be classified and 
operated as the compartment type which has the highest 
energy consumption for the energy test. Requirements 
for defining the correct compartment type are defined in 
Table 1 of Part 3 of this standard. Where a refrigerating 
appliance has variable temperature compartments 
that can operate as more than one compartment type, 
additional compartment classifications may be tested, 
if required, in addition to the primary classification 
above. 


B-2.5.3 User-adjustable Features 
User-adjustable features shall be treated as follows: 


a) Where provision is made for the user of an 
appliance to alter the balance of the volume of one 
type of space in relation to another, except where 
otherwise specified, this balance shall be set so 
that the volume of the colder space is maximized; 


b) Where an appliance is fitted with user-operated 
selectors or switches for functions which change 
operating temperatures for a period of limited 
duration, for example fast freeze devices, each 


26 


shall, except where otherwise specified, be set so 
that these functions are inoperative; 


c) Where user-operated switches are provided 
for items such as displays, butter conditioner, 
network connections or secondary functions, for 
example screens that are intended to operate on a 
continuous basis, each shall be set in accordance 
with instructions. Accessories not necessary for 
the normal operation of the refrigerating appliance 
and not intended to operate on a continuous basis 
shall remain non-operational during testing; 


d) Where user-operated controls are provided for 
anti-condensation heaters, they shall be set as 
specified for the specific test in Part 2 or Part 3 of 
this standard; 


e) Where user-operated baffles or controls are 
provided for adjustment of temperatures in 
convenience features, and these have not been 
classified as sub-compartments, each shall be set 
so that the energy consumption is maximized 
except where specified otherwise for operating 
temperature performance tests; 


f) Where user-adjustable directional air ducts, 
vents or outlets are present, these shall be set as 
per instructions providing they are not directed 
within 30° of the centre line of any temperature 
sensor positions. If no specific instructions are 
provided, they shall be fully open and set to the 
mid or central position or as close as possible to 
it providing they are directed at least 30° away 
from any temperature sensor positions. Where 
there is no mid or central position, the flow shall 
be adjusted to the most upward direction or where 
this is not possible, towards the door. Where 
ducts have an option for spreading or narrowing 
the airflow stream, these shall be set on the most 
divergent setting. If options are provided in the 
instructions, the option closest to the above shall 
be selected; 


g) Unless otherwise directed in the instructions, any 
manually controlled air circulation fans shall be 
switched on for power measurements; 


h) When the refrigerating appliance is not fitted 
with a user-adjustable temperature control, the 
refrigerating appliance shall be tested in the 
condition as shipped; and 


j) Where the settings of available controls on an 
appliance are not fully specified above, appliance 
control settings should be selected so as to 
demonstrate concurrent conformance with test 
requirements in all compartments during each test. 


B-2.6 Automatic Ice Makers 
For all tests the storage bin shall remain in place. 


For all tests, whether or not there is ice in the storage 
bin, the ice delivery mechanism shall remain functional, 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


that is all chutes and throats required for the delivery of B-2.7 Pre-test Condition 


ice shall be free of packing, covers or other blockages 
that may be fitted for shipping or when the automatic 
icemaker is not in use. 


Unless specified otherwise in Part 2 or Part 3 of this 
standard, on commencement of testing, compartments 
shall be empty, free of surface frost and free of moisture. 
Means of access such as doors, drawers and lids, etc. 
shall be kept closed except as specified in Part 2 and 
Part 3 of this standard. 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 3.5.19 and Annex A ) 
TEST PACKAGES 


( Normative ) 


C-1 DIMENSIONS AND TOLERANCES 


The test packages used in the tests shall be in the form 
of rectangular parallelepipeds. Their size, prior to 
freezing, shall be 50 mm + 2.0 mm x 100 mm + 3.0 mm 
x 100 mm + 3.0 mm. Their mass, packaging included, 
shall be 500 g + 10 g. 


To assist handling, test packages may be bound with 
a single tape layer to provide stacks with bases of 
100 mm x 100 mm. Where stacks greater than 200 mm 
high are required they may be made by strapping 1 
kg packs having dimensions of 200 mm x 100 mm x 
50 mm so that they have a 100 mm x 100 mm footprint. 


Test packages shall be checked regularly and shall not 
present visible holes or cracks on the wrapper. When 
any package is found to exceed the above-mentioned 
tolerances, it shall be replaced by a new package. 


C-2 COMPOSITION 


The packages shall consist of the following: 
a) A suitable filling material containing, per I 000 g: 
1) 230 g of oxyethylmethylcellulose; 
2) 764.2 g of water; 
3) 5g of sodium chloride; and 
4) 0.8 g of 6-chloro-m-cresol. 
The freezing point of this material is —1 °C 


b) The following alternative composition of test 
packages with a freezing point near —5 °C may be 
used: 

1) 232 g of oxyethylmethylcellulose; 


2) 725 g of water; 


27 


3) 43 g of sodium chloride; and 
4) 0.6 g of 6-chloro-m-cresol. 
c 


== 


A wrapper, consisting of a sheet of plastic or 
any other suitable material of such a nature that 
exchange of moisture with the ambient medium is 
negligible. After filling, the wrapping sheet shall 
be sealed. It is advisable to use a laminated sheet, 
consisting of layer of high-pressure polyethylene, 
easily sealable, 120 um thick, together with 
an external sheet of polyethyleneterephthalate 
approximately 12.5 um thick, and the two layers 
being bonded together. 


Where test packages are required in general both 
packages of type a) or b) can be used except: 


1) For chill compartments, only test packages 
b) shall be used; 


2) For the light load during the freezing capacity 
test, only packages a) shall be used; and 


3) For one-star compartments, only test packages 
a) shall be used. 


C-3 M-PACKAGES 


Some of the 500 g packages (50 mm x 100 mm x 100 mm) 
shall be equipped for temperature measurement and 
shall be known as M-packages. These shall be fitted 
with thermocouples or other temperature-measuring 
transducers which shall be inserted in the geometrical 
centre of the packages in direct contact with the filling 
material. All precautions shall be taken to minimize 
extraneous conduction of heat. The composition and 
the limitations of their use shall be in accordance with 
C-1 and C-2. 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX D 
( Clauses 3.5.4, Annex A, and Amnex B ) 
DETERMINATION OF COMPARTMENT AVERAGE AIR TEMPERATURES 


( Normative ) 


D-1 SCOPE 


This Annex describes the required locations of sensors 
for measuring air temperatures in all compartments. It 
also describes the method of calculating the average 
air temperature at a point and within a compartment 
for various test procedures. The intent of this standard 
is to select positions that are representative of the 
compartment temperature where foodstuff is likely to 
be stored. 


D-2 LOCATION OF SENSORS 


D-2.1 General 


The positions specified for a temperature sensor is the 
geometric centre of the sensor (metal mass) except 
where minimum clearances are specified (in which case 
clearance is to the outer surface of the metal mass). 


All temperature sensor positions are defined in terms of 
the effective height and the width of the compartment 
in the following paragraphs as applicable. 


The effective height of the compartment is set out 
in D-2.4.2. Where the top (or bottom) is sloping, the 
effective height is taken as the average height. 


Items such as controls and vent housings shall be 
ignored as shall other features or protrusions with a 
volume of less than 2 1. 


D-2.2 Unfrozen Compartments 


Except as set out in D-2.4, three air temperature 
sensors in unfrozen compartments, for example, fresh 
food, chill and cellar compartments shall be located as 
follows: 


a) 50 mm from the effective bottom of the 
compartment; 


b) at % h of the effective height of the compartment 
measured from the effective bottom; and 
c) at % h of the effective height of the compartment 
measured from the effective bottom. 
These positions are illustrated in Fig. 11, 12, 13 and 
Fig 17 a) and with reference to D-2.4 as applicable. 


Each sensor is positioned midway between the front 
and rear of the compartment at the specified height of 
that sensor, unless otherwise specified. 


28 


Any sensor immediately below a box evaporator of 
any shape within an unfrozen compartment where the 
evaporator is configured to provide a separate storage 
space (sub-compartment) shall be located under the 
plan centroid of that evaporator. 


D-2.3 Frozen Compartments 


Except as set out in D-2.4, either five or seven air 
temperature sensors in frozen compartments shall be 
located as follows: 


a) two at 50 mm from the effective top of the 
compartment (front and rear); 


b) at % h (the effective height of the compartment) 
measured from the effective bottom; 


c) two at 50 mm from the effective bottom of the 
compartment (front and rear); and 


d) where the effective height of the frozen 
compartment exceeds 1 000 mm, two additional 
sensors shall be located at /4 h and % h (the 
effective height of the compartment) measured 
from the effective bottom. 


These positions are illustrated in Fig. 13, 14, 15, 16, 
17, and 18 with reference to D-2.4 as applicable. 


D-2.4 Equivalent Positions and Other 
Requirements for all Compartment Types 

D-2.4.1 General 

The equivalent sensor locations for special 


configurations or features and other requirements for 
all compartment types are set out below. 


If it is not possible to place sensors in the positions 
shown in Fig. 11 to 18, the first option is to use a mirror 
image of the positions as applicable as illustrated in 
Fig 19. 


Where it is not possible to place the temperature 
sensors in either of these positions, they shall be 
positioned as nearly as practicable to the specified 
locations in a position which will provide an 
equivalent result taking note of the intent above. The 
position of such locations shall be recorded in the test 
report. 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


FULL WIDTH CONV 
FEATURE / SUB 
COMPARTMENT 


PART WIDTH CONV 
FEATURE / SUB 
h COMPARTMENT 


PART WIDTH CONV 


FEATURE / SUB 
COMPARTMENT 
) CUTAWAY ) CUTAWAY (iii) CUTAWAY 
1 
1A GENERIC UNFROZEN 
(iv) CUTWAY ) CUTWAY 


(v ) CUTWAY 


w 
25 mm 
| Y CLEARANCE LINE 
| 
LIFE 
> E 


h IS TAKEN FROM THE AVERAGE 
HEIGHT OF THE COMPARTMENT 


(vii) CUTAWAY (viii) CUTAWAY (ix) CUTAWAY 


iat 


⁄ GEOMETRIC CENTRE OF THE 
Y PEATE EVAPORATOR T TEMPERATURE SENSOR 
Á 


SUB-COMPARTMENTS @ — TEMPERATURE SENSOR 
STRAIGHT CONV FEATURE RELOCATED TO MEET 
MINIMUM CLEARANCE 


CRISPER 


All dimensions are in millimeter 


Fic. 11 AIR-TEMPERATURE MEASURING POINTS-UNFROZEN COMPARTMENTS WITH 
PLATE OR CONCEALED EVAPORATORS AND EFFECTIVE HEIGHT AND WIDTH EXAMPLES 


29 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


CONVENIENCE 
FEATURE / 
CHILLER 


25 mm 
CLEARANCE 
LINE 


AA 


EXAMPLE 1 GENERIC WITH PART 
WIDTH CRISPER, CHILLER AT TOP 


CONVENIENCE 
FEATURE / CHILLER 


MINIMUM 25mm 
HORIZONTAL CLEARANCE 
FROM A FIXED FEATURE 


EXAMPLE 2 GENERIC WITH 
CRISPER-RELOCATION OF TEMPERATURE 
SENSORS TO MAINTAIN CLEARANCES 


All dimensions in millimetres 


NOTES 
1 For legend, refer to Fig. 11. 


2 Two complex examples showing implementation of multiple variations. 


FIG. 12 Arr-TEMPERATURE MEASURING POINTS — FRESH FOOD, CHILL AND CELLAR 
COMPARTMENTS—EXAMPLES OF GENERIC COMPARTMENTS WITH CRISPER AND CONVENIENCE FEATURES 


D-2.4.2 Calculation of Effective Height 


The effective height (4) of the compartment (4,) shall 
be adjusted such that 1t takes into account any fully 
enclosed part width or full width convenience feature 
or sub-compartment (unfrozen) as illustrated in Fig. 12 
The formula for the effective height is: 


h=h,-a-b 
where 
h= the effective height; 
h, = the full height of the compartment (ignoring 
the partial width sub-compartment/feature); 
a= the distance to the effective top; = h,, x —4 
b= the distance to the effective bottom; = h,, x Wie 
h, = the height of sub-compartments/features at the 
top; 
h, = the height of sub-compartments/features at the 
bottom; 
w= the full width of the compartment; 
w,,= the width of the sub-compartment/feature at 


the top; and 


30 


,, the width of the sub-compartment/feature at 


the bottom. 


The effective height adjustment above only applies to 
sub-compartment/features that are at the top or bottom 
of a compartment when in its intended location. 


Partitions or shelves are ignored when calculating the 
effective height. 


When determining internal dimensions for the purpose 
of temperature sensor placement where an exposed 
plate evaporator is present and the evaporator is 
greater than 20 percent of the height, width or depth, as 
applicable, the evaporator shall be assumed to cover the 
whole wall of the compartment. 
NOTE — A plate evaporator is an evaporator adjacent to 
the wall or roof of a compartment where the evaporator is 
not configured to provide a separate shelf, storage space or 
sub-compartment. 
Where a side gap is less than 40 mm, the fixed 
sub-compartment/feature shall be considered as 
extending to the liner or adjacent object. 


Where a fixed sub-compartment/feature has a width 
greater than 80 percent of the width of the compartment, 
the sub-compartment/feature shall be treated as being 
full width. 


D-2.4.3 Compartment Depth 


Temperature sensors shall be located at the midpoint 
between the front and back of the compartment. For 
all compartments, the front of the compartment is the 
door liner. Where surfaces are other than flat/straight, 
an equivalent average of the surface shape/position 
at and around the measuring point should be used to 
determine the effective front and back positions. 

NOTE — Refer to D-2.2 regarding the treatment of box 

evaporators. Refer to D-2.4.4 regarding variable depth 

compartments. 


D-2.4.4 Variable Width and Depth Compartments 


Where the overall compartment width or depth, 
excluding convenience features specified in D-2.4.9 
varies with height, the width and depth at each 
temperature sensor height shall be used to determine 
the required position of the sensor. 


D-2.4.5 Small Compartments/Small Sub-compartments 


For a compartment/sub-compartment or convenience 
height 


feature where the of the compartment/ 


h < 150 mm 


SIDE VIEW 


13A SMALL SUB COMPARTMENTS (REFER D-2.4.5) 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


sub-compartment is not more than 150 mm and the 
volume is not more than 25 | and where temperature 
measurements are required, two temperature sensors 
shall be used. Each shall be located 50 mm from the 
base of the sub-compartment, one at the front left 
and the other at the right rear at d/4 and w/4. 
(Refer to Fig. 13A). 


D-2.4.6 Low Height Compartments 


For unfrozen compartments, sub-compartments or 
convenience features where the effective height is 
300 mm or less and this is less than 0.7 of either the 
width or the depth, the temperature sensors shall be 
located in positions as shown in Fig. 13B). 


In cases where the width or depth is greater than 
700 mm, the positions shown in Fig. 13B shall also be 
used if the ratio of effective height to either depth or 
width is less than 0.6. 


For frozen compartments where the effective height 
is 200 mm or less and the volume is 40 1 or less, the 
temperature sensors shall be located in positions as 
shown in Fig. 13B). 


¡AAA EL cl me ml mm 


N 
ll 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
ie | 


SIDE VIEW 
13B LOW HEIGHT COMPARTMENTS (REFER D-2.4.6) 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 13 AIr-TEMPERATURE MEASURING POINTs — Low HEIGHT AND SMALL COMPARTMENTS 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


D-2.4.7 Clearance from Internal Fittings (Other Than 
Shelves) 


Except where otherwise specified, the clearance of 
temperature sensors shall be at least 25 mm from any 
internal fittings, walls or features. Clearance in this 
context means the distance from the internal fitting, 
wall or feature to the closest external surface of the 
temperature sensor (metal mass). 


Where a temperature sensor would have less than 
25 mm clearance from a fixed sub-compartment/feature 
that is not full width, the sensor shall be moved so that 
the specified height is maintained while a clearance 
of 25 mm is maintained from the surface of the 
sub-compartment/feature. Where a temperature sensor 
has to be placed next to a convenience feature that has 
a gap on each side, the sensor shall be placed in the gap 
that is the larger. Where the gap sizes are equal, the 
sensor shall be placed in the left gap for sensor positions 
that are above the centre of the effective height and on 
the right gap for sensor positions that are at or below 
the centre of the effective height. Also refer to Fig. 11 
and Fig. 12. 


A sensor shall only be placed beside a part width fixed 
sub-compartment/feature where the side gap to the 
liner or adjacent object is 100 mm or greater. 


D-2.4.8 Shelf and Temperature Sensor Placement 


Where shelf positions are adjustable they shall be 
positioned just below the specified sensor locations 
while maintaining a minimum clearance of 25 mm. 
Where shelves have limited adjustability and a 
temperature sensor would have less than 25 mm 
clearance from the underside of a shelf surface, that 
temperature sensor shall be relocated to a position 
above the shelf with a clearance of 25 mm. 


Where possible one shelf in the largest unfrozen 
compartment type (where applicable) shall be located 
below temperature sensor position TMP, and above 
TMP, and one shelf shall be located below temperature 
sensor position TMP, and above TMP,. As far as 
possible, any remaining shelves shall be evenly spaced 
through the compartment. Door shelves, drawers, 
bins, sliding baskets or items with dedicated but 
interchangeable positions shall all be kept in place 
but organised to minimise their interference with 
temperature sensors. 


Items which are not intended to be in place during 
normal use, as specified in the instructions, are removed 
for all tests. 


Where a temperature sensor would have less than 
50 mm clearance above or below a refrigerated shelf 
surface, that temperature sensor shall be relocated to 
a position with 50 mm clearance above the relevant 
refrigerated shelf. 


32 


D-2.4.9 Convenience Feature and Temperature Sensor 
Placement 


Where a convenience feature interferes with the 
position of a temperature sensor, the same rules as for 
part width compartments in D-2.4.7 and for shelves, 
D-2.4.8 apply. If the sensor in the compartment lies in 
the convenience feature, it shall be moved to the nearest 
position outside it. 


D-2.4.10 Frozen Compartment Sensors and Door 
Shelves 


Where a deep door shelf interferes with or encloses 
the location for sensor positions TMP,, or TMP,,, 
(refer to Fig. 15 and Fig. 16) or the air space clearance 
is less than 10 mm, then the centreline of the sensor 
shall be moved up to 150 mm into the compartment 
(an additional 50 mm). If this does not satisfy the 
requirements, the sensor shall be located inside the 
shelf as close as possible to the original position while 
maintaining a clearance of 30 mm from the centre of 
the sensor to the wall and 50 mm from the centre of the 
sensor to the floor of the shelf. 


D-2.4.11 Placement of Temperature Sensors within 
Drawers and Bins 


Where a drawer or bin forms an enclosed 
compartment/sub-compartment or convenience feature, 
the top of the space, for the purposes of temperature 
sensor placement, shall be level with the lowest fixed 
point above the drawer or bin as it slides in and out 
effectively equal to the top of the tallest object that 
could be placed into the drawer or bin without catching. 


Where a temperature sensor is required within or in the 
vicinity of a drawer or bin, the sensor shall be located 
inside the drawer or bin and the drawer or bin shall be 
treated as the inside of the liner. 


When drawers and/or bins wholly or predominantly 
occupy the space within a compartment, sensors shall 
be placed within these drawers or bins in positions 
specified in D-2.2 or D-2.3, as applicable. In the case 
of solid drawers or bins, temperature sensors shall lie 
inside the relevant drawer or bin (refer D-2.4) while 
maintaining all clearances (see D-2.4.7) and treating 
the base of the bin as a shelf (see D-2.4.8). 


Where the available space is so small that the clearances 
specified cannot be achieved, the clearance from the 
temperature sensor to the bin bottom (25 mm) shall 
be maintained as far as possible while reducing the 
clearance to the compartment top. 


The positions of temperature sensors within drawers 
and bins are illustrated in Fig 18. 
D-2.5 Consideration of Convenience Features 


For the purposes of the tests in this standard, a 
convenience feature is not subject to the temperature 


measurement requirements which apply to 
sub-compartments. However, this is conditional upon the 
following requirement that the sum of the volumes of; 


a) Fixed convenience features in a compartment 
shall not exceed 25 percent of the compartments 
volume; or 


b) The sum of fixed and removable convenience 
features in a compartment shall not exceed 
40 percent of the compartments volume. 


Where the volume of fixed convenience features in 
any compartment exceeds these limits, a sufficient 
number of fixed convenience features shall be selected 
and deemed to be sub-compartments and therefore 
classified and tested accordingly until the above volume 
requirement on convenience features is met according 
to the following rules: 


a) Firstly, those with separate temperature controls 
(including those with 2 position controls) in 
decreasing size order; then 


b) Those without separate temperature controls in 
decreasing size order. 


Where the above rules give two or more convenience 
features an equal ranking, the first selected shall be 
the one farthest from the centre of the space in which 
compartment temperature sensors are located. 


Details of temperature-control setting for convenience 
features are set out in B-2.5.3. 


Where a compartment consists wholly or mainly of 
drawers and/or bins, these generally would not all be 
considered as convenience features. 


33 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


D-3 COMPARTMENT AVERAGE AIR 


TEMPERATURES DETERMINATION 


D-3.1 General 


For each compartment, the average air temperature at 
each sensor location is determined. These temperatures 
are then combined to determine the compartment 
temperature. 


D-3.2 Determination of the Average Temperature of 
a Sensor over a Period 


The average temperature of a sensor over a period shall 
be determined by integration. More frequent sampling 
for selected periods during the test may be used. For 
example, higher frequency sampling may be useful for 
short duration events. If it is necessary to combine data 
with dissimilar sampling rates, each data point shall be 
weighted in proportion to its relevant sampling period. 


D-3.3 Determination of the Temperature of a 
Compartment 

The temperature of a compartment shall be determined 
over the applicable temperature determination period. 
D-3.4 Calculation of Temperature Average 


The compartment temperature shall be the arithmetic 
mean of the temperatures for all temperature sensors in 
the compartment. 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


SA 7 
| 


å 


GE SEG 


> 
IA 


1000 mm 


— 


h< 
1000 m 


EE EV UV w k.p.” 


lam 


a 


PASS 


h/2 


SIDE VIEW SIDE VIEW 


14A TYPE 1 14B TYPE 2 
Dimensions in millimetres 


FIG. 14 LOCATION OF TEMPERATURE SENSORS WITHIN UPRIGHT FROZEN COMPARTMENTS WITHOUT REFRIGERATED 
SHELVES AND WITH HEIGHT EQUAL TO OR Less THAN 1 000 MM 


34 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


SIDE VIEW SIDE VIEW 
15A TYPE 1 WITHOUT COMPRESSOR STEP 15B TYPE 2 WITH COMPRESSOR STEP 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 15 LOCATION OF TEMPERATURE SENSORS WITHIN UPRIGHT FROZEN COMPARTMENTS WITHOUT REFRIGERATED 
SHELVES AND WITH HEIGHT GREATER THAN 1 000 mM 


35 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


a 


e 


TMP11TMP16 TMP17 TMP11TMP16 TMP17 


AER 4222422477 L221 


VIZ LL 
‘a 
| 


GAL 72414 


VILL 


Nur 


N 
N 
š 
Š 
N 
| 


— d 


R= Zİ A 


VA 


Ob ANM å 474 


| eter TMP 4 | N 7 

N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Ñ 

= 
NI 
| 50 h> Å 
h> 1000 mm N 
1000 mm h/4 h/4 N 

= 

me 


S 
N $ 
N y 
h/4 Y N MM 
| | 
N f 
1 y > N y 
VZZZZZZAZZL | VZLZZZZZ22Z2 43 | 
SIDE VIEW SIDE VIEW 
REFRIGERATED SHELVES - SPACING REFRIGERATED SHELVES - SPACING 
DOES NOT AFFECT SENSOR LOCATION DOES AFFECT SENSOR LOCATION 


Q MOVED SENSOR POSITION - ORIGINAL POSITION NOT 
PERMITTED WITHIN 50 mm OF REFRIGERATED SHELVES 


SENSORS NOT PERMITTED IN ZONE 50mm ABOVE 
AND BELOW REFRIGERATED SHELVES 


Dimension in millimetres 


FIG. 16 LOCATION OF TEMPERATURE SENSORS WITHIN UPRIGHT FROZEN COMPARTMENTS WITH 
REFRIGERATED SHELVES AND WITH HEIGHT GREATER THAN 1 000 MM 


36 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


hs 
1000mm 


NAS ANNAN NE 


| 
e 


WE NN NN. =$ 


iğ 
| 
| 
; 
| 
A 


TOP VIEW TOP VIEW 
17A TYPE 1 17B TYPE 2 


Dimensions in millimetres 


FIG. 17 LOCATION OF TEMPERATURE SENSORS WITHIN CHEST FREEZERS (1 OF 2) 


37 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


— 50 — — 50 =— 


TOP VIEW 
j d 


zel 


A İĞ 


100 100 


VR = å 


f 
/ 


İİ > > a 


SIDE VİEW 
17D TYPE 4 


SIDE VIEW 
17C TYPE3 


Dimensions in millimetres 


FIG. 17 LOCATION OF TEMPERATURE SENSORS WITHIN CHEST FREEZERS (2 OF 2) 


38 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


í 
| 
; 
| 
; 
| 


TMP14 TMP15 


+ 


—— 


$) TMP12 TMP:S 
TMP 11 


+ 


TMP14 VE. 


UN Ñ 
J J 
NNUU manna 


ZLA 


l 
' 
l 
' 
| 
' 
' 
' 
N 
N 


VAA A AM dk 


Ne 


VÆR NA å 


4 


18C LOCATION OF TOP TEMPERATURE SENSORS WHERE UPPER DRAWER HEIGHT IS < 75 mm(FROZEN) 


NOTE — For legend, refer to Fig. 11 
Dimensions in millimetres 


FiG. 18 LOCATION OF TEMPERATURE SENSORS WITHIN DRAWERS AND BINS 


39 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


< LL BEL 


D 
Z 
7 
7 
J 
VA 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 19 LOCATION OF TEMPERATURE SENSORS WHEN MIRROR İMAGE IS APPLICABLE 


40 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 5.2 ) 
DETAILS OF IDENTIFICATION SYMBOLS 


( Normative ) 


The details of identification symbols for frozen 
compartments are given in Fig. 20 and Fig. 21. 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Dimensions are given for information; they may be reduced, while maintaining the same proportions, but the symbol height shall not be less than 5 mm. 


FIG. 20 DETAILS OF IDENTIFICATION SYMBOLS FOR FOUR-STAR COMPARTMENTS 


41 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


R20 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Dimensions are given for information; they may be reduced, while maintaining the same proportions, but the symbol height shall not be less than 5 mm. 


Fic. 21 DETAILS OF IDENTIFICATION SYMBOLS FOR FROZEN COMPARTMENTS (EXCEPT FOUR-STAR) 


42 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX F 
ITEMS TO BE INCLUDED IN THE TEST REPORT 


( Informative ) 


The following items should be covered by test reportsin | SI No. Tests Clause Number 
respect of the tests specified in this standard in addition 
to those specified in Part 2 and Part 3 of this standard: 6 Wine storage Annex B of Part 2 
SI No. Tests Clause Number appliances and 
compartments storage 
test 
1 Storage test Clause 6 of Part 2 - 
A - 7 Temperature rise test | Annex C of Part 2 
2 Cooling capacity test | Clause 7 of Part 2 
= ; 8 Water vapour Annex D of Part 2 
3 Freezing capacity test | Clause 8 of Part 2 condensation test 
4 Automatic ice-making | Clause 9 of Part 2 9 Energy consumption Part 3 
capacity test measurement 
5 Pull-down test Annex A of Part 2 ió | Volume measurement Part 3 
ANNEX G 
( Clauses 3.1.6 and 3.3.14 ) 
WINE STORAGE APPLIANCE 
( Normative ) 
G-1 SCOPE to the instructions, in the range from T = +5 °C to + 


The purpose of this Annex G is to determine terms, 
definitions and performance of wine storage appliances. 


G-2 TERMS, DEFINITIONS AND SYMBOLS 


For the purposes of this Annex G, the following terms, 
definitions and symbols apply. 


G-2. Wine Storage Compartment Temperature 


T ma IS the arithmetic average temperature of the wine 


storage temperatures T iw Tow T, 


im” ~ w2m’ ` w3m" 


G-2.2 Ambient Air Exchange Device 

Device which allows the exchange of the air in a 
refrigerating compartment with ambient air. This 
is either fixed by the manufacturer, automatically 
controlled or set manually by the user as per the 
instructions. 


NOTE — A hole for defrost water drainage is not be considered 
to be an air exchange device. 


G-3 REQUIREMENTS 


G-3.1 Required Temperature Range 


The appliance shall have a continuous storage 
temperature, either pre-set or set manually according 


43 


20 °C. Each compartment shall provide T a < + 12 °C. 
NOTE — The range + 5 °C to + 20 °C indicate the maximum 
allowed range, not the target values. 


G-3.2 Maximum Temperature Fluctuation 


Storage temperature(s) shall vary over time by less than 
0.5 K at each declared ambient temperature specified by 
the climate class for household refrigerating appliances 
(see 4). The definition of the temperature variation is 
given in G-7. 


G-3.3 Vibration 


The appliance shall be constructed to reduce the 
transmission of vibration to the compartment, whether 
from the refrigerator compressor or from any external 
source. 


G-4 GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS 


G-4.1 General 

A-3 of this standard (Part 1) applies unless otherwise 
specified for wine storage appliances. 

G-4.2 Low Ambient Temperature 


For tests at ambient temperatures close to or below 
the average storage temperature for the specified 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


compartment, instructions on possible warmest 
temperature setting when applicable shall be considered. 


G-4.3 Interior Parts 


If position of shelves is adjustable these shall be spread 
equally in the cabinet. 


Shelves, baskets and container shall be in position as 
defined in the instructions. 


G-5 DETERMINATION OF VOLUMES 


G-5.1 Depth 


For wine storage appliances: Where a back mounted 
evaporator is covered by a fixed cover (for example, its 
protection ) the depth of the evaporator space shall be 
taken as the mean horizontal distance to the foremost 
part of the protection cover. 


G-5.2 Evaluation of Bottle Capacity for Wine 
Storage Compartments 


For the evaluation of the rated capacity of bottles 
0.75 I bottles or equivalent substitution with dimension 
as specified in Fig. 23 shall be used. 


To check the deformation of shelves etc. under normal 
usage condition, bottles are to contain water to provide 
a total weight of each bottle of 1 200 g + 50 g. 


Removable parts which are stated by the manufacturer 
as necessary for the proper thermal and mechanical 
functioning of the wine storage compartment have to be 
placed in their intended positions as per the instructions. 
Bottles shall be stacked in each space intended to carry 
bottles in normal usage as follows: 


a) Clearance to wall/back/door shall be as per the 
instructions; 


b) In the absence of instructions, to ensure proper 
cooling, the rear end of shelves and 5 mm 
clearance to the door are considered as limits; 


c) Bottles placed in door shelves may touch the door 
liner; 

d) If the evaporator is covered by fixed means for 
protection, bottles can be stacked touching the 
protection; 

e) Bottles can be placed reverse and interleaved; 

f) Bottles can touch side walls if nothing else is 
stated by the manufacturer; 

g) Bottles can be placed horizontally or vertically or 
inclined if fixed means are provided for inclined 
positions; and 

h) Movable parts like telescopic shelves have to 
be kept movable and accessible under loading 
conditions. 

Asketch of the bottle loading plan showing the location 
of bottles for evaluation of the bottle capacity for wine 


44 


storage compartments shall be included in any test 
report. 


G-6 MEASUREMENT 
TEMPERATURE 


OF STORAGE 


The temperatures 7, Tum Tsm Shall be measured in 
M-packages supported or suspended in order to have 
their geometrical centre at the temperature-sensing 
points and so that their largest surface is horizontal. The 
M-packages may be supported, for example, by use of a 
block of expanded polystyrene (EPS) of the same base 
dimensions as the M-package. M-packages shall have 
no direct contact with any other surface. 


For determining the storage temperature, the 
temperature-sensing points shall be located at TMP ,, 
TMP ,, TMP , as shown in Fig. 23, halfway between 
the rear internal wall of the appliance and the internal 
wall of the closed door. Walls defined as being 
considered for the calculation of storage volume. 


The M-packages shall be separated from any 
heat-conducting surface by at least 25 mm of air space. 
The instantaneous temperatures of the M-packages 7, , 
T „and T , shall be recorded. 


The temperatures T ,,7,, ,and7,,, atthe temperature- 
sensing points shall be the integrated time averages of 
Tu, T,, and T , during a test period with an integral 
step of 60 s or less. 

The storage temperature T „1s the arithmetical average 


of the mean temperatures 7.» T u, I and T 


Im? ~ w2m? w3m' 

If internal components do not allow the temperatures 
Ts T,, and T,, to be read at the points specified, 
readings shall be taken in positions such that the 
geometrical centre of the M-package is no more than 
25 mm from the point specified. If the interior 
arrangement of the wine storage compartment does not 
conform to those shown in Fig. 23 , the temperatures 
T, T. and T , shall be read in positions determined 


by analogy with the positions indicated. 


If there is an ambient air exchange device and this 
can be influenced by the user the device shall be set 
to operate for normal usage as per the manufacturer 
instructions. 


Storage temperatures shall be tested at the lowest and 
highest ambient temperatures for the claimed climate 
classes. Each wine storage compartment shall be 
measured at T < 12 °C. 


wma — 


The temperatures shall be recorded. 


G.7 DETERMINING 
FLUCTUATION 


TEMPERATURE 


Determining of the temperature fluctuation will be 
performed at the temperature T = 12 °C or the nearest 
colder temperature at an ambient temperature of 25 °C 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 22 STANDARD BOTTLE FOR EVALUATION OF BOTTLE CAPACITY 


and at the lowest and highest ambient temperature for 
the climate class claimed. 


The test will be performed in condition as specified in 
G-6. 


The temperature fluctuation is evaluated for each 
measuring point TMP. The instantaneous temperatures 
of the M-packages 7, , T „and T shall be recorded. 


wl? w3 

An amplitude is the difference between the warmest 
and coldest instantaneous temperature between 
two successive stops of the refrigerating system. 
If no successive stops of the refrigerating system 


45 


can be identified a continuous period of 4 h will be 
considered. 


The average of all temperature amplitudes at each 
measurement point TMP ; during the whole test period 
shall stay within 0.5 K. 


G-8 FINAL TEST REPORT 


Any final test report for wine storage appliances shall 
include the test results of the following: 


a) Energy consumption (see 5 of Part 3 of this 
standard); 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


NOTE — For wine storage appliances closed with one door but split by a fixed or adjustable divider in separate compartments with 
independent temperature control the above arrangement shall apply for each compartment. 

If z < 100 mm TMP „shall not be used 

If h. < 300 mm TMP , shall be used 


Key 
I Shelf above a container placed at lowest possible position 


2 D, resp D,= distance between reference lines as used for net volume determination 


Fic. 23 TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT POINTS (PACKAGES) 


46 


b) Temperature fluctuation (see B-5.1 of Part 2 of 
this standard); 


c) Bottle capacity of the compartments (see G-5.2 of 
this standard); and 


d) A sketch of the bottle loading plan showing the 
location of bottles for evaluation of the bottle 
capacity. 


G-9 MARKING AND INSTRUCTIONS 


G-9.1 Technical 
Information 


and Commercial Product 


The following information shall be marked on technical 
and product information of wine storage appliances: 
“This appliance is intended to be used exclusively for 
the storage of wine”. 


This shall not apply to household refrigerating 
appliances that are not specifically designed for wine 
storage but may nevertheless be used for this purpose 
or to household refrigerating appliances that have a 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


wine storage compartment combined with any other 
compartment type. 


G-9.2 Instructions 


The following information shall be marked on 
Instructions provided with wine storage appliances: 
“This appliance is intended to be used exclusively for 
the storage of wine”. 


This shall not apply to household refrigerating 
appliances that are not specifically designed for wine 
storage but may nevertheless be used for this purpose 
or to household refrigerating appliances that have a 
wine storage compartment combined with any other 
compartment type. 


For compartments providing a temperature setting 
close to or higher than the declared lowest climate 
class temperature, instructions shall be provided on the 
warmest possible temperature setting at low ambient 
temperatures. 


ANNEX H 
( Clauses 1.6 and 5.5 ) 
CRITERIA FOR ECO-LABEL FOR REFRIGERATORS 


H-1 The refrigerators shall conform to the requirements 
for quality, safety, and performance prescribed in the 
standard. 


H-2 The manufacturer shall produce the consent 
clearance as per the provisions of Water (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, Water (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977, and Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 
along with the authorization, if required under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to BIS while 
applying for ECO Mark. 


H-3 NOISE LEVEL 


For ECO Mark the refrigerators shall conform to 
the noise levels as notified under the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 from time to time. 


H-4 INSTRUCTIONS 


The refrigerators shall be sold along with instructions 
for proper use so as to maximize product performance, 
minimize wastage, and method of safe disposal of used 
product. 


47 


H-5 ENERGY CONSUMPTION 


The power consumption shall be at least 5 percent less 
than those specified in the standard. 


H-6 ENERGY EFFICIENCY 


The product shall have at least 96 percent energy 
efficiency. 


H-7 PACKING 


The refrigerators shall be packed in such packages, 
which are made of recyclable or biodegradable 
materials. 


H-8 REFRIGERANTS 


The refrigerants and foam blowing agents shall not 
contain any Ozone-Depleting Substances (ODS) 
relevant to the refrigeration industry as identified under 
Montreal Protocol. 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX J 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


Organization(s) 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Annapurna Electronics and Services Ltd, Hyderabad 
BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Pvt Ltd, 
Chennai 


Blue Star Limited, Mumbai 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Carrier Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Limited, 
Gurugram 
Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 


Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 


Danfoss Industries Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Electrical Research and Development Association, 
Vadodara 

Emerson Climate Technologies(India) Pvt Ltd, Karad 

Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Company Limited, 
Mumbai 

Honeywell International India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 

Indian Institute of Chemical Engg, Kolkata 

Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 

Ingersoll Rand India Limited, Bengaluru 

International Copper Association India, Mumbai 

Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


LG Electronics India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 


Representative(s) 


Pror (Dr) Ravi Kumar (Chairman) 


SHRI G. K. PRASAD 
Suri J. S. Sastry (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY KUMAR LOGANATHAN 
SHRI BALASUBRAMANIAN ANAND (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDRA BHAMBURE 
SHRI SUNIL Kumar JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER PANDITA 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIKH (Alternate) 
Ms DEEPSHIKHA WADHWA (YP) 
Suet T. P. ASHwIN (YP) 


SHRI BIMAL TANDON 
Suri D. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


Dr P. CHANDRA SEKHAR 
SHRI GUJJALA B. BALARAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 


SHRI MADHUR SEHGAL 
Suri K. L. NAGAHARI (Alternate I) 
Suri M. N. S. V. KIRAN Kumar (Alternate II) 


SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
SHRI RAKESH PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
Suri D. P. DESPANDE (Alternate) 


SHRI BURZIN J. WADIA 
SHRI Å. A. ACHAREKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR KAVALATH 
Dr Nitin Karwa (Alternate) 


Dr D. SATHIYAMOORTHY 
Dr Supr K. Das (Alternate) 


Dr JYOTIRMAY MATHUR 
SHRI ASHISH RAKHEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI M. VENKANNA 
Suri J. GURUSAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI MAYUR KARMAKAR 
SHRI SHANKAR SAPALIGA (Alternate) 


SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 
Suri C. M. PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI ADITYA ANIL 
SHRI RAJAT SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. SURYANARAYAN 
Suri S. K. JHA (Alternate) 


Organization(s) 


Refrigeration & Airconditioning Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


Samsung India Electronics Pvt Ltd, Noida 

Sierra Aircon Private Limited, Gurugram 

The Chemours India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 

UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 

Voltas Ltd, Mumbai 

Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 
Voice, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (H.No. 03, Savita Vihar, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (306/2, Kirti Apartments, Mayur 
Vihar, Phase-1 Extension, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


Representative(s) 


SHRI GURMEET SINGH 
SARI R. K. Menta (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV CHOUDHARY 
SHRI KALICHARAN SAHU (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. MUDGAL 
Suri S. DHIMAN (Alternate) 


SHRI VIKAS MEHTA 
SHRI NISHIT SHAH (Alternate) 


Suri V. MANJUNATH 
Suri SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SRINIVASAN MOTURI 
Suri Å. D. KUMBHAR (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. WADHWA 
Suri B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. AGRAWAL 


Suri P. K. MUKHERJEE 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms KHUSHBU JYOTSNA KINDO 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Panel on Household Refrigerating Appliances 


Organization 


In personal capacity (306/2, Kirti Apartments, 
Mayur Vihar, Phase-1 Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity, (F-88, Abdul Fazal Enclave, 
Jamia Nagar, New Delhi) 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 
Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 
Voice, New Delhi 


Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Electrical Research and Development Association, 
Vadodara 


BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Pvt Ltd, 
Chennai 


UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 
Consumer Education & Research Centre, Ahmedabad 


Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. K. MUKHERJEE (Convener) 
Suri S. T. H. Faripi (Co-Convener) 


SHRI SAMEER PANDITA 
Suri A. R. Ravi KUMAR 


Suri B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 


SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 


SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
SHRI MADHANRAJ RAMALINGAM 


SHRI V. MANJUNATH 


DR JYOTIRMAY MATHUR 


49 


IS 17550 (Part 1) : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 


Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 


Consumer Electronics and Appliances Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


Voltas Beko, New Delhi 


SHRI ROHIT KUMAR SINGH 
SHRI AMIT CHADHA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANSHU DHANDA 
Member Secretary 


Ms KHUSHBU JYOTSNA KINDO 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


50 


(Continued from second cover) 


A scheme of labelling environmentally friendly products with an ECO logo known as ECO-mark has been 
introduced at the instance of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC), Government 
of India. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India, issued a Notification 
dated 17 May 1996 [GSR 2 14(E)] for ECO labelling of refrigerators. These ECO Labelling criteria relevant to 
refrigerators have been incorporated in this standard. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex J. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (12796). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern o : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


