NAT Ala IS 17785 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Nara carat eat aaa Ana — Ytri 
Wert eh few dents 


Sustainable Development of 
Habitats — Indicators for 
Resilient Cities 


ICS 13.020.20 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2022 Price Group 13 


Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Smart Cities 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Cities need indicators to establish their baseline, measure and evaluate their performance. However, existing 
indicators are often not standardized, consistent, or comparable over time or across cities. To address these 
challenges, a new series of Standards are being developed to provide standardized indicators that enable a uniform 
approach to what is measured, and how that measurement is to be undertaken. 


The Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59 has taken up work of formulation of standards in the area of 
development of smart and sustainable cities including indicators for sustainable development of habitats, resilient 
cities and smart cities. Also, the Committee has taken up standards development in the field of smart transportation 
and allocation of parking lots, etc. In fact, smartness acts as an accelerator to sustainable development, hence the 
various concepts and standards being evolved have to be understood from the same consideration. 


The first standard in this series, IS 17000 : 2019 ‘Indicator for sustainable development of habitats’ is designed to 
assist cities in steering and assessing the performance management of city services and all service provisions as 
well as quality of life. It considers sustainability as its general principle and resilience and inclusiveness as guiding 
concepts in the development of cities. 


This standard complements IS 17000 : 2019 and establishes indicators and indicator definitions and methodologies 
to measure and consider aspects and practices relevance to a city’s resilience planning and assessment. Progress 
and transformation towards sustainable development through maintaining and improving city services and quality 
of life in the face of shocks and stresses is a core component of a resilient city. Another standard in this series is 
IS 17738 : 2022 ‘Sustainable development of habitats — Indicators for smart cities’. 


Cities are increasingly confronted by shocks which include extreme natural or human made events which result 
in loss of life and injury, material, economic, and/or environmental losses and impacts. These shocks can include 
floods, earthquakes, cyclones, wildfires, epidemics, pandemics, chemical spills and explosions, terrorism, power 
outages, financial crises, cyber-attacks, accidents, stampedes, and conflicts. A resilient city is also able to manage 
and mitigate ongoing human and natural stresses in a city relating to environmental degradation (for example, 
poor air and water quality), social inequality (for example, chronic poverty and housing shortages) and economic 
instability (for example, rapid inflation and persistent unemployment) that cause persistent negative impacts in a 
city. 

A city’s preparedness can be achieved by developing a detailed understanding of the risks to the city, by taking 
actions to reduce vulnerability and exposure to hazard, and by enhancing the awareness, building capacity and 
promoting participation of individuals, households and businesses. 


Resilience is the adaptive capacity of an organization, a system, an individual being or a physical structure, in a 
complex and changing environment. A resilient city is able to recover from shocks and stresses in a timely and 
efficient manner, with a focus on ensuring the continuity or rapid restoration of city services such as electricity, 
water, telecommunications, waste management, sanitation, food distribution, financial services, and access to 
emergency services. 


A resilient city is also a city that understands the necessity to adapt its systems and processes to ensure that they 
are as robust as possible in the face of shocks and stresses, building back better following extreme events, while 
focussing on the goal of restoring and ensuring long term prosperity. 


(Continued on third cover) 


1 SCOPE 


CONTENTS 


2 REFERENCES 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
3.7 
3.8 
3.9 
3.10 


Critical Infrastructure 
Disaster 

Hazard 

Hazard Map 

Natural Buffers 
Potable Water 
Resilient City 

Shocks 

Stresses 
Vulnerability 


4 CITY INDICATORS 


5 ECONOMY 


5.1 
5.2 
5.3 


5.4 
55 
5.6 
5.7 


Historical Disaster Losses as a Percentage of City Product 
Average Annual Disaster Loss as a Percentage of City Product 


Percentage of Essential Service Providers that have a Documented Business 
Continuity Plan 


Percentage of Properties with Insurance Coverage for High Risk Hazards 
Percentage of Total Insured Value to Total Value at Risk within the City 
Employment Concentration 

Percentage of the Workforce in Informal Employment 


6 EDUCATION 


6.1 Percentage of Schools that Teach Emergency Preparedness and Disaster Risk 
Reduction 

6.2 Percentage of Population Trained in Emergency Preparedness and Disaster 
Risk Reduction 

6.3 Percentage of the Vulnerable Population that has been Engaged with 
Emergency Preparedness and Disaster Risk Reduction Activities 

6.4 Percentage of Emergency Preparedness Publications provided in Alternative 
Languages 

6.5 Educational Disruption 

7 ENERGY 

7.1. Number of Different Electricity Sources Providing at Least 5 Percent of 
Total Energy Supply Capacity 

7.2 Electricity Supply Capacity as a Percentage of Peak Electricity Demand 


8 ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE 


8.1 
8.2 


Magnitude of Urban Heat Island Effects (Atmospheric) 


Percentage of Natural Areas within the City that Have Undergone Ecological 
Evaluation for Their Protective Services 


iii 


IS 17785 : 2022 


Page No. 


— 


N NNN NN NN RK Fe 


OA Ann ff W 


oo 


O ‘© 


IS 17785 : 2022 


8.3 Territory Undergoing Ecosystem Restoration as a Percentage of Total City 
Area 

8.4 Annual Frequency of Extreme Rainfall Events 

8.5 Annual Frequency of Extreme Heat Events 

8.6 Annual Frequency of Extreme Cold Events 

8.7 Annual Frequency of Flood Events 

8.8 Percentage of City Land Area Covered by Tree Canopy 

9 FINANCE 

9.1 Annual Expenditure on Upgrades and Maintenance of City Service Assets 
as a Percentage of Total City Budget 

9.2 Annual Expenditure on Upgrades and Maintenance of Storm Water 
Infrastructure as a Percentage of Total City Budget 

9.3 Annual Expenditure allocated to Ecosystem Restoration in the City’s 
Territory as a Percentage of Total City Budget 

9.4 Annual Expenditure on Green and Blue Infrastructure as a Percentage of 
Total City Budget 

9.5 Annual Expenditure on Emergency Management Planning as a Percentage 
of Total City Budget 

9.6 Annual Expenditure on Social and Community Services as a Percentage of 
Total City Budget 

9.7 Total Allocation of Disaster Reserve Funds as a Percentage of Total City 


Budget 


10 GOVERNANCE 


10.1 Frequency with which Disaster Management Plans are Updated 

10.2 Percentage of City Departments that are Engaged in Preparing for and 
Responding to Potential Risks 

10.3 Percentage of Essential City Services Covered by a Documented 
Continuity Plan 

10.4 Percentage of City Electronic Data with Secure and Remote Back-up 
Storage 

10.5 Percentage of Public Meetings Dedicated to Resilience in the City 

10.6 Number of Intergovernmental Agreements Dedicated to Planning for 
Shocks as Percentage of Total Intergovernmental Agreements 

11 HEALTH 

11.1 Percentage of Health Care Facilities Equipped with Capabilities and Medical 
Supplies for Acute Needs 

11.2 Percentage of Hospitals Equipped with Back-up Electricity Supply 

11.3 Percentage of Population with Basic Health Insurance 

11.4 Percentage of Population that is Fully Immunized 

11.5 Number of Infectious Disease Outbreaks per Year 


12 HOUSING AND BUILT ENVIRONMENT 


12.1 
12.2 


Capacity of Designated Emergency Shelters per 100 000 Population 
Percentage of Buildings Structurally Vulnerable to High-Risk Hazards 


Page No. 


IS 17785 : 2022 


Page No. 
12.3 Percentage of Residential Buildings not in Conformity with National Building 
Code of India and Indian Standards si 19 
12.4 Percentage of Damaged Infrastructure that was ‘Built Back Better’ after a 
Disaster wis 19 
12.5 Annual Number of Residential Properties Flooded as a Percentage of Total 
Residential Properties in the City wa 20 
12.6 Percentage of Residential Properties Located in High-Risk Zones a 20 
13 POPULATION AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS . = -.20 
13.1 Vulnerable Population as a Percentage of City Population . 20 
13.2 Percentage of Population with Access to Social Assistance Programs bes 21 
13.3 Percentage of Population at High Risk from Natural Hazards | 
13.4 Percentage of Neighbourhoods with Regular and Open Neighbourhood 
Association Meetings i 21 
13.5 Annual Percentage of the City Population Directly Affected by Natural 
Hazards ve 422 
14 RECREATION ww 22 
14.1 Percentage of City Population Living within 0.5 km of Public Outdoor 
Recreation Space we 22 
15 SAFETY Ge 22 
15.1 Percentage of City Population Covered by Multi-Hazard Early Warning 
System a 22 
15.2 Percentage of Emergency Responders that have Received Disaster Response 
Training we 23 
15.3 Percentage of Local Hazard Warnings Issued by National Agencies Annually 
that are Received in a Timely Fashion by the City w= 23 
15.4 Number of Hospital Beds in the City Destroyed or Damaged by Natural 
Hazards per 100 000 Population w= 24 
16 SOLID WASTE w= 24 
16.1. Number of Active and Temporary Waste Management Sites Available for 
Debris and Rubble per Square Kilometre . 24 
17 TELECOMMUNICATION we. -L3 
17.1. Percentage of Emergency Responders in the City Equipped with Specialized 
Communication Technologies able to Operate Reliably during a Disaster Event ... 25 
18 TRANSPORTATION wea 25 
18.1 Number of Evacuation Routes Available per 100 000 Population sn DO 
19 URBAN/LOCAL AGRICULTURE AND FOOD SECURITY we. 29 
19.1 Percentage of City Population that can be Served by City Food Reserves 
for 72 h in an Emergency w 25 
19.2 Percentage of the City’s Population Living more than One Kilometre from a 
Grocery Store vis 26 


IS 17785 : 2022 


Page No. 
20 URBAN PLANNING wa 26 
20.1 Percentage of City Area Covered by Publicly Available Hazard Maps ws 26 
20.2 Pervious Land Areas and Public Space and Pavement Built with Porous, 
Draining Materials as a Percentage of City Land Area . 26 
20.3 Percentage of City Land Area in High Risk Zones where Risk Reduction 
Measures have been Implemented ae 21 
20.4 Percentage of City Departments and Utility Services that Integrate the 
Results of Risk Assessment in their Planning and Investment we O27 
20.5 Annual Number of Critical Infrastructures Flooded as a Percentage of 
Critical Infrastructure in the City se 28 
21 WASTEWATER . 28 
21.1 Percentage of the City’s Wastewater Treated through Decentralized 
Wastewater Treatment a 28 
22 WATER u 28 
22.1 Number of Different Sources Providing at Least 5 Percent of Total 
Water Supply Capacity ne 28 
22.2 Percentage of City Population that can be Supplied Potable Water by 
Alternative Methods for 72 h we 29 
23 REPORTING AND RECORD MAINTENANCE we 29 
ANNEX A TYPOLOGY OF CITY HAZARDS we. 30 
ANNEX B MAPPING OF RESILIENT CITIES INDICATORS TO THE RISK 
MANAGEMENT PROCESS a ° 330 
ANNEX C MAPPING OF INDICATORS WITH SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
GOALS (SDGS) Te 
ANNEX D MAPPING OF INDICATORS WITH THE SENDAI FRAMEWORK FOR 
DISASTER RISK REDUCTION ai o9 
ANNEX E COMMITTEE COMPOSITION = 644 


LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 Mapping of Resilient City Indicators to the Risk Management Process . 30 


vi 


IS 17785 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT OF 
HABITATS — INDICATORS FOR RESILIENT CITIES 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard defines and establishes definitions 
and methodologies for a set of indicators on resilience 
in cities. 


1.2 This standard is applicable to any city, municipality 
or local government that undertakes to measure its 
performance in a comparable and verifiable manner, 
irrespective of size and location. These indicators 
can be adopted for the rural areas also, with suitable 
consideration. 


1.3 This standard shall be read in conjunction with 
IS 17000. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute the provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards 
including amendments, if any. 


IS No. Title 

17000 : 2019 Sustainable development of 
habitats — Indicators 

17457 : 2020 Sustainable development of 
habitats — Vocabulary 

IS/ISO 31000: Risk Management — Guidelines 

2018 (first revision) 
SP 7 : 2016 National building code of India 


2016 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in IS 17000, IS 17457 and the 
following shall apply. 


3.1 Critical Infrastructure — Physical structures, 
facilities, networks and other assets which provide 
services that are essential to the social and economic 
functioning of a community or society. 


NOTE — Examples of critical infrastructure can include, but is 
not limited to, power generation, transmission and distribution; 


water treatment, distribution and drainage; wastewater and 
storm water infrastructure; transportation; gas supply and 
distribution; telecommunications infrastructure; educational 
facilities; and hospitals and other health facilities. 


3.2 Disaster — Serious disruption to a city or community 
due to hazardous events interacting with conditions of 
exposure, vulnerability, and capacity, leading to human, 
material, economic, and/or environmental losses and 
impacts. 


NOTE — Disasters can be frequent or infrequent, depending on 
the probability of occurrence and the return period of the relevant 
hazard. A slow-onset disaster is one that emerges gradually over 
time, for example through drought, desertification, sea level rise, 
or epidemic disease. A sudden-onset disaster is one triggered by 
a hazardous event that emerges quickly or unexpectedly, often 
associated with earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, flash floods, 
chemical explosions, pandemics, critical infrastructure failures, 
transport accidents or man-made disaster like terror incident, 
fire or crime. 


3.3 Hazard — Phenomenon, human activity or 
process that may cause loss of life, injury, or other 
health impacts, property damage, social and economic 
disruption, or environmental degradation. 


NOTE — include biological, environmental, 
geological, hydro-meteorological, and technological processes 
and phenomena. Biological hazards include pathogenic 
micro-organisms, toxins and bioactive substances (for example, 
bacteria, viruses, parasites, venomous wildlife and insects, 
poisonous plants and mosquitoes carrying disease-causing 
agents). Environmental hazards may be chemical, natural, 
radiological, or biological, and are created by environmental 
degradation, physical or chemical pollution in the air, water, 
and soil. However, many of the processes and phenomena 
that fall into this category may be ‘drivers’ of hazard and risk 
rather than hazards themselves (for example, soil degradation, 
deforestation, biodiversity loss and sea level rise). With 
respect to drinking water, ‘hazard’ may be understood as a 
microbiological, chemical, physical or radiological agent 
that causes harm to human health. Geological or geophysical 
hazards originate from internal earth processes (for example, 
earthquakes, volcanic activity, landslides, rockslide and mud 
flows). Hydro-meteorological hazards are of atmospheric, 
hydrological, or oceanographic origin (for example, cyclones, 
floods, drought, heatwaves, cold spells and coastal storm 
surges). Hydro-meteorological conditions may also be a 
factor in other hazards such as landslides, wildland fires, and 
epidemics. Technological hazards originate from industrial or 
technological conditions, dangerous procedures, infrastructure 
failures, or specific human activities (for example, industrial 
pollution, nuclear radiation, toxic wastes, dam failures, 
transport accidents, factory explosions, terror incidents, fires 
and chemical spills). 


Hazards 


IS 17785 : 2022 


3.4 Hazard Map — Developed to illuminate areas that 
are affected or vulnerable to a particular hazard, natural 
and man-made (for example, earthquakes, landslides, 
rockslides and fire). 


3.5 Natural Buffers — Ecological assets that reduce 
physical vulnerability to shocks and stresses. 
NOTE — Ecosystems, such as wetlands, forests, and coastal 
systems, can provide cost- effective natural buffers against 


many shocks and stresses. Examples of natural buffers include 
reefs, floodplains, parklands, forests, and wetlands. 


3.6 Potable Water — Water that is safe for human 
consumption, either in its original state or after 
treatment, and that is intended for drinking, cooking, 
food preparation or other domestic purposes. 


3.7 Resilient City — A resilient city is able to prepare 
for, recover from and adapt to shocks and stresses. 


NOTES 


1 A resilient city can resist, absorb, accommodate, adapt 
to, transform, and recover from the effects of disasters and 
shocks in a timely and efficient manner, including through the 
preservation and restoration of essential basic structures and 
services in a sustainable way, and through risk management 
practices. It involves stakeholders and especially citizens in 
disaster risk reduction through co-creation processes; reduces 
vulnerability and exposure to natural and human-made 
disasters; and increases its capacity to respond to disasters, 
shocks, and other unforeseen chronic stresses, through 
enhanced preparedness. 


2 A resilient city is still able to thrive regardless of the hazards, 
shocks and stresses it faces. It has a focus on lesson learning, 
continuous improvement and building back better after 
disasters. 


3.8 Shocks — Natural or human-made events that 
cause a disaster such as, floods, extreme climate 
events, earthquakes, hurricanes, wildfires, pandemics, 
chemical spills and explosions, terrorism, power 
outages, financial crises, cyber-attacks, civil unrest, 
protests and conflicts. 


3.9 Stresses — Underlying human and natural 
pressures or tensions that cause persistent negative 
impacts in a city relating to environmental degradation 
(for example, poor air and water quality), climate 
change-induced extreme weather conditions, social 
inequality (for example, chronic poverty and housing 
shortages) and economic instability (for example, rapid 
inflation and persistent unemployment). 


3.10 Vulnerability — Susceptibility of individuals, 
households, businesses, assets, or systems in a city 
to the impacts of hazards, as determined by physical, 
social, economic, and environmental factors, processes, 
and conditions. 


4 CITY INDICATORS 


4.1 This standard contains indicators designed to assist 
cities in preparing for, recovering from and adapting to 


shocks and stresses. To reduce vulnerability to shocks 
and stresses, these indicators will support cities in 
engaging all sectors, stakeholders, and populations; 
apply collaborative leadership models and methods; 
work across disciplines and city systems; and use 
data information and appropriate technologies. The 
indicators can improve resilience in cities by promoting 
and enabling inclusive and collaborative approaches to 
governance at all levels (neighbourhood, district, city, 
metropolitan area, region, state/province, country). 
This involves long-term risk management of critical 
networks and their interactions and potential failures. 


4.2 This Standard shall be implemented in conjunction 
with IS 17000. The indicators are classified into themes 
according to the different sectors and services provided 
by a city, in alignment with IS 17000. The classification 
structure is used solely to denote the services and area 
of application of each type of indicator when reported 
on by a city. This classification has no hierarchical 
significance and is organized alphabetically according 
to themes. All indicators shall be compiled and reported 
on an annual basis. 


4.3 In some cases, it is difficult to define simple, 
quantitative metrics to measure the performance of 
systems and processes that are in place for managing 
resilience at the city level. However, it has been agreed 
that these systems and processes are core components 
of city resilience, and thus warrant inclusion in the 
standard. Some indicators are thus defined so as to 
reflect the minimum characteristics or performance 
requirements for these systems and processes, which 
can then be objectively verified. 


4.4 It is important to review the results of multiple 
types of indicators across themes; to focus on a 
single indicator can lead to a distorted or incomplete 
conclusion. Elements of aspiration should also be taken 
into consideration in the analysis. It is also important 
to acknowledge potential antagonistic effects of the 
outcome of particular indicators, either positive or 
negative, when analysing results. 


4.5 For data interpretation purposes, cities shall take 
into consideration contextual analysis when interpreting 
results. The local institutional environment may affect 
the capacity to apply indicators. Furthermore, it is 
important also to note that each city will face a unique 
set of shocks and stresses, as well as having a unique 
set of assets and resources to manage and address these 
shocks and stresses. In this context, it is important that 
caution is taken in applying these indicators to make 
comparison between cities to ensure a full understanding 
of these relevant contextual factors. Some aspects of 
resilience may also be the responsibility of the private 
sector, other levels of government or individuals 
themselves. 


4.6 The typologies of hazards (Annex A) can assist 
cities in identifying the potential hazards that they face, 
which is relevant to many of the indicators contained. 
These indicators can also be organized according to the 
risk management process (Annex B), the Sustainable 
Development Goals (Annex C) and the Sendai 
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (Annex D). 


5 ECONOMY 


5.1 Historical Disaster Losses as a Percentage of 
City Product 


5.1.1 General 


Historical losses reflect direct economic losses (in 
monetary terms) of disasters. Those implementing this 
standard should report on this indicator in accordance 
with the following requirements. 


5.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


Historical disaster losses as a percentage of city product 
shall be calculated as the direct economic losses from 
disaster(s) within the city summed over a period of 
five years (numerator) divided by the total city product 
summed over the same time period (denominator). 
The result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
historical disaster losses as a percentage of city product. 


Direct economic losses shall refer to losses (in 
monetary terms) that result from disasters. Such 
losses are associated with damage or destruction to 
physical, social and critical infrastructure within the 
city’s administrative boundary (even if not under the 
city’s jurisdiction). Physical infrastructure refers to 
the built structures, systems, and assets required for a 
city’s economy to function, to include transportation 
networks, telecommunication services, energy grids, 
sewerage and waste disposal systems, water supplies, 
city buildings and facilities, and housing. Social 
infrastructure is an important subset of physical 
infrastructure and includes structures that accommodate 
social services, such as schools, universities, hospitals, 
and prisons. Critical infrastructure refers to systems, 
services or assets (physical or virtual) that are vital for 
the welfare of society (refer 3.1). 


5.1.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator could be sourced from 
damage and economic loss assessments prepared after 
disasters. Data may also be available from insurance 
industry sources. 


5.2 Average Annual Disaster Loss as a Percentage 
of City Product 


5.2.1 General 


Historical loss data does not provide a full picture of 
the potential economic losses that a city faces from 
disasters. Potential economic losses can only be 


IS 17785 : 2022 


appropriately assessed through modelling of potential 
future events (catastrophe modelling), which considers 
major hazards and their likelihood of occurrence, the 
vulnerability of the city to damage from the hazard, 
and the economic consequence of this damage. 
Average annual loss is calculated from a large number 
of modelled scenarios considering these factors. 
Average annual loss is a widely used parameter in 
quantitative risk assessment and management, and 
allows estimation of the benefits of investing in risk 
reduction. 


5.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


Average annual disaster loss as a percentage of city 
product shall be calculated as the average direct 
economic losses from disaster(s) estimated from 
city-wide catastrophe modelling scenarios (numerator) 
divided by the total city product (denominator). The 
result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
average annual disaster loss as a percentage of city 
product. 


Direct economic losses shall refer to losses (in 
monetary terms) that result from disasters. Such losses 
are associated with damage or destruction to physical, 
social and critical infrastructure within the city’s 
administrative boundary. Physical infrastructure refers 
to the built structures, systems, and assets required for 
a city’s economy to function, to include transportation 
networks, telecommunication services, energy grids, 
sewerage and waste disposal systems, water supplies, 
city buildings and facilities, and housing. Social 
infrastructure is an important subset of physical 
infrastructure and includes structures that accommodate 
social services, such as schools, universities, hospitals, 
and prisons. Critical infrastructure refers to systems, 
services or assets (physical or virtual) that are vital for 
the welfare of society (refer 3.1). 


5.2.3 Data Sources 


Catastrophe modelling is a complex modelling activity 
typically undertaken by specialist risk consulting and 
advisory firms. Data may be available from sources, 
such as, national disaster management authority 
(NDMA), state disaster management authority 
(SDMA) and concerned local authorities. 


5.2.4 Data Interpretation 


Over time, average annual loss data can be used to 
quantify the expected benefits of investing in disaster 
risk reduction measures. 


5.3 Percentage of Essential Service Providers that 
have a Documented Business Continuity Plan 


Business continuity plans can enhance a city’s 
preparedness for stresses and shocks, and enable 
rapid recovery. It is important to note that many 
private-sector entities provide essential or important 


IS 17785 : 2022 


goods and services relied upon by citizens. Cities 
therefore need to be proactive in encouraging 
private-sector entities to undertake business continuity 
plans, based on a shared view of the risks likely to arise. 


5.3.1 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of essential service providers that 
have a documented business continuity plan shall be 
calculated as the total number of essential service 
providers that have a documented business continuity 
plan (numerator) divided by the total number of 
essential service providers (denominator). The result 
shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of essential service providers that have a 
documented business continuity plan. 


Essential service providers shall refer to entities 
outside of government that provide services that are 
vital to the functioning of the city. This includes private 
sector providers of infrastructure services, including 
electricity, gas, water, sanitation and wastewater 
treatment, and waste management. It also should 
include major food distributors and providers of retail 
banking services. 


A business continuity plan shall refer to a documented 
strategy that identifies the threats and risks faced by 
a company or organization, and that helps to protect 
its assets and personnel from the negative effects of a 
stress or shock, thereby ensuring operational continuity. 
Business continuity planning involves identification of 
potential risks, determining how those risks will affect 
operations, implementing safeguards and procedures 
to mitigate those risks, and regularly reviewing risks 
to ensure their relevance and accuracy. Business 
continuity plans should be regularly updated. 


5.3.2 Data Sources 


Information on business continuity planning should be 
obtained from identified essential service providers for 
the city. 


5.3.3 Data Interpretation 


The presence of a business continuity plan does not in 
itself ensure that identified continuity measures have 
been implemented or guarantee that business continuity 
will be ensured in the case of a stress or shock. 


5.4 Percentage of Properties with Insurance 
Coverage for High Risk Hazards 


5.4.1 General 


Widespread insurance coverage within cities represents 
a crucial component of resilience due to the critical role 
that insurance plays in a city to rapidly recover from 
shocks and stresses. Insurance improves economic 
and fiscal outcomes through several channels. Before 
a disaster strikes, the pricing of insurance gives 


policyholders incentives to reduce their exposures 
through risk mitigation measures. In the aftermath of 
disaster, insurance transfers the fiscal burden away 
from taxpayers onto the private sector and into capital 
markets. It also limits financial contagion by restoring 
supply chains and stalled business operations faster, 
while providing needed liquidity and certainty in 
business and financial planning. 


5.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of properties with insurance coverage 
for high-risk hazards shall be calculated as the total 
number of properties (residential and non-residential) 
within the city with insurance coverage for high-risk 
hazards affecting the city (numerator) divided by the 
total number of properties (households and businesses) 
in the city (denominator). The result shall be multiplied 
by 100 and expressed as the percentage of properties 
with insurance coverage for high risk hazards. 


Residential properties shall refer to dwellings (or 
structures) classified for residential use. Examples 
of residential properties should include, but are not 
limited to, single-family dwellings, mobile dwellings, 
semi-detached dwellings, row houses, condominiums 
and apartment buildings. 


Non-residential properties shall refer to structures 
classified for non-residential use. Examples of non- 
residential properties should include, but are not 
limited to, office buildings/private business buildings, 
hotels, restaurants, government buildings, institutional 
buildings (for example, educational and health 
facilities), factories and other special exempt properties 
(for example, non-commercial recreational spaces, 
places of worship, funeral homes, cemeteries, etc.). 


Where possible, insurance coverage data for each 
sector (that is, residential and non-residential and the 
hazards being insured against should be reported and 
listed in tables. 


For the purposes of this indicator, high risk hazards 
affecting the city are hazards for which there is a 
likelihood of extreme event(s) that could significantly 
affect many properties in the city and/or have a major 
impact on the city. 


5.4.3 Data Sources 


Aggregate insurance data can be sourced from public 
insurance agencies or insurance industry associations. 


5.4.4 Data Interpretation 


This indicator covers property insurance and excludes 
personal or life coverage. Insurance may come from 
multiple public or private providers. It should be noted 
that not all residential and non-residential properties in 
a city may require insurance for all high-risk hazards, 
for example, if they are located outside a flood zone 


(given that proper mapping and identification of flood 
zones exists). The affordability of insurance will also 
be a major influence on uptake of insurance within the 
city for residential and non-residential properties. Two 
key elements when considering insurance coverage for 
resilience is the amount of damage sustained and the 
speed of recovery. 


5.5 Percentage of Total Insured Value to Total Value 
at Risk within the City 


5.5.1 General 


An aggregate assessment of insurance levels relative to 
the value at risk from high risk hazards helps to reveal 
potential instances of underinsurance. It also helps to 
educate the community, incentivise action to mitigate 
risks and prepare for disasters, and enhance city risk 
analysis and management processes. 


5.5.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of total insured value to total value at risk 
within the city shall be calculated as the total insured 
value of all residential and non-residential properties 
within the city (numerator) divided by the total value 
of all residential and non-residential properties in the 
city (denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of total insured 
value to total value at risk within the city. 


Residential properties shall refer to dwellings (or 
structures) classified for residential use. Examples 
of residential properties should include, but are not 
limited to, single-family dwellings, mobile dwellings, 
semi-detached dwellings, row houses, condominiums 
and apartment buildings. 


Non-residential properties shall refer to structures 
classified for non-residential use. Examples of 
non-residential properties should include, but are not 
limited to, office buildings/private business buildings, 
hotels, restaurants, government buildings, institutional 
buildings (for example, educational and health facilities), 
factories and other special exempt properties (for 
example, non-commercial recreational spaces, places 
of worship, funeral homes, cemeteries, etc). Where 
possible, insurance coverage data for each sector (that 
is, residential and non-residential and the hazards being 
insured against should be reported and listed in tables. 


5.5.3 Data Sources 


Aggregate insurance data can be sourced from public 
insurance agencies or insurance industry associations. 


5.5.4 Data Interpretation 


It should be noted that not all properties in a city may 
require insurance for all hazards (for example, if they 
are located outside a flood zone). The affordability of 
insurance will also be a major influence on the uptake 
and level of insurance within the city. 


IS 17785 : 2022 


5.6 Employment Concentration 


5.6.1 General 


A diverse local economy is a key component of city 
resilience. Some communities can be dependent on a 
small number of industries for providing employment 
and/or local taxation revenue, rendering these 
communities vulnerable to chronic stresses associated 
with economic downturns and structural, industrial and 
technological changes. 


5.6.2 Indicator Requirements 


Employment concentration shall be calculated as the 
number of people in the city employed in the three 
largest sectors of the local economy (as measured by 
total employment) (numerator) divided by the city’s 
total labour force (denominator). The result shall be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as a percentage. 


Labour force shall refer to the sum of the total persons 
employed and unemployed who are legally eligible to 
work and who are primary residents of the city. This 
typically includes all working-age adults between the 
ages of 15 and 64, but the specific age may vary. 


The sectors used for the calculation of this indicator 
should be defined as per the Census of India. 


5.6.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator can be sourced from national 
or local workforce or employment surveys (such 
as Census), as well as reports from public human 
resources/employment organizations. 


5.6.4 Data Interpretation 


This indicator should be considered in the broader 
context of the economic wealth and prosperity of the 


city. 


5.7 Percentage of the Workforce in Informal 
Employment 


5.7.1 General 


Informal employment often comes with lower benefits 
and poorer working conditions, and poverty and 
informality are often found to be strongly correlated. 
Therefore, it is important that cities monitor informal 
employment to formulate effective development 
policies that help people transition from informal to 
formal employment. 


5.7.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of the workforce in informal employment 
shall be calculated as the number of people working in 
informal employment (numerator) divided by the city’s 
total workforce (denominator). This result shall then be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage of 
the workforce in informal employment. 


IS 17785 : 2022 


Informal employment shall refer to employment where 
the employment relationship is, in law or in practice, not 
subject to national labour legislation, income taxation, 
social protection or entitlement to certain employment 
benefits (advance notice of dismissal, severance pay, 
paid annual or sick leave etc). The reasons may be the 
following: 


a) non-declaration of the jobs or the employees; 
b) casual jobs or jobs of a limited short duration; 


c) jobs with hours of work or wages below a specified 
threshold (for example, for social security 
contributions); 


d) employment by unincorporated enterprises or by 
persons in households; 


e) jobs where the employee’s place of work is 
outside the premises of the employer’s enterprise 
(for example, outworkers without employment 
contract); or 


f) jobs, for which labour regulations are not applied, 
not enforced, or not complied with for any other 
reason. The operational criteria for defining 
informal jobs of employees are to be determined 
in accordance with national circumstances and 
data availability. 


Informal employment should include own-account 
workers employed in their own informal sector 
enterprises, employers employed in their own informal 
sector enterprises, contributing family workers, 
irrespective of whether they work in formal or informal 
sector enterprises, members of informal producers’ 
cooperatives, employees holding informal jobs in 
formal sector enterprises, informal sector enterprises, 
or as paid domestic workers employed by households; 
and own-account workers engaged in the production of 
goods exclusively for own final use by their household. 


Workforce shall refer to the sum of the total persons 
employed and unemployed who are legally eligible to 
work. 


5.7.3 Data Sources 


Data on employment should be obtained through 
labour force surveys or city employment 
assessments administered by local, state or national 
authorities/statistical bodies, or ministry or department 
of labour and employment. 


5.7.4 Data Interpretation 


Care should be used in evaluating this indicator, as a 
low or high percentage of the workforce in informal 
employment may not necessarily be indicative of a 
more resilient city. 


6 EDUCATION 


6.1 Percentage of Schools that Teach Emergency 
Preparedness and Disaster Risk Reduction 


6.1.1 General 


Teaching emergency preparedness and risk reduction 
in schools increases the coping capacity of society. It 
helps school administrators, instructors, students, and 
staff to prepare for emergencies and reduce risks by 
protecting themselves, their property, and their assets 
from the effects of a disaster. 


6.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of schools that teach emergency 
preparedness and disaster risk reduction shall be 
calculated as the number of schools within the city 
that teach emergency preparedness and disaster risk 
reduction (numerator) divided by the total number of 
schools in the city (denominator). The result shall be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as a percentage of 
schools that teach emergency preparedness and disaster 
risk reduction. 


Schools shall refer to primary and secondary educational 
institutions. 


Emergency preparedness and disaster risk reduction 
activities shall refer to training drills, and awareness 
programs, for example, but not limited to evacuation 
simulations, practicing/rehearsing emergency 
protocols, testing the carrying capacity of potential 
evacuation routes, and evaluating the response times 
for emergency services. 


6.1.3 Data Sources 


The data from this indicator can be obtained from 
educational authorities, individual schools and 
educational institutions. 


6.2 Percentage of Population Trained in Emergency 
Preparedness and Disaster Risk Reduction 


Training in emergency preparedness and disaster 
risk reduction enhances the response capacity of city 
populations. Regular and repeated training drills help 
to assimilate disaster awareness and responsiveness 
into the city population and to refresh and update 
emergency training and disaster protocols. 


6.2.1 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of population trained in emergency 
preparedness and disaster risk reduction shall be 
calculated as the total number of people within the 
city trained by responsible authorities in emergency 
preparedness and disaster risk reduction activities in 


the previous 12 months (numerator) divided by the 
city’s total population (denominator). The result shall 
be multiplied by 100 and expressed as a percentage 
of population trained in emergency preparedness and 
disaster risk reduction. 


Emergency preparedness and disaster risk 
reduction activities shall refer to training drills, 
capacity-building classes and courses, and awareness 
programs. Specific emergency drills may be 
supplemented by use of rallies, parades, sporting 
events, and other local activities, and also simulations 
of the disaster event to practice/rehearse aspects of 
emergency response (for example, crowd management, 
mass evacuation plans), test carrying capacity of 
potential evacuation routes, evaluate response and 
access times, etc. Emergency drilling is a method of 
practice to help populations respond to disasters and 
shocks. Emergency drills may involve evacuation 
plans designed to move people away from a disaster, or 
shelter-in-place plans that give people a place of refuge. 


6.2.2 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator can be sourced from 
emergency management authorities such as SDMAs, 
District disaster management authority (DDMAs), civil 
defence, concerned local authorities, etc. 


6.3 Percentage of the Vulnerable Population that 
has been Engaged with Emergency Preparedness 
and Disaster Risk Reduction Activities 


6.3.1 General 


Community engagement with emergency preparedness 
and disaster risk reduction helps vulnerable populations 
to understand, prepare for, mitigate, and withstand 
disasters and shocks. Information is disseminated 
through publicly available and regularly updated 
platforms that enable the public to access and exchange 
risk-related data. 


6.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of the vulnerable population that has been 
engaged with emergency preparedness and disaster risk 
reduction activities shall be calculated as the number 
of vulnerable people within the city that have been 
engaged with emergency preparedness and disaster 
risk reduction activities by responsible authorities 
(numerator) divided by the total vulnerable population 
(denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 100 and 
expressed as the percentage of vulnerable population 
that has been engaged with emergency preparedness 
and disaster risk reduction. 


Vulnerable people shall refer to individuals who have 
limited capacity to anticipate, cope with, resist, and 
recover from the effects of a disaster. The following 
segments of the population are especially vulnerable to 
disasters: 


IS 17785 : 2022 


a) the elderly; 

b) persons with physical or mental impairments; 
c) children; 

d) pregnant women; 

e) ill or undernourished people; 

f) the homeless; 

g) people located in slums and informal housing; 
h) refugees and internally displaced people; and 

j) transient or nomadic communities. 


Other population segments in the city that may be 
vulnerable to hazards due to location or context-specific 
factors may also be included in the total vulnerable 
person count. 


Where possible, percentage data for each relevant 
vulnerable population should be included and listed as 
additional information. 


Emergency preparedness and disaster risk reduction 
activities shall refer to training drills, capacity-building 
classes and courses, and awareness programs. 


Responsible authorities shall refer to professionals 
or trained volunteers in departments of the city or 
national government (for example, planning, disaster 
management, health, environment, utility provision, 
emergency services, civil protection), or other actors 
in the disaster risk reduction and resilience sectors 
(civil society organisations, academic and research 
institutions, UN organisations, donor organisations, the 
private sector), that are working in direct collaboration 
with the city authority on such emergency preparedness 
and disaster risk reduction activities 


6.3.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator can be sourced from 
emergency management authorities and other 
concerned authorities. 


6.4 Percentage of Emergency Preparedness 
Publications provided in Alternative Languages 


6.4.1 General 


Multilingual education and training activities in 
emergency preparedness and risk mitigation help to 
ensure that learning opportunities are available to all 
citizens, regardless of linguistic differences. 


6.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of emergency preparedness 
publications provided in alternative languages shall be 
calculated as the number of emergency preparedness 
publications provided in alternative languages within 
the city (numerator) divided by the total number of 
emergency preparedness publications published by 
the city (denominator). The result shall be multiplied 
by 100 and expressed as the percentage of emergency 


IS 17785 : 2022 


preparedness publications information provided in 
alternative languages. 


Alternative languages shall refer to other languages 
spoken in the city, including those not having official or 
legal status with the local government. 


Publications shall refer to official printed materials and 
digital materials produced by the city government for 
emergency preparedness. 


6.4.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator can be sourced from 
emergency management authorities. 


6.5 Educational Disruption 


6.5.1 General 


It is important that educational institutions minimize 
disruption and ensure continuity of education for all 
children. Monitoring educational disruption as the 
number of lost teaching days due to extreme events 
can help to assess the effectiveness of minimizing 
disruption in educational institutions. 


6.5.2 Indicator Requirements 


Educational disruption shall be calculated as the 
number of teaching days lost annually due to shocks 
or stresses. 


Teaching days lost shall refer to days when educational 
institutions are not operational during regular hours of 
teaching. Partial lost teaching days shall be included in 
the calculation of this indicator (for example, a half-day 
of lost teaching due to an extreme event). 


Any closure of an education facility in the city shall be 
counted as one teaching day lost. Multiple educational 
facilities closed on the same calendar date shall be 
counted as one teaching day lost. 


6.5.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of teaching days lost due to shocks 
or stresses can be sourced from local or regional school 
boards, or a ministry/department of education. 


7 ENERGY 


7.1 Number of Different Electricity Sources 
Providing at Least 5 Percent of Total Energy Supply 
Capacity 


7.1.1 General 


A diverse electricity supply mix helps ensure that 
alternative electricity provisions are available to the 
city in the event of a system failure, resulting in no or 
reduced power delivery or supply capacity. A diverse 
electricity supply system or infrastructure protects 
cities from generation and capacity disruption resulting 
from fuel or energy source disruption, and thus helps 


cities to mitigate and prepare for disasters and shocks. 
It is however noted that other system elements, such 
as the design and state of repair of transmission and 
distribution systems, will also influence the reliability 
of electricity supply and are not directly covered by this 
indicator. 


7.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


Number of different electricity supply sources providing 
at least 5 percent of total energy supply capacity shall 
refer to the number of different, or separate, electricity 
supply sources to the city each providing at least 
5 percent of total energy supply capacity. 
NOTE — The 5 percent threshold is used by international 
organizations such as the World Bank to ease calculations and 
to capture the major supply sources. 
When the number of different electricity supply sources 
exceed two, the percentage of electricity supply 
capacity of each supply source should be reported. 


A different (or separate) electricity supply source shall 
refer to electricity supplies that are not disrupted or 
directly influenced by other sources. This includes 
electricity supplies that are sourced from fossil 
fuels (coal, natural gas, petroleum), mineral fuels 
(uranium, thorium), and renewables (wind, solar, 
hydro, geothermal, tidal, biomass). These sources are 
converted to electricity at thermal and hydroelectric 
power stations, PV power plants, wind farms and wave 
farms, tidal power stations, and solar power towers. 


7.1.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator could be sourced from 
energy system regulators or management authorities, 
individual energy providers, electric utilities, and 
electricity supply or service providers. 


7.1.4 Data Interpretation 


While multiple, different, electricity sources contribute 
to city resilience in the event of a system failure, this is 
not necessarily indicative of city resilience in all cases. 


7.2 Electricity Supply Capacity as a Percentage of 
Peak Electricity Demand 


7.2.1 General 


Having sufficient capacity in electricity supply allows 
cities to cope with predicted future growth in demand 
and shorter-term (temporary) demand surges stemming 
from shocks and stresses. Managing the supply and 
demand of electricity is thus critical in the continuity 
of essential utility services, to ensure that built systems 
are not overloaded and that they can maintain sufficient 
redundancy to absorb surges in demand. It is important 
that cities monitor peak electricity demand relative to 
available supply capacity (that is, the reserve margin), 
to assess the vulnerability and robustness of its electrical 
supply system. 


7.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


Electricity supply capacity as a percentage of peak 
electricity demand shall be calculated as the electricity 
supply capacity available to the city (numerator) 
divided by the city’s monthly peak electricity demand 
averaged over the calendar year (denominator). The 
result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
electricity supply capacity as a percentage of peak 
electricity demand. 


Electricity supply capacity shall refer to the expected 
maximum available supply of electricity to meet 
projected peak demands, including reserve supplies 
to meet unexpected losses, interruptions, or surges in 
demand. 


Peak electricity demand shall refer to the highest level 
of electricity needs from consumers, across a specified 
period. Peak demand fluctuates with human activity 
cycles, time of the day, the season of the year, weather 
extremes, and industrial activity. 


7.2.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator could be sourced from 
energy system regulators or management authorities, 
individual energy providers, electric utilities, and 
electricity supply or service providers. 


8 ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE 


8.1 Magnitude of Urban Heat Island Effects 
(Atmospheric) 


8.1.1 General 


At city scale, urban areas are warmer, on average, 
than their rural surroundings. This applies to the city 
surface and the urban atmosphere, and it defines a 
phenomenon known as the ‘urban heat island’ effect. 
Heat islands are caused by retention of heat in city 
construction materials, reduction of wind speeds in 
street canyons, diminished evaporative cooling over 
impervious surfaces, and release of combustive heat 
from fuel use in buildings, industry, and vehicles. In 
cities with a hot climate, or with a hot season, the heat 
island effect can convey serious health implications for 
human morbidity and mortality during prolonged heat 
wave events or extremely hot days or nights. The heat 
island effect also increases (decreases) energy demand 
for building cooling (heating) in hot (cold) cities or 
seasons. The measured magnitude of the heat island 
effect fluctuates with time of day, season of the year, 
geographic location, urban form and function, and 
prevailing weather conditions. 


City authorities have direct control or influence over 
many planning and policy instruments that can influence 
or reduce urban heat island effects. These include urban 
planning policies, building codes, and the designation 
and maintenance of green spaces. 


IS 17785 : 2022 


8.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The urban heat island effect shall be calculated as 
the difference between mean daily air temperatures 
recorded simultaneously in one urban and one 
non-urban area, averaged over a 12 month period. 


Urban area shall refer to a central part of the city on 
the order of several hectares, with close-set buildings, 
paved roads, heavy traffic flow, and high population 
density. 


Non-urban area shall refer to a peripheral part of the city 
on the order of several hectares, with few buildings and 
roads, abundant natural land cover, and low population 
density. 


Cities should describe the two locations of the 
temperature sensors (or climate stations) used to 
measure the heat island magnitude (for example, park, 
airport, city centre, agricultural area). This is necessary 
to convey the local representativeness of the measured 
values, and the physical, demographic and human 
activities representative of the area surrounding the 
two instruments (or stations) and their influence on the 
recorded temperatures. References to Part 11 of NBC 
2016 is helpful in this regard. 


8.1.3 Data Sources 


The data shall be sourced from government agencies 
(such as IMD, local and district level planning 
authorities) or research institutions that operate 
and maintain meteorological observatories, climate 
stations, or environmental monitoring sites in cities and 
their surrounding rural areas. 


8.1.4 Data Interpretation 


Care should be taken when interpreting data relating 
to the urban heat island effect, as the magnitude is 
sensitive to measurement height, measurement location, 
measurement interval, instrument type, and instrument 
placement. Location is especially important because 
the heat island effect at city scale is comprised of many 
smaller local and micro-scale climates (for example, 
hot and cool spots associated with small parks, water 
bodies, heat-emitting factories) throughout the city that 
may not be representative of the broader climate. 


8.2 Percentage of Natural Areas within the City that 
Have Undergone Ecological Evaluation for Their 
Protective Services 


8.2.1 General 


Ecological assets, such as forests, mangroves and 
floodplains give protection to human settlements 
from hazards such as floods, heatwaves, and tropical 
storms. Protective services are direct benefits provided 
by ecological assets to prevent or reduce the negative 
impacts of hazards on cities and their citizens. 
Examples of protective services include the reduction 


IS 17785 : 2022 


of peak storm water runoff by natural ground cover in 
river catchments and the attenuation of storm surges 
by coastal mangroves. To help a city identify and 
enhance the protective value of its ecological assets, 
the city’s natural areas can be formally evaluated for 
the protective services they provide. 


8.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of natural areas within the city that have 
undergone ecological evaluation for their protective 
services shall be calculated as the total area of publicly 
owned natural areas within the city that have undergone 
ecological evaluation for their protective services 
(numerator) divided by the total area of all publicly 
owned natural areas in the city (denominator). The 
result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of natural areas within the city that have 
undergone ecological evaluation for their protective 
services. 


Natural areas shall refer to geographic spaces or 
zones whose distinguishing characteristics have 
arisen naturally, or whose predominant land cover and 
landscape features are otherwise natural (soil, sand, 
water, or vegetation) rather than built (impermeable 
construction materials). 


Protective services are direct benefits provided by 

ecological assets to prevent or reduce the negative 

impacts of hazards on cities and their citizens. 

Ecological evaluation shall refer to a formal assessment 

or classification of the protective services provided by 

the ecological assets and systems in the defined area. 
NOTE — While outside the scope for this indicator, 
assessments should ideally also be undertaken to evaluate 
ecosystems that lie beyond the city boundary but that provide 
important ecological services to the city (for example, upstream 
watersheds). This may require transboundary collaboration 
with other city governments, regulatory authorities and other 
stakeholders. Also, outside scope are ecological evaluations by 
private landowners using own resources. Although privately 
owned ecological assets provide the same protective service as 
public lands, they may be difficult to evaluate. 


8.2.3 Data Sources 


Ecological evaluations are available from city 
environmental departments, external environment 
agencies, or a combination of these and similar 
agencies. 


8.3 Territory Undergoing Ecosystem Restoration as 
a Percentage of Total City Area 


8.3.1 General 


Ecosystem restoration is an effective way to strengthen 
ecological resilience and to mitigate the impacts 
of natural hazards. It has multiple benefits, such as 
improved stormwater management, water pollution 
control, and reduced flooding and soil erosion. 


10 


8.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The territory undergoing ecosystem restoration as a 
percentage of total city area shall be calculated as the 
territory (in square kilometres) undergoing ecosystem 
restoration within the city boundary (numerator) 
divided by the total city area in square kilometres 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


Ecosystem restoration shall refer to the process of 
recovering natural and semi-natural landscape elements 
(that is, related to soil, water bodies and vegetation) 
that have been degraded, damaged or destroyed. 
Vegetation elements for restoration vary in spatial scale 
from individual rows of trees to entire valley systems; 
water elements vary from single ponds to entire 
watercourses. Examples of ecosystem restoration work 
include reconditioning of embankments or brownfields 
to parks or other recreational uses. 


8.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on ecosystem restoration can be sourced from the 
city’s capital and public works budget. Other sources 
include city environmental departments, external 
environment agencies, or a combination of these and 
similar agencies. 


8.4 Annual Frequency of Extreme Rainfall Events 


8.4.1 General 


Extreme rainfall events can cause flooding of low-lying 
areas (including residences, infrastructure and roads); 
overwhelm water sanitation systems; and damage 
urban lands dedicated to agriculture and forests within 
the city. Monitoring extreme rainfall events enables 
cities to anticipate probable changes in extreme 
weather, and to make sound investment and budgetary 
decisions regarding infrastructure and service provision 
responsibilities. This monitoring of these extreme 
rainfall events can lead to better planning, preparation 
for and response to these events. 


8.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


Annual frequency of extreme rainfall events shall be 
calculated as the number of extreme rainfall events in 
a given year. 


As defined by the India meteorological department 
(IMD), extreme rainfall events shall refer to 
precipitation events in which the 24 h accumulated 
rainfall within the city is greater than or equal to 
204.5 mm. 


8.4.3 Data Sources 


Data on extreme rainfall events can be sourced from 
IMD or local/regional meteorological departments 
monitoring the environment and climate change. 


8.5 Annual Frequency of Extreme Heat Events 


8.5.1 General 


A Heat Wave is a period of abnormally high 
temperatures, more than the normal maximum 
temperature that occurs during the summer season in 
the North-Western parts of India. Heat waves typically 
occur between March and June, and in some rare cases 
even extend till July. The extreme temperatures and 
resultant atmospheric conditions adversely affect people 
living in these regions as they cause physiological 
stress, sometimes resulting in death. As such there is 
no universal definition for heat wave. It is generally 
defined as a prolonged period of excessive heat. During 
extreme heat waves, mortality and morbidity increase 
among the general population, especially among 
vulnerable groups. This monitoring of these extreme 
heat events can lead to better planning, preparation for 
and response to these events. 


8.5.2 Indicator Requirements 


Annual frequency of extreme heat events shall be 
calculated as the number of extreme heat events in a 
given year. 


The IMD has the following criteria for heat waves as 
follows: 


a) Heat wave is considered if maximum temperature 
of a station reaches at least 40 °C or more for 
plains and at least 30 °C or more for hilly regions. 


b) Based on departure from normal 


1) Heat wave — Departure from normal is in 
between 4.5 °C and 6.4 °C, and 


2) Severe heat wave — Departure from normal is 


> 6.4 °C. 
c) Based on actual maximum temperature 
1) Heat wave — When actual maximum 


temperature > 45 °C, and 


2) Severe heat wave — When actual maximum 
temperature > 47 °C. 


d) Warm night 


It should be considered only when maximum 
temperature remains 40 °C or more. It may be 
defined based on departures or actual minimum 
temperatures as follows: 


1) Warm night — Minimum temperature 
departure is 4.5 °C to 6.4 °C, or 
2) Very warm night — Minimum temperature 


departure is more than 6.4 °C. 
e) Heat Wave conditions for coastal stations 
When maximum temperature departure is 4.5 °C 
or more from normal, heat wave may be described 


provided actual maximum temperature is 37 °C or 
more 


11 


IS 17785 : 2022 


NOTES 


1 To declare heat waves, the above criteria should be met at 
least in 2 stations in a meteorological sub-division for at least 
two consecutive days and it will be declared on the second day. 


2 Heat wave/warm night should be described, if conditions are 
satisfied simultaneously. 
Cities should consider the location ofthe air temperature 
measurements to convey the local representativeness of 
the reported values (for example, airport, city centre). 


8.5.3 Data Sources 


Data on extreme heat events can be sourced from 
IMD or local/regional meteorological departments 
monitoring the environment and climate change. 


8.6 Annual Frequency of Extreme Cold Events 
8.6.1 General 


During extreme cold events, mortality and morbidity 
increase among the general population, especially 
among vulnerable groups. This monitoring of these 
extreme cold events can lead to better planning, 
preparation for and response to these events 


8.6.2 Indicator Requirements 


The annual frequency of cold events shall be calculated 
as the number of extreme cold events in a given year. 


The IMD has the following criteria for cold waves as 
follows: 


a) Cold wave is considered when minimum 
temperature ofa station is 100 °C or less for plains 
and 0 °C or less for Hilly regions. 

b) Based on departure 

1) Cold wave — Negative departure from normal 
is 4.5 °C to 6.4 °C, or 


2) Severe cold wave — Negative departure from 
normal is > 6.4 °C. 


c) Based on actual minimum temperature (for plain 
stations only) 
1) Cold wave — When minimum temperature is 
< 04 °C, or 
2) Severe cold wave — When minimum 
temperature is < 02 °C. 
d) Cold day 
It should be considered when minimum 


temperature is 10 °C or less for plains and 0 °C or 

less for hilly regions: 

1) Cold day — Maximum temperature departure 
is —4.5 °C to —6.4 °C, or 

2) Severe cold day — Maximum Temperature 
Departure is <—6.4 °C. 


IS 17785 : 2022 


e) Cold wave conditions for coastal stations 


When minimum temperature departure is —4.5 °C or 
less over a station, cold wave may be described, if the 
minimum temperature is 15 °C or less. Cold day/cold 
wave or heat wave/warm night should be described, if 
conditions are satisfied simultaneously. 


NOTES 


1 To declare heat waves, the above criteria should be met at 
least in 2 stations in a Meteorological sub-division for at least 
two consecutive days and it will be declared on the second day. 


2 Cold day/cold wave should be described, if conditions are 
satisfied simultaneously. 


8.6.3 Data Sources 


Data on extreme cold events can be can be sourced from 
IMD or local/regional meteorological departments 
monitoring the environment and climate change. 


8.7 Annual Frequency of Flood Events 
8.7.1 General 


Floods are the most common natural disaster and the 
leading cause of natural disaster fatalities worldwide. 
With increasing frequency of climatic extremes, 
the occurrence and severity of urban flood events is 
intensifying. Cities can use annual flood frequency 
data to improve flood warning systems, and to monitor 
and forecast flood disasters and water resources. This 
monitoring of these flood events can lead to better 
planning, preparation for and response to these events. 


8.7.2 Indicator Requirements 


The annual frequency of flood events shall be calculated 
as the number of flood events in the city in a given year. 


A flood event shall refer to an overflow of water onto 
normally dry land, and may include the inundation 
of a normally dry area caused by a significant rise in 
the water level of a stream, lake, reservoir or coastal 
region. A flood event may also include pooling of water 
at or near the point of rainfall. Flooding is a longer-term 
event than flash flooding, lasting at least 72 h. 


8.7.3 Data Sources 


Data on flood events can be can be sourced from IMD or 
local/regional meteorological departments monitoring 
the environment and climate change. 


8.8 Percentage of City Land Area Covered by Tree 
Canopy 


8.8.1 General 


A city’s tree canopy coverage can have numerous 
benefits, including reduction of daytime air 
temperatures in hot seasons, improving air quality, 
and strengthening social ties among neighbours. These 
factors can strengthen resilience while also helping to 
attract businesses and residents. 


12 


8.8.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of city area covered by tree canopy 
shall be calculated as the city land area covered by tree 
canopy (numerator) divided by city’s total land area 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of city land area 
covered by tree canopy. 


Tree canopy shall refer to the layered biomass of 
tree leaves, branches, and stems that obscures the 
underlying ground surface when viewed from above. 


8.8.3 Data Sources 


Data on tree canopy coverage can be sourced 
from local or regional conservation and planning 
organizations. 


9 FINANCE 


9.1 Annual Expenditure on Upgrades and 
Maintenance of City Service Assets as a Percentage 
of Total City Budget 


9.1.1 General 


Upgrading and maintenance of city services helps to 
ensure a more resilient city. If the assets to provide 
these services are not maintained and/or upgraded, 
the level of service over time is likely to decline and 
to be more vulnerable to disruption during shocks 
and stresses. Cities should proactively maintain and 
upgrade basic services to ensure public safety, and to 
ensure adequacy for the future. 


9.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


Annual expenditure on maintenance and upgrades of 
city service assets as a percentage of total city budget 
shall be calculated as the annual total of all funds 
spent on maintenance and upgrades of assets for the 
provision of city services (numerator) divided by the 
total annual budget of the city (denominator). The 
result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
the expenditure on maintenance and upgrades of city 
service assets as a percentage of total city budget. 


Where possible, expenditure data by service type (for 
example, water, waste, transport) should be included 
as percentage values and included separately as a 
table. 


City services will vary in each city, but usually 
include sanitation, water supply, waste collection, 
public transport, electricity and gas supply, street 
lighting, and road maintenance. 


9.1.3 Data Sources 


Information on expenditures can be sourced from 
capital and maintenance budget documents which are 
approved annually. 


9.2 Annual Expenditure on Upgrades and 
Maintenance of Storm Water Infrastructure as a 
Percentage of Total City Budget 


9.2.1 General 


Protective storm water infrastructure is critical to 
mitigate hazards and potential impacts of extreme 
precipitation events. It should be maintained, upgraded, 
and managed proactively to ensure public safety, and to 
ensure adequacy for the future. 


9.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


Annual expenditure on upgrades and maintenance 
of storm water infrastructure as a percentage of total 
city budget shall be calculated as the annual total 
of all funds spent on upgrades and maintenance of 
storm water physical and management infrastructure 
(numerator) divided by the total annual budget of the 
city (denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the expenditure on upgrades 
and maintenance of storm water infrastructure as a 
percentage of total city budget. 


Storm water infrastructure shall refer to facilities, 
technical and organizational structures that are 
designed, installed, and/or maintained to mitigate the 
effects of rainwater and snowmelt hazards in urban 
areas. Examples, of storm water infrastructure include 
levees and flood barriers; flood basins; sea walls; storm 
drains and storm-water holding tanks; storm water 
ditches, culverts, and catchment basins. 


9.2.3 Data Sources 


Information on expenditures can be sourced from 
capital and maintenance budget documents which are 
approved annually. 


9.3 Annual Expenditure allocated to Ecosystem 
Restoration in the City’s Territory as a Percentage 
of Total City Budget 


9.3.1 General 


Ecosystem restoration is an effective way to strengthen 
ecological resilience and to mitigate hazards. It has 
multiple benefits such as improved storm water 
management, water pollution control, and reduced 
flooding and soil erosion. 


9.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


Annual expenditure on ecosystem restoration as a 
percentage of total city budget shall be calculated 
as the total of all funds spent annually on ecosystem 
restoration assets for the specific purpose of enhancing 
the protective and other ecosystem services that 
enhance the resilience of the city (numerator) divided 
by the total city budget (denominator). The result shall 
be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the expenditure 
on ecosystem restoration as a percentage of total city 
capital budget. 


13 


IS 17785 : 2022 


9.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on ecosystem restoration may be included in the 
city’s capital and public works budget. Some elements 
of expenditure may also be included in the city’s parks 
and conservation budgets. The total city budget used 
in this calculation should to be taken directly from the 
city’s audited financial statements without amendment 
or variation. 


9.3.4 Data Interpretation 


This indicator measures specific city-expenditure to 
support and enhance the ecosystems services. 


9.4 Annual Expenditure on Green and Blue 
Infrastructure as a Percentage of Total City Budget 


Embedding green and blue infrastructure into the urban 
fabric is an effective way to strengthen ecological 
resilience and to mitigate the impacts of many hazards. 
These infrastructures have multiple benefits such as 
improved storm water management, water pollution 
control, and reduced flooding and soil erosion. 


9.4.1 Indicator Requirements 


Annual expenditure on green and blue infrastructure 
as a percentage of total budget shall be calculated as 
the total of all funds spent on creating or enhancing 
green and blue infrastructure assets for the specific 
purpose of providing infrastructure-related services for 
the city (numerator) divided by the total city budget 
(denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the expenditure on green and blue 
infrastructure as a percentage of total city budget. 


Green and blue infrastructure shall refer to all natural 
and semi-natural landscape elements that can be 
broadly defined as a strategically planned network 
of high quality natural and semi-natural areas with 
other environmental features, which is designed and 
managed to deliver a wide range of infrastructure and 
ecosystem services and protect biodiversity. Green 
elements are related to vegetation and vary in spatial 
scale from individual rows of trees to entire valley 
systems; blue elements are related to water and vary 
from single ponds to entire watercourses. Ways to 
embed this infrastructure into the urban fabric include 
greening of street squares and roadsides; greening roofs 
and facades; developing urban agriculture; creating 
urban green corridors; replacing impermeable surfaces 
with pervious materials; natural water filtration; and 
day lighting urban rivers and restoring existing water 
courses. 


9.4.2 Data Sources 


Data on green and blue infrastructure can be sourced 
from the city’s capital and public works budget. Some 
elements of expenditure can also be included in the 
city’s budget for parks and legally protected areas. The 
total city budget used in this calculation should to be 


IS 17785 : 2022 


taken directly from the city’s audited financial statements 
without amendment or variation. 


9.5 Annual Expenditure on Emergency Management 
Planning as a Percentage of Total City Budget 


9.5.1 General 


Budgeting for emergency management planning helps 
cities to create a detailed plan of action so that the city 
can adequately respond to shocks and stresses. 


9.5.2 Indicator Requirements 


Annual expenditure on emergency management planning 
as a percentage of total city budget shall be calculated as 
the total annual expenditure on emergency management 
planning (numerator) divided by the total annual city 
budget (denominator). The result shall be multiplied 
by 100 and expressed as the annual expenditure on 
emergency management planning as a percentage of total 
city budget. 

Emergency management planning shall refer to the 
process of assessing a city’s goals for disaster risk 
reduction and emergency preparedness, and creating a 
detailed plan of action to meet those goals so that the 
city can respond to shocks and stresses. Elements of 
emergency management planning include determining 
potential emergency situations and consequences of 
those situations (that is, through risk assessments, hazard 
mapping, vulnerability analysis), and identifying the 
necessary and appropriate responses and procedures for 
each emergency situation (for example, warning systems, 
evacuation routes, service conduits). Emergency 
management planning shall exclude ongoing operational 
emergency service budgets for police, fire, or ambulance 
services. 


9.5.3 Data Sources 


Information on expenditures can be sourced from capital 
and maintenance budget documents which are approved 
annually. 


9.6 Annual Expenditure on Social and Community 
Services as a Percentage of Total City Budget 


9.6.1 General 


Social and community services are widely recognised as 
contributing to the development of social cohesion, which 
is widely recognised as being fundamental to resilience. 


9.6.2 Indicator Requirements 


Annual expenditure on social and community services 
as a percentage of total city budget shall be calculated 
as the total annual expenditure on social and community 
services by the city (numerator) divided by the total 
annual budget of the city (denominator). The result shall 
be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the expenditure on 
social and community services as a percentage of total 
city budget. 


14 


Social and community services shall be defined as services 
directly provided or supported by the city with the goal 
of promoting or supporting individual and community 
resilience and wellbeing. This may include, but is not 
limited to, programs and funding for community groups 
and associations, public health awareness, libraries, 
emergency shelters, homeless shelters, drop-in centres, 
community centres, civic events, community outreach, 
food programs, health and human services, seniors 
programs and services, and outreach, and support and 
assistance for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. 


9.6.3 Data Sources 


Information on expenditures on social and community 
services can be sourced from the annual city budget. 


9.6.4 Data Interpretation 


The provision of social and community services 
may also be the responsibility of other levels of 
governments (for example, local, regional, national) 
and other stakeholders such as charities and 
not-for-profit groups. The expenditure by the city 
government on these services should be interpreted in 
this broader context. 


9.7 Total Allocation of Disaster Reserve Funds as a 
Percentage of Total City Budget 


A disaster reserve fund is managed by the city government 
specifically to meet the unanticipated expenses of 
emergency response, recovery, and reconstruction from 
a disaster event. The disaster reserve fund elevates a 
city’s preparedness for disasters. The additional benefit 
of disaster reserve funds held by the city allows for 
the dispersal of funds to support rapid resumption of 
services. 


9.7.1 Indicator Requirements 


The total allocation of disaster reserve funds as a 
percentage of total city budget shall be calculated as the 
total allocation of disaster reserve funds (numerator) 
divided by the total city budget (denominator). The 
result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
total allocation of disaster reserve funds as a percentage 
of total city budget. 


Disaster reserve fund shall refer to budgets managed 
by the city government and allocated specifically for 
meeting the unanticipated expenses of emergency 
response, recovery, and reconstruction from a disaster 
event. 


9.7.2 Data Sources 

Information on disaster reserve funds can be sourced 
through the city budget. 

9.7.3 Data Interpretation 


Different jurisdictions will have different models for 
covering the costs of dealing with disasters, which will 


need to be taken into account when interpreting this 
indicator. 


10 GOVERNANCE 


10.1 Frequency with which Disaster Management 
Plans are Updated 


10.1.1 General 


Cities shall regularly test and update the long-term 
adequacy of disaster management plans to reflect 
relevant hazards and risks facing the community 
(based on current data or modelled hazard and 
demographic projections), and to effectively mitigate 
those risks. Disaster management plans, will change 
with urbanization and land use, shifting weather 
and climate patterns, and improved knowledge and 
technology. 


10.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The frequency with which disaster management 
plans are updated shall refer to the total number of 
city-wide disaster management plan updates that 
occurred in the previous 5 years (numerator) divided 
by five (denominator). 


Disaster management shall refer to the long-term 
organization, planning, and application of measures 
to prepare for, respond to, and recover from disaster 
events. Disaster management plans should be integrated 
with wider regional or national responses and should 
stipulate which agency assumes leadership in different 
emergency scenarios, the response roles of different 
agencies, and the human and non-human resources 
available. Key components of a disaster management 
plan are command and control; evacuations (including 
hospitals, jails, etc.); communication systems; critical 
asset management (including likely ‘failure chains’); 
integration of private sector utilities covering energy, 
water/sanitation, trash collection, communications, 
etc.; medical response; law and order response; fire 
and rescue response; public information; and triage 
policies. 


10.1.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator should be available from the 
relevant emergency management authority(ies) with 
responsibility for emergency planning. 


10.2 Percentage of City Departments that are 
Engaged in Preparing for and Responding to 
Potential Risks 


10.2.1 General 


Inter-agency engagement and co-ordination is essential 
for pre-event preparedness and post-event response 
activities. This engagement should play out at multiple 
levels of government, including city departments. 


15 


IS 17785 : 2022 


10.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of city departments that are engaged in 
preparing for and responding to potential risks shall be 
calculated as the number of city departments that are 
actively engaged in preparing for and responding to 
potential risks (numerator) divided by the total number 
of city departments within the city (denominator). The 
result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of city departments that are engaged in 
preparing for and responding to potential risks. 


Consideration should be given to inclusion of third 
parties including businesses where these entities 
provide key services on behalf of city departments. 


10.2.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator should be sourced from city 
departments. 


10.3 Percentage of Essential City Services Covered 
by a Documented Continuity Plan 


10.3.1 General 


Continuity plans can enhance a city’s preparedness for, 
and recovery from, shocks. The benefits of a continuity 
plan include continued delivery of essential services, 
reduced disruption to city operations, and timely and 
rapid recovery from disruptions due to shocks. Cities 
therefore need to be proactive in developing and 
adopting continuity plans, based on relevant risks and 
the issues likely to arise. 


10.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of essential city services covered by a 
documented continuity plan shall be calculated as the 
total number of essential services that are covered by a 
documented continuity plan (numerator) divided by the 
total number of essential services provided in the city 
by government entities (denominator). The result shall 
be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage 
of essential city services covered by a documented 
continuity plan. 


Essential city services shall refer to services that are 
deemed vital to the wellbeing and functioning of the 
community. These can include but are not limited to: 
transportation, electricity, gas, water, sanitation and 
wastewater treatment, waste management, food, health, 
police, fire and emergency services, and ambulance. 


A continuity plan shall refer to a documented 
strategy that identifies the threats and risks facing the 
city operations, and that helps to protect its assets 
and personnel from the negative effects of shocks. 
Continuity planning involves defining potential risks, 
determining how those risks will affect operations, 
implementing safeguards and procedures to mitigate 
those risks, and regularly reviewing risks to ensure 
their relevancy and currency. Continuity plans should 
be regularly updated. 


IS 17785 : 2022 


10.3.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator will be sourced from the 
continuity plans of entities providing essential city 
services. 


10.4 Percentage of City Electronic Data with Secure 
and Remote Back-up Storage 


10.4.1 General 


Safe and efficient back-up, access, recovery, and 
storage of data is critical to the functioning of city 
governments and their disaster mitigation and recovery 
strategies. Important data held by governments should 
be backed up at secure, offsite data centres to protect 
against disruptions and/or damage to primary storage. 
Plans and mechanisms for the safe, long-term storage 
of city data should reflect the city’s vulnerabilities to 
hazards and should be updated and tested regularly. 


10.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of city electronic data with secure and 
remote back-up storage shall be calculated as the 
volume of city electronic data with secure and remote 
back-up storage (numerator) divided by the total 
volume of electronic city data (denominator). The 
result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of city data with secure and remote back up 
storage. 


Back-up remote storage shall refer to the storage of 
data (held on servers, workstations, and laptops) at a 
secure secondary (for example, offsite) location. 


10.4.3 Data Sources 


Data for this indicator can be sourced from the city’s 
IT department. 


10.5 Percentage of Public Meetings Dedicated to 
Resilience in the City 


10.5.1 General 


Public meetings in cities help to promote and enable 
inclusive and collaborative approaches to resilience 
planning. These help to enhance citizen engagement 
and citizen-driven strategies in creating a more resilient 
city. 


10.5.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of public meetings dedicated to 
resilience in the city shall be calculated as the number 
of public meetings dedicated to resilience in the city 
(numerator) divided by the total number of public 
meetings in the city (denominator). The result shall be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage of 
public meetings dedicated to resilience in the city. 


10.5.3 Data Sources 


Data on public meetings can be sourced from a city’s 
public meeting registry/local authorities. 


16 


10.6 Number of Intergovernmental Agreements 
Dedicated to Planning for Shocks as Percentage of 
Total Intergovernmental Agreements 


10.6.1 General 


Intergovernmental agreements are a common and 
useful instrument serving a variety of purposes. With 
regards to resilience, intergovernmental agreements 
help to foster relationships across and between levels 
of government (for example, city, state/province and 
national governments) and promote and entrench 
long-term collaborative planning for managing shocks. 


10.6.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number of intergovernmental agreements 
dedicated to planning for shocks as a percentage of 
total intergovernmental agreements shall be calculated 
as the number of intergovernmental agreements 
involving the city that are dedicated to planning for 
shocks (numerator) divided by the total number of 
intergovernmental agreements (denominator). The 
result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
number of intergovernmental agreements dedicated 
to planning for shocks as a percentage of total 
intergovernmental agreements. 


An intergovernmental agreement shall refer to an 
agreement that is entered into by the city with at 
least one other level of government (for example, 
state/provincial and national levels of government). 


10.6.3 Data Sources 


Data on intergovernmental agreements can be sourced 
from city departments and ministries/departments 
responsible for intergovernmental relations. 


11 HEALTH 


11.1 Percentage of Health Care Facilities Equipped 
with Capabilities and Medical Supplies for Acute 
Needs 


11.1.1 General 


Health care facilities shall have services, supplies, 
and capabilities to treat the critical medical needs of 
people who are made sick, injured, or displaced by a 
disaster event. This helps to reduce the population’s 
vulnerability to hazards, while also mitigating their 
likely effects. 


11.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of health care facilities equipped with 
capabilities and medical supplies for acute needs shall 
be calculated as the total number of health care facilities 
equipped with capabilities and medical supplies for 
acute needs within the city (numerator) divided by 
the total number of health care facilities within the 
city (denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage of health care 


facilities equipped with adequate capabilities and 
medical supplies for acute needs. 


For the purposes of this indicator, health care facilities 
shall refer to hospitals and clinics. Capabilities and 
medical supplies for acute needs shall refer to the 
clinical health care functions (for example, emergency 
medicine, trauma care, pre-hospital emergency care, 
critical care surgery, urgent care, and short-term 
inpatient stabilization) that are able to deal with at least 
90 percent of major injuries within 6 h. 


11.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on the capability and equipment levels of health 
facilities can be sourced from health authorities. 


11.2 Percentage of Hospitals 
Back-up Electricity Supply 


Equipped with 


11.2.1 General 


During shocks and stresses, hospitals play a critical role 
in providing emergency care. These facilities need to 
care for existing patients, while they also take on the 
role of treating disaster-related casualties and injuries. 
Health care facilities rely on electricity to maintain 
their essential functions and therefore require a reliable 
back-up electricity supply to maintain these functions 
in the case of power outages. 


11.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of hospitals equipped with back-up 
electricity supply shall be calculated as the number 
of hospitals equipped with back-up electricity supply 
(numerator) divided by the total number of hospitals 
in the city (denominator). The result shall then be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage 
of health care facilities equipped with equipped with 
back-up electricity supply. 


Back up electricity supply will include electrical energy 
sources (including generators and battery storage) 
protected from likely hazards and with sufficient energy 
or fuel supplies to provide sufficient power to run the 
essential functions of the hospital for a 72 h period. 


11.2.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of hospitals equipped with 
emergency energy supplies and generators should be 
sourced from health authorities. 


11.3 Percentage of Population with Basic Health 
Insurance 


11.3.1 General 


The provision of basic health insurance supports 
people in maintaining good health and allows access to 
appropriate medical care when sick, injured or disabled. 
Health insurance can reduce the financial burden that 
persons and their family face when requiring essential 
medical services. Health insurance also plays a role in 


17 


IS 17785 : 2022 


enabling communities to be less vulnerable to shocks 
and stresses. 


11.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of population with basic health insurance 
shall be calculated as the total number of residents 
within the city with basic health insurance coverage 
(numerator) divided by the city’s total population 
(denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage of population with 
basic health insurance. 


Basic health insurance shall refer to a form of risk 
protection from incurred medical expenses, either 
through free or low-cost access to medical services or 
through payments of benefits as a result of sickness 
or injury to recover costs. Health insurance may be 
publicly or privately provided. 


11.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on residents with unified health histories can be 
sourced through local, or regional health care providers 
or insurers. 


11.4 Percentage of Population that 
Immunized 


is Fully 


11.4.1 General 


Immunization is one of the most cost-effective public 
health interventions to date, averting an estimated 2 to 
3 million deaths every year. Immunization programmes 
have been very successful in protecting people against 
specific infections, hence why it is important people 
receive all basic vaccinations. 


11.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of population that is fully immunized 
shall be calculated as the number of residents that have 
been fully immunized in the city (numerator) divided by 
the total city population (denominator). The result shall 
be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage of 
population that is fully immunized. 


According to the World Health Organization, a person 
who is fully immunized shall refer to a person who has 
received all basic vaccinations before reaching one year 
of age. More specifically, a person is fully immunized 
with all basic vaccinations if the person has received 
Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine against 
tuberculosis at birth; three doses each of polio and 
pentavalent [diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis-hepatitis B 
(Hep), Haemophilus influenza type B (Hib)] vaccines at 
6 weeks, 10 weeks and 14 weeks old; and a vaccination 
against measles at 9 months old 


11.4.3 Data Sources 


Data on children immunizations should be sourced 
from the relevant departments or organizations that are 
responsible for providing immunization health services. 


IS 17785 : 2022 


11.5 Number of Infectious Disease Outbreaks per 
Year 


11.5.1 General 


An infectious disease outbreak is a major potential 
shock for a city. The ability of a city to prepare for, 
recover from and adapt to an infectious disease outbreak 
is indicative of resilience. 


11.5.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number of infectious disease outbreaks per year 
shall be calculated as the count of infectious disease 
outbreaks in a given year in the city. 


An infectious disease shall refer to a disease caused by 
pathogenic microorganisms, such as bacteria, viruses, 
parasites or fungi; the diseases can be spread, directly 
or indirectly, from one person to another. 


As defined by the World Health Organization, an 
outbreak shall refer to an occurrence of cases of disease 
in excess of what would normally be expected in a 
defined community, geographical area or season. An 
outbreak may occur in a restricted geographical area or 
may extend over several countries. It may last for a few 
days or weeks, or for several years. 


11.5.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of infectious diseases can be 
sourced from relevant local or regional departments or 
organizations responsible for disease surveillance and 
epidemiology. 


11.5.4 Data Interpretation 


Public health surveillance ensures an ongoing, 
systematic collection, analysis and interpretation 
of health-related data essential to the planning, 
implementation, and evaluation of public health 
practice. Surveillance is undertaken to inform disease 
prevention and control measures, especially in the 
case of disease outbreaks. Furthermore, public health 
surveillance, such as the tracking of disease outbreaks, 
is an essential communication point in forecasting 
and responding to disease outbreaks and incidents of 
regional, national and significance. 


12 HOUSING AND BUILT ENVIRONMENT 


12.1 Capacity of Designated Emergency Shelters 
per 100 000 Population 


12.1.1 General 


Emergency shelters are places of rest, reprieve, and 
recuperation for people displaced by shocks and 
stresses. They are essential to a city’s capacity for 
disaster preparedness and response, and therefore 
resilience. 


18 


12.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


Capacity of designated emergency shelters per 
100 000 population shall be calculated as the total 
capacity of all designated emergency shelters in the city 
(numerator) divided by one 100 000" of the city’s total 
population (denominator). The result shall be expressed 
as the capacity of designated emergency shelters per 
100 000 population. 


Capacity shall refer to the maximum, pre-determined 
number of people that can be accommodated in an 
emergency shelter. Emergency shelter shall refer to an 
existing structure that has been officially designated 
to be used for temporary housing for people whose 
previous housing is unsafe or unavailable during 
or after a disaster, or who are fleeing the effects of a 
disaster. Emergency shelters should be able to resist a 
disaster by virtue of their construction and/or location. 


12.1.3 Data Sources 


Information on designated emergency shelters can be 
sourced from emergency management authorities and 
other specialized agencies. 


12.2 Percentage of Buildings Structurally Vulnerable 
to High-Risk Hazards 


12.2.1 General 


The vulnerability of a city’s building stock to severe 
damage or collapse during a disaster is vital to 
overall resilience. Assessment and review of building 
vulnerability can help cities to identify structures 
in need of repair, retrofit, or rebuilding so as to meet 
current codes and standards that are relevant to the 
current hazard-risk profile. This is especially true 
in cities prone to earthquakes, hurricanes, cyclones, 
floods, tsunamis, and landslides. 


12.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of buildings structurally vulnerable to 
high-risk hazards shall be calculated as the total number 
of buildings in the city that are vulnerable to high-risk 
hazards (numerator) divided by the total number of 
buildings in the city (denominator). The result shall be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage of 
buildings structurally vulnerable to high-risk hazards. 


Buildings shall refer to all residential and non-residential 
structures that are designed for human occupancy (that 
is, with roofs and walls) and that stand in permanent 
or semi-permanent locations. This includes public and 
private buildings used for residential, commercial, 
industrial, institutional, recreational, and other 
purposes. Buildings that are structurally vulnerable 
to high risk hazards (such as earthquakes, cyclones 
and floods) are at high risk of suffering collapse or 
significant damage due to the effects of hazards that can 
cause death or injury to the building’s occupants. 


12.2.3 Data Sources 


Data for this indicator can be obtained from city 
departments or local authorities responsible for 
ensuring compliance with building codes, standards, 
and safety regulations. 


12.3 Percentage of Residential Buildings not in 
Conformity with National Building Code of India 
and Indian Standards 


12.3.1 General 


National Building Code of India (NBC) stipulate 
safety and performance standards for the design and 
construction of residential buildings. NBC and Indian 
standards shall be legally and actively enforced to 
ensure that buildings withstand the high-risk hazards 
that a community faces, and thereby reduce risk of 
building damage or collapse during a disaster. 


12.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of residential buildings not in 
conformity with building codes and standards shall be 
calculated as the total number of residential buildings 
in the city not in conformity with building codes and 
standards (numerator) divided by the total number of 
residential buildings in the city (denominator). The 
result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of residential buildings not in conformity 
with building codes and standards. 


This indicator relates to NBC and Indian Standards, 
including (and especially) those that regulate the 
structural integrity of residential buildings and their 
resistance to severe damage or collapse during a 
disaster (for example, earthquakes, floods, cyclones, 
landslides). Residential buildings shall refer to all 
structures designed for long-term human occupancy 
(that is, with roofs and walls) and that stand in 
permanent or semi-permanent locations. 


12.3.3 Data Sources 


Data for this indicator can be obtained from city 
departments or local authorities responsible for 
enforcing NBC, Standards, and building regulations. 


12.4 Percentage of Damaged Infrastructure that 
was ‘Built Back Better’ after a Disaster 


12.4.1 General 


Post-disaster learning is an essential process in the 
reconstruction of stronger and enhanced communities. 
The process of ‘building back better’ helps cities to 
mitigate existing risks and prepare for future disasters. 
Lessons learned from real disaster events can be 
integrated into a city’s risk-management framework. 


12.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of damaged infrastructure that was built 
back better after a disaster shall be calculated as the 


19 


IS 17785 : 2022 


total number and length of infrastructures within 
the city that were ‘built back better’ after a disaster 
or extreme event (numerator) divided by the total 
number and length of infrastructures within the city 
(denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of damaged 
infrastructure that was built back better after a 
disaster. 


This indicator can only be assessed in instances 
where a disaster or extreme event has impacted the 
city resulting in damage to buildings and structures. 


Infrastructure shall refer to point and linear assets 
(physical, built) that provide essential functions at 
single, identifiable sites or positions within the city, or 
along conduits, corridors, routes, or lines within the 
city, and that stand in permanent or semi-permanent 
locations. Point infrastructures shall include major 
buildings used for education (for example, schools, 
universities, colleges) and health care (for example, 
hospitals, health clinics), as well as stations, facilities, 
plants, installations, or other point-source works 
used for solid waste disposal and treatment; water 
and wastewater treatment; and power generation, 
transmission, and distribution. Linear infrastructure 
shall include major pipelines used for delivery of water 
and gas, or removal of wastewater; transmission lines 
for delivery of electricity; and major transportation 
routes and corridors for movement of people and 
goods over land and water (for example, highways, 
roadways, railways, causeways, bridges). 


In the context of this indicator, ‘Built back better’ 
shall refer to the recovery, rehabilitation, and 
reconstruction of cities’ physical infrastructure after 
disaster events to increase its resilience. Examples of 
‘Built back better’ are: 


a) Introducing disaster risk reduction measures 
(including building codes and regulations) to 
increase the resilience of physical assets being 
reconstructed, such as earthquake-resistant; 

b) Building designs or raised-floor elevation in 

flood-prone areas; 


Introducing and enforcing appropriate 
land-use planning regulations, which curtail 
reconstruction in high-risk areas; 


Reconstructing improved hazard-control 
infrastructure, such as flood embankments; 


Replacing damaged assets with context 
sensitive, technologically updated alternatives. 
For example, modernizing damaged 
telecommunications equipment to keep up with 
technological advances; and 


Using recovery as an opportunity to right size 
infrastructure to better meet community needs. 
For example, reconstructing hospitals with an 
adequate number of beds. 


IS 17785 : 2022 


12.4.3 Data Sources 


Data for this indicator could be sourced from the 
Planning and Engineering Departments of the city 
along with other public and private entities involved in 
the planning and construction of city infrastructure. 


12.5 Annual Number of Residential Properties 
Flooded as a Percentage of Total Residential 
Properties in the City 


12.5.1 General 


With the increasing frequency of severe weather 
events, it is essential that homeowners take steps to 
protect their homes from flooding. Cities also play 
a critical role in mitigating residential flooding, for 
example, through planning controls and construction 
and maintenance of storm water infrastructure. Sources 
of flooding can include, but are not limited to, rainfall, 
storm surge, overflowing river banks, surface water 
run-off, groundwater rise, sewage back-up. 


12.5.2 Indicator Requirements 


The annual number of residential properties flooded as 
a percentage of total residential properties in the city 
shall be calculated as the annual number of residential 
properties that have flooded in the city (numerator) 
divided by the total number of residential properties 
in the city (denominator). The result shall then be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as the annual number 
of residential properties flooded as a percentage of total 
residential properties in the city. 


Residential properties shall refer to dwellings (or 
structures) classified for residential use. Examples 
of residential properties should include, but are not 
limited to, single-family dwellings, mobile dwellings, 
semi-detached dwellings, row houses, condominiums 
and apartment buildings. 


12.5.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of residential properties flooded can 
be sourced from local or regional agencies/departments 
responsible for public safety, water and/or environment 
services. 


12.6 Percentage of Residential Properties Located 
in High-Risk Zones 


12.6.1 General 


Properties located in high-risk zones are especially 
vulnerable to damage or destruction during disaster 
events. Controlling the type and location of property 
development is a key strategy for cities to avoid and 
reduce risks from natural hazards. 


12.6.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of residential properties located in high-risk 
zones shall be calculated as the number of residential 
properties located in high-risk zones within the city 


20 


(numerator) divided by the total number of residential 
properties in the city (denominator). The result shall be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage of 
residential properties located in high-risk zones. 


Residential properties shall refer to dwellings (or 
structures) classified for residential use. Examples 
of residential properties should include, but are not 
limited to, single-family dwellings, mobile dwellings, 
semi-detached dwellings, row houses, condominiums 
and apartment buildings. 


High-risk zones shall refer to those areas of the city 
that are particularly vulnerable to natural hazards, 
such as flood plains, hillsides prone to landslides, and 
low-lying coastal areas. Hazard maps should be used 
to identify such areas and indicate the probability of 
occurrence of a relevant hazard. 


12.6.3 Data Sources 


Mapping/delineation of hazards within the city is often 
a key responsibility of city governments. Information 
on hazard maps and the location of risk zones can be 
obtained from several departments and stakeholders, 
including GIS departments, emergency planners, and 
research institutions. 


13 POPULATION AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


13.1 Vulnerable Population as a Percentage of City 
Population 


13.1.1 General 


Vulnerable members of a community are often the 
people most at risk from shocks and stresses. For 
emergency planning purposes, ensuring the safety of 
vulnerable people often requires a disproportionately 
large quantity of time and resources of emergency 
services during shocks. Knowing the magnitude of a 
city’s vulnerable population can help a city prepare for 
shocks and stresses. 


13.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The vulnerable population as a percentage of total city 
population shall be calculated as the total number of 
vulnerable people within the city (numerator) divided 
by the city’s total population (denominator). The 
result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
vulnerable population as a percentage of total city 
population. 


Vulnerable people shall refer to individuals who have 
limited capacity to anticipate, cope with, resist, and 
recover from the effects of a disaster, and can include 
the following segments of the population: 


a) the elderly; 
b) persons with physical or mental impairments; 
c) children; 


d) pregnant women; 


e) ill or undernourished people; 

f) the homeless; 

g) people located in slums and informal housing; 
h) refugees and internally displaced people; and 
j) transient or nomadic communities. 


Other population segments in the city that may be 
vulnerable to hazards due to location or context specific 
factors may also be included in the total vulnerable 
person count. 


13.1.3 Data Sources 


Population and demographic data can be typically 
obtained from census and household survey data. 
Measuring some categories of vulnerable persons 
however may require additional or alternative data 
collection methods, such as additional specific surveys 
(for example, homeless people). 


13.2 Percentage of Population with Access to Social 
Assistance Programs 


Providing social and financial assistance to 
disadvantaged and low-income persons helps ensure 
access to essential needs and maintenance of basic 
living standards. Social assistance also can help to 
reduce the vulnerability of recipient populations to 
shocks and shocks. 


13.2.1 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of population with access to social 
assistance programs shall be calculated as the number 
of people within the city with access to social assistance 
programs (numerator) divided by the total population 
of the city (denominator). The result shall be multiplied 
by 100 and expressed as the percentage of population 
with access to social assistance programs. 


Social assistance shall refer to government-funded 
financial aid that provides support to families and 
individuals who cannot meet their basic living costs due 
to illness, disability, low income, or unemployment. For 
some recipients, the need for assistance is temporary, 
while for others it is long term. 


NOTE — Social assistance is also known as welfare, income 
assistance, or social security. 


13.2.2 Data Sources 


Data on access to social assistance programs should be 
available from the government agencies responsible for 
providing these programs. 


13.3 Percentage of Population at High Risk from 
Natural Hazards 


13.3.1 General 


Knowing the proportion of a city’s population that is 
exposed to hazards can help to educate the community, 


21 


IS 17785 : 2022 


incentivise actions to mitigate risk, identify instances 
of underinsurance, and enhance city risk analysis and 
management processes. 


13.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of population at high risk from natural 
hazards shall be calculated as the number of people 
in the city at high-risk of exposure to natural hazards 
(numerator) divided by the total city population 
(denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of population at 
high risk from natural hazards. 
NOTE — Delineating high-risk exposure, requires detailed 
local risk assessment (LRA) and up-to-date hazard and 
vulnerability maps. Assessments and maps should be publicly 
available and inclusive of entire urban areas. Up-to-date 
information is particularly important for hazards, such as 
floods because changes in urban development can affect the 
area of a community at risk. 
Where possible, the percentage data for each relevant 
hazard type should be included and listed in a table. 


13.3.3 Data Sources 


Mapping/delineation of hazards, vulnerabilities, risks, 
and exposures in the city is often a key responsibility 
of city governments. Information on these maps can be 
obtained from several departments and stakeholders, 
including GIS departments, emergency planners, and 
research institutions. 


13.4 Percentage of Neighbourhoods with Regular 
and Open Neighbourhood Association Meetings 


13.4.1 General 


Neighbourhood groups increase sense of place and 
mobilisation levels at the very local scale, while 
building social capital and local interpersonal ties. 


13.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of neighbourhoods with regular and 
open neighbourhood association meetings shall be 
calculated as the number of neighbourhoods in the 
city with regular and open neighbourhood association 
meetings (numerator) divided by the total number of 
neighbourhoods in the city (denominator). The result 
shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of neighbourhoods with regular, open 
neighbourhood association meetings. 


A neighbourhood shall refer to an administratively 
defined geographic area within the city. Regular and 
open neighbourhood association meetings shall refer 
to neighbourhood association meetings that occur at 
least annually and there are no exclusions in regard to 
who is able to attend the meetings. A neighbourhood 
association shall refer to an association representing the 
residents of a specific neighbourhood. 


IS 17785 : 2022 


13.4.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of neighbourhoods with association 
meetings should be sourced from the relevant local or 
regional registration authority that collects information 
and data on the registration of official neighbourhood 
associations. 


13.5 Annual Percentage of the City Population 
Directly Affected by Natural Hazards 


13.5.1 General 


The number of people directly affected (that is, 
evacuated, relocated, injured, or sickened) by natural 
hazards is a measure of a city’s vulnerability. In some 
cases, it is a more relevant measure of disaster impact 
than the number of deaths. 


13.5.2 Indicator requirements 


The annual percentage of the city population directly 
affected by natural hazards shall be calculated as the 
annual number of people evacuated, relocated, injured 
or sickened due to natural hazards (numerator) divided 
by the total city population (denominator). The result 
shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the annual 
percentage of the city population directly affected by 
natural hazards. Where possible, the data for each 
relevant hazard type should be included and listed as 
a table. 


NOTE — An indicator that measures annual disaster-related 
deaths is given in 13.9 of IS 17000. 


13.5.3 Data sources 


The data for this indicator should be sourced from 
emergency management authorities and other agencies 
engaged in emergency response. 


14 RECREATION 


14.1 Percentage of City Population Living within 
0.5 km of Public Outdoor Recreation Space 


14.1.1 General 


Access to outdoor recreation space plays an important 
role in promoting the physical, mental and emotional 
wellbeing of individuals and communities. Recreation 
facilities and spaces also support the development of 
community identity and cohesion. City governments 
can ensure that all citizens have close and convenient 
access to public recreation space. 


14.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of city population living within 0.5 km of 
public outdoor recreation space shall be calculated as 
the number of people living within 0.5 km of public 
outdoor recreation space (numerator) divided by the 
total city population (denominator). The result shall be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage of 
city population living within 0.5 km of public outdoor 
recreation space. 


22 


Public recreation space shall refer to land and open 
space available to the public for relaxation, amusement 
or leisure pursuits. Recreation space shall include only 
space that primarily serves a recreation purpose. 


Outdoor recreation space can include city-owned or 
maintained land. Other recreation spaces within the 
city not owned or operated by the city, can also be 
considered outdoor recreation space provided they 
are open to the public which can include, but is not 
limited to, state or provincially owned lands, school 
and college grounds, as well as lands owned by 
non-profit organizations. If cities report only 
city-owned recreation space, this shall be noted. 


For multi-use facilities, only the portion of the land 
devoted to recreation shall be counted (the play areas at 
a school or college, for example, not the entire school 
site). Double counting shall be avoided, for example, 
indoor facilities on parkland should not be included. 


The area of the entire outdoor recreation space shall 
be included (for example, wooded areas of parks, 
and building maintenance and utility areas), but shall 
exclude parking areas. 


14.1.3 Data Sources 


Data can be sourced from a city planning department 
and/or departments responsible for recreation. 


NOTE — IS 17000 includes an indicator on measuring the area 
of outdoor recreation space. 


15 SAFETY 


15.1 Percentage of City Population Covered by 
Multi-Hazard Early Warning System 


15.1.1 General 


This indicator refers to the specific warning of an 
imminent threat. Early warnings of that threat are 
essential to reduce human and economic losses from 
disasters. Warning systems prevent loss of life and 
mitigate the economic and material impacts of disasters. 
It is the responsibility of city governments to ensure 
that its citizens are effectively covered by some form of 
early warning system, enabling better preparedness for 
(and response to) shocks. Warnings should be reliable 
and specific to hazard type and should allow ample 
time for preparation and response (as far as technology 
permits). 


The use of social media may enhance learning 
opportunities around a resilience culture; increase 
interactions with citizens; grow social capital (a strong 
relationship) among citizens; collect good practices 
of resilience building activities that consequently are 
disseminated through social media; and build a higher 
level of trust among different partners (city stakeholders 
and external partners) for further knowledge sharing. 
On the other hand, the use of social media in crisis 
situations should be monitored and filtered as it may 
result in false information sharing and incite panic. 


15.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of city population covered by 
multi-hazard early warning systems shall be calculated 
as the total number of people within the city covered by 
multi-hazard early warning systems (numerator) 
divided by the city’s total population (denominator). 
The result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as a 
percentage of population covered by multi-hazard early 
warning systems. 


Early warning systems shall refer to an integrated 
and coordinated arrangement of hazard monitoring, 
forecasting and prediction, disaster risk assessment, 
and communication and preparedness activities that 
enable cities and residents to take action to reduce risks 
in advance of hazardous events. 


Multi-hazard early warning systems cover a range 
of hazards and impacts, and are ideally designed to 
be used in multi-hazard contexts where hazardous 
events may occur as a singular event, simultaneously, 
in succession, or cumulatively over time. Warnings 
should be delivered over the maximum possible notice 
period via multiple media, including, but not limited to, 
phone, TV, radio, web, and sirens. 
NOTE — The technology of disaster warnings is rapidly 
evolving, both in the long-term assessment of risk (for example, 
seasonal weather forecast) and the notification period and 
update frequency for a specific event (for example, landslide 
risk, tornado warnings, movement of flood crest). However, 
meaningful earthquake warning systems do not currently exist 
for practical purposes. 


15.1.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator can be sourced from 
emergency management authorities. 


15.2 Percentage of Emergency Responders that 
have Received Disaster Response Training 


15.2.1 General 


Emergency responders are among the first people to 
arrive at the scene of an emergency related to a disaster 
event. Response training is therefore a critical element 
of disaster preparedness. 


15.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of emergency responders that have 
received disaster response training shall be calculated 
as the total number of emergency responders that 
have received disaster response training in the city 
(numerator) divided by the total number of emergency 
responders in the city (denominator). The result shall 
be multiplied by 100 and expressed as a percentage 
of emergency responders that have received disaster 
response training. 


Emergency responders shall refer to police officers, 
firefighters, paramedics, and rescuers. They are among 
the first people to arrive at the scene of an emergency 


23 


IS 17785 : 2022 


related to a disaster, and are trained to deal with an array 
of medical, security, and safety issues that can arise 
immediately before, during, or after a disaster. Disaster 
training should ideally cover worst-case scenarios. 


15.2.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator can be sourced from 
emergency management authorities. 


15.3 Percentage of Local Hazard Warnings Issued 
by National Agencies Annually that are Received in 
a Timely Fashion by the City 


15.3.1 General 


Early warning mechanisms or arrangements between 
hazard monitoring agencies (for example, weather 
offices) and local emergency responders are an essential 
component of disaster preparation. Warnings and 
forecasts from national offices shall be disseminated in 
accurate and a timely fashion to emergency planning 
authorities, via well-understood information systems 
and management plans that correspond to the estimated 
return period (that is, likelihood and severity) of a 
disaster event. Warnings should be reliable and specific 
to the city, and should allow ample time for preparation 
and response (as far as technology permits). 


The use of social media may enhance learning 
opportunities around a resilience culture; increase 
interactions with citizens; grow social capital (a strong 
relationship) among citizens; collect good practices 
of resilience building activities that consequently are 
disseminated through social media; and build a higher 
level of trust among different partners (city stakeholders 
and external partners) for further knowledge sharing. 
On the other hand, the use of social media in crisis 
situations should be monitored and filtered as it may 
result in false information sharing and panic creation. 


15.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of local hazard warnings issued by national 
agencies annually that are received in a timely 
fashion by the city shall be calculated as the number 
of local hazard warnings issued annually by national 
agencies that are received in a timely fashion by the 
city (numerator) divided by the annual total number of 
local hazard warnings issued by national agencies to 
the city (denominator). The result shall be multiplied 
by 100 and expressed as the percentage of local hazard 
warnings issued by national agencies that are received 
in a timely fashion by the city. 


Hazard warning or forecast shall refer to a specific 
call, notice, projection, alert, or alarm of a potential 
disaster event. Warnings should be delivered over the 
maximum possible notice period via multiple media, 
including phone, TV, radio, and web. 


Timely fashion shall refer to hazard warnings or 
forecasts received by city emergency responders with 


IS 17785 : 2022 


sufficient time to activate information systems and 
implement emergency plans (for example, evacuation 
routes) to warn citizens. This allows time for responders 
to ask questions and obtain further information about 
the warning or forecast from representatives of the 
issuing authority. 


Emergency responders shall refer to police officers, 

firefighters, paramedics, and rescuers. They are among 

the first people to arrive at the scene of an emergency 

related to a disaster, and are trained to deal with an 

array of medical, security, and safety issues that can 

arise immediately before, during, or after a disaster. 
NOTE — The technology of disaster warnings is rapidly 
evolving, both in the long-term assessment of risk (for example, 
seasonal weather forecast) and the notification period and 
update frequency for a specific event (for example, landslide 
risk, tornado warnings, movement of flood crest). However, 
meaningful earthquake warning systems do not currently exist 
for practical purposes. 


15.3.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator can be sourced from 
emergency management authorities. 


15.4 Number of Hospital Beds in the City 
Destroyed or Damaged by Natural Hazards per 
100 000 Population 


15.4.1 General 


Damage or destruction to critical infrastructure assets 
such as hospitals and schools have major negative 
consequences for cities and can seriously hamper 
disaster recovery efforts. 


15.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number of hospital beds in the city destroyed or 
damaged by natural hazards per 100 000 population 
shall be calculated as the total number of hospital beds 
destroyed or damaged by natural hazards within the 
city (numerator) divided by 100 000th of the city’s 
population (denominator). The result shall be expressed 
as the number of hospital beds in the city destroyed or 
damaged by natural hazards per 100 000 population. 


This indicator is only applicable in the instance when 
a disaster or extreme event has occurred in the last 
12 months. 


15.4.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator can be sourced from 
emergency management authorities as well as health 
and educational authorities. 


24 


16 SOLID WASTE 


16.1 Number of Active and Temporary Waste 
Management Sites Available for Debris and 
Rubble per Square Kilometre 


16.1.1 General 


Debris removal and processing can be critical to 
helping a city recover from a disaster. It is essential 
to dispose of debris that is blocking rescue and 
emergency response activities. Safe and well managed 
disposal sites are key to debris removal if they are 
established in suitable locations, follow national 
safety rules, and meet capacity requirements. 


16.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number of active and temporary waste 
management sites available for debris and rubble per 
square kilometre shall be calculated as the number of 
active waste disposal sites in the city where debris 
and rubble can be disposed of (numerator) divided 
by the total land area of the city (square kilometre) 
(denominator). The result shall then be expressed as 
the number of active waste disposal sites available 
for debris and rubble per square kilometre. 


A waste management site shall refer to a site used 
for the accumulation of waste with the purpose 
of disposing or treatment of such waste. A waste 
disposal site may include vacuum pyrolysis plants, 
incinerators, compost plants, transfer stations, 
storage facilities and recycling plants. These facilities 
are seen as disposal sites because they allow for 
continuous storage of waste on their premises before 
the disposal, removal or handling thereof. An active 
waste disposal shall include any site that is currently 
in use and is fully functioning to dispose of waste in 
the city. 


Debris and rubble should include building and 
construction materials (for example, wall coverings, 
plaster, drywall, plumbing fixtures, roofing shingles 
and other roof coverings) and other loose solid waste, 
such as desks, chairs, sheet metals, PVC pipes, and 
papers. 


16.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on active disposal sites for debris and rubble can be 
sourced from local or regional solid waste management 
departments, ministries or organizations. 


17 TELECOMMUNICATION 


17.1 Percentage of Emergency Responders in the 
City Equipped with Specialized Communication 
Technologies able to Operate Reliably during a 
Disaster Event 


17.1.1 General 


Mobile telecommunications networks (for example, 
terrestrial cell antennas) can be damaged or overly 
congested during a disaster event. Having a 
privileged-access ‘subscriber identity module’ (SIM) 
installed in handsets can help emergency responders 
to avoid such problems and safely connect to their 
networks during and after a disaster event. Satellite 
telephones, which connect to orbiting satellites rather 
than terrestrial cell towers, can avoid such problems 
when terrestrial cellular services are unavailable. 
Professional mode radio (PMR) is designed for specific 
use by organizations, such as police forces and fire 
brigades to allow point-to-multipoint communication 
across large areas. 


17.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of emergency responders in the city 
equipped with specialised communication technologies 
able to operate reliably during a disaster event shall 
be calculated as the number of emergency responders 
within the city having access to professional mode 
radio, satellite telephony, or privileged-access mobile 
communications networks (numerator) divided by 
the total number of emergency responders in the 
city (denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a Percentage of emergency 
responders in the city equipped with specialised 
communication technologies able to operate reliably 
during a disaster event. 


Emergency responders shall refer to police officers, 
firefighters, paramedics, and rescuers. They are among 
the first people to arrive at the scene of an emergency 
related to a disaster and are trained to deal with an array 
of medical, security, and safety issues that can arise 
immediately before, during, or after a disaster. 


Professional mode radio (PMR) shall refer to field radio 
communication systems that are designed for specific 
use by organizations such as police forces and fire 
brigades. These radio systems allow point-to-multipoint 
communication across large areas. 
NOTE — PMR is also known as private mobile radio and land 
mobile radio. 
Satellite telephony shall refer to the technology 
associated with mobile phones that are connected to 
orbiting satellites rather than terrestrial cell sites. 


Privileged-access mobile communication shall refer to 
the exchange of information across mobile telephone 
networks that have prioritized access for persons, such 


25 


IS 17785 : 2022 


as members of emergency services and emergency 
response teams. 


17.1.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator can be sourced from emergency 
management authorities. 


18 TRANSPORTATION 


18.1 Number of Evacuation Routes Available per 
100 000 Population 


18.1.1 General 


Accessible and well-documented evacuation routes and 
exit strategies are necessary to ensure mass movement 
of people safely and quickly away from a disaster. 
Evacuation routes are therefore an important response 
measure to help cities deal with the immediate effects of 
a disaster. 


18.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number of evacuation routes available per 
100 000 population shall be calculated as the total 
number of evacuation routes (numerator) divided 
by one 100 000" of the city’s total population 
(denominator). The result shall be expressed as 
the number of evacuation routes available per 
100 000 population. 


Evacuation routes shall refer to highways, roadways, 
waterways, and railways and that are officially designated 
for urgent removal and temporary relocation of people 
and their assets away from imminent or ongoing danger 
associated with a disaster. 


18.1.3 Data Sources 
The data for this indicator can be sourced from emergency 
management authorities. 


19 URBAN/LOCAL 
FOOD SECURITY 


AGRICULTURE AND 


19.1 Percentage of City Population that can be Served 
by City Food Reserves for 72 h in an Emergency 


19.1.1 General 


Mechanisms should be in place to ensure continuity of 
essential food supplies during an emergency or due to 
shocks, when city supply chains are disrupted or stopped. 
The first three days after a disaster or shock event and 
before external help might be available are critical to the 
recovery effort. This indicator focuses on availability 
and supply for building resilience under emergency 
situations. 


City food reserves shall refer to essential food supplies 
from city emergency stores, arrangements with local 
supermarkets, and other contingency plans that secure 
food stocks for households. 


IS 17785 : 2022 


19.1.2 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator will require data to be 
sourced from the emergency management departments 
and other concerned organizations. 


19.2 Percentage of the City’s Population Living 
more than One Kilometre from a Grocery Store 


19.2.1 General 


The proximity to good quality and affordable food is 
a challenge for many city residents. Nearby grocery 
stores can provide access to good quality and affordable 
food, which improves the health, productivity and 
general prosperity of city residents, as well as the 
overall resilience of a city. 


Residents living in close proximity to grocery stores 
tend to have greater food security relative to those 
residents living further away from grocery stores, as 
these residents living in close proximity to grocery 
stores can travel to obtain food more efficiently. In 
addition, establishing grocery stores in closer proximity 
to residents decentralizes food supply, providing more 
grocery shopping options for residents across a city and 
ultimately ensuring the ease of access to food options 
for residents in a city. 


19.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city’s population living more than 
one kilometre from a grocery store shall be calculated 
as the number of people in the city that live more 
than one kilometre from a grocery store (numerator) 
divided by the city’s total population (denominator). 
The result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
the percentage of the city’s population living more than 
one kilometre from a grocery store. 


A grocery store shall refer to a retail shop that primarily 
sells food. 


19.2.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of people living within one 
kilometre of a grocery store can be sourced from 
surveys and by the use of GIS mapping tools. 


20 URBAN PLANNING 


20.1 Percentage of City Area Covered by Publicly 
Available Hazard Maps 


20.1.1 General 


A hazard map is a key tool for a city to plan for 
resilience. The maps should be publicly available, 
and cover the whole city. Up-to-date hazard maps are 
particularly important for hazards like flooding, where 
changing development patterns can significantly affect 
the area of the community potentially at risk. Urban 
plans are informed with, and influenced by, up-to-date 


26 


risk information. Publicly available information is 
important for community awareness and may also be 
important for insurers seeking to improve the accuracy 
of risk pricing. 


20.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of city area covered by publicly available, 
hazard maps shall be calculated as the area of city 
covered by publicly available hazard maps (numerator) 
divided by the total city area (denominator). The 
result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
the percentage of total city area covered by publicly 
available hazard maps. 


20.1.3 Data Sources 


Information on hazard maps can be sourced from 
several departments and stakeholders, including 
GIS departments, emergency planners, and research 
institutions. 


20.2 Pervious Land Areas and Public Space and 
Pavement Built with Porous, Draining Materials as 
a Percentage of City Land Area 


20.2.1 General 


Pervious (or permeable) land areas perform important 
environmental functions in urban settings, such as 
improving the urban climate and easing storm runoff 
from rainfall or snowmelt. Pervious areas are therefore 
considered natural assets that can reduce physical 
vulnerability to hazards such as floods, heatwaves, 
and tropical storms, while strengthening ecological 
resilience within the city. Cities can directly influence 
the quantity and distribution of pervious surface 
through planning policies and other mechanisms. 
Smart cities can use porous, draining materials to build 
public spaces and pavements to reduce the severity 
and consequences of floods, to allow water from urban 
surfaces to infiltrate through the surface or to be stored 
below ground. 


20.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


Pervious land area as a percentage of total city land 
area shall be calculated as the area of pervious land 
within the city (in square kilometres) (numerator) 
divided by the total city land area (in square kilometres) 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


Pervious land area shall refer to all permeable surfaces 
in the city that enable water absorption and drainage. 
Permeable surfaces include areas of vegetation (for 
example, grasses and forest), bare soils (for example, 
gardens, agricultural plots), sand (for example, beaches, 
desert), and water (for example, lakes, rivers). Pervious 
areas also include green roofs on buildings. Areas that 
are without permeable cover are assumed to be sealed 
(that is, paved or impervious). 


20.2.3 Data Sources 


Information on pervious area can be obtained from city 
recreation and parks departments, planning departments, 
forestry departments and census data. Pervious areas 
can be delineated using aerial photography and/or land 
use/land cover maps. 


20.3 Percentage of City Land Area in High Risk 
Zones where Risk Reduction Measures have been 
Implemented 


20.3.1 General 


Property and people located in high-risk zones are 
vulnerable to the damaging, destructive, and deadly 
effects of disasters. Risk reduction measures, such as 
the provision of additional protective infrastructure, 
are needed to reduce the risk of hazard exposure for 
populations inside these zones. 


20.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of city land area in high risk zones where 
risk reduction measures have been implemented shall 
be calculated as the city land area in high risk hazard 
zones where risk reduction measures have been 
implemented (square kilometres) (numerator) divided 
by the total land area of the city (square kilometres) 
(denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of city land area 
in high risk zones where risk reduction measures have 
been implemented 


Risk-reduction measures shall refer to activities 
designed to either directly enforce or empower local 
actors to contain local human vulnerability and hazard, 
and enhance adaptive capacity and actions in the long 
and short term. 


Risk-reduction measures include, but are not limited to, 
protective works. Protective infrastructure shall refer to 
physical structures and natural buffers that minimize 
the physical, humanitarian and economic impacts of 
hazards (for example, levees and flood barriers; flood 
basins; sea walls; storm shelters; storm drains and 
storm water holding tanks; wetlands and mangroves; 
and shock absorption capabilities fitted to infrastructure 
to deal with earthquakes). 


20.3.3 Data Sources 


Information on risk assessments and hazard maps can 
be sourced from several departments and stakeholders, 
including GIS departments, emergency planners, 
planning departments, and research institutions. 


20.4 Percentage of City Departments and Utility 
Services that Integrate the Results of Risk 
Assessment in their Planning and Investment 


20.4.1 General 


Risk assessments are an integral and regular feature of 
urban planning and investment. They are an effective 


27 


IS 17785 : 2022 


way to integrate hazard impacts into long-term city 
plans for urbanizing areas, and are therefore essential 
to risk mitigation. Results from risk assessments 
should be readily available and accessible to city 
departments and utility services, and should inform 
the planning and implementation of risk-reduction 
measures and strategies. These processes should be 
done in ways that are traceable and transparent. 


20.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of city departments and utility services 
that integrate the results of risk assessment in their 
planning and investment shall be calculated as the 
number of city departments and utility services that 
integrate the results of risk assessments in their 
planning and investment (numerator) divided by the 
total number of city departments and utility services 
within the city (denominator). The result shall be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage 
of city departments and utility services that integrate 
the results of risk assessment in their planning and 
investment. 


Utility services shall refer to all public and private 
companies providing basic provisions and facilities 
related to electricity, natural gas, water, sewage, waste 
management, and telecommunications. 


Risk assessment shall refer to the systematic process 
of evaluating potential risks of hazards and disasters to 
individuals, groups, organizations, critical assets, and 
protective infrastructure within the city. The purpose 
of a regular risk assessment is as follows: 


a) to ensure resilience building activities are 
relevant to the city context; 

b) ensure appropriate and proportionate investment 

of resources according to risks, hazards, shocks 


and stresses; 


enable the different risk exposures and 
vulnerabilities of the city to be understood; and 


c) 
d) enable common consequences to be identified 
so that capabilities can be developed that will 
address the impact of many risks in combination. 


Critical assets shall refer to properties and services that 
are essential for a city to function (for example, dams, 
bridges, airports, hospitals, mass transit networks, 
emergency response centres). Protective infrastructure 
shall refer to physical structures and natural buffers 
that minimize the physical, humanitarian, and 
economic impacts of hazards (for example, levees and 
flood barriers; flood basins; sea walls; storm shelters; 
storm drains and storm water holding tanks; wetlands 
and mangroves; and shock absorption capabilities 
fitted to infrastructure to deal with earthquakes). 


20.4.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator should be sourced from city 
departments and utilities. 


IS 17785 : 2022 


20.5 Annual Number of Critical Infrastructures 
Flooded as a Percentage of Critical Infrastructure 
in the City 


20.5.1 General 


With the increasing frequency of severe weather 
events, it is essential that critical infrastructure is 
protected from flooding. Cities also play a critical role 
in mitigating flooding, for example, through planning 
controls and construction and maintenance of storm 
water infrastructure. Sources of flooding can include, 
but are not limited to, rainfall, storm surge, overflowing 
river banks, surface water run-off, groundwater rise and 
sewage back-up. 


20.5.2 Indicator Requirements 


The annual number of critical infrastructures flooded 
as a percentage of total critical infrastructure in the 
city shall be calculated as the annual number of critical 
infrastructures that have flooded in the city (numerator) 
divided by the total number of critical infrastructures in 
the city (denominator). The result shall be multiplied 
by 100 and expressed as the annual number of critical 
infrastructures flooded as a percentage of total critical 
infrastructure in the city. 


Critical infrastructure shall refer to physical structures, 
facilities, networks and other assets which provide 
services that are essential to the social and economic 
functioning of a community or society. 


Critical infrastructure can include, but is not limited to, 
power generation, transmission and distribution, water 
treatment, distribution and drainage, wastewater and 
storm water infrastructure, transportation, gas supply 
and distribution, telecommunications infrastructure, 
educational facilities, hospitals and other health 
facilities. 


20.5.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of critical infrastructures 
flooded should be sourced from local or regional 
ministries/departments responsible for critical 
infrastructure. 


21 WASTEWATER 


21.1 Percentage of the City’s Wastewater Treated 
through Decentralized Wastewater Treatment 


21.1.1 General 


Decentralized wastewater treatment is a cost-effective 
and economical approach to wastewater treatment 
because itavoids large capital costsandreduces operation 
and maintenance costs. A decentralized approach helps 
cities to avoid the risk of sewer overflows and burst 
pipes during severe weather. In addition, decentralized 
systems can be green and sustainable, using energy and 
land wisely. Decentralized wastewater treatment can 


28 


thereby help municipalities reduce the environmental 
impacts associated with large centralized treatment 
systems and can mitigate contamination and health 
risks associated with wastewater. 


21.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of the city’s wastewater treated through 
decentralized wastewater treatment shall be calculated 
as the total volume of the city’s wastewater that has 
undergone decentralized treatment (numerator) 
divided by the total volume of wastewater produced 
and collected in the city (denominator). This result 
shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
the percentage of the city’s wastewater treated via a 
decentralized wastewater treatment. 


Decentralized wastewater treatment shall refer to 
wastewater treatment carried out in a wastewater 
treatment facility that is not connected to the centralized 
wastewater treatment plant. A decentralized wastewater 
treatment system is an onsite or cluster wastewater 
system that is used to treat and dispose of relatively 
small volumes of wastewater, generally originating 
from individual or groups of dwellings and businesses 
that are located relatively close together. Onsite and 
cluster systems are commonly used in combination. 


21.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on decentralized wastewater treatment and 
wastewater treatment in general can be sourced from 
municipal authorities or the main water supply and 
treatment entities. 


22 WATER 


22.1 Number of Different Sources Providing at Least 
5 Percent of Total Water Supply Capacity 


22.1.1 General 


A diversity of water sources and distribution systems 
ensures that alternative water supplies are available 
during system failure or disruption from the effects 
of disasters and shocks. The main goal should be the 
provision safe drinking water that will safeguard the 
health of inhabitants. Therefore, risk management 
should protect and safeguard public health, in particular 
from pathogenic and chemical hazards, water pollution 
and contamination, and industrial accidents. With 
diverse water sources, cities are able to mitigate the 
effects of dangers to health and improve response and 
recovery efforts during and immediately after a disaster 
event. 


22.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number of different sources providing at least 
5 percent of total water supply capacity shall refer 
to the number of different, or separate, water supply 
sources to the city each providing at least 5 percent of 
water supply capacity. 


NOTE — The 5 percent threshold is used by major 
organizations such as the World Bank to ease calculations and 
to capture the major supply sources. 
When the number of different water supply sources 
exceed two, the percentage of water supply capacity of 
the two most significant sources should be reported in 
tables. 


A different (or separate) water supply source shall 
refer to water supplies that are not disrupted or directly 
influenced by other sources. Water supply sources 
shall include dams, reservoirs, rivers, lakes, aquifers, 
desalination plants, etc. 


22.1.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator should be provided by the 
water system operator and/or appropriate regulatory 
authorities. 


22.1.4 Data Interpretation 


While multiple, different, water sources contribute to 
city resilience, this is not necessarily indicative of city 
resilience in all cases. 


22.2 Percentage of City Population that can be 
Supplied Potable Water by Alternative Methods for 
72h 


22.2.1 General 


Providing potable water is critically important to 
the response efforts for a disaster event. City water 
providers and local governments should ensure effective 


29 


IS 17785 : 2022 


planning for alternative (that is, back-up) potable 
water supply methods during and immediately after a 
disaster event or system disruption. Contingency plans 
should identify how potable water will be distributed 
in the case of such a disruption. Back-up supplies are 
especially important to serve vulnerable populations. 


22.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of city population that can be supplied 
potable water by alternative methods for 72 h shall be 
calculated as the number of people in the city that can 
be supplied potable water by alternative methods for 
72 h (numerator) divided by the total city population 
(denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of city population 
that can be supplied potable water by alternative 
methods for 72 h. 


Alternative methods of water supply shall include 
emergency water tankers, bottled water, rain water 
harvesting, etc. 


22.2.3 Data Sources 


The data for this indicator can be provided by the 
emergency management department of the city, 
water system operator and/or appropriate regulatory 
authorities. 


23 REPORTING 
MAINTENANCE 


AND RECORD 


Reports on city indicators shall compile the data 
required in the individual test methods used. 


IS 17785 : 2022 


A-1 The following table presents a typology of hazards Biological 
faced by cities. This typology and the associated 
definitions are informative only. Local typologies and 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 4.6 ) 
TYPOLOGY OF CITY HAZARDS 


Extra-terrestrial 


definitions may be established by cities themselves or technological 
through local standards or regulations. Environmental 
Geophysical A-1.1 This typology is presented to assist cities in 
Hydrological identifying the potential hazards that they face, which 
: has relevant to many of the indicators contained in 
Meteorological this standard. It is also provided as a guide for helping 
Climatological identify peer cities facing similar hazards. 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 4.6 ) 


MAPPING OF RESILIENT CITIES INDICATORS TO THE RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESS 


B-1 A major focus of city resilience is the management indicators in this standard relate to the key stages of the 
of the risks facing cities. Table 1 highlights how the  risk-management process as defined by IS/ISO 31000. 


Table 1 Mapping of Resilient City Indicators to the Risk Management Process 


( Clause B-1 ) 


SI No. 


Risk Management 
Approach 


Resilient City Indicators 


i) 


Risk context 


Tel 
8.1 
8.4 
8.5 
8.6 
8.7 
8.8 
12.3 


19.1 
20.2 


22.1 


Number of different electricity sources providing at least 5 percent of total energy supply capacity 
Magnitude of urban heat island effects (atmospheric) 

Annual frequency of extreme rainfall events 

Annual frequency of extreme heat events 

Annual frequency of extreme cold events 

Annual frequency of flood events 

Percentage of city land area covered by tree canopy 


Percentage of residential buildings not in conformity with National Building Code of India and 
Indian Standards 


Percentage of city population that can be served by city food re-serves for 72 h in an emergency 


Pervious land areas and public space and pavement built with porous, draining materials as a 
percentage of city land area 


Number of different sources providing at least 5 percent of total water supply capacity 


30 


IS 17785 : 2022 


Table 1 ( Concluded) 


SI No. | Risk Management 
Approach 


Resilient City Indicators 


ii) Risk assessment 


10.1 
10.6 


12.2 
12.6 
13.3 
20.1 


Frequency with which disaster-management plans are updated 


Number of intergovernmental agreements dedicated to planning for shocks as percentage of total 
intergovernmental agreements 


Percentage of buildings structurally vulnerable to high-risk hazards 
Percentage of residential properties located in high-risk zones 
Percentage of population at high risk from natural hazards 


Percentage of city area covered by publicly available hazard maps 


iii) Risk treatment 


— Avoidance 


— Reduction 


Percentage of schools that teach emergency preparedness and disaster risk reduction 
Percentage of population trained in emergency preparedness and disaster risk reduction 
Percentage of emergency preparedness publications provided in alternative languages 


Percentage of natural areas within the city that have undergone ecological evaluation for their 
protective services 


Territory undergoing ecosystem restoration as a percentage of total city area 


iv) 


Annual expenditure on upgrades and maintenance of city service assets as a percentage of total city 
budget 


Annual expenditure on upgrades and maintenance of storm water infrastructure as a percentage of 
total city budget 


Annual expenditure allocated to ecosystem restoration in the city’s territory as a percentage of total 
city budget 

Percentage of essential city services covered by a documented continuity plan 

Percentage of city electronic data with secure and remote back-up storage 

Percentage of city population covered by multi-hazard early warning system 

Percentage of emergency responders that have received disaster response training 


Percentage of local hazard warnings by national agencies annually that are received in a timely 
fashion by city 


Number of evacuation routes available per 100 000 population 


v) Communication and 
consultation 


Percentage of emergency preparedness publications provided in alternative languages 

Percentage of public meetings dedicated to resilience in the city 

Percentage of city population covered by multi-hazard early warning system 

Percentage of emergency responders who have received disaster response training 

Percentage of local hazard warnings issued by national agencies that are received in a timely fashion 
by city 

Percentage of emergency responders in the city equipped with specialized communication 
technologies able to operate reliably during a disaster event 


vi) Monitoring and 
review 


12.4 
12.5 


13:5 
15.4 


Historical disaster losses as a percentage of city Product 

Average annual disaster loss as a percentage of city product 

Percentage of damaged infrastructure that was ‘built back better’ after a disaster 

Annual number of residential properties flooded as a percentage of total residential properties in the 
city 

Annual percentage of the city population directly affected by natural hazards 

Number of hospital beds in the city destroyed or damaged by natural hazards per 100 000 population 


31 


IS 17785 : 2022 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 4.6 ) 


MAPPING OF INDICATORS WITH SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDGS) 


SI No. UN Sustainable Development Goal Resilient City indicators 
i) Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere | 5.1 Historical disaster losses as a percentage of city 
Specifically noting: product 
1.3 Implement nationally appropriate social 5.2 Average annual disaster loss as a percentage of 
protection systems and measures for all, city product 
including floors, and by 2030 achieve | 5.7 Percentage of the workforce in informal 
substantial coverage of the poor and the employment 
vulnerable 10.1 Frequency with which disaster-management 
1.5 By 2030, build the resilience of the poor plans are updated 
and those m vulnerable situations and 10.3 Percentage of essential service providers that 
reduce their exposure and vulnerability have a documented business continuity plan 
to climate-related extreme events and ; : ; 
R : . 11.2 Percentage of hospitals equipped with back-up 
other economic, social and environmental jack l 
shocks and disasters: See a : : 
1.5.1Number of deaths, missing per- sons 11.3 Percentage of population with basic health 
and persons affected by disaster per Sete 
100 000 people 11.4 Percentage of population that is fully immunized 
1.5.2Direct disaster economic loss in relation | 12-6 Percentage of residential properties located in 
to global gross domestic product (GDP) high-risk zones 
1.5.3Number of countries with national and | 13.1 Vulnerable population as a percentage of city 
local disaster risk reduction strategies population 
13.2 Percentage of population with access to social 
assistance programmes 
13.3 Percentage of population at high risk from 
natural hazards 
13.5 Annual percentage of the city population 
directly affected by natural hazards 
15.1 Percentage of city population covered by multi- 
hazard early warning system 
15.4 Number of hospital beds in the city 
destroyed or damaged by natural hazards per 
100 000 population 
21.1 Percentage of city’s wastewater treated through 
decentralized wastewater treatment 
il) Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and | 20.1 Percentage of city area covered by publicly 


improved nutrition and promote sustainable 
agriculture 


available hazard maps 

20.2 Pervious land areas and public space and 
pavement built with porous, draining materials 
as a percentage of city land area 


32 


IS 17785 : 2022 


SI No. UN Sustainable Development Goal Resilient City indicators 
iii) | Goal 3: Ensure healthy lives and pro-mote | 11.1 Percentage of health care facilities equipped 
well-being for all at all ages with capabilities and medical supplies for acute 
Specifically noting: needs 
3.8.2Number of people covered by health 11.2 Snead of eta equipped with back-up 
insurance or a public health system per erectricity suppty 
1,000 population 11.3 Percentage of population with basic health 
insurance 
11.4 Percentage ofpopulation that is fully immunized 
15.4 Number of hospital beds in the city 
destroyed or damaged by natural hazards per 
100 000 population 
iv) | Goal 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality | 6.1 Percentage of schools that teach emergency 
education and promote lifelong learning preparedness and disaster risk reduction 
opportunities for all 6.2 Percentage of population trained in emergency 
preparedness and disaster risk reduction 
6.5 Educational disruption 
15.4 Number of hospital beds in the city 
destroyed or damaged by natural hazards per 
100 000 population 
v) Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower 
all women and girls 
vi) | Goal 6: Ensure availability and sustainable | 9.2 Annual expenditure on upgrades and 
management of water and sanitation for all maintenance of storm water infrastructure as a 
percentage of total city budget 
20.2 Pervious land areas and public space and 
pavement built with porous, draining materials 
as a percentage of city land area 
22.1 Number of different sources providing at least 
5 percent of total water supply capacity 
22.2 Percentage of city population that can be 
supplied potable water by alternative methods 
for 72 h 
vii) | Goal 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, | 7.1 Number of different electricity sources 


sustainable and modern energy for all 


providing at least 5 percent of total energy 
supply capacity 

7.2 Electricity supply capacity as a percentage of 
peak electricity demand 

11.1 Percentage of health care facilities equipped 
with capabilities and medical supplies for acute 
needs 


33 


IS 17785 : 2022 


SI No. 


UN Sustainable Development Goal 


Resilient City indicators 


viii) 


Goal 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and 
sustainable economic growth, full and 
productive employment and decent work for all 


5: 


ji 


Historical disaster losses as a percentage of city 
product 


5.2 Average annual disaster loss as a percentage of 


city product 
5. 


LoS) 


Percentage of essential service providers that 
have a documented business continuity plan 
5.4 with 


Percentage of properties insurance 


coverage for high risk hazards 
5.6 
9.7 


Employment concentration 


Total allocation of disaster reserve funds as a 
percentage of total city budget 


ix) 


Goal 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote 
inclusive and sustainable industrialization and 
foster innovation 


Specifically noting: 


9.1 Develop quality, reliable, sustain- able and 
resilient infrastructure, including regional 
and trans-border infrastructure, to support 
economic development and human 
well-being, with a focus on affordable and 
equitable access for all 


7. 


— 


Number of different electricity sources 
providing at least 5 percent of total energy 
supply capacity 

Electricity supply capacity as a percentage of 
peak electricity demand 


7.2 


9: 


— 


Annual expenditure on upgrades and 
maintenance of city service assets as a 
percentage of total city budget 


9.2 Annual expenditure on upgrades and 
maintenance of storm water infrastructure as a 


percentage of total city budget 
9. 


U 


Annual expenditure allocated to ecosystem 
restoration in the city’s territory as a percentage 
of total city budget 


9.4 Annual expenditure on green and blue 
infrastructure as a percentage of total city 


budget 

11.1 Percentage of health care facilities equipped 
with capabilities and medical supplies for acute 
needs 

12.4 Percentage of damaged infrastructure that was 
‘built back better’ after a disaster 

18.1 Number of evacuation routes available per 
100 000 population 

19.1 Percentage of city population that can be served 
by city food reserves for 72 h in an emergency 


Goal 10: Reduce inequality within and among 
countries 


6.3 Percentage of vulnerable population that has 
been engaged with emergency preparedness 
and disaster risk reduction activities 


13.2 Percentage of population with access to social 
assistance programs 


34 


IS 17785 : 2022 


SI No. UN Sustainable Development Goal Resilient City indicators 
xi) Goal 11: Make cities and human settlements | 5.1 Historical disaster losses as a percentage of city 
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable product 
11.2 By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable, | 5.2 Average annual disaster loss as a percentage of 
accessible and sustainable transport city product 
systems for all, improving road safety, | 5.6 Employment concentration 
notably by expanding public transport, 7.1 Number of different electricity sources 
with special attention to the needs of those idi t least 5 tof totai 
in vulnerable situations, women, children. rail iat ii Peace 0 Oan RABY 
: a > 7 t 
persons with disabilities and older persons a4 Ane ae ae i j ” i 
11.5 By 2030, significantly reduce the number | ` arene sie p a erin g Pa 
of deaths and the number of people affected . 
. ; t f total city budget 
and substantially decrease the direct PE ji D 
economic losses relative to global gross | 9-2 Annual expenditure on upgrades and 
domestic product caused by disasters maintenance of storm water infrastructure as a 
including water-related disasters, with a percentage of total city budget 
focus on protecting the poor and people in | 9.3 Annual expenditure allocated to ecosystem 
vulnerable situations restoration in the city’s territory as a percentage 
11.5.1 Number of deaths, missing per-sons of total city budget 
and persons affected by disaster per | 9.4 Annual expenditure on green and blue 
100 000 people infrastructure as a percentage of total city 
11.5.2 Direct disaster economic loss in budget 
relation to global GDP, including | 9.6 Annual expenditure on social and community 


disaster damage to critical 
infra- structure and disruption of 
basic services 


11.B By 2020, substantially increase the number 
of cities and human settlements adopting 
and implementing integrated policies 
and plans towards inclusion, resource 
efficiency, mitigation and adaptation to 
climate change, resilience to disasters, 
and develop and implement, in line with 
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction 2015-2030, holistic disaster 
risk management at all levels 


11.B.1 Proportion of local governments 
that adopt and implement local 
disaster risk reduction strategies 
in line with the Sendai Framework 
for Disaster Risk Reduction 
2015 — 2030 


Number of countries with national and local 
disaster risk reduction strategies 


services as a percentage of total city budget 


10.1 Frequency with which disaster-management 
plans are updated 


10.2 Percentage of departments that are engaged in 
preparing for and responding to potential risks 


10.6 Number of intergovernmental agreements 
dedicated to planning for shocks as percentage 
of total intergovernmental agreements 


12.1 Capacity of designated emergency shelters per 
100 000 population 


12.2 Percentage of buildings structurally vulnerable 
to high-risk hazards 


12.3 Percentage of residential buildings not in 
conformity with National Building Code of 
India and Indian Standards 

12.4 Percentage of damaged infrastructure that was 
‘built back better’ after a disaster 

12.5 Annual number of residential properties flooded 
as a percentage of total residential properties in 
the city 

12.6 Percentage of residential properties located in 
high-risk zones 

13.3 Percentage of population at high risk from 
natural hazards 


35 


IS 17785 : 2022 


SI No. UN Sustainable Development Goal Resilient City indicators 
13.5 Annual percentage of the city population 
directly affected by natural hazards 
15.2 Percentage of emergency responders who have 
received disaster response training 
17.1 Percentage of Emergency Responders in the 
City Equipped with Specialized Communication 
Technologies able to Operate Reliably during a 
Disaster Event 
18.1 Number of evacuation routes available per 
100 000 population 
20.3 Percentage of city land area in high-risk zones 
where risk-reduction measures have been 
implemented 
21.1 Percentage of city’s wastewater treated through 
decentralized wastewater treatment 
22.1 Number of different sources providing at least 
5 percent of water supply capacity 
22.2 Percentage of population that can be supplied 
potable water by alternative methods for 72 h 
xii) Goal 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and | 7.1 Number of different electricity sources 
production patterns providing at least 5 percent of total energy 
supply capacity 
16.1 Number of active and temporary waste 
management sites available for debris and 
rubble per square kilometre 
22.1 Number of different sources providing at least 
5 percent of total water supply capacity 
xiii) Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat climate | 6.1 Percentage of schools that teach emergency 
change and its impacts preparedness and disaster risk reduction 
13.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive | 6.2 Percentage of population trained in emergency 
capacity to climate-related hazards and preparedness and disaster risk reduction 
natural disasters in all countries 6.3 Percentage of the vulnerable population that 
13.1.1 Number of countries with national has been engaged with emergency preparedness 
and local disaster risk reduction and disaster risk reduction activities 
strategies 7.1 Number of different electricity sources 
13.1.2 Number of deaths, missing providing at least 5 percent of total energy 
per-sons and persons affected by supply capacity 
disaster per 100 000 people 9.1 Annual expenditure on upgrades and 
13.3 Improve education, aware- ness-raising maintenance of city service assets as a 
and human and institutional capacity on percentage of total city budget 
climate change mitigation, adaptation, | 9.2 Annual expenditure on upgrades and 
impact reduction and early warning maintenance of storm water infrastructure as a 
13.3.1 Number of countries that have percentage of total city budget 
integrated mitigation, adaptation, | 9,3 Annual expenditure allocated to ecosystem 


impact reduction and early 
warning into primary, secondary 
and tertiary curricula 


restoration in the city’s territory as a percentage 
of total city budget 


36 


IS 17785 : 2022 


SI No. 


UN Sustainable Development Goal 


Resilient City indicators 


9.4 Annual expenditure on green and blue 
infrastructure as a percentage of total city 
budget 


10.1 Frequency with which disaster-management 
plans are updated 


10.2 Percentage of city departments that are engaged 
in preparing for and responding to potential 
risks 

10.3 Percentage of essential service covered by a 
documented continuity plan 


10.4 Percentage of city electronic data with secure 
and remote back-up storage 


11.3 Percentage of population with basic health 
insurance 


12.1 Capacity of designated emergency shelters per 
100 000 population 


12.2 Percentage of buildings structurally vulnerable 
to high-risk hazards 


12.3 Percentage of residential buildings not in 
conformity with National Building Code of 
India and Indian Standards 

12.4 Percentage of damaged infrastructure that was 
‘built back better’ after a disaster 

12.6 Percentage of residential properties located in 
high-risk zones 

13.3 Percentage of population at high risk from 
natural hazards 

13.5 Annual percentage of the city population 
directly affected by natural hazards 

15.1 Percentage of city population covered by 
multi-hazard early warning system 

18.1 Number of evacuation routes available per 
100 000 population 

19.1 Percentage of city population that can be served 
by city food reserves for 72 h in an emergency 

20.1 Percentage of city area covered by publicly 
available hazard maps 

22.2 Percentage of city population that can be 


supplied potable water by alternative methods 
for 72 h 


xiv) 


Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the 
oceans, seas and marine re- sources for 


sustainable development 


37 


IS 17785 : 2022 


SI No. UN Sustainable Development Goal Resilient City indicators 
xv) | Goal 15: Protect, restoreandpromote sustainable | 8.2 Percentage of natural areas within the city that 
use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably have undergone ecological evaluation for their 
manage forests, combat desertification, and protective services 
halt and reverse land degradation and halt | g 3 Territory undergoing ecosystem restoration as a 
biodiversity loss percentage of total city area 
15.9 By 2020, integrate ecosystem and| 8.8 Percentage of city land area covered by tree 
biodiversity values into national and local canopy 
planning, development processes, poverty | 93 Annual expenditure allocated to ecosystem 
reduction strategies and accounts nenii Pe : 
restoration in the city’s territory as a percentage 
of total city budget 
9.4 Annual expenditure on green and blue 
infrastructure as a percentage of total city 
budget 
xvi) | Goal 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive | 10.5 Percentage of public meetings dedicated to 
societies for sustainable development, provide resilience in the city 
access to justice for all and build effective, | 10.6 Number of intergovernmental agreements 
accountable and inclusive institutions at all dedicated to planning for shocks as percentage 
levels of total intergovernmental agreements 
20.4 Percentage of city departments and utility 
services that integrate the results of risk 
assessment in their planning and investment 
xvii) | Goal 17: Strengthen the means of — 
implementation and revitalize the global 


partnership for sustainable development 


38 


IS 17785 : 2022 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 4.6 ) 


MAPPING OF INDICATORS WITH THE SENDAI 
FRAMEWORK FOR DISASTER RISK REDUCTION 


SI No. 


Global Target Resilient City Indicators 


(a) Substantially reduce global disaster 
mortality by 2030, aiming to lower 
average per 100 000 global mortality — 
rate in the decade 2020-2030 compared 
with the period 2005-2015. 


(b) Substantially reduce the number of | 12.2 Percentage of buildings structurally vulnerable to 


affected people globally by 2030, high-risk hazards 

aiming to lower average global figure | 17 3 Percentage of residential buildings not in 
per 100 000 in the decade 2020-2030 conformity with National Building Code of India 
compared with the period 2005-2015. and Standards 


12.5 Annual number of residential properties flooded 
as a percentage of total residential properties in 
the city 


12.6 Percentage of residential properties located in 
high-risk zones 

13.3 Percentage of population at high risk from natural 
hazards 

13.5 Annual percentage of the city population directly 
affected by natural hazards 

15.1 Percentage of city population covered by 
multi-hazard early warning system 


20.3 Percentage of city land area in high-risk zones 
where risk-reduction measures have been 


iii) 


implemented 
(c) Reduce direct disaster economic loss | 5.1 Historical disaster losses as a percentage of city 
in relation to global gross domestic product 
product (GDP) by 2030. 5.2 Average annual loss as a percentage of city 
product 


5.4 Percentage of properties with insurance coverage 
for high-risk hazards 


5.5 Percentage of total insured value to total value at 
risk within the city 

12.2 Percentage of buildings structurally vulnerable to 
high-risk hazards 


12.3 Percentage of residential buildings not in 
conformity with National Building Code of India 
and Indian Standards 

12.4 Percentage of damaged infrastructure that was 
“built back better’ after a disaster 

12.6 Percentage of residential properties located in 
high-risk zones 

20.3 Percentage of city land area in high-risk zones 
where risk-reduction measures have been 
implemented 


39 


IS 17785 : 2022 


SI No. Global Target Resilient City Indicators 
iv) (d) Substantially reduce disaster damage to | 5.3 Percentage of essential service providers that 
critical infrastructure and disruption of have a documented business continuity plan 
ius mai ges F ier 6.5 Educational disruption 
ee ee 7.1 Number of different electricity sources providing 
developing their resilience by 2030. ; 
at least 5 percent of total energy supply capacity 
9.1 Annual expenditure on upgrades and maintenance 
of city service assets as a percentage of total city 
budget 
9.2 Annual expenditure on upgrades and maintenance 
of storm water infrastructure as a percentage of 
total city budget 
9.3 Annual expenditure allocated to ecosystem 
restoration in the city’s territory as a percentage 
of total city budget 
9.4 Annual expenditure on green and blue 
infrastructure as a percent- age of total city budget 
9.6 Annual expenditure on social and community 
services as a percentage of total city budget 
10.1 Frequency with which disaster-management 
plans are updated 
10.3 Percentage of essential city services covered by a 
documented continuity plan 
10.4 Percentage of city electronic data with secure and 
remote back- up storage 
11.2 Percentage of hospitals equipped with back-up 
electricity supply 
12.4 Percentage of damaged infrastructure that was 
“built back better’ after a disaster 
15.4 Number of hospital beds in the city 
destroyed or damaged by natural hazards per 
100 000 population 
20.3 Percentage of city land area in high-risk zones 
where risk-reduction measures have been 
implemented 
22.1 Number of different sources providing at least 
5 percent of total water supply capacity 
22.2 Percentage of city population that can be supplied 
with potable water by alternative methods for 
72h 
v) (e) Substantially increase the number of | 10.1 Frequency with which disaster-management 


countries with national and local disaster risk 
reduction strategies by 2020. 


plans are updated 

10.3 Percentage of essential city services covered by a 
documented continuity plan 

10.5 Percentage of public meetings dedicated to 
resilience in the city 

10.6 Number of intergovernmental agreements 
dedicated to planning for shocks as percentage of 
total intergovernmental agreements 


40 


IS 17785 : 2022 


SI No. Global Target Resilient City Indicators 


vi) (f) Substantially enhance international 
cooperation to developing countries 
through adequate and sustainable 
support to complement their national 
actions for implementation of this 


Framework by 2030. 
vii) (g) Substantially increase the availability of | 6.1 Percentage of schools that teach emergency 
and access to multi-hazard early warning preparedness and disaster risk reduction. 
systems and disaster risk information| 6,2 Percentage of population trained in emergency 
and assessments to the people by 2030. preparedness and disaster risk reduction 
6.4 Percentage of emergency preparedness 
publications provided in alternative languages 
10.5 Percentage of public meetings dedicated to 
resilience in the city 
15.1 Percentage of city population covered by 
multi-hazard early warning system 
15.3 Percentage of local hazard warnings issued by 
national agencies annually that are received in a 
timely fashion by the city 
Priority 1: Understanding disaster risk 5.1 Historical disaster losses as a percentage of city 
product 


5.2 Average annual disaster loss as a percentage of city 
product 


5.4 Percentage of properties with insurance coverage 
for high-risk hazards 


8.1 Magnitude of urban heat island effects (atmospheric) 
8.4 Annual frequency of extreme rainfall events 

8.5 Annual frequency of extreme heat events 

8.6 Annual frequency of extreme cold events 

8.7 Annual frequency of flood events 

8.8 Percentage of city land area covered by tree canopy 


12.3 Percentage of residential buildings not in conformity 
with National Building Code of India and Indian 
Standard 

12.6 Percentage of residential properties located in 
high-risk zones 

13.1 Vulnerable population as a percentage of city 
population 

13.3 Percentage of population at high risk from natural 
hazards 

13.5 Annual percentage of the city population directly 
affected by natural hazards 

20.1 Percentage of city area covered by publicly available 
hazard maps 

20.2Pervious land areas and public space and pavement 
built with po-rous, draining materials as a percentage 
of city land area 

20.3 Percentage of city land area in high-risk zones where 
risk-reduction measures have been implemented 


41 


IS 17785 : 2022 


SI No. 


Global Target 


Resilient City Indicators 


Priority 2: Strengthening disaster 
governance to manage disaster risk 


Disaster risk 


risk 


5.3 Percentage of essential service providers that 
have a documented business continuity plan 

9.5 Annual expenditure on emergency management 
planning as a percentage of total city budget 

9.7 Total allocation of disaster reserve funds as a 
percentage of total city budget 

10.1 Frequency with which disaster-management 
plans are updated 

10.4 Percentage of city electronic data with secure and 
remote back-up storage 

10.5 Percentage of public meetings dedicated to 
resilience in the city 

10.6 Number of intergovernmental agreements 
dedicated to planning for shocks as percentage of 
total intergovernmental agreements 


Priority 3: Investing in disaster risk 


reduction for resilience 


5. 


& 


Percentage of properties with insurance coverage 
for high-risk hazards 


5. 


Nn 


Percentage of total insured value to total value at 
risk within the city 


9. 


— 


Annual expenditure on upgrades and maintenance 
of city service assets as a percentage of total city 
budget 

9.2 Annual expenditure on upgrades and maintenance 


of storm water infrastructure as a percentage of 
total city budget 


9.3 Annual expenditure allocated to ecosystem 
restoration in the city’s territory as a percentage of 
total city budget 

9.4 Annual expenditure on green and blue infrastructure 
as a percentage of total city budget 

10.3 Percentage of essential city services covered by a 
documented continuity plan 

10.4 Percentage of city electronic data with secure and 
remote back-up storage 

11.2 Percentage of hospitals equipped with back-up 
electricity supply 

12.2 Percentage of buildings structurally vulnerable to 
high-risk hazards 

12.4 Percentage of damaged infrastructure that was 
‘built back better’ after a disaster 

12.6 Percentage of residential properties located in 
high-risk zones 

20.1 Percentage of city area covered by publicly 
available hazard maps 

20.2 Pervious land areas and public space and pavement 
built with porous, draining materials as a percentage 
of city land area 

20.3 Percentage of city land area in high-risk zones where 
risk-reduction measures have been implemented 


42 


IS 17785 : 2022 


SI No. Global Target Resilient City Indicators 
Priority 4: Enhancing disaster preparedness | 6.1 Percentage of schools that teach emergency 
for effective response and to ‘Build Back preparedness and disaster risk reduction 
Better’ in recovery, rehabilitation and | 62 Percentage of population trained in emergency 
reconstruction preparedness and disaster risk reduction 


6.4 Percentage of emergency preparedness 
publications provided in alternative languages 


9.5 Annual expenditure on emergency management 
planning as a percentage of total city budget 


9.7 Total allocation of disaster reserve funds as a 
percentage of total city budget 


11.2 Percentage of hospitals equipped with back-up 
electricity supply 

12.4 Percentage of damaged infrastructure that was 
“built back better’ after a disaster 


15.2 Percentage of emergency responders who have 
received disaster response training 


15.3 Percentage of local hazard warnings by national 
agencies annually that are received in a timely 
fashion by city 

17.1 Percentage of emergency responders in the 
city equipped with specialized communication 
technologies able to operate reliably during a 
disaster event 


18.1 Number of evacuation routes available per 
100 000 population 

19.1 Percentage of city population that can be served 
by city food reserves for 72 h in an emergency 

22.1 Number of different sources providing at least 
5 percent of total water supply capacity 

22.2 Percentage of city population that can be supplied 
potable water by alternative methods for 72 h 


43 


IS 17785 : 2022 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (G -1602, Pioneer Park, 
Sector — 61, Gurugram-122001) 


AECOM India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


AFCONS Infrastructure Limited, New Delhi 
Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, Ahmedabad 
National Highway Authority of India, New Delhi 

All India Institute of Local Self Government, Mumbai 
Bhubaneshwar Smart City Limited, Bhubaneshwar 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 


New Delhi 
Builders Association of India, New Delhi 


Central Statistics Office, Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation, New Delhi 


Cochin Smart City Limited, Kochi 
Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Confederation of Real Estate Developers’ Association 
of India, New Delhi 


Corporation of Chennai, Chennai 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor Development 
Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Department of Telecommunication, Ministry of 
Communications, New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & 
Industry, New Delhi 


Greater Vishakhapatnam Smart City Corporation 
Limited, Vishakhapatnam 


Gujarat International Finance Tec-City Company Ltd, 
Ghandinagar 


Guwahati Municipal Corporation, Guwahati 

Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 

Indian Green Building Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun 

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 
Institute of Town Planners, India, New Delhi 


Jabalpur Smart City Limited, Jabalpur 


44 


Representative(s) 
DR SUDHIR KRISHNA (Chairman) 


SHRI PAWAN KUMAR JAIPURIAR 
SHRI ARVIND AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRI AJAY SABARWAL 
SHRI ADVAIT AUNDHKAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRI J. K. PRASAD 


SHRI DHARMESH AWASTHI 
SHRI ARUN SAHAI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI VIRENDER SINGH 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri B. V. BABU 
SHRI S. SUDHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI LEENU SEHGAL 
SHRIMATI MANJU PAUL (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI DIRECTOR (NT-IID) (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYANT KOHALE 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI LOVELEEN GARG 


REPRESENTATIVE 

Suri K. P. ABRAHAM 

Ms SHEETAL RAKHEJA 
REPRESENTATIVE 

PROF UTTAM K. BANERJEE 


Suri B. C. DATTA 
PROF KULSHRESHTHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Organization 


Jammu Municipal Corporation, Jammu 
Karki Associates, New Delhi 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry, New Delhi 


Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution, New Delhi 


Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation, New Delhi 
Ministry of Earth Sciences, New Delhi 

Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, New Delhi 
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, New Delhi 


Ministry of Panchayati Raj, New Delhi 
Ministry of Power, New Delhi 


Ministry of Rural Development, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Tourism, New Delhi 
Ministry of Transport, New Delhi 


Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation, New Delhi 


Narnix Technolabs Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


National Association of Software & Services 
Companies, Noida 


National Real Estate Development Council, 
New Delhi 


National Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad 


North East Space Application Centre, Umiam, 
Shillong 


Office of the Registrar General & Census 
Commissioner, New Delhi 


Ranchi Municipal Corporation, Ranchi 
Saviram Engineering Consultants Pvt Ltd, Noida 
School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


Shillong Smart City Limited, Shillong 
Smart Cities Next, New Delhi 


Sulabh International Social Service Organization, 
New Delhi 


Surat Smart City Development Limited, Surat 
Survey of India, Dehradun 


45 


IS 17785 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI RAJNISH KARKI 
SHRI SUDHANSHU PANDEY 


Ms Kavita BHATIA 
SHRI MAYANK (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (BIS) 
UNDER SECRETARY (BIS) (Alternate) 


SHRI D. RAJSHEKHAR 
SHRI G. BALASUBRAMANIYAM (Alternate) 


Dr M. MOHAPATRA 
DR O. P. Misura (Alternate) 


SHRI KUNAL KUMAR 
SHRI SAMPATH KUMAR S. (Alternate) 


DR A. K. TRIPATHI 
Dr G. PRASAD (Alternate) 


JOINT SECRETARY 


SECRETARY 
SHRI SAURABH DIDDI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI BRIJENDRA SINGH 
SHRI GOPAL SAHA (Alternate) 


DR Ravi KANT BHATNAGAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI R. K. JAIN 
SHRI G. C. Pati (Alternate) 


SHRI N. KISHORE NARANG 


SHRI MANOJIT BOSE 
Ms RAMA VEDASHREE (Alternate) 


SHRI NAVIN RAHEJA 
BRIG R. R. SINGH (Alternate) 


DR K. VENUGOPAL 
DR MURALIKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI GIRISH MISHRA 


DR Vinay MAITRI 
DR SANJUKKTA S. BHADURI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


ProF K. J. NATH 
Dr N. B. MAZuMDaR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


IS 17785 : 2022 


Organization 


Svayam National Centre for Inclusive Environment, 
New Delhi 


Town and Country Planning Organization, 
New Delhi 


Udaipur Smart City Limited, Udaipur 


Unified Traffic & Transportation Infrastructure 
(P & Engg) Centre, New Delhi 


Jniversity of Delhi, New Delhi 


rban Development Department, Town & Country 
Planning Branch, Kolkata 


eC 


Urban Governance, Administrative Staff College of 
India, Hyderabad 


V. V. Giri National Labour Institute, Noida 
WRI India, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (B-399, 2™ Floor, Meera Bagh, 
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi 110063) 


In Personal Capacity Usavasyam, TC 18/1023, B-8/2, 
Lakshmi Nagar, Kesavadasapuram, Pottam P. O. 
Thiruvananthapuram 695004) 


In personal capacity (1/5 Shabd Pratap Asharam, 
Lashkar, Gwalior 474012) 


In personal capacity (374, Sector 28, Noida) 


In personal capacity (L/109, Sarita Vihar, 
New Delhi 110076) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI NAVIN KUMAR NAYAN 
Suri J. M. Syat (Alternate) 


SHRI R. SRINIVAS 
SHRI NITIN KUMAR AZAD (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRIMATI MANJU PAUL 
SHRI MANISH VERMA (Alternate) 


Dr C. R. BABU 


SHRI SATANU PRASAD KAR 
Ms SANDHYATRA SAHA (Alternate) 


PROF SRINIVAS CHARY VEDALA 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI AMIT BHATT 

Ms PRERNa V. Menta (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR 


SHRI V. SURESH 


SHRI S. P. BANSAL 


DR SANDEEP GARG 
SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Working Group on Smart Cities, CED 59/WG 1 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity, (G-1602, Pioneer Park, Sector 
6l, Gurugram 122 001) 


Gujarat International Finance Tec-City Company 
Limited, Ghandinagar 


Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, New Delhi 
School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi 

Town and Country Planning Organization, New Delhi 
WRI India, New Delhi 

In Personal Capacity (374, Sector 28, Noida 201301) 


Representative(s) 
DR SUDHIR KRISHNA (Convener) 
SHRI LOVELEEN GARG 


SHRI SAMPATH KUMAR S. 
Dr SANJUKKTA S. BHADURI 
SHRI R. SRINIVAS 

Ms PRERNA MEHTA 


Dr SANDEEP GARG 


46 


(Continued from second cover) 


The indicators in this standard have been selected to make reporting as simple and inexpensive as possible, and 
therefore reflect an initial platform for reporting. The indicators have been developed to help cities: 


a) prepare for, recover from and adapt to shocks and stresses; and 


b) learn from one another by allowing comparison across a wide range of performance measures, and 
by sharing good practices. 


The indicators in this standard can be used to track and monitor progress towards a resilient city, through the 
development of a city resilience strategy. 


A city which conforms to this standard does so in regard to measurement of indicators for city resilience in 
conformity with the definitions and methodologies as set out in this standard, and may only claim compliance to 
that effect. The standard does not provide a value judgement, threshold or target numerical value for the indicators 
and therefore conformance with this standard does not confer a status in this regard. 


It is acknowledged that cities may not have direct influence or control over factors governing some of these 
indicators, but the reporting is important for meaningful comparison and provides a general indication of resilience. 


For developing this standard, assistance has been derived from ‘ISO 37123 : 2019 Sustainable cities and 
communities — Indicators for resilient cities’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 59 (16967). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


f 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western s Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


