**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12859 (1989) : Fire Fighting - Brush Hook for Forest 
Fires -Specification [CED 22: Fire Fighting] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS 128S9 : 1989 

( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 



FIRE FIGHTING — BRUSH HOOK FOR FOREST 
FIRES — SPECIFICATION 



UDC 6340'036 : 62l-86'061 



©BIS 1990 

BU REAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

May 1990 Price Group 1 



Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 17 November 1989, after 
the draft finalized by the Fire Fighting Sectional Comnittes, had bssn approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 

Modern forest fire techniques in suppression of fires are being introduced in this country. Some 
of the important equipments which are required are relating to hand tools, water handling equip- 
ments etc. On the request of the Ministry of Environment and Forest, Indian Standards cover- 
ing specification for some of the important tools are being formulated so that on the basis of the 
same, these could be indigenously manufactured in this country and also users could procure these 
tools of proper specification. This standard covers the specification for brush hook for forest 
fires which is normally used for cutting heavy weeds, vines, brush etc. so as to prevent forest 
fires. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded 
oflTin accordance with IS 2 : 1960 *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )\ The 
number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 



IS 12859 : 1989 



Indian Standard 



FIRE FIGHTING — BRUSH HOOK FOR FOREST 
FIRES — SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers requirements for brush 
hook normally used for cutting heavy weeds, 
vines, brush etc. so as to prevent forest fires. 

2 MATERIALS 

2.1 The brush hook shall be made of 0'50 to 0*85 
percent carbon steel and shall be heat treated 
throughout to a hardness of not less than 45 and 
not more than 56 on the rock well C scale. 

3 DIMENSIONS AND TOLERANCES 

3.1 The dimensions with tolerances of the brush 
hook are given in Figure 1. 

4 PERFORMANCE 

4.1 Strength Test 

The entire blade of the brush hook shall be 
securely clamped to a flat, horizontal surface 
allowing the eye and handle to overhang the 
edge of such surface. At least one clamp shall be 



located immediately adjacent to the eye section. 
A 75 kg weight shall be attached to the tang end 
of the handle and allowed to remain for not less 
than 120 seconds, after which the weight shall 
be removed. If, after testing, the eye, the weld, 
the bolts or the rivets show sign of cracking, 
loosening or other weakness, it shall be consi- 
dered that the tool has failed thjs test. 

4.2 Corrosion Test 

The entire metal head of the brush hook shall be 
placed in a pan ( on tray ) of water. The 
depth of water shall be so as to cover approxi- 
mately one half of the blade. The blade shall 
remain in water for 24 hours at room tempera- 
ture. Upon removal of the blade from the 
water, there shall be no evidence of rust. 

5 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

5.1 The blade of the brush hook shall be free 
from all imperfections including scale, seams 
lumps, cracks, burrs, nicks, chips, warpage, or 
distortion of any kind. 



82 i 2 




27-8 ±0'5- 
lU 0-5 

1910-5 
(18-2 T0 17-i) 
AT BOTTOM EDGE 
4 81 0-5 




SECTION AA 



Fig. 1 Typical Sketch of Brush Hook 



IS 12259 : 1989 



6 MARKING 

6.1 The brush 
nominal mass 
manufacture. 



hook shall be marked with the 
and indication of the source of 



7 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 

7.1 Sampling 

7.1.1 Lot 

The tool of the type produced by the same 
manufacturer shall be grouped together to con- 
stitute a lot. 

7.1.2 Each lot shall be considered individually 
for the purpose of evaluation of quality in accor- 
dance with the specification. 

7.1.2.1 The nuniber of sample for testing to be 
taken at random from a lot and the criteria for 
conformity shall be as given in 7.1.2,2 and 
7.1.2.3. 

7.1.2.2 From each lot, a number of samples as 
indicated in column 2 of Table 1 shall be select- 



ed at random. They shall be examined visually, 
as far as possible in respect of requirement speci- 
fied in 3, 5 and 6. All the samples tested shall 
pass these requirements for the lot to be 
declared to conform to these requirements. 

7.1.2.3 In respect of performance test ( see 4.1, 
4.2 ). One sample shall be tested for each t)f the 
property and shall pass the test for the lot to be 
declared to conform to the requirement, 

7.1.2.4 In the absence of a certificate from 
manufacturer about the conformity of the speci- 
fication for the material ( see 2.1 ), ... one item 
each shall be taken from each consignment sepa- 
rately and examined individually in respect of 
the relevant requirement of the specification. 

Table 1 Sampling for Lots Produced underr 
Quality Control System 



No. of Item 
in the Lot 

(1) 
Up to 25 
26 to 50 
51 to 100 


Sample Size 

(2) 
3 
5 
6 



standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of the Indian 
Standards, Act^ 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



