INATA Aah IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


saa RA Aee sit Geren — 
uian cht wafer 
HTT 3 atheremleal, AAA Bik TAAA 
(TEC FIAT ) 


Commercial Blasting Explosives and 
Accessories — Methods of Test 
Part 3 Detonators, General and Permitted 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 71.100.30 


© BIS 2023 


ade Heh SAT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 SEL MTE AHL AMT, Ag Reet - 110002 
ee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2023 Price Group 8 


Explosives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee, CHD 26 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 3) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Explosives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 

Council. 

Testing of commercial explosives is of utmost importance for ensuring their safety during transport and handling, 

stability in storage and adequate life and performance under all conditions of use. Test methods included in this 

standard cover these aspects for all the groups of explosives under consideration. 


Depending upon the origin and type of the explosives, a large number of test methods are in vogue, which though 
similar in nature, differ in minor details of experimental procedure and expression/interpretation of results. 


It is a difficult task to select a particular method as the best. Therefore, choice has been affected in favour of those 
methods, for which sufficient experience and experimental data is available and which are mutually acceptable to 
all concerned, namely, the producers, the inspecting authorities and the consumers in the field. 


The test methods prescribed in this standard cover general and permitted explosives and accessories like 
detonators, detonating fuses and safety fuses. They do not cover all items but include those which are currently 
used and manufactured in the country. The method of tests for various explosives and explosive accessories are 
covered under different parts of this standard: 


Part 1 Gunpowder 

Part 2/Sec 1 Explosives general 
Part 2/Sec 2 Explosives permitted 
Part 2/Sec 3 Explosives slurry 
Part 4 Detonating fuses 
Part 5 Safety fuses 


This standard was originally published in 1973. In this revision, the following modifications have been 
incorporated — 

a) Requirement for sand used in strength test by sand bomb method is modified; 

b) Instrument to be used in electrical resistance test is modified; 

c) The details of current generator for no fire current test is modified; 

d) Gas incendivity test for delay and instantaneous detonators is made uniform; and 


e) Coal dust incendivity test is added. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of the standard is given in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. 


IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


COMMERCIAL BLASTING EXPLOSIVES AND 
ACCESSORIES — METHODS OF TEST 


PART 3 DETONATORS, GENERAL AND PERMITTED 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 3) prescribes the methods of test 
for detonators, general and permitted including (a) 
ordinary (plain) detonators, (b) instantaneous 
electric detonators, and (c) delay electric detonators. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of and necessary adjuncts to this standard. At the 
time of publication, the editions indicated were 
valid. All standards are subject to revision and 
parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 
IS 405 (Part 1) Lead sheets and strips — 
: 1992 Specification: Part 1 For 
chemical purposes (third 
revision) 
IS 460 (Part 1) Test sieves — Specification: 
: 2020 Part 1 Wire cloth test sieves 


(fourth revision) 


IS 488: 1980 Specification for glass making 
sands (second revision) 


IS 10081: Glossary of terms relating to 


1981 commercial explosives, 
pyrotechnics and blasting 
practices 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in IS 10081 shall apply. 


4 TEST METHODS FOR DETONATORS, 
GENERAL 


4.1 Water Resistance Test 


4.1.1 General 


The object of the water resistance test is to ensure 


satisfactory water-tight crimping on the detonator. 
Unlike plain detonators, electric detonators are very 
frequently used for blasting explosive charges in 
wet boreholes. For this reason, the sealing made by 
the crimping should be perfectly water-tight under 
field conditions of use. 


4.1.2 Apparatus 


4.1.2.1 Water pressure test vessel — as shown in 
Fig. 1. 


It is provided with a lid which can be tightened with 
nuts and with pressure gauge to check pressure. 
There is an inner container to keep the detonators. 


4.1.3 Procedure 


4.1.3.1 Storage of detonator samples under water 
pressure 


Take the samples under test and tie them in a bunch. 
Open the lid of water pressure test vessel, place the 
bunch of detonators in the inner container and fill it 
with water so as to cover the detonators. Close the 
water pressure test vessel lid and tighten the nuts. 


Apply pressure of 21 N/cm? either by operating foot 
pump or compressed air line connected to the water 
pressure test vessel. In case the water main pressure 
is sufficiently high, it can be used for raising the 
pressure to 21 N/cm?. Check the pressure-gauge 
every half an hour to ensure that the pressure is 
properly maintained. Keep the samples under this 
pressure for 2 hours. 


4.1.3.2 Firing of the samples 


After 2 hours of storage, release the pressure, open 
and take out the detonators. Determine the strength 
of the detonators by the method prescribed in 4.6. 


4.1.3.3 Record the results giving the type of the 
detonator, and markings on the lead plates on 
the basis of comparison with standard markings as 
in 4.6.2.1. 


IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 


12-5 MS HANDLE kE M16 SWING 
HINGES WELDED TO WELDED TO LIO— | | deo 42OLT 
COVER AND VESSEL —_ 
RUBBER JCINT {Ei DT) 15 A 
Zaye ESSE SSE 
2, LEP BAAN ee re ps ee SA cml 
Fi 5r mrt a5 A 25 
RER SS fan i 
aT -> | 25 


/ 
|t 


Hh 
—_ 


2 LELEL LERE EEE a T, 


se 
Si 

i 

Š; 

i 

Ra 


Free ee. 


fmm THICK MS 


VESSEL 


LIkLiI TTT 


— a b 


he SAET ee 


DUN 
METAL Cock 


ee 


PERFORATED 
GASKET 


TAAPEO HOLE For 
DRAIN COCK 


TALLET E iE ILL Leer 


Fe SSS ETE TE ih iE A A Eh eee 
Tnn 


Prrrrrr] a aramee reee eea e ae a 


Ee Te 
EEE CEEOL CELL LEE EEA EA 


26 


+ 
K 
Ly 
+ 
w 
E 
+ 
H. 
ki 
Éi 
E] 
H 
E 
a 
Ly 
ki 
i 
i, 
iy 
8 
f] 
E 
H 
k 
ki 
+ 
N 
A 
i 
k 
$ 
w 
L 
w 
= 
$ 
Bi 
E] 
Š 
A 20 
Ny 
Ñ kaa 
Nv 
a 
= 
H] 
ki] 
k 
H] 
a] 
B 
4 
Mi 
Ej 
B 
"i 
w 
wi 
ha 
Se 
A 
oa 
by 
K 
Sa 
Sy 
Ye 
2 
Ye, 
Ss 
i] 
| 


TFET Fo a F bd ae ae 


200 ¢ 


All dimensions are in mm. 


FIG.1 WATER PRESSURE TESTING VESSEL 


4.1.4 Precautions 4.2 Drop Test 


The following precautions shall be observed: 4.2.1 General 
The object of the test is to determine the insensitivity 


a) Do not open the test vessel unless the 
of detonators to shock. 


pressure is released; 


b) In case of misfire, do not approach the 4.2.2 Procedure 
detonator within 5 minutes of firing and 
after this, follow the recommended Cut the leading wires of the electric detonators so 
procedure for handling misfires; and that 20 cm lengths are left. Drop the detonators 


through a pipe of not more than 40 mm diameter 
behind a protective wall from a height of 2 m upon 
a concrete slab or an iron plate so that they fall 
vertically with the bottoms downwards. Note down 
the number of detonators that have fired. Plain 
detonators are dropped as such. 


c) Incase of partial detonation, scan the area 
where the detonators were being tested and 
carefully pick up all partly detonated 
explosive charges of the detonators and 
keep these shells for disposal or destruction 
by detonation. 


IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 


4.2.3 Precautions detonators to ensure that the detonators are not 
unduly sensitive and do not go off when subjected to 
After dropping the detonators, wait at least for severe jerk on the leading wires. 


5 minutes and then collect the shells. 


4.3.2 Apparatus 
4.3 Snatch Test 

It consists of a steel box open at one end with a hole 
4.3.1 General in the centre over which a collet to hold the 


detonator is suspended (see Fig. 2). 
The test is applicable only to electric detonators. It 


is performed to judge the safety in handling the 


TOP VIEW 


, 29 cm f 


a pacans : 


20.5 cm 


1 Lock system for box 


19.5 cm 


SAAC 
R 
JEN 


pa FRONT VIEW 
SSIS I IL SLL I III LILA ELITES ola A 
aliem Wooden Shaker Box 
(A) TOP VIEW 
8 9 


60 cm 60 cm 


24cm 24cm 


Rt A AOAC -j 


(B) FRONT VIEW (C) SIDE VIEW 


IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 


Key 

1 Shaker box container 

2 Electric motor 

3 Pulley wheel (Ø 22 cm) 

4 Pulley wheel (Ø 20 cm) 

5 Chain Pulley wheel (Ø 8 cm) 


PAUL UNIVERSAL 
DHANBAD 


VIBRATION TEST APPARATUS. 


6 Lever for wire to provide vibration 
7 Wire for vibration 

8 Steel frame 

9 Cover frame 


(E) Wooden shaker box where detonators are kept for vibration test 


FIG. 2 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF VIBRATION TEST APPARATUS 


4.3.3 Procedure 


Cut the leading wire of the electric detonator to be 
tested to a length of 1 m and suspend freely while 
the ends of the leading wire are passed through and 
tied to a 5 kg weight which is kept on a platform. 


Keep the arrangement behind a protected shield so 
that the weight can fall from a height of 0.5 m and in 
case of an explosion nobody is endangered. The 
dropping of the weight shall not cause the detonator 
to go off. 


4.3.4 Precautions 


Five minutes after the test, collect the unexploded 
detonators and destroy them as usual in a safe place. 


4.4 Vibration Test 
4.4.1 General 


The test is applicable to both ordinary and electric 
detonators. The object of the test is to see that the 
detonators are not unduly sensitive to the jolts 
received during transport and the characteristics of 
the detonators are not altered. 


4.4.2 Procedure 


4.4.2.1 For ordinary detonators, take 20 pieces to be 
tested and pack them in a suitable carton in two rows 
of 10 each, so that 10 of them face up and the other 
10 face down. Give a suitable packing on the sides 
so that the detonators stand erect without getting 
disturbed during shaking. In case of electric 
detonators, take 40 pieces in a bundle and wrap them 
in paper. Place the detonators horizontally in the 
wooden box of a shaking machine so that they are 
not disturbed from their position (by suitable 
packing on the sides) and drop the box from a height 
of 15 cm 30 times in one minute for 
5 minutes. 


4.4.2.2 Ordinary detonators shall be visually 
examined for any loose powder. If the detonators 
show no loose powder; they shall be assembled with 
safety fuse as usual and fired on lead plates. In case 
of electric detonators, they shall be fired electrically 
over lead plates. 


4.4.3 Precautions 
The following precautions shall be observed: 


a) The arrangement by which the detonators 
are shaken should be properly protected. In 
case any of the detonators go off, all the 
detonators will automatically go off; 


b) During the conduct of the trials no person 
should be present in the room where the 
machine is situated; 


c) After the shaking, 5 minutes interval 
should be given before the machine is 
approached and the detonator is taken out; 
and 


d) If loose powder is found in the ordinary 
detonators the indication is that the 
consolidation of the explosive has not been 
carried out properly. The loose powder 
should be collected carefully on a piece of 
glazed paper and then destroyed either 
chemically or by burning. 


IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 


4.5 Strength Test (by Sand Bomb Method) 
4.5.1 General 


The efficiency of a detonator in initiating an 
explosive is related to its brisance, in other words, to 
its crushing or shattering effect. The shattering 
effect is most easily produced on brittle bodies. 
Quartz sand possesses the desired qualities; it is 
cheap, abundant and quite uniform in character. 


4.5.2 Principle 


A stout iron bomb is used to hold the sand in which 
the detonator is imbedded and fired. The effect of 
the detonation is ascertained by sifting the sand after 
the explosion and by calculating from the mass of 
fine sand recovered, the percentage of sand that had 
been crushed. The procedure is same for electric as 
well as ordinary detonators. 


4.5.3 Apparatus — as shown in Fig. 3. 


It consists of a steel cylinder 210 mm long and 
90 mm in diameter on the exterior, with a cylindrical 
chamber 165 mm deep and 50 mm in diameter. The 
bomb has a steel cover 90 mm in diameter, 22 mm 
thick above the edges and 24 mm thick in the central 
position. The central position has a diameter such 
that its projection section fits neatly into the mouth 
of the bomb. The cover has two small holes bored 
parallel through its vertical centre each of such 
diameter that a leg of the electric detonator will just 
pass through one of the holes. The other top steel 
cover, as shown in Fig. 3, has a hole bored through 
the vertical centre of such a diameter that the piece 
of burning fuse used in firing a detonator will pass 
through the hole with a neat fit. A suitable clamping 
device, as shown in the figure, keeps the cover in the 
position and prevents loss of sand when the 
detonator is fired. 


4.5.4 Material 
4.5.4.1 Silica sand 


The sand shall have a minimum of 99.90 percent 
silica, when tested as per C-4 of IS 488. It shall be 
washed thoroughly to free it from chlorides and 
sulphates. It shall be dried and sieved. The sand 
passing completely through 700-micron IS Sieve, 
see IS 460 (Part 1) and retained completely on 
500-micron IS Sieve shall be used. 


4.5.5 Procedure 


4.5.5.1 Weigh 80 g of the sand and pour into the 
cavity of the bomb. Strike the bomb sharply few 
times with a light wooden hammer or jarred so that 
the sand gets uniformly packed. Insert the capped 
end of the fuse or the electric detonator carefully so 
that it rests on top of the sand vertically and as nearly 


IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 


as possible to the centre of the cavity. Pour another 
120 g of the same type of sand around the detonator 
in the bomb, tap the bomb mildly a few times to get 
the sand packed uniformly as before. Pass the end of 
the fuse or the detonator leading wires through the 
hole in the cover without disturbing the position of 
the detonator inside the bomb. Place the bomb 
within the clamping device, fix the cover tightly in 


position by screwing the two hexagonal nuts on the 
upright iron rods. Light the end of the fuse in case of 
plain detonator or fire the electric detonator using an 
exploder or a suitable firing circuit from a safe 
distance. (A mild clicking noise is produced by 
firing of the detonator inside the bomb). 


2 HOLES FOR 
ELECTRIC DETONATORS 


60 
22¢, FOR BURNING FUSE 
2 HOLES = : 4 $ S04 f 
(OP COVER 22 900 —e] 2? 
BOMB COVER 
w 
is 4 
w 
s0% S S 
theta e š 
: H T22 TOP 
. i £28 COVER 
t ' [=] OMG 
i i Su5 COVER 
t | g a 
1 
ae hea ge: TEEL 
l : 70 "= CYLINDER 
- $23 
’ i cue 
b =x 
F 7 E 
BASE PLATE 558 


STEEL 
CYLINDER 


All dimensions are in mm. 


FIG.3 APPARATUS FOR SAND BOMB TEST 


4.5.5.2 Empty out the sand carefully upon a large 
sheet of glazed paper, such sand as may adhere to 
the inside of the cavity being removed by a suitable 
scrapper and brush. Reject the leading wire of 
electric detonator or the charred fuse, also all 
possible fragments of the copper or aluminum shell 
after any adhering sand has been removed from 
them. Sift the entire charge of sand carefully 
througha nest of sieves of 500 micron, 
and 125 micron. The sand shall not be rubbed with 
the hand against the sieve. Any hard lumps shall be 
crushed between the fingers. Such lumps are 
usually found adhering tightly to the fragments of 
the shell of the detonator. After the screening is 
complete, empty out the separate fractions of the 
sand remaining in each sieve and in the bottom 
tray, on to small sheets of glazed paper and weigh. 


4.5.6 Precautions 


The following precautions shall be observed: 


a) In case of testing plain detonator, about 
4 cm to 5 cm of the fuse coil ends should 
be nipped off before use. 

b) To prevent escape of sand through the 
holes on the cover plates while firing, the 
annular space between fuse or the 
detonator leading wires should be packed 
suitably, for example, using a short length 
of soft rubber tubing. 

c) In case of misfires, wait at least for 
10 minutes. Keep the misfired detonators 
segregated for disposal/destruction by 
another detonator. 


4.6 Strength Test (by Lead Plate Method) 
4.6.1 General 


The strength of a detonator is its power of initiating 
detonation in explosives. Various tests are in use. 
Although the lead plate test does not furnish a 
quantitative estimation of initiating power, this is 
widely accepted as a routine test in view of its 
simplicity. The test consists of firing a detonator 
supported vertically on a _ lead plate of 
prescribed dimensions and comparing the 
markings/perforations produced on the lead plate 
with a series of standard markings/perforations. 


4.6.2 Apparatus 
4.6.2.1 Lead plates 


The lead plates used in the test shall be 4 cm square 
and shall be cut from lead sheet of 5.0 mm thickness 
(mass 56.7 kg/m’) conforming to lead sheet for use 
in chemical industry prescribed in IS 405 (Part 1). 


4.6.2.2 Firing frame 


The firing frame consists of horizontal parallel iron 
plates, the lowest one perforated with circular holes 
of 3 cm diameter over which the lead plate lies with 
arrangement for the detonators to be centered 
vertically on the lead plate and for a series of such 
detonators to be fired in one round. 


4.6.3 Procedure 


4.6.3.1 Place the lead plates on top of the holes on 
the lowermost plate. Place the detonators one on top 
of each plate vertically with the base of the detonator 
tube in good contact with the lead plate. Pass the 
safety fuse or the leading wires of the detonator 
through the two upper holes and fire the detonators 
following the recommended shot firing procedure. 


4.6.3.2 After firing, wait at least for 5 minutes and 
then examine the markings produced on the lead 
plates and compare these with the standard 
markings/perforations as shown in Fig. 4. Report 
the results giving the type of detonator, the 
marking/perforation as classified in 4.6.3.3 
according to the standard marking/perforation as 
shown in Fig. 4. 


4.6.3.3 Classification of results 


The results shall be classified as follows, according 
to Fig. 4: 


a) A Punched — The plate is completely 
perforated by a cleanly punched circular 


b) 


c) 


d) 


IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 


hole. The diameter of the hole is usually 
least at the middle and increases towards 
both the faces. The metal is generally piled 
in a raised rim on both sides of the plate and 
on the underside the metal may be curled 
over. 


B Perforated — The plate is deeply 
indented in a crater on its upper side and is 
perforated by a hole torn at the bottom of 
this crater. Viewed from the underside, 
there is a large circular area from which 
lead has been torn away, the perforation 
occupying the centre. A sub-classification 
is made with reference to the size of 
perforation at the bottom of the crater. The 
following figures refer to the average 
diameter exclusive of irregularities: 


B.1 — Perforation above 6 mm diameter. 


B.2 — Perforation between 3 mm to 
6 mm diameter. 


B.3 — Perforation below 3 mm diameter. 


C Broken — The appearance is similar to 
Class B plate except that the plate is not 
perforated. It has a pit on the upper side, 
and the underside is broken by the pressure 
wave giving the appearance of a shallow 
eruptive crater of which the rim is 
curled back. A sub-classification is made 
depending on the size of the crater. 


C.1 — Crater of more than 10 mm diameter. 


C.2 — Crater between 5 mm to 10 mm 
diameter. 


C.3 — Crater of less than 5 mm diameter. 


D Domed — The underside of the plate is 
not broken but deformed by a swelling 
or dome corresponding in position to 
an indent on the upper side. A 
sub-classification is made depending on the 
size of the dome. 


D.1 — Domes of about 10 mm diameter 
and relatively of greater height; in extreme 
cases the metal may be so thinned at the 
top as to give perforation, but these are to 
be distinguished from class B plates by the 
absence of a curled back rim formation on 
the underside of the plate. 


D.2 — Domes of large area but low height. 


D.3 — Small domes of less than 7 mm 
diameter. 


IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 


The sizes of the indents on the top of the tube. There are usually no radiating 
plate roughly correspond to the same three striations on the lead, but there may be 
subclasses. some embedded fragments of tube. The 


indent is shallow, or in extreme cases is 


e) E Underformed — There is no mark on the absent. The class is subdivided into: 


underside of the plate. On the upper side 
there may be a small indent sometimes 
containing the torn base of the detonator E.2 — Little or no indent on the upper side. 


E.1 — Indent on upper side. 


D3 


FRONT BACK 


FRONT BACK FRONT BACK 
E 
Et E2 
(FRONT ONLY) 
FIG.4 CLASSIFICATION OF RESULTS OF LEAD PLATE TEST OF DETONATORS 
4.6.4 Precautions prior to inserting one end of the fuse into 
the detonator. Also take at least 50 cm of 
The following precautions shall be observed: fuse for each test; 
c) In case of misfires, wait at least for 
a) While carrying out the test, ensure that the 10 minutes before approaching the misfired 
detonator is exactly vertical and placed detonator; and 
centrally on the lead plate and making good d) After the time interval specified in (c) 
contact with it; above, dislodge the misfired detonator and 
b) In case of firing the detonator with safety destroy it by firing with another good 
fuse, nip off about 5 cm of the coil ends detonator kept in contact. 


4.7 Electrical Resistance Test 
4.7.1 Procedure 


4.7.1.1 Take a detonator and stretch its leading 
wires. Keeping the bare ends of the leading wires 
short-circuited, insert the detonator into a 3 mm to 
4 mm thick mild steel pipe of about 25 mm 
diameter, connect a DGMS approved ohmmeter or 
equivalent instrument across the bare leading wires 
and measure the resistance. Record the results 
giving the particulars of the detonator, length of the 
leading wires and the resistance in ohms. 


4.7.1.2 The ohmmeter or equivalent instrument shall 
be of such construction and design that it is not 
capable of firing an electric fuse head when it is 
connected across the terminal and current is allowed 
to flow through the fuse head. Also the short-circuit 
current of the ohmmeter/equivalent instrument shall 
not exceed 10 mA. It shall be calibrated to measure 
circuit resistance with an accuracy of at least 
0.1 ohm. 


4.7.2 Precautions 


a) While carrying or handling electric 
detonators always keep the bare leading 
wires short-circuited; and 


b) Prior to connecting the bare leading wires 
with the ohmmeter ensure that the detonator 
is not in line with the ohmmeter and 
sufficiently inside the pipe. 


4.8 No Fire Current Test 
4.8.1 General 


For safety in handling, detonators are designed to 
withstand passage of certain amount of current 
without exploding. Manufacturers, therefore, 
specify passage of certain maximum current for a 
specified duration without detonation. The object of 
this test is to find out whether passage of the 
specified current for the specified duration through 
the detonator is safe or not. 


4.8.2 Apparatus 
4.8.2.1 Constant d.c. current generator 


The testing apparatus shall consist of a constant d.c. 
current generator, a device to allow the current from 
the generator to flow for a specified time, and a 
circuit resistance measuring unit. The set-up shall 
have a selector switch to check the circuit resistance 


IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 


and also to allow the current pulse to flow through 
the detonator. The current generator shall be capable 
of giving a current of 10 mA to about 500 mA in 
steps of 10 mA. The instrument shall read the 
application time from 10 s to 500 s in steps of 10 s. 


4.8.2.2 An accurate time measuring device of 
appropriate range. 


4.8.3 Procedure 


Take a sample of detonator of a particular make and 
place it inside the steel firing chamber with the 
leading wires connected to two terminals on the 
chamber. Close the chamber. Connect the firing 
chamber terminals with the apparatus as given in 
4.8.2 using a suitable length of cable. Check the 
detonator firing circuit resistance, by switching the 
circuit resistance measuring unit. Note the 
resistance, switch on the current generator and timer 
unit. Set the current to the specified level taking into 
consideration of the detonator circuit resistance and 
the time of application of the current to the 
appropriate level and allow the current to flow 
through the detonator for the duration by operating 
the firing switch of the apparatus. Note whether the 
detonator detonates or not. Record the results, giving 
the type of detonator, the magnitude of current and 
application time as specified by the manufacturer, 
whether the detonator exploded or did not fire. 


4.8.4 Precautions 


Wait for 10 minutes, remove the detonator under test 
and repeat the test using a fresh detonator. 


4.9 Minimum Series Firing Current Test 
4.9.1 General 


The test is intended to determine the minimum 
current at which a series of 20 detonators will fire 
completely. 


4.9.2 Apparatus — same as in 4.8.2. 


4.9.3 Procedure 


Take the number of detonators as recommended by 
the manufacturer for series firing, and connect them 
in series. Measure the circuit resistance. 
Compensate for the resistance of the circuit. Allow 
a d.c. current of appropriate strength and duration, 
as specified by the manufacturer of the particular 
type of detonators under test, to flow through the 
detonators. Note in the series whether fire is there or 
not, and record the results accordingly. In case of no 


IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 


detonation of some of the detonators, increase the 
current strength in steps of 50 mA using a new set of 
detonators and determine the minimum series firing 
current at which all the detonators fire. 


4.9.4 Precaution 


It shall be ensured that the detonators are placed at 
such a distance from the instrument and the firer that 
no effects of the exploding detonator are caused 
either to the person or to the instrument. 


4.10 Applications 

4.10.1 For Ordinary (Plain) Detonators 

Test methods 4.2, 4.4 and 4.5 or 4.6 shall apply. 
4.10.2 For Instantaneous Electric Detonators 
All test methods shall apply. 

4.10.3 For Delay Electric Detonators 


All test methods shall apply and in addition, a time 
metering test as mentioned in 4.10.3.1 shall also 


apply. 


4.10.3.1 Timing of any series of delay detonators 
shall be measured on a suitable electronic timer 
capable of measuring to an accuracy of + | ms in 
case of millisecond delay detonators and + 0.05 s in 
case of half-second delay detonators. 


5 TEST METHODS 
PERMITTED 


FOR DETONATORS, 


5.1 General 


Under the coal mines regulations, only detonators 
which have been approved by the Directorate 
General of Mines Safety (DGMS) shall be used in 
any coal mine in which approved safety lamps are 
required to be used. Such detonators are termed as 
‘permitted’ detonators and these include electric 
detonators for simultaneous firing, and also delay 
detonators. 


5.2 Gas Incendivity Test 


5.2.1 General 


The test is applicable to both delay and 
instantaneous permitted electric detonators. It 
consists of firing detonators one by one in a steel 
lined chamber of approximate dimension 
71 cm x 27 cm x 5 cm containing (9 + 0.25) percent 
or (8 + 0.25) percent of methane or natural gas-air 
mixture respectively, as the case may be. 


5.2.2 Apparatus 


5.2.2.1 Multi-compartment chamber — as shown in 
Fig. 5. 


The chamber consists of a number of compartments 
connected in series by means of pipe connections. 
The chambers have provision for inserting 
detonators at the middle through threaded plugs and 
for introducing and circulating gas mixture. The top 
side of the multi-compartments is closed by 
polyethylene film. The chamber is placed in a room 
which can be made dark. A typical figure showing 
one compartment is also given in Fig. 5. 


5.2.3 Procedure 


5.2.3.1 Place one detonator in each compartment 
through the threaded plug. 


5.2.3.2 Stretch a polyethylene film on the top side of 
the multi-compartment chamber and clamp it on to 
the chamber to provide gas-tight seal. 


5.2.3.3 Introduce adequate quantity of methane or 
natural gas into the chamber and circulate to obtain 
a (9 + 0.25) percent or (8 + 0.25) percent methane or 
natural gas-air mixture respectively, as the case may 
be. 


5.2.3.4 Draw a sample of the gas mixture from the 
chamber and check the percentage of methane using 
a duly calibrated methanometer. 


5.2.3.5 If the gas mixture is within the specified 
limits, connect the detonator in parallel with the 
firing cables through a sequence switch. 


5.2.3.6 Close all plug-cocks in the gas circulating 
system and fire the shots using the sequence switch 
and intrinsically safe firing circuit or exploder. 


5.2.3.7 Observe the number of gas ignitions. Record 
the results giving the type of detonator, percentage 
of methane in the gas mixture, relative humidity of 
the atmosphere, number of samples tested and 
the number of ignitions obtained. 


5.2.4 Precautions 


5.2.4.1 In case of misfire, wait at least for 
10 minutes before approaching the misfired 
detonator. 


5.2.4.2 After the time interval specified in 5.2.4.1, 
dislodge the misfired detonator and destroy it by 
firing it with another good detonator kept in 
contact. 


IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 


COMPARTMENT 


! S 
-~=}=- =} “Ih | CYLINDER 
1] (THROUGH 
| L GAS METER} 
A 
a -t Heel 
i | 
f 
t | “HANOLE 


Vi V 


SIOE WALL OF COMPARTMENT 


i 


Gi PIPE LINER NUTS AND BOLTS 


CIRCULATION 
PUMP 


“STO METHANE 
CYLINDER 


Typical Figure of Multi-compartment 
Chamber Showing One Compartment 


FIG.S MULTI-COMPARTMENT CHAMBER FOR TESTING PERMITTED DELAY DETONATORS 
5.3 Coal Dust Incendivity Test 5.3.1.3 Paper bag — of sufficient size to hold the 
detonator and coal dust. 
5.3.1 Apparatus and Materials 
5.3.2 Procedure 
5.3.1.1 Chamber 
Fill the paper bag with 227 g of coal dust and 


embed a copper tube instantaneous electric 
detonator in the dust. Suspend the paper bag from 


The test shall be carried out in a steel chamber 
measuring 970 mm x 970 mm x 610 mm. The open 


side of the chamber shall measure the top of the chamber. The detonator under test 
970 mm x 970 mm. shall be held horizontally in the middle of the side 

measuring 970 mm x 610 mm. The coal dust in the 
5.3.1.2 Coal dust — containing approximately paper bag shall be dispersed by firing the 


(40 + 2) percent of volatile matter (calculated on an 
ash-free dry basis) and shall be ground to such a 
degree of fineness that 85 percent by mass passes 
through 63-micron IS Sieve. 


detonator embedded in it and subsequently, the 
detonator under test shall be fired. Observe whether 
the coal dust ignites or not. 


IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 


ANNEX A 


(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Explosives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee, CHD 26 


Organization 


DRDO-High Energy Materials Research Laboratory, 
Pune 


Arumugam Fireworks Pvt Ltd, Sivakasi 


Ayyan Fireworks, Sivakasi 
CDET Explosives Industries Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 


Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Ltd, 
Ranchi 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 
Coal India Ltd, Kolkata 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


CSIR - Central Institute of Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


Defence Standardization Cell (DRDO), Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 


Directorate of Standardization, New Delhi 
Enif Paper Products Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 


Fireworks Manufacturers Association (North India), 
Gwalior 


GOCL Corporation Ltd, Hyderabad 

Gudiya Fireworks, Delhi 

Hariwansh Packaging Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 

High Energy Materials Research Laboratory, Pune 


Ideal Wrappers, Nagpur 


IDL Explosives Ltd, Hyderabad 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), New Delhi 


Ministry of Defence, Ordnance Factory, Bhandara 


Representative(s) 


DR A. P. DASH (Chairperson) 


SHRI K. MARIAPPAN 
SHRI ARUN LALITH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI G. ABIRUBEN 
SHRI RAGHAV RATHI 


SHRI BINAY KUMAR SINGH 


SHRI ABHIJIT PATHAK 


SHRI K. SUDHAKAR 
SHRI DEBDULAL SARKAR 


SHRI SITARAM DIXIT 
DR M. S. KAMATH (Alternate) 


DR C. SAWMLIANA 
DR FIROZ ALI (Alternate) 


DR H. L. YADAV 
Ms HEMLATA GAUTAM (Alternate) 


SHRI SAIFULLAH ANSARI 
SHRI A. RAJESHWAR RAO (Alternate) 


CAPT M. H. KEKRE 
SHRI MANAN DESAI 


SHRI HARISH MILWANI 
SHRI RAJEEV JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI C. SAINATH 
SHRI KSHITIJ JAIN 
SHRI VIJAY MURARKA 


SHRI C. GURURAJA RAO 
DR R. B. PAWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI KISHORE JUNHERS 


SHRI A. K. DASGUPTA 


SHRI AJIT ASHOKRAO TATWADI (Alternate) 


SHRI P. J. CHAHNDE 
SHRI S. DHILLIP (Alternate) 


DR ONKAR MONDHE 
SHRI D. K. URKUDE (Alternate) 


Organization 


National Academy of Petroleum and Explosives 
Safety and testing Station, Nagpur 


Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd, Chennai 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organization 
(PESO), Nagpur 


Shri Kaliswari Fireworks, Sivakasi 


Solar Industries India Ltd, Nagpur 


Standard Fireworks, Sivakasi 


The All India Chamber of Match Industries, Sivakasi 


The Coronation Fireworks Factory, Sivakasi 


The Indian Fireworks Manufacturers Association 
(TIFMA), Sivakasi 


The Metal Powder Company Ltd, Madurai 


The Singareni Collieries Company Ltd, Kothagudem 


IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI H. P. SANGOLE 


SHRI M. MUTHUKUMARAN 


SHRI P. KUMAR 
SHRI P. SEENIRAJ (Alternate) 


SHRI A. P. SELVARAJAN 


SHRI A. K. JAIN 
SHRI P. P. DEOTARE (Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. SARAVANAN 


PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI P. KANAGAVEL 
SHRI K. JEYAKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI T. KANNAN 


SHRI P. SUNDARAPANDIAN 
SHRI N. CHANDRASEKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. N. SIVA KUMAR 


The Tamil Nadu Fireworks and Amorces PRESIDENT 
Manufacturers Association (TANFAMA), SECRETARY (Alternate) 
Sivakasi 
WETWO Fireworks, Sivakasi SHRI G. V. SHYAMSUNDAR 
Yogeshwar Packers, Nagpur SHRI Y. K. YADAV 
BIS Directorate General SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 
Member Secretary 
SHRI MOHIT GARG 


SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRETOR 
(CHEMICAL), BIS 


Explosives Subcommittee, CHD 26:4 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation (PESO), 


Nagpur 
CDET Explosives Industries Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 


Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research, Dhanbad 


Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Ltd, Ranchi 


Coal India Ltd, Kolkata 


Representative(s) 


SHRI A. B. TAMGADGE (Convener) 


SHRI RAGHAV RATHI 


DR C. SAWMLIANA 
DR FIROZ ALI (Alternate) 


SHRI BINAY KUMAR SINGH 


SHRI K. SUDHAKAR 
SHRI DEBDULAL SARKAR (Alternate) 


IS 6609 (Part 3) : 2023 


Organization 


Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 


Economic Explosives Ltd, Nagpur 


High Energy Material Research Laboratory, Pune 


IDL Explosives Ltd, Hyderabad 
Indian Explosives Pvt Ltd, Raipur 


Kakatiya Energy Systems Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 
M/s Keltech Energies Ltd, Bangalore 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), New Delhi 


Munitions India Ltd, Pune 


National Academy of Petroleum and Explosives Safety 
and Testing Station, Nagpur 


Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd, Chennai 


Solar Industries India Ltd, Nagpur 


The Singareni Collieries Company Ltd, Kothagudem 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SAIFULLAH ANSARI 
SHRI A. RAJESHWAR RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ LALWANI 
SHRI ASHISH GAUTAM (Alternate) 


SHRI C. GURURAJA RAO 
DR R. B. PAWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI AJIT ASHOKRAO TATWADI 


SHRI KULDEEPAK DHURANDHAR 
SHRI RAGHIB SABRI (Alternate) 


SHRI P. R. LAKSHMANA RAO 


DR ATUL P. DWIVEDI 


SHRI S. SAI VISHWANATHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI P. J. CHAHNDE 
SHRI S. DHILLIP (Alternate) 


SHRI D. K. URKUDE 
SHRI D. VIKAS (Alternate) 


SHRI H. P. SANGOLE 


SHRI M. MUTHUKUMARAN 


SHRI A. K. JAIN 
SHRI P. P. DEOTARE (Alternate) 


SHRI S. N. SIVA KUMAR 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 26 (14726). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


