RAT Alte IS 326 (Part 1) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


MEAR ARAN qe TEEN ch TAA 
crt ihe ago weg hat 
AUT 1 THAT CAT 
( RA TITT ) 


Methods of Sampling and 
Test for Natural and Synthetic 
Perfumery Materials 
Part 1 Sampling 


( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 71.100.60 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2022 Price Group 5 


Fragrance and Flavour Sectional Committee, PCD 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Fragrance and Flavour Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products 
Division Council. 


This standard was originally published in 1952 and subsequently revised in 1968, 1984 and 2018. Till second 
revision, the standard (indigenous) covered the sampling procedures for both natural and synthetic perfumery 
materials. However, the third revision being identical adoption of ISO 212 : 2007 ‘Essential oils — Sampling’ 
issued by the International Organization for Standardization covered sampling of essential oils only. Therefore, 
the Committee decided to revise it to include sampling of natural as well as synthetic perfumery materials. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this Standard is given at Annex A. 


In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (second revision)’. 


IS 326 (Part 1) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TEST FOR NATURAL 
AND SYNTHETIC PERFUMERY MATERIALS 


PART 1 SAMPLING 
(Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) prescribes methods of 
sampling for natural and synthetic perfumery materials, 
for the purpose of determining their organoleptic, 
physical and chemical characteristics. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following Indian Standard is necessary adjuncts to 
this standard. The standard contains provisions which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All Standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent revision of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

528 : 1999 Oil of Mentha Arvensis — 
Specification (third revision) 

5757:1992 Oil of pine — Specification 
(second revision) 

6597: 2001 Glossary of terms relating to fragrance 
and flavour industry (second revision) 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 6597, and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Sampling — The collection of a small portion 
(called the sample) representative of the properties and 
composition of the lot of the material sampled. 


4 METHOD OF SAMPLING 


4.1 General 


The difficulties encountered in sampling are often 
considerable and depend upon such factors as the 
number and capacity of the containers, the physical 
state of substance, and the presence of solid, natural 
constituents and separated impurities. In order to obtain 


a representative sample, the procedure may have to be 
varied considerably. 
NOTE — Sampling should consequently be entrusted 


to experienced personnel able to cope with unforeseen 
circumstances. 


4.2 General Requirements of Sampling 


4.2.1 General Precautions 
In drawing, preparing, storing and handling samples 
the following general precautions and directions shall 
be observed: 
a) Samples shall not be taken in an exposed place; 
b) The sampling equipment and the containers for 
samples shall be made of aluminium or glass on 
which the material has no action. They shall be 
clean, dry and free from all odors; 
c 


wa 


Precautions shall be taken to protect the samples, 
the material being sampled, the sampling 
equipment and the containers for samples from 
adventitious contamination; 

d) To draw a representative sample, the contents 
of each container selected for sampling shall be 
mixed thoroughly by shaking or stirring or both, 
by suitable means or by rolling; 


e 


wm 


The sample containers shall be of such size that 
they are almost the sample. The head space shall 
be but not completely filled by between 5 to 
10 percent of the volume of the container depending 
on the method of transport adopted. For pasty and 
semi-solid substance, the containers shall have a 
wide neck; 


f) Each sample container shall be sealed air-tight 
after filling and marked with full identification 
particulars, such as the sample number, the date of 
sampling, the month and year of manufacture of 
the material and any other relevant particulars of 
the consignment; 


= 


Samples shall be stored in a cool place and 
protected from light and excessive variations of 
temperature. If agreed to, samples may also be 
stored-in an inert atmosphere; and 


8 


IS 326 (Part 1) : 2022 


h) Avoid spillage and personal contact and have 
appropriate clean-up kits during sampling. Use 
appropriate and recommended personal protective 
equipment while carrying out sampling. 


4.2.2 Additional Precautions 
The following additional precautions shall be observed: 


a) Rubber stoppers or composition corks shall not be 
used for closing the sample bottles; 


b 


wm 


Samples shall be protected by covers or oil-proof 
plastics, aluminium or tin foil or any other suitable 
impervious material over the stopper to keep the 
moisture and dust away from the mouth of the 
bottle and to protect it while being handled; 


c) To avoid spoilage of the samples under no 
circumstances, shall sealing wax be applied direct 
to the cork; 


d) All samples shall be transported with special care; 
and 


e) Samples for analysis shall be sent to the concerned 
laboratory as soon as possible after they have been 
taken. 


4.3 Sampling Equipment 
4.3.1 The recommended forms of sampling equipment 
are: 


a) closed type sampling tubes, undivided or divided, 
for sampling non-homogenous liquids, semi-liquids, 
free-flowing powders, flasks and pastes; 

b) open type sampling tube, 
homogenous liquids; and 


for sampling 

c) Sampling scoop for sampling materials in the form 
of powder, crystals, tablets and lumps broken into 
pieces, if necessary. 


4.3.2 Closed Type Sampling Tube, 
(see Fig. 1) 


Consists of two concentric metallic tubes closely fitted 
into each other throughout their entire length, so that 
one tube can be rotated within the other. Longitudinal 
opening of about one-third the circumference are cut in 
both tubes. 


In one position, the openings in the two tubes coincide; 
the sample tube is open when in this position and admits 
the material. By turning the inner tube through an angle 
of 180°, it becomes a sealed container. The inner tube 
may have a diameter of 20 to 40 mm and is undivided 
along its length to serve as a single container. 


Undivided 


The two concentric tubes shall be provided with 
V-shaped ports at their lower ends, so placed that the 
material contained in the equipment can be drained 
through them, when the longitudinal openings are in 
line. 


OPEN 
BOTTOM VIEWS 


CLOSED 


FIG. 1 CLOSED TYPE SAMPLING TUBE, UNDIVIDED 


The length of the equipment shall be, such as to enable 
it to reach the bottom of the container being sampled. 


The equipment is inserted closed, the material is 
admitted by opening it, and finally it is closed and 
withdrawn. 


4.3.3 Closed Type Sampling Tube, Divided (see Fig. 2) 


It is also of metal and has D-shaped cross section. It 
is provided with compartments along its length and 
is opened and closed by means of a closely fitting 
shutter which moves up and down throughout the 
entire length. It may be from 25 to 50 mm wide. 


NI I I I TL 


TUBE 


ENLARGED 
SECTION AA 


IS 326 (Part 1) : 2022 


ENLARGED 
SECTION BB 


FIG. 2 CLOSED TYPE SAMPLING TUBE, DIVIDED 


The equipment is inserted closed, the shutter is pulled 
out to admit the material, and the tube then closed and 
withdrawn. 


4.3.4 Open Type Sampling Tube for Homogeneous 
Liquids (see Fig. 3) 


It is made of metal or thick glass, and may be of 
20 to 40 mm diameter and 400 to 800 mm length. The 
upper and lower ends are conical and narrow down to 
5 to 10 mm diameter. Handling is facilitated by 
two rings at the upper end. For taking a sample, the 
equipment is first closed at the top with the thumb or a 
stopper and lowered until the desired depth is reached. 
It is then opened for a short time to admit the material 
and finally closed and withdrawn. 


4.3.5 The sampling scoop made of a suitable metal 
shall be as shown in Fig. 4. 


4.4 Sampling 


4.4.1 Sampling of large capacity containers (tanks, 
tank cars, etc). 


4.4.1.1 Five partial samples shall be withdrawn from 
each container, at depths from the upper surface 
approximately equal to: 

a) 10 percent of the total depth; 

b) one-third of the total depth; 

c) half of the total depth; 

d) two-thirds of the total depth; and 

e) 90 percent of the total depth. 


For each container, the five partial samples shall 
be bulked and homogenized. From this bulk three 
representative samples shall be drawn. 


IS 326 (Part 1) : 2022 


e |a—5 TO 10mm $ 


20 TO 40mm $ 


400 TO 800 mm 


—= La 5 TO 10 mm 


FIG. 3 OPEN TYPE SAMPLING TUBE 


The quantity of the material for each of the three samples 
shalt be sufficient to make triplicate determination of 
all the requirements given in the specification. 


4.4.1.2 Should there be impurities or water at the bottom 
or at the surface of the essential oil, a sample of such a 
layer shall be withdrawn separately, thoroughly mixed 
and divided into three similar portions (see 4.5.1). 
These specimens shall not be added to the five partial 
samples referred to above, but shall be retained and 
marked separately so that the nature of the impurities 
can be ascertained. 


4.4.1.3 For each container, a small but approximately 
equal quantity of material shall be taken from the three 
samples selected according to 4.4.1.1 and thoroughly 
mixed so as to constitute the composite sample for the 
container. The quantity of material for the composite 
sample shall be sufficient to make the triplicate 
determination of oil the characteristics tested on the 
composite sample. 


4.4.1.4 All the-individual and composite samples shall 
be divided into three equal parts, one for the purchaser, 
and another for the supplier and the third to be used 
as a referee sample. For packing of individual and 
composite sample the procedure given in 4.5.3.2 and 
for referee test samples the procedure given in 4.5.3.3 
shall be followed. 


FIG. 4 SAMPLING SCOOP 


4.4.2 Sampling of other containers (drums, jugs, 
carboys, flasks, bottles, etc). 


4.4.2.1 Lot 


In a single consignment of one type and grade of 
material, all the containers of the same size and drawn 
from a single batch of manufacture shall constitute a 
lot. If a consignment of one type and grade of material 
is known to consist of different batches of manufacture 
or of different sizes of containers, then the containers 
belonging to the same batch and size shall be grouped 
together and each such group shall constitute a separate 
lot. 


4.4.2.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the lot to 
the requirements of material specifications, tests shall 
be carried out for each lot separately. The number of 
containers to be selected for this purpose (n) shall 
depend on the size of lot (N) and shall be in accordance 
with Table 1. 


If inspection reveals no impurities or water, one partial 
sample shall be withdrawn from each container, the 
contents having first been homogenized. 


Ifinspection reveals the presence of impurities or water 
near the bottom or at the surface, specimens containing 
such foreign matter shall be withdrawn separately 
from each container, as specified under 4.4.1.2, such 
specimens shall be kept and marked separately. More 


than one partial sample may have to be withdrawn 
from the bulk, the number of such samples and the 
depth from which they are withdrawn depending upon 
the size of the container. Partial samples shall not be 
withdrawn from distances from the upper surface or 
bottom less than 10 percent of the total depth. 


In every case, the partial samples taken from all the 
containers shall be bulked and homogenized. 


From this bulk three representative samples shall be 
drawn. 


Table 1 Scale of Sampling 
(Clauses 4.4.2.2 and 4.4.2.3) 


Size of the Lot (N) Minimum Number of Containers 
(Number of Containers) to be Selected (7) 
1 to 3 Each container 
4 to 20 3 
21 to 60 4 
61 to 80 5 
81 to 120 6 


121 and above One in every twenty 


4.4.2.3 The containers shall be selected at random. In 
order to ensure the randomness of selection, reference 
may be made to IS 4905. In case this standard is not 
readily available following procedure may be adopted: 


a) If the lot consists of individually packed 
containers, then starting from any container in the 
tot, count them in any suitable order as 1,2,3.... 
pig up to r and so on where r is the integral part 
of N/n. Every rth container thus counted shall be 
withdrawn till the requisite number of containers 
is obtained. 


b) If the lot consists of cartons or cardboard boxes 
each containing more than one container, then a 
certain number of boxes (not less than 5 percent 
of the total number of boxes in the lot wherever 
feasible) shall be chosen first. From each of the 
boxes so chosen, approximately equal number of 
containers shall then be selected so as to obtain 
the required number of containers specified in 
Table 1. 


4.4.2.4 From each of the containers selected according 
to 4.4.2.3 a small representative portion of the material 
shall be drawn with the help of the sampling equipment. 
The approximate quantity of material to be drawn from 
a container shall be nearly equal to thrice the quantity 
required for testing indicated in 4.6. 


4.5 Preparation of Test Samples (Procedure) 


4.5.1 Inspection 


The first operation of the sampling procedure is 
inspection of the consignment. 


IS 326 (Part 1) : 2022 


The physical consistency of essential oils can be one of 
the following: 

a) Liquid (occurring most frequently), 

b) Solid, 

c) A mixture of, liquid and solid, and 

d) Pasty. 
It is desirable, where possible, to ascertain whether the 
material in each of the containers of the lot is uniform 
in appearance and, in the case of liquid, whether any or 
all the lots contained separated solids, water or other 
impurities. When, owing to the nature of the container, 
this cannot be done directly, portions of the material 
shall be withdrawn by means of a proper equipment 
(see 4.3), so that specimens from the surface and from 
the bottom can be examined. Ifthe container has a cock 
or bung hole at the bottom, specimens from the lower 
part may be withdrawn through this. 


4.5.2 Homogenization 


It is necessary to ensure that the sample taken from 
each container is a fair average of its contents. 
Homogenization is obtained as follows. 


4.5.2.1 In the case of liquid products, it is sufficient to 
shake the container, to use some form of agitator, or to 
homogenize by injection of nitrogen or de-oxygenated 
air. 


4.5.2.2 In case of materials in a solid or pasty condition 
or composed of mixed solid and liquid phases, these 
are mixed, when possible, by shaking and by exposing 
the container to a higher temperature or by warming 
it artificially until the contents are liquefied. The 
maximum limit of the heating temperature, if necessary 
“will be specified in the individual product specification. 


When total liquefaction cannot be attained, a series 
of partial samples shall be withdrawn by means of 
an appropriate equipment (see 4.3) and in the manner 
indicated in 4.4. The partial samples shall be bulked 
and homogenized. 


4.5.2.3 In the case of materials in the form of powders, 
crystals, tablets or lumps which cannot be liquefied, 
the material shall be drawn from different parts of 
the containers with the help of a suitable sampling 
equipment so as to give a representative sample for the 
container. 

NOTE — In case the material to be taken out from a container 


is not adequate for testing purposes, the requisite quantity of 
the material may be made up from additional containers. 


4.5.3 Out of these portions, a small but equal quantity 
of material shall be taken and thoroughly mixed to form 
a composite sample, sufficient for carrying out triplicate 
determinations for all the characteristics specified 
under 4.6.1. The composite sample shall be divided 


IS 326 (Part 1) : 2022 


into 3 equal parts, one for the purchaser, another for the 
supplier and the third to be used as a referee sample. 


4.5.3.1 The remaining portion of the material from 
each container shall be divided into 3 equal parts, each 
forming an individual sample, one set of individual 
samples representing the n containers sampled shall be 
marked for the purchaser, another for the supplier and 
the third to be used as referee sample. 


4.5.3.2 All the individual and composite samples shall 
be transferred to separate containers. These containers 
shall then be sealed air-tight with stoppers and labelled 
with full identification particulars. 


4.5.3.3 The referee test samples consisting of a 
composite sample and a set of n individual samples 
shall bear the seal of both the purchaser and the 
supplier. They shall be kept at a place agreed between 
the purchaser and the supplier to be used in the case of 
any dispute between the two. 


4.6 Number of Tests 


Tests for the determination of important characteristics, 
as specified in the relevant product specifications, 
shall be conducted on each of the individual sample 
separately. 


4.6.1 Tests for the determination of all the remaining 
characteristics in the product specification shall be 
conducted on the composite sample. 


4.7 Criteria for Conformity 


4.7.1 For Individual Samples 


For each of those characteristics, which have been 
determined on the individual samples, the mean (x) 
and range (R) of test results shall be calculated as 
follows: 


The sum of test result 


Mean (x) = 
Number of test results 


Range (R) = The difference between the 
maximum and the minimum 
values of the test results. 


4.7.1.1 If the specification limit for the characteristic is 
given as a minimum, then the value of the expression 
[(x) — KR] shall be calculated from the relevant test 
results (see 4.7.1.4). If the value so obtained is greater 


than or equal to the minimum limit, the lot shall be 
declared as conforming to the requirement of that 
characteristic. 


4.7.1.2 If the specification limit for the characteristic is 
given as a maximum, then the value of the expression 
[(x) + KR)] shall be calculated from the relevant test 
results (see 4.7.1.4). Ifthe value so obtained is less than 
or equal to the maximum limit, the lot shall be declared 
as conforming to the requirement of that characteristic. 


4.7.1.3 If the characteristic has bilateral specification 
limits, then the values of the expression [(x) + KR] 
shall be calculated from the relevant test results 
(see 4.7.1.4). If the values so obtained lie between the 
two specification limits, the lot shall be declared as 
conforming to the requirements of that characteristic. 


4.7.1.4 The value of the factor K referred to in 4.7.1.1 
to 4.7.1.3 shall be chosen in accordance with Table 2 
given below, depending upon the acceptable quality 
level, namely, the percentage of non-conforming 
containers that could reasonably be tolerated. 


Table 2 Values of K for Achieving Different 
Acceptable Quality 


(Clause 4.7.1.4) 


Acceptable Quality Level Value of K 
Not more than 3 percent defectives 0.4 
Not more than 1.5 percent defectives 0.5 
Not more than 0.5 percent defectives 0.6 


4.7.2 For Composite Sample 


For declaring the conformity of the lot to the 
requirements of all other characteristics determined on 
the composite sample, the test results for each of the 
characteristic shall satisfy the relevant requirements 
given in the product specification. 


Examples: 


In case of oil of peppermint, according to IS 528, total 
alcohols as menthol (percent by mass) is to be tested 
on individual samples and the value of K has been 
chosen as 0.4. In the case of oil of pine, according to 
IS 5757, distillation yield (percent by volume) and total 
alcohols as terpineol (percent by mass) are to be tested 
on individual samples and the value of K is 0.5. The 
conformity of the lot to the specification requirement in 
these two cases shall be judged as follows: 


IS 326 (Part 1) : 2022 


Product Indian Characteristic Type Specification Criteria for 
Standard Requirements Conformity 
Oilofpeppermint | IS 528 | Total alcohols as menthol, 1 65, Min (x — 0.4R) > 65 
percent by mass 
Total alcohols as menthol, 2 45, Min (x — 0.4R) > 45 
percent by mass 
Oil of pine IS 5757 | Distillation yield, percent | Below 185°C 5.0, Max (x + 0.5R) = 70 
by volume Below 200°C | 25.0, Max | &+0.5R) > 70 
Below 230°C 95.0, Min (x — 0.5R) = 70 
Total alcohols as = 70, Min (x — 0.5R) > 70 
terpineol, Percent by 
mass 
4.8 Packing and Labelling e) Number, kind and marking of the containers; 


Representative samples shall be packed in hermetically 
stoppered containers which shall be fastened and sealed 
with the seals of the owner and the sampler. 


4.8.1 The precautions listed under 4.2.1 shall be 
observed. 


4.8.2 All containers shall bear labels showing at least 
the following information to guarantee the authenticity 
and identity of the sample: 


a) Sample number; 

b) Nature and quantity of the product; 

c) Name ofthe owner or his authorized representative; 
d) Date of sampling; 


f) Signatures and names and, if necessary addresses 
of the interested parties or their authorized 
representatives; and 


g) Signature and name of the sampling supervisor. 


4.9 Instructions regarding Costly Materials 


Small containers are generally used for packing costly 
products. 


4.9.1 The bulk sampling depends on the number of 
containers used; the combined partial samplings, 
however, shall not exceed the quantities necessary for 
a normal analysis. The interested parties shall agree 
in advance as to the size of the bulk sample and the 
manner in which it shall be done. 


IS 326 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Fragrance and Flavour Sectional Committee, PCD 18 


Organization 


CSIR-Central Institute of Medical and Aromatic 
Plants, Lucknow 


All India Agarbathi Manufacturers Association, 
Bengaluru 


Aroma Sales Corporation, New Delhi 


CKC Fragrance and Flavours Private Limited, 
Kolkata 


CSIR-Central Food Technological Research Institute, 
Mysore 


CSIR-Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine, 
Jammu 


CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, 
Lucknow 


CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bio-Resource 
Technology, Palampur 


CSIR-North East Institute of Science and 
Technology, Jorhat 


CSIR-Central Institute of Medical and Aromatic 
Plants, Lucknow 


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, 
New Delhi 


Central Drugs Testing Laboratory, Chennai 


Central Revenue Control Laboratory, New Delhi 
Centre for Aromatic Plants, Dehradun 


Concert Trust, Consumers Association of India, 
Chennai 


Consumer Voice, New Delhi 


D.V. Deo Industries, Cochin 
Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Faridabad 


Drugs Control Organization, Jaipur, Rajasthan 
Essential Oil Association of India, Delhi 


Fab Flavours and Fragrances Private Limited, Delhi 
Forest Research Institute (FRI), Dehradun 


Fragrance and Flavour Development Centre, Kannauj 


Representative(s) 
Dr PRABODH K. TRIVEDI (Chairman) 
SHRI SARATH Basu P. S. 


SHRI SUNIL KUMAR JAIN 


SHRI RISHAB KOTHARI 
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KOTHARI (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRIDHAR P. 
SHRI NAGARAJAN S. (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNEESH ANAND 


DR ALOK DHAWAN 
SHRI SOMENDU KUMAR Roy (Alternate I) 
DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate II) 


DR VIJAI KANT AGNIHOTRI 


DR SAMIT CHATTOPADHYAY 
Dr Monan Lat (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDEEP TANDON 
SHRI CHANDAN S. CHANOTIYA (Alternate) 


DR. S. P. SHANI 


SHRIMATI C. VIJAYALAKSHMI 


SHRI SUNEEL MATHUR 
SHRI PRAFUL DALAL (Alternate) 


SHRI NIRPENDRA K. CHAUHAN 
Ms Hema Lonant (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 


SHRI ADITYA DEO 
DY AGRIL MARKETING ADVISER 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI AJAY K. JAIN 
SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI GURNISH SINGH 
SHRI V. K. VARSHNEY 


SHRI S. V. SHUKLA 
SHRI NADEEM AKBAR (Alternate) 


Organization 
Fragrances and Flavours Association of India, 
Mumbai 


Givaudan India Private Limited, Mumbai 


ITC Life Sciences and Technology Centre, Bengaluru 


Indian Beauty and Hygiene Association, Mumbai 
Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, Ghaziabad 
Indian Society of Cosmetic Chemists, Mumbai 
Jagat Aroma Oils Distillery, Kannauj 

Karnataka Soaps and Detergents Limited, Bengaluru 


L Liladhar and Company, Mumbai 


Lalji Aromatics Private Limited, Lucknow 


Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, 
New Delhi 


Nishant Aromas, Mumbai 


Rakesh Sandal Industries, Kanpur 
S H Kelkar and Company Private Limited, Mumbai 


SGS India Private Limited, Mumbai 
Seth Brothers (Perfumers) Private Limited, Delhi 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 

Som Extracts Limited, Delhi 

Ultra International Limited, Ghaziabad 

Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE), New Delhi 

In Personal Capacity 


In Personal Capacity 


BIS Director General 


IS 326 (Part 1) : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RISHABH C. KOTHARI 
SHRI JAIDEEP GANDHI (Alternate) 


SHRI AJIT PAL 
SHRI ARSHDEEP K. JosH1 (Alternate) 


DR JAMES BHASKAR 
SHRI GURUBASAVARAJA K. M. (Alternate I) 
DR VIJAYAN PADMANABHAN (Alternate II) 


Ms MALATHI NARAYANAN 
Ms VEENA BALGI (Alternate) 


DR Jar PRAKASH 
Dr MANOJ Kumar PANDEY (Alternate) 


DR RENUKA THERGAONKAR 
Ms MonIsHA MULLICK (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP KAPOOR 
SHRI VIBHU KAPOOR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. E. SHANKARE GOWDA 
Dr Moxasut (Alternate) 


SHRI MADHUSOODAN Mopy 
SHRI RAHUL MEHROTRA 
SHRI L. B. S. YADAV 


SHRI RAMAKANT HARLALKA 


SHRI YOGESH DUBEY 


SHRI AMIT GULATI 
SHRI AVANI MAINKAR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI ROHIT SETH 
SHRI VINOD KUMAR SETH (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMANT KUMAR NAYAK 
SHRIMATI RADHIKA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. C. VARSHNEY 
SHRI RAJA VARSHNEY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANT SANGANERIA 
SHRIMATI BHUVANA NAGESHWARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI M. A. U. KHAN 


SHRI G. S. RANADE 
SHRI V. S. VENKATESHA GOWDA 


SHRIMATI NAGAMANI T., SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (PCD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI D. UMA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’, (PCD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 18 (14454). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western E Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAL 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


