NAT Alan IS 17292 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


u — Aea ort A arat Ar 
TTA HAAT TAA 


Pumps — Minimum Required 
Efficiency of Rotodynamic 
Water Pumps 


ICS 23.100.10 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2020 Price Group 13 


Pump Sectional Committee, MED 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Pumps 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


This standard is primarily intended to introduce constructional, design, performance, safety features and testing 
requirements for rotodynamic water pump set and prescribes the method of measurement of performance and 
energy efficiency rating and testing for performance. 
The water pumps within the scope of this Indian Standard are typically produced and sold by pump manufacturers 
as series of large to very large numbers. The performance characteristics of pumps of one size produced by a 
manufacturer show some scatter caused by manufacturing tolerances, but are described by mean values and curves 
which represent that size. 
In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been drawn from the following International 
Standards: 

a) BS EN 16480 : 201 Minimum required efficiency of rotodynamic water pumps 

b) HI 14.6 -Hydraulic Institute Standard for Rotodynamic Pumpsfor Efficiency Acceptance Tests 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex K. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 


IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised )’.The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standards. 


IS 17292 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


PUMPS — MINIMUM REQUIRED EFFICIENCY 
OF ROTODYNAMIC WATER PUMPS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Indian Standard specifies performance 
requirements (methods and procedures for testing and 
calculating) for determining the minimum efficiency of 
rotodynamic gland packed water pumps for pumping 
clean water, including where integrated in other 
products. 


1.2 The pump types and sizes covered by this standard 
are described in the Annex A. These pumps are designed 
and produced as duty pumps for pressures up to 16 bar 
for end suction pumps and up to 25 bar for multistage 
pumps, temperatures between -10°C and +120°C and 
100 mm or 150 mm size for submersible multistage 
pumps at operating temperatures within a range 
of 0°C and 90°C. In addition, this standard specifies 
how the value of Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI) 
of a pump size indicated by the manufacturer can be 
checked by market surveillance. 


Even if it is left free to the manufacturer of a pump size 
(delivery size of the pump) how to prove the rated value 
of the Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI), nevertheless 
this standard specifies a method to prove that this rated 
value meets the requirements within the confidence 
intervals with a sufficiently high probability. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex B contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreement based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 For the purposes of this standard, the quantities, 
definitions, symbols and units given in 2 of IS 9137, 
gives specific definitions of terms used in this Indian 
Standard, together with any associated symbols which 
have been allocated and is based on ISO 80000. 


3.1.1 Table 1 gives an alphabetical list of symbols 
used and, Table 2 gives a list of subscripts. As far as 
possible, the quantities, definitions and symbols used 
in this standard comply with those used in 2 of IS 9137. 


Quantities, definitions and symbols used in 2 of 
IS 9137 but not needed in this standard are not 
contained in 3.2 and Tables 1 and 2, while these tables 
contain some quantities, definitions and symbols which 
are not used in IS 9137. 


3.1.2 In this standard, all formulae are given in coherent 
SI-units. 


3.1.3 For the purposes of this standard the terms and 
definitions given in 3.2 to 3.9 shall apply. Most of the 
terms and definitions come from EN ISO 9906 and 
IS 9137, except for the definition of MEI. 


3.2 (Volume) Rate of Flow — External rate of flow of 
the pump, that is, the rate of flow discharged into the 
pipe from the outlet branch of the pump 
NOTES: 
1 Losses or abstractions inherent to the pump, that is: 
a) discharge necessary for hydraulic balancing of axial 
thrust; 
b) cooling of bearings of the pump itself; and 
c) water seal to the packing. 
2) Leakage from the fittings, internal leakage, etc. is not to be 
reckoned in the rate of flow. On the contrary, all derived flows 
for other purposes, such as, cooling of the motor bearings; 
cooling of a gear box (bearings, oil cooler), etc. are to be 
reckoned in the rate of flow. 
3) Whether and how these flows shall be taken into account 
depends on the location of their derivation and of the section of 
flow-measurement respectively. 


3.3 Driver Power Input — Power absorbed by the 
pump driver. 


3.4 Pump Efficiency 


_ Paya _ Output of pump in kW 
P, Input to pump in kW 
3.5 Driver Efficiency 
_ P, _ Output of driver in kW 
"ar P, Input to driver in kW 
3.6 Overall Efficiency 
— Piya _ Output of pump in kW 
tot 


P, Input to driver in kW 


IS 17292 : 2020 


3.7 Specific Speed — Dimensional number 
characterizing the impeller type (radial, semi-axial, 
axial) of rotodynamic pumps: 


V Qber 


x —— 


Ho He” 
BEP 


s N 


NOTES: 

1) For multistage pumps, H,,, is the head per stage which 
results from dividing the total pump head at the point of best 
efficiency by the number of stages. 

2) The specific speed of an individual pump or the mean 
specific speed of a pump size is a(dimensional) value which 
characterizes the impeller shape (radial, semi-axial, axial) of 
the pump or the size. The numerical value of the specific speed 
is defined by an equation given in 3.7 by using special units 
for the quantities contained in this equation. As described in 6, 
the specific speed is one of the parameters which the nominal 
values of minimum required efficiency depend on. 


3.8 Clear Cold Water — Clear cold water shall mean, 
water having the characteristics specified below: 

a) Turbidity 50 ppm (silica 
scale), Max. 


b) Chlorides 500 ppm, Max 
c) Total solids 3000 ppm, Max 
d) pH value 6.5 to 8.5 

e) Temperature 33°C, Max. 

f) Specific gravity 1.004, Max. 


g) Hardness (as 
(drinking water) 


CaCO,) 300 mg, Max 


3.9 Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI) — Value which 
determines the minimum required efficiency for the 
qualification criteria and, thereby, is a measure of the 
quality of a pump size in respect to efficiency. 


NOTES: 


1) Dimensionless scale unit for hydraulic pump efficiency at 
BEP, PL and OL. 


2) The MEI is the result of a statistical analysis of the 
performances of a large number of commercial pumps 
and corresponds to the various “quartiles” of the statistical 
distribution. 


For example, MEI = 0.50 corresponds to the efficiency 
performance level that 50 percent of the pumps on the 
market do not meet. 


4 LISTS 
SUBSCRIPTS 


OF BASIC LETTERS AND 
4.1 Alphabetical List of Symbols 


List of basic letters used as symbols in this standard are 
given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Alphabetical List of Basic Letters Used 


as Symbols 
( Clause 4.1 ) 


SI No. Symbol Quantity Unit 
() (2) G3) (4) 
i) A Area m? 
ii) C Constant pure 
number 
iii) D Diameter m 
iv) e Measurement uncertainty, pure 
relative value number 
v) f Frequency s', Hz 
vi) g Acceleration due to gravity m/s? 
vii) H Pump total head m 
viii) k Number of instrument pure 
readings or sample pumps number 
ix) m Mass kg 
x) M Number of pumps of a sample pure 
number 
xi) n Speed of rotation s', min! 
xii) N Number of instrument pure 
readings number 
xiii) n Specific speed min! 
xiv) p Pressure Pa 
xv) Probability pure 
number 
xvi) P Power w 
xvii) Q (Volume) rate of flow m?/s 
xviii) s Standard deviation ofa sample according 
to special 
quantity 
xix) t Tolerance factor, relative pure 
value number 
xx) t Time s 
xxi) t Student's factor pure 
number 
xxii) T Torque Nm 
xxiii) u Peripheral velocity m/s 
xxiv) U Mean velocity m/s 
xxv) U Voltage V 
xxvi) v Local velocity m/s 
xxvii) V Volume m? 
xxviii) X General quantity according 
to special 
quantity 
XX1X) Y General quantity according 
to special 
quantity 
XXX) z Height above reference plane m 
XXXi) Z Number of produced pumps pure 


number 


Table 1 ( Concluded ) 


IS 17292 : 2020 


Table 2 ( Concluded ) 


SINo. Symbol Quantity Unit SI No. Subscript Meaning 
(1) (2) (3) (4) a) (2) (3) 
xxxii) n Efficiency pure xxv) Q (volume) flow rate 
number xxvi) R random 
aaan) a Temperature C xxvii) S specific, systematic 
xxxiv) v Kinematic viscosity m?/s on 
xxviii) sync synchronous 
i 3 
=) P Density kg/m XXix) tot total, overall 
XXXVI) o Angular velocity rad/s xxx) iue ünevaië 
xxxvii) o Standard deviation of normal according . 
na : xxxi) T torque 
distribution to special 
quantity xxxii) T translated 
. . . r xxxiii) v vapour 
For a list of concise designations (short term , i 
ee i xxxiv) x of quantity x 
description) of pump types in scope, see Annex C. 
XXXV) y% for probability of y percent 
4.2 List of Letters and Figures Used as Subscript xxxvi) 7 efficiency 
List of letters and figures used as subscripts in this _ xxxvii) hyd hydraulic 
standard are given in Table 2. 
5 GENERAL DEFINITIONS 


Table 2 List of Letters and Figures Used as 


Subscripts 
( Clause 4.2 ) 
SI No. Subscript Meaning 
(1) (2) 6) 
i) 1 electrical 
ii) 2 mechanical 
iii) abs absolute 
iv) amb ambient 
v) annual per year 
vi) curve on fitting curve 
vii) BEP at best efficiency point 
viii) dr driver 
ix) D datum 
x) exp experimentally determined 
xi) G guaranteed 
xii) H pump total head 
xiii) I numbering index 
xiv) J numbering index 
xv) imp impeller 
xvi) man manufacturing 
xvii) max maximum permissible 
xviii) mean mean value of pump series 
xix) min, requ minimum required 
XX) N nominal 
xxi) OL overload 
xxii) Pd pre-defined 
xxiii) P power 
Xxiv) PL part load 


5.1 Qualification 


Procedure where the manufacturer of the pump size 
proves, by appropriate methods, the fulfillment of the 
efficiency criteria defined in this standard 
NOTE — Generally, the qualification criteria refer to the mean 
values of the size which are valid for the full impeller diameter 


and which will be determined by tests and evaluations on 
pumps of the respective size. 


5.2 Verification 


Procedure where an independent institution checks the 
result of the qualification procedure, in the frame of 
market surveillance 


NOTE — In this case, the tests and the evaluation of the test 
data are carried out according to 7 of this Standard. 


The approval decision is taken according to the 
procedure described in 9 of this Standard. 


5.3 Independent Institution/Market Surveillance 


Organization mandated by the market surveillance for 
verification of MEI values indicated by manufacturers. 


NOTES: 
1) These organizations are generally called independent 
institutions whatever the special type of the institution (non- 
governmental organization (NGO), neutral institute, market 
surveillance authorities or similar) may be. 
2) Neutral institutions or similar organizations can also be 
mandated by a manufacturer for the qualification procedure, 
in this case they are not considered as independent institution 
when applying this standard. 

5.4 Minimum Required Efficiency (q 


a, 
min,requ: 
Value of efficiency that have to be reached in order to 
fulfill a particular MEI value. 


IS 17292 : 2020 


NOTE — The value of minimum required efficiency depends 
on certain properties of the pump size (pump type, nominal 
speed of rotation, flow rate at best efficiency point and specific 
speed) and on the Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI). For one 
size, different minimum required efficiencies are relevant 
at best efficiency point, at specified part load and overload 
operating points, respectively. 


5.5 Particular Threshold Values of Efficiency 
m iia) 


Values calculated from the minimum required efficiency 
by subtracting a total tolerance. 


5.6 Pump Size 


Range of pumps characterized by certain dimensions 
( for example, nominal diameter of discharge flange 
and nominal impeller diameter for end-suction and 
multistage pumps, nominal outer casing diameter in the 
case of submersible multistage pumps) and given in his 
catalogues by the manufacturer. 
NOTE — Ina Q-H-chart each pump size covers a certain range 
of Qand H-values. Within this range, each duty point can be 
served by a pump of the corresponding pump size by adapting 
its Q-H-curve by impeller trimming, that is, by cutting down 
the outer impeller diameter to an appropriate value. The upper 
limit of the Q-H- range covered by one pump size is determined 
by the full diameter of the impeller corresponding to this size. 


5.7 Full Impeller Diameter of a Pump Size 


Impeller with the maximum diameter for which 
performance characteristics are given for a pump size 
in the catalogues of a water pump manufacturer. 


5.8 Best Efficiency Point (BEP) 


Operating point where the greatest value of pumps 
efficiency is obtained, at nominal speed of rotation. 


5.9 Part Load (PL) 


Particular operating point in the range of operating 
points with lower flow than best efficiency point, at 
nominal speed of rotation. 


5.10 Overload (OL) 


Particular operating point in the range of operating 
points with higher flow than best efficiency point, at 
nominal speed of rotation. 


6 MINIMUM REQUIRED EFFICIENCIES 
AND MINIMUM EFFICIENCY INDEX 


6.1 The Concept of ‘House of Efficiency’ 


To achieve the goal of energy saving by replacing less 
energy efficient pumps by pumps which are qualified 
in respect to fulfilling criteria of minimum required 
efficiency, two important aspects have to be taken into 
account: 


a) The required minimum values of n,,, shallbe 
fulfilled by the mean values of the qualified 
pump sizes which are produced and sold in large 
numbers. Therefore, these mean values shall be 


determined by appropriate methods and then be 
compared to minimum required values which 
are based on general physical interrelations (see 
Annex C) as well as on a statistical evaluation of 
existing pumps of” state of the art” design and 
manufacturing quality (see 6.2 and 6.3). 


b) Not only the value ofn,,, is relevant for energy 
consumption and saving by pumps, but also the 
efficiency in the part load and overload ranges of 
operation. This is caused by two reasons: 


1) The product program of pump manufacturers 
for a certain pump type is from economic 
reasons, subdivided into a limited number of 
different pump sizes in which each cover a 
certain range of flow rate Q and pump head 
H. This leads to the effect that not for any 
Q-H duty point ( that is, the operating point 
specified by the pump user which normally 
is the most probable point of operation) for a 
pump application, a pump size will exist for 
which its best efficiency point is identical to 
the required duty point. The selection of the 
“best choice” size for a given application will 
most often cause the duty point to be a slight 
“off-design”, that is, part load or overload, 
point of the selected size (for more information 
to aspects of pump selection, see Annex B). 


2) Even if the best efficiency point of a pump 
size fits exactly to a required duty point, the 
pump will normally be operated in a range of 
operation and not only at its duty point. This 
can result from changes or variations of the 
hydraulic resistance of the circuit (caused 
either by varying demand of system flow rate 
or by long time effects as, for example, internal 
incrustation of pipes) or, in the case of parallel 
operation of pumps, from variable operation 
conditions when different numbers of pumps 
are running. 


Therefore, the qualification of a pump size in respect to 
minimum required efficiency is based on the so- called 
concept “house of efficiency” which includes two 
criteria A and B. 


6.1.1 Criteria A 


Criterion A is the minimum efficiency requirement at 
the best efficiency point (BEP) of the pump size: 


pgp) cen 2 leo) min, requ ( 1) 
6.1.2 Criteria B 


Criterion B is the minimum efficiency requirement at 
specified part load (PL) and overload (OL) operating 
points of the pump size: 


Miraa Mon) min,requ (2) 


m A m E (3 ) 


In this standard, the operating points which shall 
be representative for the efficiency in the part load 
and overload range are fixed at Q, = 0.75 Qprp and 
Qa = 1.1 Quer 


All efficiency values in the criteria given above are 
mean values of the pump size and are to be taken for 
pumps of this size with full impeller diameter. 


As a result, the mean efficiency curve of the size has to 
show a high maximum and a broad width to fulfill the 
criteria for qualification. 


In Fig. | the representation of the two criteria is shown 
in a Q-n diagram. To be qualified, the mean efficiency 
curve of the size with its maximum at the best efficiency 
point shall not penetrate into the “roof” of the “house 
of efficiency”. 


6.2 Mathematical Representation of Minimum 
Required Efficiency 


The minimum required efficiency values for pump sizes 
fulfilling the qualification criteria A and B arebased 
on scientific analyses of the attainable efficiency of 
rotodynamic pumps as well on a statistical evaluation 
of data collected from several questionnaires sent to 
European pump manufacturers in 2007. 


The specific speed n, of the pumps forming the data 
base ranges from 6 to 110.5 min’ and the range of 
flow rate at best efficiency Q,., is from 1.8 to 1200 
m°/h. The performance data supplied by the European 


QpL 


Key 
n pump efficiency 


IS 17292 : 2020 


manufacturers were assumed to be valid for the full 
diameter of the respective pump sizes. 


In respect of the general physical dependency 
of attainable mean values of efficiency on main 
parameters (see Annex C), the collected data have 
been ordered according to a representation in the form 
Nesp 7 f (Nn, Q,,,) for each pump type and nominal 
speed within the scope. This correlation is described 
by a mathematical formula (see below). The form of 
the formula is based on previous investigations. The 
various presented in more detail in the final report of 
the evaluation studysteps to come from the collected 
data to the quantitative description of the relation 
Nesp 7 f (ny Qep) in the form of a 3-dimensional 
quadratic polynomial approximation are: 


The mathematical formula describing the relation 
Neep = f (n, Qber) is: 


Terp = -11,48 (In (n,))? — 0,85-(1n (Qorp))? — 
0,38-In (n.)-In (Qrp) + 88,591n (n,) + 


13,46-In (Qpe) —C (4) 


With 
Npppin [percent]; 

nin [min"] 

Qaep 1n [m/h]; 

C: constant in [percent], depending on Minimum 

Efficiency Index (METI), see 6.4. 


Qeer QoL Q 


Fic. 1 HOUSE OF EFFICIENCY — EXPLANATORY REPRESENTATION 


IS 17292 : 2020 


The result calculated from formula (4) has to be 
rounded to the 1* digit after the decimal point. 


The mathematical range of validity of the formula is: 
6 min-1 <n < 120 min-1 


< 1000 m*/h 


BEP — 


2m/h<Q 
The physical range of validity of the formula is: 


prp £ 88 percent 


NOTES: 


1) The limitation of the physical range of validity to a maximum 
value of 7,,, results from the fact that the hydraulic and 
mechanical losses in commercially designed and manufactured 
rotodynamic pumps cannot fall below a lower limit. 

2) Further reduction of losses would need special measures in 
design and manufacturing which would lead to unacceptable 
efforts and costs and/or would be incompatible with other 
pump operating requirements as, for example, good cavitations 
performance, low noise and vibration levels. 

3) Assuming that there are no other constraints, formula (4) 
is valid for all pump types within the scope of this standard 
pumping clean cold water. In the case of multistage pumps 
(MS), it is valid for a minimum stage number of 3, in the 
case of submersible multistage pumps (MSS) for a minimum 
stage number of 9. Generally, the equation is valid for the full 
impeller diameter of a pump size. 


The efficiency values concern only pump efficiency, 
not the overall efficiency even in the case of close 
coupled pump-motor units. 


6.3 Minimum Efficiency at Part Load and Overload 


The pump data given by the manufacturers was also 
evaluated at selected part load (0.75 Q.,...) and overload 
(1.10 Qrp) operating points. 


BEP 


Part load and overload coefficients defined by: 


Not 


Ti pEP 


x po NPL : Xo. _ 


PL 
Tl BEP 


is 


were calculated for each pump type. The mean value 
of these coefficients was found to be X,, = 0.947 and 
Xo = 0.985 for all pump types in good approximation. 


Using the relation described in 6.2 for n,,,, the 
minimum efficiency requirements for the selected 
operating points at part load and overload are 


is ee = 0.947 x Cia see (6) 


(Nor) ania = 0.985 x (irp) iiaia ... (7) 


6.4 Minimum Efficiency Index 


By varying the constant C in the equation for n,,,, 
the curves resulting from formula (4) and plotted in 
ea min requ” diagram for constant values of Qrp are 
shifted in the vertical direction. With a chosen value 


of C for a pump type and rotational speed within the 
scope, the existing pumps of this type produced by the 
European manufacturers are split into a percentage of 
the total number of pump sizes which already fulfill 
the corresponding minimum efficiency requirement (in 
respect to criteria A and B) and the (complementary) 
percentage of those which do not fulfill this requirement 
yet and, therefore, will be replaced on the market by 
pumps which are qualified in respect to the criteria 
A and B. The quantitative effect of the qualification 
criteria (finally determined by the value C) on the 
market and energy saving effect is characterized by 
the Minimum Efficiency Index (MED). In the statistical 
evaluation, the Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI) was 
determined such that its value, multiplied by 100, 
indicates the percentage of existing pump sizes which 
do not fulfill the qualification criteria A and B for the 
corresponding value of C. To come to these results, the 
data for each pump given by the pump manufacturer 
were taken as being representative for the total number 
of pumps of the corresponding size with full impeller 
diameter. 


The Minimum Efficiency Index (defined as described 
above) is a measure for the quality of a pump size 
in respect to efficiency. At the lower limit MEI = 0, 
the corresponding efficiencies of pump sizes can be 
achieved on a low level of design and manufacturing. 
For values of MEI > 0.7 the corresponding efficiencies 
of pump sizes can only be achieved by a very special 
hydraulic design which only aims at high efficiency 
and does not respect other hydraulic aspects as, for 
example, good cavitation performance, and additionally 
by exceptional measures in mechanical design and 
manufacturing. Therefore, values of MEI higher than 
0.7 are not practically attainable for mass produced 
pumps 

NOTE — The maximum effect of reducing energy consumption 


by using pumps with high MEI will only be achieved if the 
pumps are carefully selected for required duties (see Annex C). 


Table 3 shows the values of C for the pump types within 
the scope and for different values of the Minimum 
Efficiency Index (MEI). 


Examples of efficiency values resulting from 
formula [4] for certain values of MEI are shown 
in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. 


For the choice of the value of MEI within the 
qualification procedure, the following applies: 


a) The value of the Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI) 
can be chosen (and proven by a qualification 
procedure) by the pump manufacturer to indicate 
the quality of a pump size in respect to efficiency. 


b) Minimum values of MEI might be fixed by law, 
governmental or Bureau of Indian Standards 
for market acceptance in order to reduce overall 
energy consumption. 


Examples of the graphical representations for one pump 
type and rotational speed are given in Fig. 2 and Fig. 
3. Figure 2 shows the principal dependence of on 
on the specific speeds n, and on the flow rate at best 
efficiency Q.,..,. In Fig. 3, the effect of varying the value 
of MEI on n is demonstrated. 


min,requ 


BEP 


In the frame of qualification or verification of a pump 
size, the values of Q,pp and n, - which Lean depends 
on shall themselves be determined by tests on sample 
pumps and are not known a priori nor do they result 
from the tests as exact or true values. The determination 
of Qrp and n, from tests on sample pumps is subjected 


IS 17292 : 2020 


to effects of manufacturing tolerances within the size 
(see Annex D) and of measurement uncertainties (see 
7). Therefore, the values of Q,,.., and n, can only be 
determined to be confined to corresponding tolerance 
or confidence intervals. When calculating npinrequ DY 
the means of formula (4), the uncertainties of Qrp 
and n, propagate into the result. In this standard, the 
value of eer which is calculated by the means of 
formula (4) using as input the measured (and — in the 
case of a sample of M > 1 pumps — arithmetically 
averaged) values of Q,,., and n, is called nominal value 
of minimum required efficiency. The combined effects 
of manufacturing tolerances within the size and of 


Table 3 Values of the Constant C for Different Values of the Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI) 
( Clause 6.4 ) 


Minimum Efficiency Index 


(Pump Type, rpm) 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60 0.70 
C (ESOB 1450) 132.58 130.68 129.35 28.07 126.97 126.10 24.85 
C (ESOB 2900) 35.60 133.43 131.61 130.27 129.18 128.12 27.06 
C (ESCC 1450) 32.74 131.20 129.77 28.46 127.38 126.57 25.46 
C (ESCC 2900) 35.93 133.82 132.23 30.77 129.86 128.80 27.75 
C (ESCCi 1450) 36.67 134.60 133.44 32.30 131.00 130.32 28.98 
C (ESCCi 2900) 39.45 136.53 134.91 33.69 132.65 131.34 29.83 
C (MS-V 2900) 38.19 135.41 134.89 33.95 133.43 131.87 30.37 
C (MSS 2900) 34.31 132.43 130.94 28.79 127.27 125.22 23.84 

100 r - r 
Q=1000 m?/h Q=200 m?/h 
Q=100 m?/h 
E = Q=50 m3/h 
80} a 
60+ 
$ Q=16 m?/h : 
es \ Q=32 m*/h 
= 40 |- Q=6m*/h | 
20+ J 
0 1 1 1 1 L 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 
n [min] 


Fic. 2 Two-DIMENSIONAL REPRESENTATION OF Nppp = f(ns, QBEP) 
FOR ESOB, n = 2 900 min? AND MEI 0,70 (see TABLE 3) 


IS 17292 : 2020 


100 r r r r - 


MEI = 0.4 


n [%] 


40 60 
n. [m in] 


Fic. 3 13.» = fns) For ESOB with QBEP = 32 m*/h, 2 900 min AND 
For DIFFERENT VALUES OF MEI (SEE TABLE 3) 


120 


measurement uncertainties are taken into account by 
applying a total negative tolerance on the nominal value 
of minimum required efficiency tN cane The values 
resulting from the application of the total negative 
tolerance on the values 1,,;,..4, are called particular 
threshold values of efficiency and are used in the 
qualification and verification procedures specified in 
this standard for comparison with the actual efficiencies 


of pumps of the size in question. 


NOTE — The application of a total negative tolerance on the 
nominal values of minimum required efficiency is in close 
correspondence to the application of a total tolerance on 
guaranteed values of hydraulic quantities as in the method 
described in EN ISO 9906. The difference is the fact that in 
this standard the values on which the total tolerance is applied 
result from tests while they are fixed in a contract in the case of 
EN ISO 9906. 


7 DETERMINATION 
OF A TEST PUMP 


OF THE EFFICIENCY 


7.1 General 


7.1.1 This clause specifies performance tests and 
evaluations on test pumps drawn at random out of a 
sizes which are carried out: 


a) by an independent institution (for example, in the 
frame of market surveillance) in order to verify 
the value of the Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI) 
indicated by the manufacturer; and 


b) by a manufacturer in the case he has decided to 
qualify this size in respect to a certain value of 
Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI) by applying 
these tests and evaluations. 


7.1.2 Such tests and evaluations shall provide the 
necessary information on the actual performance values 
of test pumps needed for the verification procedure 
described in 8 or for the qualification procedure 
described in 9. These values comprise: 


a) the flow rate at best efficiency point Q,.., from 
which also the values of flow rate Q, and Q,, at 
specified part load and overload operating points 


(defined in 6.1), respectively, can be derived, 


b) the maximum efficiency y,,, at Q,., and the 
values of efficiency np No at the 
and 


corresponding values of flow rate Q, and Qoi 


c) the specific speed n which is needed to determine 
the minimum required efficiencies (see 6.2 to 6.4). 


Regarding the requirements on test installations and 
measuring equipment, IS 9137 is to be applied. 


7.2 Test Procedures 


Test shall be provided in accordance with EN ISO 9906 
grade 2B. The exception for input power of 10 kW and 
below (see EN ISO 9906 : 2012, 4.4.2) shall not be 
considered. 


For pumps (P2) < 1 KW it is recommended to test a 
sample number higher than 3 in order to ensure a higher 
reliability to determine mean values: 


a) Tests shall be carried out on test stands of the 
manufacturer or of laboratories in accordance to 
the methods and in the test arrangements specified 
in EN ISO 9906; 


b) The pump performance shall be determined 
between the pump’s inlet flange and discharge 
flange; 

c) The conditions necessary to ensure satisfactory 


measurement of the performance characteristics 
are defined in 7.3; 


d) As explained in EN ISO 9906 : 2012, A-1.4, the 
pump power input which is needed to determine 
the pump efficiency can be experimentally 
determined: 


1) either by measurements of rotational speed 
and torque; or 


2) by electric power measurements. 


NOTE — Recommendations and general guidance about 
suitable pipe arrangements to ensure satisfactory measurements 
for flow and head are given in EN ISO 9906 : 2012, Annex A 
and, if necessary, they can be used in conjunction with the ISO 
Standards on measurement of flow rates in closed conduits 
concerning the different methods (see EN ISO 9906:2012, 
Annex A). 
In the case of determining by electric power 
measurements the pump power input of test pumps taken 
out of a size, an electric motor shall be used which is 
calibrated according to the IEC or IEEEStandards cited 
in EN ISO 9906:2012, A-1.4.3 and which is operated 
only under conditions where the motor efficiency is 
known with sufficient accuracy. 


In the case of testing a pump with an integrated electric 
motor (as for pump types ESCC or MSS) in the frame 
of the verification procedure, the motor efficiency 
dependent on the motor load shall be found out in a 
suitable way, for example, by information given by the 
motor manufacturer or by disassembling the test pump 
and calibrating the motor according to the IEC or IEEE 
Standards cited in of EN ISO 9906 : 2012, A-1.4.3. 


For sizes of multistage pumps which are offered and 
sold by the manufacturer with different numbers 
of stages, the tests on test pumps which should be 
representative (in respect to the efficiency) for the size 
shall be carried out on pump versions with at least 3 
stages for (not submersible) multistage pumps (MS-V) 
and with at least 9 stages for submersible multistage 
pumps (MSS). 


The test pumps taken out of a pump size shall have an 
impeller with the full diameter of the corresponding 
pump size. 

NOTE — Trimming a pump ofa given size by cutting down the 


impeller diameter will reduce the pump efficiency compared to 
the efficiency of the same pump size with full diameter. 


IS 17292 : 2020 


The test results shall be summarized in a report. Further 
guidance regarding the contents of a test report and a 
suitable pump test sheet is given in Annex J. 


7.3 Test Conditions 


Tests shall be carried out with clean cold water. 
The duration of the test shall be sufficient to obtain 
repeatable results. 


All measurements shall be made under steady state 
conditions (see 7.4). 


The tests should be conducted under conditions 
where cavitation does not affect the performance of the 
pump. 
NOTE — If capitation exists to a remarkable extent in the test 
pump during the test, not only the pump head but also the pump 
efficiency can deteriorate which leads to an underestimation of 
the pump efficiency. 
A minimum of seven test points shall be taken for 
all performance tests within the range of 60 percent 
to 120 percent around the expected value of flow at 
the BEP. 


Four of these points shall be spaced between 60 
percent and 95 percent, two between 105 percent and 
120 percent, and one point chosen within 95 percent to 
105 percent of the expected flow at the BEP. 


Preferably, tests should be carried at speeds of 
rotation and close to the nominal speed of rotation ny 
which is given in the technical documentation of the 
manufacturer. 


Under some circumstances, for example, if the electric 
motor is running at a constant frequency and its speed 
of rotation varies with the loading by the test pump 
which depends on the pump operating point, tests may 
be carried out at values of speed of rotation different 
from the nominal value. In this case, the speed of 
rotation at test should be within the range 80 percent 
to 110 percent of the nominal speed of rotation to 
establish rate of flow, pump total head and power input. 
If testing at different speeds the efficiency may be 
affected. However, in the case the variation of speed is 
within 20 percent of the nominal speed the efficiency 
change is considered negligible. 


In certain cases, the pump shaft is not accessible for 
the measurement of the rotational speed, for example, 
in the case of submersible multistage pumps, and/or a 
nominal electric frequency f, is given in the technical 
documentation of the manufacturer for the pump size 
instead of a nominal speed of rotation. In these cases, 
the tests shall be carried out at a frequency f of the 
electric supply which does not deviate from the nominal 
frequency f, by more than 1 percent. The voltage U 
of the electric supply used in the test shall be no more 
than 5 percent above or below the voltage on which the 
characteristics given in the technical documentation of 
the manufacturer of the manufacturers are based. 


IS 17292 : 2020 


7.4 Measuring Uncertainties 
7.4.1 Relevance 


In Tables 5 and respectively Tables 6 and 7, maximum 
permissible values of measurement device uncertainty 
and overall uncertainty are given. The values given in 
these tables are set in analogy to the values given in 
EN ISO 9906, grade 2, for pump acceptance tests. They 
have to be met when performing tests according to 9 of 
this standard. 


For tests done by a pump manufacturer which aim at 
the qualification of a size, it is obvious from the criteria 
and procedures described in 8, that it is advantageous 
in respect to the fulfillment of the qualification criteria 
to have a width of the confidence interval of the mean 
efficiencies of the size as small as possible. Whichever 
method is used by the manufacturer to determine the 
mean values and their confidence intervals needed 
to prove the fulfillment of qualification criteria, it is 
advisable to the manufacturer to achieve random and 
systematic measurement uncertainties (see Annex H) 
as small as possible. 


For tests done by an independent institution in the frame 
of the verification procedure which is described in 8, 
the situation is different. Each test pump selected for 
the verification test(s) has to be evaluated and assessed 
individually in respect to its efficiency. The efficiencies 
resulting from the test(s) have to be compared to 
corresponding particular minimum (threshold) values 
partly resulting from the same test(s). In this case, 
the “pass-or-fail” result is strongly dependent on 
the total measurement uncertainties. Therefore, to 
neutralize the influence of measurement uncertainties 
on the verification result, the maximum permissible 
measurement uncertainties specified in this Indian 
Standard have to be met and proven in tests aiming at 
the verification of the value of Minimum Efficiency 
Index (MEI) indicated by the manufacturer. 


7.4.2 Fluctuations 


The fluctuations stated in Table 4 shall not be exceeded. 
If a damping device is used it shall provide integration 
over at least one complete cycle of fluctuations. 


7.4.3 Statistical Evaluation of Overall Measurement 
Uncertainty 


The random component due either to the characteristics 
of the measuring system or to variations of the measured 
quantity or both appears directly as a scatter of the 
measurements. Unlike the systematic uncertainty, the 
random component can be reduced by increasing the 
number of measurements of the same quantity under 
the same conditions. 


The random uncertainty shall permit the overall 
uncertainty not exceeding the limits given in Table 6. 


10 


Table 4 Permissible Amplitude of Fluctuation as 
A Percentage of Mean Value of Quantity Being 
Measured 


( Clause 7.4.2 ) 


Permissible Amplitude 
SI No. Measured Quantity of Fluctuations 
Percent 

(1) (2) (3) 

i) Rate of flow +3 

ii) Differential pressure +4 

iii) Discharge pressure +3 

iv) Suction pressure +3 

v) Driver power input +3 

vi) Speed of rotation +1 
vii) Torque +3 
viii) Temperature 0.3°C 


7.4.4 Maximum Permissible Measurement Device 
(Systematic) Uncertainty 


7.4.4.1 General 


For tests according to 7 of this standard, Table 5 gives 
values of maximum permissible (relative) measurement 
device uncertainty e 


S,max. 
The values in Table 5 have to be applied for all operating 
points of the tests. 
NOTE — The values in Table 5 correspond to the values 
given for the relative measurement device uncertainties in 


EN ISO 9906 : 2012, Table 5 for acceptance tests according 
to class 2. 


Table 5 Maximum Permissible Measurement 
Device Uncertainty e ma, as A Percentage 
of the Arithmetically Averaged Value 
of the Measured Quantity 


( Clause 7.4.4.1 ) 


SI No. Measured Quantity Maximum Permissible 
Measurement Device 
Uncertainty e, nax 
Percent 
() (2) 8) 
i) Rate of flow +2.5 
ii) Differential pressure #25 
iii) Discharge pressure £2.5 
iv) Suction pressure +2.5 
v) Driver power input + 2.0 
vi) Speed of rotation + 1.4 
vii) Torque +2.0 
viii) | Temperature £10°C 


EN ISO 9906 : 2012, A-1 describes different methods 
of measurement as well as devices that typically are 
used to determine rate of flow, pump total head, speed 
of rotation and pump power input in the range of 
required accuracy. 


7.4.4.2 The overall uncertainty 


The value for overall uncertainty, e, is given by: 


an re .. (8) 
Permissible values of overall measurement 
uncertainties, e, are given in Table 6. 
Table 6 Permissible Values of Overall 
Uncertainties 
( Clause 7.4.4.2 ) 
SI No. Quantity Symbol Percent 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Flow rate & +3.5 
ii) Speed of rotation e + 2.0 
iii) Torque e, + 3.0 
iv) Pump total head ey +3.5 
v) Driver power input epi 3.5 
vi) Pump power input (computed 
from driver power and motor e + 4.0 


efficiency) 


7.4.4.3 Determination of overall uncertainty of 
efficiency 
If efficiency is computed from torque and speed of 


rotation: 
_ f2 2 2 2 
e, =le +e, tE +e 


If efficiency is computed from pump power input: 


_ [2 2 2 
e, = flo tey + ep 


Using the values given in Table 6, the calculations lead 
to the results given in Table 7. 


Table 7 ResultingLargest Values of the Overall 
Uncertainties of Efficiency 


( Clause 7.4.4.3 ) 


SI No. Quantity Symbol Percent 
a) 2) (3) (4) 
i) Pump efficiency (computed from E £61 
Q, H, M, n) | 
ii) Pump efficiency (computed from P +64 


Q, H, P1, |dr) l 


11 


IS 17292 : 2020 


7.5 Evaluation of Test Data 


7.5.1 Conversion of the Test Results to the Nominal 
Speed of Rotation or to the Nominal Electric Frequency 


Conversion of the test results to the nominal speed of 
rotation or to the nominal electric frequency shall be in 
accordance with EN ISO 9906. 


Case 1 — A nominal speed of rotation n, is given in the 
catalogues of the manufacturer: 


All test data obtained at an actual speed of rotation n in 
deviation from the nominal speed of rotation n shall be 
converted to the nominal speed of rotation n,. 


If the deviation of the test speed of rotation n from 
the nominal speed of rotation n, does not exceed the 
permissible variations stated in 7.3, the measured 
data on the rate of flow Q, the pump total head H, the 
pump power input P and the pump efficiency n can be 
converted (according to the hydrodynamicsimilarity 
laws) by means of the following formulae: 


Q,=Ox— .. (9) 
n 

H, -1x(™] ... (10) 
n 

p =Px{2) (A) 
n 

n=" ... (12) 


Case 2 — A nominal frequency f, and voltage U, 
of electric supply is given in the catalogues of the 
manufacturer: 


All test data obtained at an actual electric frequency 
f at the pump test in deviation from the nominal 
electric frequency f, shall be converted to the nominal 
frequency f,. 


If the deviations of the electric frequency f at the pump 
test from the nominal frequency f, and of the electric 
voltage U at the pump test to the value given in the 
catalogues do not exceed the permissible variations 
stated in 7.3, the measured data on the rate of flow Q, 
the pump total head H, the pump power input P and 
the pump efficiency y can be converted (according to 
the hydrodynamic similarity laws) by means of the 
following formulae: 


f 
= x N sees 13 
Q, =Q F (13) 


vee (14) 


IS 17292 : 2020 


vac (15) 


wee (16) 
7.5.2 Performance Curves 


In order to determine the data which are needed for the 
qualification or verification procedure (QrQ Qor 
the corresponding values of efficiency 1). Np, and No, 
and the specific speed n,), performance curves for head 
H versus flow rate Q and, efficiency yn versus flow rate 
Q have first to be established. These shall be best-fit 
curves in relation to the measured points. 


These curves shall fulfill the condition of “least 
squares”, that is, the condition that the sum of the 
squared deviations of the measured values of H and 
n, respectively, from the corresponding values on the 
fitting curve at the same flow rates is at minimum: 


DH, (Q;) -Hene (QT =min we (7) 


ENQ) - Nare (Q; = min .... (18) 


For the determination of the flow corresponding to BEP, 
PL, and OL, the flow-efficiency fitting curve shall be 
represented by an appropriate mathematical expression. 
In the range of flow rates from PL to OL, the curve 
represented by the mathematical expression shall have 
only one maximum, and the second derivative of the 
mathematical expression shall be negative. Appropriate 
methods for drawingthe flow-efficiency fitting curve 
are, for example, polynomials of third order or spline 
functions. Alternatively, the nominal best flow value 
from the manufacturer’s test reports can be chosen if 
provided. The mathematical expression has to fulfill the 
following conditions: 


a) in the range of flow rates from Q = Q, to Q = Qoi 
the curve represented by the mathematical 
expression shall have only one maximum, or 

b) in the range of flow rates from Q=Q,, to Q = Qo 
the 2nd derivative of the mathematical expression 
shall be negative. 


After having determined the fitting curves, these shall 
be plotted together with the measured test points in a 
Q-H- and in a Q-n-diagram, (see Fig. 4). 


7.5.3 Determination of the Values Relevant for the 
Qualification or Verification 


The next step consists in the determination of Q,,,, and 
Neer Qprp 18 found as the value of the flow ratewhich 
corresponds to the maximum of the fitting curve in the 


12 


Q-n-diagram. This maximum fulfils the mathematical 
condition: 


Q 


Key 

X measured points è — values relevant for the qualification or 
verification 

A Q-H fitting curve 

B Q-n fitting curve 


Fic. 4 PERFORMANCE CURVES WITH VALUES RELEVANT 
FOR THE QUALIFICATION OR VERIFICATION 


From the fitting curve (most easily from its mathematical 
expression), the value n,,, corresponding toQ,,., is 
determined. 


The values of Q,, and Q,, are found by multiplying 
Quep by the factors 0.75 and 1.1, respectively. The 
corresponding values of n, and No, are determined 
from the fitting curve (most easily from its mathematical 
expression). These values are also plotted in Fig. 5. 


For the determination of the specific speed n, and for 
the determination of the actual overall measurement 
uncertainties of the efficiencies n,..N,, and Nor also 
the values of pump head H,,,, at Q..,, H,, at Q,, and 
Ho; at Qor are needed. These are found on the Q-H 
fitting curve at the respective values of flow rate (see 
Fig. 4). 


NOTE — It is important to note that the values of Nyon Np, 
and no, determined in the manner described above are not the 
true values of these efficiencies but are the mid-points of the 
corresponding confidence intervals to which the true values 
are confined with a probability of 95 percent. Within these 
confidence areas, each value is equally valid. For details 
of the determination of the actual overall measurement 
uncertainties and the confidence intervals of efficiencies, see 
Annex E. 


Also, the specific speed njis needed to determine the 
minimum required values of efficiency (see 6.8 and 9). 
The specific speed ns is defined by the formula: 


V Qber 


0.75 
H 


BEP 


=Ny, X 


The units are [min-1] for ns and ny, [m*/s] for Q,,, 
and [m] for H,,,. Hprp is the value on the Q-H fitting 
curve at the point where Q = Q,,., (see Fig. 4). For 
multistage pumps, H,,,, is the head per stage, for 
example, the pump total head divided by the number 


of stages. 


If the measurement of the rotational speed is 
inappropriately difficult, for example, shaft inaccessible 
in case of a submersible multistage pump, a slip of 3 
percent is assumed for the rotational speed at the point 
of best efficiency of the pump. 


7.5.4 Procedures for Testing and/or Evaluation of 
Special Pump Types 


7.5.4.1 General 


For special pump types covered by the scope of 
this standard, procedure and testing according to7.5.4.2 
to 7.5.4.4 shall be applied, respectively. 


7.5.4.2 Other nominal speeds than 1 450 min’ or 
2 900 min" 


For those pumps, one of the following two options for 
testing shall be applied: 


a) Pumps are tested at their nominal speed. The 
calculation of the minimum required efficiency 
or minimum efficiency index shall be done 
on the basis of formula 4.4. The C-value 
(from Table 3) shall be taken for 1450 min’ or 
2900 min! whichever is closer to the nominal 
speed of the tested pump size. 


b) Pumps are tested at 1450 min"! or 2900 min“. The 
corresponding C values (from Table 3) shall be 
taken. 

NOTES: 


1 For b) only testing and evaluation is done under the 
assumption that this pump size is designed for the respective 
test speed. 

2 Typical examples are pumps driven by six-pole motors or 
over synchronous permanent magnetmotors. 


13 


IS 17292 : 2020 


7.5.4.3 Twin head pumps (ESCCi with two impellers) 


Twin head pumps shall be tested by incorporating 
one of the driver/impeller sets into an adequate pump 
casing of ESCCi type. The C-value (from Table 3) shall 
be taken for the corresponding ESCCi pump type and 
speed. 


7.5.4.4 Pumps according to more than one type 
definition 

For pump types where more than one type definition 
is applicable the type of pump casing shall determine 
which C value (from Table 3) has to be taken. 


8 PROVING THE MINIMUM EFFICIENCY 
INDEX OF A PUMP SIZE 


8.1 General 


There are two possible cases of information on the 
Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI) of a pump size which 
is indicated by the manufacturer on the nameplates and/ 
or in the technical documentation: 


a) The conformity to requirements by law in respect 
to the MEI-value is indicated by the information 
that MEI is at least equal to or higher than MET in 
where MEI, is defined by law (for example 
“MEI > 0,40” if MEI... = 0,4). 

The numerical value determined according 
to this Standard is indicated (for example, 
“MEI > 0,47”). 

Both cases of indicated values are valid for the 
mean efficiency values of the size at BEP, PL 
and OL and the manufacturer has to prove that 
the values Npepmean? Npr mean 294 Nor mean UII with 
a sufficiently high probability the criteria defined 
in 6. 


b) 


c 


ma 


To prove the conformity to requirements by law 
in respect to the MEI-value, tests and evaluations 
have to be carried out according to 7 on sample 
pumps taken randomly out of the size and mean 
values of efficiency at PL, BEP and OL have to 
be determined (for example, as described in 7). 
Subsequently, the MEI-value has to be calculated 
as described in 8.2. 


The conformity to law is than proven if the MEI- 
value determined in that way fulfils the condition: 


MEI > MEI | 


min 


.... (20) 


Where 
MEI 


To prove the validity of an indicated numerical 
value of MEI which is higher than the minimum 
value required by law, the determination of 
the indicated value of MEI has to be carried 
out by tests and evaluations according to 7 and 
calculations according to 8.2. 


„ Is prescribed by law. 


mi 


d 


wm 


IS 17292 : 2020 


NOTE — In the verification procedure according to 9, a 
tolerance t, = - 5 percent is applied to the values OFM sin requ 
which are calculated by formula (4) for the MEI-value required 
by law or indicated by the manufacturer. This tolerance is not 
included in the method to determine and to prove the MEI- 
value of a pump size by the manufacturer. 


8.2 Determination of the Minimum Efficiency Index 
of a Pump Size 


The values which are needed to determine the MEI 
value of a pump size are the: 


a) nominal rotational speed n,, 


b) mean values of the flow rate Qp gpmean and the pump 
head Hy pp mean At best efficiency point BEP, resulting 
from tests and evaluations carried out according 


to 7; 

mean values of efficiency Npepmean? Npp Mean 
and No, mea resulting from tests and evaluations 
carried out according to7 and, if applied, Annex E, 


c) 


d calculated from n 


„mean N? QBEPmean 
and H pepmean according to 7.5.3. The MEI-value is 


than determined in the following way: 


wa 


specific speed n, 


Step I— The auxiliary function F, is calculated from: 


F, =—11,48(1n (7, „ean ))? -0,8500 (Q prp mean ))” 
— 0,38 (In (7, meon )) xIn (Osr iin ) 
+88,59 (In (7, mean ))+13,461n (Q prp mean ) 2 

with 


n 


s,mean 


in [mint] 
in [m?/h] 


OTEN, 


The value of F _ calculated from Formula (21) has to be 
rounded to the 2™ digit after the decimal point. 


Step 2 — For each of the values of mean efficiency 
at BEP, PL and OL, a corresponding value of C 
iscalculated from: 


Corp = F, — NBEP,mean . (22) 
NPL mean 

Cp = n 0.947 .. (23) 
NoL,mean 

Cor = n 0985 .. (24) 


Step 3—The values calculated from formulae (22) to 
(24) have to be rounded to the 2™ digit after thedecimal 
point. The greatest of the 3 values Cpp Cp, and Co, is 
taken as the value Cp, which serves to calculate the 
MEI value: 


Cum = max (Chers Con Cor ) z (25) 


14 


Step 4 —The value of MEI corresponding to Cypr 
is calculated by linear interpolation between the 
neighboring values in Table 3. For this purpose, in the 
line for the pump type and nominal rotational speed of 
the pump size the neighboring values C, and Cyn to 
the left and to the right of C „gp respectively, are taken 
from Table 3 as well as the values MEI,,,, and MEL out 
corresponding to Ca and C p Finally, the MEI value 
of the pump size is calculated from: 


Cue —Cren + MEI 


left 


MEI = (MEI jg, —METien ) x 


left 


... (26) 


right 
right 


Because in Table 3 the difference MEL pm ~ MEI,,,, is 
generally equal to 0.1, formula (26) can besimplified 
to: 


MEI = 0.1x Cuer = Cien +MEI 


left 


left 
right 


w+. (27) 
The value of MEI of a pump size calculated from 
formulae (26) or (27) shall be rounded to the 2™ digit 
after the decimal point. 


9 VERIFICATION OF THE MINIMUM 
EFFICIENCY INDEX FOR A PUMP SIZE 


9.1 General Remarks 


If a manufacturer has qualified a size of a pump as 
described in 7 a check and a confirmation of the result 
of the qualification by an independent institution, for 
example, in the frame of market surveillance, may be 
required. This is called verification of the MEI-value in 
this standard. 


Normally, the MEI-value required as a minimum will 
be prescribed by law as for example, MEI > 0.40. 


The numerical MEI value indicated by a manufacturer 
which is higher than the value required by law shall be 
indicated as a number with two digits after the decimal 
point as for example, MEI > 0.47.9.2 describes the 
procedure to be applied in the case that the conformity 
to the requirements by law in respect to MEI or the 
validity of the numerical value of MEI indicated by 
the manufacturer shall be verified by tests on pumps 
of this size. This verification procedure uses a limited 
number of test pumps and tests. The procedure is based 
on simple pass-or-fail tests and a “decision tree”. In 
Annex I, some explanations are given concerning the 
methodology and the probability of the results. 


An alternative to the verification procedure described 
in 9.2 exists if the manufacturer either has proven 
that the mean efficiencies of the pump size fulfill the 
requirements by law in respect to MEI according to 
8 or has determined the indicated numerical value of 
MEI which is higher than the minimum value required 
by law by applying the method described in 7and has 


completely documented the whole procedure which 
was applied. The applied procedure can consist of 
tests and evaluations according to 7 and application of 
one of the methods described in 9 or of other methods 
chosen by the manufacturer. The documentation should 
be presented by the manufacturer to the independent 
institution on request for the purpose of verification. 
If the documentation is approved by the independent 
institution, the conformity to law in respect to MEI or 
the validity of the indicated numerical value of MEI 
shall be confirmed and the qualification of the pump 
size is regarded as verified. 


9.2 Procedure and Decision 


The whole verification methodology and procedure 
applies to pumps with full diameter impeller and 
consists of several steps: 


a) An individual pump is drawn at random out of 
the size, tested, evaluated and assessed in respect 
to the corresponding Minimum Efficiency Index 
(MEI) as described below. 

If the individual pump has passed according 
to the criterion described below, the value of 
the Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI) of the 
investigated size is confirmed. 


b 


wm 


Cc 


wa 


If the efficiency of the first individual pump does 
not achieve the correspondingthreshold values, 
three other individual pumps are drawn at random 
out of the size, tested and evaluated as described. 


The values of Qep Nesp Npr No, and n,has to be 
determined for each of the three tested pumps. 
Outof these values the MEI is determined 
according to (see formulae (29) and 30)). The 
three derived MEI values have to be arithmetically 
averaged according to formula (28). 


d 


wn 


3 


$x, se (28) 


i=l 


K=1x 
3 

e) If the “average-of-three MEIs” has also failed 
according to the criterion described below, 
the verification of the investigated size for the 
Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI) required by 
law or indicated by the manufacturer is definitely 
rejected. 


If the “average-of-three MEIs” has passed 
according to the criterion described below, the 
pump size has passed in spite of the fact that the 
first pump test has failed. 


The tests and evaluations on each of the pumps drawn 
at random and independently from each other out of the 
size for which the conformity to law in respect to the 
Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI) or the validity of the 
numerical value of MEI indicated by a manufacturer 
shall be verified according to 8 of this standard. 


15 


IS 17292 : 2020 


For each of the tested pumps, the Q-n and Q-H fitting 
curves and from these the values of Q,.., and n have to 
be determined as described in 7.5.2. 


BEP 


The following calculations have to be done for the first 
test pump and in the case it fails, also for the “average- 
of-three” pump ( that is, the “virtual” pump having 
the averaged hydraulic performance of the three real 
pumps which were additionally tested). 


Using the values Q,., and n, or On. and 7, 
respectively, determined from the test, the minimum 
required efficiencies (Nyrp)minsequ’ pt) minzequ aNd 
(Now) minzequ fOr the pump have to be calculated. These 
calculations are done by the means of formulae (4), 
(6) and (7) given in 6with the C-value taken from 
Table 3 in 6.4 for the type and nominal speed of the 
tested pump(s) and for the Minimum Efficiency 
Index (MEI) as required by law or as indicated by the 
manufacturer. 


If the value of MEI indicated by the manufacturer 
is a numerical number between the values given in 
Table 3, the corresponding value of C in formula 
(2) shall be determined by linear interpolation in the 
interval between the neighboring values given in 
Table 3. 


For this purpose, in the line for the pump type 
and nominal rotational speed of the pump size the 
neighboring values MEI „a and MEI „w to the left 
and to the right of the indicated numerical value 
MEI, respectively, are taken from Table 3 as well as 
the values C,,, and C corresponding to MEI p and 
MELl „w Finally, the value of C corresponding to the 
indicated numerical value of MEI of the pump size is 


calculated from: 


left 


MEI- MEI 
C=C,,, + 
MEI 


MEI 


«(Crise Cia) sone (29) 


right left 


Because in Table 3 the difference MEL pm ~ MEI,,,, is 
generally equal to 0.1, formula (22) can be simplified 
to: 


MEI -MEI,., 
0.1 


C=C un + x (Cien Cin) .-. (30) 


As described in 6, the minimum required values of 
efficiency depend themselves on the quantities Q,., 
and n, which result from tests and evaluations on the 
test pumps taken as sample. Thereby, they are also 
subjected to effects of manufacturing tolerances within 
the size and inevitable measurement uncertainties. To 
take account of these effects together with the inherent 
measurement uncertainties of the efficiency values 
determined by the verification test(s), a tolerance has 
to be applied also on the minimum required values 
of efficiency used in the verification procedure. This 


IS 17292 : 2020 


leads to the particular threshold values which the 
measured efficiencies of the tested pumps shall exceed. 
Forthis purpose, the negative tolerance of t = - 0.05 
(or - 5 percent) is applied to each of the values (n,,..,) 
min requ’ MpL) min requ 424 (Noy) minsegu Which are calculated by 
the means of formulae (4), (6) and (7). By application 
of the total tolerance on the calculated values ( that 
is, by multiplying them with the factor (1 — | t, |) = 
0.95,the particular threshold values result. If plotted in 
a Q-1-diagram at the flow rates: 


E Qber or Q BEP’ 
a Qu: = 0.75 Qir or Q PL 0.75 Q BEP’ 
=Q 1.1 Qber or Oa 1.1 Q ger 


The calculated values, the tolerance bars and the 
particular threshold values can be visualized (see Fig.6). 
The points of the particular threshold values form the 
“house of efficiency” (see Fig. 2) being relevant for 
the first test pump or for the “average-of-three” pump, 
respectively. 


Qe. 


Qeep Qo. 


Key 


9.2.1 Decision Criteria 


The first tested pump or the “average-of-three” pumps 
has passed in respect to confirming the required or 
indicated value of the Minimum Efficiency Index 
(MED), if all 3 values npe» Np, and No, resulting from 
the measurements are equal to or higher than the 
corresponding particular threshold value at BEP, PL 
and OL. 


The first tested pump or the “average-of-three” pumps 
has failed in respect to confirming the required or 
indicated value of the Minimum Efficiency Index 
(MED), if at least one of the3values n,.5 Np, and Nor 
resulting from the measurements is lower than the 
corresponding particular threshold value at BEP, PL 
and OL. 


Examples of “passed” or “failed” results are shown 
schematically in Fig. 5. 


Qeer QoL 


A calculated minimum required efficiencies at PL, OL and BEP for required or indicated 


MEI value 
B Q-y fitting curve from test(s) 


C particular threshold values for PL, OL and BEP resulting from A 


t(h ) total tolerance applied to h 


min,requ min,requ 


Fic. 5 SCHEMATIC PRESENTATION OF “Pass” (LEFT FIGURE) AND “FAIL” (RIGHT FIGURE) RESULTS 
OF A TEST PUMP FOR A CERTAIN VALUE OF THE MINIMUM EFFiclENCY INDEX (MEI) 


16 


IS 17292 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Normative ) 
( Foreword and Clause 1.2 ) 


PUMP TYPES IN SCOPE 


Table A-1 Pump Types within the Scope 


ESOB 
End Suction Own Bearings pump 


ESCC 
End Suction Close Coupled pump 


ESCCi 
Inline End Suction Close Coupled pump 


MS-V 
Vertical Multistage pump 


MSS 
Submersible multistage borehole pump 


17 


IS 17292 : 2020 


A-1 END SUCTION PUMPS (ESOB, ESCC AND 
ESSCD. 


Glanded single stage end suction rotodynamic water 
pump in axial-top or in-line arrangement of the pipe 
connections and with volute casing designed for 
pressures up to 16 bar. 


All pumps made with flanged or threaded nozzles in 
metric or inch dimensions. 


Pump sizes with performance data according to 
Table A-2. 


A-2 VERTICAL MULTISTAGE PUMPS (MS-YV). 


Glanded multi stage (1 > 1) rotodynamic water pump 
in which the impellers are assembled on a vertical 
rotating shaft, which are designed for pressures up to 
25 bar. 


Pump sizes with performance data according to 
Table A-2. 


The efficiency to be evaluated for being an energy 
efficient pump is the efficiency of the pump version 
with 3 stages (pumps with more stages have better 
efficiency by physical reasons). 


A-3 SUBMERSIBLE 
BOREHOLE PUMP (MSS). 


MULTISTAGE 


Multi stage (i > 1) rotodynamic water pump with a 
nominal outer diameter of 4” (10, 16 cm) or 6” (15, 
24 cm) designed to be operated in a borehole at 
operating temperatures within a range of 0°C and 90°C. 


The efficiency to be evaluated for being an energy 
efficient pump is the efficiency of the pump version 
with 9 stages. 


Table A-2 Pumps within the Scope 
( Clause A-2 ) 


Pump Type 


Defined Scope 


ESOB n= 1450 min! 
ESCC 


ESCCi 


Quep Z 6 m*/hr 


H 


BEP — 


<90m 6 min-1 <n, < 80 min-1 P2 < 150 kW 


ESOB n= 2900 min! 
ESCC 


ESCCi 


Quer 26 m/hr 


H 


BEP — 


< 140m 6 min-1 <n, < 80 min-1 P2 < 150 kW 


MS-V n= 2900 min! 


< 100 m*/hr 


BEP — 


Q 


n= 2900 min” 


MSS 


4” and 6” 


18 


IS 17292 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


IS No./ Title IS No./ Title 
Other Publications Other Publications 

ISO 9906 : 2012 Rotodynamic pumps —  °!37: 1978 Code for hydraulic 
Hydraulic performance performance acceptance tests 
acceptance tests — Grades 1, for centrifugal, mixed and 

2and3 axial flow pumps — Class C 

IS/ISO 80000-1 : Quantities and units: Part 1 

2009 General 
ANNEX C 


( Informative ) 
[ Clauses 4.1, 6.1 a) and 6.2 ] 


GENERAL REMARKS ON THE EFFICIENCY OF ROTODYNAMIC PUMPS 


The efficiency 7 of each rotodynamic pump, running 
at constant rotational speed n or driven by an electric 
motor at constant electric frequency f, depends on the 
pump flow rate Q. From 7 = 0 at Q =0, the efficiency 
increases with increasing flow rate, reaches a maximum 
value 77,,., and then decreases with further increasing 
flow rate. The point of best efficiency “BEP” with the 
corresponding values of flow rateQ ppp and pump head 
H,,,p18 defined by the condition 7 = ppp Usually and 
also in this standard, the operating range Q <Q,,.., is 
called “part load” (PL), while the range Q >Q,,.., is 
called “overload” (OL). 


Rotodynamic pumps cannot be expected to have 
generally comparable values of 77,,,, even if they were 
designed and manufactured with comparable quality. 
In contrary, for comparable quality of design and 
manufacturing the values of ppp depend on two main 


hydraulic parameters: 
a) The flow rate Q pp which characterizes the size of 
the pump (and indirectly the Reynolds number R,, 

a hydrodynamic parameter on which most of the 


internal hydraulic losses in pumps aredependent). 
b 


wm 


The specific speed n (with the unit [min'']) which 
characterizes the impeller shape (from radial atthe 
lowest n -values to axial at the highest ones) and is 
calculated by the means of the formula: 


n n. Veep 


s= 
0.75 
orp 


wee (C-1) 


Wherein the units [min"] for ns and for the rotational 
speed n, [m*/s] for Q, and [m] for H, have to 


BEP . BEP A 
beused. In the case of multistage pumps, Hyp is 


19 


the head per stage which results from dividing the 
total pump head by the number of stages i. 


Many theoretical considerations and 
experimental investigations have shown that 
for rotodynamicpumps of comparable quality of 
design and manufacturing: 


1) ppp increases monotonically with increasing 
Qprp Where the slope 67, / OQ,» is steepest 
at the lowest values of Q,,,,, and flattens down 
asymptotically to zero for very high values of 


BEP 
Ngep has a maximum at n—values in the range 
between 40 and 50 min’ and decreases for 
higherand lower n —values, especially leading 
to very low values of ppp at n< 10 min”. 


2) 


This typical dependency of ppp on Q,,, and n, can 
physically be explained by the influence of these 
two parameters on the various internal hydraulic 
losses (relative to the power input of a pump) as are 
flowthroughlosses, disc friction losses and internal 
leakage losses. Additionally, the increasingly low 
valuesof efficiency at low values of Q,.., and/or n— 
which are typical for small pumps of correspondingly 
lowpower input result from a considerable contribution 
of mechanical friction losses (arising in shaftsealing 
and bearings) to the total pump losses. 


Compared to single stage pumps (types ESOB, ESCC 
and ESCCi), the efficiencies of multistage pumps(types 
MS-V and MSS) with the same values of Q pp and n, 
are generally lower because of additionalflow-through 
losses in the guide vanes and return channels. But 
multistage pumps have an advantage in respect to 


IS 17292 : 2020 


efficiency, when the required data of Q, H and n would 
lead to a very low n -value of a single stage pump for 
this duty point. In this case, the more favourablen -value 
of a multistage pump(calculated and relevant per stage) 
leads to a considerably higher efficiency compared to a 
single stage pump. The general dependency of 77,,,, on 
Op and n for multistage pumps is similar to that one 
ofsingle stage pumps. 


In Fig. C-1, two pumps A and B are compared. Pump B 
is the better one in respect to the efficiency at BEP. But 
the required duty point specified by the system designer 


Head —> 


è Efficiency at duty point A: 69% 
@ Efficiency at duty point B: 63% 


BEP A: 69% 


(customer) differs from the point of best efficiency of 
pump B. So, pump A with a lower efficiency at BEP 
but better matching to the required duty point results 
in a better choice (higher efficiency) for the given 
application. 


In summary it is necessary to underline that a correct 
and precise dimensioning of parameters, such as, H, 
Q and NPSH (et al.) needs to be carried out by the 
customer quoting the duty point and the manufacturer 
selecting the right pump for the quoted duty point. 


ni 
N. 
Duty point \ 


\ 


N 
Pump B, trimmed 


BEP B: 74% 


s — ` 


60 


Efficiency [%] ——= 


Flow —= 


Fic. C-1 ComPaRIsoN OF Pump A AND Pump B 


20 


IS 17292 : 2020 


ANNEX D 


( Informative ) 


MEAN VALUES OF A SIZE RELEVANT FOR ITS MINIMUM EFFICIENCY INDEX 


As explained in 8, in order to achieve a certain value of 
the Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI) the mean values 
of efficiency of a pump size shall be at least equal or 
higher than corresponding minimum required values. 


Within one size of mass produced pumps of one 
manufacturer (with the same full impeller diameter), 
there is an inevitable scatter of hydraulic performance 
characteristics including the efficiency and other 
values (OQBEP and 1,) which are of relevance for 
the Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI). This scatter 
of hydraulic performance characteristics results 
from small differences of hydraulically relevant 
geometrical dimensions (as for example, internal flow 
cross sections, impeller blade angles, gap clearances) 
among the individual pumps of the same size. These 
differences are within the range of geometrical or 
dimensional tolerances which are inherent in every 
manufacturing process and which cannot be reduced 
below some economically acceptable limits. 


The bandwidth of the hydraulically relevant geometrical 
tolerances leads to a corresponding bandwidth of 
hydraulic performance characteristics of individual 
pumps of the same size. 


The size as a whole is characterized by the mean 
performance data and curves. The mean values 
ofhydraulic quantities relevant for the Minimum 
Efficiency Index are defined as: 


(D-1) 


Where x is the respective quantity (for example, Q, H, 
n, n) and z is the total number of pumps of the same 
size ever produced by the same manufacturer. For sizes 
produced in very large numbers, the total number z can 
be replaced by the number Z ana: of pumps of the same 
size produced per year. 


NOTE — If the number z (or Z muar) is large, it can generally 
be assumed that the geometrical dimensions and, thereby, the 
hydraulic quantities x depending on these dimensions show 
normal (Gaussian) distributions (see Fig. C-1). For the same 
impeller diameter, and especially for the full impeller diameter 
these distributions are characterized by their true mean value 
Xvrean(Which is identical to the value defined by the equation 
above) and the associated bandwidth of scatter. The latter can 
also be called the actual manufacturing tolerance of a hydraulic 
quantity or actual hydraulic manufacturing tolerance of a pump 


size. 


For normal distributions, the probability is 95 percent 
that any individual true value x, of the respective 
hydraulic quantity x is confined to a confidence interval 
of + 1.96- s_ around the mean value x 


ean. 


21 


Where, 


is the standard deviation of the quantity x within the 
same size, see Annex F. 


Therefore, the manufacturing tolerance of a quantity x 
can be defined as + 1.96 s , see Fig. D-1. 


Furthermore, the true value x, of any pump of the same 
size and impeller diameter, produced by the same 
manufacturer, has a probability of: 


a) 50 percent to be equal to or larger thanx, and 


b) 97.5 percentto be equal to or larger than 
X near 1-96 s l0. 


mean 


Because, in most cases, the total numbers z or Z anaf 
pumps of one size within the scope of thisEuropean 
Standard produced by a manufacturer are very large, 
the mean values of the size can only be determined 
by performing and evaluating tests on a sample of a 
number M (typically being very small compared to 
Z OF Z ama) Of test pumps drawn at random out of the 
production. Thereby, the mean values can only be 
determined with some remaining uncertainty even if 
no measurement uncertainties would exist. While the 
individual true values of efficiency and other relevant 
quantities evaluated from tests on a sample of test 
pumps can be expected to be confined to the bandwidth 
of scatter around the (unknown) true mean values, it 
is unknown where the individual values are located 
within the corresponding bandwidth. 


For example, a test pump drawn at random out of a 
size can have any true value of efficiency yiwithin the 
scatter bandwidth, and also, as one of the two possible 
extreme cases, either the minimum or the maximum 
value of efficiency on the boundaries “I” (low) and “h” 
(high) of the bandwidth, see Fig. D-1. 


To prove for a pump size a certain value of the Minimum 
Efficiency Index (MEI) by the procedure described in 
6, besides the mean efficiency values (75.5) near Mp) 
mean ANd (775) mean OF the size, also the mean values 
(Qrep)mem@Nd (A) aean Of the size are needed for the 
determination of the corresponding nominal values of 
minimum required efficiency (see 6). 


When determining the mean hydraulic values of a size 
by tests and evaluations on sample pumps, additionally 
to the bandwidth of the true values caused by hydraulic 
manufacturing tolerances within the size, the effect of 
measurement uncertainties shall be taken into account. 


IS 17292 : 2020 


f(x) 


X 
exp,l 
Key 
f(x) relative frequency of x 1 
X : hydraulic quantity Q, H, n, ... h 
mean value of x P 


‘mean 


s, . standard deviation of x 


mean exp,h x 
low 
high 
95 percent probability interval of x 


mean 


Fic. D-1 NorMAL DISTRIBUTION AF A QUANTITY X WITHIN A PuMP SIZE RESULTING FROM 
MANUFACTURING TOLERANCES 


The bandwidth of true values within a size is only 
dependent on the quality of manufacturing. The width 
of the confidence intervals of hydraulic quantities 
which are experimentally determined are additionally 
dependent on the accuracy of the measuring methods 
and devices, that is, on the actual overall measurement 
uncertainties (see Annex E). 


Therefore, the true mean values of hydraulic quantities 
of a size, especially of those which are relevant for the 
Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI), can be determined 
by tests and evaluations only as being limited to 
corresponding confidence intervals which can be 
quantified by total tolerance factors or values. These 
total tolerance factors can either be based on general 
experience of the individual manufacturer or can be 
determined directly from measurements on a sample of 
several tests pumps of the same size (when applying, 
for example, the method described in E-3). 


To assure a sufficiently high probability that: 


a) the true mean efficiency values of a pump size are 
at least equal to the threshold values corresponding 
to the Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI) of this 
size, and 


b) tests on one or more pump(s) of this size (with 
a full impeller diameter) which is carried out in 
the frame of a verification procedure will result in 
a confirmation of the Minimum Efficiency Index 
(MEI) indicated by the manufacturer. 


22 


It is necessary that the mean efficiency values 
of tee mean? (Mpt) mena nd i) aes determined 
by tests on sample pumps shall have some 
positive margins (expressed by total tolerances 
or confidence intervals) relative to the threshold 
values for the value of the Minimum Efficiency 
Index (MEI) required by law and/or indicated by 
the manufacturer. 


These necessary margins between the mean 
efficiency values determined by tests on sample 
pumps of a size and the corresponding threshold 
values of efficiency for a certain value of the 
Minimum Efficiency Index are the smaller: 


1) the smaller the hydraulic scatter within the 
size is (— good manufacturing quality, small 
manufacturing tolerances), 


2) the smaller the measurement uncertainties of 
the measurements on the sample pumps are 
(— high accuracy of measuring equipment, 
small random errors, see Annex I), or 


3) he larger the number M of tested sample pumps 
is (see Annex H and Annex I). 


In Fig. D-2 and Fig. D-3, the effect of the magnitude 
of the total tolerances ( that is, the width of the 
confidence intervals) of the mean efficiencies of a size 
on the comparison with the corresponding threshold 
values according to 7 is demonstrated. In both cases, 
the average efficiency resulting from measurements 


on sample pumps as well as the nominal values of 
minimum required efficiency and the corresponding 
threshold values of efficiency are assumed to be the 
same ones. In the case of larger total tolerances of the 
measured efficiencies (shown in Fig. D-2) the same 
pump size may miss the criteria (defined in 7) for 
qualification in respect to a certain value of Minimum 
Efficiency Index (MEI), while it fulfils the criteria in 
the case of smaller total tolerances of the measured 
efficiencies (shown in Fig. D-3). 


n mean| 7 


min,requ 


t ( EET 


1] treshhold------*-- 


Qpr Qrer OF QoL 


Key 


1 min requ 


M resno Particular threshold value 


EON pina / total tolerance according to EN ISO 9906, grade 2B, applied to 7 


Ay or <<Eqn42.eps>>from test(s) 


B 95 percent confidence interval of 7, ., from test(s) 


mean 


C min. value of true y (with 97.5 percent probability) 


mean 


IS 17292 : 2020 


When the procedure described in 8 is applied by a 
manufacturer in order to prove for a pump size a 
certain value of the Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI), 
the determination of the relevant (confidence intervals 
of the) mean values of this size is generally in the 
responsibility of the manufacturer. Two possibilities to 
determine with sufficient probability for a pump size on 
the basis of tests on sample pumps of this size the mean 
values of efficiency and the other relevant quantities 
are described in detail in Annex E. 


mean 


nominal value of minimum required efficiency [calculated by Formulae (4),(6),(7)] 


min,requ 


Fic. D-2 EFFECT oF TOTAL TOLERANCES OF MEASURED EFFICIENCIES, CASE 1 


n mean| 77 


min,requ 


t ( EE 


a K 


Qpr Qpep OF QoL 


Key 


H insegi 
M resno PATticular threshold value 


loime 


Ay from test(s) 


B 95 percent confidence interval of 7 from test(s) 


mean 


C min. value of true 77, ., (with 97.5 percent probability) 


mean 


total tolerance according to EN ISO 9906, grade 2B, applied to 4 


mean 


nominal value of minimum required efficiency [calculated by Formulae (4),(6),(7)] 


min,requ 


Fic. D-3 EFFECT OF TOTAL TOLERANCES OF MEASURED EFFICIENCIES, CASE 2 


23 


IS 17292 : 2020 


ANNEX E 


( Informative ) 


METHODS RECOMMENDED FOR MANUFACTURERS TO DETERMINE THE MEAN 
VALUES OFHYDRAULIC QUANTITIES OF A SIZE RELEVANT FOR MEI 


E-1 GENERAL REMARKS 


To determine mean quantities of a size, two 
possibilities exist and are recommended to be applied 
by manufacturers for proving that the size achieves a 
certain value of the Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI): 


a) Only one test on a single test pump drawn 
at random out of the size is carried out and 
its efficiency values at BEP, PL and OL are 
determined by measurements and evaluations 
as described in 7. The mean efficiency values 
of the size are calculated by making use of a 
hydraulic manufacturing tolerance factor Tah 
which is based on experience of the manufacturer 
concerning maximum manufacturing tolerances to 
be expected for the respective pump size. But it 
is generally not known where the experimentally 
determined values ny, of the sample pump are 
located within the bandwidth of scatter caused 
by manufacturing tolerances. Also the actual 
magnitude of the bandwidth of scatter is unknown. 
But the true mean values nean can be expected to 
be confined to the interval of + tann Mex around 
the experimentally determined values n, To be 
sure that the requirements mentioned in Annex D 
are met for the qualification, the extreme case shall 
be considered that the efficiency of the sample 
pump is at the high end (point “h” in Fig. D-1) of 
the scatter bandwidth of n. Then, one can be sure 
that the mean value of efficiency nmean is equal to 
or higher than (1- t in any case. 


Tests are carried out on a sample consisting of 
Mtest pumps drawn at random out of the size. On 
the results of these tests, small (or exact) sampling 
theory is applied. On the basis of the results for 
the M tested pumps, the arithmetically averaged 
values, the standard deviations of the relevant 
hydraulic quantities and the actual confidence 
intervals of the mean efficiencies of the size are 
calculated. 


mann) ` Nexp 


b 


wm 


While the second method needs more experimental 
effort, itnormally willleadto smallerconfidence intervals 
if good manufacturing quality is attained by quality 
management measures applied by the manufacturer. 
This is because the magnitude of fixed manufacturing 
tolerance factors used for the first method is set to cover 
even cases of poorer manufacturing quality. Therefore, 
the higher effort when applying the second method is, in 
most cases justified by smaller margins (in comparison 
to the fixed tolerance in the first method) by which the 
experimentally determined mean values of efficiency 


24 


shall exceed the corresponding threshold values which 
are relevant for the verification procedure described 
in 9. This effect is also demonstrated in Fig. D-2 and 
Fig. D-3 of Annex D. 


E-2 DETERMINATION OF THE MEAN 
EFFICIENCY OF A PUMP SIZE FROM A TEST 
ON ONE SINGLE TEST PUMP 


The test on a single pump has to be performed and 
evaluated as described in 5. 


Thereby, the measured values of flow rates Opep O,, 
and Q,, and the corresponding values of efficiency 
Neep Np, and No, as well as the value of specific speed n, 
(see 7.5.3) are available for the test pump. 


Based on these values, the total tolerance intervals 
have to be determined to which the values of the mean 
efficiencies 7... (at BEP, PL and OL) of the size are 
confined with a high probability. For the determination 
of the width of these intervals, the total tolerance factor 
foy Has to be applied. 


Because the scatter of efficiencies within the size and 
the measurement uncertainties of the test on the selected 
pump can be assumed to be normally (Gaussian) 
distributed and statistically independent of each other, 
the total tolerance factor for the mean efficiencies of the 
size are calculated by the means of the formula: 


torn = (Cnr, +h 


tot.n tot.n mann ) 


(E-1) 


In formula (E-1), rannis the (relative) hydraulic 
tolerance resulting from geometrical manufacturing 
tolerances within the size. The value of t,,,, has to 
set on the basis of the manufacturers experience, for 
example, on the basis of data available from quality 
management. The tolerance interval of + ¢,,, shall be 
sufficiently large to enclose about 95 percent of the 
true efficiency values of individual pumps of the size. 
Only as a default value tan’, 7 0-04 (or 4 percent) is 
recommended for sizes produced with usual quality 
of manufacturing. Sizes consisting of small pumps 
with low power input tend to have larger scatter of 
individual efficiency (and, thereby, larger values of 
t , ) because: 


mar y 
a) Geometrical tolerances have stronger effects on 
the efficiency, and 


b) Mechanical losses in shaft sealings and bearings 
which can show relative large scatter within 
thesame size contributes more to pump efficiency. 


In a Q-y-diagram, the total tolerance intervals of 
the values of efficiency relevant for the Minimum 
Efficiency Index (MEI) can be plotted at the values of 
flow rate determined from the test result (see Fig. E-1). 
The semi-axes of these total tolerance intervals are: 


at Q Osip tot, Neep 
at Q Qa: tot, Net 
at Q Qor: botn Nor 


The true mean values of 7 of the pump size (which 
are relevant for the qualification in respect to the 
Minimum Efficiency Index (MEJ)) are confined to the 
total tolerance intervals. Within these total tolerance 
intervals, each value of y is equally valid. 


The mean values of flow rate at best efficiency Q,,., 
and specific speed ns of the size which are needed to 
calculate values of minimum required efficiencies are 
set to be equal to the values determined for the test 


pump: 
O ion = Qer eer (E-2) 


n 


s,mean 


=n 


8 


vs (E-3) 


E-3 DETERMINATION OF THE MEAN 
EFFICIENCY OF A PUMP SIZE FROM A 
SAMPLE OF M TEST PUMPS 


A sample of M > 1 test pumps is drawn at random out 
of a pump size. Preferably, the number of test pumps 
forming the sample should be M > 5. For each of the 
sample pumps a test has to be carried out and evaluated 
as described in 7. 


Y 


(BEP) mean 


p a mean 


(Q PL) mean 


Key 


95 percent confidence interval of 7 


IS 17292 : 2020 


For each test pump of the sample, the values of flow 
rates QO... Qp and Qo and the corresponding values 
of efficiency Npp» Maand Naas well as the value of 
the specific speed n have to be determined according 
to 7.5.3. 


Then, for each of these hydraulic quantities x 
the arithmetically averaged value x of the sample 
and the standard deviation S, of the sample have 
to be calculated by the means of the following 


formulae: 


.... (E-4) 


.... (E-5) 


If a value of a quantity x, especially the value of ppp 
of one of the test pumps, seems to be not plausible or 
erroneous compared to the values of the other M-/ 
pumps of the sample, an outlier test can be conducted 
according to Annex G. If by this test the value is proven 
to be an outlier, the results of this test pump should be 
rejected and: 


a) either the values x and S have to be recalculated 
from the test results of the remaining /-/. 


b) test pumps, if /-/ is still sufficiently large to be 
statistically significant (see Annex G). 


c) the test on the test pump which produced the 
outlier value may be repeated. 


d) another test pump may be tested additionally. 


Ifno measurement uncertainties of the efficiency would 
exist, the true mean values of efficiency at BEP, PL and 


(No 1) mean 


a ) mean (QoL) mean 


mean FO test(s) il 


Fic. E-1 GRAPHICAL PRESENTATION OF MEAN EFFICIENCIES RELEVANT FOR THE 
MINIMUM EFFICIENCY INDEX (MEI) oF A PUMP SIZE 


25 


IS 17292 : 2020 


OL, respectively, would be confined with a probability 
of 95 percent to the confidence interval 


1(95%, M).S, 


JM 


using the value of t(95%,M) for the number M of test 
pumps from Table G-1 in Annex G. 


Ht 


However, because of the inevitable measurement 
uncertainties, the combined effects of hydraulic 
manufacturing tolerances and measuring uncertainties 
have to be taken into account. The measurement errors 
arising at the tests on each of the M test pumps can 
be assumed to be statistically independent from each 
other. Therefore, the uncertainty of the arithmetically 
averaged values 7 of the sample can be calculated 
from the total measurement uncertainties e „at each 
of the tests on the M test pumps according to the law of 
error propagation (see Annex G): 


Con ar" Z Cot 
tn M 2, 7 Ni 


In the (probable) case that for each of the tests on one of 
the M pumps, the values 7,do not differ much from each 
other (that is, N= 1,7. = n) and the measurement 
uncertainties eoni PAVE nearly the same magnitudes (for 


example eom ~ Cron, ~- ™ Con ) it results: 


.... (E-6) 


1 
en sees (E-7) 


Cota = 


Then, the width of the 95 percent confidence interval 
of the true mean values of efficiency at BEP, PL and 


26 


OL, respectively, can be calculated by the means of the 
formula: 


(Ltn) Sse T E] 


2 
1 S 
= 2 n 
Lota = fe + M (ez 


The semi-axes of the total tolerance intervals of the true 
mean values of efficiency relevant for theMinimum 
Efficiency Index (MEI) are: 


.... (E-8) 


With 


.... (E-9) 


at O = Qpep : te Neep 
at Q = Qo, : Ef otn Npr 


at Q=Qo :+ Lot mo, Nor 


Figure D-1 shows the graphical presentation of 
the results in a Q-7 diagram. The true mean values 
of 7 of the pump size [which are relevant for the 
Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI)]are confined to the 
total tolerance intervals. Within these total tolerance 
intervals, each value of 7 is equally valid. 


The mean values of flow rate at best efficiency Q,,,, 
and specific speed n of the size which are needed to 
calculate values of minimum required efficiencies are 
set to be equal to the respective arithmetically averaged 
values: 


(e Q BEP .... (E- 10) 


n, =n 
s mean S 


ww (E-11) 


IS 17292 : 2020 


ANNEX F 


( Informative ) 


F-1 NUMERICAL EXAMPLE 


F-1.1 The numerical example described illustrates the 
application of the two different methods described 
in A-5.2 and A-5.3, to compare the two methods 
in respect to tolerances and results in respect to 
qualification and demonstrate the advantages of 
testing a sample of M > 1 pumps in the frame of the 
qualification procedure. 


To simplify the comparison, the numerical example 
focuses on the mean efficiency values of a size at 
BEP. 


F-1.2 The exemplarily chosen size is a “virtual” one 
and may be characterized by the following properties 
and mean values: 
a) pump type: ESOB, nominal speed of rotation: 
n=2 900 min", 
b) design flow rate: Q,., 
head: H,,,., = 24,04 m, 
c) design specific speed: ns = 19.82 min-1, 


= 19.82 m*/h, design pump 


d) true mean efficiency of the pump size : Nyep mean 
0.607 p.u. = 60.7 percent, and 


e) mechanical power input: P2 = 2.2 kW. 


F-1.3 It is assumed that the true efficiency values 
NpepuwOf the individual pumps within the size show 
a normal (Gaussian) distribution with the true mean 
value having the highest probability and with a scatter 
bandwidth caused by manufacturing tolerances, that 
is, 95 percent confidence interval, of + 4 percent 
Of Npermean (In this example, the actual bandwidth 
of manufacturing tolerances is the same as the 
value of tman,n = 0,04 which is recommended as a 
default value when applying the method described in 
Annex F). 


The absolute hydraulic manufacturing tolerance is: 


e 
a Tiaan n BEP,mean 


= + 0.04 • 0.607 = 0.0243 = 
2.43 percent 


F-1.4 For the purpose of demonstration, five “virtual” 
pumps are drawn at random out of the “virtual” size 
as sample pumps so that their true efficiency values 
respect their probability resulting from the underlying 
normal (Gaussian) distribution within the size. This 
leads to the true values of 1,,,,,,. Of the exemplarily 
taken pumps shown in Table F-1. 


27 


Table F-1 “True Efficiency Values” of 
Sample Pumps 


( Clause F-1.4 ) 


SI n° of Test Manufacturing Noepsrue 
No. Pump Scatter ( Percent ) (Percent) 
i 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) il -2.00 58.70 
ii) 2 0.43 61.13 
iii) 3 1.22 61.92 
iv) 4 -0.80 59.90 
v) 5 1.35 62.05 


F-1.5 Next, “virtual” test results are generated 
taking into account assumed actual random and 
systematic measurement uncertainties which are 
smaller than the maximum permitted values given in 
Table 5 and Table 6 in 7.4.4. The effect of the “virtual” 
actual measurement uncertainties on the “virtual” 
measured efficiency values is treated in the following 
way: 

a) Efficiency is assumed to be determined by 

measurement of speed and torque. 


b) The values of measurement uncertainties of the 
individual measured quantities (Q, H, T, n) respect 
probabilities resulting from underlying normal 
(Gaussian) distributions. 


c) Individual (and different) values of random 
uncertainties are assumed for each test pump of 
thesample. 


d 


© 


Same values of systematic uncertainties (that is, 
same accuracy of test equipment) are assumed for 
all test pumps of the sample: 


1) es,Q: 0.01 p.u. =1 percent; 
2) es,H: 0.01 p.u. =1 percent; 
3) es,n: 0.01 p.u. =1 percent; and 
4) es,T: 0.01 p.u. =1 percent. 


Uncertainties of directly measured quantities are 
correctly combined when calculating efficiency. 


This leads to the “measurement results” for the 
exemplarily taken pumps shown in Tables F-2 and 
F-3. 


IS 17292 : 2020 


Table F-2 “Measured Values” of Sample Pumps 


( Clause F-1.5 ) 


SI n° of Test Flow Rate Total Head Torque Speed of Rotation 
No. Pump 
i Orp, test Eog BEP,test CoH Taip test EotT Myep test Ciota 
(mc/h) (Percent) m) (Percent) (Nm) (Percent) (min) (Percent) 
() (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (80 (9) (10) 
i) 1 20.60 1.12 24.7 2.12 7.76 1.41 2900 1.02 
ii) 2 19.52 2.69 23.4 3.81 6.69 2.97 2900 1.22 
iii) 3 19.16 1.41 23.8 2.58 6.59 1.02 2900 1.17 
iv) 4 20.01 2.06 24.6 1.58 7.36 1.28 2900 1.12 
v) 5 19.80 1.56 23.7 3.18 6.77 2.15 2900 1.35 
Table F-3 “Calculation of Measured Values” of Sample Pumps 
( Clause F-1.5 ) 
SI No. n’ of Test Pump Specific Speed Measured Efficiency 95 Percent confidence 
Interval of Measured 
Efficiency 
i 1. BePtest etotns N BEptest Eotn TEP Lest 
(min?) (Percent) (Percent) (Percent) (Percent) 
0) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) 1 19.80 1.97 58.70 2.96 56.96 — 60.44 
ii) 2 20.07 3.39 61.13 5.66 57.67 — 60.59 
iii) 3 19.63 2.37 61.92 3.32 59.86 — 63.98 
iv) 4 19.57 1.93 59.00 3.10 58.04 — 61.76 
v) 5 20.02 2.85 62.05 4.36 59.34 — 64.76 


F-1.6 If the five pumps are taken together to form a 
sample of M = 5, averaging of the individual measured 
values by applying the calculations according to 
formulae A-5.4 to A-5.11, the method described in 
Annex F leads to the following results: 


Arithmetically averaged values of the sample: 


ORTEN = 19.82 m/h 
Ne.mean = 19.82 min! 
NBER mean = 60.74 percent 


28 


95 percent confidence interval of mean efficiency of the 
size: 


58.66 percent < Npepmen £ 02-82 percent 


F-1.7 On the other hand, if only one of the five pumps 
would be taken as a sample with M = 1, if the method 
described in Annex F with formulae A-5.1 to A-5.3 is 
applied and if the manufacturing tolerance factor is set 
to the default value of tong F 0,04 = 4 percent, the 95 
percentconfidence intervals of the mean efficiency of 
the size shown in Table F-4 would result from the test 


results of each individual pump. 


IS 17292 : 2020 


Table F-4 95 Percent Confidence Intervals of Mean Efficiency Resulting from 
Tests on a Single Pump 


( Clause F-1.7 ) 


SI No. n° of Test Pump Flow Rate Measured Total 95 Percent Confidence Interval of 
Efficiency Tolerance Mean Efficiency of the Size 
Factor 
i Q per, test "pep ot pep 
(mc/h) (Percent) (Percent) (Percent) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) 1 20.60 58.70 4.98 55.78 — 61.62 
ii) 2 19.52 61.13 6.93 56.89 — 65.37 
ili) 3 19.16 61.92 5.20 58.70 — 65.14 
iv) 4 20.01 59.90 5.06 56.87 — 62.93 
v) 5 19.80 62.05 5.92 58.38 — 65.72 
vi) all test pumps combined 19.82 60.74 3.43 58.66 — 62.82 
Y 
(BEP) mean A a 
cielal eects aid Mo) mean 
(pi) mean [a 


(Qpr) mean ( OBEP ) mean (QoL ) mean X 


Fic. F-1 COMPARISON OF CONFIDENCE INTERVALS OF MEAN EFFICIENCY 


29 


IS 17292 : 2020 


ANNEX G 


( Informative ) 


APPLICATION OF MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS ON TESTS 


G-1 PURPOSES OF APPLYING STATISTICS 
IN THE FRAME OF QUALIFICATION AND 
VERIFICATION 


G-1.1 The application of this standard needs to 
perform and evaluate tests on pumps. In the frame of 
this work, use is made of mathematical statistics for 
different purposes: 


a) To determine the random error of measured 
hydraulic quantities when tests are carried out 
according to 7 and to prove that they do not 
exceed maximum permissible values given in EN 
ISO 9906. 


b) To determine confidence intervals of relevant 
measured quantities (see 8 and 9). 


Cc 


Ww 


To determine the total measurement uncertainty 
of efficiency values, where the law of error 
propagation has to be applied because the 
efficiency cannot be directly measured but is 
calculated from several directly measurable 
quantities(see Annex H). 


d 


wn 


To qualify a pump size in respect to a certain 
value of the Minimum Efficiency Index (MED). 
For this purpose, mean efficiency values of the 
size (defined in Annex D) have to be determined. 
If corresponding tests and evaluations are done on 
a sample of 1 < M < z pumps drawn at random 
out of the z total numbers of pumps of the size, 
the confidence interval of the mean values can 
be determined mathematically as described in 
Annex D. 


G-1.2 Normal or Gaussian Distribution 


The effects of random error of measurements as well 
as of scatter of hydraulic quantities within a pump 
size resulting from manufacturing processes can be 
assumed to be of random nature. For sufficiently 
large numbers of individual instrument readings for 
a measured quantity or of individual pumps within a 
size, the individual values of instrument readings of 
the same measured quantity or of a hydraulic quantity 
of the individual pumps within a size will obey in 
good approximation the so called normal or Gaussian 
distribution. This distribution describes the frequency 
(or probability) with which the individual values will 
occur within their whole range (see Fig. D-1 in Annex 
D). Mathematically, the normal or Gaussian distribution 
is described by the formula: 


In formula (G-1), p(x) is the probability density, X san 
is the true mean value and ø is the standard deviation 
of the quantity x which obeys exactly a normal or 
Gaussian distribution. 


Setting: 
X-X 
Z = mean 3 
5, ... (G-2) 
Formula G-1 can be written as: 
1 =z” 
P(Z) == exp| —— ww. (G-3 
o-z) = 


The integration of the probability density p(Z) from 
Z=—o to Z gives the function P(Z*) which describes 
the (normalized) probability that any individual value 
of Z is lower than Z’while, 1— P(Z*) describes the 
probability that any individual value of Z is higher 
than Z*. 


For quantities which obey this distribution, some 
statements are generally valid: 


a) The probability distribution is symmetrical in 
respect to the mean value X sa The value x = X ean 
has the highest frequency or probability. The 
probability ofx<x andofx>x__ is equal and 


mean mean 


is0.5 (or 50 percent). 


The probability is 0.9 (or 90 percent) that any 
value of x is within the interval x ea + 1.65 o. 
The probability is 0.95 (or 95 percent) that any 
value of x is within the interval x, | + 1.96 o . The 


probability is 0.99 (or 99 percent) that any value 
of x is within the interval x, 2.58 0. 


The probability is 0.841 5 (or 84.15 percent) that 
any value of x is > xX ean — 1.65 o,. The probability 
is 0.975 (or 97.5 percent) that any value of x is 
>X ean 1-96 6,. The probability is 0.995 1 (or 99.51 
percent) that any value of x is > Xaa 7 2-98 G,- 


b 


we 


Cc 


wa 


G-2 CONFIDENCE INTERVAL 


If confidence interval is: 


a) only a limited number N of readings of the same 
measured quantity x is made, or 


b) only a limited number M of sample pumps ofa size 
is tested and the individual values of a hydraulic 
quantity x are determined. 


Neither the true (mean) value X ea nor the true 
standard deviation ø, can be determined exactly. 
In these cases, only a confidence interval of x can 
be determined to which the true (mean) value x 


mean 


is confined with a certain probability. For this aim, 
the arithmetically averaged value x of the N or M x 
values is taken as an estimate of the true (mean) value. 
Depending on the desired probability p, the confidence 
interval is then defined by x+ f (p).0,. Most 
commonly, the desired probability p is chosen as 0.95 
(or 95 percent) so that f(p) = 1.96. As mentioned, in 
this case the probability is 0.975 (or 97.5 percent) that 
the true (mean) value is > (¥ —1.96 o / JN ) (for high 
numbers of readings) where ø is the true but unknown 
standard deviation of the normal distribution of x. 
To calculate a confidence interval on the basis of the 
limited numbers N of readings or M of sample pumps, 
respectively, the following formula can be used: 


—_t(p,k).s, s t(p,k).s, 
vk vk 


In this equation, k is the degree of freedom and is equal 
to either the number N-1 of instrument readings or 
the number M-1 of sample pumps. S\ is the standard 
deviation of the readings of the quantity x or of the 
values of the quantity x of the individual sample 
pumps from the arithmetically averaged value x and is 
calculated by the means of the formula: 


<x+ ws (G-4) 


— “mean 


...(G-5) 


t(p,k) is the so-called Student’s factor which depends 
on the desired probability of the confidence interval 
p and on the number k. For a two sided probability 
of 0.95 (or 95 percent or a single sided probability of 
97.5 percent) the values of t(p, k) are given in Table G-1. 


Table G-1 Values of Student’s Factor for Two Sided 
Probability 95 Percent (Single Sided with 97.5 
Percent) 


( Clause G-2 ) 


K = (N-1) t(95Percent,k) K = (N-1) t(95Percent,k) 
2 4.303 16 2.120 
3 3.182 17 2.110 
4 2.776 18 2.101 
5 2.571 19 2.093 
6 2.447 20 2.086 
7 2.365 21 2.080 
8 2.306 22 2.074 
9 2.262 23 2.069 
10 2.228 24 2.064 
11 2.201 25 2.060 
12 2.179 26 2.056 
13 2.160 27 2.052 
14 2.145 28 2.048 
15 2.131 29 2.045 
16 2.120 30 2.042 


31 


IS 17292 : 2020 


For increasing k, the Student’s factor approaches the 
value 1.96, the width of the confidence interval goes 
asymptotically to zero and the arithmetically averaged 
value x approaches the true mean value X ssa In most 
practical applications, the Student’s factor can be set 
approximately to 1.96 for k > 30. 


G-2.1 Outlier Test 


When sampling N instrument readings of a quantity x 
during its measurement or when determining a quantity 
x of M sample pumps by tests and evaluations, the 
possibility exists that one reading of x or the x-value 
of one of the sample pumps may deviate much more 
widely from the arithmetical average x than the 
remainder in the set. This value is called x. The so- 
called outlier test can serve to decide whether or not the 
value x, is an outlier and may be rejected. 


For this purpose, first the arithmetical mean x and the 
standard deviation s, are calculated from the whole set 
including the suspect value x 


x, —x| 
R=— ... (G-6) 


S 


x 


Then, the ratio is calculated and compared to the 
maximum permissible value of R „ given in Table 
G-2. If the actual value of x is larger than the maximum 
permissible value, taken from Table G-2 for the original 
number N of readings or M sample pumps, the value x, 
is rejected. In this case, k is reduced by 1, and s, are 
recalculated. If the new number N or M respectively 
becomes too small (for example, < 5 in the case of a 
sample of pumps), additional readings should be taken 
or in case of different sample pumps an additional 
sample pump should be tested. 


Table G-2 Maximum Permissible Values of 
Ratio R (Two Sided 95 Percent) 


( Clause G-2.1 ) 


NorM Rig NorM Ra 
3 1:15 17 2.62 
4 1.48 18 2.65 
5 1.71 19 2.68 

67N, 1.89 20 2.71 
8 2.02 21 2.73 
9 2.13 22 2.76 
10 2.21 23 2.78 
11 2.29 24 2.80 
12 2:36 25 2.82 
13 2.41 26 2.84 
14 2.46 27 2.86 
15 2.51 28 2.88 
16 2.55 29 2.90 

2.59 30 2.91 


IS 17292 : 2020 


G-3 LAW OF ERROR PROPAGATION 


The evaluation of test results often requires the 
calculation of relevant quantities y as, for example, the 
efficiency from other quantities x,which can be directly 
measured. The functional dependency is known and is 
given by the equation 
Vf Ris hye w+ (G-7) 
Each of the quantities xi shows a standard deviation s, . 
If the effects causing the deviations from the true mean 
value (or from the arithmetically averaged value) are 
of random nature, the measured quantities x, will obey 
a normal (Gaussian) distribution. If, additionally, the 
quantities are statistically independent of each other, 
the standard deviation sof the quantity y is given by: 


2 
L| dy 2 

S,= —]|. 
i H2) k 


If f is a linear function (as in case of the efficiency), Sy 
is given by: 


.... (G-8) 


... (G-9) 


The same relations can be used for the calculation of 
multiples of the standard deviations, for example, for 
the calculation of the width of the 95 percent confidence 
interval of the quantity y from the 95 percent confidence 
intervals of the quantities x.. 


G-4 NUMERICAL EXAMPLE 


G-4.1 The numerical example described illustrates 
the application of the two different methods described 
in Annexes A-5.2 and A-5.3\, to compare the two 
methods in respect to tolerances and to results in respect 
to qualification and to demonstrate the advantages of 
testing a sample of M > 1 pumps in the frame of the 
qualification procedure. 


To simplify the comparison, the numerical example 
focuses on the mean efficiency values of a size at BEP. 


G-4.2The exemplarily chosen size is a “virtual” one 
and may be characterized by the following properties 
and mean values: 


a) pump type: ESCC, nominal speed of rotation: 
n= 2 900 min’; 


b) design flow rate: Qppp = 19.82 m*/h, design pump 


head: H,,,.p = 24.04 m; 
c) design specific speed: n = 19.82 min”; 


d) true mean efficiency of the pump size: Npepmear” 
0.607 p.u. = 60.7 percent; and 


e) mechanical power input: P2 = 2.2 kW. 


32 


G-4.3 It is assumed that the true efficiency values 
Neeptme Of the individual pumps within the size show 
a normal (Gaussian) distribution with the true mean 
value having the highest probability and with a scatter 
bandwidth caused by manufacturing tolerances, that 
is, 95 percent confidence interval, of + 4 percent of 
Mike memi (In this example, the actual bandwidth of 
manufacturing tolerances is the same as the value of 
many ~ 0-04 which is recommended as a default value 
when applying the method described in Annex F). The 
absolute hydraulic manufacturing tolerance is: 


E ba NBEPmean + 0.04 + 0.607 = 0.024 3 = 
2.43 percent 


G-4.4For the purpose of demonstration, five “virtual” 
pumps are drawn at random out of the “virtual” size 
as sample pumps so that their true efficiency values 
respect their probability resulting from the underlying 
normal (Gaussian) distribution within the size. This 
leads to the true values of npepe Of the exemplarily 
taken pumps shown in Table G-3: 

N1) National footnote: The value 6 has been put in the same line 

with the value 7. As a consequence, each of thecorresponding 


Rmax values is located one line below. 
N2) National footnote: Here, it should read “D-2 and D-3”. 


Table G-3 “True Efficiency Values” of 
Sample Pumps 


( Clause G-4.4 ) 


SI No. n’ of Test Manufacturing p 
Pump Scatter (Percent) 
i (Percent) 

0) (2) (3) (4) 

i) 1 -2.00 58.70 
ii) 2 0.43 61.13 
iii) 3 1.22 61.92 
iv) 4 -0.88 59.90 
v) 5 1.35 62.05 


G-4.5 Next, “virtual” test results are generated taking 
into account assumed actual random and systematic 
measurement uncertainties which are smaller than the 
maximum permitted values given in Tables 5 and 6 
in 7.4.4. The effect of the “virtual” actual measurement 
uncertainties on the “virtual” measured efficiency 
values is treated in the following way: 


a) Efficiency is assumed to be determined by 
measurement of speed and torque. 


b) The values of measurement uncertainties of the 
individual measured quantities (Q, H, T, n) respect 
probabilities resulting from underlying normal 
(Gaussian) distributions. 


c) Individual (and different) values of random 
uncertainties are assumed for each test pumpof the 
sample. 

d) Same values of systematic uncertainties (that is, 

same accuracy of test equipment) are assumed 


for all test pumps of the sample: 


1) es,Q: 0.01 p.u. =1 percent; 
2) es,H: 0.01 p.u. =1 percent; 
3) es,n: 0.01 p.u. =1 percent; and 
4) es,T: 0.01 p.u. =1 percent. 


e) 


Uncertainties of directly measured quantities are 
correctly combined when calculating efficiency. 


This leads to the “measurement results” for the 
exemplarily taken pumps shown in Table G-4 and 
G-5. 


G-4.6 If the five pumps are taken together to form a 
sample of M = 5, averaging of the individual measured 
values by applying the calculations according to 


IS 17292 : 2020 


formulae A-5.4 to A-5.11^®, the method described in 
Annex F leads to the following results: 
Arithmetically averaged values of the sample: 
Qhermean 7 19-82 m?/h 
= 19.82 min! 
= 60.74 percent 


n s,mean 
g! BEP,mean 


95 percent confidence interval of mean efficiency of the 
size: 


e 58.66 percent * < Npepmean £ 02-82 percent 


On the other hand, if only one of the five pumps 
would be taken as a sample with M = 1, if the method 
described in Annex E with formulae A-5.1 to A-5.3%°) 
is applied and if the manufacturing tolerance factor is 
set to the default value of t, = + 0.04 = 4 percent, the 
95 percentconfidence intervals of the mean efficiency 
of the size shown in Table G-6 would result from the 
test results of each individual pump. 


Table G-4 “Measured Values” of Sample Pumps 


( Clause G-4.5 ) 


SI n° of Test Flow Rate Total Head Torque Speed of Rotation 
No. Pump 
i ice Pa Boe Ax Teg e iia ean 
(mc/h) (Percent) m) (Percent) (Nm) (Percent) (min) (Percent) 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (80 (9) (10) 
i) 1 20.60 1.12 24.7 2.12 7.76 1.41 2900 1.02 
ii) 2 19.52 2.69 23.4 3.81 6.69 2.97 2900 1.22 
iii) 3 19.16 1.41 23.8 2.58 6.59 1.02 2900 1.17 
iv) 4 20.01 2.06 24.6 1.58 7.36 1.28 2900 1.12 
v) 5 19.80 1.56 23.7 3.18 6.77 2.15 2900 1.35 
Table G-5 “Calculation of Measured Values” of Sample Pumps 
( Clause G-4.5 ) 
SI No. n’ of Test Pump Specific Speed Measured Efficiency 95 Percent confidence 
Interval of Measured 
Efficiency 
i N, BEPtest rots Teprrtest oun 1 BEPitest 
(min) (Percent) (Percent) (Percent) (Percent) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) 1 19.80 1.97 58.70 2.96 56.96 — 60.44 
ii) 2 20.07 3.39 61.13 5.66 57.67 — 60.59 
iii) 3 19.63 2.37 61.92 3.32 59.86 — 63.98 
iv) 4 19.57 1.93 59.00 3.10 58.04 — 61.76 
v) 5 20.02 2.85 62.05 4.36 59.34 — 64.76 


33 


IS 17292 : 2020 


Table G-6 95 Percent Confidence Intervals of Mean 


Efficiency Resulting from Tests on a Single Pump 


( Clause G-4.6 ) 


95 Percent Confidence Interval of 


SI No. n° of Test Pump Flow Rate Measured Total 
Efficiency Tolerance Mean Efficiency of the Size 
Factor 
i Oren test "pep tot "pep 
(mc/h) (Percent) (Percent) (Percent) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) 1 20.60 58.70 4.98 55.78 — 61.62 
ii) 2 19.52 61.13 6.93 56.89 — 65.37 
iii) 3 19.16 61.92 5.20 58.70 — 65.14 
iv) 4 20.01 59.90 5.06 56.87 — 62.93 
v) 5 19.80 62.05 5.92 58.38 — 65.72 
vi) all test pumps combined 19.82 60.74 3.43 58.66 — 62.82 
0 
65 ; 
aa saree cere E E, aac ieee cet [ssi sanois 
= 
E5 henkenne e E N E e] 
50 - - i i i 
18.5 19.0 19:5 20.0 20.5 21.0 
Q (m?/h) 
—1 @2 @3 @4 A5 Gall test pumps combined 


Fic.G-1 COMPARISON OF CONFIDENCE INTERVALS OF MEAN EFFICIENCY RESULTING 
FROM APPLICATION OF DIFFERENT METHODS 


G-4.7 It can clearly be seen from the example that 
the width of the 95 percentconfidence intervals of 
the mean efficiency of the same size and determined 
with the same measurement accuracy are much larger 
when testing only one sample pump than when testing 
a sample of five pumps (it has to be noted that in the 
example the default value of trang + 9.04 describes 
exactly the actual scatter of efficiencies of individual 
pumps within the size). 


G-4.8 Finally, the results shall serve to prove that for 
the size a minimum efficiency index of MEI = 0.4 
can be indicated. According to 6, the value of n 


mean 


34 


has to be compared to the corresponding minimum 
required value. To fulfill the qualification criterion 
for MEI = 0.4, the value of ne shall be equal to 
or higher than the corresponding minimum required 
value. 


G-4.9 To determine the minimum required values of 
Nea first the nominal values of minimum required 
efficiency are calculated by the means of formula 4 for 
MEI = 0.4 with the values of as input quantities: 


a) Qorres 2nd n,,,., in the case of M = 1, and 
b) Qyrpmean 2nd D, nean in the case of M = 5. 


G-4.10 According to 8, the value of ne within its 
95 percent confidence interval has to be compared 
to the corresponding threshold value. To fulfill the 
verification criterion for MEI = 0.4, the value of nean 
shall be equal to or higher than the corresponding 
particular threshold value. To determine the particular 
threshold values of nsa» the previous values resulting 
from formula 4, is multiplied by the factor 0.95 (which 
corresponds to the total tolerance t= -5 percent in 
EN ISO 9906, class 2). The mentioned ‘values are shown 
in Tables G-7 and G-8. In the last column of Tables G-7 
and G-8, also the result of the comparison in respect 
to the fulfillment of the qualification and verification 
criterion for MEI = 0.4. 


G-4.11 Although in this example, the true mean 
value Nsepmean 00-74 percent is actually higher than 
the nominal minimum required values (qualification 
criterion), the results for two of the five pumps when 


IS 17292 : 2020 


taken as a single test sample, would not prove that 
an value of MEI = 0.4 is justified. On the other hand, 
when all five pumps are taken as a sample of M = 5, the 
result (qualification criterion) would not only prove 
clearly that a value of MEI = 0.4 is justified. 


NOTE— The indication of the value MEI = 0.4 for the size, 
proven by the manufacturer on the basis of the sample of 
M = 5 pumps, would be confirmed by an independent 
institution (applying the procedure described in 8) already 
with the first test if anyone of the five pumps serving for 
the example above would be drawn at random out of the 
size. 


Only in cases of very low probability if only one 
pump is tested for the qualification, a pump chosen 
for the verification would fail. But also in this cases, 
the indicated value of MEI = 0.4 would be confirmed 
with very high probability by tests on three additional 
sample pumps (see also Annex G). 


Table G-7 Relevant Values and Results in Respect to Qualification of the Size 


( Clause G-4.10 ) 


SI no of Test Measured Lowest Value Minimum Auxiliary C Value Minimum Fulfilled 
No. Pump Efficiency of 95 Percent Required Function Tested Efficiency Index Qualification 
Confidence Value Pump of the Tested Criterion 
Interval Pump MEI 
i prr Tepe hrot spe, requ Fy CMEI 
(Percent) (Percent) (Percent) (Percent) (Percent) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (80 (9) 
i) 1 58.70 55.78 60.90 191.67 132.97 0.25 No 
ii) 2 61.13 56.89 60.77 191.54 130.41 0.44 Yes 
iii) 3 61.92 58.70 60.22 191.99 129.07 0.57 Yes 
iv) 4 59.90 56.87 60.47 191.24 131.34 0.36 no 
v) 5 62.05 58.38 60.83 191.60 129.55 0.53 yes 
vi) All test 60.74 58.66 60.64 0.43 yes 
pumps 
combined 


Table G-8 RelevantValues and Results in Respect to Verification of the Size 


( Clause G-4.10 ) 


SI No. no of Test Measured Minimum Required Particular Threshold Fulfilled Qualification 
Pump Efficiency Value Value Criterion 
i "pep "pep, requ N sep threshold 
(Percent) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) 1 58.70 60.90 57.86 yes 
ii) 2 61.13 60.77 57.73 yes 
iii) 3 61.92 60.22 57.20 yes 
iv) 4 59.90 60.47 57.45 yes 
v) 5 62.05 60.83 57.78 yes 
vi) All test pumps 60.74 60.64 57.61 yes 
combined 


35 


IS 17292 : 2020 


ANNEX H 


( Informative ) 


MEASUREMENT UNCERTAINTIES 


H-1 GENERAL REMARKS 


Every measurement is inevitably subject to some 
uncertainty, even if the measuring procedures and 
the instruments used, as well as, the methods of 
analysis, fully comply with good practice and with the 
requirements of EN ISO 9906 and this Indian Standard. 
This uncertainty results from two sources: 


a) Even at constant conditions which determine an 
operating point of a test pump (speed of rotation or 
frequency of electric supply, hydraulic resistance 
of test circuit, inlet pressure, liquid properties), 
inevitable fluctuations of the measured quantities 
due to the characteristics of the measuring system 
or to random variations of the measured quantity 
will occur. These fluctuations cause slightly 
different values of the instrument readings of 
the same quantity at the same operating point. 
Therefore, an averaging of repeated readings is 
necessary to determine an average value of the 
measured quantities. The arithmetically averaged 
value x of a set of N instrument readings of the 
quantity x is calculated as: 


S .... (H-1) 


b 


wm 


If N increases, the values of x tend to approach the 
true mean value x, of the instrument readings 
within its fundamental limits of precision. 
The bandwidth of variations of the individual 
readings of the quantity x at the same operating 
point around the average value x is also called 
random uncertainty. Assumed that the results of 
repeated measurements of the quantity x show a 
normal (Gaussian) distribution (see Annex D). 
The true mean value x sa can be expected with 
a probability of about 95 percent to be confined 
to a confidence interval of x + 1.96:s / N where, 
s is the standard deviation of the M readings and 
can be calculated by the means of the following 
formula H-2 (the value 1.96 is to be taken for high 
numbers of measurements only): 


. (H-2) 


Within this confidence interval, every value of x is 
equally valid. 


For values of N less than 30, small (or exact) 
sampling theory may be applied. Then, the 
confidence interval is given by x + ¢ (p, N). 
S./VN where t (p,N) is the so-called Student’s 


36 


c 


Na 


factor for the corresponding probability p. For 
a probability of 95 percent, the values of t(95 
percent, N) are given in Table G-1 in Annex G. 
In this Indian Standard, maximum permissible 
values of random uncertainty are specified as 
given in European Standard EN ISO 9906, grade 
2B. The actual values of random uncertainty have 
to be determined as + 1.96. S/JN for N > 30 or 
as + t (95%,N)). S, JN for N < 30, respectively. 
Usually, the random uncertainty is given as a 
relative value e__ referred to the arithmetically 
averaged value x : 


1 
ae ag 8s eNe .... (H-3) 
“EN 
1(95%,N).S, 
e,, =t for N<30__... (H-4) 
X. 


In respect to successfully proving the achievement 
of a certain value of the Minimum Efficiency 
Index (MEI) of a size by the procedure and criteria 
described in 8, it is strongly recommended to the 
manufacturer to make great effort in order to have 
random uncertainties as small as possible. This 
can be reached by: 


1) providing a damping device in the measuring 
instruments or in their connecting line (where 
use shall be made of symmetrical and linear 
damping devices, as for example a capillary 
tube, to not negatively affect the accuracy of 
instrument readings), or 


2 


xw 


the use of electronic data acquisition systems 
with appropriate hardware and/or software 
tools for low pass filtering or by appropriate 
data sampling and averaging. 


Even after careful measurement of dimensions, 
proper installation etc., and ifall known corrections 
(found by calibration) are applied to the value of 
an instrument reading taken at perfectly steady 
conditions, the reading may differ from the true 
value of the measured quantity. This residual 
uncertainty is called instrument uncertainty, 
and arises from limitations of the calibration, 
change of installation compared to calibration 
conditions, unknown environmental influences, 
unknown reactions of the measuring installation 
on the quantity to be measured and inherent and 
constructional limitations of the measuring chain 
itself. The instrument uncertainty cannot be 
avoided or reduced by repeated readings if the 


same instrument and the same method of 
measurement are used. It can only be estimated on 
the basis of information given by the manufacturer 
of the instruments (instrument accuracy, non- 
linearity, hysteresis,...), of information given 
by standards concerning maximum errors 
of standardized measuring methods, and of 
experience available at the staff carrying out 
the measurements. Usually, the instrument 
uncertainty is given as a relative value e_ referred 
to the true value of the measured quantity Xa 


In respect to successfully proving the achievement 
of a certain value of the Minimum Efficiency Index 
(MEI) of a size by the procedure and criteria described 
in 6, it is strongly recommended to the manufacturer to 
make great effort to have instrument uncertainties as 
small as possible. This can be reached by: 


a) selection and application of highly accurate 
instrumentation, data acquisition hardware and 
software, 

b) careful design and construction oftest rig details to 
avoid negative effects on measurement accuracy 
as, for example, disturbed flow distribution 
at pump inlet or at location of flow meter, not 
standard conform and/or badly manufactured 
geometry of static pressure taps, 

c) careful installation of measuring devices as for 

example flow meters and torque meters, 


careful calibration of instruments and/or 
whole measuring chains at proper intervals (see 
EN ISO 9906), and 


regular zero adjustment of instruments and/or 
measuring chains. 


In accordance with EN ISO 9906, the relative overall 
measurement uncertainty e, of a quantity x is 
calculated by the square root of the sum of the squares 
of the (relative) random uncertainty e | (fluctuations) 
and the (relative) instrument uncertainty es of the 


quantity x: 
—» fa 2 
Cvot,x ~~ ex + esx 


The absolute overall measurement uncertainty £,, . 
of a quantity x results by multiplying the value of 
x determined from the measurements and evaluations 
by the relative overall measurement uncertainty e 


d) 


e) 


... (H-5) 


tot,x” 


E eX 


tot,x tot,x ” 


.... (H-6) 


The 95 percent confidence interval of a quantity x is 
determined by: 


(l-e) F SxS (lten) ¥ w. (H-7) 


tot, x 


Or, 


X -E SYS OE ww. (H-8) 


tot,x 


37 


IS 17292 : 2020 


H-2 DETERMINATION OF THE OVERALL 


MEASUREMENT UNCERTAINTY OF 
EFFICIENCY 
In the equations below, the relative overall 


measurement uncertainties e „Of all quantities x have 
to be determined at the respective flow rates Opep O,, 
and Q,,. Normally, these values can be taken from the 
measured operating points nearest to the flow rates 
Qpem Op, and Qoi respectively. 

The overall measurement uncertainty of the pump 
efficiency 7 has to be calculated according to the law of 
error propagation. Under the premise that the errors of 
the quantities which are directly measured are normally 
(Gaussian) distributed and statistically independent of 
each other, the overall measurement uncertainty of 
the efficiency 7 (as percentages of the corresponding 
values of 7 on the fitting curves) can be calculated by 
the means of one of the following formulae: 


a) In the case that the pump power input P is 
determined by measuring the speed of rotation n 
and the shaft torque T: 


2 2 


_ 2 2 
Eotn = A ae + Cot, H + Crot.n + Scott sees (H-9) 


b) In the case that the pump power input P is 
determined by measuring the driver power input 
Po and calculating P from Pa by the means of 


the electric motor efficiency 7, known from 


calibration: 
2 2 2 2 
e, = Jas + Cio F Corp, Fong, => (H-10) 
In these equations, the relative overall 


measurement uncertainties Cig of the flow rate Q, 
eon Of the speed of rotation n, er of the torque 
T and Ot of the driver power input P result 
directly from the relative random and instrument 
uncertainties of the instrumentation which is used 
to measure these quantities. 


The relative overall measurement uncertainty e in 
of the pump head H has to be calculated according 
to the law of error propagation. Under the premise 
that the errors of the quantities which are directly 
measured are normally (Gaussian) distributed 
and statistically independent of each other, the 
relative overall measurement uncertainty of H (as 
percentages of the corresponding values of H on 
the fitting curves) can be calculated by the means 
of one of the following formulae: 

c) In the case that the pump head H is determined by 

separately measuring the suction pressure p, and 

the discharge pressure p,: 


cook 


P2 
P2.—P 


2 
oy) .(H-11) 


1 


IS 17292 : 2020 


d) In the case that the pump head H is determined 
by measuring the pump differential pressure 


Ap =P, =P; 


e 


tot, H =e 


tot, Ap 


.... (H-12) 


NOTE— In the formulae for e ,,, it is assumed that the overall 
uncertainties of the density p and of the acceleration due to 


gravitation g can be neglected. Additionally, the contributions 
2 2 


of the difference of velocity heads — — — at pump inlet 


2 
and outlet as well of the height difference z, 2 z,of pump inlet 
and outlet to the pump head are assumed to be sufficiently 
small so that the effect of their uncertainties on e „can be 
neglected. 


It shall be emphasized that large overall uncertainties 
of pump # head will result from measuring the suction 
pressure pand the discharge pressure p,separately and 
calculating their difference, if this difference is much 
smaller than one or both of the pressures pand p,. 
In this case, it is strongly recommended to measure 
directly the differential pressure Apwith the aid of a 
differential pressure transducer. 


The overall measurement uncertainty ¢,,..,of the 
electric motor efficiency has to be determined separately 
dependent on the method and instrumentation of motor 


calibration. 


ANNEX I 


( Informative ) 


I-1 EXPLANATIONS CONCERNING THE 
METHODOLOGY OF THE VERIFICATION 
PROCEDURE ANDTHE PROBABILITY OF 
THE RESULTS 


The verification procedure serves to confirm (or reject) 
the value of the Minimum Efficiency Index (MEI) of a 
pump size indicated by the manufacturer. Because of 
the scatter of individual efficiency values among the 
total number of pumps of the size, the efficiency of a 
single pump drawn at random out of the size can be 
lower or higher than the mean efficiency of the size. 


Under the assumption of a normal (Gaussian) 
distribution of the efficiency values (see Annex D): 


a) the probabilities are both 50 percent that the true 
efficiency of an individual pump drawn at random 
out of the size is either lower or higher than the 
true mean efficiency y _ of the size, 


b) the probability is 95 percent that the true efficiency 
of an individual pump drawn at random out of the 
size is confined to the range of 7 +t where 


trang 1S the hydraulic tolerance of the individual 
true efficiency values within the size caused by 
manufacturing tolerances and is 1.96 times the 
true standard deviation of efficiency values within 


the size, 


c) the probability is 97.5 percentthat the true 
efficiency of an individual pump drawn at random 
out of the size is at least equal to or better than 


M inean 7 


t : 
man, 


From tests on a sample of pumps of the size (done 
in the frame of the qualification procedure) the true 
mean efficiency Nean is only known to be confined 
to a confidence interval with a certain probability. 
According to Annex G the half width of the confidence 


38 


interval of Nean ISE f While the hydraulic tolerance 


of individual efficiency values within the size (caused 
by manufacturing tolerances) is: 


© niin Mines Coan, 7 
The situation is illustrated in Fig. I-1. The maximum 
( = center) of the normal (Gaussian) distribution of 
individual efficiency values within the size can be 
located somewhere within the confidence interval of 
M „an With the two extreme cases at the lower and upper 
limit of the interval. 


The probability that an individual pump drawn at 
random out of the size has a certain true efficiency 
value 7 (plotted as the horizontal axis) is qualitatively 
shown in Fig. I-1 and can be mathematically expressed 
by the probability function. 


The probability that the true efficiency of any individual 
pump drawn at random out ofa size will be at least equal 
to a threshold value 77,,_..,,,,, depends on the probability 
that the efficiency of an individual pump is higher than 
the mean efficiency 7. of this size (50 percent for a 
normal distribution),the location of Msn relative to 
the confidence interval of 7, which can be described 
by the “margin” 7 


~ Nehreshold* 

In the case that M reiii is at the lower limit of the 
confidence interval of 7 ea» ( that is, that the “margin” 
which is used for the indication of the MEIvalue by 


= Nehreshold =+ lara -N 
there is a high probability that the efficiency of any 


the manufacturer is set to 7 


individual pump will be at least equal to 7,,...,14 Lf in 
this case the ratio of tolerances is for example, £ an BAe 
z 1, it results from the probability function (shown in 


Figure H.1) that this probability is about 84 percent 
and the probability to “fail” is only about (100 — 84) 
percent = 16 percent. 


If, on the other hand, for the same ratio of tolerances 
tran! Coun L Minreshoia!S at the upper limit of the confidence 
interval of Mea» that is, 7] —Nyoncnmark = T horn- n, it 
follows that this probability is only about 16 percent, 
but the probability to “fail” is about (100 — 16) percent 
= 84 percent. 


Probability 
of 77 


50% 


Bandwith of 
scatter within 
size 


Confidence 


IS 17292 : 2020 


According to 9, even if the first pump taken for a 
verification test will fail, the MEI value indicated by 
the manufacturer has to be confirmed if the average 
efficiency of three additional pumps will “pass”. Of 
course, there is a relation between the probability to 
pass the whole procedure (including the possibility of 
testing four pumps in all) and the probability that any 
individual pump will pass. 


Bandwith of 
scatter within 
size 


intervall of 77mean 


Fic.I-1 PROBABILITY OF INDIVIDUAL EFFICIENCY WITHIN A SIZE 


39 


IS 17292 : 2020 


ANNEX J 


( Informative ) 


J-1 REPORTING OF TEST RESULTS 


J-1.1 Test Report Requirements 


When tests are carried out to determine the Minimum 
Efficiency Index (MEI) the test report shall contain 
detailed information to identify the tested pump and 
any other equipment that may be subject to test. The 
report shall contain the raw test data for all test points 
taken. A graph shall be drawn where the corrected 
test points are plotted. A curve fitted to the corrected 
test points shall be drawn on the graph. The operating 
points at best efficiency (BEP) as well as at part load 
(PL) and overload (OL) as specified in 5 of this Indian 
Standard shall be determined and documented. 


The following information should be included in the 
report (as applicable): 

a) test date; 

b) the tested equipment; 

c) test facility and location; 


40 


d) ambient and water temperatures; 
e) barometric pressure; 

f) density of test-water; 

g) driver data; 


h) if test point corrections are made, the correction 
method shall be outlined; 


j) the mathematical approximation method used to 
fit the test data shall be outlined; and 


k) comments pertaining to anything noteworthy 
about the test. 


J-1.2 Pump Test Sheet 


The pump test sheet illustrated in this Annex is given for 
guidance for presenting pump test results and to assist 
in their interpretation. It does not purport to include 
all the information required from a pump test and 
modifications may be necessary depending on the type 
of pump, its application, and the mode of calculation. 


(in percent) 


IS 17292 : 2020 
Table J-1 Test Report 1 
TEST REPORT 
Test record number : Document no. : 
Pump type : Date: 
Pump size : Nominal speed : rpm 
Impeller diameter : mm No. of stages : 
Test motor rating : kW Test liquid : | Cold water 
Test motor efficiency:- Suc. inmm Del. in mm 
Test Speed Values 
MEASUREMENT POINTS 
Measured variables 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
Percent of BEP -> 0 10 | 20 | 30 | 40 | 50 | 60 | 68 | 75 | 82 | 94 | 100 | 110 | 120 | 135 | 150 


n Min! 
H, m 
H, m 
Gaugediffer. m 
Av?/2g m 

total m 
Q m?/hr 
Q I/s 
P; kW 
Paya kW 
h % 


0.75 Percent (Part load) 


1.00 (BEP) 


P A 

P 

h, % 

Values at Operating Points Designed for MEI 

n IS- MEI C Speed 
H m 

Q m?/hr 

P, kW 

Bied % 

h, uired % 


1.10 (Over load) 


41 


IS 17292 : 2020 


ANNEX K 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Composition of Pumps Sectional Committee, MED 20 


Organization 


FACT, New Delhi 


Aquasub Engineering, Coimbatore 
Best Engineers Pumps Pvt Limited, Coimbatore 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Central Water & Power Research Station, 
Khadakwasla, Pune 


Crompton Greaves Consumer Electricals Limited, 
Ahmednagar 

Delhi Jal Board, New Delhi 

Electrical Research & Development Association 
(ERDA), Vadodra, Gujarat 

Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


Gail India Ltd, New Delhi 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 
Indian Pump Mfrs Association, Ahmedabad 


In Pesonal Capacity, Mumbai 


International Copper Association India, Mumbai 

Kirloskar Brothers Limited, Pune 

Kirloskar Ebara Pumps Ltd, Pune 

KSB Pumps Limited, Pune 

Mangalore Refinery and Petrochemicals Ltd, 
Mangalore 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


Min of Defence (CQAE), New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri A. K. Nunawan (Chairman) 


Dr C. Mutu 
SHRI C. MuRuGESAN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. THANGAPANDI 
Suri N. RANADHIVE (Alternate) 


Suri D. P. CHANDRAMORE 
SHRI SANTOSH N. KALE (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER PANDITA 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIKH (Alternate) 
Suri RAJEEV (YP) (Alternate I) 
Ms NEHA Kumari (YP) (Alternate II) 


SHRI PRAMOD KUMAR GOEL 


SHRI ABDUL RAHIMAN (Alternate) 


SHRI PANDHARI SUSAR 
SHRI PARVIN GARJE (Alternate) 
SHRI KARAN KAMBLE (YP) (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. Gupta 

SHRI BHUPESH Kumar (Alternate) 
SHRI RAVI PRAKASH SINGH 

SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT (Alternate) 
SHRI ANKUL MANDAL 

SHRI ABHAY Kumar (Alternate) 
SHRI SATISH GEDA 
SHRI P. VENKATA NARAYANA 

SHRI ARIJIT SANYAL (Alternate) 
SHRI BHARAT B. PATEL 

SHRI UTKARSH A. CHHAYA (Alternate) 
SHRI S. L. ABHYANKAR 
SHRI ABHISHEK DHUPAR 

Sarı DEBDAS GoswaMI (Alternate) 
Suri R. S. BIRAJDAR 

SHRI VASANT GODBOLE (Alternate) 
SHRI A. S. JOsHI 

SHRI V. K. Surivastava (Alternate) 
SHRI ABHAY VIRKAR 

SHRI SANJEEV CHoupury (Alternate) 
SHRI ADARSH G. A. 

SHRI P. RAJENDRAN (Alternate) 
Suri P. S. Rao 

Suri A. GANGAL (Alternate) 


JoINT CONTROLLER (JAG/NFSG) 
Lt Cor R. D. Misura, Dy ConTROLLER (Alternate) 


42 


Organization 


National Bank For Agri & Rural Devlp, Mumbai 

Petroleum Conservation Research Association, 
New Delhi 

Projects & Development India Ltd, Vadodara 

Punjab Agriculture University, Ludhiana 

North India Pump Manufacturers Assn., Phagwara 


Rajkot Engg Association, Rajkot 


SiTarc, Coimbatore 


The Southern India Engg Mfrs Assn, Coimbatore 


Wilo Mather And Platt Pumps Ltd, Pune 
Director General, BIS 


IS 17292 : 2020 


Representative(s) 


Suri D. ELANGOVAN 
Suri A. K. Suna (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. GOEL 
Dr ABHAY SHARMA (Alternate) 
SHRI A. K. Gupta 
Suri D. K. vonra (Alternate) 
Dr (Pror) A. K. JAIN 
Dr (PROF) SUNIL GARG 
Suri C. L. GARG 
SHRI SURINDER Kats! (Alternate) 
SHRI ANAND P. SAVALIA 
Suri D. R Suau (Alternate) 
SHRI A. M. SELVARAJ 
SHRI K. V. KARTIK 
Suri D. JAYAPRAKASH (Alternate) 
SHRI MANOJ BAFNA 
SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Suri A. K. MOHINDROO 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Composition of Agricultural and Domestic Pumps Subcommittee, MED 20:5 


Organization 


Convenor MED 20:5 (SIEMA & Co India), Coimbatore 


Agrofab, Jaipur 

Aquasub Engineering, Coimbatore 

Best Engineers Pumps Pvt Ltd, Coimbatore 

Central Equip & Stores Procurement Circle-II, 
Lucknow 


Central Ground Water Board, Nagpur 


Crompton Greaves Consumer Electricals Limited, 
Ahmednagar 


CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research 
Institute, Durgapur (WB) 


In Pesonal Capacity, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI G. RAJENDRAN (Convener) 


SHRI ALOK GUPTA 
SHRI SIDDHARTH GUPTA (Alternate) 


Dr C. Mutu 
Suri C. MuruGEsan (Alternate) 


SHRI S. THANGAPANDI 
Suri N. RANADHIVE (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN KUMAR 
Suri M. P. Kanpo! (Alternate) 


Suri G. D. OJHA 
SHRI AsHIS CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


SHRI PANDHARI SUSAR 
SHRI PARVIN MURDEKAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRASHANT MAHALE (YP) (Alternate II) 


SHRI SUBRATA KUMAR MANDAL 
SHRI ASHOK Kumar Prasan (Alternate) 


SHRI S. L. ABHYANKAR 


43 


IS 17292 : 2020 


Organization 


Indian Pump Mfrs Association, Ahmedabad 
Kalsi Metal Works, Jalandhar 

Kirloskar Brothers Ltd, Pune 

KSB Pumps Ltd, Pune 


North India Pump Manufacturers Association, 
Jalandhar 


Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 
Rajkot Engg Association, Rajkot 


Roxon Industries (Regd.), Amritsar 


Small Industries Testing And Research Centre 
(SiTARC), Coimbatore 


The Southern India Engg Mfrs Association (SIEMA), 
Coimbatore 


UL India Pvt Ltd, Whitefield, Bangalore 


Representative(s) 


SHRI YOGESH MISTRI 


SHRI UTKARSH A. Cuuaya (Alternate) 


SHRI BARINDER KALsI/SHRI PUNEET KALSI 


Suri K. R. Konui (Alternate) 


SHRI NIRMAL C. TIWARI 


Suri R. S. BIRAJDAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHAY VIRKAR 


SHRI SANJEEV CHOUDHRY (Alternate) 


Suri C. L. GARG 


Suri JATIN Karsı (Alternate) 


DR A. K. JAIN 


Dr Suni GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND P. SAVALIA 


Suri D. R. SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI KIRPAL SINGH 


Suri A. M. SELVARAJ 


Suri K. V. KARTIK 


Suri D. JAYAPRAKASH (Alternate) 


SHRI MANJUNATH V. 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Composition of Utility and Industrial Application Pumps Subcommittee, MED 20:6 


Organization 


Convenor MED 20:6 
Best Engineers Pumps Pvt Ltd, Coimbatore 


Crompton Greaves Consumer Electricals Limited, 
Ahmednagar 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 
Flowmore Limited, Gurgaon 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity, Mumbai 
Indian Pump Mfrs Association (IPMA) 


Kirloskar Brothers Limited, Pune 
KSB Pumps Limited, Pune 


Mechanical Engg. Res & Devp Organisation, Ludhiana 


44 


Representative(s) 


Suri R. S. BIRAJDAR (Convener) 


SHRI S. THANGAPANDI 
Suri N. RANADHIVE (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVIN GARJE 
SHRI PARVIN MURDEKAR (Alternate I) 
Suri Ronit KANASE (YP) (Alternate II) 


SHRI ANKUL MANDAL 
SHRI ABHAY Kumar (Alternate) 


Suet I. C. JAIN 
Suri P. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. VENKATA NARAYANA 
SHRI ARIJIT SANYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI S. L. ABHYANKAR 


SHRI UTKARSH A. CHHAYA 
Sarı P. K. M. Datwapt (Alternate) 


SHRI CHIDAMBAR DESHPANDE 


SHRI ABHAY VIRKAR 
SHRI SANJEEV CHoupury (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH NIGAM 
Suri S. K. MANDAL (Alternate) 


Organization 
MECON Ltd, Ranchi 
North India Pump Manufacturers Association Jallandhar 
Projects & Development India Ltd, Vadodara 
Roxon Industries (Regd.), Amritsar 
Small Industries Testing And Research Centre 
(SiTARC), Tamilnadu 
Tata Consulting Engineers, Bangalore 
The Southern India Engg Mfrs Association, Coimbatore 
UL India Pvt Ltd, Whitefield, Bangalore 
WPIL Ltd, Ghaziabad 
Wilo Mather And Platt Pumps Ltd; Pune 


Thyssenkrupp Industrial Solutions (India) Private 
Limited, Mumbai 


45 


IS 17292 : 2020 


Representative(s) 


SHRI S. SHSHIREK A. G. 
Suri G. Israni (Alternate) 


Suri C. L. GARG 
Suri JATINS Karsı (Alternate) 


Suri G. P. DABI 
Suri R. C. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI KIRPAL SINGH 
Suri E. A. M. SELvaras (Alternate) 


SHRI S. V. KAMESH 
Suri R. MADHAVAN (Alternate) 


SHRI K. V. KARTIK 
Suri D. JAYAPRAKASH (Alternate) 


SHRI VMANJUNATH 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri B. C. BHAOYAL 
Suri B. P. KHAre (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ BAFNA 


SHRI SUHAS SHRIRAO 
SHRI RAJESH SHEKATKAR (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 20 (12322). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


