IS I 4410 ( Part XIV/Set

1 ) - 1977

Indian Standard
PART XIV SOIL CONSERVATION AND

( Reaffirmed 1998 )

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
RECLAMATION Section I Soil Conservation

( First Reprint MARCH

1990 )

UDC

001.4:627.81:624.138

@ Copyright 1977 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

Cr5

September 1977

IS t 4410 ( Part XlV/Sec

1) - 1977

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART XIV SOIL CONSERVATION Section I Terminology AND RECLAMATION Soil Conservation

Relating to River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, BDC 46
Representing Irrigation Department, Chandigarh Government of Punjab,

Chairman
SHRI I. P. KAPIU Members SHRI B. S. BHALLA CHIEF ENGINEER

Beas Designs Organization ( Ministry of Irrigation Power ), Nangal Township Irrigation & Power Department, Government Maharashtra, Bombay

& of

,?,HRI v. s. GUPTE ( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Project Wing, GovernC KIEF ENGINEER ment of Andhra Pradesh, Hydcrabad SUPERINTENDING ENQINEER ( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Government of TamilCJUEF ENGINEER nadu, Madras SUPERINTENDIX~ ENQINEER ( Alternate) Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, CHIEF ENQINEER (.D ) Chandigarh . DI~BCTOR ( W. R. ) ( Alternate ] Irrigation and Works Department, Government of SHRI S. M. DEB West Bengal, Calcutta Survey of India, Dehra Dun DEPUTY SURVEYOR GENERAL 1 DEPUTX DIRECTOR ( T & P ) ( Alternote ) Irrigation Department, Government of Madhya DIRECTOR ( CD0 ) Pradesh, Bhopal DIRECTOR (IRRIGATION RESEARCH) ( Alternate )

( Continued on page 2 )

@ copyright1977
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any ycans except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infrmgement of copyright under the said Act_

IS : 4410 ( Part XlV/Sec
( Continued from

1 ) - 1977

page1 )
Repesenting Central Water Commission, New Delhi Irrig;;cnat~w~rtmcnt, Government of Uttar Pradesh, In personal capacity ( M 18 New Delhi South Extension, Part II, New Delhi 110019 ) Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, New Delhi .Geological Survey of India, Calcutta Irrigation & Power Department, Government Orissa Bhubaneshwar Indian Inslitute of Technology, New Delhi University of Roorkee, Roorkee Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) Secretary SHRI V. KAT~YANASUNDARAII Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI of

Members DIRECTOR ( HYDROLOGY ) SERI N. K. DWIVEDI DR R. C. HOON JOINT COIIIMISSIONER ( S. C. ) SHRI G. PANT Snnr R. P. SIN~R ( Alternate ) .%RI R. K. SARU PROF SARANJIT Sr~on DR P. P. SEHGAL SHRI D. AJITHA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg )

Panel for soil
Convene7 DR R. C. HOON Members

Conservation and Water Management,

BDC 46 : ~11

In personal capacity ( M 18 New Delhi South Extension, Part II, New Delhi 110049 )

JOINT COM~XISSIONER ( S. C. ) n -- E P u T Y COMMISSIONER ( S. C.' ) ( Alternate ) DR A. M. MICHEAL SHRI R:S. MOLXOTE DR R. S. MURTHY

Ministry of Agriculture

and Irrigation,

New Delhi

Indian Agricultural Research Institute New D&l Central Water Commission, New Delh\ Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi

2

IS t 4410 ( Part XIV/See 1) - 1977

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART XIV SOIL CONSERVATION Section I AND RECLAMATION Soil Conservation

0.

FOREWORD

1 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 March 1977, after the draft finalized by the Terminology Relating to River Valley Frojects Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 A number of Indian Standards has already been printed covering various aspects of river valley projects and a large number of standards are in `the process of formulation. These standards include technical terms, the precise definitions of which are required to avoid ambiguity in their interpretation. `TO achieve this end, the Institution is bringing out this glossary of terms relating to river valley projects ( IS : 4410 ) which is being published in parts. The other partsaf this standard so far published are given on page 26. 0.3 Part XIV covers the important field of soil conservation and reclamation and in view of the vastness of this subject, it is proposed to cover the subject in three sections. While this section covers terms Section 2 covers terms relating to relating to soil conservation, reclamation. 0.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. This has been met by deriving assistance from the following publications: UNITED NATIONS. ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR ASIA AND THE FAR EAST. Glossary of hydrologic terms used in Asia and Far East. 1956, Bangkok. INDIA. INTERNATIONAL COMMISSIONON IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE. Multilingual technical dictionary on irrigation and drainage. 1967.
INDIA. CENTRAL BOARD OF 1~~10~~10~ AND POWER.

0.1This Indian Standard ( Part XIV/Set

irrigation and hydro-electric terms and standard notations India. 1954. Manager of Publications, Delhi. New York.

Glossary

used in

of

Nomenclature for hydraulics. 1962. American Society of Civil Engineers. 3

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set 0.4.1 All the definitions on irrigation and drainage'

1) - 1977

taken from ` Multilingual technical dictionary are marked with asterisk (*) in the standard.

1. SCOPE
1.1 This standard (Part XIV/Set relating to soil conservation.
NOTE - Throughout synonymously. 2. this standard,

1) covers
the terms

the

definitions

of terms

` bund ' and 6embankment* are urd

GENERAL

TERMS

2.1 Afforestation

* - Planting of forest cover over denuded has no forest or other cover or protection.

land

which

dissected topography developed by rill lvash 3.2 Badlands* - Minutely on a series of weak sedimentary rock or deposits of unconsolidated sands, clays, and gravels usually presenting marked differences in the resistance of successive layers. 2.3 Conservation Farming - The most efficient use of the land over a long period oftime which protects and preserves the land for wriculture, forestry, pasture, etc, for sustained production. 2.4 Deforestation*
-

Act of removal

of forest cover from land. between

The scientific study of the relationship 2.5 Edaphology* soils and living entities, including man's use of the land. 2.6 Exhaustive Farming over a short period of time. Farming practices which exhaust

the soil

2.7 Land Forms - Physical features of the land surface developed by erosion, sedrmentation and tectonic changes the processes of denudation, upland divides, glacial troughs, such as gullys and lar ger valleys, residual w7ave_cLltcliffs, wind blow-outs, graben, etc. Renewal of forest cover on denuded land, 2.3 Reforestation* has lost protective cover, by natural seeding or artificial planting. which

2.9 Scab Lands - Areas where the soil cover is shallow and the rock lies close to the ground surface, is parallel to it, and frequently even exposed. Soils on scab land are so shallow as to be amenable to severe runoff and erosion.
4

IS I 4410 ( Part XIV/&x

1) - 1977

2.10 Soil Conservation - The application to land of cultural, vegetational, structural and management measures, either singly or in combination, needed `to develop a system of use and management which will enable the desired level of productivity to be attained without drainage or loss of soil and/or soil fertility on this or other land and without causing any deterioration of the environment. 2.11 Soil Improvement The result of such practices as are adopted for protecting land against deterioration, rebuilding eroded soil, conserving moisture for crop use, providing proper irrigation and drainage, building up ioil fertility and increasing yields which ultimately leads to rationalized land use. 2.12 Soil Management - The practices, such as use of fertilizers, cultivation of plants which maintain or improve the physical, chemical and biological properties of the soil. 3. EROSION 3.1 Abrasion - Mechanical wearing of rock and soil by the action of solid materials moved along by wind, waves, running water, glaciers or gravity. Erosion which has been increased above 3.2 Accelerated Erosion that which existed under natural environment either as the result of the destruction of vegetative cover or by some activity of man. 3.3 Back Slope The less sloping side of a ridge. The lowest level to which a stream can

3.4 Base Level erode its bed.

of Erosion*

3.5 Beach Erosion* - The retrogression of the upper line of large lakes and coastal waters caused by wave action, shore currents, or natural causes other than subsidence. 3.6 Blow Out by wind erosion. The depressed area from which soil has been removed

3.7 canopy - A cover provided by shrubs/trees to protect the soil from further erosion. 3.8 Cataract a river bed. Action The digging back action of a rapid current on

A land configuration resulting from the 3.9 Cattle Terraces movement of soil in which the weight of the cattle supplies the energy for detachment and transportation. 5

IS: 4410 ( Part XIV/Set 1) - 1977 3.10 Channel Erosion* - Erosion occurring where surface water has concentrated so that a large mass of water supplies the energy both for detaching and transporting the soil. Channel erosion exists as ' stream erosion ' ( see3.64)) ` rill erosion ' ( see 3.52) and ` gully erosion ' (see3.32 ) . 3.11 Colhvium - Loose incoherent deposit at the foot of a slope of cliff, brought there principally by gravity but not carried away. 3.12 Contemporaseoas Erosion - Erosion of a local or unimportant character that takes place while ssdimentation is taking place elsewhere. 3.13 Continuous Trenching - An arrangement of trenches along the soil embankment in a continuous manner generally across a slope, used as a type of soil conservation measure for steeply sloping lands. 3.14 Corrasion - The mechanical process involved in the wearing away of rock and soil by scouring action of rock fragments activated by wind or water. or destruction of a 3.15 Corrosion* - The gradual deterioration substance or material by chemical action, frequently induced by electrochemical processes. 3.16 Culturally-Induced Erosion - Erosion caused by increased runoffor wind action due to the work of man in deforestation by cutting or burning protective cover cultivation of the land, overgrazing, and disturbances of the natural drainage; the excess of erosion by the acts of man over that normal for the area. 3.17 Debris Avalanche* - The sudden movement of soil downslope of the ,soil mantle on steep slopes caused by its complete saturation through protracted heavy rains. 3.18 Deflation - The complete removal of loose material by wind, exposing the underlying rock. 3.19 Denudation* a) The erosion by rain, frost, wind, running water, and other agencies, of the solid matter of the earth so that strata formerly covered are exposed, and elevations are worn down. b) The removal, either by natural or artificial means, of all vegetative and organic matter so that the land surface is bare.

3.20 Deposition a) The process of subsidence of solid material held in suspension in water. b) The geological process involving the accumulation of rock material or other debris transported by such agencies as flowing water, waves, winds, glaciers, etc; also the mass movement of the material itself, resulting from subsidence due to the slackening movement of the transporting agency. 6

IS t 4410 ( Part XIV/Set

1 ) - 1977

3.21 Desert Erosion* - That form of erosion or general wearing away of rocks which takes place in arid countries, such rrosion being due largely to the wind. Arid erosion is equivalent to `desert erosion', and is in contradiction to normal, glacial and marine erosion. 3.22 Detachment* - The removal from a soil mass of transportable fragments of soil material by an eroding agent, usually falling rain-drops, running water or wind. 3.23 Earth Flow - A slow flow of earth lubricated with water occurring as either a low angle terrace flow or a somewhat steeper but slow hillside flow. 3.24 Elutriation, Assortment, or Selective Erosion* - A process by which runoff from soil, particularly sandy land, picks up and carries away the finer, lighter particles leaving behind the larger, heavier particles. 3.25 Eolian* - Of or relating to, formed by, or deposited from the wind or currents of air. 3.26 Erodibility 3.27 Erodible The relative ease with which the soil is eroded. to erosion. by by

A soil, that is easily eroded or susceptible

3.26 Erosion i The detachment and movement of soil particles precipitation, surface. runoff, stream flow, sediment moved along water waves and glaciers, wind, etc.

3.29 Escarpment* - A more or less continuous line of cliffs or the steep slopes facing in one general direction which are caused by erosion or faulting. 3.30 Fluvial Erosion* -Erosion caused by the action of running water. 3.31 Gully - A small, elongated depression, usually eroded, in the land surface, usually dry except after a rainstorm; a channel or miniature valley cut by running water, but *through which water commonly flows only during and immediately after heavy rains or during the melting of snow. The distinction between, gully, and rill is one of size (see also 3.49). A gully is sufficiently deep that it would not be obliterated by normal tillage operations whereas rill is of lesser depth and would be smoothed by ordinary farm tillage. of 3.32 Gully Eromion - Removal of soil by excessive concentration running water in gullies resulting in the formation of deep channels which cannot be obliterated by tillage. - Erosion which occurs in the upstream 3.33 Headwater Erosion* end of the valley of a stream, causing it to lengthen its course in such direction. 7

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set 3.34 Incipient Erosion reference to gully erosion.

1 ) - 1977 The early stages of erosion, especially or rock, with or a

3.35 Landslide - The rapid, massive moment of earth mixture of both, in downward and outward directions.

from the sides and 3.36 Lateral Erosion - The scouring of material bed of water channel and the cutting of the banks by running water. 3.37 Leaching

a) 1) 2) b) 1)

Removal

of materials

in solution. matter followed by perco-

Solution of minerals and organic lation of the dissolved substances. The removal of soluble constituents by percolating liquid.

from soils or other material by abundant

2)

The removal of salts and alkali from soil matrix irrigation combined with drainage.

a non-watertight artificial 3) The disposal of a liquid through structure, conduit, or porcus material by downward or lateral drainage, or both, into the surrounding permeable scils. 3.39 Mass Movement - A slow or rapid masses ( see 3.35, 3;41, 3.59 and 3.62 ). 3.39 Minimal Impact Threshold wind velocity to start erosion or to saltation'particles from neighbouring adding their kinetic energy to that of movement involving large

Wind Velocity - The minimum initiate erosion in an area when area are falling on the area and the wind to start the soil moving. velocity required particles. with to a

3.40 Minimal Threshold Wind Velocity - Wind start erosion in an area without assistance of outside

3.41 Mudflow* -The flow of heterogeneous debris lubricated large amount of water usually following a former stream course. 3.42 Non-erodible Soil which is resistant to erosion.

3.43 Pavement Erosion* - The accumulation of fragments of rock or coarse particles at the surface of a soil, caused primarily by the removal of the fine material by surface rainwash, wind or erosion. 3.44 Peneplain* - A relatively flat, featureless plain from the erosion of former overlying formations first, a series of channels, and then th? ridges which channels eroding until the resulting surface is almost 3.45 Pluvial Denudation Denudation 8 effected which has resulted by streams cutting lay between such flat.

by rain.

3.46 Raindrop Rrosiem ec Spkbs Rmmim?' - A form of soil erosion resulting from soil splash caused by the impact of falling rain drops. 3.47 Raim Pillars* ; Minor erosional forms composed of upward projecting pillars of sol1 or soft rock capped and protected by pebbles or `concretions.
3.48 Rain Wash - The detachment and transportion of soil material under the impact of rain. 3.49 Ravine - A gorge or deep gully with steep sides caused by erosive action of flowing water. 3.50 Rejuvenation a) The renewal of erosive activity relating to streams. b) The development of youthful features previously worn down to a base level. of topography in an area

very small passage caused by surface runoff a few 3.51 Rill -A centimetres in depth with steep sides but usually presenting no obstacle to agricultural machinery. type of erosion which occurs when runoff 3.52 RiJl Erosion -The water concentrates in rills in sufficient volume and velocity to. generate cutting power. 3.53 Saltation a) Wind erosion by short jumps from unprotected surface.

b) Discontinuous motion of particles in the fluid above the bed of a channel in series of short hops. A sand wave of approximately triangular cross 3.54 Ssqd D-eszction in a vertical plane in `the direction of flow formed by moving wind or downstream water with gently upstfeam slope and steep downstream slope which travels downstream by the movement of sediment up the upstream slope and the deposition of it on the downstream slope. 3.55 Sheet Eros&m, occurs when material of relatively uniform rainfall. 3.56 Shore ErosimP land area adjacent to water, wave or wind. or Sheet Ww* - The type of etosion which is removed from the surface in a thin layer or sheet thickness, generally resulting from sudden heavy -Removal of sand, soil, or rock from the shore oceans, seas, lakes, or ponds due to the action of

is a phenomenon that occurs in 3.57 S&s-CM sropc Bank -Slip unstable soil bank flow. The *slip surface' or the ` surface of rupture' or the `surface of failure' occurs across the points of maximum shear stress and by definition lies at an angle of 45" -I- 4 (where 4 is the angle of friction or angle of shearing resistance ) to the plane upon which major principal stress acts. `9

18 I 4410 ( Part XIVjSec

1) - 1977 material where the bank or an

3.58 Sloughing - Sliding of overlying underlying stratum is saturated.

3.59 Slump - The downward slipping of a mass of rock or soil moving as a unit or asseveral subsidiary units, usually with backward rotation on a more or less horizontal axis parallel to the cliff or slope from which it descends. ~10~ movement, usually over relatively short 3.60 Soil Creep -The distances of a mass of soil, acting under the force of gravity. The term is usually applied to such a phenomenon when it is much slower and smaller in magnitude and extent than a landslide. 3.61 Soil ,Erosion* - The process of detachment and movement of soil from the land surface by wind or running water, in&ding normal soil erosion and accelerated erosion. 3.62 Solifluxion See3.60.

3.63 Stream-Bank Erosion - The scouring of material from the sidei and bed of water channel and the cutting of the banks by running water. 3.64 Stream Erosion See3.63.

3.65 Subsidence* - The lowering of the elevation of surface soil due to disagpearance or shrinkage of the material below. 3.66 Surface Creep* - Movement of soil particles by wind along surface of ground, rolling, but not jumping or flying. 3.67 Surface . Erosion* - The of exposed soil or exposed rock . erosion . . surfaces by dlsmtegratmg, dlssolvmg and wearing action of water, ice, wind and other atmospheric agencies. 3.66 Surface Sealing of Soil* - The packing of dispersed soil particles in the immediate surface layer whereby it becomes almost impermeable to water and air. 3.69 Suspension - Very fine dust particles suspended by the turbulence of the wind. entrained in the air stream

3.70 Terracettes - A small steplike form developed on the surface of a slumped soil mass along a steep grassy incline. 3.71 Toe Slope The lower portion of the back slope.

3.72 Transportation* - The movement of detached soil material across the land surface or through the air by running water, wind or gravity. 3.73 Undercut-Slope by stream action. Bank The bank of a meandering 10 stream eroded

IS : 4410 ( Part xrV/sec

1 ) - 1977

3.74 Water Erosion - The removal of soil from the exposed surface of land by rapidly running water, including runoff from rainfall, melted snow and ice. 3.75 Weathering* - The geological processes caused by physical and chemical action by atmospheric agencies upon rocks at or near the surface of the lithosphere, which result in the disintegration and decomposition of such rock and in some instances its removal to other locations by separate wind and water action. and deposition 3.76 Wind Erosion* - The detachment, transportation, of soil by the action of wind. The removal and deposition may be more or less in uniform layers or as localized blowouts and sand dunes. 4. SOIL CONSERVATION

4.1 Absorptive Outlet* - Outlet channel in which contour furrows, ridges, ditches, or other such means are used to collect and hold runoff until it is absorbed by the soil. 4.2 Absorptive Terrace or Retention TerraceA terrace of variable cross section constructed by excavating on both sides of the bund ( ridge ), formed and designed primarily for the retention and spreading of moisture over the widest possible area. 4.3 Bench Terrace - A terrace in the form of bench or strip designed to facilitate soil conservation erosion control, and cropping on steep slopes by the development of level or flat gradient strips normal to the slope used for agricultural purposes. 4.4 Box Inlet `Drop Spillway* - A rectangular box open both at the top and at the downstream end; and outlet structure is attached to the open end of the box inlet. 4.5 Broad Base Terrace - A 10~ embankment or ridge with gently sloping sides, rounded crown, and a broad shallow channel along the upper side, constructed to control erosion by diverting runoff along the contour at low velocity instead of permitting it to rush down the slope or to intercept and retain runoff on the terraced land. It may be level or have a grade toward one or both ends. 4.6 Brush Matting* - A matting of branches placed on badly eroded land to conserve moisture and reduce erosion while trees or other vegetative covers are being established. 4.7 Buffer Strip* - A more or less permanent contour strip, usually of variable width, planted with grass or other erosion-resistant vegetation which is not a part of the regular farm rotation, and which may or may not be harvested. 11

I9 t 4439 ( PnFi XIV/&x

1) - 1973

4.9 -1 bpmmlmnt' - The improvement of the hydraulic flow characteristics of a natural or artificial channel by clearing, excavation or other means in order to increase iis carrying capacity and prevent channel erosion. 4.9 Check Dam or Check -A small low fixed dam, constructed of brush, logs, timber, loose rock, masonry or concrete in an eroded channel to reduce the slope of the water flowing therein during high stages, and also the resulting velocity thereby preventing excessive scour and erosion and inducing deposition. Such dams are also used `to retain debris. They are usually built of inexpensive and temporary materials where dependence for ultimate protection is placed on vegetative cover. 4.18 c&ate* a) An inclined drop or fall in which the lowering of the water surface achieved over a relatively long length of the channel but where the slope is steep enough to develop high velocities. It has generally a higher drop than in falls. b) High velocity conduit inclined drop or fall. 4.11 Clean Tilled Crops* enough apart for intertillage.
-

for conveying Crops which

water to lower level, are planted

an

in rows far

4.12 Collective Outlet* - A draw or channel that receives the discharges froh two or more terraces. 4.13 Contour a contour.
Bund -

A small bund ( embankment
Narrow-Base

) constructed

along

4.14 contour Bun&&Level struction of a series of contour of water along a slope.

bunds

SO

Terracbg - The conas to Provide barriers to the flow

4.15 Contour Cultivation, Contour Farming* - The process of conducting field operations, such as ploughing, planting and cultivation on the contour or at right angles to the natural direction of slope. 4.16 Contour Strip Crop&q* - The farming of sloping land in alternate strips of intertilled row crops and close-growing crops. These ,,+:ips are placed on the contours at right angles to the direction of the ridrural flow of surface runoff water with the purpose of slowing down the runoff and of filtering out in the close-growing crop the soil washed from the land in the intertilled crop. Yra &qPE* A term used to designate leftovers from crops. of different - The growing ofa selected number M epop IBotation* kinds of crops in regular order on any particular field. Ii

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/SW 4.19 Diversion Terrace a terrace system, some purpose.

1 ) - 1977
water from channel for

A terrace constructed to divert or to divert water from its natural drainage

4.20 Drainage Terrace, Drainage Control Terrace, and Diversion Terrace, Runoff Control Terrace, graded terrace built with a relatively Terrace* -A
designed primarily for the surface runoff at non-corrosive systematic velocities. interception developed and

Interception or Channel
deep channel discharge of natural

Micro-storages 4.21 Dug Out Pondsdepressions or ground surface.

by deepening

4.22 Erosion Control - The application of necessary measures to control accelerated erosion of land surfaces by vegetative or by artificial structures, such as terraces, dams, retards, baffles, etc; in contrast to vegetative control. 4.23 Exhaustive Farming over a short period of time. Farming practices which exhaust the soil

4.24 Field Strip Cropping* - The farming or relatively of uniform width across the general slope but not closely contours.

narrow strips following the

4.25 Flat Land - Land with a slope of less than 1 percent and at times having trough like topographic condition with.inadequate drainage. 4.26 Furrowing -A kind of tillage practice involving formation of ridges and furrows to conserve moisture in dry land agriculture or aid in the application of water to row crops in irrigated agriculture. 4.27 Gently Sloping Land 3 to 5 percent. Land with slope gradient ranging from

4.28 Grade-Stabilizing Structure* -A dam or drop structure constructed for the purpose of stabilizing the grade of gully of other watercourse, thereby preventing further head cutting or lowering of the channel grade. 4.29

Graded Bench Terrace A A level terrace having a longitudinal gradient across the hill slope, that is along the bench level, and is
normally 4.30 used for raising non-paddy crops such as potato. constructed on a on the upstream

Graded Bund - A small bund (embankment) fdling or graded contour and provided with a channel
side.

4.31 Graded Bunding/Narrow Base Terracing - Constructing a series of bunds on falling or graded contours at regular intervals with a channel on the upstream side to break the slope for diverting runcff safely. 13

IS t 4410 ( Past XIV/&c

1 ) - 1977 or

4.32 Graded ( Channel ) Terrace -A terrace with a constant variable grade along its length (as contrasted with level terrace).

4.33 Grassed Chute* -A specially prepared slope, used to control headward erosion of gullies, which safely carries water from natural ground surface to the gully floor. It is level in cross section and is provided with a dense cover grass to protect its surface from erosion.

of

4.34 Grassed Watdrways OT Sod Waterways* -A vegetated waterways used to conduct the accumulated runoff from cultivated fields in a strip-crop or terrace system. 4.35 Grassland Farming* -Arrangement of permanent pasture; use of grasses and similar plants in strips, as permanent soil stabilizers in waterways and headlands, as crops in rotation, as fertilizers or green manures, and as cover crops. vegetative 4.36 Ground Cover -A soil for protecting it against erosion. 4.37 GIJlv Control* - Regulation structural or vegetative means. or other types of cover over the of erosion of soil in a gully by

4.38 Gully Pllrgging - A treatment involving the construction of gully control structures, such as check dams for preventing gully erosion particularly at the gully head. k;;!d . structure installed at the head or upper end of a 4.40 HeacW* -A gully to prevent overall cutting. 4.41 Land Capability Cbses - Grouping of lands into classes of similar production potential for agricultures, pasture, forestry, etc, with a view of making the best use of each piece of land without causing excessive erosion, or 1OsS Of productivity. series of embankment constructed along a 4.42 Lateral Bunds -A slope at right angles and at interva!s along the length of a contour bund in order to prevent runoff accmulation in a depression. 4~ LCVCI ( contour ) Terrace - A terrace that follows a contour along its length [ as contrasted with a graded ( channel) terrace]. 4.44 ~~~01 ( Paddy ) Bench Terrace - A bench terrace slope in any direction and generally used to grow paddy. having no Ditch (Field Irrigation Channel)The main field

4.1s. Ley Farming - A system of farming in which grass is used in rotation as a practice for soil and moisture conservation. 14

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/&c

1) - 1977

4.46 Listing or Basin Listing* - The ploughing or furrowing of land, usually in the contour, with a special lister that places earth plugs at intervals in the open furrows to form small basins between them. 4.47 Marginal Bund

a) An embankment which is constructed at the lowest part of the catchment without any reference to contour. b) An embankment constructed along the river at a short distance from the river banks with the object of preventing inundation of the area behind the embankment. 4.48 Marginal Land - Land at vulnerable locations along the banks of a stream or periphery of a tank or reservoir. It may be degraded/ eroded/water logged. 4.49 Meadow Strip ( Pasture Strip ) - A relatively flat, shallow swale protected with adaptable grasses or legumes in an area large enough to form an economical pasture or ` hay unit `. 4.50 Mulch* - A natural or artificially applied layer of plant residues or other materials on the surface of the soil. Mulches are generally used to help conserve moisture, control temperature, prevent surface compac-. tion or crusting; reduce runoff and erosion, improve soil structure or control weeds. 4.51 Mulch Tillage or Mulch Farming - A crop and soil management practice that utilizes the preceding crop residue by leaving a percentage of the latter on or near surface of the ground as a protective mulch. 4.52 Narrow&Base Terrace -A terrace similar to a broad-base terrace in all respects excepting the width of ridge and channel. 4.53 Pasture Management* - The establishment and maintenance of a dense ward of vegetation by fertilization, grazing control and cultivation. 4.54 Paving* - A cover of stone or other material used to protect an earth dam face, a dike, or shore from the erosive action of waves and currents. 4.55 Peripheral Bund - An embankment constructed along the periphery of gully heads and banks at a short distance from the head to prevent encroachment of gullies into Adjoining land. 4.56 Permanent Strip* - A relatively narrow or small area of land kept in permanent cover for the purpose of retarding runoff and checking erosion by wind or water. 15

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set

1 ) - 1977 Developing suitable measures for protectof fish and other wild life, fire protection,

4.57 Pond Management* irlg ponds, such as production and stock water.

by soil 4.58 Regenerated Soil* - Soil which was once impoverished erosion but which has been restored to its normal productivity by various nmcliorelative measures. 4.59 Retention Dam/Check Dam - A dam, usually small in size, constructed to impound or retard temporarily surface runoff and bring about deposition of a substantial portion of the soil being carried away by storm water runoff. 4.60 Ridge Planting* of soil. 4.61 Rock Wash-A adcquatcly protected Placement of plants on top or sides of ridges and is from

natural drainage-way that conveys runoff from erosion by rock or gravel deposits. Land with slope gradient ranging

4.62 Rolling Topography 5 to 10 percent.

4.63 Sedimentation -The process of deposition of fragmental material transported by, suspended in or deposited by a flowing channel without Sediments in rivers and canals may be classified in any regard to size. accordance with IS : 1498-1970f. 4.64 Shelter Belt - A natural or plant barrier control wind erosion by providing barriers against also minimize the drying effect of wind on soil. of trees or shrubs to wind movement and

4.65 Shifting (jhum) Cultivation - Cultivation for one or two crops along slopes in hilly areas after deforestation and burning vegetation, without terracing or bunding leading to denudation of forest cover and top soil. The frequency in years at which Jhum cultivation is done in the same area is known as the ` Jhum cycle `. 4.66 Side Bund - An embankment at right angle to the contour bund. constructed along the slope usually

4.67 Sloping Bench Terrace - A bench terrace with a cross slope. A bench with a cross slope away from the hill side is said to be an outwardly sloping bench terrace and that with a cross slope towards the hill side is called an inwardly sloping bench terrace. or held 4.66 Sod - A surface layer of soil. matted rhizomes and stolons of grasses and other herbs. tclassification /(&t rwisien ) . and identification of soils for general together engineering by roots, purposes

16

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/SW 1) - 1977 `4.69 Sodding* - Laying grass-covered ditches to prevent erosion. earth on side slopes of drainage

4.70 Soil Binder ( Vegetative) -A plant used to prevent soil erosion, as various grasses or stoloniferous plants. 4.71 Soil Saving Dam - A dam, usually small in size, constructed to impound or retard temporarily surface runoff and bring about deposition of a substantial portion of the soil being carried away by storm water runoff. 4.72 Soil Saving Dike - An earth dike constructed at the lower end of an irrigated field, for the purpose of holding soil sediment. 4.73 Solid Sodding an area. Transplanting of a continuous layer of sod over of springs of grass roots or rbot used to collect and/or divert measure with

4.74 Spot Sodding - Transplanting stocks more or less at random. 4.75 Spar runt ff. Terrace A short

terrace

4.76 Staggered Trenching staggered trenches.

A type of soil conservation

4.77 Strip Cropping - The practice of growing crops by a systematic arrangement of strips or bands. Erosion permitting crops (row or grain crops) and erosin resisting crops (cover crops or sod) are alternated in strips to protect, the soil and vegetation against running water or wind. The alternate strips are laid out approximately along the contour on erosive soils or at approximate right angles to the prevailing direction of the wind where soil blowing is a hazard. 4.78 Strip Sodding' - Laying sods in strips approximately contour and at regular intervals down the slope. on the

crop

4.73 Stubble Mulching (Mulch Tillage or Mulch Farming) - A and soil management practice that utilizes the residual mulches of the preceding crop by leaving a percentage of this vegetal residue on or near surface of the ground as a protective mulch. loosening or fracturing 4.80 Subsoiling - A process of mechanically subsoil to increase infiltration, penetrability to plant roots and aeration.
the

A broad elevated, nearly level land or deeply cut at 4.81 Table Landintervals or by valleys due to sheet and rill erosion or broken by escarpments. 17

fS : 4410 ( Part 4.92 Terrace

XIV/!Sec 1) - 1977

.

A flat, level or nearly level, narrow, area of land bordering a a> river, bounded on at least one side by a definite steep slope rising

b)

c>
4

upward from it. ( Generally termed a `river terrace `. ) A low embankment or ridge of earth constructed across a slope to control surface runoff and minimize soil erosion by intensive runoff. Sloping ground cut into a succession of benches and steep inclines for purposes of cultivation. Often inclines are made quite steep and are protected by riprap, or retaining walls are subatituted, thus giving greater areas for cultivation. Areas bordered by low broad ridges constructed on cultivated land of such alignment, height and spacing as to conform to the topoT graphy and to permit travel of cultivating and/or harvesting machinery, the object being to prevent loss of soil by erosion.

4.83 Terracing - A method of erosion control and moisture conservation by constructing a series of mechanical barriers or benches across the land slope, with arrangements for disposal of excess runoff in order to break the length ofslope and also to reduce the degree of slope. 4.84 Terrace Crown the top of a terrace.
-

The highest part of the terrace

ridge, that is

4.85 Terrace Outlet Channel, Outlet Channel, or Outlet* - A water way or drainage channel provided to collect and carry away the runoff discharged from terrace channels. 4.86 Terrace Spacing - The distance between the two corresponding points on twa successive terraces. The elevation difference may he

expressed as vertical interval ( V I ) and horizontal distance as horizontal interval (H I). 4.87 Terrace System* -- A complete series of terraces occupying a slope and either discharging runoff into an outlet channel or intercepting runoff and retaining it on the terraced land. of the soil to provide 4.88 Tillage* - The mechanical manipulation soil conditions suited to the growth of crops, the- control of weeds, and for the maintenance of infiltration capacity and aeration. 4.89 Tilth* - The physical condition of a soil in respect to its. fitness for the growth of a specified plant or sequence of plants. 4.90 Trenching - A type of terracing where small trenches are constructed across the land slope in order to intercept and either to drain it safely or to conserve it on land, particularly for improving soil condition of the degraded land slopes where afforestation of pasture development When the trenches are made on contour, it is programmes are taken. 18

called contour trenching and when tKe trenches are provided with a gradient across land slope, it is called graded trenching. 4.91 Under-Cut Slope Bank eroded by stream action. The bank of a meandering stream

4.92 Vegetated Outlet* - Any channel, depression, or area stabilized with vegetation sufficiently to permit safe disposal of terrace discharge. 4.93 Water Control - The physical control of water by such measures as conservation practices on land, as channel improvement and installation of structures for water retardation and sediment detention. 4.94 Watershed Management* -The planned use of watershed lands in accordance with predetermined objectives, such as the control of erosion, streamflow, sedimentation, and the improvement of vegetative cover and other related resources. 4.95 Wind-Break - Any object which serves as an obstacle to free movem:nt of surface winds. In forestry, trees serve such a purpose. Tree wind-breaks are classified according to their general arrangement as rows atid hedge-rows, belts and shelter belts cf three or more rows and groves. 4.96 Wind Strip Cropping* - Planting of regular farm crops in straight parallel strips at right angles to the direction of the prevailing winds, without regard to the contour. 4.97 Wire Dam, or Wire-Wrapped Dam* - A dam constructed of rock held together by wire mesh, used principally in flood protection works.

19

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices) Regional Offices: Telephone Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 *Eastern : l/l 4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 331 01 31 331 1375 I 36 24 99 18 43 16 41 24 42 25 19 2916 92 95

2 3 I 41 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 41 ( 41 twesterri : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 BOMBAY 400093

Branch Offices: Okushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 2 63 48 AHMADABAD 380001 I 2 63 49 +,Peenya Industrial Area 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road 38 49 55 BANGALORE 560058 38 49 56 I Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor. Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 667 16 BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82/83. Lewis Road. BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5 36 27 5315 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 3 31 77 GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), 23 1083 HYDERABAb 500001 6 34 71 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 { 6 98 32 2.1 68 76 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 ( 21 82 92 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 6 23 05 T.C. No. 14/1421. University P.O.. Palayam I6 21 04 TRIVANDRUM 695035 16 21 17 /nspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): Pushpanjali, Firs1 Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, 2 51 71 Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 5 24 35 PUNE 411005
`Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhre Approach, P. 0. Princep 27 58 00 Street. Calcutta 700072 @ales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, 89 85 28 Bombay 400007 @ales Office in Bangaloreis at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, 22 36 71 Bangsfore 560002

Reprography

Unit,

BIS,

New Delhi,

India

