INATA Ah IS 18314 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


We sik wr wee — urfremiuren 
EAE GN 


Silk and Silk Processing — 
Glossary of Terms 


ICS 01.040.59 


© BIS 2023 


amea AA St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


eee HAH Wd, 9 FR ITE sit AMT, 4$ Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 9 


Silk and Silk Products Sectional Committee, TXD 28 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Silk and Silk 
Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Silk has played an important role in the history of the textile industry. As a natural material, silk has a long history 
of human use and is still used textile applications today. India is the second largest producer of silk, contributing 
to about eighteen percent to the world production. This standard aims to fulfil the need by providing a 
comprehensive compilation of key terminologies specific to the world of silk production and hence, this standard 
has been prepared to eliminate ambiguity or confusion arising from various interpretations of definitions of terms 
commonly used in the silk processing. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


TERMS RELATING TO SILK AND SILK PROCESSING — 
GLOSSARY 


1SCOPE 


This standard covers definitions of the terms 
commonly used in the field of silk and silk 
processing. 


2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


2.1 Acca — A rich medieval fabric made of silk 
decorated with gold threads; originally made at 
Acre, Syria. Used during the 14" Century for church 
vestments and regal applications. 


2.2 Agra Gauze — A strong, thin, transparent and 
gauze like silk fabric. 


2.3 Adhi — An Indian term for light weight fabric 
in plain weave. It is used as shirting in tropical 
countries and also as the ground fabric for chicken, 
kamadani etc. 


2.4 Adras — A glossy union fabric, half silk and 
half cotton usually made with narrow stripes, with a 
beetled finish, made in India and Central Asia. 


2.5 Aeolian — A warp rib dress material made of 
cotton warp and silk, man-made fibre or worsted 
weft. The cloth is light in weight, has a flossy finish 
and is piece dyed. 


2.6 Amber Charkha — A small device used to spin 
fibres into yarn. 


2.7 Anaphe Silk — This silk of southern and central 
Africa is produced by silkworms of the genus 
Anaphe: A. Moloneyi Druce, A. Panda Boisduval, 
A. Reticulate Walker, A. Ambrizia Butler, 
A. Carteri Walsingham, A. Venata Butler and 
A. Infracta Walsingham. They spin cocoons in 
communes, all enclosed by a thin layer of silk. 


2.8 Antique Satin — Antique satin is a satin- 
weave fabric which is normally used for draperies. 
Both sides may be used. The face is a classic 
lustrous satin. 


2.9 Antique Taffeta — A stiff-finished fabric in 
plain weave made to resemble fabrics of the 18" 
century. It may be made of dupion silk or synthetic 
fibres. Often yarn-dyed with two colours to give it 
an iridescent effect. 


2.10 ARM — Automatic reeling machine. 


2.11 Art Silk — Artificial silk or imitation silk that 
is made from viscose rayon. 


2.12 Atlas — A term used in France, England, 
Germany and Austria for a highly finished silk 
fabric made with an eight-harness satin weave. Used 
for dresses and cotton-back lining. 


NOTE — Originally made in India in colour of gold. A light 
weight satin lining made with silk face and a cotton back. 
Used for dresses. 


2.13 Bad Cast — A defect in raw silk characterised 
by abruptly thickened places in the thread due to the 
cocoon filaments not being properly attached to the 
raw silk thread by defective casting of filament, or 
made by adding more than one cocoon filament at a 
time. 


2.14 Bafta — An Indian term for a fabric made with 
silk warp and cotton weft used as dress material. 


2.15 Bale (Silk) — A defined quantity of raw silk 
carefully wrapped in a cotton cloth and gunny cloth. 
A Japanese or Shanghai bale contains 60 kg (picul) 
or European bale 100 kg and a Canton bale 48 kg of 
raw silk. Indian bale is 20 kg. 


2.16 Balkal Yarn — Yarn spun out of tasar cocoon 
peduncles on ambar charkha (KUIC system) or spun 
manually on takli, after they are boiled in alkali 
solution and opened up. 


2.17 Ball Warps — Warps that, after being wound 
on à warping machine are bunched together in a rope 
form and wound into a ball or similar form. 


2.18 Bengaline — A cloth with more or less striking 
warp rib appearance running across the fabric, 
produced from cotton or worsted yarns, silk or other 
continuous filament yarns, a typical example being 
silk warp and worsted weft. The warp rib or corded 
effect may be produced by employing any of the 
following methods: 


(a) Suitable thickness and setting warp and 
weft threads; 

(b) Suitable warp rib weaves; and 

(c) A combination of (a) and (b). 


The fabric was first made in Bengal, India, and is 
used for dresses, coats, trimmings, and draperies. 


2.19 Banner Cloth — A plain weave fabric of 
cotton, wool or silk used for the fabrication of flags, 
banners, and buntings. 


2.20 Banok — An embroidery work/art made on the 
fabric using silk threads. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


2.21 Barathea — A fabric of pebbled appearance, 
usually of twill hopsack or broken rib weave, made 
of silk, worsted or manmade fibre and used for a 
variety of clothing purposes. It is a rich, soft-looking 
fine fabric. 


2.22 Basine — A silk fabric in which two sets of 
fine warps float over every two fillings and interlace 
with the third. 


2.23 Bassinas — Waste silk obtained from the 
residue cocoon after reeling. 


2.24 Bast Liquor — A bath liquor, used in dyeing, 
that is prepared by acidifying soap solutions that 
have been used for degumming of silk. It greatly 
facilitates the production of a level shade. An 
artificial bast liquor is prepared from a solution of 
gelatin in soap solution. 


2.25 Batik — A term referring to a wax-resistant 
dyeing technique. First, design elements are painted 
or stamped onto the cloth's surface with melted wax; 
then it is immersed in a hot dye bath. The wax is 
removed after the dyeing is completed. 


2.26 Bave — The bifilar thread spun by the silk 
worm: it consists of two filaments (brins) that are 
cemented together by the gum called sericin. 


2.27 Berlin Silk — A type of cordonnet or 
crocheting silk made by twisting 4 to 8 single yarns 
with a right-hand twist and then twisting three of 
these with a left-hand twist. The yarn is high twist 
and therefore round smooth and hard. 


2.28 Bhir — The traditional wooden contrivance 
operated by two persons which is used for 
preparation of untwisted muga yarn. 


2.29 Bivoltine Silk — Cocoons built by a silkworm 
race with two generations (life cycle) in a year. 


2.30 Blaze (France) — The silk spun by the 
silkworm that serves as a scaffold to support the 
cocoon also called floss silk or spelai (Italy). 


2.31 Boarding — A process of drying and shape- 
setting of stockings after they have been dyed. The 
stockings are placed on either heated metal forms or 
wooden forms that are heated in a boarding machine. 


2.32 Bogai — An eco-race of tasar silkworm. 


2.33 Boil Off Loss — The amount of sericin 
removed from silk yarn or fabric by the degumming 
process expressed as a percentage. 


2.34 Boiled Off Silk — Undyed thrown silk/raw silk 


from which natural gum or sericin has been removed 
by boiling in soap solution. 


NOTE — Boiling off is the process of removing sericin 
from silk or other gummy material fibres like ramie. 


2.35 Bolting Cloth — An industrial fabric 
originally from silk, used for screen printing and 
also in flour mills as a sieve. The fabric is woven 
with undegummed yarn with high regularity in 
structure with a gauze weave and firm finish. 


2.36 Bombyx Mori — A species of silk producing 
moth, which feeds on mulberry leaves and from 
which a large part of the continuous filament silk of 
commerce is obtained. 


2.37 Book — A defined quantity of raw silk skeins 
carefully compressed to a package. Book of 
mulberry raw silk weighs about 5 kg, whereas 
muga and tasar weighs 2 kg. 


2.38 Borato — A light weight fabric of silk and fine 
wool produced in the 17" century in England. 


2.39 Bordadillo — A floral patterned silk taffeta 
fabric used for women's wear in Spain. 


2.40 Boski — A closely woven dress material 
usually from spun silk warp and weft. 


2.41 Bourette (France) — Silk noil (an irregular 
slubbed yarn usually made of silk waste). 


2.42 Bourre (France) — Gum waste 


2.43 Bright Silk — Thrown silk, completely boiled 
off and dyed. 


2.44 Brin — The ultimate filament of silk as 
emanating from each gland of the silkworm. Two 
brins (from each gland on either side of body of 
silkworm) are cemented together by gum or sericin 
at the spinneret of the silkworm to emerge as a bave 
or silk thread. 


2.45 Brocade — A figured fabric having a Jacquard 
weave with an all-over interwoven design, normally 
figures or flowers. The figure is developed by 
floating the warp thread, the weft thread, or both and 
bound in a more or less irregular order. The ground 
is usually formed of a weave of simple character. It 
may be made of natural or manmade fibres. The 
word brocade is derived from the Spanish word ‘to 
figure’. It is not reversible as Damask. 


2.46 Brushing (Silk) — Act of transferring newly 
hatched silkworms from the egg sheets on to the 
rearing trays, or act of removal of floss from the 


cooked and boiled cocoons for collection of ends for 
reeling. 


2.47 Bulky Raw Silk — Raw silk reeled with a 
central hollow structure meant to lowers its apparent 
density. 


2.48 Buniyaad Reeling Machine — A simple 
reeling device for tasar cocoons aimed at 
eliminating thigh reeling practise and enhance 
production by incorporating false twist during 
reeling, similar to thigh reeling. 


2.49 Button — Device used in cottage basin, 
multiend and automatic reeling machines to arrest 
waste and thick portions going into thread while 
reeling. It improves the cleanness quality 
characteristic of yarn. 


2.50 Calendering — A finishing process in which a 
fabric is passed through a calender, normally to 
smooth and flatten it, so as to confer surface glaze. 


2.51 Cannage — A fault in silk cloths due to, a warp 
tension effect. It is prevalent in taffetas and takes the 
form of ripples of alternate high and low lustre 
distributed irregularly over the cloth. 


2.52 Canton Crepe — A sturdy silk dress material 
with a pebbly crepe surface with six ‘S’ threads and 
six ‘Z’ threads in arrangement and two ‘S’ picks and 
two ‘Z’ picks, originally made of silk in Canton, 
China. 


2.53 Canton Silk — A raw silk reeled form very 
small domesticated silk cocoons in South China. 
The fibre is regular, soft and lustrous but light, hairy 
and weak. 


2.54 Capella — A 2/1 twill weave mulberry silk 
fabric generally used as dress material. 


2.55 Carded Sliver — The long continuous 
twistless strand of fibres produced by the carding 
machine. 


2.56 Carding — The separation and partial cleaning 
by processing of a tangled or matted mass of fibres 
to a filmy web by working the fibres between two 
closely-spaced, relatively moving surfaces, clothed 
with pointed wire, pins spikes or saw teeth. 


2.57 Cashemire De Soie — A high grade taffetta, 
usually made of fine silk yarn, which is given a 
finish to resemble cashmere fabric. 


2.58 Cellular — A term describing a fabric 
constructed so as to have a close and orderly 
distribution of hollows or holes. In woven fabric, 
this can be achieved by honey comb, leno or mock- 
leno weaves. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


2.59 Chambery — A dress material from silk or 
manmade fibres warp and worsted weft in twill 
weave. 


2.60 Chanaki — A small bamboo made device used 
to make design on cloth manually (for looms 
without jacquard). 


2.61 Chaple Silk Yarn — Silk yarn spun from 
inferior cocoons and silk spinners waste. 


2.62 Chardonnet Silk — Thick soft silk yarn 
consisting of two or more strands twisted together in 
one direction, each strand being made of a number 
of single loosely twisted in the opposite direction. 


2.63 Charkha (Silk) — A simple hand operated 
indigenous crude contrivance for reeling raw silk. 


2.64 Charkha Silk — Raw silk reeled on charkhas. 


2.65 Charmeuse — An eight-end satin weave, silk 
fabric. It is soft in feel, drapes very well and used in 
ladies wear. 


2.66 Chassum — A term popular in west Bengal, to 
denote the silk waste obtained during reeling of 
cocoons from polyvoltine races for example Bengal 
Chassum. 


2.67 Chiffon — A very light, sheer, open mesh 
fabric made from hard twisted yarns. Silk chiffon is 
made from raw silk in both warp and weft directions. 
The yarns are highly creped and twisted, ranging 
from 50 to 100 TPI (2 000 TPM to 4 000 TPM). 


2.68 Chiffon Twist — Hard twisted single raw silk 
thread having about 2 000 TPM to 4 000 TPM used 
for making chiffons, mousseline de soie (French), etc. 


2.69 China Silk 


a) A plain weave, lustrous light weight silk 
fabric produced in China and Japan. These 
threads are irregular and soft. It is dyed or 
printed and used for blouses, lingerie, 
linings, etc. The fabric was originally 
handwoven in China of mulberry silk, as 
early in 1 200 B.C. The term has been 
applied to machine-made imitations in the 
U.S; and 


b) A white raw silk yarn of superior quality 
from north China. 


2.70 Chinon — Silk fabric which has reeled filature 
Silk without twist in the warp but with alternate 
yarns having left and right twist in the weft. 


2.71 Chop — A trade mark or ticket on a book of 
raw silk indicating its grade and name of the 
producer or shipper. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


2.72 Chundari — An Indian tie-dye cotton or silk 
dress used in native costume. 


2.73 Chunri (Chungri and Chungidi) — An 
Indian term originally for a plain weave Indian 
cotton and silk sarees dyed by the knot tying method. 


2.74 Chupi Cocoon — It is a variety of cocoon 
rendered unreelable due to various types of bacterial 
and viral infections. 


2.75 Cleanness (Raw Silk) — The degree of 
cleanness of raw silk panels, determined on the basis 
of incidence of cleanness defects which are 
classified as 'super major defects' 'major defects' 
and 'minor defects ' by using official standard 
photographs for cleanness. Cleanness is expressed 
as a percentage. 


2.76 Cleanness Defects — Defects found in raw silk 
such as waste, slugs, bad casts, knots, cork screws, 
loops and loose ends. Cleanness defects are 
classified into three categories, namely Super-major 
defects, major defects and minor defects. Penalty 
points are given for each defect and penalty points 
vary with the class of defect. Cleanness is derived 
from deducting total penalties from 100 and is 
expressed as a percentage. 


2.77 Cloque — A French word, meaning blistered, 
that is used for dress and coat materials with the 
surface irregularly raised forming the blistered 
effect. 


2.78 Coan Silk — The larvae of Pachypasa otus D 
from the mediterranean bio-geographic region 
(southern Italy, Greece, Romania, Turkey, etc), feed 
primarily on trees such as pine, ash cypress, juniper 
and oak. They spin white cocoons measuring about 
8.9 cm x 7.6 cm. In ancient times, this silk was used 
to make the crimson-dyed apparel worn by the 
dignitaries of rome. However, commercial 
production came to an end long ago because of the 
limited output and the emergence of superior 
varieties of silk. 


2.79 Cocoon (Silk) — The silken shell spun by the 
silkworm larvae that serves as a protective covering 
to the insect during its pupal stage of existence. 


2.80 Cocoonage (Silk) — Appliance used for 
mounting mature silkworms to enable them to spin 
cocoons, known as chandrike. 


2.81 Cocoonase — This proteolytic enzyme 
produced by the silkworm as it reaches the final 
stage of its metamorphosis, to soften the anterior 
portion of cocoon and enables the moth to exit from 
cocoon. 


2.82 Cocoon Entangled Silk — Raw silk in which 
the cocoon filaments are not parallel to the yarn axis 
but they are randomly entangled due to the rotation 
of cocoons during reeling. 


2.83 Cohesion — The degree of agglutination of 
cocoon filaments forming raw silk thread, 
determined by subjecting the raw silk threads to 
friction in a cohesion tester and counting the number 
of strokes required to spread and open out 
constituent filaments. 


2.84 Combing — Straightening and parallelizing 
fibres and removing short fibres and impurities by 
using a comb or combs assisted by brushes and 
rollers, pins and sometimes by knives. 


2.85 Commercial Moisture Regain — The agreed 
value to be added to the mass of a defined material 
(after drying it using prescribed methods) in order to 
obtain its commercial mass, linear density or mass 
per unit area. It is expressed as a percentage of the 
mass of the extracted and dried material. 


2.86 Conditioned Mass (or Correct Invoice Mass) 
— The mass of raw silk obtained by adding to its 
oven dry mass, 11 percent of its oven-dry mass. It is 
also the mass of a textile material conditioned in the 
standard atmosphere for testing. 


2.87 Conditioning — To allow textile materials 
(raw materials, slivers, yarns and fabrics) to come to 
hygroscopic equilibrium with the surrounding 
atmosphere or with the standard atmosphere for 
testing. 


2.88 Cooking (Silk) — The process by which the 
silk cocoons are treated in boiling water for a short 
time with a view to soften the filament for easy 
unwinding during the subsequent reeling process. 


2.89 Corkscrews — A defect in raw silk 
constituting places in which one or more cocoon 
filaments are longer than the remainder, and give the 
appearance of a thick spiral form. 


2.90 Cottage Basin — Traditional mulberry silk 
reeling machine. 


2.91 Count — A numerical expression indicating 
the mass per unit length or length per unit mass of 
yarn. 


NOTE — Various counting systems (Direct and 
Indirect), using different units of mass and length, have 
been in use. 


2.92 Crandy Silk — Silk fabric in which warp is 
un-twisted, weft is noil or spun silk. 


2.93 Crepe — A lightweight fabric of silk, rayon, 
cotton, wool, man-made, or blended fibers 
characterized by a crinkled surface. This surface is 
obtained through the use of crepe yarns (yarns that 
have such a high twist that the yarn kinks), and by 
chemical treatment with caustic soda, embossing, 
or weaving. Although crepe is traditionally woven, 
crepe yarns are now used to produce knit crepes. 


2.94 Crepe Fabric — A fabric, characterised by a 
crinkled, puckered or pebbly surface with highly 
twisted yarns in the weft and sometimes in the warp 
or both. Similar effect is also obtained by using 
normal twisted yarn and crepe weave. 


2.95 Crepe Georgette — A sheer fabric, similar 
to chiffon (see 2.67), made with a crepe yarn that 
gives the fabric a crepe appearance (see 2.93). 


2.96 Crepe Yarn — Highly twisted yarn generally 
with 1 200 TPM to 4 000 TPM used for producing 
crepe effect in woven or knitted fabrics. 


2.07 Crepe/Georgette Yarn — Twisted yarn 
usually with 2 000 TPM to 3 600 TPM, generally 
made of two threads of raw silk. 


2.98 Crepe-backed Satin — A two-faced fabric 
that can be used on either side. One is satin whereas 
the reverse, made of twisted yarns, is crepe. 


2.99 Crepe-de-Chine (French Yarn) — Hard 
twisted yarn, usually with 1 600 TPM to 2 500 TPM, 
generally made from 3 to 5 raw silk threads. It is 
used as weft in Crepe-de-Chine. 


2.100 Crepe-de-Chine Fabric — A light weight 
fabric made with ‘S’ and ‘Z’ highly twisted filament 
yarns alternating in the weft and with a normally 
twisted filament yarn. 


2.101 Crepon — A dress fabric in the crepe but 
heavier and more rugged than the average crepe. It 
is usually made with silk or rayon. The crepe effect 
appears in the direction of the warp and is produced 
either by different degrees of twist in the yarn, by 
employing only right or left-hand twist yarns or by 
weaving some warp yarns slacker than others. 


2.102 Croissure — A technique of twisting raw silk 
over itself in the process of reeling with the object 
of consolidating the different filaments constituting 
the raw silk rounding off the angularities of the 
thread and squeezing off the extra moisture and 
gum. 


2.103 Croissure Wheel — Set of three plastic 
pulleys arranged at an angle of 45? which helps in 
removing moisture, improving cohesion quality of 
yarn and helps in attaining circular cross section of 
silk yarn. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


2.104 Cultivated Silk — Fibers from a silkworm 
that have had scientific care. 


2.105 Cut Cocoons — Cocoons cut at one end or 
along one side to remove the pupae for examination. 


2.106 Cutie — Nett silk from which the gum has 
been completely removed. Synonym: bright silk. 


2.107 Daba Cocoon — An ecorace of tasar cocons, 
Antheraea mylitta. D. available commercially in 
bivoltine and trivoltine varieties. 


2.108 Damask — A glossy, heavy, firm- 
textured Jacquard weave fabric, similar to brocade, 
but lighter, with flat and reversible patterns. Made of 
cotton, silk, wool, linen and man made fibres, it is 
used for tablecloths, napkins, home furnishings, 
draperies and  upholsteries, and occasionally 
clothing. 


2.109 Dead Cocoons — (see 2.207) The cocoon 
with dead pupa inside. 


2.110 Dakhana Fabric — Bodo traditional dress 
made by silk/cotton yarn. 


2.111 Defective Cocoons — Cocoons that are 
considered unfit for reeling operation. 


2.112 Deflossing — Removal of soft and loose outer 
most layer silk filament from the cocoons is called 
deflossing. 


2.113 Degumming — A process of removing the 
sericin or natural gum from silk yarn or fabric by 
boiling in a soap solution. Synonym: Boiling-off 


2.114 Denaturation — A process whereby the 
physical and chemical properties of a protein are 
considerably modified. The conversion of the silk 
gland protein into insoluble silk filament may be 
considered as a process of denaturation. 


2.115 Denier — The unit of expressing the linear 
density of silk filaments and manmade fibres and 
yarns, given by the weight in grams per 9 000 m of 
material. 


2.116 Dhoti — Traditional Indian attire for men. It 
is a rectangular piece of unstitched fabric wrapped 
around the waist and legs and knotted at the waist. 
Mundu, veshti, dhuti, mardani, chaadra, panchey, 
dhotar are traditional men garments worn in the 
Indian sub-continent. 


2.417 Do Kadi — Silk waste extracted during 
charkha reeling while manipulating the cocoon 
cooking and end picking by means of two sticks. 


2.118 Dosuti — A Hindi word which literally means 
two threads used to describe the operation of 


IS 18314 : 2023 


combining two threads together in a winding 
machine, in which case the operation is known as 
*dosuti winding. When applied to cloth, it means 
that two warp threads are working in pairs and that 
two weft threads are placed in the same thread. 


2.119 Double Cocoons — A cocoon jointly built by 
two silk worms; it serves as protective shell for both 
the worms during their pupal stage of existence. 
Such cocoons are readily distinguished by their size 
and toughness. 


2.120 Double Faced Satin — A satin fabric with 
a satin appearance on both sides unlike 
ordinary satin, which has a definite right and wrong 
side 


2.121 Doubling — The process of combining two 
or more silk threads for twisting into a yarn suitable 
for weaving, knitting, etc. 


2.122 Dupion (French) — Dupion or doupon silk is 
the raw silk reeled either entirely from double 
cocoons, or from a mixture of double and single 
cocoons as even from single cocoon only, but reeled 
in such a way as to give an effect of dupion. By 
dupion effect is meant the particular surface 
appearance of dupion silk caused by a variable 
number of characteristic thick places. 


2.123 Dupion Silk Fabric — A plain weave 
mulberry silk fabric generally produced on 
handlooms employing organzine in warp and 
doupion silk in weft. The fabric is used as dress 
material, cushion covers, curtains etc. 


2.124 Drap Beresilienne — A French serge dress 
goods made with silk or silk warp and fine worsted 
filling. 


2.125 Drap de Arest — A rich silk fabric used for 
church vestments in the middle ages. 


2.126 Drap de Chasse — A plain weave suiting 
made with fine silk warp and heavy cotton filling to 
produce prominent horizontal ribs. Used in women's 
wear. 


2.127 Drap de Prince — A silk or wool surge 
suiting woven with eight warp threads and three 
picks in a repeat. 


2.128 Drap de Soie : 


a) French term for silk fabric; 


b) A closely woven serge dress goods and 
men's suitings originally made in black 
only; and 


c) A silk fabric with pronounced cords. 


2.129 Drap Pique — A quilted silk fabric woven 
with fancy figures. Uses : men's vests. 


2.130 Drap Royal 


a) A light weight, twilled French dress woven 
with a silk organzine warp and very fine 
worsted filling producing small cross ribs; 
and 


b) An obsolete lightweight, fulled and printed 
French wool fabric. 


2.131 Drappo — An Italian term for silk fabric. 


2.132 Dressing (Silk) — In the spun silk industry, 
the process of sorting out fibres into groups of 
different lengths. Neps and noils are also removed 
during the process. 


2.133 Drugget — A course heavy weight material 
used as floor covering, woven with cotton, spun silk, 
sun hemp or jute yarn in warp and woollen, sun 
hemp, spun silk or jute yarn in weft. 


2.134 Drying (Cocoons) — A process that kills the 
pupa so as to prevent it from transforming into moth 
and emerging out of the cocoon by piercing the 
cocoon. 


2.135 Duchesse — A lustrous and smooth silk fabric 
made with dense warp; it is popular dress material 
for women. 


2.136 Dup Chan — An Indian term for plain weave 
changeable silk fabric usually made with red warp 
and green filling. 


2.137 Dupatta — An Indian term for a kind of open 
fine scarf made from cotton, silk or man-made fibre, 
worn by ladies. 


2.138 Dupion Raw Silk- — Raw silk reeled either 
entirely from double cocoons or from a mixture of 
double and single cocoons or even from single 
cocoons only but reeled in such a way as to give 
effect of dupion. 


2.139 Durreeaee — A striped silk fabric with 
stripes of contrasting colours, especially red, yellow, 
green stripes. Produced at Agra. 


2.140 Durrie (or Durry) — An Indian term for a 
course plain weave weft faced fabric generally used 
as a floor covering. 


2.141 Echevette — A skein of reeled silk yarn of a 
specified length, usually small; the weight indicates 
the count of the yarn. 


2.142 Echizen — The best grade of Japanese silk 
fabrics. 


2.143 Ecru Silk — Thrown silk that has been 
washed in tepid soap solution to remove dirt, the 
original gum content being retained. 


2.144 Ek Kadi Waste — Silk waste extracted 
during charkha reeling while manipulating the 
cocoon cooking and end picking by means of one 
stick. 


2.145 Elaiche — A hand made, plain weave, yarn 
dyed Indian silk fabric made at Agra, in narrow 
white stripes on rose ground. 


2.146 Embroidery Silk — A loosely twisted silk or 
man-made fibre yarn composed of untwisted or 
single yarns. 


2.147 Empress Gauze — A fine flower figured 
fabric originally woven with raw silk and linen. The 
raw silk is employed for the ground weave while the 
linen is used for the designs in satin weave. 


2.148 Endi (or Eri) Silk — Silk of white or brick 
red colour obtained from a species of domesticated 
Iepidopteran insect (Attacus ricini) belonging to the 
family Saturniidae. It feeds on castor leaves. 


2.149 Epingling — A warp rib dress material made 
of silk warp and worsted weft. The cloth has a 
pebbled effect and feel similar to crepe. 


2.150 Epprouvette — It is a warp reel having 
1.0 meter or 1.125 meters periphery swift with an 
indicator. The apparatus is used for single cocoon 
test reeling and also size test. 


2.151 Eri Culture 


a) A household activity practised by the 
tribals to get protein rich pupae and a 
byproduct, that is, open mouthed eri 
cocoons; and 


b) The complete process involved in rearing 
of eri silkworm for its silk cocoons, 
spinning the yarn and making finished 
fabric. 


2.152 Etoile 


a) A lustrous satin cloth used as dress 
material; and 


b) A star design made by weft in the meshes 
of the net foundation. 


2.153 Etshigo Silk — A fine Japanese raw silk. Also 
spelled etschingo, etschizen. 


2.154 Evenness — The degree of evenness of raw 
Silk panels within approximately the same length as 
the sizing skeins, determined on the basis of 
incidence of evenness defects by using official 
standard variation photographs. Evenness defects 
are those portions of raw silk which show stripes 
caused by the variation in the size of raw silk to such 
a degree as is easily noticeable by visual inspection. 
Evenness is expressed as the number of stripes for 


IS 18314 : 2023 


20 panels, categorized as Evenness I, II and III 
depending on the intensity of the stripes, as shown 
by the standard variation photographs. They are the 
short-term variations. 


2.155 Exfoliation — Silk that has small specks 
(defects) in silk yarn or fabric that appears on the 
silk after degumming. 


2.156 Extra Thread — Refers to the threads other 
than warp and weft of base fabric used for weaving 
buttas (small repetitive patterns), body portion and 
border portion. 


2.157 Fagara Silk — Fagara silk is obtained from 
the giant silk moth Attacus atlas L. and a few other 
related species or races inhabiting the Indo- 
Australian bio-geographic region, China and 
Sudan. They spin light-brown cocoons nearly 6 cm 
long with peduncles of varying lengths (2 cm to 
10 cm). 


2.158 Faille — A flat ribbed fabric with a light lustre 
made with heavier yarns in the filling than in the 
warp in plain weave. Made of cotton, silk, rayon or 
other manmade fibres alone or in combination. 


2.159 Fasua (Feshua) — Yarn spun by hand out of 
uncleaned mulberry silk waste. 


2.160 Fibril (Silk) — An extremely fine filament 
produced by the longitudinal splitting of a normal 
silk filament or brin. 


2.161 Fibrillation (Silk) — The formation of fibrils 
on the silk filament. It is responsible for the defect 
known as lousiness in dyed silk yarn. 


2.162 Fibroin (Silk) — The fibre material of raw 
silk thread which is a protein not soluble in boiling 
water. It constitutes about 80 percent of raw silk 
fibre. 


2.163 Filament — A fibre of indefinite or extreme 
length. E.g., silk filament, which runs from 300 m to 
1 200 m. 


2.164 Filature — An establishment for the 
production of raw silk from cocoons, employing 
modern techniques, such as steam for heating and 
power for driving the reels. 


2.165 Fine Corkscrews (Raw Silk) — Places in 
which one or more cocoon filaments are longer than 
the other and give the appearance of a fine spiral 
form. It is a type of neatness defect in raw silk. 


2.166 Fine End — A silk warp thread that is thin in 
places because all the filaments supposed to make 
up the full ply are not present, mainly caused by 
laxity on the part of the reeler. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


2.467 Flat Crepe — A firm, medium- 
weight silk crepe with a soft, almost imperceptible 
crinkle. It has crepe fillings alternating with two 
S and two Z twists. The surface is fairly flat. Flat 
crepe may also be made of man-made fibers. It is 
used for dresses, negligees, and blouses (see 2.93). 


2.168 Flimsy Cocoon — A cocoon in which the 
shell is loosely spun in layers and has a low silk 
content. These cocoons are easily overcooked and 
produce waste. 


2.169 Floss Silk — Silk from the outer part of the 
cocoon; it is of low grade and is available only in 
small amount. It is also known as Blaze (French). 
The term is also applied to soft silk yarn or singles 
without twist, used in embroidery and electrical 
insulation of wires. 


2.170 Foulard — Foulard is a light weight silk, 
rayon, cotton or wool fabric characterised by its twill 
weave. It has a high lustre on the right side and is 
dull on the reverse side. It is usually printed. It is also 
made in plain or solid colours. It has a characteristic 
feel that may be described as light, firm and supple. 


2.171 Frison (French) — The silk waste brushed 
from the outer layer of cocoon prior to reeling. Such 
waste is also described as strusa (Italian), knube 
(English) and kibizzo (Japan and China). 


2.172 Galettame (Italy) — Waste silk from the 
inner part of cocoons. 


2.173 Gassing — The process of passing a spun silk 
yarn rapidly through a small flame so that the 
protruding fibres are burnt off, to obtain a smooth 
surface. 


2.174 Georgette Crepe Fabric — A fine light 
weight, open texture fabric usually in plain weave, 
made from crepe yarns, usually two Z twisted and 
two S twisted yarns in both warp and weft. The 
fabric is usually made of silk. 


2.175 Ghicha — The yarn drawn by hand out of 
tasar cocoons without any twisting, with the help of 
earthen pot. 


2.176 Ghicha-Ghicha Fabric — A medium 
weight fabric from tasar waste silk yarn hand 
woven, is used for dress making and furnishing. 


2.177 Gamucha — An assamese traditional hand- 
woven fabric made by either muga, pat, eri or cotton 
yarn. 


2.178 Gicha Noil Fabric — A medium weight 
fabric from tasar waste silk yarn in the warp and 
spun noil yarn in the weft mixed with tasar yarn. 


2.179 Gilling — An operation, preparatory to 
spinning of passing, wool or spun silk fibres through 


one or more gill boxes in order to improve fibre 
parallelization. 


2.180 Gold Thread — A core yarn formed by 
twisting thin filaments of gold on central yarn of 
silk, cotton, manmade fibres etc. Pure gold thread 
consists of a fine silver wire covered with gold film. 


2.181 Grade (Silk) — Classification of raw silk on 
the basis of test carried out according to standard 
methods in silk conditioning and testing houses. The 
qualities taken into consideration are winding, size, 
tenacity, elongation, evenness, cleanness, neatness 
and cohesion. 


2.182 Grainage — An Institution where silkworm 
seed is produced and sold to rearers. 


2.183 Grains (Cocoon) — The wavy/grainy patern 
that is produced on the surface of cocoons by the silk 
worm. 


2.184 Grant Reel — A method of reeling a skein of 
raw silk in which the yarn makes definite and regular 
crossings, differing from yarn reeled in parallel 
rows. 


2.185 Green Cocoons — Cocoons of mulberry 
silkworm just after harvesting on 6" or 7" day are 
called green cocoons. They are usually transported 
to the cocoon market for selling. For tasar and muga 
cocoons harvesting day differs. 


2.186 Grege (French) — The silk thread produced 
by the reeling together of the baves of several 
cocoons. Grege has no twist that is, raw silk 
produced by filatures. 


2.187 Grenadine — A silk thread formed by 
doubling two or more ends of poil and then throwing 
in a direction opposite to that of the individual poil 
ends. The composition is like that of organzine, but 
grenadine is three to four times more tightly twisted 
with 800 TPM to 2 400 TPM. 


2.188 Grey Finished Fabric — A silk fabric woven 
with the gum (sericin) in the raw. The fabric is 
degummed, dyed and finished after weaving. 


2.189 Gum (Silk) — A sticky protein material that 
costs the filaments of raw silk. This is otherwise 
called as Sericin. 


2.190 Gum Silk — Thrown silk from which gum or 
sericin has not been removed. 


2.191 Gum Spots — Hard un-windable places in 
skeins of raw silk or in silk waste, due to the 
presence, at time of production, of excessive 
amounts of moisture, which causes the gum to soften 
and then harden to an aggregated mass of filaments 
and gum. 


2.192 Gum Waste — Bits of silk collected as waste 
in the re-reeling of raw silk at the filatures or during 
throwing and weaving. It is also called ‘Strazza’ 
(Italian) or ‘Brourre’ (French). 


2.193 Habutai — A Japanese silk fabric, soft, 
lightweight, silk cloth, originally woven in the gum 
on Japanese handlooms, now woven on power 
looms. Also spelled hautae and habutaye. The yarn 
can be twisted or thrown very little or not at all. This 
plain wove fabric, heavily sized is piece-dyed or 
printed. Various types of weaves are used 
according to the weight, which varies from 2.5 
momme to 60 momme (see 2.255). 


2.194 Hairiness (or Fuzziness) (Raw Silk) — The 
condition of the thread which shows small loose 
ends of less than 10 mm and fine particles of cocoon 
filaments, projecting from the thread. 


2.195 Hammered Silk — A silk fabric made in a 
jacquard effect suggesting hammered metal 


2.196 Hammeri Silk — A Japanese spun silk made 
of waste; it is half or fully boiled. 


2.197 Hand — The term 'hand' shall denote the feel 
of raw silk in terms of hardness and smoothness. 


2.198 Hang La — A plain weave silk gauze made 
in China. Uses: Men's and women's garments. 


2.199 Hank — Silk reeled and removed from a 
reeling machine in the form of an open band. It shall 
be one continuous thread made by tying all breaks 
with good, clean knots, with the loose ends cut not 
more than three millimetres (one-eighth inch) long. 
The outside end of the thread shall be tied round the 
hank in such a manner as to be easily found. The 
hank shall be laced at places equally spaced with a 
fine, soft twisted, cotton or spun silk yarn passed 
through at least five diamonds in the width of the 
hank, tied such that the knot is about one centimetre 
(one-half inch) from the edge of the hank and the 
loose ends ought not to exceed one centimetre (one- 
half inch) in length from the knot. 


2.200 Heavy Corkscrews (Raw Silk) — Places in 
which one or more cocoon filaments are longer than 
the remainder, and give the appearance of a very 
thick and large spiral form. It is a type of cleanness 
defect in raw silk. 


2.201 Hwachow — A plain weave silk fabric about 
24 inches wide, with a sized finish, made in China. 
The warp is organzine, and the filling is six-ply tram, 
producing a ribbed effect. 


2.202 Hwasienchow — A very soft plain weave silk 
fabric with a ribbed effect, made in China. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


Occasionally made in crepe effect. Woven about 
25 inches wide. 


2.203 Hygroscopic — Tendency of a material to 
absorb (or desoprb) moisture from the air. 


2.204 Ilaicha — A hand woven silk satin fabric 
made in verticle stripes one half inch wide arranged 
in alternating diagonal bars of purple and gold: the 
stripes are broadered with alternating red and white 
dots. Produced in Surat. Uses: Women's outer 
garments. 


2.205 Ilicha — A fabric made of silk and cotton, 
produced in India. Used by Indian women for 
shawls. 


2.206 Improved Charakha — A charkha in which 
a 0.5 HP single phase motor is incorporated to 
reduce drudgery of the reelers. 


2.207 Inside Stained Cocoons — The pupa is dead 
and sticks to the inside shell of the cocoon causing a 
stain. They are called mutes because they do not 
make a sound when shaken. These cocoons are 
difficult to process and will result in silk, which is 
dull in colour. 


2.208 Jala — It is an inferior variety of silk waste 
which contains more of palade layer silk and 
extraneous matter. 


2.209 Jamdani — An Indian term used for 
superfine cloth produced on handlooms with 
characteristic designs. 


2.210 Jatan — Yarn spun by hand, from mulberry 
silk waste. Synonym: Jatam, Jhut, Fansua. 


2.211 Jetteboutte — A device that helps in easy 
casting of filaments in silk reeling and brings down 
the down time thus improving the productivity and 
ease of operation. 


2.212 Jelly — It is unreeable and burst open cocoons 
which come out during cooking and reeling. 
Synonym- Boiled off cocoons. 


2.213 Jhoot Silk Coating — It is plain weave thick 
coating fabric produced on handloom in West 
Bengal. 2 ply degummed Jhoot warp and 2 ply or 
3 ply Jhoot weft is used. Jhoot yarn is produced 
from reeling silk waste. 


2.214 Jhuri (Silk) — Yarn spun out of tasar waste 
without subjecting it to opening process. 


2.215 Jhuri Fabric — A plain weave woven thick 
fabric produced on handloom mostly in Bihar out 
of reeled tasar silk waste hand spun yarn. It is used 
for dress material, furnishing, etc. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


2.216 Kahan — It is a unit in practice in tasar 
industry representing number of tasar cocoons. In 
Bihar - Kahan contains 1 280 cocoons. In Orissa - 
Kahan contains 1 600 cocoons. In M.P - Kahan 
contains 1 000 cocoons. In Maharashtra-Kahan 
contains 4 000 cocoons. 


2.217 Kakame Cost — It is the cost of that quantity 
of cocoons required to produce one kilogram of raw 
silk. 


2.218 Kamdani — An Indian term for fine fabric 
with ornamentation made with gold and silver 
threads 


2.219 Kashmere Silk — Silk fabric made with 2/1 
right hand twill weave that gives a soft finish. 


2.220 Katan — It is twisted filature silk. 


2.22] Katan Cloth — A plain weave mulberry silk 
fabric in which double and twisted yarn is employed 
both in warp and weft. 


2.222 Katari Cloth — A Hond-woven, yarn dyed 
fabric made with silk warp and fine count cotton 
filling. Made in Bengal 


2.223 Katia — The yarn spun out of tasar waste 
after opening and cleaning. 


2.224 Kerial — It is a handloom silk sari generally 
woven in West Bengal, with twisted degummed silk 
yarn. It is woven in plain weave with design or plain 
border and pallu, brought out by throw shuttle loom. 


2.225 Kesseru — Host plant of Eri silkworm. 


2.226 Khadi (or Khaddar) — An Indian term for 
fabric woven on handlooms from hand spun yarns of 
natural or manmade fibres or blends of two or more 
such fibres. 


2.227 Kora Cloth — Printed sarees, scarf and 
printed dress materials for ladies are made from kora 
cloth or fabric. Kora cloth is a silk fabric mainly of 
mulberry silk used both in warp and weft in 
undegummed and untwisted condition. Kora cloth is 
classified in two varieties: (a) Single, where the 
warp is of single ply and weft two ply and (b) 
double, where the warp is two ply and weft is three 
ply. 


2.228 Kosa — A light weight fabric handwoven 
from tasar yarn in warp and weft and is generally 
printed. 


2.229 Large Slugs — Considerably thickened 
places in the thread seven millimetre and above in 
length, or extremely thickened places with less 
length. 


2.230 Lassis — A French term for waste silk. Also, 
light weight fabric made out of this waste. 


2.231 Lettered Silk — A silk fabric ornamented 
with inscriptions, letters, words or sentences. It was 
originally an Oriental fabric so decorated. 


2.232 Lintress — A term formally used in France 
for a type of silk fabric imported from China. 


2.233 Sere 


a) A heavy, French corded silk fabric made 
with brocade floral patterns formed by 
filling and Jacquard figures formed by the 


warp. 
b) A narrow ribbon used as binding or piping 
for a seam. 
2.234 Sse 


a) A French term used for warp. 


b) A silk chiffon, crimped and used for 
ruching and trimming. Sometimes made of 
cotton. 


2.235 Long knots (Raw Silk) — Knots which have 
loose ends, from 3 mm to less than 10 mm in length. 
Itis a type of cleanness defect in raw silk. 


2.236 Long Loops or Loose Ends (Raw Silk) — 
Loops or split ends, 10 mm and above in length, 
when measured along the filament. It is a type of 
defect in raw silk. 


2.237 Loom Finished Fabric — A fabric woven 
with degummed and dyed yarns. It is ready for use. 


2.238 Loops (Raw silk) — Small open places in the 
thread due to the excessive length of one or more 
cocoon filaments, and are less than 10 mm in length 
when measured along the filament. It is s type of 
neatness defect in raw silk. 


2.239 Lousy Silk (Lousiness) — A defect in silk 
yarns or fabrics consisting of little specks caused by 
the fibres splitting and curling up i.e., fibrillation of 
the silk filaments. This forms small neps that in a 
dyed fabric are evident as white specks. 


2.240 Lowe Silk — An experimental silk yarn made 
of a silk filament surrounded with a rayon solution. 
The resulting fibre was one continous filament 
which took dye well and possessed the hand and 
lusture of silk. Developed in the early 20" century. 


2.241 Major Defects (Raw Silk) — Defects in raw 
silk that are classified as major defects are waste, 
large slugs, bad casts, very long knots, crokscrews. 


2.242 Makhmal — An Indian term for cotton or 
rayon or silk velvet sometimes embroidered with 
gold. 


2.243 Malformed Cocoon — Abnormally shaped 
cocoons, which may arise from species variation. 
This defect may be due to racial characteristics and 
breeding with mulberry leaves stained with 
agrochemicals. 


2.244 Mar about Silk — Hard twisted, stiff silk 
yarn dyed in the gum state, consisting of 2 or 3 
untwisted or slightly twisted singles. It is used for 
carpets. 


2.245 Marble Silk — A light weight silk dress 
material which has mottled appearance caused by 
the use of multicoloured weft yarns or by warp 
printing prior to weaving of the cloth to simulate the 
veining of marble. 


2.246 Marquisettee — A light, open textured, fine 
quality gauze, in which slipping is reduced by 
crossing the warp threads by means of lino principle. 
Used as curtain and dress materials. 


2.247 Matka — The yarn spun by hand appliances 
out of mulberry pierced and other waste cocoons 
with the help of earthen pot. 


2.248 Matka Fabric — An Indian term for a rough 
handloom fabric made from yarn spun out of pierced 
cocoon in the weft and organzine in warp. It is used 
as a dress material, furnishing, cushion covers etc. 


2.249 Maximum Deviation — The degree of size 
variation in the test skeins; it is expressed by the 
higher of the two differences namely, the difference 
between the average size and the average size of a 
known number of coarsest skeins and the difference 
between the average size and the average size of the 
same number of finest skeins. It is a measure of 
extreme variations in size of the lot. 


2.250 Melted Cocoons — Melted cocoons are also 
known as Dead cocoons. In this case, the pupa is 
dead and sticks to the inside shell of the. cocoon 
causing a stain (see 2.207). 


2.251 Mekhala — A Traditional dress of assamese 
lady made by silk/cotton yarn. 


2.252 Minor Defects (Raw Silk) — Defects in raw 
silk that are classified as minor defects are small 
slugs, large knots, crokscrews, long loops or loose 
ends 


2.253 Modal Cocoon — An ecorace of tasar 
cocoon, Antheraea mylitta D. found in the natural 
forest on Sal Trees mainly in Jharkhand, Bihar and 
Odisha. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


2.254 Moire Fabric — A ribbed or corded fabric 
that has been subjected to heat and heavy pressure 
by rollers after weaving so as to present a rippled 
appearance. The effect arises from differences in 
relation of the flattened and unaffected parts. 


2.255 Momme — A Japanese weight equal to 
3.75 g. Which is applied to a piece of fabric 
measuring 25 yards by 1.49 inches, an area of 
1.035 square yards: thus, a momme silk weighs 
3.62 g per square yard. 


2.256 Moriculture — A branch of sericulture 
mainly dealing in cultivating mulberry plants in 
order to obtain feed for silkworms. 


2.257 Mousseline de Soie — A French term for 
‘Silk Muslin’. It is a plain weave, crisp, sheer fabric, 
more closely woven and stiffer than chiffon. It is not 
as soft as voil. The yarns are highly twisted and sized 
before weaving. This sizing is not removed by any 
subsequent finishing operation when the fabric is 
made in Europe. In domestic made fabrics the sizing 
may be applied to the fabric after weaving operation. 


2.258 Muga Cloth — A fabric woven using Muga 
silk in warp and weft, mainly produced in Assam. 


2.259 ga Culture 


a) The complete process involved in rearing 
muga silkworm for their cocoons, reeling 
of Muga silk yarn to weaving finished 
fabric. 


b) An art and science of raising the Muga 
(Antheraea assamensis) silkworms for the 
production of cocoons. 


2.260 Muga Juthari — Muga silk waste 


2.261 Muga Silk — Silk of golden yellow colour 
obtained from partly domesticated moth Antherea 
assamensis which feeds on the leaves of Som 
(Machilus | Bombycina) and  Soalu (Litsaea 
Polyantha). 


2.262 Mulberry — Hardy perrenial tree: silk worms 
(Bombyx Mori) feed on its leaves. 


2.263 Mulberry Raw Silk — Silk reeled out of 
mulberry cocoons with its natural gum or sericin. 


2.264 Mulberry Silk — Silk mainly of yellow, 
white or greenish yellow colour obtained from 


domesticated silkworm yx Mori belonging to 
the family ich feed on mulberry 
leaves. 


2.265 Mulberry Spun Silk Yarn — Silk yarn made 
out of mulberry silk waste by the spinning process. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


2.266 Multiend Reeling Machine — 4A suitable 
reeling device to produce gradable raw silk 
economically with mulberry silkworm cocoons of 
both multivoltine and bivoltine hybrid cocoons and 
consists of ten end per basin, appropriate thread 
passage is provided to keep the reeling tension, 
effective individual reel stop motion, variable speed 
drive unit, Planetary gear type thread distribution 
system, Specially designed reeling basins made of 
stainless steel, Jetteboutes for picking up casted 
cocoon filament etc. and suitable for 
medium/superior quality cocoons. 


2.267 Multivoltine Cocoons — Cocoons built by a 
silkworm race with more than two generations (life 
cycle) in a year. 


2.268 Muslin — A generic term for a light weight 
open cloth of plain or plain gauze weave. Normally 
muslins do not exceed 68 g/m”, some of these cloths 
are used in grey whereas others are bleached and 
dyed. They are also made of silk. 


2.269 Mussel Silk — Mussel silk is obtained from a 
bivalve, pinna squamosa, found in the shallow 
waters along the Italina and Dalmatian shores of the 
Adriatic. The strong brown filament, or byssus, is 
secreted by the mussel to anchor it to a rock or other 
surface. The byssus is combed and then spun into 
yarn known as “fish wool”. 


2.270 Namabali — An Indian term for handloom 
cotton and silk fabrics printed with religious names. 
Worn as outer covering on ceremonial occasions by 
Hindus. 


2.271 Narrow Fabric 


a) Any narrow fabric not exceeding 45 cm 
(18 inches) in width. 


b) Any braid or trimming. 


NOTE — The upper limit of width recognized by the 
Brussels Nomenclature on 30 cm (12 inches). 


2.272 Native Silk — Native silk is a very coarse silk 
yarn in order of 30/35 denier and 56/70 denier, 
generally reeled from inferior cocoons. The reeling 
process is the same as in the case of raw silk. 


2.273 Natwa — A cone shaped device made from 
six bamboo strips which is rotated by one arm and 
used to wrap tasar silk waste on it for spinnig of katia 
yarn. 


2.274 Neatness — The degree of neatness of raw 
silk panels, determined on the basis of incidence of 
defects which are smaller than those classified as 
‘minor cleanness defects’ by using official standard 
photographs for neatness. Neatness is expressed as 
a percentage. 


NOTE — Low neatness is the average of the neatness 
percent values of one-fifth of the panels inspected for 
neatness, which show the lowest neatness values. 


2.275 Nibs (Raw silk) — A defect in raw silk 
consisting of small thickened places or spots in the 
thread which are less than 2 mm in length. Also spelt 
knibs. 


2.276 Ninon — A smooth, crisp, light weight silk or 
manmade fibre, fabric made in plain weave with an 
open mesh, heavier than chiffon. Uses : curtains, 
evening wear, fine lingerie. 


2.277 Nishi Jin — A rich silk brocade made in 
Kyoto, Japan. As many as 40 colours may be 
employed in the filling. 


2.278 Nistari — A wild silkworm, Bombyx croesi, 
introduced into Bengal from China which produces 
rich yellow coloured cocoon in multiple crops. 
Feeds on mulberry leaves. 


2.279 Noil Yarn (Silk) — Yarn spun from silk noils. 


2.280 Noils (Silk) — Short staple residue from the 
dressing operations in silk spinning. 


2.281 Non-Broken Filament Length — It is the 
average length of filament that can be unwound 
from the cocoon without break. 


Total Filament Length 
1 + No.of breaks 


NBFL = 


2.282 Non-mulberry — Three other commercially 
important types fall into the category of non- 
mulberry silks namely eri silk, tasar silk, and muga 
silk etc (see 2.398). 


2.283 Northrow Silk — Two or more untwisted 
singles, which are doubled together with no more 
twist than is necessary to bind together the filaments 
of silk. 


2.284 Noshi Ito — A Japanese waste silk produced 
during reeling. Colour varies from white to dark 
grey in proportion to the amount of foreign matter it 
contains. 


2.285 Noshito Joshiu Silk — Lowest grade of 
Japanese waste silk used for spun silk. Synonym : 
Tamas 


2.286 Oak Tasar — A finer variety of tasar 
produced by the silkworm, Antheraea Proyeli J. in 
India which feed on natural food plants of oak, found 
in abundance in the sub-Himalayan belt of India. 


2.287 Organdie — A plain weave, translucent 
fabric of light weight and with a permanent stiff 
finish. 


2.288 Organdy — Organza is a lightweight, sheer, 
plain-woven fabric that was originally made from 
raw silk. It has a shimmery and translucent quality. 
Uses: For wedding gowns and evening wear. 


2.289 Organzine — A silk yarn used as warp for 
weaving or knitting comprising single threads that 
are first twisted and then folded together two, three 
or four-fold and then twisted in the direction 
opposite to that of the single twist. The twist 
generally ranges from 350 TPM to 700 TPM. 


2.290 Ottoman — A heavy, plain silk fabric that has 
wide, flat ribs made of silk, cotton or worsted weft. 
The ottoman weave is a diagonal rib effect made 
from a steep twill weave. 


2.29] Outside Stained Cocoons — Cocoons having 
a rusty colour spot on the shell caused by absorption 
of intestinal fluid/urine of the mature worm formed 
during mounting. Reelability is very poor in this 
case. 


2.292 Par Weighting — A degree of weighting that 
results in a degummed silk returning to its original 
weight, thus it is considered that 100 kgs of raw silk 
yields 75 kg of degummed silk and from this will be 
produced 100 kgs of par-weighted silk. 


2.293 Pat-Muga — Traditional cloth woven with 
mulberry warp yarn and muga weft yarn. 


2.294 Peau de Soie — Peau de soie is a French term 
meaning "silk skin". Originally it was a silk fabric 
made with an eight-shaft satin weave. It looks the 
same on both sides. It is a very smooth, silky, semi 
dull appearance. It is much heavier than most satin 
constructions. Today this fabric may be made of 
Silk, acetate, orlon or rayon. 


2.295 Peduncle Yarn — The yarn spun from silk 
fibres in the peduncle of tasar cocoons. 


2.296 Pelade (French) — Silk waste consisting of 
residual cocoons from the reeling basin which is 
often re-boiled and beaten in order to remove pupae. 
Also called Ricotti (Italy). 


2.297 Permeation — The process of wetting of raw 
silk on small reels before re-reeling to soften the 
gum spots between silk threads on the small reel and 
hence facilitates smooth unwinding. 


2.298 Picul — The weight of a Japanese or Chinese 
bale of silk, almost equal to 60 kg. (Actually 
60.465 kg) in weight. 


2.299 Pierced Cocoon — Cocoon from which the 
moth has emerged after softening the end of the 
cocoon and forcing its way out. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


2.300 Poil — A silk yarn formed by throwing raw 
Silk yarn. The twist may be very slight or exceed 
3 000 TPM. 


2.301 Pongee — Originally a Chinese silk cloth, tan 
or ecru in colour and very light in weight. Tasar silk 
is used and the fabric is woven on handlooms. The 
term is said to have been derived from the Chinese 
word 'Punki' which means woven at home on one's 
own handloom. 


2.302 Poult de Soie — A fine silk grosgrain fabric 
having the result of taffeta. The yarns are so woven 
that the surface of the fabric has a grainy appearance, 
yet close observation discloses a fine rib running in 
the filling direction. It is stiffer than peau-de-soie. 


2.303 Printed Cocoon — A cocoon defect that can 
happen due to improper mounting frames; these are 
also called scaffold pressed cocoons. 


2.304 Protein — A natural polymer of animal or 
vegetable origin, consisting of amino acids linked 
together by the peptide group (C-O-NH-). 


2.305 Pupa (Silk) — The resting stage in the life 
cycle of lepidopteran insects. It is also called 
chrysalis stage. During this stage, replacement of 
larval organs by that of the adult is realised. 


2.306 Pure Dye Silk — Silk dyed but neither 
weighted nor adulterated. 


2.307 Pure Zari — A yarn having a silk core, 
wrapped with silver wire and electroplated with 
gold. The silk core is a two ply 16/18 denier soft 
twisted yarn dyed in a red or yellow colour. 


2.308 Quilt (Silk) — A cover for a bed that has a 
thick warm material of silk, inside it. Generally 
made of two layers of fabric with silk between them 
and stitched in patterns. 


2.309 Railey Cocoons — An eco-race of tasar 
silkworm, Antheraea Mylitta. D. 


2.310 Raw Knots (Raw Silk) — Knots which have 
loose ends/protruding ends which are less than 
3 mm in length. 


2.311 Raw Silk — Raw silk is the thread reeled by 
drawing together the required number of filaments 
from the cocoons and contains its original gum or 
sericin. It is understood to be a continuous thread 
from beginning to end of the skein 


2.312 Raw Silk Percentage — The number of 
kilograms of cocoons required to produce one 
kilogram of raw silk expresses as a percentage. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


2.313 Reelability — It is the ratio of the cocoons 
reeled to the total number of cocoons casted, 
expressed as a percentage. 


2.314 Reeling (Silk) — The process of unwinding 
silk filament from the cocoon. 


2.315 Reel Permeation — (see 2.297) 


2.316 Renditta — The number of kilograms of 
cocoons required to produce one kilogram of raw 
silk. Raw silk yield is expressed in terms of renditta. 


2.317 Re-reeling — The process of winding yarn 
reeled on small reels on to standard reel (150 cm 
periphery) to make hanks for marketing. 


2.318 Resham — Indian term for natural silk 


2.319 Riha Fabric — Type of Muga woven fabric 
characterized with long length and small width used 
by assamese married women. 


2.320 Rings (Raw Silk) — Places where a length of 
raw silk thread has, in reeling been inadvertently 
wound in the form of ring instead of its usual cross 
form, due to the thread having escaped from the 
traversing guide of the reeling machine. Ring 
increases waste in winding. 


2.321 Roving — A sliver of silk, cotton, wool, or 
other fibre, drawn out and slightly twisted, 
especially preparatory to spinning. 


2.322 Saree or Sari — A traditional Indian attire for 
women. It is a rectangular piece of unstitched, 
designed fabric, four to nine meters in length, draped 
over the body in various styles. Usually, it is 
wrapped around the waste with one end draped over 
the shoulder. 


2.323 Sarihan — An ecorace of tasar silkworm. 


2.324 Sateen — A fabric with a lusterous surface 
obtained by a sateen weave with lower warp sett and 
higher weft sett. 


2.325 Satin — A fabric with a lusterous surface 
obtained by a satin weave with higher warp sett and 
lower weft sett. 


2.326 Satin, Double Faced — A silk fabric 
employing two sets of warp yarn, one set of weft so 
as to present a satin face on both sides. Both warps 
interlace with the weft. 


2.327 Scarf — A square, rectangular or a triangular 
piece of fabric made generally from silk or man- 
made fibres. It is generally worn on the head or neck. 


2.328 Schappe — Spun silk yarn, particularly that 
which is made from partly degummed stock and 


hence a schappe silk contains up to 10 percent or 
12 percent of gum. 


2.329 Scroop — A property of finished silk such 
that the material has a characteristic feel and gives a 
crackling or a crunching noise when crushed by 
hand. It is produced by treating the silk in mild acid 
(such as acetic acid) and drying without washing. 


2.330 Scuple Silk — Silk that has been dyed and 
from which only a part of the gum has been 
removed. 


2.331 Selvedge — Compactly woven edges of a 
woven fabric at either sides about 1 cm wide that 
prevents unravelling of threads. 


2.332 Selvedge Waste — Shuttleless looms weave 
a false selvedge, also referred to as catch-cord, 
dummy, or auxiliary selvedge, which is different 
from a true selvedge in that it is temporary and is 
discarded after weaving as selvedge waste. 


2.333 Sericin — A natural gummy coating on silk 
filaments. The amount of sericin in raw silk is about 
20 percent to 27 percent. 


2.334 Sericulture — An art and science of raising 
silk worms for the production of cocoons. 


2.335 Serigraph — A constant rate of traverse 
pendulum type yarn strength testing machine for 
recording simultaneously the breaking load and 
corresponding elongation of the raw silk threads. 


2.336 Shantung — A plain weave fabric with a 
slubbed or rubbed structure originally made from 
yarns of tasar silk in which the natural yarn 
irregularities have been retained. 


2.337 Shell — The compact part of the cocoon 
containing the silk filaments. 


2.338 Shell Ratio — It is the ratio of weight of 
cocoon shell by weight of whole cocoon (that is, 
shell plus pupae). 


2.339 Silk — A protein substance which is secreted 
in the fluid state by silk worm (Caterpillar stage of 
several silk moths) and which on exposure to air 
hardens in the form of a filament. It is composed 
mainly of fibroin and partly of sericin and other 
substances. It is available in the market in various 
varieties such as mulberry silk, endi, muga silk and 
tasar (tussah) silk. 


a) Pure silk — A textile material marked 
‘pure silk’ comprises of silk only subject to 
manufacturing tolerance up to 5 percent of 
foreign matter including metallic and 
weighting materials; 


b) Blended silk — A textile material marked 
‘blended silk’ contains not less than 
50 percent of silk fibres and a tolerance of 
X 3 percent on the declared silk content in 
the textile material; 


c) Part silk — A textile material marked ‘part 
silk’ contains not less than 20 percent of 
silk and a tolerance of + 3 percent on the 
declared silk content in the textile material; 
and 


d) Nett Silk — Raw silk filaments or strands 
which have been processed into yarns by 
twisting or folding or both. 


2.340 Silk Camlet — A silk fabric made with two 
colours in the warp and a third colour in the filling. 


2.341 Silk Canvas — A term used in great Britain 
for plain weave. 


2.342 Silk Croise — A twill silk dress fabric. The 
term croise is the French word for twill. 


2.343 Silk Damescene — A fabric made of silk and 
wool with fine alternate stripes of wool and silk 
satin. Used for English women's clothing in the late 
19* century. 


2.344 Silk Longcloth — A term used in great 
Britain for plain weave spun silk fabric made with 
two ply yarns in the warp and single filling. Made in 
solid colours. Uses: under wears and dresses. 


2.345 Silk Road — An extensive interconnected 
network of trade routes across Asia, North and 
Northeast Africa and Europe historically used by 
silk traders. 


2.346 Silk Sheet 


a) Pelade waste/defective cocoons/unreelable 
cocoons are converted into sheets of silk by 
sheet making machine which are used for 
making quilts and for spun silk 
manufacture; and 


b) A nonwoven sheet made of silk filaments 
from pelede waste and unreelable cocoons. 
The sheet is generally of 1 meter by 
3 meters dimension. 


2.347 Silk Waste — A by-product of the silk 
industry, it is used for making spun silk yarn by 
spinning. 


2.348 Silkette — A lining fabric made of silk and 
cotton. 


2.349 Size (Raw silk) — Term used in respect of 
raw silk synonymous to linear density/count in 
respect of cotton, woollen and jute yarns. The size 
of raw silk is expressed in deniers or tex. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


2.350 Size Deviation — The degree of variation in 
size between the test skeins; it is expressed by the 
square root of the quotient obtained by dividing the 
sum of the squares of the deviations (differences) of 
the individual observed size values from the mean, 
by the number of observations. It is the long-term 
variation in size. 


2.351 Sizing — The process of applying an adhesive 
material to a spun warp so as to afford protection 
against mechanical damage during weaving. With 
nett silk, the gum is left on the silk and serves as an 
effective size, but with spun silk warps, a size of 
gelatine-oil is often applied. 


2.352 Skein — A continuous strand of yarn or cord 
of any desired length in the form of a collapsible 
coil, obtained by winding a definite number of turns 
on a reel under prescribed conditions. 


2.353 Sliver (Silk) — A twistless ribbon or rope of 
silk fibres delivered by carding or combing machine 
in a spun silk mill. 


2.354 Slub — A defect consisting of an abruptly 
thickened place in a yarn usually caused by the 
inclusion of fly or clearer waste along with the 
regular yarn. 


2.355 Small Slugs (Raw Silk) — Considerably 
thickened places in the thread from 2 mm to less than 
7 mm in length, or extremely thickened places less 
than 2 mm in length. 


2.356 Soaking (Silk) — A process of treating raw 
silk with oil-in-water type of emulsions to soften the 
gum and render the threads pliable for winding, 
throwing and knitting. 


2.357 Soft Silk — Silk from which the gum has been 
removed and which has been dyed. 


2.358 Souple Silk — Silk which has been dyed and 
from which only a part of gum has been removed. 


2.359 Spider Silk — A strong and elastic thread 
produced by spider. It is also soft and fine. The 
commercial production of this silk comes from 
certain Madagascan species, including Nephila 
madagascarensis, Miranda aurentia and Epeira. 
Because of the high cost of production, spider silk is 
not used in the textile industry; however, durability 
and resistance to extreme temperature and humidity 
make it indispensable for cross hairs in optical 
instruments. 


2.360 Spinning — The process of converting fibres 
into yarn by twisting the fibres to make them hold 
together and form a yarn. 


2.361 Spinning of Cocoons — The formation of a 
cocoon by a matured silkworm. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


2.362 Spun Silk (Yarn) — Yarn made from waste 
silk and pierced cocoons, by dressing and spinning. 
It is composed of short length of filaments ranging 
from 2.5 cm to 20 cm. 


2.363 Spun Silk Count (Nm) — Metric count 
system defined as the number of hanks of 1 000 m 
per 1 kilogram of that yarn. 


2.364 Spun Silk Crepe — A crepe fabric made from 
a warp of spun silk yarn (generally 60/2 count) and 
a weft of nett silk (generally 4 threads of 13/15 d 
with a twist of about 60 to 70 turns per inch) 
alternate 2/2 S and Z twist. The warp is sometimes 
sized before beaming and the woven cloth is 
degummed to remove the gum from the crepe weft 
yarn. 


2.365 Stifling — Process to kill the pupa in order to 
prevent it from transforming into moth and come out 
of the cocoon by piercing the cocoon. 


2.366 Straight Reeled Skeins — The skein made 
by direct reeling that is without re-reeling. For 
example, charkha and domestic basin reeling. 


2.367 Sulmah — A gold or silver thread on a silk 
fabric in Dacca, Pakistan for embroidering caps and 
slippers. 


2.368 Super-Major Defects (Raw Silk) — 
Cleanness defects which are ten or more times as 
large as the minimum size of the major defects in 
length or in size. 


2.369 Sukhinda — An ecorace of tasar silkworm, 
Antheraea mylitta. D. 


2.370 Surah — Sometimes called silk serge, it is a 
semi dull, soft, light weight fabric with twill weave. 
Itis loom finished. 


2.371 Sutwan — A term used for various piece dyed 
silk satins made with eight harness weave in 
Nanking and Shanghai, China. 


2.372 Swatch — A small piece of cloth used as a 
sample. 


2.373 Swift — A frame reel with hub and suitable 
bearings, on which a hank of silk can be mounted for 
winding. 


2.374 Tabaret — A strong silk fabric made with 
alternating moire and satin strips, generally in 
different colours. Uses: drapery and upholstery. 
Also called tabinet. 


2.375 Tabby — A light weight silk fabric usually 
printed, plain woven and employing untwisted raw 
silk as warp and weft. 


2.376 Taffetta — A closely woven, smooth and 
crisp fabric with a lusterous appearance 
characterised by a fine cross rib. The rib is due to the 
construction, as the ends considerably outnumber 
the picks or by a heavier filling yarn than warp yarn. 
The weave is plain weave. Taffetas are produced in 
solid colors, yarn-dyed plaids and stripes. 
Changeable and moiré effects are often employed. 


2.377 Takli Spinning — Preparation of eri spun 
yarn in a handmade wooden device. 


2.378 Tasar (Tussah) Silk — Silk of natural 
copperish colour obtained from a species of wild 
lepidopteran insect (Antheraea Mylitta) belonging 
to ihe Assamonsis group. It feeds on the leaves of a 
variety of forest trees such as Asan (Terminalia 
Tomentosa), Arjuna (Terminalia Arjuna), Ber 
(Ziziphus Jujuba) Sal (Shorea Robusta) and 
Himalayan Oak (Quercus Serrata), etc. 


2.379 Tasar Culture — Tasar culture includes all 
the activities starting from collection of cocoons 
(either naturally grown cocoons from forests, reared 
on its host plants in forests or raised by rearers) to 
their utilization for production of yarn and fabrics. 


2.380 Tensile Strength — Ability of a fibre, yarn or 
fabric to resist breaking under tension. Measured in 
force per unit cross sectional area of the original 
material. 


2.381 Teshike — A light weight Japanese silk fabric 
treated to resist the deteriorating effect of the 
perspiration. 


2.382 Thana Silks — A general term used in India 
for tasar silk fabrics made in Thane, near Mumbai. 
Chiefly of two types: small checks, usually black 
and white, or coloured geometric patterns. 


2.383 Thin-End Cocoon — One or both ends of the 
cocoon are very thin and risk bursting when 
processed. The cause of this defect may be attributed 
to species characteristics or improper temperature 
and humidity during rearing and mounting. 


2.384 Throwing (Silk) — A process of winding 
with or without soaking and doubling and twisting 
of raw silk to make it into yarn suitable for knitting, 
weaving, etc. 


2.385 Thrown Silk — Twisted silk. 


2.386 Throwster Yarn — Yarn made from 
mulberry throwing, weaving and winding wastes. 


2.387 Tissue — The fabric made from silk or man- 
made fibre richly coloured and ornamented and 
usually interwoven with gold and silver threads. It is 
used as dress material. Derived from French word 
‘Tissu’ which means fabric. 


2.388 Titer 


a) Weight per unit length of yarn; and 
b) Number of filaments in reeled silk thread. 


2.389 Tram — A silk thread formed by doubling 
two or more raw silk threads and then throwing 
(twisting) them slightly, generally 80 to 150 twists 
per metre. 


2.390 Tulle (Warp Knitted) — A net with 
hexagonal holes produced by knitting. 


2.391 Tulle (Lace) — A fine soft very light weight 
machine made net with hexagonal mesh made from 
silk yarns. 


2.392 Tulle (Woven) — A fine net fabric made in 
plain weave from silk yarns. 


2.393 Twisting — The process by which fibres are 
arranged around the axis of yarn is called twisting 
(see 2.384). 


2.394 Univoltine Cocoons — Cocoons built by 
silkworm race with only one generation (life cycle) 
in the year. 


2.395 Ushnakoti — Is a cottage hot air-drying 
chamber capable of hot air stifling/drying of live 
cocoons economically without use of electric power 


2.396 Uzen Silk Satin — A washable silk satin 
dress fabric made at Uzen, Japan for export. 


2.397 Vana — A second grade of reeled silk 
produced in Punjab. Used in filling. Synonym-Peta. 


2.398 Vanya silk 


a) Sericulture and post cocoon activities 
related to silk other than mulberry silk; and 


b) Silk produced by silkworm living in the 
wild nature. A collective term often used 
for tasar, eri and muga silks. 


2.399 Velvet — A warp pile fabric having a cut pile, 
rich in appearance and soft to touch, velvets may be 
made of silk, wool, mohair, rayon, acetate or nylon. 
The background may be plain, twill or satin weave. 


2.400 Velveteen — A weft pile fabric similar to 
corduroy but having a surface uniformly covered 
with a short fall cut pile. The weft is soft spun. 


2.401 Very Long Knots (Raw Silk) — Knots which 
have loose ends 10 mm and above in length, or those 
caused by improper tying of threads. 


2.402 Void Silk — Silk yarn with a hollow core that 
imparts wrinkle effect on the fabric (similar to crape 
fabric) after degumming. 


IS 18314 : 2023 


2.403 Voile — A sheer, transparent, soft, light 
weight plain weave fabric made of highly twisted 
yarns. It may be made of wool, cotton, silk or man- 
made fibre. It is used for blouses, curtains, etc. 


2.404 Warp — The warp is a set of lengthwise 
threads attached to a loom before weaving begins 
and through which the weft is inserted. 


2.405 Washed Silk — A light- to medium-weight 
fabric which drapes well. It's been washed in fabric 
softeners to make it soft and slightly faded in 
appearance, and is used mostly for shirts and 
dresses. 


2.406 Waste (Raw Silk) — A mass of tangled 
cocoon filaments or fibres attached to the thread. 


2.407 Watt Silk — A waste silk produced in the 
cultivation of the silk worm. It is very irregular, and 
is therefore one of the poorest grades, being virtually 
a silk refuse. 


2.408 Web Silk — A bulky silk yarn produced by 
introducing a suitable mechanism in the reeling 
machine which creats a web effect on the yarn. The 
silk is three times bulkier than the raw silk made 
with the same number of cocoons. 


2.409 Weft — The weft is the crosswise yarn that is 
woven through the warp to make cloth. 


2.410 Weft Bands — Block of colours across the 
width of the cloth. If not intended, it is a fabric 
defect. 


2.411 Weft Streaks — Narrow stripes running 
across the width of cloth, forming a fabric defect. 


2.412 Weighted Silk — Silk that has been increased 
in weight and bulk, by the addition of chemicals. 


2.413 Wild Silk — Coarse silk produced by wild 
silkworms (see 2.398). 


2.414 Wrap Reel — A reel used for taking small 
hanks of a definite length of silk threads for testing 


purpose. 


2.415 Yarn Dyed — A term referring to fabric that 
are woven with yarn that are dyed before weaving. 


2.416 Zarbaf — A light weight silk fabric brocaded 
with gold; made in Punjab. The term is of Persian 
origin, zar meaning gold and baf meaning weave. 


2.417 Zari — (see 2.307) 


2.418 Zarzahan — A plain weave striped silk fabric 
similar to taffeta. Better grades were brocaded with 
gold. The fabric is of Arabic origin. Made and used 


IS 18314 : 2023 


in Spain in the 14 and 15" centuries for garment 
and linings. 


2.419 Zephirities — A light weight, lace like silk 
jacquard made with two sets of raw silk warp; the 
ground warp was given a hard finish, and the warp 
used to form the design was soft finished. The very 
sheer foundation was woven with both right-hand 
and left-hand twist filling, with one pick of each type 
alternating in every shed. First made in Lyons, 
France, in the early 19" century. 


2.420 Zephyr Flannel — A fine, soft, lightweight 
flannel made of wool and silk. 


2.421 Zerbase — A double-faced silk fabric 
interwoven with gold or silver threads, made in Iran. 


2.422 Zoguri — Silk grege goods produced in 
Japan. 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


IS 18314 : 2023 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Silk and Silk Products Sectional Committee, TXD 28 


Organization 
Central Silk Board, Bengaluru 
Anwar Silk Industries, Sidlaghatta, Karnataka 


Association of Corporations and Apex Societies of Handlooms, 
New Delhi 


Central Silk Technological Research Institute, Bengaluru 


Chamundi Textiles Silk Mills Limited, Bengaluru 


Directorate of Handicraft and Handloom, Kashmir 


Directorate of Handlooms and Textiles, Government of Tamil Nadu, 
Chennai 


Directorate of Handlooms and Textiles, Guwahati 


Himatsingka Seide Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Silk Export Promotion Council, New Delhi 
Jaipuria Silk Mills, Bangalore 


Karnataka Handloom Development Corporation Limited, Dharwad 


Karnataka Silk Industries Corporation, Bengaluru 


Karnataka State Sericulture Development Institute, Thalaghattapura 


Khadi and Village Industries Commission, Mumbai 


National Handloom Development Corporation Limited, Greater 
Noida 


Office of Director of Handlooms and Textiles, New Delhi 


Office of the 
New Delhi 


Development Commissioner for Handlooms, 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Savanadurgha | Narashimma 
Ramanagara 


Swamy Silk Reeling Factory, 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Silk Mark Organisation of India, Bengaluru 


Representative(s) 
DR Y. C. RADHLAKSHMI (Chairperson) 
SHRI MOHAMMED HASEEB 


SHRI PALLAB TALUKDAR 


DR S NIVEDITA 
DR PRAKASH N. BHAT (Alternate) 


SHRI A. L. MUTHIAH 


SHRI IMTIYAZ AHMAD DAR 
ZAHOOR AHMAD KHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI THIRU C. MUNIANATHAN 
DR K. KARNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ATAUR RAHMAN 
SHRI NAREN MALAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN RAO 
SHRIS. A. VISHVANATH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI VIKRAM JAIPURIA 


SHRI P. CHANDRASHEKHAR 
SHRI P. MANJUNATH (Alternate) 


SHRI SIDDALINGA PRASAD S. G. 
SHRI D. S. SANGAM (Alternate) 


SHRI A. JAMBUNATH 


SHRI D. DHANPAL 
SHRI J. K. GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKTHIVEL PERUMALSAMY 
SHRI JITENDRA TOLAMBIYA (Alternate) 


JOINT DIRECTOR (TEXTILES) 
DY DIRECTOR (HANDLOOMS) (Alternate) 


DR AMIN HIRENBHAI NAVINBHAI 


SHRI PRANAV PARASHAR 
N. K. GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI NAGANNA 


SHRI VINAY KUMAR SAMANIA 
SHRI BHUVNESHWAR RAI (Alternate) 


SHRI K. S. GOPAL 
SHRI A. SUBBARAJ (Alternate) 


IS 18314 : 2023 


Organization 


Tamil Nadu Co-operative Silk Producers Federation Limited 
(TANSILK), Kancheepuram 


Textiles Committee, Mumbai 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


The Tamil Nadu Handloom Weavers Co-operative Society Limited, 
Chennai 


Vinegar Exports Private Limited, Bengaluru 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 
SHRI BANOTHU RANGA 


Representative(s) 
SHRI P. MURUGAN 
P. ARULMOZHI (Alternate) 


DR P. RAVICHANDRAN 
SHRI KARTIKAY DHANDA (Alternate) 


SHITAL PALASKAR 
SHRI AMOL THITE (Alternate) 


SHRI G. GUNASEKARAN 


BIMAL MAWANDIA 


SHRI J. K. GUPTA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (TEXTILES) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 


(TEXTILES), BIS 


20 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 28 (20628). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


