NAT Hab IS 13094 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


aterm TAT TAL wie HT atentar 
ama — miai Araia 


( Teel JAGO ) 


Selection of Ground Improvement 
Techniques for 
Weak Soils — Guidelines 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.020 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2021 Price Group 7 


Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 43 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


In poor and weak subsoils, the design of conventional foundation for structures and equipment may present 
problems with respect to both sizing of foundation as well as control of foundation settlements. A viable alternative 
in certain situations is to improve the subsoil to an extent such that the subsoil would develop an adequate bearing 
capacity and foundations constructed after subsoil/ground improvement would have resultant settlements within 
acceptance limits. This method/technique is called ground improvement which is used to improve in-situ soil 
characteristics by improving its engineering performance as per the project requirement by altering its natural 
state, instead of having to alter the design in response to the existing ground limitations. The improvement is 
in terms of increase in bearing capacity and shear strength, reducing settlement and enhancing drainage facility, 
mitigating liquefaction potential, etc of soil, as also improving lateral capacity in case of deep foundations. 


This standard has been formulated to cover provisions with regard to necessary data to be collected to establish 
the need for ground improvement at a site, considerations for establishing need for ground improvement, 
selection of ground improvement techniques, equipment and accessories for ground improvement, control of 
ground improvement works and recording of data. The standard in Annex A presents various methods of ground 
improvement along with principles, applicability to various soil conditions, material requirements, equipment 
required, results likely to be achieved and limitations. This may be referred to for guidance for selecting the proper 
method for a situation. 


This standard was first published in 1992. This revision of the standard has been taken up to incorporate 
modifications in light of latest developments in the field. 


In this revision of the standard, the following major modifications have been incorporated: 


a) Considering that ground improvement may also be adopted for application other than construction 
of foundation, the tittle of the standard has been modified from ‘Guidelines for selection of ground 
improvement techniques for foundations in weak soils’ to ‘Selection of ground improvement techniques 
for weak soils — Guidelines’. 


b) Some new terms and their definitions have been added and existing definitions have been modified; 
c) Provision on lime stabilization has been elaborated; 


d) Reference to IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 ‘Criteria for earthquake resistant design of structures: 
Part 1 General provisions and buildings (sixth revision)’ has been made for assessment of 
liquefaction potential of soil; and 


e) Provisions on methods of ground improvement have been modified. 


For provisions relating to ground improvement by reinforcing the ground using stone columns so as to meet the 
twin objective of increasing the bearing capacity with simultaneous reduction of settlements, reference be made to 
IS 15284 (Part 1) : 2003 ‘Design and construction for ground improvement — Guidelines: Part 1 Stone columns’. 


Whenever soft cohesive soil strata underlying a structure are unable to meet the basic requirements of safe 
bearing capacity and tolerable settlement, ground improvement is adopted to make it suitable for supporting 
the proposed structure. Both the design requirements that is shear strength and settlement under loading, can be 
fulfilled by consolidating the soil by applying a preload, if necessary, before the construction of the foundation. 
This consolidation of soil is normally accelerated with the use of vertical drains. For provisions relating to 
ground improvement by preconsolidation using vertical drains, reference be made to IS 15284 (Part 2) : 2004 
‘Design and construction for ground improvement — Guidelines: Part 2 Preconsolidation using vertical drains’. 


Use of suitable geo-synthetics/geo-textiles may be made in an approved manner for ground improvement, where 
applicable as per this standard. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding of numerical values revised ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 13094 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


SELECTION OF GROUND IMPROVEMENT 
TECHNIQUES FOR WEAK SOILS — GUIDELINES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the guidelines for selection of 
ground improvement techniques using one or more 
methods. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication the editions 
indicated are valid. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreement based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


1892 : 2021 Subsurface investigation 
for foundations — Code of 


practice (second revision) 


1893 (Part 1):2016 Criteria for earthquake 
resistant design of 
structures: Part 1 General 
provisions and buildings 


(sixth revision) 


Code of practice for 
determination of bearing 
capacity of shallow 
foundations (first revision) 


Code of practice for 
calculation of settlements 
of foundations: Shallow 
foundations subjected to 
symmetrical static vertical 
loads 


6403 : 1981 


8009 
(Part 1) : 1976 


(Part 2) : 1980 Deep foundations subjected 
to symmetrical static 


vertical loading 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Ground Improvement — Enhancement of the 
in-place properties of the ground by controlled 


application of techniques suited to the subsoil 
conditions. 
NOTE — These techniques are used to improve the load 


bearing capacity and settlement potential of the loose or soft 
soil lying close to the surface or at depths. 


3.2 Injection => Introduction of a 
chemical/cementitious material into a soil mass by 
application of pressure. 


3.3 Liquefaction — It is a state primarily in saturated 
cohesionless soils wherein the effective shear strength is 
reduced to negligible value for all engineering purposes, 
when the pore pressure approaches the total confining 
pressure during earthquake shaking. In this condition, 
the soil tends to behave like a fluid mass. 


3.3 Preloading — Application of loads to achieve 
improvement of soil properties prior to imposition of 
structural loads. 


3.4 Soil Densification — A technique to densify 
cohesionless soils by imparting shocks or vibrations. 


3.5 Soil Reinforcement — Rods, strips or geosynthetics 
(metallic or fabric) incorporated within soil-mass to 
impart resistance to tensile, shear and compressive 
forces. 


4 NECESSARY DATA 


4.1 The information as specified in 4.1.1 to 4.1.4 shall be 
collected to establish the need for ground improvement 
at a site, for selection of method to be adopted and for 
design of selected scheme. 


4.1.1 Subsoil profile and soil characteristics down to 
a depth of about twice the width of the loaded area 
or up to dense/hard strata if encountered earlier shall 
be obtained. This information shall be acquired by 
conducting subsurface investigation as per IS 1892. 


4.1.2 Engineering properties of subsoil shall 
include index properties, shear strength parameters, 
compressibility characteristics, etc. 


4.1.3 Boreholes shall be supplemented by conducting 
a suitable number of static/dynamic cone penetration 
tests up to the depth to be improved. In conjunction with 
selected boreholes, these tests serve as an economical 


IS 13094 : 2021 


and rapid method of establishing the state of subsoil 
before and after treatment. 


4.1.4 Information shall be obtained with respect to 
nature of the proposed structure and area covered by it, 
intensity and nature of loading, permissible distortions 
which the structure can withstand. 


5 CONSIDERATIONS FOR ESTABLISHING 
NEED FOR GROUND IMPROVEMENT 


5.1 Based on subsoil data obtained from site and the 
loading exerted by the structure, foundation design shall 
be carried out from bearing capacity considerations and 
settlement analysis. Ground improvement is indicated 
if the net loading intensity of the foundation exceeds 
the allowable bearing pressure computed as per 
IS 6403. 


5.2 Ground treatment may be required if even for 
relatively low loading intensities, the resultant settlement 
[computed in accordance with IS 8009 (Part 1) and 
IS 8009 (Part 2)] exceeds the acceptable limits for the 
structure both from view point of distortions induced in 
the structure and from operation angle. Specific cases 
may require different treatments according to the site 
conditions and project requirements. 


5.3 Loose cohesionless deposits in seismic zones 
may be prone to liquefaction during earthquakes 
specially under high water table conditions. In 
such cases, analysis should be carried out for 
establishing liquefaction potential of the subsoil as per 
IS 1893 (Part 1). Ground improvement is called for, 
if such analysis establishes that the subsoil is prone to 
liquefaction. 


5.4 Stability of soil in slopes can be enhanced by use of 
soil reinforcement. 


6 METHODS OF GROUND IMPROVEMENT 


6.1 Ground improvement is achieved by the methods 
covered in 6.1.1 to 6.1.5. 


6.1.1 Soil Densification 


6.1.1.1 Soil densification is carried out by application 
of shock and vibration to the subsoil by appropriate 
technique and thereby causing rearrangement of the 
soil structure from a loose to medium to dense state. 
This technique is applicable to cohesionless soils. 


6.1.1.2 Methods under this head include vibroflotation, 
vibrocompaction, compaction piles, blasting and 
dynamic compaction. 


6.1.2 Pre-Consolidation 


6.1.2.1 Expulsion of water from the pores causes 
consolidation of the soil thereby resulting in build-up 
of shear strength and substantially reduced values of 
final settlements of foundations. This is achieved by 
pre-compression of the subsoil by subjecting the area to 
a preload. Preload can be done by any suitable method 
and is carried out in stages to allow gradual build-up 
of soil strength enabling it to safely support further 
stages of preload. For poorly draining soils, such as soft 
clays, pre-compression is accelerated by installation of 
prefabricated vertical drains (PVD). 


6.1.2.2 Preloading is applicable to fine grained soils 
such as silts and clays. Subsoils exhibiting high 
secondary consolidation characteristics may not be 
amenable to required degree of improvement by the 
preloading method. 


6.1.2.3 Removal of water from pore spaces may also 
be achieved by application of an external electric field 
to subsoil, the process being known as electro osmosis. 


6.1.3 Injection and Grouting 


6.1.3.1 Injection of chemicals, lime, cement, etc, 
into subsoil improves subsoil by formation of bonds 
between soil particles. Mechanical stabilization of 
the soil can also be achieved by grouting under high 
pressure. 


6.1.3.1.1 Lime stabilization is achieved by two ways 
depending upon the nature of the soil, thickness of 
strata, depth of strata, etc. Mixing of lime with clay 
is generally resorted to when the thickness of layer is 
small and clay is available at shallow depths. Lime 
column technique may be adopted at locations where 
soft clay extends to greater depths. The lime reacts 
with soil and increases its functional properties, thus 
decreasing the compressibility of soil. 


6.1.4 Soil Reinforcement 


6.1.4.1 Reinforcement introduced into the soil 
mass causes marked improvement in stiffness and 
consequently the load carrying capacity and stability of 
the soil mass. 


6.1.4.2 Reinforcements may be in the form of dense 
granular materials in the form of stone columns. These 
are used where the primary requirement is to increase 
the vertical load carrying capacity. 


6.1.4.3 Reinforcements may also be in the form of 
horizontal or vertical strips and membranes. These 
reinforcements serve significantly to increase the 


capacity of soil to withstand tensile, shear and 
compression loads and contribute towards improvement 
of stability of soil mass. These include geotextiles, 
geomembranes, soil nails, ground anchors, strips, etc. 


6.1.5 Miscellaneous Methods 


6.1.5.1 Other methods used successfully include 
replacement of poor subsoil by competent fill. These 
methods, however have limitations of depths of 
application. 


6.1.5.2 Improvement of properties of subsoils by 
heating and drying and by fusion at high temperatures 
have been employed with success. Soft soil has also 
temporarily been strengthened by freezing to improve 
its stiffness. These techniques have, however, limited 
application. 


6.1.6 Choice of Method 


6.1.6.1 Annex A presents a summary of various 
methods of ground improvement along with principles, 
applicability to various soil conditions, material 
requirements, equipment required, results likely to be 
achieved and limitations. This table may be referred to 
as guidance for selecting an appropriate method under 
a given situation. 


6.1.6.2 Annex B gives applicable grain size ranges for 
different treatment methods. 


6.1.6.3 For a particular situation, more than one method 
may appear to be suitable. In such cases, a relative study 
should be made for a proper selection. If necessary, a 
combination of more than one method may be adopted. 


7 EQUIPMENT AND ACCESSORIES 


The requirement of equipment and accessories will 
depend upon the method of ground improvement 
adopted. In practice, the type of equipment employed 
can vary considerably depending upon the substrata 
and project requirements. However, not only it is 
important that the equipment should be capable of 


IS 13094 : 2021 


reaching the required depths but also the installation 
procedure should not adversely affect subsoil properties 
thereby reducing efficacy of treatment procedure 
adopted. 


8 CONTROL OF GROUND IMPROVEMENT 
WORKS 


8.1 Prior to commencement of ground improvement 
works, pilot boreholes with relevant field and laboratory 
tests shall be carried out in locations specific to area to 
be improved. 


8.2 After completion of ground improvement work in 
a specific area, the field and laboratory tests shall be 
repeated to assess degree and adequacy of improvement 
of the subsoil. 

NOTES 


1 For medium and major works, it is desirable to initially 
earmark a trial area for establishing the pattern and efficiency 
of the treatment technique proposed to be employed and for 
optimization of the same. 


2 It will also be beneficial to include a programme of 
instrumentation to monitor the behaviour of subsoil during 
loading by measurement of pore pressure, soil movements, 
earth pressures, foundation settlement, etc. 


9 RECORDING OF DATA 


9.1 A competent inspector shall be present to record the 
necessary information during execution of the ground 
improvement work. 


9.2 Data to be recorded shall include: 
a) Sequence of operation of the work; 
b) Sequence and spacing of treatment points; 
c) Depth of treatment; 


d) Details of equipment employed and installation 
procedure followed; 


e) Records of instrumentation, if any; 
f) Results of soil tests before and after treatment; and 
g) Settlements during preloading. 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword and Clause 6.1.6.1 ) 
GROUND IMPROVEMENT METHODS 


Summary of Ground Improvement Methods 


Method Principle Most Suitable Maximum Special Special Properties Special Relative 
Soil Conditions/ Effective Materials Equipment of Treated Advantages and Cost 
Types Treatment Required Required Material Limitation 
Depth 
Blasting Shock waves and Saturated, >30m Explosives, | Jetting or drilling | Can obtain Rapid, Low 
vibrations cause clean sands; backfill to machine relative densities | inexpensive, can 
liquefaction; partly saturated plug drill of 70-80 percent; | treat any size 
displacement with sands and silts holes, hole may get variable | areas;variable 
C settlement to higher (collapsible casings density; time properties; no 
S density loess) after dependant Improvement 
A flooding strength gain near surface; 
> Dangerous 
E and requires 
S expertise 
$ Vibratory Densification by Saturated or dry 20m None Vibratory pile | Can obtain Rapid, simple, Moderate 
s | Probe vibration; liquefaction | clean sand (Ineffective driver and 750 mm | relative densities | good underwater, 
$ induced settlement above 3-4 m dia open steel pipe | of up to soft under layers 
= under overburden depth) 80 percent. may damp 
5 to produce a higher Ineffective in vibrations, 
O density some sands difficult to 
Y penetrate, stiff 
8 over layers, not 
Š good in partly 
É saturated soils 
Vibro- Densification Cohesionless 30m Granular Vibroflot, crane, | Can obtain Useful in Moderate 
compaction by vibration and soils with less backfill, pumps high relative saturated and 
compaction of than 20 percent water densities; good partly saturated 
backfill material fines supply uniformity soils 


1707 : P60€T SI 


Summary of Ground Improvement Methods 


Injection and Grouting 


and below water, 
requires control, 
shall be away 
from existing 
structures 


Method Principle Most Suitable Maximum Special Special Properties Special Relative 
Soil Conditions/ Effective Materials Equipment of Treated Advantages and Cost 
Types Treatment Required Required Material Limitation 
Depth 
2 | Compaction Densification by | Loose sandy soils: >20m Pile material | Pile driver, special | Can obtain high | Useful in Moderate to 
S piles displacement of | partly saturated (often sand | sand pile equipment | densities; good soils with high 
A pile volume and by [clayey soils, loess or soil plus uniformity fines; uniform 
E vibration during cement compaction; easy 
$ driving mixture) to check results; 
à slow; limited 
S A ' 
O improvement in 
> upper 1-2 m 
2 : E : 
.S| Heavy tamping | Repeated application | Cohesionless 30 m None Tampers of up to|Can obtain good |Simple, rapid, Low 
S (dynamic of high intensity | soils, waste fills, 200 tonne, high |improvement suitable for some 
= compaction/ impacts at surface partly saturated capacity crane and reasonable soils with fines; 
S consolidation) soils uniformity usable above 
> 
Q 
Q 
S 
a 
Š 


Particulate Penetration Medium to coarse Unlimited Grout, water | Mixers, tanks, | Impervious, Low cost grouts, | Lowest of the 
grouting grouting fills soil pores | sand and gravel pumps, hoses high strength high strength; grout systems 
with soil, cement, with cement limited to 
and/or clay grout, eliminate | coarse-grained 
liquefaction soils, hard to 
danger owing to | evaluate 
filling of voids 
with grout 
Chemical Solutions of two} Medium silts and Unlimited Grout, water | Mixers, tanks, | Impervious, high | Low viscosity High to very 
grouting or more chemicals | coarser pumps, hoses strength void controllable gel high 
react in soil pores to filled with cement | time, good water 


form a gel or a solid 
precipitate 


grout, eliminate 
liquefaction 
danger 


shut-off; high 
cost, hard to 
evaluate 


1707 : P60€T SI 


Summary of Ground Improvement Methods 


columns or panels 


precision in 
locating treated 
zones 


Method Principle Most Suitable Maximum Special Special Properties Special Relative 
Soil Conditions/ Effective Materials Equipment of Treated Advantages and Cost 
Types Treatment Required Required Material Limitation 
Depth 
Pressure Lime slurry injected | Expansive clays | Unlimited, but | Lime, water | Slurry tanks, | Lime in Only effective in | Competitive 
injected lime to shallow depths 2-3 m usual surfactant agitators, pumps, | capsulated narrow range of with other 
under high pressure hoses zones formed soil conditions solutions to 
by channels expansive 
resulting from soil 
cracks, root problems 
holes, hydraulic 
fracture 
Displacements | Highly viscous | Soft, fine-grained | Unlimited, but | Soil, cement | Batching Grout bulbs Good for Low 
grout grout acts as radical | soils; foundation |a few metre | water equipment, high within reduction of (material) 
P hydraulic jack when | soils with large | usual pressure pumps, compressed soil | differential high 
Š pumped in under high | voids or cavities hoses matrix settlements; (injection 
S pressure filling large process) 
© voids; careful 
E control required 
3 | Electro-kinetic | Stabilizing chemicals | Saturated silts; Unknown Chemicals d.c. power supply, | Increased Existing soil Expensive 
E injection moved into soil by | silty clays (clean stabilizer anodes, cathodes | strength, reduced | and structures 
> electro-osmosis or | sands in case of colloidal compressibility, | not subjected to 
= colloids into pores by | colloid injection) void fillers reduced high pressures; 
electrophoresis liquefaction not good in 
potential soils with high 
conductivity 
Jet grouting High speed jets at | Sands, silts, clays - Water, Special jet nozzle, | Solidified Useful in soils High 
depth excavate, inject, stabilizing | pumps, pipes and | columns and that can't be 
and mix stabilizer chemicals hoses walls permeation 
with soil to form grouted, 


1707 : P60€T SI 


Summary of Ground Improvement Methods 


conductive soils 


Method Principle Most Suitable Maximum Special Special Properties Special Relative 
Soil Conditions/ Effective Materials Equipment of Treated Advantages and Cost 
Types Treatment Required Required Material Limitation 
Depth 
Preloading Load is applied | Normally — Earth fill Earth moving Reduced water Easy, theory Low 
with/without sufficiently in advance | consolidated or other equipment, content and void | well developed, (moderate, 
drains of construction so | soft clays, silts, material for | large water ratio, increased uniformity; if vertical 
that compression/ | organic deposits, loading the | tanks or vacuum strength requires long drains are 
consolidation of soft | completed site; sand drainage systems time (vertical required) 
soils is completed | sanitary landfills or gravel sometimes drains can be 
prior to development for drainage | used; settlement used to reduce 
of the site blanket markers, consolidation 
piezometers time) 
Surcharge fills | Fill in excess of that | Normally u Earth fill Earth moving Reduced Faster than Moderate 
required permanently | consolidated or other equipment; water content, preloading 
is applied to achieve | soft clays, silts, material for | settlement void ratio and without 
S a given amount of | organic deposits, loading the | markers, compressibility | surcharge, theory 
A settlement in a shorter | completed site; sand piezometers increased well developed, 
Š time; excess fill then | sanitary landfills or gravel strength extra material 
S removed for drainage handling; can 
3 blanket use vertical 
` drains to reduce 
consolidation 
time 
Electro- d.c. current causes | Normally _ Anodes d.c. power supply, | Reduced water No fill loading High 
osmosis water flow from anode | consolidated silts (usually wiring, metering | content and required, can be 
towards cathode | and silty clays rebars or systems compressibility, | used in confined 
where it is removed aluminium) increased area, relatively 
cathodes strength, fast; non-uniform 
(well points electrochemical | properties 
or rebars) hardening between 
electrodes; not 
good in highly 


1707 : P60€T SI 


Summary of Ground Improvement Methods 


Method Principle Most Suitable Maximum Special Special Properties Special Relative 
Soil Conditions/ Effective Materials Equipment of Treated Advantages and Cost 
Types Treatment Required Required Material Limitation 
Depth 
Remove and Foundation soil | Inorganic soils 10m Admixture | Excavating, Increased Uniform, High 
replace excavated, improved stabilizers mixing and strength and controlled 
by drying or admixture compaction stiffness, reduced | foundation soil 
addition, and equipment, compressibility | when replaced; 
re-compacted dewatering system may require large 
area dewatering 
Structural fills | Structural fill | Used over soft _ Sand, Mixing and Soft subgrade High strength, Low to high 
distributes loads to | clays or organic gravel fly compaction protected by good load 
underlying soft soils | soils, marsh ash, bottom | equipment structural distribution to 
$ deposits ash, slag, load-bearing fill | underlying soft 
3 expanded soils 
E aggregate, 
= clam shell 
or oyster 
shell, 
incinerator 
ash 
Mix-in-place Lime, cement, or | All soft or loose >20m Cement, Drill rig, rotary Solidified soil Use native Moderate to 
piles and walls | asphalt introduced | inorganic soils lime, cutting and mixing | piles for walls of | soil, reduced high 
through rotating auger asphalt, or | head, additive relatively high lateral support 
or special in-place chemical proportioning strength requirements 
mixer stabilizer equipment during 
excavation; 
difficult quality 
control 


1707 : P60€T SI 


Summary of Ground Improvement Methods 


allowable bearing 
pressure 


Method Principle Most Suitable Maximum Special Special Properties Special Relative 
Soil Conditions/ Effective Materials Equipment of Treated Advantages and Cost 
Types Treatment Required Required Material Limitation 
Depth 
Heating Drying at low Fine-grained soils, 15m Fuel Fuel tanks, burners, | Reduced water Can obtain High 
temperatures; especially partly blowers content, plasticity, | irreversible 
alteration of clays saturated clays water sensitivity; | improvements 
at intermediate and silts, loess increased strength | in properties; 
N temperatures can introduce 
Š (400-600 °C); fusion stabilizers with 
S at high temperatures hot gases 
Es (> 1 000 °C) 
Freezing Freeze soft, wet ground All soils Several metres |Refrigerant | Refrigeration Increased Not good in High 
to increase its strength system strength and flowing ground 
stiffness stiffness, reduced | water; temporary 
permeability method 
Vibro Hole jetted into soft,|Soft clays and 20m Gravel or Vibroflot, crane or | Increased bearing | Faster than Moderate to 
replacement fine-grained soil and | alluvial deposits crushed rock | vibrocat, water capacity, reduced | precompression, high 
sand/stone backfilled with densely backfill settlement avoids dewatering 
columns compacted gravel or required for 
sand remove and 
replace method; 
limited bearing 
capacity 
| Root piles, soil | Inclusions used to All soils = Reinforcing | Drilling and Reinforced zone |In-situ Moderate to 
= nailing carry tension, shear, bars, cement | grouting equipment | behaves as a reinforcement for high 
Š compression grout coherent mass soils that cannot 
S$ be grouted or 
3 mixed in-place 
= with admixtures 
Strips and Horizontal tensile All soils Can construct | Metal or Excavating, Self-supporting — | Economical, Low to 
membranes strips, membranes earth structures | plastic strips, | earth handling, earth structures, | earth structures moderate 
buried in soil under to heights of|geotextiles | and compaction increased bearing | coherent, 
embankments, gravel several metres equipment capacity, reduced | can tolerate 
base courses and deformations deformations; 
footings increased 


1707 : P60€T SI 


IS 13094 : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 6.1.6.2 ) 
GRAIN SIZE RANGES FOR DIFFERENT TREATMENT METHODS 


B-1 Applicable grain size ranges for different treatment methods are given below: 


TS GE 


GRAVEL ——, SILT 


VIBRO - COMPACTION — 
A, 
BLASTING 


AAA 
PARTICULATE cour] 


CHEMICAL GROUT 
DISPLACEMENT GROUT 


En A PEA 
PRECOMPRESSION 
ASA AN 
HEAVY TAMPING (DYNAMIC COMPACTION 


SR 


REINFORCED ( TENSION, COMPRESSION, SHEAR ) 


De 
THERMAL TREATMENT 


MEA a 
ADMIXTURES 


1.0 0.01 0.001 0.0001 


10 
PARTICLE SIZE, in mm 


NOTE — Jagged lines indicate uncertainty of applicability of the method. 


10 


IS 13094 : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 43 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 202/395, Jodhpur 
Park, Kolkata 700068) 


In Personal Capacity (D-1903, PWS, 7 Hills, 
Narsingi(v), Kokapet Road, Ranga Reddy 
500089) 


AFCONS Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai 

AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 

Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Association of Piling Specialists (India), Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Noida 


CEM Engineers & Consultants Pvt Ltd, Bhubaneswar 


Cengrs Geotechnica Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 


Central Designs Organization, Water Resources 
Deptt, Govt of Maharashtra, Nashik 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 


Consulting Engineering Services (India) Pvt Ltd, 
New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


D-CAD Technologies, New Delhi 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Technological University, Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dr N. Som (Chairman) 


Dr D. N. Naresu (Vice Chairman) 


Suri P. S. BANSOD 
Suri V. RAMAMURTY (Alternate) 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 
Suri LALIT Monan PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHANWA AMOL SHINGAREY 
SHRI CHANDRAMOULEESWAR S. (Alternate) 


SHRI V. T. GANPULE 
SHRI MADHUKAR J. LODHAVIA (Alternate) 


SHRI C. PUSHPAKARAN 
SHRI HEMANT MALHOTRA (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK BASA 


SHRI SANJAY GUPTA 
Suri RAVI SUNDARAM (Alternate I) 
SHRI SORABH Gupta (Alternate I) 


DIRECTOR 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


SHRI NEERAJ KUMAR 
SHRI SIDHARTHA MITRA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH KHARE 
SHRI SAUROBH Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr R. CHITRA 
SHRI MAHABIR DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI DIPANKAR PAUL 
Suri T. K. Roy CHOUDHURY (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJIT SAMANTA 
Dr S. GANESH Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI KANWAR SINGH 
Dr P. S. Prasan (Alternate) 


Dr P. KAMATCHI 
SHRIMATI R. SREEKALA (Alternate) 


DRK. G. BHATIA 


SHRI GOVIND RAM SHIROMANI 
Suri K. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


Pror ASHOK KUMAR GUPTA 


11 


IS 13094 : 2021 


Organization 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


F S Engineers Pvt Limited, Chennai 


Gammon Engineers and Contractors Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Geodynamics Ltd, Vadodara 

Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 

Ground Engineering Limited, New Delhi 

Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 

Hydraulic and Engineering Instruments (HEICO), 
New Delhi 


Indian Geotechnical Society, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Road Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Society of Earthquake Technology, Roorkee 
ITD Cementation India Ltd, Kolkata 

Jadhavpur University, Kolkata 

Keller Ground Engineering Pvt Ltd, Chennai 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


MN Dastur & Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


Representative(s) 


SHRI V. K. PANWAR 
SHRI SANJOY BHOWMIK (Alternate) 


DR A. VERGHESE CHUMMAR 


SHRI VENKATARAMANA. N. HEGGADE 
SHRI SANDEEP M. Guan (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVI KIRAN RAMESH VAIDYA 
SHRI SUJAN KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Dr TIMIR BARAN GHOSAL 


SHRI PRASHANT TUKARAM ILAMKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JAIN 
SHRI NEERAJ KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI K. A. KESHVANI 
Suri R. S. Vasava (Alternate) 


SHRI JATTINDER SINGH 
SHRI RAUNAQ SINGH (Alternate) 
SECRETARY 


Pror T. G. SITHARAM 
Pror G. L. SIVAKUMARA Basu (Alternate) 


Dr G. V. RAMANA 
Dr J. T. SHaHu (Alternate I) 
Dr PRASHANTH VANGLA (Alternate II YP) 


PROF PRIYANKA GHOSH 


PROF SUBHADEEP BANERJEE 
Pror RAMESH K. KANDASAMI (Alternate) 


PROF DEEPANKAR CHOUDHURY 
ProF Dasaka Murty (Alternate) 


PROF MAHENDRA SINGH 
Pror VisHwas A. Sawant (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
Director (T) (Alternate) 


Pror T. G. SITHARAM 
Dr B. K. Maneswanı (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH KUMAR 
SHRI SACHIN Kamat (Alternate) 


PROF SIBAPRIYA MUKHERJEE 
ProF RAMENDU Bikas Sanu (Alternate) 


Suri V. V. S. RAMADAS 
SHRI MADAN Kumar ANNAM (Alternate) 


DRK. S. RAMAKRISHNA 
SHRI JESUDOSS ASIRVATHAM (Alternate) 


SHRI RANJAN KUMAR PANDEY 
Suri AJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr ABHIJIT DASGUPTA 
Suri SUVENDU Dey (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR Ray 


12 


Organization 


Ministry of Shipping, New Delhi 

Mumbai Port Trust, Mumbai 

Nagadi Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 
National Institute of Disaster Management, 


New Delhi 
NTPC Limited, Noida 


Research Designs and Standards Organization 
(Ministry of Railways), Lucknow 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 
Safe Enterprises, Mumbai 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


Simplex Infrastructures Limited, Chennai 

Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 
Telangana State Research Laboratories, Hyderabad 
The Pressure Piling Co (I) Pvt Limited, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity, New Delhi (Flat No. 220, Ankur 
Apartments Mother Dairy Road, Patparganj, 
Delhi 110092) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 13094 : 2021 


Representative(s) 


Suri H. N. ASWATH 
Suri ANIL PRUTHI (Alternate) 


Dy CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (DESIGN) (Alternate) 


Dr V. V. S. Rao 
Dr N. Santosu Rao (Alternate) 


Dr CHANDAN GHOSH 
SHRI Amir ALI (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDER KUMAR 
Suri Monit JHALANI (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER SINGH 
Suri S. K. Oma (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK GARG 
Suri S. K. Kapoor (Alternate I) 
SHRI SANDIPAN Hore (Alternate II) 


SHRI VIKRAM SINGH RAO 
SHRI SURYAVEER SINGH Rao (Alternate) 


Pror Y. K. JAIN 


SHRI SHANKAR GUHA 
Dr V. BALAKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV GUPTA 
Suri B. N. Nacara (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI J. SRIDEVI 
Suri P. JoHN VICTOR (Alternate) 


SHRI V. C. DESHPANDE 
SHRI PUSHKAR V. DESHPANDE (Alternate) 


DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI MADHURIMA MADHAV 
ScIENTIST ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 43 (14120). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


