( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 3247 - 1976

Indian

Standard

SPECIFICATION FOR CANNED BITTER GOURD (KARELA)

(First
Chairman DaP.K.KAGRICULTURAL MARKEIXW ADVISERTO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA DR B. S. SAXENA(Alternare) SEno KARTAR SINGH Aaoa.4 SHRI NARAIN DASS DUDWA (ANernafe) SHRI S. R. BAJAI Smu B. S. BHATM Smu L. A. RAMANATHAN (Alternate) S~iu D. S. CXAEHA .9%x& BGms~zo% Srim S. K. MITI`AL (Alremte) Da B. CHOUDI.X~~ Da J. C. ANAND (AIternote) BIUG S. K. DAS
Smu DAYA NAND

Revision)
AFDC 23
and

Fruits and Vegetables Sectional Committee,

Food and Nutrition Board, Ministry of Agriculture Irrigation (Department of Food), New Delhi Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ture & Irrigation), Faridabad

(Ministry of Agricul-

Department of Agriculture, Government of Haryana, Chandigarh Bajaj Consultants, New Delhi DefebyncoFPeOd Research Laboratory (Ministry of Defence), Central Committee for Food Standards (Ministry of Health), New Delhi Department of Agriculture, Government of West Bengal All India Cold Storages Association, New Delhi Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi (Ministry of

SFXRI J. K. JAOTTANI(Alternate)

Technical Standardization Committee (Foodstuffs) of Agriculture and Irrigation), New Delhi Central Fruit Products Advisory Committee Agriculture and Irrigation), New Delhi The Metal Box Co of India Ltd, Calcutta Depa&;r;;; Ministry.of of Agriculture, Government of

(Ministry

Smu K. R. NARASIMHAN DR S. C. CluKRAVAR,`Y (Alternare) DEPUTY DIRECTOROP AGRICULTURB
MARKETING)

Tamihadu, of Agricul-

Ho~ncu~.rlnuls Smu S. D. DEWAN SHRI 0. P. DWMIJA

(Altera&) Export Inspection Council (Ministry of Commerce), Calcutta Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi National Co-operati~e Development Corporation, New Delhi Dep;;~~;; of Agrxulture, Government of Maharashtra,

ture)

Agriculture

% Irrigation

(Department

SmU S. L. mT?`AL PROP RANliT SINQH ( Alwrnore)

Smu B. C. MAIHCJP. Da R. L. NAGPAL DEPUTY Dnoxroa OP AGRICULTURE (Houxxnxm~) (Alternate) Da A. 0. NAIK-KURADB Sm M. S. KOHLI (Alrernu&)

All Jndia Food Preservers'

Association,

New Delhi

(Conrimed

on page 2)

@ Copyright 1977 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 3241- 1976
(Continuedfrom Members DR M. V. PATWARDHAN SHRIV. B. DALAL (Ahmale) SHIU s. hMA.swAMY DR K. S. R*NDWWA Da G. S. NUJAR (Alternow) Smtr S. R. Smn-rv SHRI S. M. NE~~BFIANI (Alternote) SW P. S. SRwV*sAN SHRI B. K. IYZNIXR (Altermfe) COL R. N. TANEJA LT-COL D. D. VOHIU (Altermzte) DR S. S. Ta.+olu Da S. K. BOSE (Afternate) SHRI J. C. bItMA Sm T. PIJRNANANDAM, Deputy Director (Agri & Food) C.ent$l~~d page 1) Represenring Technological Research Institute (CSIR),

Development Council for Food Processing Industries (Dircctorate General of Technical Development), New Delhi Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay Council, Army New Delhi; Headquarkrs of Uttar

Processed Foods Export Promotion and MinistrY of Commerce Directorate of Supplies & Transport, (Ministry of Defence) Directorate of Fruit Pradesh, Lucknow Utilization,

Government

Export Promotion Cell, Ministry of Agriculture Director General, ISI (Ex-o&cio Member)

and Irrigation

Secretary SHRI V. S. MATHUR Depury Director (Agri & Food),

1.51

Processed Fruits and Vegetables Subcommittee,
Convener

AFDC 23 : 3
(Ministry of

Smu DANA NAND

Central Fruit Agriculture

Products Advisory Committee & Irrigation), New Delhi

AGIUCULTURAL MARKETING ADVISOR TO THEGOVGRNMENT OF INDIA Dnuxro~ OPLAIWRATORES (Aim-mate)
DR

Directorate of Marketing & Inspection tore dr Irrigation), Faridabad Fruit

(Ministry

of Agricul-

J. C. hAND

SHRI N. P. BHARGAVA SHIU B. S. BXATIA Sruu L. A. R*MANAWAN (Alternafe) gkpGpW.H.4L . . SHRIP. K. DXINORA (ABemate) SARI L~urr SINGH SIOUV. C. MAMADAPUR SHRJ 5. C. MATHUR Da A. G. NAIK-KURADE SHRI A. K. Tncoo (ANmate) SHPJ A. M. NANITJNDASW*MY
%W.I c. SHIU V.

Processing Division, Indian Agricultural R-ch Institute (ICAR), New Delhi The Midland Fruit & Vegetable Products (India) Pvt Ltd. New Delhi De.fe~x&od Research Laboratory (Ministry of Defence),

Provision Merchants' Association,. Delhi Technical Standardization Commlttm (Foodstuffs) of Agriculture & Irrigation), New Delhi

(Ministry

Punjab State Co-operative Supply and Marketing Federation Ltd, Chandigarh and Vegetable Co-operative Processing Society Ltd, Koshalnagar National Co-operative Development Corporation, New Delhi All India Food Preservers' Association, New Delhi Fruit Cent$;raood Technological Research Trichur Institute (CSIR),

SHIUM. V. SASTRY (Allemote) L. SHARDA Da L. L. fiA',`RI

v.

PAUL

Canning Industries Cochin Limited, Tims Products Limited, Calcutta

SECRETARY SecIuITARY

(Alternate)

COL R. N. TANIUA LT-COL D. D. VOHRA(Afrernore)

Central Committee for Food Standards (MinisVy Of Health), New Delhi Development Council for Food Processing Industries (Directorate General of Technical Development), New Delhi Directorate of Supplies & Transport, Army Headquarters (Ministry of Defense)

2

IS : 3247 - 1976

Indian

Standard
)

SPECIFICATION FOR CANNED BITTER GOU.RD
(KARELA

(First

Revision)

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 September 1976, after the draft finalized by the Fruits and Vegetables Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 The trade in canned bitter gourd (KARELA ) is on increase. It is, however, necessary to ensure the quality of the product, if the demand is to be maintained and further developed. In order to ensure proper quality, it is desirable to have strict quality control based on specifications. It was, therefore, found necessary to formulate an Indian Standard specification for this product. 0.3 This standard was first issued in 1965. The Sectional Committee responsible for preparation of this standard felt that this specification be reviewed. In this revision definition of the term `blemished' has been modified and new term `disintegrated unit' has been added. Further, requirements, such as general, vacuum, head space, arsenic, lead, copper, zinc and net content in different can sizes have also been modified. Requirements for defects have been made more precise and reference to relevant Indian Standard for packing material has been incorporated.
0.4 In the preparation

of this standard, due consideration has been given to the provisions of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 and the Fruit Products Order, 1955. However, this standard is subject to the restrictions imposed under these statutes, wherever applicable. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing ' the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. *Rulesfor rounding off numericalvalues (revised). 3

IS:3247-1976

1. SCOPE
1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements for bitter gourd (KARELA) (Momordica charantiu Linn.) canned in brine.

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions 2.1 Head Space - The distance between the top of the double the level of the surface of the contents. shall apply. seam and

2.2 Absence of Defects - The degree of freedom from extraneous material such as the ends of bitter gourd (KARELA) and also freedom from damage due to mechanical injury. 2.3 Blemished Units - Units that are blemished with some injury, such as wormhole, insect damage, physiological disorder or other abnormality such as sun burn, scab and enzyme activity on the surface, readily visible to the naked eye to a noticeable degree. A unit shall be considered blemished when the aggregate blemished area exceeds the area of a circle @32 cm in diameter. Uneven distribution of pigments and changes in colour normally associated with proper processing shall not be considered as defects. 2.4 Disintegrated Units - Units which have lost the normal form, or from which some portion have been separated. 3. STYLES 3.1 The bitter gourd (KARELA) used for canning shall be in any one of the following forms: a) Whole pieces, unscraped, with ends removed; b) Truncated cones, unscraped, with ends removed; and c) Circular discs (should be uniform in size), unscraped. 4. GRADES 4.1 Canned bitter gourd (KARELA) shall be of two grades, namely, Grade 1 and Grade 2. 5. REQUIREMENTS 5.1 Hygienic Requirements - The material shall be prepared and handled under strict hygienic conditions (see IS : 6542-1972*) by persons free from contagious and infectious diseases and only in premises maintained in a `Fjthoroughly clean and hygienic condition and having adequate and safe water supply. All workers shall use clean, white, washed clothing. Necessary precautions shah be taken to prevent incidental contamination of the product from soiled equipment or from personnel suffering from injuries.
*Code for hygienic conditions for fruit and vegetable canning units.

shape or

4

IS : 3247 - 1976 5.1.1 All equipment coming in contact with raw materials or products in the course of manufacture shall be kept clean. An ample supply of steam and water, and hose, brushes and other equipment necessary for proper cleaning of machinery and equipment shall be available. The equipment shall be properly cleaned by suitable chlorine solution having at least 50 mg/kg of available chlorine. 5.2 General - The bitter gourd (KARELA) selected for canning shall be of the proper stage of maturity and shall have the characteristic colour, flavour and texture, and shall be free from blemishes and damage by insects or disease. Colour of seeds shall not be red. Texture of seed shall not be hard. KARELA used should be of the same variety. 5.3 Freedom from Preservatives, Artificial Colouring Matter and Flavouring Agents - The material shall be free from any preservative, artificial colouring matter or flavouring agents. 5.4 Requirements for Covering Brine - The covering brine shall be clear. The only substances that may be added to the covering brine are edible common sah (sodium chloride) between 1 to 2 percent, with or without small quantity of sucrose, and citric or tartaric acid not exceeding 0 1 percent of the packing medium. 5.5 Requirements for the Finished Product - The contents of the can on opening shall display the following characteristics: Grade I - The material shall possess a good, characteristic and practically uniform colour; shall be practically uniform in size; shall be practically free from defects; shall be practically free from disintegration; shall possess a characteristic, good texture and flavour; and shall be of such quality with respect to clarity of covering liquor as to score not less than 85 points. Grade 2 - The material shall possess a characteristic and reasonably uniform colour; shall be reasonably uniform in size; shah be reasonably free from defects; shall be reasonably free from disintegration; shall possess a characteristic reasonably good texture and flavour; and shall be of such aualitv with resnect to clarity of covering liquor as to score not less than 75 points. * The maximum and the minimum numbers of points, to be scored by different factors shall be as given below: . Maximum Minimum +Grade 1 Grade 2 Colour 11 9 15 Texture and uniformity of size Taste and flavour ;; E :3' 30 26 Absence of defects 40 5

IS : 3247- 1976

Scoring shall be done according to the method prescribed in Appendix A. 5.5.1 Colour
Grade IThe units shall possess a good, practically uniform colour, characteristic of bitter gourd (KARELA) of the proper maturity, which means that the colour of the units shall be pale green but not yellowish red or red indicative of very mature units, practically free from any bluish black or black discolouration either partly or wholly. Uneven distribution of pigments and change in colour normally associated with proper processing shall not be considered as defects. Grade 2 - The units shah possess a good, reasonably uniform colour, characteristic of bitter gourd (KARELA) at the right stage of maturity, which means that the colour of the units shall be pale green but not yellowish red or red indicative of very mature units, reasonably free from any bluish black or black discolouration. Uneven distribution of pigments and change in colour normally associated with proper processing shall-not be considered as defects.

5.5.2 Texture and Uniformity of Size
Grade IThe units shall possess practically good texture, which means that the units shall be just firm but not hard. The seeds of bitter gourd (KARELA) shall not be unduly hard and horny. The units shall be practically uniform in size. Grade 2 - The units shall possess a reasonably good texture, which means that the units shall be reasonably firm but not hard. The seeds of the bitter gourd (KARELA) shall not be unduly hard and horny. The units shall be reasonably uniform in size.

5.5.3 Taste and Flavour
Grade 1 - The units shall possess the characteristic bitter taste of bitter gourd (KARELA). The units shall be completely devoid of any objectionable or off-taste, or objectionable smell. and odour. Grade 2 - The units shall possess characteristic bitter taste of bitter gourd (KARELA). The units shall be devoid of any objectionable or off-taste or objectionable smell and odour. 5.5.4 Absence of Defects Grade 1 - The units shall be practically free from defects, which means that there shall not be present any extraneous material !ike the ends and there shall be present not more than 5 percent of blemished units, not more than 5 percent of disintegrated units and not more than 05 percent detached seeds calculated on the drained mass. The covering

6

IS : 3247 - 1976

brine shall be thin, practically clear and practically free from cloudiness and suspended matter and shall be practically free from blackening or discolouration.
Grade 2 - The units shall be reasonably free from defects which means that there shall not be present any extraneous material like the ends, and there shall be present not more than 10 percent of blemished units, not more than 10 percent of disintegrated units, not more than 1 percent of detached seeds calculated on the drained mass. The covering brine shall be thin, reasonably clear and reasonably free from cloudiness and suspended matter and shall be reasonably free from blackening or discolouration.

5.5.5 The material shall also conform to the requirements Table 1.
TABLE 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNED BITTER GOURD

prescribed in
(KARELA)

SL No. (1) i) ii) iii) iv) v) vi) vii) viii) ix)

CHARACTERISTIC (2) Vacuum in the can in mm, Min Head space in the can in mm, Max Drained mass of the contents of the can, as percentage of net mass, Min Arsenic, mg/kg, Max Lead, mglkg, Max Copper, mdk, Max Zinc, mg/kg, Max Tin, mg/kg, Max Microbiological requirements

REQUIREMENTS

M&OD

(REF TO CL No:

OF TEST

OF1s : %$-l%`t*)
(3) 150 12 60 1.0 2.5 5 5 250

5
6 7

To satisfy the requirements of the test *Methods of sampling and test for processed fruits and vegetables.

13 14 15 16 17 18

6. PACKING AND MARKING
6.1 Packing 6.1.1 The material shall be packed in cans made of electrolytic or any other suitable tinplate. The cans shall be either plain or internally lacquered and hermetically sealed. The side seam shall also be lacquered. When lacquered internally, the lacquer shall be acid-resistant and shall not be destroyed, altered or its components transferred to the material inside the can during processing or subsequent storage or transport. The can exterior shall be free from dents, rust, perforations and seam distortions. The cans shall not show leaking, panelling or swell. The interior of the lacquered cans shall not show any visible black discolouration, rusting or pitting and the inside lacquer shall

7

IS : 3247 - 1976 be in good condition.

discolouration.

The interior of the plain cans may show visible black Normal feathering shall not be considered as a defect.

6.1.2 The cans shall be filled with the material, without impairment of quality. The size of the cans and the net mass of their contents shall ordinarily be as given in Table 2. For determining the capacity and dimensions of cans method given in IS : 6093-1971* shall be followed. In case containers other than those specified in Table 2 are used, the size of the container and the net mass of the contents shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the vendor.
TABLE 2 TRADE SIZE I% (1) i) ii) iii) (2) 301 x409 401 X411 603 X 700 SIZES AND CAPACITIES OF CANS
NOMINAL NOMINAL

DIAMETER (3) mm 77.8 103.2 157.2

HEIGHT (4) mm 115.9 119.1 177.8

NET Miss OF CONTFNTS; (5)

& 800 2890

6.1.3 Packing in Cases - The cans shall be packed in wooden packing cases (see IS : 1503-1967t) or corrugated board boxes or any other case as agreed to between the purchaser and the vendor. 6.2 Marking 6.2.1 Each can shall be marked with the following particulars: a) Name, style, and grade of the material with the brand name, if any; b) Name and address of the manufacturer; c) Net mass of the contents of the can in grams; d) Date of manufacture or code number indicating the date of manufacture; and e) Manufacturing licence number.
NOTE - Any other marking required under Packaged Commodities shall also be marked on the can. Regulation, 1975

'

6.2.2 Each packing information :

case

shall also be marked

with the following

a) Name of the product; b) Number of cans x mass of each can;
*Method for determining the capacity and dimension of hermetically food containers. $+eciscation for iyooden packing cases (first revision). sealed metal

8

IS : 3247 - 1976 c) Date of manufacture

or code number indicating the date of manufacture; d) Manufacturing licence number; and e) Name and address of the manufacturer and gross mass. Mark.

6.3 The container may also be marked with the IS1 Certification

NOTE - The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence. for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

7. SAMPLING
7.1 Representative samples of the material shall be drawn and tested for conformity to this standard by the method prescribed in 3 of IS : 2860-1964*.

8. TESTS 8.1 The samples of canned bitter gourd (KARELA) shall be tested for conformity of the material to the requirements of this specification by the methods given in IS : 2860-1964*. Reference to relevant clauses is given in co1 4 of Table 1.

APPENDIX A (Clause 5.5)
DETERMINATION A-l. APPARATUS A-l.1 OF THE GRADE OF THE PRODUCT

White Porcelain Bowls under examination. A-l.2 Stainless Steel Spoons -

big enough to hold the contents of the can Tablespoons.

*Methods of sampling and test for processed fruits and vegetables.

9

IS : 3247 - 1976 A-2. PROCEDURE A-2.1 Panel of Judges - Judging for grading the product shall be done by a panel of three to five judges. All the judges constituting a panel shall be conversant with the factors governing the quality of the product. The cans shall be opened and the contents poured separately into white porcelain bowls. Each judge shall independently examine the contents from each of the cans and assign scores for different characteristics. A-2.1.1 The judges shall consider the following characteristics: colour, texture and uniformity of size, taste and flavour, and absence of defects. A-2.2 System of Scoring - The variations within each factor are so described that the scores may be ascertained for each factor and expressed numerically. The relative importance of each factor has been expressed numerically on a scale of 100. Each judge shall give a score for the individual factors, by the method described in Table 3 and record his observations in the Score Sheet for individual judge. A-2.2.1 The scores as number of points given on the Score Sheet by the judges for the contents of each can for the four factors shall be recorded in a tabular form in the Score Card and the average score calculated for each factor with overall average for each can entered in the appropriate columns of the Score Card after complying with the conditions specified in A-2.3.1 and A-2.3.2 A-2.3 Ascertaining the Grade A-2.3.1 Agreement Among Judges - To ascertain the consistency of judgement among the judges, the total score assigned by each of them for the contents of the same can shall be calculated by adding up the scores for the various individual characteristics. IF the difference between the maximum and the minimum of the total score so obtained does not exceed (K+ 5), where K is the number of judges, the scoring shall be deemed as consistent for the can under consideration. If the difference exceeds (K+ 5), the most outlying score, that is, the one which is farthest from its immediate neighbour (the scores being arranged in one order), shall be discarded and the consistency among the remaining judges shall be examined. A-2.3.2 When the consistencv is thus established (A-2.3.1). the overall average scores given by the judges, whose scoring has been fo&d to be consistent, shall be calculated for each can. The average score for each of the individual characteristics shall also be calculated by taking into account the corresponding scores as given by the same judges for the contents of the same can. 10

IS : 3247- 1976
A-2.3.3 Assignment of Grade - In order to assign a grade for the contents of a can, the following procedure shall be adopted: Grade 1 - The score for each factor individually (A-2.3.2) shall be not less than 75 percent of the maximum score obtainable, and the overall average score shall be not less than 85 points. Grade 2 - The score for each factor individually (A-2.3.2) shall be not less than 65 percent of the maximum score obtainable, and the overall average scoie shall be not less than 75 points.
TABLE 3 METHOD FOR GIVING SCORES BITTER GOURD (K&U&4) FOR CANNED

(Clause A-2.2)
SL ORGANOLEPTIC No. CHARACIPRIWIC REQUIREMENTS MAXIMUM NUMBER OF FO&TS (4) Colour Good pale green, uniform, characteristic of the variety and of bitter gourd of proper maturity; free from any bluish black or black discolouration. Uneven distribution of pigments and change in colour normally associated with proper processing shall not be considered as defects Good texture, just firm but not hard; seeds not unduly hard and horny. Uniform in size 15 FROPERTIE~ WHICH REDUCE THB VALUE (5) Not quite uniform, slightly varying shades of the characteristic colour. Very slight discolouration Non - uniform, some units may have yellowish red colour. Some discolouration Dull, non-uniform, red colour, black dlscolouration FOINTs REDUCING THs VALUE UP TO (6) 11

(1) i)

9

0

ii)

Texture and uniformity of size*

25

Texture not very good. Some units slightly hard, seeds somewhat horny. Almost uniform size Units rather hard. Size varying within reasonable limits Leathery texture, very very hard units. Seed very very hard and horny. Size not at all uniform __ ,.

19

16 0

(Lonrmued)

11

Is :3241-1976
TABLE 3 METHOD FOR GIVING SCORES FOR CANNED BITTER GOURD (K/l&%4) - Cod
REQUIREMENTS MAXIMUM NUMBER POP% PROPERTW~ WHICH REDUCETHE VALUE (5) Slight variation in normal bitter taste, a trace of metallic taste Rather a flat taste not so bitter as typical of KARELA, slight smell of sourness or sulphide odour Off-taste, bad flavour; offensive strong smell Blemished units up to 5 percent and disintegrated units up to 5 percent of the drained mass. Detached seeds up to 05 ;E;cenn,,o' the draiBlemished units up to 10 percent and disintegrated units up to 10 percent of the drained mass. Detached seeds not very excessive Blemished and disintegrated units above 10 percent of the drained mass. Excessive detached seeds of size', texture may be allotted POINTS REDUCING
THE UP VALUE TO

SL No.

ORGANOLEFTIC CHARACTERLWC

(1)
iii)

(2)
Taste and flavour

(3)
Pleasant flavour and bitter taste characteristic of bitter gourd (KARELA) : free from any objectionable odour. Free from sourness, staleness, or metallic taste

(4) 20

(6)
15

13

0

iv)

Absence of defects7

Free from defects, no extraneous material present; free from blemished? disintegrated units. No detached seeds. Covering brine shall be clear, free from cloudiness, blackening or thickening and free from sediment

40

30

26

0

*While rating for `Texture and uniformity and uniformity of size, 15 points.

10 points

tWhile rating for `Absence of defects', a tentative maximum score of 15 points for the absence of blemished units, 10 points for absence of disintegrated units; 5 points for absence of detached seeds and 10 points for clarity of brine may be considered.

12

IS : 3247- 1976
SCORE SHEET FOR INDIVIDUAL JUDGE Sample No. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . .

Date of Sampling.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Details of the Sample Can: a) Product.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . c) Type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e) Date of Manufacture b) Name of Manufacturer... .. ... . ... .. ... .

d) Batch No. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. ... ... .. .. .. .. .. ... .. .. ... . .. ... .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. ... .. ... ... .. .. .. ..

SAMPLE CANS FACTOR
SCORE POINTS 1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Colour Texture and

Grade 1 : 11-15 -Grade 2 : 9-10

Taste and flavour Absence of defects

Grade 1 : 11-15 Grade 2 : 13-14 Grade 1 : 30-40 Grade 2 : 26-29 Signature of the Judge with Date.. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

IS : 3247 - 1976 : : : : : : : : : : : : : . : . :

: zB
.

z"d
2%

B

d p

6

a
2
u

2 5 1 8

AMENDMENT NO. 1 MAY 1996 TO IS 3247 : 1976 SPECIFICATION FOR CANNED BITTER GOURD (KARELA ) ( Page 3, Foreword, clause 0.4 ) - Insert the following new clause after 0.4 and renumber the subsequent clause:
`05 A scheme for labelling environment friendly products known as ECO-Mark has been introduced at the instance of the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MEF), Government of India. The ECO-Mark shall be administered by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) under the BLSAct, 1986 as per the Resolution No. 71 dated 20 February 1991 and Resolution No. 425 dated 28 October 1992 published in the Gazette of the Government of India. For a product to be eligible for marking with the ECO-Mark it shall also carry the Standard Mark of BIS for quality besides meeting additional environment friendly (EF) requirements. The environment friendly requirements for canned bitter gourd ( KARELA ) are, therefore, included through Amendment No. 1 to this standard. This amendment is based on the Gazette Notification No. 624 (E) dated 6 September 1995 for Labelling Beverages, Infant Foods, Processed Fruits and Vegetable Products as environment friendly, published in the Gazette of the Government of India.' (Page 7, clause 5.55 ) - Insert the following new matter after 53.5: "5.6 Additional Requirements for ECO-Mark 5.6.1 General Requirements 5.6.1.1 `The product shall conform to the requirements prescribed under clauses 5.1 to 5.5.5. 5.6.1.2 The manufacturer shall produce the consent clearance as per the provisions of Water (PCP) Act, 1974, W&er (PCP) Cess Act, 1977 and Air (K'P) Act, 1981 along with the authorization if required under Environment (Protecion) Art, 1986 and the Rules made thereunder to the Bureau of Indian Standards while applying for the ECO-Mark and the product shall also be in accordance with the Prevention of Food Aabheration Act, 1954 and the Rules made thereunder. Additionally, FPO 1955 (Fruit Product Order) framed under Essential CommoditiesAct, 1955, Stanahis of Weigkr and Measures Act, 1977 requirementa wherever applicable has to be complied with. 1

Amend No. 1 to I!3 3247 : 1976 5.6.13 The product/packaging may also display in brief the criteria based on which the product has been labelled environment friendly.

5.6.1.4 The material used for biodegradable.

product/packing

shall be recyclable

or

5.6.1.5 Tht date of manufacture and date of expiry shall be declared on the product package by the manufacturer. 5.6.1.6 The product shall be microbiologically safe when tested as per IS 5403 : 1969 `Method for yeast and mould count of foodstuffs' and IS 5887 ( Part 5 ) : 1976 `Methods for detection of bacteria responsible for food poisoning: Part 5 Isolation, identification and enumeralion of Vibrio Choleme and Vibrio Parahaemolyhs (fvs revision )' and shall be f&e from bacterial and fungal toxins. 5.6.1.7 The pesticide residues, if any in the product shall not exceed the limit as prescribed in PFA Act, 1954 and the Rules made thereunder. 5.6.1.8 The product/package or leaflet accompenying it may display instmctions of proper use, storage and transport ( including refrigeration temperature compliance ) so as to maximize the product performance, safety and minimize wastage. 5.64 Specific Requirements
5.6.2.1 The product shall not contain any of the heavy metal contaminants in excess of the quantities prescribed inTable 1."

( Page 9, clause 6.3 ) - Insert the following new clause after 63: `6.4 ECO-Mark The product may also be marked with the ECO-Mark, the details of which may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.'

(FADlO)

Ftcprogmphy

Unit, BIS, NewDelhi, Iodii

2

