RAT AAF IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


angee seurat aie Barart 
ch feu afeat 


FUT 2 STATA cat PreTTOT 


Accessibility for the ICT Products 
and Services 


Part 2 Determination of Conformance 


ICS 35.240.80, 11.180 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM eat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2022 Price Group 16 


Active Assisted Living Sectional Committee, LITD 35 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft is finalized by the 
Active Assisted Living Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Electronics and Information Technology 
Division Council of BIS is obtained. 


This Indian Standard is published in two parts. The other part in the series is: 
Part 1 Requirements 


The development of the Indian standard on Accessibility for ICT products and services was initiated by Ministry 
of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) under the ‘Knowledge and Resource Centre for Accessibility 
in ICT (KAJ) Project’ led by Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (CDAC). During the preparation of 
this standard, several consultations, meetings and discussions were held with a wide cross section of stakeholders 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities (DEPwD), Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) and Department of Telecommunications 
(DoT). This Indian Standard is developed to provide a set of accessibility requirements that specify how to make 
content accessible, primarily for the people with disabilities and also for all the end users. 


The present Indian Standard (Part 2) is the technical adoption of the European Standard EN 301 549 v 3.2.1 
“Accessibility requirements for ICT products and services” developed by CEN, CENELEC and ETSI. 
Modifications have been made to adapt it to India and are limited to referencing the relevant regulatory context 
(Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016) and the official languages of India. The technical coverage is 
otherwise identical. 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) is to be read in conjunction with the Part 1 of this standard to understand the 
functional performance statements and their relation with the specific accessibility requirements for various 
functions of ICT Products and Services. 


The mapping of real-world ICT products and services with requirement clauses mentioned in part1 of this standard 
is given in Annex A (informative). 
A guidance document for Accessibility conformity report is given in Annex B (informative). 


The Composition of the panel, LITD 35/P1 and the sectional committee, LITD 35 responsible for the formulation 
of this standard is given at Annex C. 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


CONTENTS 
Page No. 
1 SCOPE e 1 
2 REFERENCES ae 1 
3 TERMINOLOGY AND ABBREVIATIONS ii 2 
3.1 Terminology 2 
3.2 Abbreviations and Acronyms 5 
4 ICT PRODUCTS AND SERVICES 5 
4.1 Type of ICT Products and Services 5 
4.2 Maturity of the Technology 6 
5 CONFORMITY IN THE CONTEXT OF ICT ACCESSIBILITY 6 
5.1 Success Criteria - Conformance in Respect of Accessibility as per WCAG 2.1 6 
5.2 Conformance of a Web Page 6 
5.3 Statement of Partial Conformance - Language 7 
6 DETERMINATION OF CONFORMANCE 7 
7 ACCESSIBILITY CONFORMANCE REPORT we 70 
8 TESTING AND TOOLS . 70 
ANNEXA us 7 
ANNEX B GUIDANCE DOCUMENT FOR ACCESSIBILITY CONFORMITY REPORT we 12 
ANNEX C COMMITTEE COMPOSITION ae 13 
BIBLIOGRAPHY ie. hd 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 (a) | Generic Requirements me 9 
Table 1 (b) ICT with Two-way Voice Communication es 14 
Table 1 (c) ICT with Video Capabilities ss 18 
Table 1 (d) Hardware a 20 
Table 1 (e) Web wer 29 
Table 1 (f) | Non-web Documents ay. ot 
Table 1 (g) Software ve 49 
Table 1 (h) Documentation and Support Services . 68 
Table 1 (i) ICT Providing Relay or Emergency Service Access ws 69 
Table 2. Representative Real-World ICT Products and Services with Requirement Clauses... 71 
Table 3 (a) Sample Template for Filling ACR te 72 


Table 3 (b) Detailed Criteria for Clause 5.10 ue 72 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


ACCESSIBILITY FOR 
THE ICT PRODUCTS AND SERVICES 


PART 2 DETERMINATION OF CONFORMANCE 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) specifies the test 
procedures and evaluation methodology for the 
accessibility requirements of ICT products and services 
mentioned in Part 1 of this standard. This standard 
(Part 2) also gives guidance in preparing the 
accessibility conformance report for ICT products and 
services against each requirement. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards or other publications given below 
contain provisions which, through reference in this 
text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time 
of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards or other publications are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of the standards or other 
publications. 


IS/HISO/IEC/ Other Title 
Publications 
17802 (Part 1): Accessibility for the ICT 
2021 Products and services: Part 1 


Requirements 


EN 301 549 v 3.2.1 Accessibility requirements for 
ICT products and services, 


March, 2021 


W3C/WAI/WCAG Web Content Accessibility 
2.1 Guidelines, 2018 
ISO/IEC 40500 : Information technology — 
2012 W3C web content accessibility 
guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 
WCAG 2.0 WCAG 2.0, Understanding 
Conformance 
CEN/CLC/ETSI TR Guidance for the application 
101 552 of conformity assessment to 


accessibility requirements 
for public procurement of 
ICT products and services in 
Europe, March, 2014 


Information technology — 
Universal coded character set 
(UCS) 


ISO/IEC 10646 : 
2020 


IS/ISO/IEC/ Other Title 
Publications 
16333 (Part 3) : Mobile phone handsets: Part 3 
2017 Indian language support for 


mobile phone handsets — 
Specific requirements 
(first revision) 


IS/AISO/TEC 14496- Information technology — 


22 : 2019 Coding of audio — Visual 
objects: Part 22 open font 
format 

Character Character encoding standard 

Encoding: 01: for Indian languages, 

2009 Document No: - Character 
Encoding: 01, Version: 1.0, 
November, 2009, MCIT, 
Government of India 

MoI&B Accessibility Standards for 

Accessibility Persons with Disabilities in 

Standard TV Programs, Sept, 2019, 


Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting, Government of 
India 


Harmonized Guidelines and Space Standards for 
Barrier-Free Built Environment for persons with 
Disability and Elderly Persons, Feb, 2016, CPWD, 
MoUD 


WCAG2ICT, 2013 W3C, Guidance on 
Applying WCAG 2.0 to 
Non-Web Information 
and Communications 


Technologies (WCAG2ICT), 
2013, https://www.w3.org/ 
TR/wcag2ict/ 


Rights of Persons 
Disabilities Act, 2016 


Conformity assessment — 
Vocabulary and general 
principles 


RPwD Act, 2016 with 
ISO/IEC 17000 : 
2004 


16350 : 2016 Indian language 
and Keyboard Standard 
computers, “Enhanced 


INSCRIPT Keyboard Layouts 


Inputting 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


ISISO/IEC/ Other 
Publications 


Recommendation 
ITU-T V.18 (2000) 


IETF RFC 4103 
(2005): 


ETSI TS 126 114 


ETSI EG 201 013 


ETSI TS 122 173 


ETSI TS 134 229 


IETF RFC 4103 


ANSI/TIA-4965 


TIA-1083-A (2010) 


ETSI ETS 300 
381 (Edition 1) 
(December 1994) 


Title 


Operational and interworking 
requirements for DCEs 
operating in the text telephone 
mode 


RTP Payload for Text 
Conversation 
Universal Mobile 


Telecommunications System 
(UMTS); LTE; IP Multimedia 
Subsystem (IMS); Multimedia 
telephony; Media handling 
and interaction (3GPP TS 
26.114) 


Human Factors (HF); 
Definitions, abbreviations and 
symbols 


Digital cellular 
telecommunications system 
(Phase 2+) (GSM); Universal 
Mobile Telecommunications 
System (UMTS); LTE; 
IPMultimedia Core Network 
Subsystem (IMS) Multimedia 
Telephony Service and 
supplementary services; 
Stage 1 (3GPP TS 22.173) 


Universal Mobile 
Telecommunications System 
(UMTS); LTE; Internet 
Protocol (IP) multimedia call 
control protocol based on 
Session Initiation Protocol 
(SIP) and Session Description 
Protocol (SDP); User 
Equipment (UE) conformance 


specification (3GPP TS 
34.229) 

RTP Payload for Text 
Conversation 

Receive volume control 


requirements for digital and 
analogue wireline terminals 


Telecommunications; Telephone 
Terminal equipment; Handset 
magnetic measurement 
procedures and performance 
requirements 


Telephony for hearing 
impaired people; Inductive 
coupling of telephone 


earphones to hearing aids 


IS/ISO/IEC/ Other Title 
Publications 
ETSI ES 200 381-2 Telephony for hearing 
(V1.1.1) (October impaired people; Inductive 
2012) coupling of telephone 
earphones to hearing aids; 
Part 2: Cellular speech 
terminals 


ANSI/IEEE C63.19 
(2011) 


American National Standard 
Method of Measurement 
of Compatibility between 
Wireless Communication 
Devices and Hearing Aids 


ETSI ES 200 381-1 Telephony for hearing impaired 
(V1.2.1) (October people; Inductive coupling 
2012) of telephone earphones 

to hearing aids; Part 1: 
Fixed-line speech terminals 


Voluntary Product Accessibility Template® (VPAT®) 
EN 301 549 Edition V2.4 


3 TERMINOLOGY AND ABBREVIATIONS 


3.1 Terminology 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 17802 (Part 1) : 2021, WCAG 2.1, ETSI EG 201 013 
and the following shall apply. 


3.1.1 Accessible Design — Design focused on 
principles of extending standard design to persons with 
some type of performance limitation to maximize the 
number of potential customers who can readily use a 
product, building or service, which may be achieved 
by: 
a) designing products, services and environments 
that are readily usable by most users without any 
modification; 


b) making products or services adaptable to different 
users (adapting user interfaces); and 


c) having standardized interfaces to be compatible 
with special products for persons with disabilities. 
NOTES 
1 Terms, such as design for all, barrier-free design, inclusive 


design and transgenerational design are used similarly but in 
different contexts. 


2 Accessible design is a subset of universal design, where 
products and environments are usable by all persons, to the 
greatest extent possible, without the need for adaptation 
or specialized design. [Source: ISO/IEC Guide 71 : 2001; 
CEN/CENELEC Guide 6:2002, 3.2] (see [26] and [1]) 


3.1.2 Accessibility Supported — Supported by users’ 
assistive technologies as well as the accessibility 
features in browsers and other user agents. 


3.1.3 Common Web Pages — Web pages and web 
page states that are relevant to the entire website. This 


includes the homepage, login page, and other entry 
pages, and, where applicable, the sitemap, contacts 
page, site help, legal information, and similar web 
pages that are typically linked from all other web pages 
(usually from the header, footer, or navigation menu of 
a web page). 


3.1.4 Complete Processes — When a web page is one 
of a series of web pages presenting a process (that is, 
a sequence of steps that need to be completed in order 
to accomplish an activity), all web pages in the process 
conform at the specified level or better (conformance 
is not possible at a particular level if any page in the 
process does not conform at that level or better). 


3.1.5 Captcha — Initialism for “Completely Automated 
Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans 
Apart”. 


3.1.6 Conformance — Satisfying all the requirements 
of a given standard, guideline or specification. 
3.1.7 Conforming Alternate Version — Version that: 
a) conforms at the designated level; 
b) provides all of the same information and 
Functionality in the same human language; 
c) is as up to date as the non-conforming content; and 
d) for which at least one of the following is true: 


1) the conforming version can be 
non-conforming page via an 
mechanism, 


reached from the 
accessibility-supported 


2) the non-conforming version can only be reached from the 
conforming version, or 


3) the non-conforming version can only be reached from a 
conforming page that also provides a mechanism to reach the 
conforming version. 


3.1.8 Conformity Assessment — Demonstration that 
specified requirements relating to a product, process, 
system, person or body are fulfilled [source: ISO/IEC 
17000 : 2004). 


3.1.9 Context-sensitive Help — Help text that provides 
information related to the function currently being 
performed. 


3.1.10 Contrast Ratio — (L1 + 0.05)/(L2 + 0.05), 
where L1 is the relative luminance of the lighter of the 
colours, and L2 is the relative luminance of the darker 
of the colours. 


3.1.11 Correct Reading Sequence — Any sequence 
where words and paragraphs are presented in an order 
that does not change the meaning of the content. 


3.1.12 Essential — If removed, would fundamentally 
change the information or functionality of the content, 
and information and functionality cannot be achieved 
in another way that would conform. 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


3.1.13 Essential Functionality — Functionality of a 
website that, if removed, fundamentally changes the 
use or purpose of the website for users. This includes 
information that users of a website refer to and tasks 
that they carry out to perform this functionality. 


3.1.14 Functionality — Processes and outcomes 
achievable through user action. 


3.1.15 Informative — For information purposes and not 
required for conformance. 


3.1.16 Input Error — Information provided by the user 
that is not accepted. 


3.1.17 Keyboard Interface — Interface used by 
software to obtain keystroke input. 


3.1.18 Keyboard Shortcut — Alternative means of 
triggering an action by the pressing of one or more 
keys. 


3.1.19 Label — Text or other component with a text 
alternative that is presented to a user to identify a 
component within web content. 


3.1.20 Large Scale (Text) — With at least 18 point or 
14 point bold or font size that would yield equivalent 
size for Indian language [Chinese, Japanese and Korean 
(CJK)] fonts. 


3.1.21 Link Purpose — Nature of the result obtained by 
activating a hyperlink. 


3.1.22 Live — Information captured from a real-world 
event and transmitted to the receiver with no more than 
a broadcast delay. 


3.1.23 Media Alternative for Text — Media that 
presents no more information than is already presented 
in text (directly or via text alternatives). 


3.1.24 Navigated Sequentially — Navigated in the 
order defined for advancing focus (from one element to 
the next) using a keyboard interface. 


3.1.25 Non-text Content — Any content that is not a 
sequence of characters that can be programmatically 
determined or where the sequence is not expressing 
something in human language. 


3.1.26 Normative — Required for conformance. 


3.1.27 Paused — Stopped by user request and not 
resumed until requested by user. 


3.1.28 Pointer Input — Input device that can target a 
specific coordinate (or set of coordinates) on a screen, 
such as a mouse, pen, or touch contact. 


3.1.29 Pre-recorded — Information that is not live. 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


3.1.30 Process — Series of user actions where each 
action is required to complete an activity. 


3.1.31 Programmatically Determined (Programmatically 
Determinable) — Determined by software from 
author-supplied data provided in a way that different user 
agents, including assistive technologies, can extract and 
present this information to users in indifferent modalities. 


3.1.32 Programmatically Determined Link Context — 
Additional information that can be programmatically 
determined from relationships with a link, combined 
with the link text, and presented to users in different 
modalities. 


3.1.33 Programmatically Set — Set by software using 
methods that are supported by user agents, including 
assistive technologies. 


3.1.34 Pure Decoration — Serving only an aesthetic 
purpose, providing no information, and having no 
functionality. 


3.1.35 Real-time Event — Event that a) occurs at the 
same time as the viewing and b) is not completely 
generated by the content. 


3.1.36 Relationships — Meaningful associations 
between distinct pieces of content. 


3.1.37 Relative Luminance — The relative brightness 
of any point in a colourspace, normalized to 0 for 
darkest black and 1 for lightest white. 


3.1.38 Relied Upon (Technologies that are) — The 
content would not conform if that technology is turned 
off or is not supported. 


3.1.39 Role — Text or number by which software 
can identify the function of a component within web 
content. 


3.1.40 Same Functionality — Same result when used. 


3.1.41 Same Relative Order — Same position relative 
to other items. 


3.1.42 Satisfies a Success Criterion — The success 
criterion does not evaluate to ‘false’ when applied to 
the page. 


3.1.43 Set of Web Pages — Collection of web pages 
that share a common purpose and that are created by 
the same author, group or organization. 


3.1.44 State — Dynamic property expressing 
characteristics of a user interface component that 
may change in response to user action or automated 
processes. 


States do not affect the nature of the component, 
but represent data associated with the component 


or user interaction possibilities. 
include focus, hover, select, press, 
visited/unvisited, and expand/collapse. 


Examples 
check, 


3.1.45 Status Message — Change in content that is not 
a change of context, and that provides information to 
the user on the success or results of an action, on the 
waiting state of an application, on the progress of a 
process, or on the existence of errors. 


3.1.46 Structure 


a) The way the parts of a web page are organized in 
relation to each other; and 


b) The way a collection of web pages is organized. 


3.1.47 Supplemental Content — Additional content 
that illustrates or clarifies the primary content. 


3.1.48 Synchronized Media — Audio or video 
synchronized with another format for presenting 
information and/or with time-based interactive 
components, unless the media is a media alternative for 
text that is clearly labelled as such. 


3.1.49 Technology (Web Content) — Mechanism 
for encoding instructions to be rendered, played or 
executed by user agents. 


3.1.50 Templates — Content patterns that are filled in 
by authors or the authoring tool to produce web content 
for end users (for example, document templates, 
content management templates, presentation themes). 
Often templates will pre-specify at least some authoring 
decisions. ATAG 2.0 definition for “templates”. 


3.1.51 Text — Sequence of characters that can be 
programmatically determined, where the sequence is 
expressing something in human language. 


3.1.52 Text Alternative — Text that is programmatically 
associated with non-text content or referred to from 
text that is programmatically associated with non-text 
content. Programmatically associated text is a text 
whose location can be programmatically determined 
from the non-text content. 


3.1.53 Unicode — UNICODE, formally the UNICODE 
Standard, is an information technology standard for the 
consistent encoding, representation, and handling of 
text expressed in most o f the world’s writing systems. 


3.1.54 Up-event — Platform event that occurs when 
the trigger stimulus of a pointer is released. 


The up-event may have different names on different 
platforms, such as “touchend” or “mouseup”. 


3.1.55 Used in an Unusual or Restricted Way — Words 
used in such a way that requires users to know exactly 
which definition to apply in order to understand the 
content correctly. 


3.1.56 UserAgent — Any software that retrieves and 
presents Web content for users. 


3.1.57 User-controllable — Data that is intended to be 
accessed by users. 


3.1.58 User Interface Component — A part of the 
content that is perceived by users as a single control for 
a distinct function. 


3.1.59 User Inactivity — Any continuous period of time 
where no user actions occur. The method of tracking 
will be determined by the web site or application. 


3.1.60 Video — The technology of moving or sequenced 
pictures or images. 


3.1.61 Video-only — A time-based presentation that 
contains only video (no audio and no interaction). 


3.1.62 Visually Customized — The font, size, colour, 
and background can be set. 


3.1.63 Web Page — Anon-embedded resource obtained 
from a single URI using HTTP plus any other resources 
that are used in the rendering or intended to be rendered 
together with it by a user agent. 


3.1.64 Web Page States — Dynamically generated 
web pages sometimes provide significantly different 
content, functionality, and appearance depending on 
the user, interaction, device, and other parameters. In 
the context of this methodology, such web page states 
can be treated as an cillary to web pages (recorded as 
an additional state of a web page in a web page sample) 
or as individual web pages. 


3.2 Abbreviations and Acronyms 


ACR Accessibility Conformance Report 

CEN European Committee for 
Standardization 

CENELEC European Committee for 
Electrotechnical Standardization 

EN European Norm 

ETSI European Telecommunications 
Standards Institute (France) 

ICT Information and Communication 
Technology 

IEC International Electrotechnical 
Commission 

ISL Indian Sign Language 

ISO International Organization for 
Standardization 

PDF Portable Document Format 

TR Technical Report 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


VPAT Voluntary Product Accessibility 
Template 

W3C World Wide Web Consortium 

WAI Web Accessibility Initiative 

WCAG Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 

QVGA Quarter Video Graphics Array 


4 ICT PRODUCTS AND SERVICES 


4.1 Type of ICT Products and Services 


4.1.1 The ICT market is continuously and rapidly 
evolving. Furthermore, it is characterized by a great 
diversity: 

a) ICT consists of many products and services — 
Hardware such as desktop or laptop or tablet or 
smartphone or e-book reader devices for personal 
use; peripherals such as printers and scanners; 
kiosks and PoS terminals — including touch-based 
and contactless, display boards, non-web contents, 
documents, office software or accounting software 
or other specialized software; websites and portals 
other on-line services, mobile apps, support and 
emergency services. 


b) ICTis developed, produced and sold by a variety of 
companies — Product developers, manufacturers, 
system integrators, service providers, software 
developers, web designers, retailers, payment 
system participants etc. Most products and services 
pass through many links of a value chain before 
they reach their final design and are delivered to 
the customer. 


c) Many business models are applied — Selling 
off-the-shelf products over the counter, bundling 
of hardware and services such as cloud-based 
services, Software as a Service (SaaS), Anything 
as a Service (XaaS) etc. 


4.1.2 Since an ICT product or service is presumed 
to pass through a number of stages in a value chain 
and has functions, characteristics and other value 
added during this process, characteristics and features 
providing accessibility may be created and added 
during several stages. Since it is in the supplier’s 
responsibility to demonstrate the fulfilment of given 
functional accessibility requirements of the complete 
offered solution, conformity assessment of accessibility 
should be made at the stage when the final delivery and 
use happens. 


4.1.3 The nature of ICT could be of any one of the 
following types: 

a) Off-the-shelf products; 

b) Customized products; 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


c) Integrated products or systems; 

d) Proprietary software; 

e) Open-source software and open standards; 
f) Services; 

g) Web sites; 


h) Cloud-based and distributed application platforms 
and services (including SaaS and XaaS); and 


j) Development of bespoke applications. 


4.1.4 A few ICT categories and its set of applicable 
clauses for conformance are given in Annex A 
(Informative). 


4.2 Maturity of the Technology 


IS 17802 (Part 1) covers requirements for functions 
relating to all kinds of ICT products and services; 
therefore, the conformity assessment of the diverse 
ICT products and services in the procurement process 
can be very different. Maturity of the technology can 
be a factor affecting the procurement of accessible ICT 
products and services. While mature products (such 
as computers, web sites, mobile phones) could imply 
an easier assessment of accessibility, newer products 
and bespoke applications or those involving innovation 
or cutting-edge technology (AI/ML, Robotics, NLP, 
Blockchain, IoT, AR/VR and the like) would generally 
require more knowledge to be able to carry out an 
efficient conformity assessment. 


5 CONFORMITY IN THE CONTEXT OF ICT 
ACCESSIBILITY 


5.1 Success Criteria - Conformance in Respect of 
Accessibility as per WCAG 2.1 


5.1.1 ‘Understanding conformance’ is clearly stated 
in WCAG 2.0 and is applicable across the WCAG 
series, which includes WCAG 2.1. It states that the 
‘requirements’ are the ‘success criteria’. As such, to 
conform to clauses of WCAG 2.1 and to Web, Non-Web 
documents and software [refer to clasues 9, 10 and 11 
of IS 17802 (Part 1) respectively], one needs to satisfy 
the success criteria in respect of each clause, wherever 
stated, as it is. There is no content, non-web document 
(or) software which violates the success-criteria. 


NOTE — This means that if there is no content to which a 
success criterion applies, the success criterion is satisfied. 


5.1.2 Success criteria for each guideline are 
testable success criteria, provided to allow WCAG 
2.0 conformity principles to be used where 
requirements and conformance testing are necessary 
such as in design specification, purchasing, regulation, 
and contractual agreements. In order to meet the needs 
of different groups and different situations, three levels 
of conformance are defined in WCAG 2.0: A (lowest), 


AA, and AAA (highest). (In this standard, though, only 
level AA has been made applicable for the purpose of 
conformity). 


5.1.3 Success criteria are written as testable criteria 
for objectively determining if content satisfies them. 
Testing the success criteria can involve a combination 
of automated testing and human evaluation. The testing 
should be able to determine if a success criterion has 
been satisfied with a high level of confidence. The 
content should be tested by those who understand how 
people with different type of disabilities use the web. 


5.1.4 Testing and testable in this context refer to 
functional testing, that is, verifying that the content 
functions as expected, or in this case, that it satisfies 
the success criteria. Although content may satisfy 
all success criteria, the content may not always be 
usable by people with multiple disabilities. Therefore, 
usability testing is recommended, in addition to the 
required functional testing. Usability testing aims to 
determine how well people can use the content for its 
intended purpose. It is recommended that users with 
disabilities be included in test groups when performing 
usability testing. 


5.1.5 There are a number of conditions that must be 
met for a success criterion to be included at all. These 
include 5.1.5.1 and 5.1.5.2. 


5.1.5.1 All success criteria must be important access 
issues for people with disabilities that address problems 
beyond the usability problems that might be faced by 
all users. In other words, the access issue must cause 
a proportionately greater problem for people with 
disabilities than it causes people without disabilities 
in order to be considered an accessibility issue (and 
covered under these accessibility guidelines). 


5.1.5.2 In order to accommodate different situations that 
may require or allow greater levels of accessibility than 
others, WCAG 2.0 has three levels of conformance and, 
therefore, three levels of Success Criteria. Accordingly, 
Success Criteria have one of the respective levels 
of conformance. This standard specifies normative 
conformance criteria for Level as AA [IS 17802 
(Part 1)]. Conformity to AAA is encouraged, wherever 
possible. 


5.2 Conformance of a Web Page 


In order for a web page to conform to WCAG 2.1, all 
of the following conformance requirements(Success 
Criteria) must be satisfied. [Source: WCAG 2.1: 2018]. 


5.2.1 Full Pages 


Conformance (and conformance level) is for full web 
page(s) only and cannot be achieved if part of a web 
page is excluded. 


5.2.2 Complete Processes 


When a web page is one of a series of web pages 
presenting a process (that is, a sequence of steps 
that need to be completed in order to accomplish an 
activity), all web pages in the process conform to the 
specified level or better. (Conformance is not possible 
at a particular level if any page in the process does not 
conform at that level or better.) 


5.2.3 Only Accessibility-supported Ways of Using 
Technologies 


Only accessibility-supported ways of using technologies 
are relied upon to satisfy the success criteria. Any 
information or functionality that is provided in a way 
that is not accessibility supported is also available in a 
way that is accessibility supported. (See understanding 
accessibility support). 


5.2.4 Non-interference 


If technologies are used in a way that is not accessibility 
supported, or if they are used in a non-conforming way, 
then they do not block the ability of users to access the 
rest of the page. In addition, the web page as a whole 
continues to meet the conformance requirements under 
each of the following conditions: 


a) when any technology that is not relied upon is 
turned on in a user agent, 


b) when any technology that is not relied upon is 
turned off in a user agent, and 


c) when any technology that is not relied upon is not 
supported by a user agent. 


In addition, the following success criteria apply to 
all content on the page, including content that is not 
otherwise relied upon to meet conformance, because 
failure to meet them could interfere with any use of the 


page: 
1) Audio control; 
2) No keyboard trap; 
3) Three flashes or below threshold; and 


4) Pause, stop, hide. 


5.3 Statement of Partial Conformance - Language 


An example of partial compliance will be: “statement 
of partial conformance due to language” may be made 
when the page does not conform, but would conform if 
accessibility support existed for (all of) the language(s) 
used on the page. The form of that statement would be, 
“This page does not conform, but would conform to 
WCAG 2.1 at level X if accessibility support existed for 
the following language(s)”. 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


In the light of the above discussion, requirements for 
other ICT products and services have been covered in 
IS 17802 (Part 1). 


6 DETERMINATION OF CONFORMANCE 


6.1 Conformance to the requirements specified in 
IS 17802 (Part 1) is achieved by meeting all the 
applicable requirements, these are clauses containing 
the word “shall”. Those clauses containing the word 
“should” are recommendations and are not required for 
conformance. 


6.2 All clauses except those in clause 12 of IS 17802 
(Part 1) are self-scoping — in the sense that the 
test procedure and/or success criteria is met when 
the specified function/feature is supported and the 
concerned inputs/outputs are made available and 
the corresponding test is passed. When one of the 
functions/features is not supported or concerned 
inputs/outputs are not made available, the requirement 
is to be deemed as not applicable. 


6.3 ICT is often an assembly of two or more items of 
ICT. In some cases, two or more interoperable items 
of ICT may together meet more requirements of the 
standard when one item complements the functionality 
of the other and the sum together meets more of the 
accessibility requirements. However, combining two 
items of ICT, both of which fail to meet any particular 
requirement, will not lead to a combined ICT system 
that meets that requirement. 


6.4 This standard does not prioritize requirements. 
NOTES 


1 Conformance with the accessibility requirements could be 
affected by subsequent implementation or maintenance. 


2 Sampling is frequently required on complex ICT when 
there are too many instances of the object to be tested. This 
standard cannot recommend specific ICT evaluation sampling 
techniques as these are context specific. 


6.5 The inherent nature of certain situations makes it 
impossible to make reliable and definitive statements 
that accessibility requirements have been met. In those 
situations, therefore, the requirements in this standard 
are not applicable: 


a) when the product is in a failure, repair or 
maintenance state where the ordinary set of input 
or output functions are not available; and 


b) during those parts of start-up, shutdown, and other 
state transitions that can be completed without 
user interaction. 

NOTE — Even in the above situations, it is best practice to 


apply requirements in this standard wherever it is feasible and 
safe to do so. 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


6.6 Determination of conformance and success criteria 
for various requirements specified in clause 5 to clause 
13 of IS 17802 (Part 1) are given as below: 


a) For generic requirements, refer to Table 1(a); 


b) For ICT with two-way voice communication, 
refer to Table 1(b); 


c) For ICT with video capabilities, refer to 
Table 1(c); 


d) For hardware, refer to Table 1(d); 
e) For web, refer to Table 1(e); 
f) For non-web documents, refer to Table 1(f); 


g) For software, refer to Table 1(g); 


h) For documentation and support services, refer to 
Table 1(h); and 


j) For ICT providing relay or emergency service 
access, refer to Table 1(i). 


6.7 The requirements mentioned in clause 9, 10 and 
11 of IS 17802 (Part 1) refers to ‘WCAG 2.1 Success 
Criteria’. WCAG 2.1 provides ‘sufficient and advisory 
techniques’ to meet the success criteria. ‘Other 
techniques’ may also be sufficient if they meet the 
success criterion. 


5.1.1 Introduction 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (a) Generic Requirements 


( Clause 6.6 ) = 


Clause 5.1.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1) is informative and does not contain requirements 


that require testing 


5.1.2 General 


5.1.2.1 Closed functionality 


NIL 


See Table 1(a) to table 1(i), as applicable. 


5.1.2.2 Assistive technology 


Testing 


Check that the ICT has closed functionality. Determine the closed functions of the 
ICT. 


1. Check that the tests for 5.1.3 to 5.1.6 mentioned in Table 1(a) can be carried 
out without the attachment or installation of any assistive technology except 
personal headsets or inductive loops. 


5.1.3 Non-Visual Access 


5.1.3.1 Non-visual output of visual 
information 


Testing 


Check that the ICT needs Visual information to enable the use of those functions of 
the ICT (such as operating instructions and orientation, transaction prompts, user 
input verification, error messages and non-text content) that are closed to assistive 
technology such as screen reading. 


1. Check that atleast one alternative mode, such as audio, or haptic or tactile 
form (such as braille), is provided for each function. 


2. Check that the functions are operable using the provided alternative mode, 
such as audioor haptic or tactile form (such as braille).output access. 


3. *Check that same Indian language chosen by the user is supported. 


5.1.3.2 Auditory output delivery 
including speech 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT delivers auditory output in respect of closed functions by a 
mechanism included in or provided with the ICT (Mechanisms included in 
or provided with ICT may be, but are not limited to, a loudspeaker, a built-in 
handset/headset, or other industry standard coupled peripheral). 


1. Check that the auditory output is delivered by a personal headset that can be 
connected through a 3.5 mm audio jack or an industry standard connection 
(could be a wireless connection or inductive loop) without requiring the use 
of vision. 


2. *Choose an Indian language. Check that auditory output is also in the same 
language. 


5.1.3.3 Auditory output correlation 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT provides auditory output as non-visual access to closed 
functionality, and information is displayed on the screen. 
1. Enable a representative set of diverse information to be displayed on the 
screen during operation. 


2. Check that the ICT provides auditory information that allows the user to 
correlate the audio with the information displayed on the screen. 


5.1.3.4 Speech output user control 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT provides speech output as non-visual access to closed 
functionality. 


1. Check that the speech output is capable of being interrupted or paused and 
rewound (by a few steps or fully) when requested by the user. 


2. Check that the speech output is capable of being repeated when requested by 
the user. 


5.1.3.5 Speech output automatic 
interruption 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT provides speech output as non-visual access to closed 
functionality. 


1. Determine the closed functions of the ICT. 

2. Check that the current speech output happens on a user function. 
3. Before that completes, undertake a new user action. 
4 


. Check that the current speech output for each single function is interrupted 
when new speech output begins. 


5. *Check that the interrupt to speech output does not occur when safety 
instruction or warning messages are being read out and new user actions is 
blocked. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(a) ( Continued) 


content 


Check that the ICT presents for Non-text content to users via speech output. 


1. Check that speech is provided as an alternative to each non-text content. 


2. Check whether the non-text content is not pure decoration or used only for 
visual formatting. 


3. Check that the speech output follows the guidance for “text alternative” 
described in WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.1.1. 


4. *Check that the speech output is in the same language chosen by the user. 


5.1.3.7 Speech output for video 
information 


Testing 


Check that the ICT needs Pre-recorded video content to enable the use of closed 
functions of ICT. 


Check ICT whether Speech output is provided as output to closed functionality. 


1. Check that the speech output presents an equivalent information for the 
pre-recorded video content. 


2. *Check that the speech output is in chosen or supported Indian language. 


5.1.3.8 Masked entry 


Testing 


Check that the ICT provides auditory output as non-visual access to closed 
functionality. 


Check that the characters displayed are masking characters. 
Check that the ICT has not activated the option to allow non-private auditory output. 


1. Enter masking characters. Check that the auditory output is not a spoken 
version of the characters entered or the auditory output is delivered only to a 
mechanism for private listening. 


5.1.3.9 Private access to personal 
data 


Testing 


Check that the ICT provides auditory output as non-visual access to closed 
functionality. 


Check that the output contains data that is deemed private. 


1. Check that the auditory output of the private data is delivered only to a 
mechanism for private listening. 

2. Check that the mechanism for private listening can be connected without 
requiring the use of vision. 

3. *Check that the privacy preserving output is in the same language chosen by 
the user and warning highlighting privacy is also in the same language. 


5.1.3.10 Non-interfering audio 
output 


Testing 


Check that the ICT provides auditory output is as non-visual access to closed 
functionality and the ICT automatically plays interfering audible output. 


1. Check that the interfering audible output lasts no longer than three seconds. 


5.1.3.11 Private listening volume 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT provides auditory output as non-visual access to closed 
functionality. 
Check that the ICT delivers whether auditory output through a mechanism for 
private listening. 
1. Check that there is at least one non-visual mode of operation for controlling 
the volume. 


5.1.3.12 Speaker volume 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT provides auditory output as non-visual access to closed 
functionality. 


Check that the ICT delivers auditory output through speakers. 
1. Check that a non-visual incremental volume control is provided. 


2. Check that output amplification up to a level of at least 65 dBA (-29 dBPaA) 
is available. 


5.1.3.13 Volume reset 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT provides auditory output as non-visual access to closed 
functionality. 


Check that the ICT is not dedicated to a single user. 


1. Check that a function is provided to automatically reset the volume to be at a 
level of 65 dBA or less after every use. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cas 


10 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(a) ( Continued) 


5.1.3.14 Spoken languages Testing Check that the ICT provides speech output as non-visual access to closed 
functionality. 


Check that the speech output is not proper name, technical term, words of 
indeterminate language or words or phrases that have become part of the vernacular 
of the immediately surrounding text. 


Check that the content is not generated externally and is under the control of the 
ICT vendor. 


Check that the ICT languages of the display can selected using non-visual access. 


Check the user has not selected a speech language that is different from the language 
of the displayed content. 


1. Check that the speech output is in the same human language of the displayed 
content provided. 


5.1.3.15 Non-visual error Testing Check ICT Whether Speech output is provided as non-visual access to closed 
identification functionality. 


Check ICT Whether an input error is automatically detected. 
1. Check that speech output identifies the item that is in error. 
2. Check that the speech output describes the item that is in error. 


3. *Check that the error indication is described by the speech output in the same 
Indian language chosen by the user. 


5.1.3.16 Receipts, tickets, and Testing Check that the ICT is closed to visual access and provides receipts, tickets, or other 
transactional outputs outputs as a result of a self-service transaction. 


Check that the information being checked is not printed copies of itineraries and 
maps. 


1. Check that speech output is provided which includes all information necessary 
to complete or verify the transaction. 


2. *Check that the speech output is in the same Indian language chosen by the 
user, immaterial of the language in which the tickets etc. are printed. 


3. Make payment for a transaction through a mechanism provided by the 
system which involves payment gateways. Check whether the transaction 
is completed, ticket issued, and speech output is provided containing all the 
necessary information. 


5.1.4 Functionality closed to text Inspection and | Check that the ICT offers functionality closed to the text enlargement features of 
enlargement measurement | platform or assistive technology and viewing distance is specified by the supplier. 


1. Check that the ICT provides a mode of operation where the text and images of 
text necessary for all functionality is displayed in such a way that the height 
of a non-accented capital ‘H’ subtends an angle of at least 0.7 degrees at the 
specified viewing distance. 


5.1.5 Visual output for auditory Inspection Check that the ICT needs Pre-recorded auditory information to enable the use of 

information closed functions of ICT. 

1. Check that the ICT provides visual information equivalent to the auditory 
output. 

2. *Check that the visual output is in the same language as the auditory 
information. 


5.1.6.1 Operation without keyboard Inspection Check that the ICT functionality is closed to keyboard or keyboard interfaces. 


interface (closed functionality) 1. Check that all functionalities are operable without vision. 


5.1.6.2 Operation without Inspection Check that the ICT functionality is closed to keyboards or keyboard interfaces. 


keyboard interface (Input focus) Check that the ICT’s Input focus can be moved to a user interface element. 


1. Check that it is possible to move the input focus away from that element using 
the same mechanism. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


11 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(a) ( Continued) 


5.1.7 Access without speech 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT needs speech to enable the use of closed functions of ICT. 
1. Check that the closed functions can be enabled by an alternative input 
mechanism that does not require speech. 


2. *Check that the alternate mechanism is also in the same Indian language as 
the one chosen by the user or in the language in which speech is used to 
enable the functions. 


5.2 Activation of accessibility 
features 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT has documented accessibility features to meet a specific need. 


1. Check that it is possible to activate those accessibility features, that do not 
rely on a method that does not support that need. 


5.3 Biometrics (a) 


Test 1 


Check that the ICT uses biological characteristic for user identification. 


1. Check that more than one biological means can be used for user identification. 


Biometrics (b) 


Test2 


Check that the ICT uses biological characteristic for control of ICT. 


1. Check that more than one means can be used for control of ICT. 


5.4 Preservation of accessibility 
information during conversion 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT provides documentation fornon-proprietary information on 
accessibility. 


Check that the ICT converts information or communication. 


1. Check that the non-proprietary information provided for accessibility is 
preserved, to the extent supported by the destination format. 


5.5 Operable parts 


5.5.1 Means of operation 


Testing 


Check ICT Whether there are operable parts that require grasping, pinching or 
twisting of the wrist to operate actions. 
1. Check if there are accessible alternative means of operation that do not require 
grasping, pinching or twisting of the wrist to operate these actions. 


5.5.2 Operable part discernibility 


Testing 


Check that the ICT has operable parts. 
1. Check that there is a means to discern each operable part without vision. 


2. Check that the action associated with the operable part has not been performed 
when using the means to discern each operable part of step 1. 


5.6 Locking or Toggle controls 


5.6.1 Tactile or auditory status 


Testing 


Check that the ICT has a locking or toggle control. 
Check that the locking or toggle control is visually presented to the user. 


1. Check that there is at least one mode of operation where the status of all 
locking or toggle controls can be determined through touch or through sound 
without operating the control. 


5.6.2 Visual status 


Testing 


Check that the ICT has a locking or toggle control. 
Check Whether locking or toggle control is presented to the user. 


1. Check that there is at least one mode of operation where the status of all 
locking or toggle controls can be visually determined when the control is 
presented. 


5.7 Key repeat 


Testing 


Check that the ICT has a key repeat function. 
1. Check that the delay before key repeat can be adjusted to at least 2 s. 
2. Check that the key repeat rate can be adjusted to 2 s per character. 


5.8 Double-strike key acceptance 


Testing 


Check that the ICT has a keyboard or keypad. 
Check that there is a mechanism that allows adjustment of the delay after any 
keystroke, during which an additional key-press 
will not be accepted if it is identical to the previous keystroke. 
1. Adjust that mechanism to its maximum setting and press any key. After delay 


of 0.5 s press the same key and observe whether the keystroke has been 
accepted. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


12 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(a) ( Concluded) 


5.9 Simultaneous user actions Inspection Check that ICT has a mode of operation requiring simultaneous user actions. 
Determine all the user controllable functions of the ICT. 

1. Check that there is a mode of operation that does not require simultaneous 
user actions. 

2. Check that each user controllable function can be operated with a mode of 
operation not requiring simultaneous user actions. 

5.10.1 Indian Language Inspection/ Check that the ICT offers features, content or operations in one or more Indian 
Requirements Testing/ languages. 
Measurement | Check the list of Indian languages it offers support to in respect of the features, 
content or operations. 
Choose each language setting, one at a time and check the following: 

1. Check whether Unicode is supported as per ISO/IEC 10646. 

2. Check whether display in supported for Indian languages as per 
IS/ISO/IEC 14496-22 : 2015. 

3. Check whether inputting is enabled through keyboard (hard or soft) in the 
concerned Indian language, as per IS 16333-3 for mobile keyboard layout. 

4. Check whether inputting is enabled through keyboard (hard or soft) for 
desktop or Laptop as per IS 16350 : 2016. 

5. Check Indian language inputs and fonts are provided as per MeitY 
eGovernance Standard on Character Encoding: 01 : 2009. 

6. *Check whether auditory outputs are given in the chosen Indian language (in 
closed systems) and screen reader supports the same Indian language (in open 
systems). 

7. *Check whether voice command is supported in the chosen Indian language. 

5.11 Indian Sign Language Inspection/ 1. Check whether ICT (such as TV, Set-top box and remote control) support sign 
Testing/ language. 
Measurement 2. *Check whether they offer ready options for the user to access sign language 
output setting. 

3. *Choose a content that provides Sign language. 

4. *Check whether sign language is shown in a picture-in-picture mode. 

5. *Check whether the sign language is as per ISL Dictionary released by 
ISLRC, is accurate and conveys clear message to the hearing impaired. 

6. *Check online/internet TV/Television/Video programs through Internet and 
Internet platforms. 

7. *Check compliance to Accessibility Standards for PwDs, Mol&B 
Accessibility standard 2019. 

5.12 Captioning and Subtitling Inspection/ 1. Check Whether ICT (such as TV, Set-top box and remote control) support 
Testing/ Captioning (closed and open) and subtitling. 
Measurement 2. *Check the list of Indian languages it offers support to in respect of the 
features, content or operations. 

3. *Choose each language setting, one at a time and check the following: 

3.1 *Choose a content that provides Captioning. 

3.2 *Check whether the captioning is accurate, synchronized, complete and free 
from errors of spelling and grammar. 

3.3 *Check the positioning of captioning, case, italics and underlining, colour and 
font for easy visibility and readability of hearing impaired. 

3.4. *Check online/internet TV/Television/Video programs through offered 
through Internet and Internet platforms. 

3.5. *Check compliance as per Accessibility Standards for PwDs, MoI&B 
Accessibility standard, 2019. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


13 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (b) ICT with Two-way Voice Communication 
( Clause 6.6 ) 


6.1 Audio bandwidth for speech Measurement | Check that the ICT can provide two-way communication. 


1. Check that the ICT can encode and decode audio with a frequency range with 
an upper limit of at least 7000 Hz. 


6.2 Real-Time Textv (RTT) functionality 
6.2.1 RTT provision 


6.2.1.1 RTT communication Inspection Check that ICT has a mode and is in a mode that provides two-way voice 
communication. 


Check “RTT reference terminal” is available as it is essential for testing. 


1. Check that the ICT allows two-way RTT communication with the “reference” 
ICT. 
NOTE 1 — Feature phones may not be able to support RTT capabilities. 
NOTE 2 — An “RTT reference terminal” is a terminal specifically designed 
for testing RTT capable devices in a manner that would confirm their 
functionality and interoperability. These are generally created by a national 
or international standards entity so that all testing is done with a consistent 
“RTT reference terminal”. 
NOTE 3 — For support to Indian languages, UNICODE, a character set 
which is 16-bit ISO/IEC 10646-1 level 3 is to be mandatorily supported 
[see clause 5.10 of IS 17802 (Part 1)]. 
NOTE 4 — Where this requirement would require design changes to add 
input or output hardware to the ICT are exempted. 


6.2.1.2 Concurrent voice and text Inspection Check that the ICT provides a means for two-way voice and RTT communication. 


1. Check if it allows concurrent use of voice and RTT through a single user 
connection. 


NOTE 1 — For multiparty communication, as in a conference system, check 
that Step 1 is supported by a typical protocol that allows voice and RTT on a 
‘one at a time’ basis among participants, even as chat may support concurrent 
submission of messages by all participants. 

NOTE 2 — Where both server-side software and local hardware and 
software are required to provide voice “communication, where neither part 
can support voice communication without the other and are sold as a unit for 
the voice communication function, the local and server-side components are 
considered a single product. 


6.2.2 Display of RTT 


6.2.2.1 Visually distinguishable Inspection Check that the ICT under test has RTT send and receive capabilities. Check that the 
display “RTT reference terminal” is available for testing. 


1. The ICT under test is connected to the “RTT reference terminal”. 


2. The different elements of the ICT are in an operational status (the connection 
is active and the terminals are in the relevant RTT mode) and the two 
terminals are communicating with each other. 


3. A Short text sequence is sent by the ICT under test. 
4. A Short text sequence is sent by the “RTT reference terminal”. 


5. Check, on the ICT under test, that displayed sent text is visually differentiated 
from and separated from received text. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These 
may be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


14 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (b) ( Continued) 


6.2.2.2 Programmatically Inspection Check that the ICT under test has RTT send and receive capabilities and has open 


determinable send and receive functionality. 
direction 


Check “RTT reference terminal” is available for testing. 
1. The ICT under test is connected to the “RTT reference terminal”. 


2. Check that the different elements of the ICT are in an operational status (the 
connection is active and the terminals are in the relevant RTT mode) and the 
two terminals are communicating with each other. 


3. Send a short text sequence by the ICT under test. 
4. Send a short text sequence by the “RTT reference terminal”. 


5. Check that the send/receive direction of text sequences are programmatically 
determinable. 


6. *Repeat steps 3 to 5 by sending the short text in Indian languages. 


6.2.2.3 Speaker identification Inspection Check that the ICT has RTT and speaker identification capabilities. 
Check “RTT reference terminal” is available for testing 
1. The ICT under test is connected to the “RTT reference terminal”. 
2. Send RTT from the “RTT reference terminal” to the ICT under test. 


3. Check by observation whether the ICT under test provides speaker 
identification of voice. 


4. Check that the incoming RTT text also provides speaker identification. 
5. *Repeat 3 to 4 by sending RTT in Indian languages. 

6.2.2.4 Visual indicator of Audio Inspection Check that the ICT is providing two-way voice communication and has RTT 
with RTT capabilities. 


1. ICT under test is connected to another ICT providing two-way voice 
communication that is compatible with the voice communication on the ICT 
under test. 

2. A person speaks into the other ICT. 


3. Check by observation whether there is a real-time visual indicator of audio 
activity. 


6.2.3.a Interoperability (a) Test Check that the ICT provides a means for two-way voice communication over 
the Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN). Check that the ICT provides a 
means for two-way RTT communication. Check availability of A “V.18 reference 
terminal” for testing. 

1. Check that the ICT interoperates over the Public Switched Telephone 
Network (PSTN), with the V.18 reference terminal connected to the PSTN 
as described in Recommendation ITU-T V.18 or any of its annexes for text 
telephony signals at the PSTN interface. 


NOTE — A “V.18 reference terminal” is a terminal specifically designed 
for testing V.18 capable devices in a manner that would confirm their 
functionality and interoperability. These are generally created by a national 
or international standards entity so that all testing is done with a consistent 
reference terminal. 


6.2.3.b Interoperability (b) Test Check that the ICT provides a means for two-way voice communication using 
VOIP with Session Initiation Protocol (SIP). Check that the ICT provides a means 
for two-way RTT communication. 


Check that an “RTT reference terminal” is available as it is essential for testing for 
testing. 


1. Check that the ICT interoperates with the “RTT reference terminal” using 
VOIP with Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and using RTT that conforms to 
IETF RFC 4103. 


2. If the ICT interoperates with other ICT using the IP Multimedia Subsystem 
(IMS) to implement VOIP, check that it follows the set of protocols in ETSI 
TS 126 114, ETSI TS 122 173 and ETSI TS 134 229 that specify how IETF 
RFC 4103 applies. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


15 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (b) ( Continued) 


6.2.3.c Interoperability (c) Test Check that the ICT provides a means for two-way voice communication using 
technologies other than PSTN or VOIP with Session Initiation Protocol (SIP). 
Check that the ICT provides a means for two-way RTT communication. 
Check that an “RTT reference terminal” is available for the mode of RTT 
communication for testing. 
1. Check that the ICT interoperates with the “RTT reference terminal” using 
a relevant and applicable common specification for RTT exchange that 
is published and available for the environment in which the ICT will be 
operating. 
2. Check that the common specification in check | includes a method for 
indicating loss or corruption of characters. 


6.2.3.d Interoperability (d) Test Check that the ICT provides a means for two-way voice communication and RTT. 
Check an “RTT reference terminal” is available using the new RTT Standard for 
testing. 


1. Check that the ICT under test interoperates with the “RTT reference terminal” 
for the new RTT standard that has been introduced for use. 


2. Check that the new RTT standard is supported by all of the other active ICT 
that support voice and RTT in the same environment. 


6.2.4 RTT responsiveness Inspection of | Check that the ICT under test utilises RTT input. Check that the ICT under test 
Measurement | is connected to a device or software that can determine when characters are 
data or Test transmitted by the ICT under test. 

1. Enter single characters to the terminal under test. 

2. Check the time at which input entry has occurred (for example, characters 
appear up on the local screen). 

3. Check the period between input entry to the ICT under test and the time when 
the text is transmitted to the ICT network or platform. 

4. Check that it is less than or equal to 500ms. 
NOTE — As described in the notes to clause 6.2.4 of IS 17802 (Part 1), the 
identification of when input entry has occurred may vary according to the 
type of RTT system under test. 


6.3 Caller ID Inspection Check that the ICT terminal provides caller identification or similar 
telecommunications functions and the functionality is open. 


1. Check that the information delivered by each function is available in text 
form. 


2. Check that the information delivered by each function is programmatically 
determinable. 


3. *Repeat Steps | to 2 by setting Indian language option. 


6.4 Alternatives to voice-based Inspection Check that the ICT provides real-time voice-based communication. Check ICT 

services provides voice mail, auto-attendant, or interactive voice response facilities. 

1. Check that the ICT offers users a means to access the information without the 
use of hearing or speech. 

2. Check that a user can carry out the tasks provided by the system without the 
use of hearing or speech. 

3. *Check that the information displayed is in the same Indian language chosen 
by the user and the operation is supported with the use of the chosen Indian 
language. 


6.5 Video Communication 


6.5.1 General NIL Clause 6.5.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1) is informative only and contains no requirements 
requiring test. 


6.5.2 Resolution Inspection Check that the ICT provides two-way voice communication that includes real-time 
video functionality. 


1. Check that the video communication resolution is QVGA resolution or better. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


16 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (b) ( Concluded) 


6.5.3 Frame rate Inspection Check that the ICT provides two-way voice communication that includes real-time 
video functionality. 


1. Check that the video communication frame rate is equal to or higher than 20 


frames per second (FPS). 
6.5.4 Synchronization between Measurement | Check that the ICT provides two-way voice communication that includes real-time 
audio and video video functionality. 


1. Check that the time difference between the speech and video presented to the 
user is equal to or less than 100 ms. 


6.5.5 Visual indicator of audio Inspection Check that the ICT provides two-way voice communication and includes real-time 
with video video functionality. 


1. Check that ICT under test is connected to another ICT providing two-way 
voice communication that is compatible with the voice communication on 
the ICT under test. 


2. Let a person speak into the other ICT. 
3. Check by observation whether there is a real-time visual indicator of audio 


activity. 
6.5.6 Speaker identification Measurement | Check that the ICT provides two-way voice communication and includes real-time 
with video (sign language) video. 
communication 1. Check that a person communicates in sign language from the other compatible 


terminal. 


2. Check by observation whether the ICT under test provides a means for 
speaker identification for the sign language users. 


6.6 Alternatives to video based NIL Advisory only and contains no testable requirements 
services 


17 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (c) ICT with Video Capabilities 
( Clause 6.6 ) 


7.1 Caption processing technology 


7.1.1 Captioning playback Inspection Check that the ICT displays video with synchronized audio. 
1. Check that there is a mechanism in the ICT to display the captions. 


2. Check that the ICT has a mechanism to display the captions and 
sub-titling in supported languages. 

3. .*Check that the captioning and sub-titling is in the same Indian language 
chosen by the user or in the language agreed to by all participants 

4. .*Check that the captions follow MoI&B Accessibility standard as 
regards timing, colour, positioning and other parameters. 
NOTE — If a Braille device is connected, the ICT should provide an 
option to display captions on the Braille device. 


Test Check that the ICT displays or processes video with synchronized audio. 
Check that Closed captions are provided as part of the content. 


1. Check that there is a mechanism for the user to choose to display the 
captions. 


7.1.2 Captioning synchronization Inspection Check that the ICT has a mechanism to display captions. 

1. Check that the mechanism to display the captions preserves the 
synchronization between the audio and corresponding captions within 
100 ms of the time stamp of the caption, or the availability of the caption 
to the player if a live caption. 


7.1.3 Preservation of captioning Inspection Check when ICT transmits, converts or records video with synchronized audio. 

1. Check it preserves caption data such that it can be displayed in a manner 
consistent with clauses 7.1.1 and 7.1.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 

2. Check the captioning is consistent with the guidelines of MoI&B 
accesibility standard 


7.1.4 Captions characteristics Inspection Check that the ICT displays captions and the captions under display are 
modifiable characters. 

1. Check whether the ICT provides a way for the user to adapt the displayed 
characteristics of captions - background and foreground colour of 
subtitles, font type, size opacity of the background box of subtitles, and 
the contour or border of the fonts, to suit his/her requirements. 


NOTE — Characteristics of Captions shall be consistent with MoI&B 
TV Accessibility standard. 


7.1.5 Spoken subtitles Inspection Check that the ICT displays video with synchronized audio. 

1. *Check that the content of the displayed captions are programmatically 
determinable. 

2. Check that there is a mode of operation to provide a spoken output of the 
available captions. 


7.2 Audio description technology 


7.2.1 Audio description playback Inspection Check that the ICT displays video with synchronized audio. 

1. Check that there is an explicit and separate mechanism for audio 
description. 

2. Check that there is a mechanism to select and play the audio description 
to the default audio channel. 

3. Check that the ICT enables the user to select and play several audio 
tracks. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These 
may be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


18 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (c) ( Concluded) 


7.2.2 Audio description Inspection Check that the ICT has a mechanism to play audio description. 
synchronization 


1. Check that the synchronization between the audio and-visual content and 
the corresponding audio description is preserved. 


7.2.3 Preservation of audio Inspection Check that the ICT transmits converts or records video with synchronized 
description audio. 


1. Check that the ICT preserves audio description data such that it can be 
played in a manner consistent with clauses 7.2.1 and 7.2.2 of IS 17802 


(Part 1). 
7.3 User controls for captions and Inspection Check that the ICT primarily display materials containing video with associated 
audio description audio content. 


1. Check that user controls to activate subtitling and audio descriptions are 
provided to the user at the same level of interaction (that is, the number 
of steps to complete the task) as the primary media controls. 


19 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (d) Hardware 
( Clause 6.6 ) 


8.1 General 


8.1.1 Generic requirements Inspection Check that the ICT Supports Indian Language(s). Check that the ICT system 
is a mobile. 

1. *Check that the mobile supports UNICODE as per ISO/IEC 10646. 

2. *Check that the mobile keyboard supports one type of Indian language 
keyboard layout as per IS 16333 (Part 3). 

3. Check that the mobile has the ability to display Indian language content 
as per IS/ISO/IEC 14496-22 : 2015. Check that the ICT Supports 
Indian Language(s). 

Check that the ICT system is a desktop or a laptop. 

1. *Check that the desktop/laptop supports UNICODE as per 
ISO/IEC 10646. 

2. *Check that the desktop/laptop keyboard supports one type of Indian 
language keyboard as per IS 16350 : 2016. 

3. *Check that the desktop/laptop has the ability to display Indian 
language content and as per IS/ISO/IEC 14496-22 : 2015. 

*For website, SAKAL BHARATI font or similar font having same height 
and stem width for all Indian script is recommended. 


NOTE — The “generic requirements” of clause 5 of IS 17802 (Part 1) 
apply to all ICT hardware. 


8.1.2 Standard connections Inspection Check that the ICT provides user input or output device connection points. 


1. Check that one type of connection conforms to an industry standard 
non-proprietary format. 


2. Check that one type of connection conforms to an industry standard 
non-proprietary format and through the use of commercially available 
adapters. 


NOTE — The connections may be physical or wireless connections. 


8.1.3 Colour Inspection Check that the hardware aspects of the ICT conveys visual information using 
colour coding as a means to indicate an action, to prompt a response, or to 
distinguish a visual element. 


1. Check that an alternative form of visual coding is provided. 


8.2 Hardware products with speech output 


8.2.1 Speech volume gain 


8.2.1.1 Speech volume range Inspection based on | Check that the ICT hardware has a speech output. 
measurement data 1. Check that the ICT is certified to meet ANSI/TIA-4965. 
2. Measure the level (in dB) of the speech output at the lowest volume 
setting. 


3. Measure the level (in dB) of the speech output at the highest volume 
setting. 


4. Check that the range between | and 2 is greater than or equal to 18 db. 


8.2.1.2 Incremental volume control | Inspection based on | Check that the ICT hardware has speech output and its volume control is 
measurement data incremental. 


1. Measure the level (in dB) of the speech output at the lowest volume 
setting. 


2. Check that there is at least one intermediate step that provides a level 
12 dB above the lowest volume level measured in step1. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These 
may be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


20 


8.2.2.1 Fixed-line devices 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(d) ( Continued) 


Inspection based on 
measurement data 


Check that the ICT hardware is a fixed-line communication device with 
speech output and which is normally held to the ear. 
1. Check that the measurements are made according to ETSI ES 
200 381-1 which prove that the requirements defined in that standard 
are fulfilled (or) Check ICT is certified to meet TIA-1083-A. 


2. The ICT carries the “T” symbol specified in ETSI ETS 300 381. 


8.2.2.2 Wireless communication 
devices 


Inspection based on 
measurement data 


Check that the ICT hardware is a wireless communication device with speech 
output which is normally held to the ear. 


1. Check that the ICT provides a means of magnetic coupling to hearing 
technologies which meets the requirements of ETSI ES 200 381-2 (or) 
Check that the ICT is certified to meet ANSI/IEEE C63.19. 


8.3 Stationary ICT 


8.3.0 General (informative 
recommendation) 


Inspection based on 
measurement data 


Check that the ICT has operable parts 


1. Ensure while installing that minimum and maximum heights of 
operable parts: 800 mm and 1 100 mm respectively. 


Inspection based on 
measurement data 


Check that the ICT has displays units 


1. Ensure while installing that minimum and maximum heights of 
displays: 1 200 mm and | 400 mm respectively. 


8.3.1 Forward or side reach 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT. 
1. Check that they confirm to either 8.3.2 or 8.3.3. 


8.3.2 Forward reach 


8.3.2.1 Unobstructed high forward 
reach 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that ICT is Stationary ICT and no part of the stationary ICT obstructs 
the forward reach. 


1. Check that at least one of each type of operable part is located no 
higher than 1 200 mm above the floor of the access space. 


8.3.2.2 Unobstructed low forward 


Inspection and 


Check that ICT is Stationary ICT and that no part of the stationary ICT 


reach measurement obstructs the forward reach. 
1. Check that at least one of each type of operable part is located no lower 
than 380 mm above the floor of the access space. 
8.3.2.3.1 Obstructed forward Inspection Check that the ICT is a tationary ICT and an integral part of the stationary 


reach-Clear space 


ICT forms an obstruction which hinders to any type of operable part. 


1. Check that the ICT provides a clear space which extends beneath the 
obstructing element for a distance not less than the required reach 
depth over the obstruction. 


8.3.2.3.2 Obstructed (< 500 mm) 
forward reach 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is Stationary ICT and an integral part of the stationary 
ICT forms an obstruction which is less than 500 mm deep. 


1. Check that the forward reach to at least one of each type of operable 
part is no higher than 1 000 mm above the floor contact of the ICT. 


8.3.2.3.3 Obstructed (< 600 mm) 
forward reach 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and an integral part of the stationary 
ICT forms an obstruction which is not less than 500 mm but is less than 
600 mm deep. 


1. Check that the forward reach to at least one of each type of operable 
part is no higher than 1 100 mm above the floor contact of the ICT. 


8.3.2.4 Knee and toe clearance 
width 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and the space under an obstacle that is 
an integral part of the stationary ICT is part of access space. 


1. Check that the width of the knee and toe clearance is greater than 
900 mm. 


21 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


8.3.2.5 Toe clearance (a) 


Table 1(d) ( Continued) 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and has an obstacle is an integral part 
of the ICT. 


Check that there is a toe clearance space under any obstacle that is an integral 
part of the ICT that is less than 230 mm above the floor. 


1. Check that the toe clearance does not extend more than 635 mm under 
the obstacle. 


8.3.2.5 Toe clearance (b) 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and has an obstacle is an integral part 
of the ICT. 


Check that there is a toe clearance space under any obstacle that is an integral 
part of the ICT that is less than 230 mm above the floor 


1. Check that the toe clearance is at least 430 mm deep and 230 mm 
above the floor under the obstacle. 


8.3.2.5 Toe clearance (c) 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and has an obstacle is an integral part 
of the ICT. 


Check that there is a toe clearance space under any obstacle that is an integral 
part of the ICT that is less than 230 mm above the floor. 


1. Check that the toe clearance extends no more than 150 mm beyond any 
obstruction at 230 mm above the floor. 


8.3.2.6 Knee clearance (a) 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and has an obstacle is an integral part 
of the ICT. 


Check that there is a knee clearance space under the obstacle between 
230 mm and 685 mm above the floor. 


1. Check that there is a knee clearance that extends less than 635 mm 
under the obstacle at a height of 230 mm above the floor. 


8.3.2.6 Knee clearance (b) 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and has an obstacle is an integral part 
of the ICT. 


Check that there is a knee clearance space under the obstacle between 
230 mm and 685 mm above the floor. 


1. Check that there is a knee clearance that extends at least 280 mm under 
the obstacle at a height of 230 mm above the floor. 


8.3.2.6 Knee clearance (c) 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and has an obstacle is an integral part 
of the ICT. 


Check that there is a knee clearance space under the obstacle between 
230 mm and 685 mm above the floor. 


1. Check that there is a knee clearance that extends more than 205 mm 
under the obstruction at a height of 685 mm above the floor. 


8.3.2.6 Knee clearance (d) 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is Stationary ICT and has an obstacle is an integral part 
of the ICT. 


Check that there is a knee clearance space under the obstacle between 
230 mm and 685 mm above the floor. 


1. Check that the reduction in depth of the knee clearance is no greater 
than 25 mm for each 150 mm in height. 


8.3.3 Side each 


8.3.3.1 Unobstructed high side 
reach 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and has an obstacle is an integral part 
of the ICT 


Side reach is unobstructed or is obstructed by an element that is an integral 
part of the stationary ICT which is less than 510 mm. 


1. Check that the high side reach to at least one of each type of operable 
part is no higher than 1220 mm above the floor of the access space. 


22 


8.3.3.2 Unobstructed low side 
reach 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(d) ( Continued) 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and the side reach is unobstructed or 


obstructed by an element that is an integral part of the stationary ICT and 
which is less than 510 mm. 


1. Check that the low side reach to at least one of each type of operable 
part is greater than or equal to 380 mm above the floor of the access 
space. 


8.3.3.3.1 Obstructed (< 255 mm) 
side reach 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and there is an obstruction, less than or 
equal to 255 mm in depth, that is an integral part of the ICT. 


1. Check that the high side reach to at least one of each type of operable 
part is no higher than 1 220 mm above the floor of the access space. 


8.3.3.3.2 Obstructed (< 610 mm) 
side reach 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and there is an obstruction, greater than 
255 mm and no more than 610 mm in depth, that is an integral part of the ICT. 


1. Check that the high side reach to at least one of each type of operable 
part is no higher than 1 170 mm above the floor of the access space. 


8.3.4 Clear floor or ground space 


8.3.4.1 Change in level 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and there is a floor within the ICT that 
has a change in level. 


1. Check if the change in level is ramped, check that it has a slope less 
than 1:12. (or) 

2. If there is a vertical change of floor level, check that it is less than or 
equal to 6.4 mm. (or) 


3. Ifthere is a vertical or sloped change in floor level, check that the slope 
is not greater than 1:2. 


8.3.4.2 Clear floor or ground space 


Inspection and 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and there is an operating area within it. 


measurement 1. Check that there is a clear floor area with minimum rectangular 
dimensions of 900 mm on one edge and 1200 mm on the other edge. 
8.3.4.3 Approach 
8.3.4.3.1 General Inspection Check that the ICT is stationary ICT has an access space inside it. 


1. Check that it has at least one full side of the space that is unobstructed. 


8.3.4.3.2 Forward approach 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT containing an alcove and the operating 
area is within the alcove. 


Check that the depth of the alcove is greater than 610 mm where a forward 
approach is necessary. 


1. Check that the dimension of the access space is a minimum of 915 mm 
wide. 


8.3.4.3.3 Parallel approach 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT containing an alcove and the operating 
area is within the alcove. 


Check that the depth of the alcove is greater than 380 mm and a parallel 
approach is possible. 


1. Check that the dimension of the access space is a minimum of 
1525 mm wide. 


8.3.5 Visibility 


Inspection and 
measurement 


Check that the ICT is stationary ICT and one or more display screens are 
provided. 
1. Check that at least one of each type of display screen is positioned 
such that the information on the screen is legible from a point located 
1015 mm above the centre of the floor of the operating area. 


23 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(d) ( Concluded) 


8.3.6 Installation instructions Inspection and Check that The ICT is stationary ICT. 
measurement 1. Check that installation instructions are made available. 
2. Check that the instructions give guidance on how to install the ICT in 


a manner that ensures that the dimensions of the installed ICT conform 
to clauses 8.3.2 to 8.3.4 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


3. Check that the instructions say that the installers should also take 
into account applicable requirements for accessibility of the built 
environment as they apply to the installation of the ICT. 


8.4 Mechanically operable parts 


8.4.1 Numeric keys Inspection Check that the ICT has physical numeric keys arranged in a 12 key telephone 
keypad layout. 


1. Check that the number five key is tactilely distinct from the other keys 
of the keypad. 

Check that the ICT has softkey based keyboard (like PoS). 

1. *Check for available provision for an alternate way of location and 
navigation within the key board space to assist the user about the keys 
such as through provision of audio-also ensuring privacy through 
headphone support while entering privacy respecting input. 


8.4.2 Operation of mechanical parts 


8.4.2.1 Means of operation of Inspection Check that the ICT has a control that requires grasping, pinching, or twisting 
mechanical parts of the wrist to operate. 


1. Check that an accessible alternative means of operation is provided 
that does not require these actions. 


8.4.2.2 Force of operation of Inspection and Check that the ICT has a control that requires a force greater than 22.2 N to 
mechanical parts measurement operate it. 


1. Check that an accessible alternative means of operation is provided 
that requires a force less than or equal to 22.2 N. 


8.4.3 Keys, tickets and fare cards Inspection and Check that ICT provides keys, tickets or fare cards, and their orientation is 
measurement important for further use. 
1. Check that keys, tickets or fare cards have an orientation that is tactilely 
discernible. 
8.5 Tactile indication of speech Inspection and Check that the ICT is designed for shared use and speech output is available. 


mode measurement 1. Check that a tactile indication of the means to initiate the speech mode 


of operation is provided. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


24 


9.1 Perceivable 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (e) Web 
( Clause 6.6 ) 


9.1.1 Text alternatives 


9.1.1.1 Non-text content 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 


1. Identify any non text content present on the page. Examples of non-text content 
are images, graphs, figures etc. 


2. Using an assistive technology like screen reading software, verify that there is 
text alternative present for these non-text content. 


3. Note that not all non-text content needs text alternative to be present as in the 
case of decorative images. Any non-text element present which already has a 
text equivalent present doesn’t have to be exposed to screen reader users. 

4. When the text alternative is needed for the image, then check that the text 
alternative present for the image is meaningful and descriptive of the image that 
is present. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.1.1 Non-text 
content Success Criterion 1.1.1 Non-text Content 


9.1.2 Time-based media 


9.1.2.1 Audio-only and 
video-only (pre-recorded) 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
if it has has multimedia [audio/ video] present in the content check the following: 


1. Ifthe content is only audio, check if the audio content is repetitive and describes 
the content in text elsewhere in the same page. Then the following tests are not 
required. 


a. Identify the text transcript present for the audio. 


b. If text transcript is present, then ensure that it has all the essential dialogs, 
identifies speakers and describes all essential sound effects for the audio only 
content. 


2. If the content is a video, check if the video content is repetitive and describes 
the content in text elsewhere in the same page. Then the following tests are not 
required. 

a. Identify the video content. 

b. For the unique video content, text description is mandatory. Verify that either 
an audio description or text description is provided for the essential visual 
content in the video. 

c. In either case of audio description or text description, check that important 
scenes and any other visual information that is not being conveyed via 
dialogues is being presented to visually impaired user. 


Check that the web page does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.1 
Audio-only and Video-only (Prerecorded) 


9.1.2.2 Captions (prerecorded) 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 

if it has video in the content, 
1. Check for the presence of captions in the Video. 
2. When captions are present, check that 


a. Captions are visible with the required colour contrast between the text and the 
background. 


b. Identify speakers and any background noises 
c. Captions are in sync with the video content. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.2 Captions 
(Prerecorded) 


25 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(e) ( Continued) 


9.1.2.3 Audio description or media | Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
alternative (prerecorded) 1. Identify the video content. 

2. If the video content does not provide additional information where sight is 
needed to understand the content then audio description is not a mandate for this 
requirement. 

3. If the video content contains additional information which needs sight to 
perceive it then ensure the following: 

a. Verify that an audio description is provided for the essential visual content in 
the video that requires sight to understand. 

b. In case of audio description being present, check that important scenes and 
any other visual information that is not being conveyed via dialogues is being 
presented to visually impaired users. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.3 Audio 
Description or Media Alternative (Prerecorded) 
9.1.2.4 Captions (live) Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 

1. Identify the live video content present on the page. 

2. Check for the presence of captions in the live video. 

3. When captions are present, check that: 

a. Captions are visible with the required colour contrast between the text and the 
background; 

b. Identifies speakers and any background noises; and 

c. Captions are in sync with the video content. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.4 Captions 
(Live) 

9.1.2.5 Audio description Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 

(pre-recorded) 1. Identify the video content. 

2. If the video content does not provide additional information where sight is 
needed to understand the content then audio description is not a mandate for this 
requirement. 

3. If the video content contains additional information which needs sight to 
perceive it then ensure the following: 

a. Verify that an audio description is provided for the essential visual content in 
the video that requires sight to understand. 

b. In case of audio description being present, check that important scenes and 
any other visual information that is not being conveyed via dialogues is being 
presented to visually impaired users. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.5 Audio 
Description (Prerecorded) 

9.1.3 Adaptable 

9.1.3.1 Info and relationships Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 


1. Check that all the visual elements like tables, lists, form fields should be 
programmatically conveyed to the screen reader. 

2. Identify each form field like option button, dropdown list, checkbox, edit box 
on the page and test that associated label along with role/ state is read for each 
control. 

3. Identify any table on the screen and read the column header, row details using 
screen reader. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.1 Info and 
Relationships 


26 


9.1.3.2 Meaningful sequence 


Inspection 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(e) ( Continued) 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Using a screen reader, go over the content present on the page. 


2. Check that all the content present is announced to screen reader users in a 
meaningful and appropriate order. 

3. Check that no content is being missed by screen reader software AND that no 
content that is visually hidden is being announced to screen reader users. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.2 Meaningful 
Sequence 


9.1.3.3 Sensory characteristics 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 

1. Go over the content present on the page. 

2. Check for any instructions related to understanding or operating content. If any 
of those instructions refer to visual characteristics such as shape, colour, size, 
visual location, orientation or sound cue then check that alternative non-sensory 
characteristics instruction is present. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.3 Sensory 
Characteristics 


9.1.3.4 Orientation 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Ensure that orientation lock is disabled on the device or software. 
2. Check the web page is in the default orientation of portrait mode. 


3. Now change the orientation of the page by turning the device to change its 
orientation from portrait to landscape mode. 
Note that the changes to design or to the content is permissible to be different in 
different orientations as long as the content and functionality is present in both the 
orientations. Note: this can be tested on mobile phone or tablet computers. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.4 Orientation 


9.1.3.5 Identify input purpose 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Turn on the screen reader. 
2. Identify the form fields on the page. 


3. Check if screen reader is giving any information about the input field, for e.g. 
Enter telephone number without STD code, e-mail id field. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.5 Identify 
Input Purpose 


9.1.4 Distinguishable 


9.1.4.1 Use of colour 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 


1. Check the content present on the page for scenarios where colour is being used 
alone to convey information. Examples are charts, graphs where colour is used 
to distinguish different elements being presented in the graph. 


a. When content is presented using colour alone, then check to ensure that the 
same information is presented in text so that colour blind users would still be 
able to get all the information. If graphs are accompanied with tabular data of 
the content that is being presented in the graph, then this requirement is met. 


2. Another scenario to look for are links being present in between blocks of text in 
paragraphs. When colour alone is used as the only means to differentiate links 
and text then colour-blind users would not even know the existence of the same. 
a. When links are using colour alone to distinguish themselves, then ensure that 

an additional visual indicator like underline or any other indicator OR if the 
colour contrast between the link text and the surrounding non-link text is 3 : 1 
then this requirement is met. 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.1 Use of 
Colour 


27 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(e) ( Continued) 


9.1.4.2 Audio control Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 

1. Identify the multimedia elements on the page. 

2. Ifthe multimedia automatically starts playing audio when you visit the page or 
anytime during the operation that lasts for more than three seconds, then: 

a. The audio can be paused, stopped, or muted. 
b. Check there is a mechanism to adjust the volume (independent of overall 
device volume). 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.2 Audio 
Control 
9.1.4.3 Contrast (minimum) Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 

1. Check for text on the page that may have poor colour contrast. Identify the 
text that is not easily readable by users. examples are light grey text over white 
background etc. 

2. Using an automated tool, pick the colours of the text and the background. Test 
the codes for colour contrast of 4.5:1 for regular text and 3:1 for large text. 

a. Regular text is anything below 12 point. 
b. Large text is 14 point bold and anything above 18 point. 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.3 Contrast 
(Minimum) 
9.1.4.4 Resize text Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 

1. Check that text resizing mechanism is provided and it works with and without 
assistive technology. 

2. Check that the page does not lose any text or features. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.4 Resize text 
9.1.4.5 Images of text Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 

1. Change the font size of the page using provided option or through the browser. 

2. If this change is applicable to all the text on the page, then there are no images 
of text present. 

3. Ifthe font size doesn’t respond to the changes, then that particular element could 
be an image of text. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.5 Images of 
Text 

9.1.4.6 Void 

9.1.4.7 Void 

9.1.4.8 Void 

9.1.4.9 Void 

9.1.4.10 Reflow Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 


1. Turn on the magnification software. 

2. Zoom/magnify the user interface by 400 percent. 

3. Check that page is navigable and readable without losing any text and features. 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.10 Reflow 


28 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(e) ( Continued) 


9.1.4.11 Non-text contrast Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 

1. Identify non-text elements like icons, graphs, interactive elements present on the 
page. 

2. Ensure that icons, graphical elements do not have a text alternative present, 
and they are the only means via which the meaning of the content is being 
communicated to users. 

3. For icons and graphs: 

a. take a screenshot of the icons and graph and using colour picker choose the 
value of the element and the adjacent colour. Adjacent colours are the ones 
that are right next to them. 

b. Using those values, check the colour contrast to be 3:1 between the element 
colour and the adjacent element colour. 

4. For interactive elements: 

a. Trigger different states that an element may have. For ex, focused, selected, 
hovered etc. 

b. Take a screenshot of the elements in those triggered states and using colour 
picker choose the colour codes of the element and the adjacent colour of the 
element. 

c. Using those values, check the colour contrast to be 3:1 between them. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.11 Non-text 
Contrast 
9.1.4.12 Text spacing Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 

1. Check that the text on the page does not overlap or wrap after adjusting the text 
spacing between two lines. 

2. *Check that, for Indian languages, text spacing is as per the font standard 
specified in IS/ISO/IEC 14496-22 : 2019. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.12 Text 
spacing 
9.1.4.13 Content on hover or focus | Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 

1. Identify the element on the page which displays additional information when 
hovered or focused. 

2. Make sure that this additional content is dismissible without moving the focus. 

3. Check that this newly displayed content is hoverable. 

4. Check that this content remains visible until the hover or focus trigger is 
removed. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.13 Content 
on Hover or Focus 

9.2 Operable 

9.2.1 Keyboard accessible 

9.2.1.1 Keyboard Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 


1. using a keyboard, voice or switch, this requirement can be tested. 


2. In case of the keyboard, using tab key or arrow key, ensure that all the content 
and functionality is usable by keyboard alone. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.1.1 Keyboard 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


29 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(e) ( Continued) 


9.2.1.2 No keyboard trap 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then: 


1. Turn on the screen reader. 


2. swipe or tab through all the elements on the page. 

3. Ensure that the screen reader focus doesn’t get trapped on any element. Meaning, 
user is able to swipe in and out of the elements present on the page. 

4. Now, turn off the screen readers and repeat step 3 to ensure that there are no 
swipe or keyboard traps present. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.1.2 No Keyboard 
Trap 


9.2.1.3 Void 


9.2.1.4 Character key shortcuts 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Identify any element on the page which has character key shortcut. 
2. Check if it allow user to enable/disable this shortcut. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.1.4 Character 
Key Shortcuts 


9.2.2 Enough Time 


9.2.2.1 Timing adjustable Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then 
1. Turn on the screen reader. 
2. Leave the web page idle for the time which is needed to trigger the session 
extension functionality if present. 
3. Once the session time out functionality is triggered, ensure that a user can do the 
following: 
a. Turn off the session extension functionality OR 
b. Before you encounter the time out, you can adjust the time limit to at least 
10 times the length of the default setting. 

c. You are warned before the time limit expires, are given at least 20 seconds 
to extend the time limit, and then can extend the time limit at least 10 times 
longer than the default. 

4. Turn off the screen readers and repeat step to ensure that mobility users are able 
to access the session time out functionality as well.” 
Check that the web page does not fail WCAG2.1 Success Criterion 9.2.2.1 Timing 
Adjustable 
9.2.2.2 Pause, stop, hide Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 


1. Identify all the moving, scrolling, blinking or autoupdating content present on 
the page. Ensure that these should last for more than 5 seconds and is presented 
along with other essential information. 


2. Check that the moving, blinking, scrolling or autoupdating content is provided 
with pause, stop or hide mechanism. 


3. This is applicable to all the content of the page including informative and 
decorative. “ 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.2.2 Pause, Stop, 
Hide 


9.2.3 Seizures and physical reactions 


30 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(e) ( Continued) 


9.2.4.5 Multiple ways 


9.2.3.1 Three flashes or below Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
threshold 1. Identify any element on the page which flashes or blinks (general flash or red 
flash). 
2. Count the number of times an element flashes or blinks (general flash or red 
flash) in any one-second period, or 
3. Count the number of flashes or blinks (general flash or red flash) in 10 s, and 
divide by 10, to verify no more than three flashes or blinks occur per second. 
4. This is applicable to all the elements on the page including informative and 
decorative.” 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.3.1 Three 
Flashes or Below Threshold 
9.2.4 Navigable 
9.2.4.1 Bypass blocks Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Check whether the users can bypass blocks of content that are repeated on 
multiple Web pages. 
2. Identify the link on the web page to bypass the repeated content. 
3. Ensure that provided link is operable only using the keyboard. 
4. Ensure that once this provided link is activated the focus is moving to main 
content area. 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.4.1 Bypass 
Blocks 
9.2.4.2 Page titled Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Ensure that web page displays the title on the title bar of the user agent. 
2. Ensure that title of the web page is meaningful and descriptive. 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.4.2 Page Titled 
9.2.4.3 Focus order Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Turn on the screen reader. 
2. Ensure that the focus moves from element to element in an order that preserves 
the meaning and operability of the web page. 
3. Interact with dynamic content such as modals, adding or deleting content, etc. 
Ensure that focus is managed appropriately as content is added or removed from 
the page. 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.4.3 Focus Order 
9.2.4.4 Link purpose (in context) Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 


Inspection 


1. Using a screen reader navigate through each link element. 


2. Listen that the link texts are meaningful by themselves, meaning when the user 
listens to link text, user must be made aware of the link purpose or destination. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.4.4 Link Purpose 
(In Context) 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 

1. Check if the web page has more than one way provided to locate a Web page 
within a set of Web pages except where the Web Page is the result or a step in a 
process. 

2. Ensure there is more than one way to access a webpage, for example, by using a 
search function, site map, standard navigation, etc. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.4.5 Multiple 
Ways 


31 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(e) ( Continued) 


9.2.4.6 Headings and labels Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Using the screen reader navigate to each heading element on the screen. 
2. Check that it provides enough description about its content and surrounding text. 
3. Navigate to each form field which has label element. 
4. Check that this label described the usage of the form field. 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.4.6 Headings 
and Labels 
9.2.4.7 Focus visible Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Identify all the interactive elements on the web page. 
2. Using the tab key on the keyboard, tab through all the interactive elements on the 
web page. 
3. Check that all the interactive elements have some form of identification of focus 
available. Browser default focus indicator is acceptable to meet this requirement. 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.4.7 
Focus Visible 
9.2.5 Input modalities 
9.2.5.1 Pointer gestures Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Check for any functionality that can be triggered by: 

a) Path-based gestures (see description of path-based gestures below) OR 

b) Multipoint gestures (see description of multipoint gestures below) 

c) For each functionality that can be triggered by path-based gestures or 
multipoint gestures, verify that the functionality can also be operated with the 
use of single-pointer actions that are not path-based (such as taps, double taps, 
long presses, clicks, click and holds, double clicks, or dragging actions that 
are not path-based). 

d) Exceptions exist if the functionality is essential. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.5.1 Pointer 
Gestures 
9.2.5.2 Pointer cancellation Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 


1. Identify all controls on the page with actions that are irreversible. 


2. If that control (with an irreversible action) can be triggered by a single-pointer 
touch, make sure that at least one of the following is true: 

a. No Down-Event-The action triggers on the up event. (The action is not 
triggered on the down event). 

b. Abort/Undo-The action triggers a confirmation dialogue, giving the user an 
option to abort/undo. 

c. Up Reversal - The action that would be triggered on the down event (for 
example, placing your finger on the screen) can be reversed by releasing the 
pointer outside the trigger area (for example, sliding the finger off the control 
and then lifting it off the screen). 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.5.2 Pointer 
Cancellation 


32 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(e) ( Continued) 


9.2.5.3 Label in name 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Identify all controls in the web page that have a visible text label. 
2. Using screen reader, put focus on the control. 
a. Ensure the entire onscreen visible text label is EITHER: 
b. An exact match to the label announced by screen reader OR 


c. Is contained within the label announced by screen reader (in the same order 
presented visually) 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.5.3 Label in 
Name 


9.2.5.4 Motion actuation 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Identify any functionality that can be triggered by: 
a. Device motion (such as shaking or tilting the device) OR 
b. User motion detected by a device. 


2. For each functionality that can be triggered by motion actuation verify that both 
of the following are true: 


a. Motion actuation can be disabled AND 
b. The functionality can be operated without using motion 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.5.4 Motion 
Actuation 


9.3 Understandable 


9.3.1 Readable 
9.3.1.1 Language of page 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Inspect the page source code to check that lang attribute is present AND the 
provided lang attribute is valid to the default page language. 
2. In case the lang attribute is missing or inaccurate or wrong, this requirement is 
not met. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.1.1 Language 
of Page 


9.3.1.2 Language of parts 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 

1. Identify any section/paragraph on the page which is not in the default page 
language. For example web page is in English and there is one section is having 
Hindi text. 

2. Check that lang attribute is properly defined for this section. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.1.2 Language 
of Parts 


9.3.2 Predictable 


9.3.2.1 On focus 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Turn on the screen reader. 
2. Swipe or tab through the page from top to bottom. 


3. Check that no unexpected change of context as any of the components receive 
focus. 

4. Under change of context we can consider focus moving to different area or 
opening up a new modal dialog. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.2.1 On Focus 


33 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


9.3.2.2 On Input 


Inspection 


Table 1(e) ( Continued) 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Turn on the screen reader. 


2. Interact with any of the input control on the screen, for example entering text in 
a input box, opening a dropdown. 


3. Check that no unexpected change of context as you interact with any control. 


4. Under change of context we can consider focus moving to different area or 
opening up a new modal dialog. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.2.2 On Input* 


9.3.2.3 Consistent navigation Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 

1. Check that users who interact with repeated content across Web pages to be able 
to predict the location of the content they are looking for and find it more quickly 
when they encounter it again. 

2. Check that use of consistent presentation and layout throughout the web site for 
users who interact with repeated content within a set of Web pages and need to 
locate specific information or functionality more than once. 

3. Check that repeated components occur in the same order on each page of a page 
or site. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.2.3 Consistent 
Navigation 
9.3.2.4 Consistent identification Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then: 


1. Check that the web page ensures consistent identification of functional 
components that appear repeatedly within a set of Web pages. 


2. Ensure that same functionality within a set of Web pages is identified consistently. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.2.4 Consistent 
Identification 


9.3.3 Input assistance 


9.3.3.1 Error identification 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then: 
1. Identify if any user form presents on the web page. 


2. Complete every form control, deliberately entering user input that falls outside 
the required format or values or leaving required fields blank and submit the 
form. 


3. Ifan input error is detected, verify that BOTH of the following are true: 
a. The form control that is in error is identified in text. Options include: 
1) Visible text on page 


ii) Alternative text on an image (using screen reader, listen to the alternative 
text) 


iii) Text that is programmatically associated with the control (Using screen 
reader, move to the control and ensure that the error message is read 
along with the control type and label) 


b) The error is described to the user in text. Options include: 
1) Visible text on screen 


ii) Alternative text on an image (using screen reader, listen to the alternative 
text) 
Using screen reader, ensure each error message can be read with screen reader. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.3.1 Error 
Identification 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


34 


9.3.3.2 Labels or instructions 


9.3.3.3 Error suggestion 


Inspection 


Inspection 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(e) ( Continued) 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. visually identify each form control on the page. 
2. Verify that each form control has a label that is always visible 
3. required fields are identified visually and programmatically or via error text 
4. Any input that requires specific data or format is provided for all users and not 
only to users without disabilities 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.3.2 Labels or 
Instructions. 
Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Identify any form on the page. 
2. Complete every form control, deliberately entering user input that falls outside 
the required format or values and submit the form. 
3. If an input error is automatically detected, verify that the error message gives a 
suggestion about how to fix it. 
4. Using screen reader, ensure each error message with the suggestion can be read 
properly. 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.3.3 Error 
Suggestion 


9.3.3.4 Error prevention 
(legal, financial, data) 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 


1. Identify any module on the page where a user action can cause an important 
legal, financial, test/exam or unrecoverable/unchangeable user data transaction 
to occur. 


2. Confirm that AT LEAST ONE of the following is true: 


a. Reversible: Instructions are provided explaining how to reverse or cancel the 
transaction. 


b. Verified: Data entered by the user is provided for review before final 
submission, and the user is able to make changes to this data. 


c. Confirmed: A mechanism (such as a checkbox) is provided for the user to 
confirm the transaction. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.3.4 Error 
Prevention (Legal, Financial, Data) 


9.4 Robust 


9.4.1 Compatible 
9.4.1.1 Parsing 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Use any HTML validator tool and type in the URL of the webpage. 


2. Identify any start or end tags issue or presence of duplicate attributes or id’s not 
being unique. 


3. Ifthere are issues around those areas then this requirement fails. 
4. Semi-automated tools are recommended to perform this test procedure. 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 4.1.1 Parsing 


35 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1(e) ( Concluded) 


9.4.1.2 Name, role, value Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then 


1. Using screen reader, navigate through each user interface component. 
2. Make sure the screen reader correctly conveys (see expectations detailed below) 
the following information about each component: 
a. Its role: For example, button, link, switch, picker, slider, stepper, switch, text 
field, alert, tab, etc. 
b. Its name: For example, a label for a form control or button, the name of the 
tab, the label of a switch, etc. 
3. Ifapplicable, its value or state: for example, on/off, selected, dimmed, adjustable, 
expanded/collapsed, slider’s value, textfield’s value, “tab _ of _”, etc. 


Check that the web page does not fail WCAG2.1 Success Criterion 4.1.2 Name, Role, 
Value 


9.4.1.3 Status messages Inspection | Check that the ICT is a web page then, 
1. Identify any status messages that can appear on the page. Status messages are: 


a. Defined as a message that provides information to the user on the success 
or results of an action (confirmation message, updated shopping cart, etc), 
on the waiting state of an application, on the progress of a process, or on the 
existence of errors. 


b. Added to the page but do not receive focus. 


2. Using screen reader, trigger each status message and confirm that the newly 
added status message is automatically announced by the screen reader without 
moving focus to the message. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 4.1.3 Status 


Messages 
9.5 WCAG 2.1 AAA Success Criteria(informative) 
9.6 WCAG Conformance Inspection | Check that following five WCAG 2.1 conformance requirements meet in the web 
requirements pages: 


1. Conformance level: One of the following levels of conformance is met in full. 
Level A: For level A conformance (the minimum level of conformance) 
Level AA: For level AA conformance. 


2. Full pages: Conformance (and conformance level) is for full Web page(s) only 
and cannot be achieved if part of a Web page is excluded. 


3. Complete processes: When a web page is one of a series of web pages presenting 
a process (that is, a sequence of steps that need to be completed to accomplish an 
activity), all Web pages in the process conform at the specified level or better. 


4. Only  accessibility-supported ways of using technologies: Only 
accessibility-supported ways of using technologies are relied upon to satisfy the 
success criteria. 


5. Non-interference: If technologies are used in a way that is not accessibility 
supported, or if they are used in a non-conforming way, then they do not block 
the ability of users to access the rest of the page. 


36 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (f) Non-web Documents 
( Clause 6.6 ) 


10.0 General (Informative) 


10.1 Perceivable 


10.1.1 Text alternatives 


10.1.1.1 Non-text content Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document and there is presence of non-text content. 

1. Locate any non-text content present on the document. Examples of non-text 
content are images, graphs, figures etc. 

2. Using a screen reader software, verify that there is text alternative present for 
these non-text content. 

3. Not all non-text content needs text alternative to be present. Any non-text element 
which already has a text equivalent present doesn’t have to be exposed to screen 
reader users. 

4. When the text alternative is needed for the image, check that it is meaningful and 
descriptive of the image that is present. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.1.1 Non-text 


content 
10.1.2 Time-based media 
10.1.2.1 Audio-only and Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has multimedia [audio/video] present 
video-only (pre-recorded) in the content. 


1. Ifthe content is only audio, check if the audio content is repetitive and describes 
the content in text elsewhere in the same document. Then the following tests are 
not required. 

a. Identify the text transcript present for the audio. 

b. If text transcript is present, then ensure that it has all the essential dialogs, 
identifies speakers and describes all essential sound effects for the audio only 
content. 

2. Ifthe content is a video, check if the video content is repetitive and describes the 
content in text elsewhere in the same document. Then the following tests are not 
required. 

a. Identify the video content. 

b. For the unique video content, text description is mandatory. Verify that either 
an audio description OR text description is provided for the essential visual 
content in the video. 

c. In either case of audio description or text description, check that important 
scenes and any other visual information that is not being conveyed via 
dialogues is being presented to visually impaired user. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.1 Audio-only 
and Video-only (Prerecorded) 


10.1.2.2 Captions Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has video in the content then, 
(pre-recorded) 1. Check for the presence of captions in the video. 
2. When captions are present, check that 


a. Captions are visible with the required colour contrast between the text and the 
background. 


b. Identify speakers and any background noises. 
c. Captions are in sync with the video content. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.2 Captions 
(Prerecorded) 


37 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


10.1.2.3 Audio description 
or media alternative (pre- 
recorded) 


Inspection 


Table 1 (f) (Continued) 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has video in the content. 

1. If the video content does not provide additional information where sight is 
needed to understand the content then audio description is not a mandate for this 
requirement. 

2. Ifthe video content contains additional information which needs sight to perceive 
it, then ensure the following: 

a. Identify the video content. 

b. Verify that either an audio description OR text description is provided for the 
essential visual content in the video. 

c. If text transcript is present then ensure that it has all the essential dialogs, 
identifies speakers and describes all essential sound effects for the audio only 
content. 

d. In case of audio description being present, check that important scenes and 
any other visual information that is not being conveyed via dialogues is being 
presented to visually impaired users. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.3 Audio 
Description or Media Alternative (Prerecorded) 


10.1.2.4 Captions (live) 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has live video in the content then: 
1. Check for the presence of captions in the live video. 
2. When captions are present, check that : 


a. Captions are visible with the required colour contrast between the text and the 
background. 


b. Identifies speakers and any background noises. 
c. Captions are in sync with the video content. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.4 Captions 
(Live) 


10.1.2.5 Audio description 
(pre-recorded) 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has video in the content then, 

1. If the video content does not provide additional information where sight is 
needed to understand the content, then audio description is not a mandate for this 
requirement. 

2. Ifthe video content contains additional information which needs sight to perceive 
it then ensure the following: 

a. Verify that an Audio Description is provided for the essential visual content in 
the video that requires sight to understand. 

b. In case of audio description being present, check that important scenes and 
any other visual information that is not being conveyed via dialogues is being 
presented to visually impaired users. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.5 Audio 
Description (Prerecorded) 


10.1.3 Adaptable 


38 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (f) (Continued) 


10.1.3.1 Info and relationships Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive elements in the content 
then, 

1. Identify content that is conveying information and relation via visual 
representation of the content such as headings being big and bold, data presented 
in table to convey the relationship, form fields presented with labels to convey 
the intent of the form fields and representing content in chronological order. 

2. To ensure that headings are programmatically being announced to screen reader 
users, use the below testing steps: 


a. Navigate through the content that appears like a heading using screen reader 


b. Listen to the role or trait of heading being announced for all the content that 
appears like a heading. 
2. To ensure that relationship between content in the tables is being announced to 
screen reader users, use the below testing steps: 


a. Navigate through the content that appears like tables, content present in rows 
and columns, using screen reader 


b. Listen to header text being read for each individual text present in the data cell 
of the table. 
3. To ensure that the form fields information is being announced to the screen reader 
appropriately, use the below testing steps: 
a. Navigate through the form fields present on the document using the screen 
reader 


b. Listen to the form label being announced along with the form field role or trait. 
Requirement for this requirement is to hear the label being present for the form 
fields being present programmatically. 


4. To insure that the content represented as a list is being announced appropriately 
to screen reader users, use the below testing steps: 


a. Navigate through the content that appears like a list using screen reader 
b. Listen to “in and out of list” or number of number for each list items 
announcement being present for the list content.* 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.1 Info and 
Relationships 


10.1.3.2 Meaningful sequence Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document then, 
1. Using screen reader go over the content present in the document. 


2. Check that all the content present is announced to screen reader users in a 
meaningful and appropriate order. 

3. Check that no content is being skipped by screen reader software AND that no 
content that is visually hidden is being announced to screen reader users. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.2 Meaningful 


Sequence 
10.1.3.3 Sensory Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document then, 
characteristics 1. Go over the content present on the document. 


2. Check for any instructions related to understanding content or operating content. 
If any of those instructions refer to visual characteristics, such as shape, colour, 
size, visual location, orientation or sound cue then check that there is a non- 
sensory characteristic instruction is present. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.3 Sensory 
Characteristics 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


39 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


10.1.3.4 Orientation 


Inspection 


Table 1 (f) (Continued) 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document then: 
1. Check to ensure that device lock is disabled on the devices. 


2. Check the application and or document in the default orientation of portrait 
mode. 


3. Now change the orientation of the application and or document by turning the 
device to change its orientation from portrait to landscape mode. Note that the 
changes to design or to the content is permissible to be different in different 
orientations as long as the content and functionality is present in both the 
orientations. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.4 Orientation 


10.1.3.5 Identify input purpose 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive elements in the content 
then: 


1. Turn on the screen reader. 
2. Identify the form fields on the document. 


3. Check if screen reader is giving any information about the input field, for 
example Enter telephone number without STD code, e-mail id field. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.5 Identify 
Input Purpose 


10.1.4 Distingishable 


10.1.4.1 Use of colour 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document then, 


1. Check the content present on the document for scenarios where colour is being 
used alone to convey information. Examples are charts, graphs where colour is 
used to distinguish different elements being presented in the graph. 


a. When content is presented using colour alone, then check to ensure that the 
same information is presented in text so that colour blind users would still be 
able to get all the information. If graphs are accompanied with tabular data of 
the content that is being presented in the graph then this requirement is met. 


2. Another scenario to look for are links being present in between blocks of text in 
paragraphs. When colour alone is used as the only means to differentiate links 
and text then colour blind users would not even know the existence of the same. 
a. When links are using colour alone to distinguish themselves, then ensure 

that an additional visual indicator like underline or any other indicator OR if 
the colour contrast between the link text and the surrounding non-link text is 
3:1 then this requirement is met. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.1 Use of Colour 


10.1.4.2 Audio control 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has multimedia [audio/ video] in the 
content then, 


1. Ifthe multimedia automatically starts playing audio when you open the document 
or anytime during the operation that lasts for more than three seconds, then: 


a. The audio can be paused, stopped, or muted. 
b. Check there is a mechanism to adjust the volume (independent of overall 
device volume). 


Check that the document does not fail ‘document success criterion for audio control’ 
given in clause 10.1.4.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


40 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (f) (Continued) 


10.1.4.3 Contrast (minimum) Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document then: 

1. Check for text on the document that may have poor colour contrast. Identify the 
text that is not easily readable by users. examples are light grey text over white 
background etc. 

2. Using an automated tool, pick the colours of the text and the background. Test the 
codes for colour contrast of 4.5:1 for regular text and 3:1 for large text. 

a. Regular text is anything below 12 point. 
b. Large text is 14 point bold and anything above 18 point. 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.3 Contrast 
(Minimum) 
10.1.4.4 Resize text Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document then, 

1. Check that text resizing mechanism is provided and it works with and without 
assistive technology. 

2. Check that the document does not lose any text or feature after resizing up to 
200 percent. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.4 Resize text 
10.1.4.5 Images of text Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document then: 

1. Use CTRL + A or CMD + A to select all the text on the page/document, check 
whether any information is not selected. 

2. If there is such content, then it could be an image of text. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.5 Images of text 
10.1.4.6 Void 
10.1.4.7 Void 
10.1.4.8 Void 
10.1.4.9 Void 
10.1.4.10 Reflow Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document then, 

1. Turn on the magnification software. 

2. Zoom/magnify the user interface by 400 percent. 

3. Check that document is navigable and readable without losing any text and features. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.10 Reflow given 
in clause 10.1.4.10 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 
10.1.4.11 Non-text contrast Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document then: 


1. Identify non-text elements like icons, graphs, interactive elements present on the page. 


2. Ensure that icons, graphical elements do not have a text alternative present, and they 
are the only means via which the meaning of the content is being communicated to 
users. 


3. For icons and graphs: 


a. Take a screenshot of the icons and graph and using colour picker choose the value of 
the element and the adjacent colour. Adjacent colours are the ones that are right next 
to them. 


b. Using those values, check the colour contrast to be 3:1 between the element colour 
and the adjacent element colour. 


4. For interactive elements: 


a. Trigger different states that an element may have. For example, focused, selected, 
hovered etc. 


b. Take a screenshot of the elements in those triggered states and using colour picker 
choose the colour codes of the element and the adjacent colour of the element. 


c. Using those values, check the colour contrast to be 3:1 between them. 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.11 Non-text Contrast 


41 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


10.1.4.12 Text spacing 


Inspection 


Table 1 (f) (Continued) 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document then, 
1. Check that the text on the page does not overlap or wrap after adjusting the text 
spacing between two lines 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.12 Text 
spacing. 


10.1.4.13 Content on hover or 
focus 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive elements in the content 
then, 


1. Identify the element on the document which displays additional information 
when hovered or focused. 


2. Make sure that this additional content is dismissible without moving the focus. 
3. Check that this newly displayed content is hoverable. 
4. Check that this content remains visible until the hover or focus trigger is removed. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.13 Content on 
Hover or Focus 


10.2 Operable 


10.2.1 Keyboard accessible 


10.2.1.1 Keyboard 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive elements in the content 
then 


1. Using an external keyboard, this requirement can be tested. 
2. Ifusing external keyboard: 
a. Connect the external keyboard with the ICT. 


b. Using tab key or arrow key, ensure that all the content and functionality is 
usable by keyboard alone. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.1.1 Keyboard 


10.2.1.2 No keyboard trap 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive elements in the content 
then, 


1. Turn on the screen reader 
2. Now swipe or tab through the document. 


3. Ensure that the screen reader focus doesn’t get trapped on any element. Meaning, 
user is able to swipe in and out of the elements present on the page. 

4. Now, turn off the screen reader and repeat step 3 to ensure that there are no swipe 
or keyboard traps present. 


Check that the document does not fail ‘Document success criterion for No keyboard 
trap’ given in clause 10.2.1.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


10.2.1.3 Void 


10.2.1.4 Character key 
shortcuts 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive form controls then: 
1. Identify any element on the document which has character key shortcut. 
2. Check if it allows user to enable/disable this shortcut. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.1.4 Character 
Key Shortcuts 


42 


10.2.2 Enough time 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (f) (Continued) 


10.2.2.1 Timing adjustable 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive elements in the content 
then: 


1. Turn on the screen reader. 

2. Leave the document idle for the time which is needed to trigger the session 
extension functionality if present. 

3. Once the session time out functionality is triggered, ensure that a user can do the 
following: 
a. Turn off the session extension functionality. 
b. Before you encounter the time out, you can adjust the time limit to at least 

10 times the length of the default setting. 


c. You are warned before the time limit expires, are given at least 20 s to extend 
the time limit, and then can extend the time limit at least 10 times longer than 
the default. 


4. Turn off the screen reader and repeat step to ensure that mobility users are able to 
access the session time out functionality as well. 


Check that the document does not fail ‘Document success criterion for Timing 
adjustable’, given in clause 10.2.2.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


10.2.2.2 Pause, stop, hide 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has moving, scrolling, blinking or 
autoupdating elements in the content then, 


1. Ensure that these should last for more than 5 s and is presented along with other 
essential information. 

2. Check that the moving, blinking, scrolling or autoupdating content is provided 
with pause, stop or hide mechanism. 


Check that the document does not fail ‘Document success criterion: Pause, stop, hide’, 
given in clause 10.2.2.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


10.2.3 Seizures and physical reactions 


10.2.3.1 Three flashes or Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has flashing element in the content then: 
below threshold 1. Count the number of times an element flashes or blinks(general flash or red flash) 
in any one-second period, or 
2. Count the number of flashes or blinks(general flash or red flash) in 10 s, and 
divide by 10, to verify no more than three flashes or blinks occur per second. 
Check that the document does not fail ‘Document success criterion for Three flashes or 
below threshold’ given in clause 10.2.3.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 
10.2.4 Navigable 
10.2.4.1 Void 
10.2.4.2 Document titled Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document then, 


1. With screen reader turned on, open the document. 

2. When the document loads, ensure that one of the following is announced: 
a. A descriptive document title. 
b. *The first content element (that serves as a descriptive heading). 


c. *An element within the navigation bar (such as a back or menu button) AND 
you can swipe to a descriptive heading or title. 


Check that the document does not fail ‘Document success criterion for Document 
titled’ given in clause 10.2.4.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


43 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


10.2.4.3 Focus order 


Inspection 


Table 1 (f) (Continued) 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive elements in the content 
then: 


1. Turn on the screen reader. 


2. Ensure that the focus moves from element to element in an order that preserves 
the meaning and operability of the document. 


3. Interact with dynamic content such as modals, adding or deleting content, etc. 
Ensure that focus is managed appropriately as content is added or removed from 
the document. 


Check that the document does not fail ‘Document success criterion for Focus order’ 
given in clause 10.2.4.3 given in IS 17802 (Part 1). 


10.2.4.4 Link purpose 
(in context) 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has hyperlinks in the content then: 
1. Turn on the screen reader and move through the links in the document. 
2. Listen that the link texts are meaningful by themselves, meaning when the user 
listens to link text, user must be made aware of the link purpose or destination. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.4.4 Link Purpose 
(In Context) 


10.2.4.5 Void 


10.2.4.6 Headings and labels 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document then: 
1. Go over each heading and label on the document that are present. 
2. Check to ensure that heading and labels are: 
a. Provides a clear description of the content in that section or form field. 
b. Gives users an effective overview of the content and its organization. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.4.6 Headings 
and Labels 


10.2.4.7 Focus visible 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive form controls then: 


1. Using the tab key on the keyboard, tab through all the interactive elements on the 
document. 

2. Check that all the interactive elements have some form of identification of focus 
available. Browser default focus indicator is acceptable to meet this requirement. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.4.7 Focus Visible 


10.2.5 Input modalities 


10.2.5.1 Pointer gestures 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive elements in the content 
then: 


1. Check for any functionality that can be triggered by: 
a. Path-based gestures (see description of path-based gestures below); or 
b. Multipoint gestures (see description of multipoint gestures below). 


2. For each functionality that can be triggered by path-based gestures or multipoint 
gestures, verify that the functionality can also be operated with the use of 
single-pointer actions that are not path-based (such as taps, double taps, long 
presses, clicks, click and holds, double clicks, or dragging actions that are not 
path-based). 


3. Exceptions exist if the functionality is essential. 


Check that the document does not fail ‘Document success criterion for Pointer gestures’ 
given in clause 10.2.5.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


44 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (f) (Continued) 


10.2.5.2 Pointer cancellation Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive controls with actions 
that are irreversible then: 
1. If that control (with an irreversible action) can be triggered by a single-pointer 
touch, make sure that at least one of the following is true: 
a. No down-event — The action triggers on the up event. (The action is not 
triggered on the down event). 
b. Abort/undo — The action triggers a confirmation dialogue, giving the user an 
option to abort/undo. 
c. Up reversal — The action that would be triggered on the down event 
(for eample, placing your finger on the screen) can be reversed by releasing the 
pointer outside the trigger area (for example, sliding the finger off the. control 
and then lifting it off the screen). 
Check that the document does not fail ‘Document success criterion for Pointer 
cancellation’ given in clause 10.2.5.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 
10.2.5.3 Label in name Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive controls that have a 
visible text label then: 
1. Using screen reader, put focus on the control. 
a. Ensure the entire onscreen visible text label is EITHER: 
b. An exact match to the label announced by screen reader OR 
c. Is contained within the label announced by screen reader (in the same order 
presented visually). 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.5.3 Label in 
Name 
10.2.5.4 Motion actuation Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive elements in the content 
then, 
1. Identify any functionality that can be triggered by: 
a. Device motion (such as shaking or tilting the device) OR 
b. User motion detected by a device. 
2. For each functionality that can be triggered by motion actuation verify that both 
of the following are true: 
a. Motion actuation can be disabled AND. 
b. The functionality can be operated without using motion. 
Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.5.4 Motion 
Actuation 
10.3. Understandable 
10.3.1 Readable 
10.3.1.1 Language of Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document then: 
document 1. Check the language of the document is programmatically determinable by 
reading the content using a screen reader. 
2. If screen reader has the support for that language, then it should read the content 
of the document. Check that the document does not fail ‘Document success 
criterion for Language of document’ given in clause 10.3.1.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 
10.3.1.2 Language of parts Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has text in multiple languages then: 


1. Identify text that is in a language different from the language of the rest of the 
document. 


2. Using screen reader, ensure that the text is read using the appropriate language 


library (that is, accent). Check that the document does not fail ‘Document success 
criterion for Language of parts’ given in clause 10.3.1.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


10.3.2 Predictable 


45 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


10.3.2.1 On focus 


Inspection 


Table 1 (f) (Continued) 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive elements in the content 
then: 


1. Turn on the screen reader. 
2. Swipe or tab through the document from top to bottom. 


3. Check that no unexpected change of context as any of the components receive 
focus. 


Change of context is defined as change in focus. It means focus moving away from the 
element which has focus or opening a new modal or screen. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.2.1 On Focus 


10.3.2.2 On input 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive elements in the content 
then, 


1. Turn on the screen reader. 
2. Interact with all input controls on the document. 


3. Ensure you do not unexpectedly encounter a change of context as you interact 
with the controls, for example: 


a. Leaving the last field does not submit the form and trigger a change of context. 


b.User can enter text in a text field, toggle switches, select checkboxes, and move 
through a picker control without triggering a context change. 


c. New screens or dialogs do not automatically launch. 


Change of context is defined as change in focus. It means focus moving away from the 
element which has focus, or opening a new modal or screen. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.2.2 On Input 


10.3.3 Input assistance 


10.3.3.1 Error identification 


10.3.3.2 Labels or instructions 


Inspection 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has form controls in the content then: 


1. Complete every form control, deliberately entering user input that falls outside 
the required format or values or leaving required fields blank and submit the 
form. 


2. Ifan input error is detected, verify that both of the following are true: 
a. The form control that is in error is identified in text. 


b. The error is described to the user in text. Options include: ensure each error 
message can be read with screen reader. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.3.1 Error 
Identification. 
Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has form controls in the content then, 
1. visually identify each form control on the document. 
2. Verify that each form control has a label that is always visible. 
3. required fields are identified visually and programmatically or via error text. 
4 


. Any data that requires specific data or format is provided for all users and not 
only to users without disabilities. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.3.2 Labels or 
Instructions 


10.3.3.3 Error suggestion 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has form controls in the content then, 


1. Complete every form control, deliberately entering user input that falls outside 
the required format or values and submit the form. 


2. If an input error is automatically detected, verify that the error message gives a 
suggestion about how to fix it. 


3. Using screen reader, ensure each error message can be read. 


Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.3.3 Error 
Suggestion 


46 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (f) (Continued) 


10.3.3.4 Error prevention Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive form controls in the 
(legal, financial, data) content then, 

1. Identify any section in the document where a user action can cause an important 
legal, financial, test/exam or unrecoverable/unchangeable user data transaction 
to occur. 

2. Confirm that AT LEAST ONE of the following is true: 

a. Reversible: Instructions are provided explaining how to reverse or cancel the 
transaction. 

b. Verified: Data entered by the user is provided for review before final 
submission, and the user is able to make changes to this data. 

c. Confirmed: A mechanism (such as a checkbox) is provided for the user to 
confirm the transaction. 

Check that the document does not fail ‘Document success criterion for Error prevention 
(legal, financial, data)’, given in clause 10.3.3.4 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 

10.4 Robust 

10.4.1 Compatible 

10.4.1.1 Parsing Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive elements in the content 
then, 

1. Using screen reader, navigate through each user interface component. 

2. Make sure the screen reader correctly conveys (see expectations detailed below) 
the following information about each component: 

a. Its role: For example, button, link, switch, picker, slider, stepper, switch, text 
field, alert, tab, etc. 

b. Its name: e.g. a label for a form control or button, the name of the tab, the label 
of a switch, etc. 

c. If applicable, its value or state: For example, on/off, selected, dimmed, 
adjustable, expanded/collapsed, slider’s value, textfield’s value, “tab _ of _”, 
etc. 

Check that the document does not fail ‘Document success criterion for Parsing’, given 
in clause 10.4.1.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 
10.4.1.2 Name, role, value Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has interactive elements in the content 


then: 
1. Using screen reader, navigate through each user interface component. 


2. Make sure the screen reader correctly conveys (see expectations detailed below) 
the following information about each component: 


a. Its role: For example, button, link, switch, picker, slider, stepper, switch, text 
field, alert, tab, etc. 
b. Its name: For example, a label for a form control or button, the name of the tab, 
the label of a switch, etc. 
3. Ifapplicable, its value or state: For example, on/off, selected, dimmed, adjustable, 
expanded/collapsed, slider’s value, textfield’s value, “tab _ of _”, etc. 


Check that the document does not fail ‘Document success criterion for Name, role, 
value’, given in clause 10.4.1.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


47 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (f) (Concluded) 


10.4.1.3 Status messages Inspection Check that the ICT is a non-web document and has any status messages added to the 
content then: 


1. Identify any status messages that can appear on the document. Status messages 
are: 

a. Defined as a message that provides information to the user on the success or 
results of an action (confirmation message, updated shopping cart, etc), on the 
waiting state of an application, on the progress of a process, or on the existence 
of errors 


b. Added to the screen but do not receive focus 


2. Using screen reader, trigger each status message and confirm that the newly 
added status message is automatically announced by the screen reader without 
moving focus to the message. 

Check that the document does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 4.1.3 Status 
Messages 


10.5 Caption positioning Advisory only 
and contains 
no testable 
requirements 


10.6 Audio description timing | Advisory only 
and contains 
no testable 
requirements* 


These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


48 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (g) Software 
( Clause 6.6 ) 


11.1 Perceivable 
11.1.1 Text alternatives 
11.1.1 Non-text content 


11.1.1.1.1 Non-text content Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface, is open for 

(open functionality) assistive technologies and there is presence of non-text. 

1. Identify any non-text images present on any screen. Examples of non-text 
content are images, graphs, figures etc. 

2. Using an assistive technology like screen reader software, verify that there 
is text alternative present for these non-text content. 


3. Note that not all non-text content needs text alternative to be present. Any 
non-text element presents which already has a text equivalent present 
doesn’t have to be exposed to screen reader users. 

4. When the text alternative is needed for the image, then check that the 
text alternative present for the image is meaningful and descriptive of the 
image that is present. 

Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.1.1 
Non-text content 


11.1.1.1.2 Non-text content Testing Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface, is closed 
(closed functionality) to assistive technologies and there is presence of non-text: 


1. Check that speech output is provided as an alternative for non-text content. 
2. Check that if the non-text content is not pure decoration. 
3. Check that the non-text content is not used only for visual formatting. 


Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.1.1 
Non-text content 


11.1.2 Time-based media 
11.1.2.1 Audio-only and video-only (pre-recorded) 


11.1.2.1.1 Audio-only and Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which is open for assistive technologies 
video-only (pre-recorded-open and there is presence of audio/video. 
functionality) 1. Ifthe content is only audio, then ensure the following: note that if the audio 


content is repetitive and describes the content in text elsewhere in the same 

software, then the following tests are not required. 

a. Identify the text transcript is present for the audio. 

b. If text transcript is present, then ensure that it has all the essential 
dialogs, identifies speakers and describes all essential sound effects for 
the audio only content. 

2. If the content is a video, then ensure the following: note that if the video 
content is repetitive and describes the content in text elsewhere on the 
same document then the following tests are not required. 


a. Identify the video content. 

b. For the unique video content, text description is mandatory. Verify 
that either an audio description OR text description is provided for the 
essential visual content in the video. 

c.In either case of audio description or text description, check that important 

scenes and any other visual information that is not being conveyed via 
dialogues is being presented to visually impaired users. 
Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.1 
Audio-only and Video-only (Prerecorded) 


49 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


11.1.2.1.2.1 Pre-recorded 
audio-only (closed functionality) 


Inspection 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface which 
is closed to assistive technologies for screen reading. Pre-recorded auditory 
information is needed to enable the use of closed functions of ICT. 


1. Check that the visual information is equivalent to the pre-recorded auditory 
output. 


11.1.2.1.2.2 Pre-recorded 
video-only (closed functionality) 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface which is 
closed to assistive technologies for screen reading. Pre-recorded video information 
must enable the use of closed functions of ICT. Speech output is provided as 
non-visual access to non-text content displayed on closed functionality. 


1. Check that the speech output equivalent information for the pre-recorded 
video content. 


11.1.2.2 Captions (pre-recorded) 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface and there 
is presence of video. 


1. Identify the video content present on the screen. 
2. Check for the presence of captions in the audio, video. 
3. When captions are present, check that: 


a. Captions are visible with the required colour contrast between the 
text and the background, refer clause 11.1.4.3 contrast (minimum) of 
IS 17802 (Part 1) for the same. 


b. Identifies speakers and any background noises. 
c. Captions are in sync with the audio, video content. 
Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.2 Captions 


11.1.2.3 Audi description or media alternative (pre-recor 


ded) 


11.1.2.3.1 Audio description or 
media alternative (pre-recorded- 
open functionality) 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is non-web software and has video content in user interface. 

1. Identify the video content. 

2. Ifthe video content does not provide additional information where sight is 
needed to understand the content, then audio description is not a mandate 
for this requirement. 

3. Ifthe video content contains additional information which needs sight to 
perceive it then ensure the following: 

a. Verify that an Audio Description is provided for the essential visual 
content in the video that requires sight to understand. 

b. In case of audio description being present, check that important scenes 
and any other visual information that is not being conveyed via dialogues 
is being presented to visually impaired users. 


Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.3 Audio 
Description (Prerecorded) 


11.1.2.3.2 Audio description or 
media alternative (pre-recorded- 
closed functionality) 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface and 
user interface is closed to assistive technologies for screen reading. Speech 
output is provided as non-visual access to non-text content displayed on closed 
functionality. 


1. Check that the speech output presents equivalent information for the 
(pre-recorded) video content. 


50 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


11.1.2.4 Captions (live) Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software and has video in its user interface. 
1. Identify the live video content present on the screen. 

2. Check for the presence of captions in the live video. 

3. When captions are present, check that: 


a. Captions are visible with the required colour contrast between the 
text and the background, refer clause 11.1.4.3 contrast (minimum) of 
IS 17802 (Part 1) for the same. 


b. Identifies speakers and any background noises. 
c. Captions are in sync with the video content. 
Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.4 Captions 


(Live) 
11.1.2.5 Audio description Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software and has video in user interface. 
(pre-recorded) 1. Identify the video content. 


2. Ifthe video content does not provide additional information where sight is 
needed to understand the content, then audio description is not a mandate 
for this requirement. 


3. Ifthe video content contains additional information which needs sight to 
perceive it then ensure the following: 

a. Verify that an audio description is provided for the essential visual 
content in the video that requires sight to understand. 

b. In case of audio description being present, check that important scenes 
and any other visual information that is not being conveyed via dialogues 
is presented to visually impaired users. 

Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.2.5 Audio 
Description (Prerecorded) 


11.1.3 Adaptable 
11.1.3.1 Info and relationships 


11.1.3.1.1 Info and relationships Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software and open for assistive technologies like 

(open functionality) screen reader. 

1. Check that all the visual elements like tables, lists, form fields are 
programmatically conveyed to the screen reader. 

2. Identify each form field like option button, dropdown list, checkbox, edit 
box, slider on the screen and test that associated label along with role/state 
is read for each control. 

3. Identify any table on the screen and read the column header, row details 
using screen reader. 


Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.1 Info 
and Relationships 


11.1.3.1.2 Info and relationships Inspection Clause 11.1.3.1.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1) is advisory only and contains no testable 
(closed functionality) requirements. 


51 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


For Requirements, Type of Inspection, Test Procedure and Success Criteria 
refer to respective clauses of Assessment 
IS 17802 (Part 1) 
11.1.3.2 Meaningful sequence 
11.1.3.2.1 Meaningful sequence Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software and it is open for assistive technologies. 
(open functionality) 1. Using the screen reader, go over the content present in the native application 
and any screen. 

2. Check that all the content present is announced to screen reader users in a 
meaningful and appropriate order. 

3. Check that no content is being missed by screen reader software AND that no 
content that is visually hidden is being announced to screen reader users. 

Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.2 Meaningful 
Sequence. 
11.1.3.2.2 Meaningful sequence Inspection Clause 11.1.3.2.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1) is advisory only and contains no testable 
(closed functionality) requirements. 
11.1.3.3 Sensory characteristics Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 

1. Go over the content present on the screen of the native application. 

2. Check for any instructions related to understanding or operating content. If 
any of those instructions refer to visual characteristics such as shape, colour, 
size, visual location, orientation or sound cue then check that alternative 
non-sensory characteristic instruction is present. 

Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.3 Sensory 
Characteristics 
11.1.3.4 Orientation Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 

1. Ensure that orientation lock is disabled on the device or software. 

2. Check the application is in the default orientation of portrait mode. 

3. Now change the orientation of the application by turning the device to change 
its orientation from portrait to landscape mode. 

Note that the changes to design or to the content is permissible to be different in 
different orientations as long as the content and functionality is present in both the 
orientations. 
Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.4 Orientation* 
11.1.3.5 Identify input purpose 
11.1.3.5.1 Identify input purpose Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which supports assistive technology and 
(open functionality) there is presence of form element. 

1. Turn on the screen reader. 

2. Identify the form fields on the user interface. 

3. Check if screen reader is giving any information about the input field, for e.g. 
Enter telephone number without STD code, e-mail id field. 

Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.3.5 Identify 
Input Purpose 
11.1.3.5.2 Identify input purpose Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface and user 


(closed functionality) 


interface is closed to assistive technologies for screen reading. Auditory output is 
provided as non-visual access to closed functionality. 


1. Check that the auditory output is delivered by a mechanism included in or 
provided with the ICT. 


2. Check that the auditory output is delivered by a personal headset that can be 
connected through a 3.5 mm audio jack or an industry standard connection 
without requiring the use of vision. 


Check that the auditory output comprises of purposes from the Input Purposes for 
User Interface Components section. 


11.1.4 Distinguishable 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


52 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


11.1.4.1 Use of colour Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 


1. Check the content present on the screen or page for scenarios where colour 
is being used alone to convey information. Examples are charts, graphs 
where colour is used to distinguish different elements being presented in 
the graph. 


2. When content is presented using colour alone, then check to ensure that 
the same information is presented in text so that colour blind users would 
still be able to get all the information. If graphs are accompanied with 
tabular data of the content that is being presented in the graph then this 
requirement is met. 

3. Another scenario to look for are links being present in between blocks 
of text in paragraphs. When colour alone is used as the only means to 
differentiate links and text then colour blind users would not even know 
the existence of the same. 

4. When links are using colour alone to distinguish themselves, then ensure 
that an additional visual indicator like underline or any other indicator OR 
if the colour contrast between the link text and the surrounding non-link 
text is 3:1 then this requirement is met. 

Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.1 Use of 
Colour 


11.1.4.2 Audio control Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 
1. Identify the multimedia elements on any screen of the software. 


2. Ifthe multimedia automatically starts playing audio when you launch the 
software or anytime during the operation that lasts for more than three 
seconds, then: 


a. Check that the audio can be paused, stopped. 


b. Check there is a mechanism to adjust the volume (independent of overall 
device volume) 


Check that the software does not fail ‘software success criterion for audio control’ 
contained in clause 11.1.4.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


11.1.4.3 Contrast (minimum) Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 


1. Check for text that may have poor colour contrast. Identify the text that 
is not easily readable by users. examples are light grey text over white 
background etc. 


2. For mobile applications, take a screenshot of the screen and using an 
automated tool, pick the colours of the text and the background. Test the 
codes for colour contrast of 4.5:1 for regular text and 3:1 for large text. 


a. Regular text is anything below 12 point. 
b. Large text is 14 point bold and anything above 18 point. 
Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.3 Contrast 


(Minimum) 
11.1.4.4 Resize text 
11.1.4.4.1 Resize text Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides an user interface and it 
(open functionality) is open for assistive technologies. 


1. Text resizing mechanism is provided and it works with and without 
assistive technology. 


2. Check that the software does not lose any text and features after resizing 
up to 200 percent. 


Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.4 Resize 
text 


53 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


11.1.4.4.2 Resize text (closed 


Inspection and 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface and user 


functionality) measurement interface is closed to enlargement features of platform or assistive technology 
and when even viewing distance is specified by the supplier. 
1. Measure the height of a capital letter H. 
2. Check that it subtends an angle of at least 0.7 degrees at the specified 
viewing distance. 
11.1.4.5 Images of text 
11.1.4.5.1 Images of text Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software and it is open for assistive technologies. 
(open functionality) 1. Change the font size of the software/user interface. 
2. If this change is applicable to all the text on the screen, then there are no 
images of text present. 
3. Ifthe font size doesn’t respond to the changes, then that particular element 
could be an image of text. 
There is no straight or sure way to test this requirement when it comes to native 
applications. 
Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.5 Images 
of Text 
11.1.4.5.2 Images of text Testing Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface and user 
(closed functionality) interface is closed to assistive technologies for screen reading. When the non-text 
content is presented to users via speech output. 
1. Check that speech output is provided as an alternative for non-text content. 
2. Check that the non-text content is not pure decoration. 
3. Check that the non-text content is not used only for visual formatting. 
Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.5 Images 
of Text. 
11.1.4.6 Void 
11.1.4.7 Void 
11.1.4.8 Void 
11.1.4.9 Void 
11.1.4.10 Reflow Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 


1. Turn on the magnification software provided by platform. 
2. Zoom/magnify the user interface by 400 percent. 


3. Check that user interface is navigable and readable without losing any text 
and features. 


Check that the software does not fail ‘software success criterion for reflow’ given 
in clause 11.1.4.10 of IS 17802 : (Part 1). 


54 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


11.1.4.11 Non-text contrast Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides an user interface and 
there is presence of non-text elements like icon or graphs. 
1. Identify non-text elements like icons, graphs, interactive elements present 
on any screen of the software. 


2. Ensure that icons, graphical elements do not have a text alternative present 
and they are the only means via which the meaning of the content is being 
communicated to users. 

3. For icons and graphs: 


a. take a screenshot of the icons and graph and using colour picker choose 
the value of the element and the adjacent colour. Adjacent colours are 
the ones that are right next to them. 


b. Based on those values, check the colour contrast to be 3:1 between the 
element colour and the adjacent element colour. 
4. For interactive elements: 
a. Trigger different states that an element may have. For ex, focused, 
selected, hovered etc. 


b. Take a screenshot of the elements in those triggered states and using 
colour picker choose the colour codes of the element and the adjacent 
colour of the element. 

c. based on those values, check the colour contrast to be 3:1 between them. 


Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.11 
Non-text Contrast 


11.1.4.12 Text spacing Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 


1. Check that the text of the user interface does not overlap or wrap after 
adjusting the text spacing between two lines. 


Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.12 Text 


spacing. 
11.1.4.13 Content on hover or Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 
focus 1. Identify the element which displays additional information when hovered 


or focused. 


2. Make sure that this newly displayed information is dismissible without 
moving the focus. 


3. Check that this newly displayed content is hoverable. 


4. Check that this content remains visible until the hover or focus trigger is 
removed. 


Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 1.4.13 
Content on Hover or Focus 


11.2 Operable 


11.2.1 Keyboard accessible 


11.2.1.1 Keyboard 


11.2.1.1.1 Keyboard Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which is open for assistive technologies. 
(open functionality) 1. Using an external keyboard, this requirement can be tested. 
2. Using external keyboard: 

a. Connect the external keyboard with the device. 


b. Using tab key or arrow key, ensure that all the content and functionality 
is usable by keyboard alone. 
Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.1.1 
Keyboard 


55 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


11.2.1.1.2 Keyboard 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface and the 
(closed functionality) user interface is closed to keyboards or keyboard interfaces. 
1. Check that all functionality of the user interface is operable without vision. 
11.2.1.2 No keyboard trap Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which is open for assistive technologies. 
1. Turn on the screen reader. 
2. Using screen reader, swipe or tab through the complete user interface of 
the software. 
3. Ensure that the screen reader focus doesn’t get trapped on any element. 
Meaning, user is able to swipe in and out of the elements present on the 
page. 
4. Now, turn off the screen reader and repeat step 3 to ensure that there are no 
swipe or keyboard traps present. 
Check that the software does not fail ‘Software success criterion for No keyboard 
trap’ given in clause 11.2.1.1.3 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 
11.2.1.3 Void 
11.2.1.4 Character key shortcuts 
11.2.1.4.1 Character key Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides user interface and it 
shortcuts (open functionality) support at least one assistive technology. 
1. Check for the presence of shortcut keys. 
2. Review the list of shortcuts and determine if any shortcuts can be triggered 
by typing only one printable character. 
3. Ifa single character key shortcut exists, ensure that they can be turned off 
OR remapped OR are active only on focus. 
Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.1.4 
Character Key Shortcuts 
11.2.1.4.2 Character key Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface and the 
shortcuts (closed functionality) user interface is closed to keyboards or keyboard interfaces. 
1. Check that all functionality is operable without vision. 
11.2.2 Enough time 
11.2.2.1 Timing adjustable Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides user interface. 


1. Turn on the screen reader. 

2. Leave the application idle for the time which is needed to trigger the 
session extension functionality if present. 

3. Once the session time out functionality is triggered, ensure that a user can 
do the following: 
a. Turn off the session extension functionality OR. 


b. Before you encounter the time out, you can adjust the time limit to at 
least 10 times the length of the default setting. 


c. You are warned before the time limit expires, are given at least 20 s to 
extend the time limit, and then can extend the time limit at least 10 times 
longer than the default. 


4. Turn off the screen readers and repeat step to ensure that mobility users are 
able to access the session time out functionality as well.” 


Check that the software does not fail ‘software success criterion for timing 
adjustable’ given under clause 11.2.2.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


56 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


11.2.2.2 Pause, stop, hide Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides an user interface and there 
is presence of moving, scrolling, blinking or autoupdating element. 

1. Identify all the moving, scrolling, blinking or autoupdating content present 
on thesoftware. Ensure that these should last for more than 5 s and is 
presented along with other essential information. 

2. Check that the moving, blinking, scrolling or autoupdating content is 
provided with pause, stop or hide mechanism. 

3. This is applicable to all the content of the software including informative 
and decorative. 


Check that the software does not fail ‘Software success criterion for Pause, stop, 
hide’ given under clause 11.2.2.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


11.2.3 Seizures and physical reactions 


11.2.3.1 Three flashes or below Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface and there 
threshold is presence of flashing element. 


1. Identify any element in the user interface which flashes or blinks (general 
flash or red flash). 

2. Count the number of times an element flashes or blinks (general flash or 
red flash) in any one-second period, or 


3. Count the number of flashes or blinks (general flash or red flash) in 10 s, 
and divide by 10, to verify no more than three flashes or blinks occur per 
second. 


4. This is applicable to all the elements of the software including informative 
and decorative. 


Check that the software does not fail ‘software success criterion for three flashes 
or below threshold’ given under clause 11.2.3.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


11.2.4 Navigable 


11.2.4.1 Void 
11.2.4.2 Void 
11.2.4.3 Focus order Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface. 

1. Turn on the screen reader. 

2. Ensure that the focus moves from element to element in an order that 
preserves the meaning and operability of the interface. 

3. Interact with dynamic content such as modals, adding or deleting content, 
etc. Ensure that focus is managed appropriately as content is added or 
removed from the screen. 

Check that the software does not fail ‘Software success criterion for focus order’ 
given under clause 11.2.4.3 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 
11.2.4.4 Link purpose Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface and there 
(in context) is presence of link element. 

1. Using the screen reader navigate through each link element. 

2. Listen that the link texts are meaningful by themselves, meaning when the 
user listens to link text, user must be made aware of the link purpose or 
destination. 

Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.4.4 Link 
Purpose (In Context) 
11.2.4.5 Void 


57 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


11.2.4.6 Headings and labels 


11.2.4.7 Focus visible 


Inspection 


Inspection 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface. 
1. Using the screen reader navigate to each heading element on the software. 


2. Check that it provides enough description about its content and surrounding 
text. 


3. Navigate to each form field which has label element. 

4. Check that this label described the usage of the form field. 
Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.4.6 
Headings and Labels 
Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 

1. Navigate through all the interactive elements of the software. 


2. Check if currently selected element is highlighted with surrounding border 
and different colour so that user can easily identify the active element on 
the screen. 


Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.4.7 Focus 
Visible. 


11.2.5 Input modalities 
11.2.5.1 Pointer gestures 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface. 
1. Check for any functionality that can be triggered by: 
a. Path-based gestures (see description of path-based gestures below) OR. 
b. Multipoint gestures (see description of multipoint gestures below). 


2. For each functionality that can be triggered by path-based gestures or 
multipoint gestures, verify that the functionality can also be operated 
with the use of single-pointer actions that are not path-based (such as 
taps, double taps, long presses, clicks, click and holds, double clicks, or 
dragging actions that are not path-based). 


3. Exceptions exist if the functionality is essential. 


Check that the software does not fail ‘Software success criterion for Pointer 
gestures’ given under clause 11.2.5.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


11.2.5.2 Pointer cancellation 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 
1. Identify all controls in the software with actions that are irreversible. 


2. If that control (with an irreversible action) can be triggered by a 
single-pointer touch, make sure that at least one of the following is true: 
a. No Down-event — The action triggers on the up event. (The action is 

not triggered on the down event). 

b. Abort/undo — The action triggers a confirmation dialogue, giving the 
user an option to abort/undo. 

c. Up reversal — The action that would be triggered on the down event 
(for example, placing your finger on the screen) can be reversed by 
releasing the pointer outside the trigger area (for example, sliding the 
finger off the control and then lifting it off the screen). 

d. Essential — Completing the function on the down-event is essential. 


Check that the software does not fail ‘Software success criterion for pointer 
cancellation’ given under clause 11.2.5.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


11.2.5.3 Label in name 


58 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


11.2.5.3.1 Label in name 
(open functionality) 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is non-web software and it is open for assistive technologies. 
1. Identify all controls in the software that have a visible text label. 
2. Using screen reader, put focus on the control. 

a. Ensure the entire onscreen visible text label is EITHER: 

b. An exact match to the label announced by screen reader OR 


3. Is contained within the label announced by screen reader (in the same 
order presented visually). 


Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.5.3 Label 
in Name 


11.2.5.3.2 Label in name 
(closed functionality) 


Informative only 
and contains no 
requirements 
requiring test 


Clause 11.2.5.3.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1) is informative only and contains no 
requirements requiring test. 


11.2.5.4 Motion actuation 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 
1. Identify any functionality that can be triggered by: 
a. Device motion (such as shaking or tilting the device) OR 
b. User motion detected by a device. 


2. For each functionality that can be triggered by motion actuation verify that 
both of the following are true: 


a. Motion actuation can be disabled AND 
b. The functionality can be operated without using motion. 


Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 2.5.4 Motion 
Actuation 


11.3 Understable 


11.3.1 Readable 


11.3.1.1 Language of software 


11.3.1.1.1 Language of software 
(open functionality) 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is non-web software and it is open for assistive technologies. 
1. Turn on the screen reader. 


2. Check if screen reader reads the user interface language with correct voice 
and accent. If multiple languages are used on any screen then check that 
screen reader switches to the correct voice and able to read the text. 

3. It must detect and read all the available Indian languages in the system. 


Check that the software does not fail ‘Software success criterion for Language of 
software:’ given in clause 11.3.1.1.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


11.3.1.1.2 Language of software 
(closed functionality) 


Testing 


Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface and the 
user interface is closed to assistive technologies for screen reading. The speech 
output is provided as non-visual access to closed functionality. The speech output 
is not proper names, technical terms, words of indeterminate. language, and 
words or phrases that have become part of the vernacular of the immediately 
surrounding text. The content is not generated externally and is under the control 
of the ICT vendor. The displayed languages can be selected using non-visual 
access. The user has not selected a speech language that is different from the 
language of the displayed. 


1. Check that the speech output is in the same human language of the 
displayed content provided. 


11.3.1.2 Void 


11.3.2 Predictable 


59 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


11.3.2.1 On focus 


Inspection 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 
1. Turn on the screen reader 
2. Swipe or tab through the screen from top to bottom 


3. Check that no unexpected change of context as any of the components 
receive focus. 

4. Under change of context we can consider focus moving to different area or 
opening up a new modal dialog. 


Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.2.1 On 
Focus. 


11.3.2.2 On input 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 
1. Turn on the screen reader 


2. Interact with any of the input control on the screen, for example, entering 
text in a input box, opening a dropdown. 

3. Check that no unexpected change of context as you interact with any 
control. 

4. Under change of context we can consider focus moving to different area or 
opening up a new modal dialog. 


Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.2.2 On 
Input. 


11.3.3 Input assistance 


11.3.3.1 Error identification 


11.3.3.1.1 Error identification 
(open functionality) 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT is non-web software which is open for assistive technologies 
and there is presence of form element. 


1. Identify any forms on a software. 


2. Complete every form control, deliberately entering user input that falls 
outside the required format or values or leaving required fields blank and 
submit the form. 

3. Ifan input error is detected, verify that BOTH of the following are true: 

a. The form control that is in error is identified in text. Options include: 
i. Visible text on screen. 
ii. Alternative text on an image using screen reader, listen to the 
alternative text). 


b. Text that is programmatically associated with the control (using screen 
reader, swipe to the control and ensure that the error message is read 
along with the control type and label). 

Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.3.1 Error 
Identification 


11.3.3.1.2 Error Identification 
(closed functionality) 


Testing 


Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface and the 
user interface is closed to assistive technologies for screen reading. Speech 
output is provided as non-visual access to closed functionality and when an input 
error is automatically detected. 


1. Check that speech output identifies the item that is in error. 

2. Check that the speech output describes the item that is in error. 

3. Check that the speech output is provided in the same Indian language 
chosen by user. 


Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.3.1 Error 
Identification 


60 


11.3.3.2 Labels or instructions 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


(open functionality) 


there is presence of form element. 
1. Visually identify each form control on the software. 
2. Verify that each form control has a label that is always visible. 
3. Required fields are identified visually and programmatically or via error 
text 
4. Any input that requires specific data or format is provided for all users and 
not only to users without disabilities 
Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.3.2 Labels 
or Instructions”. 
11.3.3.3 Error suggestion Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides an user interface and 
there is presence of form element. 
1. Identify any forms on a software. 
2. Complete every form control, deliberately entering user input that falls 
outside the required format or values and submit the form. 
3. If an input error is automatically detected, verify that the error message 
gives a suggestion about how to fix it. 
4. Using screen reader, ensure each error message with the suggestion can be 
read properly. 
5. *Ensure that this information is available in the Indian language chosen by 
the user. 
Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 3.3.3 Error 
Suggestion. 

11.3.3.4 Error prevention Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 

(legal, financial, data) 1. Identify any screen/module where a user action can cause an important 
legal, financial, test/exam or unrecoverable/unchangeable user data 
transaction to occur. 

2. Confirm that AT LEAST ONE of the following is true: 
a. Reversible: Instructions are provided explaining how to reverse or 
cancel the transaction. 
b. Verified: Data entered by the user is provided for review before final 
submission, and the user is able to make changes to this data. 
c. Confirmed: A mechanism (such as a checkbox) is provided for the user 
to confirm the transaction. 
Check that the software does not fail ‘Software success criterion for Error 
prevention (legal, financial, data)’ given in clause 11.3.3.4 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 

11.4 Robust 

11.4.1 Compatible 

11.4.1.1 Parsing 

11.4.1.1.1 Parsing Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software that provides a user interface and it 


supports at least one assistive technology. 

1. Using the evaluation tool check the markup is having proper start and end 
tags, it is nested according to its specifications and it is not having any 
duplicate ids. 

Check that the software does not fail ‘Software success criterion for Parsing’ 
given in clause 11.4.1.1.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


11.4.1.1.2 Parsing 
(closed functionality) 


Contains no 
requirements 
requiring test 


Clause 11.4.1.1.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1) contains no requirements requiring test. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


61 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


For Requirements, Type of Inspection, Test Procedure and Success Criteria 
refer to respective clauses of Assessment 
IS 17802 (Part 1) 
11.4.1.2 Name, role, value 
11.4.1.2.1 Name, role, value Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software and it is open for assistive technologies. 
(open functionality) 1. Using screen reader, navigate through each user interface component. 

2. Make sure the screen reader correctly conveys (see expectations detailed 
below) the following information about each component: 

a. Its role: For example, button, link, switch, picker, slider, stepper, switch, 
text field, alert, tab, etc. 

b. Its name: For example, a label for a form control or button, the name of 
the tab, the label of a switch, etc. 

3. If applicable, its value or state: for example, on/off, selected, dimmed, 
adjustable, expanded/collapsed, slider’s value, textfield’s value, “tab _ of _”, 
etc. 

Check that the software does not fail ‘Software success criterion for Name, role, 
value’ given in clause 11.4.1.2.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 
11.4.1.2.2 Name, role, value Contains Clause 11.4.1.2.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1) contains no testable requirements. 
(closed functionality) no testable 
requirements 
11.4.1.3 Status messages 
11.4.1.3.1 Status messages Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software and it is open for assistive technologies. 
(open functionality) 1. Identify any status messages that can appear on the software. Status 
messages are: 
a. Defined as a message that provides information to the user on the 
success or results of an action (confirmation message, updated shopping 
cart, etc), on the waiting state of an application, on the progress of a 
process, or on the existence of errors. 
b. Added to the screen but do not receive focus. 

2. Using screen reader, trigger each status message and confirm that the 
newly added status message is automatically announced by the screen 
reader without moving focus to the message. 

Check that the software does not fail WCAG 2.1 Success Criterion 4.1.3 Status 
Messages. 

11.4.1.3.2 Status messages No testable 

(closed functionality) requirements 


11.5 Interoperability with assistive technology 


11.5.1 Closed functionality Contains If device or software is a closed functionality. 
no testable 1. Check that the closed functionality conforms to clause 5.1 of IS 17802 
requirements (Part 1). 
2. Where the closed functionality of software conforms to clause 5.1 (Closed 
functionality) of IS 17802 (Part 1), it shall not be required to conform with 
clause 11.5.2 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 
11.5.2 Accessibility services 
11.5.2.1 Platform accessibility Inspection Check that the ICT is platform software. 
service support for software that 1. Check that the platform software documentation includes information 
provides a user interface about platform services that may be used by software that provides a user 
interface to interoperate with assistive technology. 
11.5.2.2 Platform accessibility Inspection Check that the ICT is platform software. 


service support for assistive 
technologies 


1. Check that the platform software documentation includes information 
about platform accessibility services that enables assistive technology to 
interoperate with software that provides a user interface running on the 
platform software. 


62 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


11.5.2.3 Use of accessibility Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 
services 1. Check that the software uses the applicable documented platform 
accessibility services. 


2. Check that the software can meet the applicable requirements mentioned 
in clause 11.5.2.5 to 11.5.2.17 of IS 17802 (Part 1) whilst using the 
documented platform accessibility services. 

3. Check that the software can meet requirements mentioned in clause 
11.5.2.5 to 11.5.2.17 of IS 17802 (Part 1) whilst using the documented 
platform accessibility services and other documented services. 


11.5.2.4 Assistive technology Inspection Check that the ICT is an assistive technology. 


1. Check that the assistive technology uses the documented platform 
accessibility services. 


11.5.2.5 Object information Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. 
1. Using screen reader, navigate through each user interface component. 


2. Make sure the screen reader correctly conveys (see expectations detailed 
below) the following information about each component: 


a. Its role: For example, button, link, switch, picker, slider, stepper, switch, 
text field, alert, tab, etc. 


b. Its name: For xample, a label for a form control or button, the name of 
the tab, the label of a switch, etc. 


3. If applicable, its value or state: For example, on/off, selected, dimmed, 
adjustable, expanded/collapsed, slider’s value, textfield’s value, “tab _ of _”, 


etc. 
11.5.2.6 Row, column, and Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If user 
headers interface of software has a data table. 


1. Using assistive technologies like screen reader navigate to the data table in 
which the tests are to be performed. 


2. Check that each cell’s row is programmatically determinable by assistive 
technologies. 

3. Check that each cell’s column is programmatically determinable by 
assistive technologies. 

4. Check that each cell’s row header, if the row header exists, is 
programmatically determinable by assistive technologies. 


5. Check that each cell’s column header, if the column header exists, is 
programmatically determinable by assistive technologies. 


11.5.2.7 Values Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If user 
interface of software has any element with value. 


1. Using assistive technologies like screen reader navigate to a user interface 
element that can have a value. 


2. Check that the current value is programmatically determinable by assistive 
technologies. 


3. Ifthe user interface element conveys information about a range of values, 
check that the minimum value is programmatically determinable by 
assistive technologies. 


4. Ifthe user interface element conveys information about a range of values, 
check that the maximum value is programmatically determinable by 
assistive technologies. 


63 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


11.5.2.8 Label relationships Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If user 
interface of software has label. 


1. Obtain the information of each user interface element using assistive 
technologies like screen reader. 


2. Check that the user interface element’s information includes the relationship 
with the user interface element that is its label, if the current user interface 
element has a label, and that this relationship is programmatically 
determinable by assistive technologies. 


3. Check that the user interface element’s information includes the relationship 
with the user interface element that it is labelling, if the current user 
interface element is a label, and that this relationship is programmatically 
determinable by assistive technologies. 


11.5.2.9 Parent-child Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If user 
relationships interface of software has some elements which are parent/child of another user 
interface element. 


1. For user interface elements that have a parent, check that the user interface 
element’s information includes the relationship with the user interface 
element that is its parent. 


2. Check that the user interface elements that are parents of the user interface 
element selected in check include the relationship with the user interface 
elements that are its children in their information, and that this relationship 
is programmatically determinable by assistive technologies like screen 
reader. 


3. For user interface elements that are a parent of other user interface 
elements, check that the user interface element’s information includes 
the relationship with the user interface elements that are its children, 
and that this relationship is programmatically determinable by assistive 
technologies. 


4. Check that the user interface elements that are a child of the user interface 
element selected in check include the relationship with the user interface 
elements that are its parents in their information, and that this relationship 
is programmatically determinable by assistive technologies. 


11.5.2.10 Text Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If user 
interface of software has text rendered on the screen. 


1. Using the assistive technologies like screen reader check the text content is 
programmatically determinable. 


2. Check that all the attributes including its boundary are determinable by 
assistive technologies. 


11.5.2.11 List of available Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If user 
actions interface of software has any executable elements. 


1. Using the assistive technologies like screen reader check that the user 
interface element’s information includes the* list of actions that can be 


executed. 
2. Check that this list is programmatically determinable by assistive 
technologies. 
11.5.2.12 Execution of available Inspection and If user interface of software has executable elements and security requirement of 
actions Testing that software permits the assistive technologies to execute the action. 


1. Check that the user interface element’s information includes the list of 
actions that can be executed by assistive technologies according to clause 
11.5.2.11 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


2. Check that all the actions in the list can successfully be executed by 
assistive technologies like screen reader. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


64 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


11.5.2.13 Tracking of focus and Inspection and If user interface of software has text editing elements. 


selection attributes Testing 1. Check that the user interface element’s information includes mechanisms 


to track focus, text insertion point and selection attributes. 


2. Check that this information is programmatically determinable by assistive 
technologies. 

3. Activate those tracking mechanisms using assistive technologies like 
screen reader. 

4. As a user, use the text editing functionality in the evaluated software 
product. 


5. Check that the tracking of focus, text insertion points and selection 
attributes work properly with assistive technologies. 


11.5.2.14 Modification of focus Testing Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If 
and selection attributes software has user interface elements that can receive focus or that enable text 
editing. If security requirements permit platform software to programmatically 
modify focus, text insertion point and selection attributes of user interface. 


1. For user interface elements that can receive focus and where the focus can 
be modified by a user without the use of assistive technology, check that 
the focus can be programmatically modified by assistive technologies. 


2. For user interface elements that enable text editing by a user without the 
use of assistive technology, check that the position of the text insertion 
point can be programmatically modified by assistive technologies like 
screen reader. 

3. For user interface elements that enable text editing, check that the selection 
attributes can be programmatically modified by assistive technologies 
where they can be modified by user without the use of assistive technology. 


11.5.2.15 Change notification Inspection and Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If 
Testing software has user interface. 


1. Using assistive technologies like screen reader activate notifications of 
changes in the user interface elements. 


2. Check that notifications about changes in object information (role, state, 
boundary, name and description) are sent to assistive technologies, if this 
information changes in the software user interface. 


3. Check that notifications about changes in row, column and headers of data 
tables are sent to assistive technologies, if this information changes in the 
software. 


4. Check that notifications about changes in values (current value, minimum 
value and maximum value) are sent, if this information changes in the 
software. 


5. Check that notifications about changes in label relationships are sent to 
assistive technologies, if this information changes in the software. 


6. Check that notifications about changes in parent-child relationships are 
sent to assistive technologies, if this information changes in the software. 


7. Check notifications about changes in text (text contents, text attributes 
and the boundary of text rendered to the screen) are sent to assistive 
technologies, if this information changes in the software. 


8. Check that notifications about changes in the list of available actions are 
sent to assistive technologies, if this information changes in the software. 


9. Check that notifications about changes in focus, text insertion point and 
selection attributes are sent to assistive technologies, if this information 
changes in the software. 


65 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (g) ( Continued) 


For Requirements, 
refer to respective clauses of 
IS 17802 (Part 1) 


Type of 
Assessment 


Inspection, Test Procedure and Success Criteria 


11.5.2.16 Modifications of states 
and properties 


Testing 


Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If user 
interface of software has modifiable elements and security requirement of the 
software permits the assistive technologies to change the state or property of an 
element. 


1. Activate the assistive technology like screen reader and check that the 
state of user interface elements, whose state can be modified by a user 
without the use of assistive technology, can be programmatically modified 
by assistive technologies. 

2. Check the properties of user interface elements, whose properties can 


be modified by a user without the use of assistive technologies, can be 
programmatically modified by assistive technologies. 


11.5.2.17 Modifications of 
values and text 


Testing 


Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If user 
interface of software has text modification elements and security requirement of 
the software permits the assistive technologies to change the text or value of an 
element. 


1. Activate the assistive technology like screen reader and check that the 
values of user interface elements, whose values can be modified by a 
user without the use of assistive technology, can be modified by assistive 
technologies using the input methods of the platform. 


11.6 Documented accessibility usage 


11.6.1 User control of 
accessibility features 


11.6.2 No disruption of 
accessibility features 


Testing 


Testing 


Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If 
software documentation has any feature defined as accessibility feature. 
1. Check that sufficient modes of operation exists where user control over 
platform features, that are defined in the platform documentation as 
accessibility features intended for users, is possible. 


Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If 
software documentation has any feature defined as accessibility feature. 


1. Check if software that provides a user interface disrupts normal operation 
of platform accessibility features. 


2. Check if the disruption was specifically requested or confirmed by the user. 


11.7 User preferences 


Inspection and 
Testing 


If software which provides user interface has the settings for language, colour, 
contrast, font type, font size, or focus cursor, that correspond to platform settings. 
The software is not designed to be isolated from its underlying platforms. 


1. Check that the software provides a mode of operation that follows the 
platform settings. 


11.8 Authoring tools 


11.8.1 Content technology 


11.8.2 Accessible content 
creation 


Inspection and 
Testing 


Inspection and 
Testing 


Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If 
software is an authoring tool and output format of the authoring tool supports 
information required for accessibility. 

1. Check if the authoring tool conforms to clauses 11.8.2 to 11.8.5 to the 


extent that information required for accessibility is supported by the 
format used for the output of the authoring tool. 


Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If 
software is an authoring tool. 


1. Check if the authoring tool has features that enable and guide the 
production of content that conforms to Clauses 9 (Web) and 10 (non-web 
documents) of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


66 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (g) ( Concluded) 


11.8.3 Preservation of Inspection If software is an authoring tool and it supports restructuring transformations or 
accessibility information in re-coding transformations. 
transformations 1. Fora restructuring transformation, check if the accessibility information is 


preserved in the output. 

2. Fora restructuring transformation, check if the content technology supports 
accessibility information for the restructured form of the information. 

3. For a re-coding transformation, check if the accessibility information is 
preserved in the output. 


4. For a re-coding transformation, check if the accessibility information is 
supported by the technology of the re-coded output. 


11.8.4 Repair assistance Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software and is an authoring tool. The accessibility 
checking functionality of the authoring tool can detect that content which does 
not meet a requirement of clauses 9 (Web) or 10 (Non-web documents) of 
IS 17802 (Part 1) as applicable. 


1. The authoring tool provides repair suggestions when content does not meet 
requirement of clauses 9 or 10 (as applicable) of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


11.8.5 Templates Inspection Check that the ICT is non-web software which provides a user interface. If 
software is an authoring tool and it provides the template for content creation. 


1. Check that the authoring tool provides at least one template that supports 
the creation of content that conforms to requirements of clause 9 
(Web content) or clause 10 (Documents) of IS 17802 (Part 1) as applicable. 


2. Check that at least one template identified in step 1 is available and is 
identified as conforming to requirements of clauses 9 or 10 of IS 17802 
(Part 1) (as applicable). 


67 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


12.1 Product documentation 


Table 1 (h) Documentation and Support Services 


( Clause 6.6 ) 


12.1.1 Accessibility and 
compatibility features 


Inspection 


Check that the ICT product documentation is supplied with ICT, separately or 
integrated within the ICT. 


1. Check that it lists and explains adequately how to use the accessibility and 
compatibility features of the ICT Product. 


2. *Check whether the product documentation is in the same Indian language 
chosen by the user. 


12.1.2 Accessible documentation Inspection Check that the product ICT documentation is provided in electronic format. 

1. Check that it is in Web format that conforms to clause 9 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 

2. Check that it is anon-Web format that conforms to clause 10 of IS 17802 (Part 1). 

3. Check that it is offered in any one of the formats given in 2 and 3 above. 

4. *Check whether the electronic format of the documentation is in the same 
Indian language chosen by the user. 

12.2 Support Services 

12.2.1 General No test Clauses 12.2.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1) is informative and contains no requirements 
requiring test. 

12.2.2 Information on Inspection Check that the support services are provided. 

accessibility and compatibility 1. Check that the support services provide information on the accessibility and 

features compatibility features that are included in the product documentation. 

2. Check that support services provide information contained in the product 
documentation and it explains adequately how to use the accessibility and 
compatibility features of the ICT. 

12.2.3 Effective communication Inspection Check that the ICT support services are provided. 


12.2.4 Accessible documentation 


Inspection 


1. Check that the ICT support services accommodate the communication needs of 
individuals with disabilities either directly or through a referral point. 


Check that the documentation is provided by ICT support services. 


1. Check that the documentation provided by the ICT support services in electronic 
format conform to the requirements of clauses 9 or 10 of IS 17802 (Part 1) as 
appropriate. 

2. *Check that the documentation in other formats (printed or otherwise) are 
accessible. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


68 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Table 1 (i) ICT Providing Relay or Emergency Service Access 
( Clause 6.6 ) 


13.1 Relay service requirements 


13.1.1 General No test Clause 13.1.1 of IS 17802 (Part 1) is informative and contains no requirements 
requiring test 


13.1.2 Text relay services Inspection Check that the service is a text relay service. 


1. Check that the service enables text users and speech users to interact by 
providing conversion between the two modes of communication. 


2. *Check that the text relay service supports Indian language users-text users in 
a given Indian language and speech users in the same language and between 
one Indian language text and speech users to another Indian language or 
English language users. 


13.1.3 Sign relay services Inspection Check that the service is a sign relay service. 


1. Check that the service enables sign language users and speech users to interact 
by providing conversion between the two modes of communication. 

2. Check that the sign language relay services provide two-way translation 
between sign language users and speech users. 


3. *Check that the sign language users and various Indian language speech users 
interact between the two modes of communication. 


13.1.4 Lip-reading relay Inspection Check that the service is a lip-reading relay service. 


services 1. Check that the service enables lip-readers and voice telephone users to interact 
by providing conversion between the two modes of communication. 


2. *Check that translation between spoken word to Indian Sign language is 


facilitated. 

13.1.5 Captioned telephony Inspection Check that the service is a captioned relay service. 

SETVICES 1. Check that the service assists a deaf or hard of hearing user in a spoken 
dialogue by providing text captions, translating the incoming part of the 
conversation. 

13.1.6 Speech to speech relay Inspection Check that the service is a speech relay service. 

SOEVACES 1. Check that the service enables telephone users who are speech impaired, or 
have limited cognitive, language and learning abilities, to communicate by 
providing assistance between them. 

13.2 Access to relay services Inspection Check that the ICT system supports two-way communication. 


1. Check that a set of relay services for two-way communication is specified. 


2. Check that the system does not prevent access to those relay services 
for incoming and outgoing calls, relating to voice, RTT, or video, either 
individually or in combinations supported by both the relay service and the 
ICT system. 


13.3 Access to emergency Inspection Check that the ICT system supports two-way communication. 


services 1. Check that a set of emergency relay services for two-way communication is 


specified. 


2. Check that the system does not prevent access to those emergency services 
for outgoing and incoming calls, relating to voice, RTT, or video, either 
individually or in combinations supported by both the emergency service and 
the ICT system. 


* These procedures are applicable in respect of informative requirements only and, as such, are not part of normative requirements. These may 
be included based on user requirement in applicable cases. 


69 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


7 ACCESSIBILITY 
REPORT 


CONFORMANCE 


A supplier’s declaration of conformity can be 
substantiated by supporting documentation for which 
the supplier is responsible. Anyone should be able 
to repeat the attestation and arrive at the same result 
using this information. An example is Voluntary 
Product Accessibility Template (VPAT), specified by 
the Information Technology Industry Council (ITI) for 
supplier’s declaration of their products for accessibility 
- one that is widely used by industry and users in many 
countries. In declaration of conformance, the ACR can 
be used as reference that is mentioned in the Annex B 
(Informative). 


70 


8 TESTING AND TOOLS 


Testing for conformity in respect of ICT accessibility 
requires good understanding of the needs of PwDs and 
the requirements spelt out in Part | of this standard. 
While it is necessary and possible for testing for full 
compliance of a sub-system based on ‘determinants of 
compliance’ and ‘success criteria’ specified in Table1, it 
may be too arduous to test all purely by manual testing. 
Hence, many fully automated and semi-automatic tools 
have become available in the market bothopen source 
and proprietary or commercial types. Again, these can 
be limited function types or more comprehensive for 
various functions. Most popular tools are in respect of 
websites and mobile apps. Automated testing tools are 
also valuable for software developers at various stages 
of the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC). In no 
case, test tools are to be fully relied upon and they must 
be complemented by manual testing, especially from 
people with disabilities. 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


ANNEX A 


( Informative ) 
( Clause 4.1.4) 


A-1 MAPPING OF REAL-WORLD ICT 
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES WITH 
REQUIREMENT CLAUSES 


This annexure will guide the user to understand the 
different categories of ICT products and services around 
us. A few real-world examples are also provided. In 
the Table 2, the ICT categories are mapped with their 
applicable clauses of IS 17802 (Part 1). 


NOTES 


1 It is difficult to list all categories of ICT products and 
services; however, top priority categories are mentioned along 


2 Respective clauses from the IS 17802 (Part 1) are mapped 
against the specific ICT category; however, it is recommended 
that all the clauses and their requirements are referred to for 
better results. 

3 The reader may refer to the functional performance 
statements specified in clause 4 of IS 17802 (Part 1) before 
designing or supplying or procuring any ICT product and 
service. This will help to understand the different requirements 
of different disabilities and operating conditions. 


with the suitable examples. 


Table 2 Representative Real-World ICT Products and Services with Requirement Clauses 


( Clause A-1 ) 


Computer hardware systems and Desktop computers/all-in-one PC/workstation/notebooks/ptops/tablets/ 5, 8, 11 
peripherals printers/inputting systems/biometric access systems/networking 
devices/ storage 
Computer/mobile Operating Windows, Inux, mac, android, iOS 5, 11 
systems 
Application software Security and protective software including antivirus, office suite software, 5,11 
DBMS, accounting package, browser 
Self-service terminals Payment terminals (swipe machines), automated teller machines (ATM), 5, 8, 11 
ticketing machines, check-in machines, interactive self-service terminals 
providing information 
Consumer terminal equipment Set-top-boxes, interactive TV’s, smart home solutions, assisted living 5, 8, 11 
with interactive computing solutions 
capability 
Electronic ticketing services Electronic tickets (for example, metro cards/tokens/machines) 5, 8, 11 
Non web documents E-books, word processing documents, spreadsheets, presentations, 5,10 
PDFs, e-mails 
Navigational services Online maps/mapping services 5,11 
Web based consumer services E-commerce, net banking and other web-based banking services, payment 5,6,7,9, 11, 12 
gateways, e-governance, voice and text chat services, video conferencing, 

e-learning 
Mobile [smart phone] app-based Mobile banking apps, payment solutions, cab aggregators, food delivery 5, 8,9, 11 
consumer services apps, e-commerce, instant messaging, video conferencing, OTT apps 
Support services Helpdesk systems, help documentation 5,12 
Multimedia [audio/video] T.V. programs, movies, documentaries, web series, OTT (Over-The-Top) 5,7 

platforms 
Real-time communication Real-time transcript [RTT] calls 5,6 
services 
Emergency or relay services Text relay services, sign relay services, speech to speech relay services 5,13 


71 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


GUIDANCE DOCUMENT FOR ACCESSIBILITY CONFORMITY REPORT 


This Annexe can be used by stakeholders to assess and 
confirm, prima facie, the fulfilment of the accessible 
functionalities. 


B-1 PROCEDURE FOR PREPARING THE ACR 


B-1.1 Identify the product/service of interest. 


B-1.2 Based on the product category, identify the 
clauses to be complied with. Annexure | can be used as 
a guidance to do the same. 


B-1.3 Identify the user’s accesSsibility requirement. 


B-1.4 Map the product accessibility and functional 
requirements with the accessibility clauses in the 
Standard. 


B-1.5 Suppliers to declare the compliance and 
compliance level of their products to the Standard, as 
per applicable clauses, in a standardized format. 


ANNEX B 
( Informative ) 
( Clause 7 ) 
B-2 ACCESSIBILITY CONFORMANCE 
REPORT (ACR) 


An ACR can be prepared by evaluating and recording 
the conformance against each requirement by following 
the Inspection, Test Procedure and Success criteria 
steps mentioned in the Table 1. 


The conformance report can be presented in the format 
given in Table 3(a) and in specific to the clause 5.10 
Indian Language, the format under Table 3(b) may be 
preferred. 


Table 3 (a): Sample Template for Filling ACR 
( Clause B-2 ) 


Requirement Conformance Remarks 


Table 3 (b) Detailed Criteria for Clause 5.10 
( Clause B-2 ) 


Languages UNICODE Display Input Support, Auditory Output Voice Command 
Supported Font 

Language 1 

Language 2 

Language 3 


NOTE — For example, ITI VPAT®, which is a leading global reporting format can be used for creating the ACR. It is a self-disclosing 
document produced by the vendor which details each aspect of the Standards requirements and how the product supports each criterion. 


The most appropriate version “Accessibility requirements suitable for public procurement of ICT products and services in Europe” 
is VPAT 2.4 EU: EN 301 549 template may be used as reference in preparing the ACR to any ICT. (Voluntary Product Accessibility 
Template® (VPAT®) EN 301 549 Edition Version 2.4 which can be downloaded from https://www.itic.org/dotAsset/22d0c5ca-e78a- 


4b5d-bea3-3 fad3 13ae924.doc). 


The terms used in the Conformance Level information as per VPAT® are: 


a) Supports — The functionality of the product has at least one method that meets the criterion without known defects or meets with 


equivalent facilitation. 


b) Partially Supports — Some functionality of the product does not meet the criterion. 


c) Does Not Support — The majority of product functionality does not meet the criterion. 


d) Not Applicable — The criterion is not relevant to the product. 


e) Not Evaluated — The product has not been evaluated against the criterion. This can be used only in WCAG Level AAA criteria. 


72 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Active Assisted Living Sectional Committee, LITD 35 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity 
In Personal Capacity 


Centre for Accessibility in Built Environment 
Foundation, New Delhi 


Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, 
Pune 


ERNET India, New Delhi 
G3ict 


Kannur University, Department of Information 
Technology, Kannur 


Price water house Coopers Private Limited, 
Gurugram 


Seconded European Standardization Expert for India 
(SESEI), New Delhi 


Secure Meters Limited, Gurugram 


Standardization Testing and Quality Certification 
(STQC) 


Narnix Technolabs Private Limited, New Delhi 
In Personal Capacity 

In Personal Capacity 

Other Contributors (CDAC) 


BIS Director General 


Representative(s) 


PROF SUPTENDRANATH SARBADHIKARI (Chairman) 
SHRI SRINIVASAN RAMAKRISHNAN 


SHRI SUBHASH CHANDRA VASHISHTH 


Dr N. SUBRAMANIAN 
Ms LENALI SINGH (Alternate I) 
MR Sat DARSHAN (Alternate II) 


NAVEEN CHOUDHARY 


DR NIRMITA NARASIMHAN 


DR N. S. SREEKANTH 
MR MOHAMMED ASIF IQBAL 
SHRI DINESH CHAND SHARMA 


SHRI PUNEET KHURANA 
SHRI ANIL Menta (Alternate 1) 
Ms Asmita GoYaL (Alternate II) 


SHRI ANKIT JAIN 
SHRI A. CHAKRAVARTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI KISHOR N. NARANG 
Ms ABHA KHETARPAL 
SHRI SOMESHWAR SINGH 


MR SHUBANSHU GUPTA 
Ms NOBBY VARGHESE (Alternate) 


Ms REENA GARG, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (ELECTRONICS AND IT) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI BHANU KRISHNADEV P. 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (ELECTRONICS AND IT), BIS 


73 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


Panel involved in the Finalization-LITD 35/P1 Accessibility Standards for ICT Products and Services 


Organization 


Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, 
Pune 


Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, 
Pune 


Barrier Break Solutions Private Limited, Mumbai 
DAISY Consortium, New Delhi 

Deque Software Private Limited, Hyderabad 
G3ict 

Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Manufacturers Association for Information 
Technology, New Delhi 


PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited, Gurugram 


Seconded European Standardization Expert for India 
(SESEI), New Delhi 


Standardization Testing and Quality Certification 
(STQC) 


Tata Consultancy Services Limited, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity 


74 


Representative(s) 
Dr N. SUBRAMANIAN (Convener) 
Ms LENALI SINGH 


Ms SHILPI KAPOOR 

MR DIPENDRA MANOCHA 
Ms SATYA JAYA APARNA PASI 
DR NIRMITA NARASIMHAN 
PROF GAURAV RAHEJA 


MR GEORGE PAUL 
MR RIsHI VERMA (Alternate I) 
Ms NIKHILA SALAKA (Alternate II) 


SHRI MOHAMMED ASIF IQBAL 


SHRI DINESH CHAND SHARMA 
SHRI ANKIT JAIN 


SHRI CHARUDATTA JADHAV 


SHRI SRINIVASAN RAMAKRISHNAN 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


[b.1.] Guidelines for Indian Government Apps and Websites, v2.0, Feb, 2019, NIC, MeitY, GOI; Adopted 
by Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances (DARPG), Ministry of Personnel, 
Public Grievances and Pension, Gol, ISBN-978-81-909457-0-7 


[b.2.] GIGW Compliance and Certification Handbook, https://cdnbbsr.s3 waas. gov.in/ 
s3c92a10324374fac68 17 19d63979d00fe/uploads/2020/03/20200326100.pdf 


[b.3.] ISO/IEC Guide 60 : 2004, Conformity assessment — Code of good practice 


[b.4.] ISO/IEC 17050-1:2010, Conformity assessment — Supplier’s declaration of conformity — Part 1: 
General requirements 


[b.5.] ISO/IEC 17050-2:2004, Conformity assessment — Supplier’s declaration of conformity — Part 2: 
Supporting documentation 


[b.6.] ISO/IEC Guide 23:1982, Methods of indicating conformity with standards for third-party certification 
systems 


[b.7.] ISO/IEC Guide 28:2004, Conformity assessment — Guidance on a third-party certification system 
for products 


[b.8.] ISO/IEC 17030:2009, Conformity assessment — General requirements for third-party marks of 
conformity 


[b.9.] ISO/IEC 17011:2004, Conformity assessment — General requirements for accreditation bodies 
accrediting conformity 


[b.10.] ISO/IEC Guide 68:2002, Arrangements for the recognition and acceptance of conformity assessment 
results 


[b.11.] W3C, Website Accessibility Conformance Evaluation Methodology (WCAG-EM) 1.0, 2014 
[b.12.] W3C, Understanding Conformance _ Understanding WCAG 2.0 
[b.13.] W3C, WCAGZ2ICT Task Force 


[b.14.] Section 508, Applicability and Conformance, https://www.section508.gov/develop/applicability- 
conformance/ 


[b.15.] Section 508, Test for Accessibility, https://www.section508.gov/test/ 


[b.16.] Mandate M 376: new software accessibility requirements, Loic Martineza*, Michael Plukeb, Procedia 
Computer Science 27 (2014) 271 — 280, Elsevier, www.sciencedirect.com 


[b.17.] TR 101 550 V1.1.1 (2014-02), Documents relevant to EN 301 549 “Accessibility requirements 
suitable for public procurement of ICT products and services in Europe” 


[b.18.] TR 101551 V1.1.1 (2014-02), Guidelines on the use of accessibility award criteria suitable for public 
procurement of ICT products and services in Europe 


[b.19.] Website Accessibility Conformance Evaluation Methodology (WCAG-EM) 1.0, W3, 
http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG-EM/ 


[b.20.] Essential Components of Web Accessibility, https://www.w3.org/WAI/fundamentals/components/ 
[b.21.] How People with Disabilities Use the Web, https://www.w3.org/WAI/people-use-web/ 


[b.22.] Easy Checks — A First Review of Web Accessibility, https://www.w3.org/WA\I/test-evaluate/ 
preliminary/ 


[b.23.] Involving Users in Evaluating Web Accessibility, https://www.w3.org/WAI/test-evaluate/involving- 
users/ 


[b.24.] Selecting Web Accessibility Evaluation Tools, https://www.w3.org/WA\I/test-evaluate/tools/selecting/ 


75 


IS 17802 (Part 2) : 2022 


[b.25.] Web Accessibility Evaluation Tools List, https://www.w3.org/WAI/ER/tools/ 


[b.26.] Using Combined Expertise to Evaluate Web Accessibility, https://www.w3.org/WAI/test-evaluate/ 
combined-expertise/ 


[b.27.] Section 508.gov: Acquisition, Request Accessibility Information from Vendors & Contractors, 
https://www.section508.gov/buy/request-accessibility-information/#:~:text=Accessibility%20 
Conformance%20Report%20%28ACR%29%20-%20A%20written%20ACR,be%20 
complete%2C%20and%20submitted%20according%20to%20the%o2 instructions. 


[b.28.] Voluntary Product Accessibility Template® (VPAT®) EN 301 549 Edition V2.4 


https://www.itic.org/policy/accessibility/vpat 


76 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 35 (18478). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


