**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10236-15 (1986) : Procedure for basic climatic and 
durability test for optical instruments. Part 15: Drop test 
[PGD 22: Educational Instruments and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



l$:1023«(Part15)'' 19B6 

( Reaffirmed 1998) 

Indian Standard 

PROCEDURE FOR 
BASIC CLIMATIC AND DURABILITY 
TESTS FOR OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS 

PART 15 DROP TEST 



UDC 6S17:6:^0165 72 




© Capjtighi 1987 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 fSAHADUR SHAH ZAUfsK MARC 

tfEW DELHI nOQ€2 

Or 2 J«nfffl)7 l^S? 



IS : 10236 ( Part 15 ) - 1986 

Indian Standard 

PROCEDURE FOR 
BASIC CLIMATIC AND DURABILITY 
TESTS FOR OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS 

PART 15 DROP TEST 

Optical and Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee, EDG M 

Chairman Representing 

Dn R. Hbadaynath Ministry of Defence ( IRDK ), Dehra Dun 

Members 

Dr O. p. Nijhawan ( Alternate to 
Dr R. Hradaynath ) 
Lt-Gen K. L. Khosla The Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi 

Coii ( Dr ) M. G. Arur Survey of India, Dehra Dun 

Shri S. p. Roy ( Alternate ) 
Col M. S. Bopabai Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical 

Service, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 
Shri J. Choudhuki National Instruments Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi a. K. GnosHAii ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. M. Gupta Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ) 

Brig H. Lal Ministry of Defence 

GoL N. MoTJDGAi* ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. B. Mat.ik Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri Mohan Jeet Singh ( Alternate ) 
Cdr G. D. Bhaxt Chief Hydrographer to the Government of India, 

Dehra Dun 
Dr E. K. Murthy Central Scientific Instruments Organization 

( CSIR), Chandigarh 
Db a. K. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. Nabayana Rao Bharat Electronics Ltd, Machilipatnam 

Shri A. M. Jose ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. N. Puktambekar National Physical Laboratory ( GSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri Ram Prasad ( Alternate.) 
Shri J. K. SoNEJA All India Instrument Manufacturers' and Dealers' 

Association, Bombay 
Shbi C. L, Batra ( Alternate ) 
Lt-Col Arun Kxtmar Ministry of Defence 

Maj J» L. Yadav ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10236 ( Part 15 } - 1986 

( Continued from page I ) 

Members Representing 

Shri H. C. Verma Associated Instrument Manufacturers' ( India ) Pvt 

Ltd, New Delhi 
Shri K. G. Purang ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. K, Verma Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. S. Lamba ( Alternate ) 
Shri S, Chanorasekhahan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member) 

Director ( Mech Engg ) 

Secretary 

SlIRI S. K. PURT 

Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ), ISI 



Panel for Basic Climatic and Durability Tests for Optical Instruments 

EDG 36 : P-1 

Convener 
Shri Bhagwan Singh Ministry of Defence ( IRDE ), Dehra Dun 

Members 
Shri S. P. Roy Survey of India, Dehra Dun 

Shri O. S. Nagar ( Alternate ) 
Lt-Col L. S. Kulitaki Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), Dehra Dun 

Shri H. D. Gangar ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. K. Sachdev Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ), Dehra Dun 

Shet a. K. Ghoshal National Instruments Ltd, Calcutta 

Dr E. K. MuRTiiY Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( CSIR ), 

Chandigarh 

Dr a. K, Agarwal ( Alternate ) 



IS : 10236 ( Part 15 ) - 1986 

Indian Standard 

PROCEDURE FOR 
BASIC CLIMATIC AND DURABILITY 
TESTS FOR OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS 

PART 15 DROP TEST 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 15) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 7 August 1986, after the draft finaHzed by the Optical 
and Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 Fast development in the field of instruments had brought a significant 
change in their basic content and design. It has been felt over the years 
that IS : 2352-1963* does not cater for the present day needs of the 
instruments and is also not in line with the recent trends in climatic and 
environmental testing procedures to be adopted for imporving their 
quality and reliability. It has, therefore, become necessary to have 
uniform and more rational testing procedures as far as possible. This 
series of standards; on climatic and durability test ( IS : 10236 ) has been 
prepared with this objective. 

0.2.1 It is proposed to withdraw the existing Indian Standard 
( IS : 2352-1963* ) as soon as the tests mentioned therein are covered in 
the new series ( IS : 10236 ). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 15 ) covers the procedure for conducting drop 



test. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 



2.1 For the purpose of this standard the definitions given in IS : 10236 
( Part I )t shall apply. 

♦Procedure for basic climatic and durability tests for optical instruments. 
fProcedure for basic climatic and durability tests for optical instruments: Part 1 
General ( under preparation ). 



IS: 10236 ( Part 15 )- 1986 

3. OBJECT 

3.1 To determine the suitability of optical instruments for applications 
where they are likely to be dropped or otherwise roughly handled such 
as during use and transportation. 

4. INITIAL MEASUREMENTS 

4.1 The instrument shall be visually examined, and optically, electrically 
and mechanically checked as required by the relevant instrument speci- 
fication. 

5. TEST EQUIPMENT 

5.1 Equipment 1 

5.1.1 A drop test bed as described in 5.1.2 to 5,1.4 shall be used for 
conducting the test. 

5.1.2 The drop test bed shall consist of approximately 150 mm thick 
good river sand covered with one layer of canvas. 

5.1.3 The surface dimensions of the bed shall be larger than the largest 
surface of the specimen under test. A suitable enclosure with felt lining 
or any other suitable arrangement may be provided around the sand 
bed to avoid damage on account of instrument accidently falling on the 
hard surface. 

5.1.4 The method of releasing the specimen shall be such as to allow 
free fall from the desired height, with a minimum of disturbance in its 
position at the moment of release. 

5.2 Equipment 2 

5.2.1 A drop test platform as described in 5.2.2 to 5.2.4 shall be used 
for conducting the test. 

5.2.2 The drop test platform shall consist of a steel plate not less than 
6 mm thick which has been wet floated on and bolted down to a fully 
set concrete block of at least 50 cm thickness, 

5.2.3 The surface dimensions of the steel plate shall be larger than the 
largest surface of the specimen tinder test. 

5.2.4 The method of releasing the specimen shall be such as to allow 
free fall from the desired height, with a minimum of disturbance in its 
position at the moment of release, 

6. TEST SEVERITIES 

6.1 The severity indicated by height of fall shall be as specified in the 
relevant instrument specification. The value may be selected from those 
given in 6.2 and 6.3 on the basis of test equipment used. 

4 



IS ? 10236 ( Part 15 ) - 1986 



6.2 Equipment 1 

Ax — Height o[ fall - 150 cm 

B^ — Height of fall «• 120 cm 

C^ _ Height of fall == 90 cm ^ With or without case as specified 

D^ „ Height of fall = 60 cm ] 

Ej^ — Height of fall = 30 cm J 

6.3 Equipment 2 

A2 — Height of fall - 10*0 cm '] 

B2 — Height of fall =~- 5-0 cm y Instrument not in its case 

C2 — Height of fail =^ 2-5 cm J 

^3 — Height of fall = 100 cm 1 

Bs — Height of fall -^ 50 cm Y Instrument in its case 

C3 — Height of fall - 25 cm J 

7. TEST PROCEDURE 

7.1 The instrument shall be subjected to this test in unpacked condition 
or in its case. This shall be specified in the relevant instrument 
specification. 

7.2 The instrument with or without case, shall be allowed to fall freely 
on the test bed/platform from the desired height as required by the 
severities given in 6. 

7.3 The height of drop shall be measured from that point of specimen 
nearest to the surface of the test bed or platform when suspended/held 
prior to dropping. 

7.4 The instrument in its case shall be dropped once on each face. 
Where instrument not in its case is to be tested it shall be dropped once 
in each of the six directions of the three mutually perpendicular axes 
convenient for the instrument which shall be specified in the relevant 
instrument specification. 

NoTK — Any change regarding *height of fall* altitude and number of drops shall 
be specified in the relevant instrument specification. 

8. FINAL MEASUREMENTS 

8.1 The instrument shall be visually examined for any signs of 
mechanical damage or looseness of parts. Its performance shall also be 
checked in accordance with the relevant instrument specification. In 
case of sealed instruments they shall also be checked for leaks. 



IS : 11)236 ( Part 15 ) - 1986 

9. DETAILS TO BE GIVEN IN RELEVANT INSTRUMENT 
, SPECIFICATION 

9.1 The relevant instrument specification shall state the following for 
carrying out this test: 

a) Initial observations/measurements; 

b) Equipment used for the test; 

c) Test severity; 

d) Testing with or without case; 

e) Attitude and number of drops in each attitude; 

f ) Any change in test conditions, if required; 

g) Final observations/measurements; and 

h) Any deviation from the normal procedure. 



