Indian Standard

IS 12576 : 1989 (Reaffirmed 2005)

*

SEED PROCESSINGMACHINERY-INDENTED

CYLINDER GRADER-TEST CODE wmhsm sr?;srrnm&d*o ftt@wmhTpT7wq @fear

UDC

631*362*34 : 620-l

DESCRIPTORS

:

t

AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY, SEED PROCESSING INDENTED CYLINDER GRADER. TEST CODE

MACHINERY.

@ BIS 1989

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARC
Price Group 4

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Sejmnber

1989

Seed Processing

and Technology

Sectional

Committee,

AFDC

62

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 31 January 1989, after draft finalized by the Seed Processing and Technology Sectional Committee had been approved the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. the by

With the modernization of seed processing industry, indented cylinder graders are being increasingly A need was, therefore, felt for the preparation of this manufactured and usetl in the country. It is hoped that testing standard to provide uniform guidelines for conducting tests on the grader. based on this code will help in the compilation of data which may be used later for evolving a detailed specification for such graders. In the preparation Machinery Training assistance of this standard, and Testing Institute, Hissar has been derived from Northern Region Farm and National Seeds Corporation, New Delhi. with this standard, if the final value, accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules

Tn reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in for rounding off numerical values f revised )`.

IS 12576 : 1989

Indian Standard

INDENTED SEEDPROCESSTNGMACHINERYCYLINDER GRADERTEST CODE
1 SCOPE prescribes This standarc indented cylirlcler grader industry. 2 REFERENCES The following, Indian Standards adjuncts to this stantlard: IS Jvu. IS 4333 ( Part are Title 1 ) : 1967 iUethocls of analysis for food grains: Part 1 Refractions (&I r6-0~~i0n ) 2 ) : 1967 Methods of analysis for grains: Part 2 Moisture necessary method for testing of nsed for grain and seed 3.7 Foreign Matter

It includes inorganic and organic ~natter. The inorganic matter shall include sand, gravel, dirt, pebbles, stones, lumps of earth, mud and iron chips. The organic matter shall include chaff, straw, weed seeds, dead insects, worms and other gl,ains. 3.8 Indented Cylinder Grader

A machine which makes the length separation of' seeds/grains by either, lifting or rejecting them in p~o~~kets or indentations pressed into the side of a cylindrical boliy which revolves Mrith the seetl/ grain mass inside the cylinder. 4 PRE-TEST 4.1 OBSERVATIONS of Grain Size

IS 4333 ( Part

Determination

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose definitions shall 3.1 of this apply. standard, the following

Large `Big Brokens kernels of less than thl-ee-fourth of the grain in length and bigger than medium grain shall be calletl large/big brokens. Brokens

Grain whole broken 3.2

4.1.1 Ten number of randomly taken whole grains shall be kept in a straight line lengthwise and total length measured and average length of a grain shall be calculated by clivitling total of three replications length by 10. An averaRe should be taken as length of the grain. 4.1.2 Ten nunlber of the same grains should be kept in a straight line breadthwise and on the similar line, the average bl-eadth of the grain should be determined.
j.)e measuretl

Medium

Grain kernels of less than one-half of the size of whole grain in length and bigger than small/fine brokens shall be called nledium brokens. 3.3 Small/Fine Brokens of less than one-fourth of the size in length shall be called small/fine

Grain kernels of whole grain brrjkens. 3.4 Total

Tl;ic~krl~~ss of each of the 10 grains should with the help of vernier calipers or screw gauge ant! the total slroultl be dividei by 10 to calcrilate the average thickness of a grain. Average of threv replications should be taken as the thickness of the grain. ( set Fig. formula: 1 ) should )i$

4.1,3

4.1.4 The size of the grain be calculated by the follo\ving Size -. ( length ,L' breadth

Broken total Grain above in length beat1 grain. of small, medium and large

x: thickness

The sum brokens. 3.5 Head

4.2 Determination of Small Brokens and Head Grains
Fix*<:

Medium/Large

Grain of size three-fourth and of a whole gl.ain shall be called

NO'I'F: -- `I'he term grain shall cuvw seed nl~. For the purpose of seed ptocesaing. head grain will be the grain in whole size.

1epMS~~ltat~\ f' samples of` 10 g each from the gt ain nlass are takfan and stllall `metliun/ large brokens and hrnd grain< are separated by and percentage fr:tc.tlons shall be hand picking calculated.
4.3 Determination of Foreign Matter

3.6 Rated

Input

Capacity the grading limit.

The maximum efficiency shall

feed rate at which be \vitllirr the specified

`l'he foreign mutIer present in tile seed mass of the feed shall be tleterlnineil in acc~orclancc \vith 3, 4 ant1 5.2 of IS 4333 [ l'at,t 1 ) : 1967.

IS 12576 : 1989
6 TESTS 6.1 General

a) Checking b) Checking

of specification, of material, and cllecking of pro-

c) Visual observations and vision for adjustments. 6.2 Test at No Load
6.3 Test at Load Test

6.3.1 Short-Run a) Visual

observations, of grading efficiency, and

b) Determination c) Capacity, d) Power
WITH HUSK

consumption.
Test AND PRELIMINARY

6.3.2

Long-Run

c

WITHOUT L = Length B = Breadth

HUSK

Tl
B
WITH

7 RUNNING-IN ADJUSTMENTS 7.1 The indented

cylinder grader shall be installed on level and preferably on hard surface. All the adjustments shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 7.2 The grader shall be attached with a suitable prime mover preferably with an electric motor of capacity recommended by the manufacturer and An energy meter or auto-voltage stabilizer. some form of transmission dynamometer shall be The power delivered to the grader may fitted. be supplied in the following ways: a) Directly coupling the prime mover the main shaft of the grader, and with

T = Thickness C = Length of Beard

FIG. 1 DIMENSIONS OF KxaE KERNEL HUSK AND AFTER MILLING 4.4 Determination The moisture
:;;;mined of Moisture

b) Connecting the prime mover with the help of a flat or V-belt and pulleys with the main shaft of the grader.
NOTE - In cw: of (a), the power delivered LOthe grader would be the power output of the prime mover whrreas in case of (I,), the allowances for G and 3 percent, respectively may be made.

content of the seed mass shall be in accordance with IS 4333 ( Part 2 ) : A ND SPECIFICATION

5 SELECTION
5.1 Selection

7.3 The

grader

shall

be run-in

without

load

For commercial test report or for certification purpose, the indented cylinder grader shall be selected from the series production by the testing authority. For prototype testing or confidential test, the machine shall be submittecl by the manufacturer directly. 5.2 Specification
and other Literature

before commencing the tests. `The running-in shall be carried out in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. In the absence of any recommendation by the manufacturer, the grader shall be run-in for 30 minutes. During of run-in acljuslment the period for Various functional components may hc done. All the adjustments done shall be in accordance with the instructions contained in the instruction manual supplied by [he manufacturer. 8 GENERAL 8.1 Checking TESTS of Specification

`rhe manufacturer shall supply all literature, operation manual and specification sheet as given jJ] Annex A duly filled-in. The manufacturer

shall indicate the type of' grains to be handled, Inaximum input capacity and rated input capacity shall furnish any further information which might be required to carry out the tests. 2

`Tile speciIications given by the riianufacturer shall be checked and repnrtell in the proforma given in Annex A.

IS 12576 : 1989 8.2 Checking of Material
NOTE - For the purpose of certification, the test at 10.1.2 and 10.1.2.1 shall be conducted at the capacit! declared by the manufacturrr and lest at 10.1.2.2 need not be conducted.

`The material of construction of various components of the machine shall be reported in the data sheet given in Annex B. 8.3 Visual Provision
The Observations for Adjustments and Checking of

10.1.2.3 The

ante 10.1.3

data shall with Annex E. Analysis of Samples

be recorded

in accortl-

observations and adjustments given in the data sheet in Annex C shall be made and reported. 9 TEST
AT NO

LOAD

Three samples of different fractions materials obtained at each outlet a.nalysed for the following. Record accordance with Annex F: a) Maitl grain outlet, for brokens, and foreign matter. b) Rejection outlet, for head grains. 10.1.4
Determination of Grading Qiciency

of graded should be the data in head grains,

9.1 After the running-in is over, the grader shall be run at no load for 30 minutes at the specified speed. Duriug and after no load run, the visual observation of the grader shall not show the following: a) Presellce of any marked vibration the operation, b) Presence of undue knocking of sound, during rattling

l`he grading efficiency following formula:
D _

shall be calculated

by the

Ex( ---))((---)x(
Fx(
E-G)*x(

l--G)
1-F)

xoo1

c) Frequent slippage of belts, d) Any marked unusual wear or slackness any component, and e) Any marked rise in bearing temperature. 9.2 Data shall be the proforma given 10 TEST
AT LOAD Tests

where in D -~- grading E with efficiency head in percent, grain at main fraction of grain outlet,

recorded in Annex

in accordance D.

F -= fraction

of head of head data in

grain grain the

in feed, and at rejection

G = fraction outlet. 10.1.4.1 Record the given in Annex G.

10.1 Short-Run 10.1.1 Tot

data sheet as

Material of the grain ( wheat/paddy ) already cleaned by air screen be taken. The observations be made.

10.1.5 Determination of Power Consumption

Sufficient quantity of the same variety seed cleaner shall given under 3 shall 10.1.2

The power requirement for each feed rate shall be calculated in accordance with 10.1.5.1 and 10.1.5.2.
10.1.5.1 In case of prime mover fitted with an energy meter, the readings taken shall be the power consumption for 10 minutes. The power consumption per hour giving due allowance to the type of tlrive shall be calculated and reported.

Operation and Collection of Dala

The grader shall be operated at its specified speed for 30 minutes at a feed rate slightly below the rated input capacity specified by the manufacturer. During the run period, collect the following samples and data: a) Three sets of samples of graded fractions like brokens and head grain at an interval of 10 minutes at each outlets. b) The speed of the main shaft and the reading of the energy meter or dynamometer shall be recorded. 10.1.2.1 At the end of 30 minutes feeding, run the grader for some time so that practically no At the more material already fed comes out. end of the test, collect and weigh the material. 10.1.2.2 The test given in 10.1.2 and 10.1.2.1 shall be repeated for a minimum of three times at various feed rates covering approximately 90, 100 and 110 percent of rated input capacity declared by the manufacturer. 3

10.1.5.2 In case of prime mover fitter1 with the dynamometer, the reading taken shall indicate the torque required. The power consumption per hour, giving due allowance to the type of drive ( see 7.2.1 ), shall be calculated by the following formula:

where
P = power, kW; T = torque, XIII; and

s = speed,

rev/min.

NO rE - For the purpose of certitication, the power conrumplion at the declared l&d rate shall only be calculated.

IS 12576 : 1989
10.1.5.3 Record Annex G. 10.1.6
Determination

the

data

in

accordance

with

10.1.7 The observed data and results shall be recorded as per proforma given in Annex G. 11 LONG-RUN TEST

of the Rated Input CapacitJv

Select the feed rate at which the grading eficiThe capacity in ency is not less thdn 85 percent. terms of the energy consumed shall be calculated by dividing the capacity by power consumed and shall be expressed in q/kWh. Record the data in Annex G. NOTE -For the purpose of certification, since the grader has been operated only at declared capacity, It shall be seen whether the grading efficiency is met at the declared capacity or not.

The grader shall be operated for a minimum period of 20 hours at no load. This period should be covered in a maximum of 4 contiDuring and after the operation, nuous runs. record the major break-downs, defects developed and repairs made into the data sheet given in Annex H.

ANNEX A ( Clauses 5.2 and 8.1 )
SPECIFM~ATION A-l SHEET

FOR INDENTED

CYLINDER

GRADER

GENERAL
Make a>

A-5 REJECT TROUGH

4 Type
b) Construction c) Conveyor details d) Separator for grading A-6 FRAME details DETAILS

b) Model c) Type 4 Year of manufacture grains 4 Recommended
A-2 POWER UNIT
a)

Type

of prime of drive

mover power, kW

b) Recommended c) Type

a) Height of indented cylinder centre ( from ground level in installed condition ) b) Height of graded grain discharge outlet from ground c) Height ground d) Height of reject discharge outlet from level

A-3 GRAIN FEEDING a) Method b) 1,ocation of feeding of inlet from ground

of feed hopper

from ground

e) Size of the frame: 1) Length 2) Width ~-7 TRANSPORT )

c) Height of feeding hopper level in installed condition A-4 INDENTED CYLINDER

ARRANGEMENT

a) Size ( length and diameter of cylinder b) Cylinder construction c) Number of indents in one row d) Number of rows e) Thickness of sheet f) Indent diameter

4 Type
of wheels ( in case wheels are b1 Number not provided, details of an alternative provision shall be given ) c) Size of wheels d) Wheel bearing e) Type of towing f ) Wheel tread

9) h)

Indent Distance

depth between two pockets:

g) Wheel

base

1) Across

j)

2) In row Revolution/minute

A-8 TOOLS, ACCESSORIES MANUALS PROVIDED
of cylindeI

AND

NOTES
1 The items which are not applicable grader should be crossed while filling. 2 If other filled-iu. items are provided, their in a details
particular

k) Provision of adjustment: 1) Cylinder speecl 2) Cylinder slope

should

be

IS la576 : 1989

ANNEX B ( Clause 8.2 )
DATA B-I ~_a DATE OF TEST OF CONSTRUCTION Material ___ SHEET MATERIAL OF CONSTRUCTION

MATERlAL

~.-

Sl No. 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7)

Component Frame Indent Conveyor Reject Main trough shaft system Feed hopper Transmission

ANNEX C ( Clause 8.3 )
DATA C-1 OBSERVATIONS a) Adequacy of marking inlet and outlets of direction of of SHEET

FOR VISUAL

OBSERVATIONS

AND

ADJUSTMENTS

h) Provision for changing of compo__ easy nents requlrmg fiequent replacement j) Provision for anti-corrosive of bolts and coatings nuts and other k) Tightness fasteners m) Other C-2 PROVISION a) Feed rate b) Cylinder c) Cylinder d) Waste speed slope collector inclination

b) Adequacy of marking rotation of cylinder

4 4

of protection Adequacy against ingress of dust

bearings speciparts

observations FOR

Adequacy of safety arrangements, ally at moving points for lubrication for transportation of moving for belt tightening

ADJUSTMENT

OF

4 Provision f > Provision
8) Provision

ANNEX D ( Clause 9.2 1)
DATA D-l
D-2 D-3

SHEET

FOR TEST

AT NO LOAD
b) Presence sound of undue knocking or rattling

SOURCE
TYPE OF

OF POWER
DRIVE

OBSERVATIONS a) Presence of any marked operation vibration during

c) Frequent Slippage of drive belt d) Any marked unusual wear or slackness any component e) Any marked rise in bearing f ) Orher observations temperature

in

5

IS 12576 : 1989

ANNEX E ( Clause 10.1.2.3 )
DATA
E-l

SHEET

FOR

TEST

AT LOAD

SOURCE

OF POWER RATING DETAIL tilt angle adjustment pulley on load on load

E-6 OBSERVATIONS a) Presence operation b) Presence sound c) Frequent of any marked of undue slippage vibration during

E-2 POWER E-3 MACHINE

a) Cylinder

knocking of belts of shafts in

or rattling

b) Reject-trough

c) Speed of driving d) Speed of cylinder E-4 GRAIN a) Type of grain b) Variety of grain

running d) Smooth pective bearings e) Frequent f) Smooth different clogging

their res-

flowing of components
wear,

material

through
temperature and

c) Size of grain d) Moisture content e) Foreign matter before feeding E-5 TEST DATA*
Stopping Time Duration of Operotion Speed (rev/min) Feed Rate (q/h)

g) Any marked h) Any marker1 breakdown

rise in bearing

deformation

loosening j) Frequent k) Other observations,
Fuel POWCT Required Consumed WV (WI No. of Samples

of fasteners if any
Total Quantity ;f 2;;: . Grain Outlet (kg)

S1 Date Starting Time NO.

Quantity (kg) of Samples from C-----*----T

Main
Grain Outlet i)

Rejection
Outlet

il) iii)
l

f'he data rhorlld he collected

for every test conducted

on different

feed rates.

ANNEX F ( Clause 10.1.3 )
DATA
Sl No. Feed Rate Sample Sources

SHEET

FOR

ANALYSIS

OF

SAMPLES
of

Sample

Mars

r____--h.___
Head Grain g

Mass

--Foreign Matter g

\

Remarks

l3rokens g

g i) From main grain outlet ii) From
rejection outlet NOTE -- For di&rcnt

feed rates, USCthe Paine ~~oforrnn as above.

6

IS 12576 : 1989

ANNEX G (Clauses 10.1.4.1, 10.1.5.3, 10.1.6 and 10.1.7 )
DATA Sl No. i) ii) iii) iv) v) Cylinder Power Grading Rated SHEET Item r-------1 speed, rev/min required, input kW percent q/kWh 2 FOR EFFICIENCY, POWER REQUIREMENT AND Test CAPACITIES

No. ~________~ 3 4

etc

Feed rate, q/h efficiency, capacity,

ANNEX H ( Clause 11 )
DATA H-l TOTAL RUNNING TIME TIME UNIT UNIT SHEET FOR LONG-RUN TEST IN BODY REPAIR CONDUCTED H-5 BREAKDOWNS H-6 ANY H-7 ANY MAJOR OTHER

H-2 CONTINUOUS H-3 BREAKDOWNS H-4 BREAKDOWNS

RUNNING

IN GRADING IN ELEVATION

OBSERVATION

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard LMark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BlS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indira Standards BIS is a statutory harmonious goods and attending Copyright BIS has the copyright any form without grade designations. of all its publications. permission the standard, relating No part of these publications of BIS. This of necessary details, such may be reproduced and sizes, type in or BIS. institution established of the activities matters under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of

development

of standardization, in the country+

to connected

the prior Enquiries

in writing to copyright

does not preclude as symbols to the Director

the free use, in,

the course of implementing

be addressed

( Publications),

Revision of Indian Standards periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in are issued from time to time. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent possession of the latest amendments or edition. to BIS giving Dot : No. the following AFDC reference : Indian Standards are reviewed

63 ( 2949 )

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telephones

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, NEW DELHI 9 Bahadur 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

Eastern

: l/14 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

Maniktola 36 24 99 160936

Northern

I

3 1641 2 1843

r41 24 42 Southern Western Branches : C. I. T. Campus, : Manakalaya, BOMBAY IV Cross Road, Marol, MADRAS Andheri 600113 (144: ;"9 ;: 6 32 92 95

E9 MIDC, 400093

( East )

: AHMADABAD. GUWAHATI. TRIVANDRUM.

BANGALORE. HYDERABAD.

BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR JAlPUR. KANPUR. PATNA.

AMENDMENT

NO. 1
TO

JULY 1990

IS 12576 : 1989 SEED PROCESSING MACHINERY INDENTED CYLINDER GRADER - TEST CODE ( We 1, clause 4.1.4 ) - Substitute
formula: `Size = ( length x breadth x thickness )lis' Substitute the following for the
x
1oo,

the following

for the existing

( Page 3. clause 10.1.4, formula ) existing formula:
Fx( E-G)*x(

GD=E x (F-G)x(E-F)x(I-G)
1-F)

( AFDC

62 ) Printed at Printwell Prin&, Delhi, India

