( Reaffirmed 2000 )

.ISt2524{Partti)-1968

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PAINTING OF NON-FERROUS METALS IN BUILDINGS
PART II
Paint& clrofrrrrmr Smu B. &UUZI
MUltlkS Blundell &mite Paints Ltd, Bombay &ax N. S. BHIIIUTU National Test House, Calcutta sa81:S.K. &SE S=E. K. RAUMZANDMN(Aftsrnotc) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SERX P. K. CHAKRAvAaTY SHRI G. S. S~vura (Al&mate ) &RI K. P. @iMTOPADEYAYA Pu~I~~~As Department, Government of West -&2=Oa
s*L JhRRCE9R DKUONS ( On-ATIoN

PAINTING

Vafnishing and Allied Finishes Sectional Committee, BDC 34 RrpnJafing
.&le Paints & Contracts Private Ltd, Bombay

cHE14cAIs ),
AND

Ministry of Elailways
hdia~~ LRC Research

Smtl Y. s ANIURAHARAYANAN

Institute ( CSIR ), Ranchi

(dlbncafc) DBvbM.Dosuus

I~ti~~ondEngineas(Xr;dia),Calcuna

SroUN. C. JNN `,DR Joraea GRORGR w .DllS..M. SWOE (dltemair) 0. P. KWAR
hhCEERJ=

Foreat Research Institute & Colleges, Debra Dun Cent;~orkilding Resckh Institute ( CSIR ), En~mWs Branch, &my Headquart~ Centnrl'Bttilda~ ASSOC%OII, New Delhi National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR'), Jamsbedpur Goodk+Nerolac Paints Private Ltd, Bombay The rndii Paints Association, Calcutta
)

SanrHARiUUL~WAR

Sau K. P.

Sl?ltiH.N.RAMAcHAIL Sziat M. N. RAO Smtx T. K. S. h&N:

.,

( hmatu

4 . INgIANMANAK

(Confindonpag~?)

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
MAR0

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI

Membel~ SFtUtC.tb!SXAQtALAM Sttttt P. B. SHAH DttR.K.Svo
"tSsR~mtt#Q &`tGtf&ER,

Represea* Chtzcn i?z Cc, Madras Asian Paints (I) Private Ltd, &z&ay Nagrath Paima Private ttd, Kanpur 2rdD t&~trd Public h'orks Dqwtrnent, ; I TO Imperieri~3mical &dust& ( Iqdia )` private Ltd Mmbcr)

SmtvEYORa OF wow SSW III (&cm+) SFtm Y. s. SWAMY .: Smu R. NAGABAJ~, Di-tm. ( Civ Engg )

Dir&or General, ISi ( &&i& .sancw Deputy Director ( Civ Engg )? ISI

XS:2524(PartII)-1968

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PAINTING OF NON-FERROUS METALS IN BUILDINGS
PART 0. II PAINTING

F.OREWORD

0.1This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution

on 16 October 1968, after the draft finalized by the Painting, Varnishing and Allied Finishes Sectional Committee had been approved by the `Civil Engineering Division Council.

OS This standard is the second part of the Indian Standard code of practice for painting of non-ferrous metals in buildings, and deals with the painting schedule. The first part of this standard covers the pretreatment. Both the parts together are intended to provide guidance with regard to the painting of non-ferrous metals in buildings. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to `the practices in the field in this country. This has been met by referring to BSCP 231 : 1966 ` Painting of buildings' published by the British Standards Institution. 0.4 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on painting in buildiigs. Other standards published so far in the series are given in Appendix A. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis~ shall be rounded off in accordance with IS: 2-1960*. The number of ngnificant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.,

I. SCOPE I.1This standard ( Part II ) lays down schedules for painting of non-ferrous
metals used in buildings. l Ruksfor roundbg o@nu4nc?iml vahcs +#d). 3

IS:2524(PartlI)-1968 .2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard the definition of terms relating to painting shall be as given in IS : 1303-I963*.
3. NECESSARY INFORMATION

\

3.1 Required information for the efficient painting of non-ferrous metals as given in 3 of IS : 2524 ( Part I )-1968t shall be taken into account. 4. MATERIALS 4.1 General - It is the feature of certain non-ferrous metals, for example, aluminium, zinc, cadmium, copper, lead and tin, that under rural atmospheric conditions, they are capable of resisting corrosion without painting. Anodized aluminium may be especiaily resisting. Metal-to-metal joints _ need careful treatment, especially if they are likely to be exposed to damp A jointing compound ( see 4.1.1 ) conditions and the metals are dissimilar. or a preformed bandage or strip, should be used to insulate magnesium and aluminium from one another, but bitumen paints or rubber-based compounds may be used for joints involving other metals. In all cases the joint should be made while the jointing compound is still wet, the metal having been previously prepared and primed. 4.1.1 Jointing Cornfound - These are usually paste-like materials used for coating surfaces which are to be brought together and which will be inaccessible. Sometimes several coats of the paint used elsewhere on the structure are used for jointing, when it is usual to bring the surfaces together before the last applied coat is dry. .Where dissimilar metals are used in conjunction in a structure, an isolating jointing compound is essential, and those containing chromates are preferred where aluminium or magnesium A typical compound for this purpose consists of equal is one of the metals. parts by weight of barium chromate and kaolin in an oil varnish medium, the content being between 50 and 60 percent by weight and free from water Bitumen or bituminous pastes and rubbersoluble sulpha .es and chlorides. based jointinr, compounds are used for other metals. 4.1.2 The surface should be prepared as specified in 6 of IS: 2524 ( Part I )-1968t. Even where this includes using an etch primer it is still necessary to apply a priming paint appropriate to the individual metal except in the case of lead and terne coating. Some etch primers are softened by water. For situations where exposure of the etch-primed surface to moisture may be expected special types of water-resistant etch primer should be Where the metals used, or they should be quickly overcoated with primer. concerned come into contact with alkaline materials, for example, concrete,
*Glossary of terms relating to paints (K&&).
iCOtk Of pntctiCC fbr painthg Of OOPfCm* metal8 in

;

buildings: Part f &ctre,&acnt.

-4.

,

xs:2524(Partn)xl68

lime mortar and brickwork, they should be given one or two coats of bituminous paint and, where the conditions are persistently damp, even thicker 6hns are desirable. Ahnninium, lead, terne plate and tin must be treated fully in this way> zinc, cadmium, tin and magnesium need only. be treated in this way if conditions are adverse, while copper is unlikely to Where non-ferrous metals are brought into permanent need protection. contact with hard-woods, such as oak and chest-nut, for example, when used for flashings for oak frames and sills, two coatsof bituminous paint. should be applied to both contact surfaces. the preparation has included pretreatment 46 AIumisiissm -Whether with an etch primer or not a zinc chrome or a modified zinc chrome paint should be used. For subsequent coats, normal types of oil, cleoresinous or synthetic resinous paints may be used provided that they are compatible with the priming paint. l3ituminous paints are also permissible. 4.5 Zinc and Zinc-Goated Metals -As many items constructed from zinc and zinc-coated metal, such as ducting, cladding and `casing units arrive on site untreated, particular care should lx taken for pretreatment and preparation of zinc surfaces: For subsequent coatings, normal types of paint, as described in 4.2, may be used provided that they are compatible with the priming paint and will adhere well to it. 4.4 CopPer Lead 7 The first coating or primer may be an unpigmentcd If a light-coloured finish is required, resin varnish or an etching primer. a coat of aluminium paint over the resin varnish will need to be applied; its leafing properties help to prevent the discoloration of superimposed coats of paint by green compounds should they be formed by inter-action between the copper and the medium. The fmishing coats may be those indicated for zinc. - The medium throughout the paint system to be applied 4.5 Magnesium to magnesium and its alloys should be highly resistant to water and alkali, for example, a stoving or air-drying medium, such as that based on tung The primer should not contain graphite, lead oil/phenolic resin varnish. pigments or metallic lead, bronze or aluminium; it should, however, contain zinc chromate in a proportion appropriate to the severity of the conditions ofexposure. For normal exposure, the zinc chromate should constitute about 20 percent by weight of the dry paint film. 5. SCHEDULE

FOR PAINTING

5.1 General-The surface shall be prepared and pretreated as specified in 6 After treatment the surface of the metals shall of IS : 2524 ( Part I )-1968*. be handled as little as possible before painting and shall be primed without delay. *Code of practiti forpainting of non-femow metals in buildings: Part I Prctrcatqent. E .

5.1.1 The painting system may comprise primer, primer surE3cer or Wer, putty and 6nish coats in &ll or in suitable combination, such as primer/ fkish or smfkr/Snish as may be found necessary depending on tbe condition of substrate and its end use. Fix&b coats alone may be applied where adequate. Dry, mineral oil or water -ding using suitable grades of abrasive paper may, be carried out at appropriate stages to obtain a smooth finish. Each successive coat may be applied only when the preceding coat is thoroughly dry. After applying the top coat further proccssin~, such as to produce any decorative design for pleasing appearance, varnishmg or polishing with suitable polishing compounds may be followed. 5.1.2 The types of primer, Ijrimer su&acer, etc, may be of any type compatible to each other and suitable for application over the substrate. 5.13 Application may be by any satisfactory method and air drying, force drying or stoving may be carried out. 5.2 Factory Painting - A variety of paint systems applied by or&nary or sophisticated methods of application like roller coat, electrostatic spraying, etc, and air drying, force drying or stoving all or part of the components in the painting system are possible. 5.3 On-Site Painiing - Surfaces untreated or protected with a temporary protective shall be pretreated as specified in 6 of IS : 2524 ( Part I j-1968* and then painted in a suitable system as mentioned in 5.1. 53.1 Surfaces already factor): pretreated and primed or finished shall be cleaned of foreign matter like 011, grease, dust, etc; damaged areas, if any, shall be appropriately feather-edged and touched up with suitable primer and brought forward as necessary with primer, primer surfacer, putty, finish coats, etc. The entire surface may then be flatted, if necessary, before applying finish coats. Generally only an air-drying system may be_ possible for on-site painting and applications may be linked to brushing and spraying. 6. MAX&DSANCE the prime object of painting is to protect the metal 6.1 Gemeratl -Since from corrosion, the paint film should ,not be aIlowed to deteriorate to a If the paint film is allowed to crack or peel serious extent More recoating. Corn the surf&x, corrosion may. start and spread under the paint completely in order to prepaxe the surf?ce properly for repainting. 6.2 Removal of&c old Paint - In removing the old paint, care should be ti to avoid, as fiu as possible, damaging any anodized or other chemical ~nv&on coating which may. have betn applied to protect the metal. For this reason, an organic solvent-type paint remover should be employed, so that only a minimum of scraping and .mechanical abrasion will be needed.

6

ISr2524(PartII)-1968 6.3 Where flaking of the paint has occurred on a limited area and the
adhesion of the rest appears to be sound, it may be sufficient to remove loose paint and the corrosion products.

Ch~P&niug - After the removal of the loose paints and corrosion products priming on patches or on the overall surface, as the case may be, shall be carried out at once. 6.5 Finishing described in 5. Subsequent process for finishing should be followed as

APPENDIX ( Clause 0.4 )

A

LIST OF STANDARDS ON PAINTING
IS : 1477 ( Part I )-1959 Code of practice for finishing of ferrous metals in buildings : Painting and allied finishes : Part I Operations and workmanship IS : 1477 ( Part II )-1963 Code of practice for finishing of ferrous metals in buildings : Painting and allied finishes : Part II Schedules and equipment IS : 1650-1960 Colours for building and decorative finishes IS : 2338 ( Part I )-1967 Code of practice for finishing of wood and wood based materials : Part I Operations and workmanship IS : 2338 -( Part II )-1967 Code of practice for finishing of wood and wood based materials : Part II Schedules . IS : 2395 ( Part I )-I966 Code of practice for painting concrete, masonry and plaster surfaces : Part I Operations and workmanship IS : 2395 ( Part II )-1967 Code of practice for painting concrete, and plaster stir&es : Part II Schedules. IS : 3140-1965 Code products of practice for pain.ting asbestos cement masonry building based

IS.: 4597-1968 Code of practice for finishing of wood and wood `materials with nitrocellulose and cold catalysed materials

