$"-

. :: x,"

`. :;&

IS 12619 : 3989 ( Reaffirmed 2003 ) _. .__

Indian Standard

~

-...

PRINTING INDUSTRY -

SAFETY CODE

UDC 655'614'8

0

BlS 1989

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BA~HADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

October 1989

Price Group

2

Printing Machinery Sectional Committee,

EDC 86

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 9 February 1989, after the draft finalized by the Printing Machinery Sectional Committee, EDC 86 had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The fact that a factory, including the printing processes, needs safety measures does not call for any emphasis nor elaboration. The Factories Act, 1948 lays down certain norms regarding safety measures for the employees in a factory in general. This standard has been prepared keeping the provision of the Act in view so that this does, not contravene the Act. Attempt has also been made to avoid repetition of the Act in this code. Wherever the word `Act' appears in this standard, it refers to Factories Act, word "Rule" appears in this standard, it refers to Delhi State Factory Rules. Under the Factories Act, Factory Rules are framed by the respective States. For obvious reasons, rules of all the states from state to state but the basic approach of the rules of the Indian Standard, Rules of Delhi State have been quoted for for furtherence of the safety measures.
1948;

whenever

the

different State Governments for their could not be quoted. Rules might vary different state are the same. In this illustration purposes and also as a guide

IS 12619 : 1989

Indian Standard

PRINTING INDUSTRY 1 SCOPE

SAFETY CODE

4.3 Letter Press a) Electrical interlocks shall be provided for guards required to be opened during operation. b) In multi-unit machines stop, inch, run and emergency stop shall be provided within easy reach of the operator or a starting alarm shall be provided. 4.4 Offset Printing Machines ( mushroom a) Emergency stop switches types ) shall be provided close to the operator. b) Braking Time i) Fof Sheet-fed Ofiet and-a-half revolution cylinder.
Machine -

This Indian Standard specifies the safety requirements as applicable to printing industry. 2 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, the terminology and definitions given in IS 11097 ( Part 1 ) : 1984 `Glossary of terms for printing machines : Part 1 Fundamental terms' shall apply. 3 APPLICABILITY shall be applicable to all types and sizes of printing industry ranging from small scale to large scale industries engaged in either the total process of paper printing or part thereof. 3.2 In this standard only the safety requirements relevant to specific plant and machinery involved in printing industry, such as foundry, photolitho, printing machines, cutting and binding machines, etc have been enumerated. Other general safety requirements for building, electricity, fire-fighting arrangements, effluents and environment control, etc, as applicable to any other industry shall have to be in compliance with factory regulation Act 1948, prevailing in respective states where they are located. 4 SAFETY STANDARDS
4.1 Area-wise follows: 3.1 These safety requirements

of

Oneimpression

ii) For Web Offset Machine -

See Fig. 1.

4 For multi-colour sheet-fed offset and web

safety

requirements

shall be as

4.2 Type Foundry

a) Automatic

temperature regulation by thermostat control shall be provided with the electric furnaces. b) Guards shall be provided around all continuous moving parts such as pulleys. 4 There shall be proper provision of ventilation and flow of free air to drive the fumes coming out of the crusible. d) Adequate room height and space for proper ventilation shall be maintained.
e) Dress collection

shall be done in closed containers and kept at a minimum distance of 3 m from casting machine to prevent lead poisoning. exhaust

offset machines and for single colour sheetfed offset machines with extended feed the push button switches for the purpose of inching and run shall be coupled with a delay timer and a buzzer ( preferably ) whereby the machine does not start immediately on pressing the button and all concerned shall hear the buzzing sound and after a gap of, say 5 seconds, the machine shall start moving. d) All stop push button shall get locked automatically on pressing. The operator shall have to release the lock or turn the push botton to restart the machine. 4 Feeder table lifting chain shall be positively driven both for upward and downward movements to ensure against sudden drop of a loaded pile due to brake failure/electrical power. f) All moving parts such as rotating oscillating and reciprocating parts on all sides of the machine shall be properly guarded by sheet metal/wire/plastic/any other type of machine guard members securely fitted with screws or locks. Electrical interlocking is desireable. No moving items shall project beyond such guards. g) All electrical-connections shall be properly insulated and earthings must be provided as per factory regulations. h) Entry points of all cylinders shall be provided with protective barriers or guards

f) Near the working area, proper shall be provided to avoid fumes.

g) Fire-fighting equipments shall be-provided. 8,', 1 Jii : 1

IS.12619

: 1989

14 '
12 !O vl h. s w 6% m4-

2
FIG. 1

8 Lc 6 MAXIMUM BRAKING TIME,(SECOND)

10

, 12

BREAKINGTIME GRAPH FOR WEB OFFSETMACHINE

to ensure against manychance of operator's hand getting involved in an accident. j ) No connecting lead wires shall lie loose above the floor. They shall have conduit encasing laid properly inside grooves cut on floor having no projection that may get damaged due to drop of a heavy article or movement of trollies or other lifts and tackles resulting in an accident.
k) No electrical

e) Two-push-button system shall be provided in machines for the safety of the operator. This shall be applicable for cutting and guilletine machines and shall not be applicable for three-knife trimmer. Wherever possible, Iimit swiches may be provided. 4.6 FoIa ng, Binding, Stitching, Perforating
and Punching Machines

wires shall hang loose ( in case of overhead line ) at any point which might cause breakage- due id a person object colliding with it or getting entangled.

a) Suitable guards shall be provided moving parts.

for all

b) Control switch shall be within the reach of the operator. c) Machine switches. shall have emergency stop

m) Stacking or piling of papers before or after printing or scrap shall not be done in a place which might obstruct movement. n) All connecting points shall be earthed. p) Projection of any item, moving or stationary, shall not be allowed into passage for men of material. 4.5 Paper
Cutting/Guillotine 3-Knife Trimmer a) Operating Machine and

d) Rejected wire, strings, paper slags shall be collected in a place away from the operating area. 4.7 Plate Making Machines Exhaust for fumes and suitable effluent control for the chemicals handled shall be provided. 4.8 Block Making Machine Mechanical guard shall be provided. 4.9 Photographic Studio a) Camera : Fire fighting equipment provided. b) Developer: il Good fume exhaust be provided. arrangement shall shall be

switch shall be in series connection with photocells so that machine shall not start in case operator's hand is near the shear blades.

b) Cut ends or fluffs shall not be accumulated on the passage causing obstruction to easy movements of other material. It shall be collected in a bin at a safe place. c) The knife shall be properly guarded raisedposition. _ _ with relevant safety regulation. in its

4 Hydraulic system shall be in conformity
2

ii) Chemicals shall be disposed of as per efliuant regulation.

IS 12619 P1989

4 Step and Repeat Machine - Proper ventila-

Where are lamp is tion shall be provided. used instead of halogen lamp, proper protection against flash for the eyes shall be provided. Table Retouching Table and Drawing equipment shall shall be be

for oils, grease, flammable inks and thinners in compliance with safety regulations under the Act Adequate precautions shall be taken with regard to `NO SMOKING' instructions and provisions for fire fighting equipment. 4.11 Generator Industries having their own generating set for captive power shall take adequate precautions in regard to its location, maintenance storing of fuels etc. 4.12 General Stores ( Paper ) a) Store and passage ways shall be kept clear and in good condition.

d) $;$J

i) Fire fighting provided.

ii) All electrical equipment properly, earthed. e) Film

9 Separate storage space shall be provided

for films in a place away from the process area as a precaution against fire hazards. arrangements shall

b) Materials stored in tiers shall be stacked, 4 Storage

ii) Proper fume exhausting shall be provided. iii) Suitable fire fighting be provided.

blocked, interlocked and limited in height so that they are stable and secured. areas shall be kept free from possible hazards from tripping. Adequate clearance shall be provided with sprinkler heads or suitable fire fighting equipment. storage areas, shall be strictly prohibited. smoking

equipments

4.10 Storage of Oil, Greases and Flammable Inks and Thinners Suitable safe storage facilities shall be provided

d) In indoor/internal

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards Act, Z986 and the Rules and Regulations

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BJS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications). BIS. grade designations.
Revision of Indian Standards

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving of the latest amendments OT edition. the following reference:
Dot : No. EDC 86 ( 4172 )

Amendments

Issued

Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VI1 M, V. 1. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephone 331 01 31 { 331 13 75 36 24 99 2 18 43 { 3 16 41 141 24 42

Southern : C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 :z Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM.
Printed at Saini Printers, Delhi. India

2; :;

6 32 92 95

