IS10820 (Part 2)
IEC 489-2 (1991)

:

1996

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR RADIO EQUIPMENT USED IN'THE MOBILE SERVICES
PART 2 TRANSMITTERS EMPLOYING A3E, F3E OR G3E EMISSIONS

(First

Revision)

ICS 33.060.50

0 BIS 1996

BUREAU OF MANAKBHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI 110002 August 1996

Price Group

14

Radio Communications Sectional Committee. LTD 20

CONTENTS
SECTIONONE-GENERAL,
SIIPPLEM~N~.AKYL)E~;~NI.~IONS ANDCONDITIONS OF

MEASIJKEMDU

Clause

Pap

1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.

scope
Object... _.. Supplementary terms and definitions... Standard test conditions Supplementary test conditions Characteristics of the measuring equipment
SECTION Two

1.1

1::

:::

1::
._. ..,

::I ..,
_._ __.

.._

._.
METHODS OFMEASUREMENT

,,.

_..

-

7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18.

Frequency error .. .. ,.. ._, _.. Terminal radio-frequency power _.. Radiated radio-frequency power ,, __. .,. Input power and overall efficiency __, _.. Inter-transmitter intermodulation .,, .._ Modulation characteristic ... G _., _._ Total distortion factor (of a sine-wave at audio frequencies) ,. ___ Relative audio-frequency intermodulation product level _. Modulation limiting .._ .., .., Residual modulation (due to hum and noise) __, .._ ,., Transmitter attack time _._ __. .__ .., .._ .., Transmitter performance under conditions deviating from standard test conditions

..

4 4 14 26 26 28 30 30 31 32 34 34 36

-Recommended characteristics of the measuring equipment .,_ -Guide for the construction of a 30 m radiation test site for equipment emitting radio frequency electromagnetic energy ._. 41 APPENDIXC -Example of a mains power line impedance stabilization network APPENDIXD-Guide for the construction of a 3 m radiation test site for measurements above 100 MHz of equipment emitting radio-frequency electromagnetic energy 47
APPENDIXB

APPENDIXA

44

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 2) ( First Revision ) which is identical with IEC Pub 489-2 (1991) `Methods of measurement for radio equipment used in the mobile services : Part 2 Transmitters employing A3E, F3E or G3E emissions', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Radio Communications Sectional Committee, LTD 20 and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. This standard was originally published in 1984 and was largely based on IEC 489-2( 1978). Consequent upon the revision of IEC 489-2( 1978) as IEC 489-2( 1991) this standard is now being revised to align it with IEC 489-2
( Continued on third coverpqe )

IS IS0

10820 489-2

( Part 2) : 1996

( 1991 )

lndiun Standurd
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR RADIO EQ1711'MEN'I (JSED IN THE MOBILE SERVICES
EMPLOYING A3E, F3E OR G3E EMISSIONS

PART 2 TRANSivllTTERS

( First Revision )
1. scope This standard refers specifically bandwidths generally not exceeding signals, using: a) angle modulation b) double-sideband (phase/frequency amplitude to mobile radio transmitters having audio-frequency 10 kHz for the transmission of voice and other types of

modulation),

or

modulation

with full carrier.

This standard is intended to be used in conjunction with IEC 489-l. The supplementary terms and definitions and the conditions of measurement set forth in this standard are intended for type tests and may be used also for acceptance tests.
2.

Object The object of this standard is to standardize the definitions, the conditions and the methods of measurement used to ascertain the performance of transmitters within the scope of this standard and to make possible a meaningful comparison of the results of measurements made by different observers and on different equipment.

3.

Supplementary terms and definitions For the purpose of this standard, the following supplementary definitions apply.

3. I

Input simulurion nerwork(see

figure 1, page 8)

A weighting network which modifies the characteristics of an audio-frequency generator so that it simulates the amplitude/frequency characteristics of a device which produces an electrical input signal as a result of a physical change. 3.2 Rated radio-frequency output power The power specified by the manufacturer which, under specified conditions of operation, should be available at the transmitter output terminals when the latter are connected to a specified load.

IS 10820 ( Pat-l 2 ) : 1996 ISO 489-2 ( 1991 )

Legend
GI. G2 M/C audio-frequency generators matching or combining network (where required)

S T NOW. -

- input arrangement - transmitter under test

S may be a simulation network (see 3.1). an impedance matching network, through connection, or any other specified network.

FIG. 1. -

Input-signal

measuring arrangement.

3.3

Modulation depth For double-sided following: modulation
where: V,,,, is the peak-to-peak I',,,;. is the peak-to-peak voltage at the crest of modulation voltage at the valley of modulation

amplitude

modulation,

the modulation

depth, in percent, is given by the

depth =

( Vrnax- Fmin) x 1000,0 ( vmax
+ Vmin)

3.4

Maximum permissible frequency (or phase) deviation The value to which the peak frequency (or phase) deviation convention for a particular class of service. shall be limited by an agreed

4.

Standard test conditions

Unless otherwise specified, all measurements shall be performed under the general conditions stated in IEC 489-l and the supplementary test conditions given hereafter.

test

5.
5.1

Supplementary

test conditions

Input-signal arrangements, modulation accessible antenna terminals Input-signal source

limiting and pre-emphasis for transmitters

having

5..1.1

TRe input-signal source shall consist of one or more audio-frequency to the transmitter input terminals as shown in figure 1.

generators

connected

2

IS

10820

( Part 2) : 1996

IS0
5. Q.2

489-2 ( 1991 )

Input-signal voltage The audio-frequency input-signal voltage is the voltage across terminals 1 and 2 of the arrangement shown in figure 1. The input-signal voltage should be expressed in terms of the individual voltages of this signal.

5.1.3

Standard

test modulation

The modulation 5.1.4
a

due to a sinusoidal depth of 60%; permissible

input signal of 1000 Mz at a level to produce:

modulation

60% of maximum Standard

frequency

(or phase) deviation.

input-signal voltage

TPle input voltage required

to produce the standard test modulation.

5.1.5

Modulation limiting The modulation specified.

limiter, if present, shall be adjusted for normal operation

unless otherwise

5.1.6

Pre-emphasis

Pre-emphasis
. specified.

networks,

if included

in the transmitter,

shall be operative

unless otherwise

5.2

Output-signal measuring
NOIP.In this standard,

arrangementsfor

transmitters having accessible antenna terminals
with `aerial".

the term *antenna"

is synonymous

5.2.1

Test load

A non-radiating load, with an impedance and power rating specified by the transmitter manufacturer, to replace the antenna including any associated transmission line when the transmitter is being tested. 5.2.2
Connections to the measuting equipment

Care shall be taken to ensure thit the measuring
Output-signal measuring arrangements

equipment

and any coupling

devices do
terminals

not adversely affect the transmitter loading conditions. 5.3
for transmifters without accessible'antenna

The test load shall be the antenna supplied by the manufacturer. For absolute ments, a test site equipped with radiation measurement instruments shall be used.

measure-

For relative measurements, a radiation coupling system, for example a coupling device having stable characteristics over the range of measurement frequencies, shall be used. In this case, the output terminals of the coupling device shall be treated as the output terminals of the transmitter. 5.4
Limitation of the measuring audio-frequency band

Because some properties, for example noise and audio-frequency harmonic distortion, depend upon the audio-frequency bandwidth of the test equipment, reproducible results can be obtained only when the band of audio-frequencies occupied by the demodulated signal is restricted to specified limits. This restriction may be accomplished by means of a band-limiting filter preceding any audio-frequency measuring device. The filter may be incorporated within the measuring equipment. When measuring residual hum and noise, only the low-pass portion of the filter need be specifieu.

3

IS 10820 (Part 2) : 1996
IS0 6. 489-2 ( 1991 ) Characteristics of the measuring equipment

Recommended

characteristics

of the measuring equipment

are given in appendix

A.

SECTION

TWO -

METHODS

OF MEASUREMENT

7.
7.1

Frequency error Dejinition

Frequency error is the difference between the unmodulated carrier frequency and the assigned frequency. The frequency error is expressed in parts per lo6 or in hertz. For the purpose of this measurement, the assigned frequency is any one of the nominal frequencies. Nore. - This definition is in conformity with the general definition of frequency error in se&on two of IEC 244-l.
Assignedfrequencyis

defined in the International Telecommunication

Unions (ITU) Radio Regulations.

7.2

Method of measurement The frequency modulation. error is determined by measuring the carrier frequency in the absence of

The carrier frequency may be measured with any suitable measuring device with an accuracy that is at least ten times more precise than the frequency tolerance given in the equipment specification. If required, the measurements equipped to operate.
8. Terminal radio-frequency power

may be repeated on each channel for which the transmitter

is

This clause is applicable

to transmitters

equipped with suitable antenna terminals.

8.1

General The terminal radio-frequency -

output power of a transmitter

may contain:

a carrier component modulation

(see 8.2); determining transmission quality (see clauses 12, 13 and 14); to the adjacent channel

components

other modulation power (see 8.5);

components,

for example

those contributing

-

spurious narrow-bandwidth

components

(see 8.3); 16) and outside, where it is called spurious

noise, both inside the band (see clause transmitter noise (see 8.4), and inter-transmitter intermodulation

products (see clause I 1). may

Measurements are normally made at the antenna terminals. Additional measurements be made at the audio, control and power terminals using specified terminations.

4

IS 10820(Part2):1996
IS0 489-2 ( 1991 )

8.2 8.2. I

Carrierpower
Definition

The aveffge power supplied to a transmission line by a transmitter during one radiofrequency cycle in the absence of modulation. Nore. - This definition is in conformity with that given in the ITU Radio Regulations. In this standard, the
transmission line may be replaced by a test load.

8.2.2

Method of measurement Measure the output power in the absence of modulation. gives an accuracy of at least f 10% may be used. If required, themeasurement equipped to operate. Any convenient method which is

may be repeated on each channel for which the transmitter

8.3 8.3.1

Spurious narrow-bandwidth Definition

radio-frequency components

Spurious narrow-bandwidth radio-frequency components include harmonic and non-harmonic components and parasitic components that, are usually characterized by a signal having a dominant component at a discrete frequency or in a narrow band of frequencies. Components in the immediate vicinity of the necessary band, which are the result of the modulation process for the transmission of information, are excluded. 8.3.2 Method of measurement at rhe antenna terminals a) Connect the equipment
b) With the transmitter

as illustrated

in figure 2, page 12.

operating at the carrier power level measured in 8.2, adjust the frequency of the selective voltmeter (10) to the transmitter carrier frequency and adjust the band-rejection filter (8) to produce a minimum deflection of the selective voltmeter.

c) Adjust the frequency of the selective voltmeter to the first spurious narrow-bandwidth component. Record the frequency and the deflection of the selective voltmeter. d) Repeat the measurements frequency range. Calibration procedure If the absolute power level of each of these spurious calibrate each deflection as follows: emissions needs to be known, for each spurious narrow-bandwidth component in the specified

e) Replace the transmitter by the auxiliary generator (2) at point (Pi) and adjust it to operate successively at the centre frequency of each of the spurious narrow-bandwidth components. At each frequency, adjust the auxiliary generator output and the scale of the selective voltmeter, as necessary, to obtain the same deflection as recorded in steps c) and d) or a known ratio thereof. Record this ratio, the generator output voltage, the scale change and the input impedance of the measuring arrangement. fl Calculate the power of the spurious narrow-bandwidth the values recorded in step e). radio-frequency component from

IS 10820 ( Part 2 ) :
ISO' 489-2 ( 1991 )

1996

~___________7__-_-----~

`.
I
I

I 6

i

I
--1 `-dt3

I

\
1.

I
!

I I I ; I -t

r

I I 1
I

30
255
4

I

I

A

i I

7L

-1

= 1 I

---__ k----I I

I _________A

i i

@+
Power mains control lines
Or

1x1 3 L-,-J

r-k i-i

F

audio

line

1

i c-_---------Legend I = transmitter under test 2 - radio-frequency signal generator 3 = power mains, control lines, or audio line terminals 4 - line-stabilization network 5 = test load 6 = coupling device (may be incorporated in the test load) 7 - isolating pad (may be incorporated in the test load) 8 - band-rejection Jilter (if needed) 9 - isolating pad (if needed) IO - selective voltmeter Nofe. The standing wave ratio presented by the test arrangement frequency of the spurious component concerned.

I -I

at point (PI) should

not exceed 1.4 for any

FIG. 2. -

Measuring arrangement for terminal spurious narrow-bandwidth

radio-frequency

components.

6

IS 10820 (Part2) : 1996 IS0 489-2 ( 1991 )

8.3.3

Method of measurement at the audio. control orpower terminals forfrequencies

below 30 MHz

a) Connect the equipment as illustrated in figure 2, page 12, with the selective voltmeter connected to the radio-frequency output terminals (A) of the line stabilization network.
NOW. An example of a mains power line stabilization network suitable for use on the mains power line is given in appendix C. Examples of networks for use with audio lines and for battery-powered equipment are under consideration.

b)

With the transmitter operating at the carrier power level measured in 8.2, adjust the selective voltmeter to the centre frequency of each spurious narrow-bandwidth radiofrequency component to be measured. Record the frequency and the voltage of each measured component along with the input impedance of the selective voltmeter.

8.3.4

Presentation of r&dts The values recorded in 8.j.2 shall be expressed either as absolute power or as a ratio, in decibels, relative to the carrier power, for each spurious narrow-bandwidth radio-frequency component that is measured. The values recorded used. in 83.3, step b) shall be expressed in volts, specifying the test circuit

The carrier power level shall be recorded, 8.4 8.4-l Spurious transmitter noise General

as measured in 8.2.

Spurious transmitter noise which falls within the bandwidth of any receiver may degrade the receiver performance. The methods of measurement provide for assessing the transmitter noise in terms of: a) the attenuation mance, or
Note. -

required

to avoid more than a specified

degradation

of receiver

perfor-

b) the spectral power density, which may be used more generally.
This method of measurement may not be suitable for certaintypes of impulsive noise.

8.4.2

Dqfinition Spurious transmitter noise is the continuous transmitter output terminals. spectrum of noise components present at the

8.4.3

Method of measurement a) Connect the equipment
Nore. -

as illustrated

in figure 3, page 14. (7) with

Recommended characteristics of the measuring equipment are described in appendix A.

b) With the transmitter not operating, apply a signal from-the signal generator standard test modulation to port(b) of the matching or combining network (6).

c) Adjust the standard test receiver (8) and the signal generator (7) to operate on a frequezc which is displaced from the transmitter operating frequency by A1; e.g. = 40 kHz. d) Adjust the signal level to a value that is 3 dB greater than reference sensitivity. e) With the transmitter operating at the carrier power level measured in 8.2, adjust attenua:` (4) to reduce the signal-to-noise ratio at the receiver output terminals to the standard va!:r,s (12 dB SINAD). Record the values of attenuation of attenuator (4) and of the matchtr.r: . . combining network (b) between ports (a) and (c).

fl

Record the value of the reference sensitivity of the test receiver.
7

IS IS0

10820 489-2

( Part 2 ) : 1996 ( 1991 )

g) The measurements should be repeated transmitter carrier frequency.

at other

values

of A/ above

and below

the

In order to obtain the spectral power density of the transmitter values referred to in step g). proceed as follows:

noise at each of the Af

hl With the transmitter

not operating, change the connection at PI from the attenuator (4) to the noise generator (5) and, with the radio-frequency signal generator (7) adjusted according to steps b) to d) above, apply a noise spectrum from the noise generator (5) at a level to reduce the signal-to-noise ratio at the receiver output terminal to the standard value, i.e. 12 dB. Record the value of the spectral power density p. expressed in dB (kT), at the output of the noise generator.

Legend Itransmitter under test

2345678Nore. -

distortion-factor meter test load coupler/attenuator device white noise generator (if used) matching orcombining network radio-frequency signal generator standard test receiver

The measuring arrangement shall be capable of measuring noise to a level IOdB lower than the noise of the transmitter.

FIG. 3. -

Measuring arrangement

for terminal spurious transmitter

noise.

The spectral power density Nof the transmitter noise at the radio frequency to which the receiver is tuned is equal to the value of p plus the attenuation of attenuator (4) recorded in
step eJ. NOW. i) The expression `kT" sometimes appears in technical documents as `klb", bandwidth of I Hz. where `b" is equal to a

The measurements
mitter carrier

should be repeated

at other

values

of Afabove

and below

the trans-

frequency. of resulrs

8.4.4

Presentation a) Required terminals

path attenuation

between

the transmitter

output

terminals

and the receiver

input

Plot the values of total attenuation recorded in 8.4.3, steps <p) and g), on the linear of a graph with the values of A,fon the logarithmic abscissa.

ordinate

IS 10820 (Part
IS0 489-2

2) : 1996

( 1991 )

Record the value of the reference sensitivity and/or
Nore. -

the noise figure of the test receiver.

An affected receiver may have different characteristics from the test receiver used. This should be taken into account when interpreting the results.

b) Spectral power density of the transmitter

noise

Plot the spectral power densities of Ncalculated in 8.4.3, step h)on the linear ordinate of a graph with the values of Afon the logarithmic abscissa. 8.5 8.5.1 Adjacent channelpowerfor Definition The adjacent channel power of transmitters operating in systems allocated on a channel basis is that part of the total power ouput of a transmitter which, under defined conditions of modulation, falls within a specified bandwidth centred on the centre frequency of either of the adjacent channels. This power is measured by means of a power measuring receiver having its -6 dB response frequencies displaced from the transmitter carrier frequency by amounts derived from the channel spacing or by means of a spectrum analyzer. This measurement provides the ratio, expressed in decibels, of the carrier power to the adjacent channel power. For the purpose of this measurement, this ratio is called the `adjacent channel power ratio".
Note. The following are severalof the commonly usedchannel spacingsand specifiedbandwidths:
Channel spacings /kHz) Specifiedbandwidths fk Hz)

transmitters with accessible antenna terminals

30 25 20 20 15 12.5 IO

16 16 16 14 8.5 8.5 8.5

8.5.2

Method of measurement

- Power measuring receiver

4 Connect

the equipment, as illustrated in figure 4, page 19, using a power measuring receiver of specified selectivity. See clause A7 of appendix A for the required characteristics of the power measuring receiver.

b) Operate the transmitter at the carrier power measured as described in 8.2. 4 Set the i.f. attenuator (4C) to a high value, for examp!e 70 dB, then adjust the coupler/
attenuator measuring (3) to provide receiver. a signal level which is within the linear range of the power

4 Adjust the frequency of the local oscillator (4A) to obtain a maximum reading on the r.m.s.
meter (4D). Record this reading, and the attenuation of the i.f. attenuator, in decibels.

Increase the frequency of the local oscillator (4A) until the indication reduced by 6 dB. Record the frequency of the local oscillator. Increase the frequency of the local oscillator (4A) by an additional channel spacing minus one-half of the specified bandwidth.
Nore. -

on the r.m.s. meter is amount equal to the

The following are several of the commonly used channel spacings and specified bandwidths.
SpeciJkdbandwidrhsfkHr) Fiberbandw~dthr fk Hz)

Channel ~prrctngr fkHz1

25 20 20 12.5 IO

I6 16 I4 8.5 8.5

I6 I6 I4 8.5 8.5

II I2 I3 8.25 5.75

9

IS 10820(Part2):1996 IS0 489-2 (1991 )

sl Modulate the transmitter

at 1250 f 2 Hz with a signal at a level which is 10 dB greater than the level that produces: !) a modulation depth of 60% for AM transmitters, or
.

2) 60% of maximum

permissible

frequency

(or phase) deviation

for FM transmitter

a.

For equipment without modulation limiters which are intended to operate at a fixed input level, the measurement should be made using the input signal level specified by the manufacturer. Adjust the i-f. attenuator (4C) until the indication of the r.m.s. meter is approximately the same as that recorded in step d). Reccrd the reading of the r.m.s. meter and the attenuation of the i-f. attenuator, in decibels_ i) The adjacent channel power ratio, A, is the difference of the attenuator values, recorded in steps d) and h), corrected for the difference in readings of the r.m.s. meter in those steps. Record this value.

j) Remove the modulation
recorded in step d). W Repeat steps c) through and g). 8.5.3 Presentation of results

from the transmitter i). but decrease

and set the i-f. attenuator of the local oscillator

to the value in steps fl

the frequency

4 Calculate and state the power, P(adjacent
the ratios A recorded described in 8.2:

channel), in each of the adjacent channels from in 8.5.2, steps i) and k), and the carrier power P(canier) measured as channel) - P(carrier)
x 10-*`t" in watts

P(adjacent

b) Calculate

and state the 6 dB bandwidth of the power measuring receiver. This is the difference between the two values of the local oscillator frequency recorded in 8.5.2, steps e)and k).

8.5.4

Methods of measurement - Spectrum analyzer There are two methods of measurement using a spectrum analyzer given here. The first method (see 8.5.5) allows the use of non-digital storage types of spectrum analyzers which will give a measurement accuracy of f2 dB when a significant part of the adjacent channel power is contained in one or more spectral components rather than in the noise. The second method of measurement (see 8.5.7) uses a digital storage spectrum analyzer and can be used for all cases when a detector correction factor F, is applied, typically between 0 and 2.5 dB for a mixture of sinusoidal components and thermal noise. For this standard, F, will be 1 dB (see clause A8 of appendix A for a method of measurement of the maximum adjacent channel power ratio of the digital storage spectrum analyzer to be used).

8.5.5

Method qfmeasurement

- Non-digital storage spectrum analyzer analyzer for

al Connect the equipment, as illustrated in figure 4, page 19, using a spectrum item (4). Adjust the spectrum analyzer as follows:
-

resolution and video filter bandwidth to the lowest possible setting, but not less than the specified bandwidth divided by 200 nor greater than the specified bandwidth divided by 40, and record this as R;
tctal swept bandwidth to the lowest pbssible -etting which is equal to or greater than the specified bandwidth and record this as B;

-

.- the sweep time to greater than 3B/R2.

10

IS IS0

10820 489-2

( Part 2 ) : lwt ( 1991 )

.,

Adjust the coupler/attenuator (3) to a value which is compatible with the input charactit &tics of the spectrum analyzer. b) Operate the transmitter unmodulated at the carrier power measured as described in 8.2.

c) Adjust the spectrum analyzer so that the centre of the displayed figure coincides with thtcarrier frequency of the transmitter. d) Adjust the coupler/attenuator (3) and the sensitivity of the spectrum analyzer to value< suitable to provide a displayed figure on the screen which is in the linear range of tt~c spectrum analyzer. Record the value Pc of the transmitted carrier in dBm.

4 Adjust the spectrum analyzer so that the ccntre of the displayed figure coincides with the
centre frequency of the upper adjacent channel.

n

Modulate the transmitter at 1 250 f 2 Hz with a signal level which is 10 dB greater than thtlevel that produces: 60% modulation
60%

depth for AM transmitters, 01

of maximum permissible frequency (or phase) deviation for FM transmitters.

For equipment without modulation limiters which are intended to operate at a fixed inpu: level, the measurement should be made using the input signal level specified by thr manufacturer.

g) Within the specified bandwidth determine whether the value of the largest component
exceeds the highest noise power level by at least lOlg(B/R) + 3 dB
I!

If not, the method of measurement in 8.57 should be used. If so, record the values of the components Al, AZ, . . . An, within the specified bandwidth d Bm. Calculate and record the indicated adjacent channel power:
i-n

Pa - 1Olg 1 10Ai"'
iI

dBm

where n is the number of samples h) llsing the lower adjacent channel, repeat steps e) through g). 8.5.6 Presentation of results

4 Calculate the ratio PR for the upper adjacent channel using the following relationshlr:
where:
PCis the value recorded in 85.5. step d)

PR=P,-p,

dB

W 4 Record the lower value of PR calculated in steps a) and b) as the adjacent km:.+:
ratio (ACPR). Calculate the power (adjacent channel) Pdj using the following relationship: PIdj = P X
wnere: t'is the carrier power measured in 8.2.2 in watts A CPR is the value recorded in step c)
10-ACPW'o

stepg). for the upperadjacent channel Repeat step a) for the lower adjacent channel.

P. is the value recorded in 8.55.

W

Record this value as the adjacent channel power;

4 Record the channel spacing, the specified bandwidth and the carrier powel'
11

IS 10820 ( Part 2) : 1996 IS0 489-2 ( 1991 )

8.5.1

Method

of measurement

- Digital storage

spectrum

analyzer

Connect the equipment as illustrated in figure 4, page 19. using a digital storage spectrum analyzer for item (4). Adjust the spectrum analyzer as follows: - resolution and video filter bandwidth to the lowest possible setting, but not less than the specified bandwidth divided by 200 nor greater than the specified bandwidth divided by 40, and record this as R; - total swept bandwidth to the lowest possible setting which is equal to or greater than
.

the specified bandwidth

and record this as B; with the input charac-

-

the sweep time to greater than 3 B/R2.

Adjust the coupler/attenuator (3) to a value which is compatible teristics of the spectrum analyzer. Operate the transmitter unmodulated

at the carrier power measured as described in 8.2. figure coincides with the

Adjust the spectrum analyzer so that the centre of the displayed carrier frequency of the transmitter.

Adjust the coupler/attenuator (3) and the sensitivity of the spectrum analyzer to values suitable to provide a displayed figure on the screen which is in the linear range of the spectrum analyzer. Activate the digital storage spectrum analyzer to record the values G in dBm for at least 200 samples uniformly distributed throughout the specified bandwidth. Calculate and record the indicated carrier power:
in

PE= IOlg t 10"" i-l where n is the number of samples

dBm

Adjust the spectrum analyzer so that the centre of the displayed centre frequency of the upper adjacent channel.

figure coincides

with the

Modulate the transmitter at 1250 f 2 Hz with a signal level which is 10 dB greater than the level that produces: - 60% modulation depth for AM transmitters, or 60% of maximum permissible frequency (or phase) deviation for FM transmitters.

For equipment without modulation limiters which are intended to operate at a fixed input level, the measurement should be made using the input signal level specified by the manufacturer. Activate the digital storage spectrum analyzer to record the values Ai in dBm for the same number of samples used in step d) uniformly distributed throughout the specified bandwidth. Calculate and record the indicated adjacent channel power: i--n
P, = IOlg z 10 """ i- I dBm

where n is the number of samples Using the lower adjacent channel repeat steps e) through g). 8.5.8
Presentation a) Calculate of results

the ratio PR for the upper adjacent channel using the following relationship:
PR= PC-[P,+ I]

dE

12

IS 10820 ( Part 2 ) : 1996
is0 where: PCis the value recorded in 8.57, step dJ P, is the value recorded in 8.5.7, step g). for the upper adjacent channel Nore. For an explanation of the I dB in the equation, see 8.5.4. 469-2 ( 1991 )

Repeat step a) for the lower adjacent channel Record the lower value of PR calculated in steps a) and b) as the adjacent channel power ratio (ACPR). Calculate the power (adjacent channel)
&j Padj

using the following relationship: W

PX 10-"cP~o

where: Pis the carrier power measured in 82.2 in watts ACPR is the value recorded in step c)

Record this value as the adjacent channel power. Record the channel spacing, the specified bandwidth and the carrier power.

1

/

4r------------

I

r

4c

L
Legend

___-------a-

J

I 2 3 4

I

5

transmitter under test audio-frequency generator coupler/attenuator device (may be incorporated in the test load) power measuring receiver 4A - mixer and local oscillator 4B - channel band-pass filter 4c - i.f. attenuator (0 to 80 dB) 4D - r.m.s. meter (may be preceded by an i.f. amplifier) test load

FIGA

-

Measuring arrangement for terminal adjacent channel power.

13

IS 10820

( Part 2) : IS0 489-2 ( 1991 )
9.

1996

Radiated radio-frequency power These measurements are usually made only on transmitters power output of a transmitter transmission having integral antennas. may contain: General The radiated radio-frequency a carrier component modulation components (see 8.2); determining quality (see clauses 12,13 and 14); contributing to the adjacent channel

9.1

other modulation power) (see 8.5);

components

(e.g. components (see 9.3);

spurious narrow-bandwidth

components

noise, both inside the band (see clause 16) and outside the band, where it is called spurious transmitter noise (see 9.4), and inter-transmitter intermodulation products (see clause I I). from the antenna, audio lines, control of

The measured levels may be due to the radiation lines, power mains or from the cabinet.

These measurements generall; require the use of a test site. Guides for the construction such test sites are given in appendices of this standard. 9.2 9.2. I Average radiated powerfot transmitters with integral antennas Definition The average of the radiated horizontal plane. 9.2.2 Method of measurement powers in eight directions distributed

at 45" angles in the

4

Choose the test site suitable described in the appendices.

for the frequency

and use of the transmitter

from those

The 30 m test site (appendix B) should be the reference for transmitters operating in the frequency range 25 MHz to 1000 MHz. Any other test site described in some appendices of this standard may also be used, provided account is taken of the limitations attached to the use of the test site that is chosen.

b) Connect the equipment under test as illustrated in the chosen appendix. 4 Adjust the length of the measuring antenna (if adjustable) for the frequency
transmitter.

of the

4 4

Position rization.

the measuring

antenna

within the specified

elevation

range for vertical pola-

Activate the transmitter. Tune the selective measuring frequency. measuring device. device, e.g. spectrum analyzer, the maximum to the transmitter indication operating

n

gl Rotate the equipment

under test to obtain

on the selective

h) Raise and lower the measuring
selective measuring attenuator.
Nore. The maximum

device.

antenna to obtain the maximum indication on the Note the value of the indication and the setting of the
at heights outside the specified limits.

may be a lower value than the value obtainable

j)

Rotate the equipment

under test 45" clockwise and note the new value.

14

IS 10820
IS0 489-2

(Part 2)
( 1991

: 1996

)

i) k)

Repeat step i) until values have been obtained for eight azimuth positions. Replace the equipment under test with the auxiliary antenna connected to the radiofrequency generator, in accordance with the instructions in the chosen appendix.

1) Raise and lower the measuring antenna to obtain the maximum indication on the selective measuring device. m) Adjust the output of the r.f. signal generator, and where necessary the attenuator, to obtain the level recorded in step h). Record the output level corrected for the attenuator value. 9.2.3 Presentation of results Calculate the maximum effective radiated power, Pmpx,of the equipment under test from the reading taken in 9.2.2, step h), taking into account the attenuator setting, the auxiliary antenna gain, and the cable loss between the generator and the auxiliary antenna.
NOMS1. - The measured power of an unmodulated AM transmitter should be multiplied by 1.18 to take into account the additional power corresponding to a modulation depth of 60%. The radiited power is the average of he eight values calculated above. 2. - On request, the maximum radiated power. which is the maximum value determined above, can be stated.

9.3 9.3.1

Spurious narrow-bandwidth components Definition Spurious narrow-bandwidth radio-frequency components include harmonic and non-harmonic components and parasitic components that are usually characterized by a signal having a dominant component at a discrete frequency or in a narrow band of frequencies. Components in the immediate vicinity of the necessary band which are a result of the modulation process for the transmission of information are excluded. Method of measurement (see figure 5, page 23)
Note. The value of the average radiated power determined in 9.2 is required for this measurement. It should be measured on the same test site that is chosen in the following step a).

9.3.2

a) Choose the test site, suitable for the range of frequencies applicable and power levels to be measured, from those described in the test site appendices. 6) Connect the equipment as illustrated in the chosen appendix. When a particular step in the method of measurement requires an antenna to be raised and lowered to find a maximum indication, use the height limits in the chosen test site description, c) Activate the equipment under test (unmodulated). Note. - Radio regulations establish limits for spurious components

of a modulated emission. However, at this time no practical method has been developed for measuring spurious components of the transmitter while being modulated.

d) Identify the frequencies of the significant spectral components by using the selective measuring device, e.g. spectrum analyzer. If necessary, closely couple it to the equipment under test. e) Adjust the measuring antenna (if adjustable) to the correct length for the frequency of each significant spectral component to be considered. fl g) Tune the selective measuring device to a significant spectral component. Orient the measuring antenna so that it is vertically polarized. 15

IS 10820 ( Part 2) : 1996
IS0 489-2 ( 1991 )
h)

i)

Rotate the equipment under test to obtain the maximum indication on the selective measuring device. When required by the test site description, raise and lower the measuring antenna to obtain the maximum indication on the selective measuring device.
Note. The

maximum may

be a lower value than the value obtainable at heights outside the specified limits.

j)

Repeat steps h) and i) until no further increase occurs. Record the corresponding maximum indication and the frequency of the component. &) Orient the measuring antenna so that it is horizontally polarized and repeat steps h), i) and j). 1) Repeat steps e) to k) for all significant spectral components until the levels have been measured for all significant spectral components. m) Replace the equipment under test with the auxiliary antenna.

4 4
P)

Select one of the significant spectral components measured in step j) and adjust the frequency of the radio-frequency generator to its frequency. Adjust the length of the auxiliary antenna (if adjustable) to the frequency of the sjgnificant spectral component. Adjust the length of the measuring antenna (if adjustable) to the frequency of the significant spectral component. Tune the selective measuring device to the frequency of the significant spectral component. Position the auxiliary and measuring antennas for vertical polarization. Adjust the output level of the radio-frequency signal generator to provide an indication on the selective measuring device. Raise and lower the measuring antenna to obtain the maximum indication on the selective measuring device. Readjust the output level of the radio-frequency signal generator to obtain tha same ~G.te of indication as noted in step j). Note the output level of the radio-frequency signal generator and its frequency. Repeat steps s) to u) with the auxiliary and measuring antennas horizontally polarized.

4)
r) d I) 4

v)

WI Repeat steps n) to v) for the remaining significant spectral components measured in
step j).

16

IS IS0
START

10820(Part2):1996 489-2

( 1991 )

b)

Connect

equipment

under

test

Yes

m)
Actwate equrpment under test hMmlodulatadJ

Replace antenna

aqurpment

under

test by auxrliary

dj*I
ldentrfy Tune measurrng

nl
spectral S

Tune slgnal generator component

to a spectral

slgndrcant

1 0)

P)

Tune auxlllarv

and measunng

antennas

elL I -1
f)
Tune selactwa

antenna

to a spectral

I 9)
* Tune selectwa measunng I dewce

measurrng

dewce

gJ

Ortent

measunng

antenna

to vertical

sl

I
t-

Adjust

stgnal generator

output

level

I

h)

Rotate

equrpment

under

test for Rarse and lowermeasurmg antenna tar

i)

1 Adjust signal generator the same tndrcatron level (0 gwe

for rnaxwnum

rndlcatton

as In Step/l

Record indicated

frequency value

and

Orrent measwng antenna horrzontal to

1
kl

polaruatton

k)

END 0

FIG. 5. -

Flow chart.
17

IS 10820( tso 9.3.3

Part 2):1996
)

489-2(199?

Presentation qf results Calculate the power availabie to the auxiliary antenna from the values noted in 9.3.2, step u), taking into account the different settings of the attenuator, the gain of the auxiliary antenna and the cable loss between the radio-frequency signal generator and the auxiliary antenna. The powers thus calculated characterize the spurious narrow-bandwidth components of the transmitter under test. Each should be expressed either as an absolute value or in decibels in relation to the average radiated power as described in 9.2. Record these powers and frequencies of the corresponding components in a table. spurious narrow-bandwidth

9.4

Spurious transmitter noise General Spurious transmitter noise which falls within the bandwith of any receiver may degrade the receiver performance. The methods of measurement provide for assessing the transmitter noise in terms of: a) the attenuation formance, or required to avoid more than a specified degradation of receiver per-

9.4.1

b) the spectra1 power density, which may be used more generally. 9.4.2 Definition Spurious transmitter noise is the continuous transmitter. 9.4.3 Method of measurement Connect
Nore -

spectrum of noise components

radiated by the

the equipment

as illustrated

in figure 6, page 25. specified for any other with

Recommended characteristics of the standard test receiver are described in appendix A.

Place the transmitter near the test antenna or in the position radiation-coupling device. Operate standard the transmitter test modulation. at the output power level measured

in 9.2 modulated

Adjust the receiver (8) to receive the transmitter carrier frequency frequency signal generator (7) output to minimum.

and reduce the radio-

Adjust attenuator (4) to produce the standard signal-to-noise ratio, i.e. 12dB at the receiver output terminals. Record the value of attenuation of attenuator (4). With the transmitter not operating, adjust the frequency of the radio-frequency signal generator to the frequency of the test receiver and adjust the signal level to produce the standard signal-to-noise ratio (12 dB) at the receiver output terminals. Measure and record the power at port (b) of the matching or combining network (6). Verify that the coupling loss from ports (a) to (c) is the same as from ports (b) to (c). Calculate the coupling loss from the transmitter to port (a). It is the value of the ratio, in decibels, of the transmitter effective radiat.ed power to the power measured at port (b). (Roth powers are expressed in dBW.) Ca?culate the coupling loss of the coupling device (3). It is the value calculated nrxin~s the attenuation of attenuator (4), rei:c)rded rn step e). Adjust the standard test receiver (8) and the radio-frequency operate on a frequency which is displaced from the transmitter i$ e.g. 40 k Hz.. in step g)

signal generator (7) to operating frequency by

IS 10820( IS0

Part 2):1996
)

489-2(1991

i) 4

Adjust the input signal to a level that is 3 dB greater than reference sensitivity. With the unmodulated transmitter operating at the carriei power level measured in 9.2, adjust attenuator (4) to reduce the signal-to-noise ratio at the receiver output terminals to 12 dB. Record the values of attenuation of attenuator (4) and of the matching or combining network between ports (a) and (c). and below the trans..

1) Record the value of the reference sensitivity of the test receiver. m) The measurements should be repeated at other values of Afabove
mitter carrier frequency. In order to obtain the spectral power density of the transmitter of Afreferred to in step m), proceed as follows:

noise at each of the values

4

With the transmitter not operating, change the connection at PI from the attenuator (4)to the noise generator (5) and with the radio-frequency signal generator (7) adjusted according to steps i) and j) above, apply a noise spectrum from the noise generator (5) at a level to reduce the signal-to-noise ratio at the receiver output terminal to the standard value, i.e. 12 dB. Record the value of the spectra1 power density p, expressed in dB (kT), at the output of the noise generator.

1

P
Legend

Pl
4 -J a 6 b c 8 9

I - transmitter under test
2 3 4 5 6 7 g 9 Note. audio-frequency generator calibrated loop antenna coupling device, e.g. calibrated loop antenna white noise generator (if used) matching or combining network radio-frequency signal generator standard test receiver distortion-factor meter

The measuring arrangement shall be capable of measuring noise to a level 10 dB lower than the noise of the transmitter.

FIG. 6. -

Measuring arrangement

for radiated spurious transmitter

noise.

The spectral' power density N of the transmitter noise at the radio frequency to which the receiver is tuned is equal to the value of p plus the attenuation of attenuator (4) recorded in step k), plus the coupling loss recorded in step h). 9.4.4 Presenrarion of results a) Requiredpath attenuation between the transmitter oufput and the recezver input terminals

19

IS IS0

10820( 489-2

Part2): ( 1991 )

1996

Add the attenuations recorded in 9.4.3, steps h) and k), and plot this value on the linear ordinate of a graph with the values of Afon the logarithmic abscissa. Record the value of the reference sensitivity and/or
Nore. -

the noise figure of the test receiver.

An affected receiver may have different characteristics from the test receiver used. This should be taken into account when interpreting the results.

W Specrral power density of the transmitter noise
Plot the spectral power densities in values on N calculated in 9.4.3, step n), on the linear ordinate of a graph with the values of Af on the logarithmic abscissa. 9.5 9.5-l Radiated adjacent channel powerfor transmitters with integral antennas Definition The adjacent channel power of transmitters operating in systems allocated on a channel basis is that part of the total power output of a transmitter, under defined conditions of modulation, which falls within a specified bandwidth centred on the centre frequency of either of the adjacent channels. This power is measured by means of a power measuring receiver having its -6 dB response frequencies displaced from the transmitter carrier frequency by amounts derived from the channel spacing or by means of a spectrum analyzer. This measurement provides the ratio, expressed in decibels, of the carrier power to the adjacent channel power. For the purpose of this measurement this ratio is called the `adjacent channel power ratio".
Note. -

The following are several of the commonly used channel spacings and specified bandwidths.
Chonnclspadngs(kHzl Sprcijicd bondwidrhr(kHr)

30 25 20 20 I5 12.5 10

16 16 16 I4 8.5 8.5 8.5

9.5.2

Method of measurement - Power measuring

receiver

a) Connect

the equipment, as illustrated in figure 7, page 31, using a power measuring receiver of specified selectivity. See clause A7 of appendix A for the required characteristics of the power measuring receiver. near the test antenna device. or in the position specified for any other

bJ Place the transmitter
radiation-coupling

4 Operate the transmitter at the effective radiated power level measured as described in 9.2. 4 Set the i.f. attenuator
attenuator measuring (4C) to a high value, for example 70 dB, then adjust the coupler/ (3) to provide a signal level which is within the linear range of the power receiver. of the if. attenuator, in decibels.

4 Adjust the frequency of the local oscillator (4A) to obtain a maximum reading on the r.m.s.
meter (4D). Record this reading, and the attenuation

n

Increase the frequency of the local oscillator (4A) until the indication reduced by 6 dB. Record the frequency of the local oscillator. of the local oscillator (4A) by an additional channel spacing minus one-half of the specified bandwidth.

on the r.m.s. meter is amount equal to the

8) Increase the frequency

20

IS IS0 NOW. -

10820 489-2

(Tart 2 ) : 1996
(1991 )

The following are several of the commonly used channel spacings and specified bandwidths.
Speci~?edbandwidths (k Hz) 16 Filrrr bondwidths (kf/z) Drsploccmenr o/rhc rcfrrcnct pow from the

Channel spacin#s /k Hz) 25

carrwr/requcncy ytkHzI
I7 I2 I3 8.25 5.75

20 20 12.5 IO h)

I6 I4 8.5 8.5

I6 I6 I4 8.5 8.5

Modulate the transmitter the level that produces: 1) a modulation 2) 60% of maximum

at 1 250 f 2 Hz with a signal at a level which is 10 dB greater than or for FM transmitters.

depth of 600/o for AM transmitters, permissible frequency

(or phase) deviation

For equipment without modulation limiters which are intended to operate at a fixed input level, the measurement should be made using the input signal level specified by the manufacturer. i) Adjust the i-f. attenuator (4C) until the indication of the r.m.s. meter is approximately the same as that recorded in step d). Record the reading of the r.m.s. meter and the attenuation of the i.f. attenuator, in decibels. j) The adjacent channel power ratio, A, is the difference of the attenuator values recorded in steps e) and i), corrected for the difference in readings of the r.m.s. meter recorded in those steps. Record this value. k) Remove the modulation recorded in step e). from the transmitter and set the i-f. attenuator (4C) to the value in steps fl

1) Repeat steps d) through j) but decrease and g). 9.5.3 Presentation of results

the frequency

of the local oscillator

a) Calculate and state the power, P(adjacent channel), in each of the adjacent channels from the ratios A recorded in 9.52, steps j) and Z),and the effective radiated power, P(effective radiated) measured in 9.2, from the formula: P(adjacent b) Calculate difference and 1). 9.5.4 channel) = P(effective radiated) x 10-A~to in watts and state the 6dB bandwidth of the power measuring receiver. This is the between the two values of the local oscillator frequency recorded in steps Jl

Methods of measurement - Spectrum analyzer There are two methods of measurement using a spectrum analyzer given here. The first method (see 9.5.5) allows the use of non-digital storage types of spectrum analyzers which will give a measurement accuracy of f 2 dB when a significant part of the adjacent channel power Is contained in one or more spectral components rather than in the noise. The second method of measurement (see 9.5.7) uses a digital storage spectrum analyzer and can be used for all cases when a detector correction factor F, is applied, typically between 0 and 2.5 dB for a mixture of sinusoidal components and thermal noise. For this standard, F, will be 1 dB (see clause A8 of appendix A for a method of measurement of the maximum adjacent channel power ratio of the digital storage spectrum analyzer to be used).

9.5.5

Method of measurement - Non-digital storage spectrum analyzer a) Connect the equipment as illustrated in figure 7, page 31, using a spectrum item (4). Adjust the spectrum analyzer as follows: analyzer for

21

IS 10820 IS0

(Part 2) : 1998
)

489-2 ( 1991 -

resolution and video filter bandwidth to the lowest possible setting, but not less than the specified bandwith divided by 200 nor greater than the specified bandwidth divided by 40, and record this as R;
total swept bandwidth to the lowest possible setting which is equal to or greater than the specified bandwidth and record this as B;

-

the sweep time to greater than 3 B/R2. with the input charac-

Adjust the coupler/attenuator (3) to a value which is compatible teristics of the spectrum analyzer. b) Operate the transmitter unmodulated

at the carrier power measured as described in 8.2. or in the position specified for any other with the

c) Place the transmitter near the test antenna radio-frequency coupling device.

d,J Adjust the spectrum analyzer so that the centre of the displayed carrier frequency of the transmitter.

figure coincides

d Adjust the coupler/attenuator

(3) and the sensitivity of the spectrum analyzer to values suitable to provide a displayed figure on the screen which is in the linear range of the spectrum analyzer. Record the value PCof the transmitted carrier in dBm. figure coincides with the

n

Adjust the spectrum analyzer so that the centre of the displayed kentre frequency of the upper adjacent channel. level that produces: 60% modulation 60% of maximum depth for AM transmitters, permissible frequency or

gl Modulate the transmitter

at 1250 f 2 Hz with a signal level which is IO dB greater than the

(or phase) deviation

for FM transmitters.

For equipment without modulation limiters which are intended to operate at a fixed input level, the measurement should be made using the input signal level specified by the manufacturer.

h) Within the specified bandwith determine whether the amplitude of the largest component
exceeds the highest noise power level by at least lOlg(B/R)+3dB If not, the method of measurement in 9.5.7 should be used. in If so, record the values of the components At, AZ, . . ., An, within the specified bandwith, dBm. Calculate and record the indicated adjacent channel power:
i-n

Pa - 1Olg 1 10 N"
I i-

dBm

I

where n is the number of samples i,J Using the lower adjacent channel, repeat stepsfl through h). j.5.6 Presentation of results

a) Calculate the ratio PR for the upper adjacent channel using the following relationship:
PRwhere: PCis the value recorded in 93.5, step e)

PC- Pa dB

P. is the value recorded in 9.5.5, step h), for the upper adjacent channel

6)

Repeat

step a) for the lower adjacent channel.

22

IS 10820 (Part 2) : 1996
IS0 489-2(1991)

Record the lower value of PR calculated in steps a) and 6) as the adjacent channel power ratio (ACPR). Calculate the power (adjacent channel) padj using the following relationship:
padj = P X IO-`C'R"O

W

where: Pis the effective radiated power measured in 9.2.2 in watts

ACPR is the value recorded in step c)

Record this value as the adjacent channel power. Record the channel spacing, the specified bandwidth and the effective radiated power.

9.5.7

Method of measurement - Digitalstorage spectnrm analyzer a) Connect the equipment as illustrated in figure 6, page 25, using a digital storage spectrum analyzer for item (4). Adjust the digital storage spectrum analyzer as follows: - resolution and video filter bandwidth to the lowest possible setting, but not less than the specified bandwidth divided by 200 nor greater than the specified bandwidth divided by 40 and record this as R; total swept bandwidth to the lowest possible setting which is equal to or greater than the specified bandwidth and record this as B;

- the sweep time to greater than 3 B/R2. Adjust the coupler/attenuator (3) to a value which is compatible with the input characteristics of the spectrum analyzer. b) Operate the transmitter unmodulated at the carrier power measured as described in 8.2.

4 Place the transmitter near the test antenna or in the position specified for any other
radio-frequency coupling device.

4 Adjust the spectrum analyzer so that the centre of the displayed figure coincides with the
carrier frequency of the transmitter. 4 Adjust the coupler attenuator (3) and the sensitivity of the spectrum analyzer to values suitable to provide a displayed figure on the screen which is in the linear range of the spectrum analyzer. Activate the digital storage spectrum analyzer to record the values G in dBm for at least 200 samples uniformly distributed throughout the specified bandwidth. Calculate and record the indicated carrier power:
i-n

PC- 1Olg 1 10 "lo
i-l

dBm

where n is the number of samples.

n

Adjust the spectrum analyzer so that the centre of the displayed figure coincides with the centre frequency of the upper adjacent channel. level that produces: - 60% modulation depth for AM transmit&s,
-

gl Modulate the transmitter at 1250 f 2 Hz with a signal level which is 10 dB greater than the
or

60% of maximum permissible frequency (or phase) deviation for FM transmitters.

23

IS 10820 (Part 2) : 1996
IS0 489-2 ( 1991 )

For equipment without modulation limiters which are intended to operate at a fixed input level, the measurement should be made using the input signal level specified by the manufacturer.

h) Activate the digital storage spectrum analyzer to record the values Ai in dBm for the same
number of samples used in step d,l uniformly distributed throughout bandwidth. Calculate and record the indicated adjacent channel power:
in

the specified

pa where n is the number of samples

1Olg x 10 ""`O
i-l

dBm

i) Using the lower adjacent channel, repeat stepsfl through h).
9.5.8 Presentation of results a) Calculate the ratio PR for the upper adjacent channel using the following relationship: PRwhere: PC is the value recorded in 9.5.7, step cl f'. is the value recorded in 9.5.7, step hJ, for the upper adjacent channel Nore. For an explanation of the I dB in the equation, see 9.5.4.

Pi-[Pa+

I]

dB

Repeat step a) for the lower adjacent channel. Record the lower value of PR calculated ratio (ACPR). Calculate the power (adjacent channel) in steps a) and b) as the adjacent
Padj

channel power

using the following relationship: W

p,dj P P
where:

X lO-"CPW'O

P is the effective radiated power measured in 9.2.2 in watts ACPR is the value recorded in step c)

Record this value as the adjacent channel power. Record the channel spacing, the specified bandwidth and the effective radiated power.

24

IS IS0

10820 489-2

( Part ( 1991

2) )

: 1996

Legend

I - transmitter under test 2 - audio-frequency generator 3 - coupler/attenuator device 4 - power measuring receiver 4A - mixer and local oscillator 48 - channel band-pass filter 4C - if. attenuator (0 to 80 dB) 4D - r.m.s. meter (may be preceded by an i.f. amplifier) 5 - calibrated loop antenna FIG. 7. -

Measuring arrangement for radiated adjacent channel power.

9.6

Cabinet radiation Definition and methods of measurement of cabinet radiation
Methods of measurement of cabinet radiation of small and medium-sized transmitters are given in EC 244-6. These methods of measurement are not applicable to transmitters with integral antennas.
Note. IEC 244-6 describes two different methods, one for measurements at a distance of 3 m (in accordance with CISPR 13). and the other for measurements at a distance of 30 m, both being appropriate for frequencies between about 27 MHz and IO00 MHz. A separate method, also suitable for frequencies above I GHx, is under acmsideration.

9.6. I

25

IS IS0

10820 489-2

(Part 2) : 1996
( 1991 )

IO. Input power and overall efficiency 10.1 10.1.1 Input power Definition The input power is the power delivered to the transmitter under specified conditions of operation and modulation, including the power absorbed by ancillary equipment required for normal operation. 10.1.2 Method of measurement The input power for frequency modulation. For amplitude-modulated amplitude deviation(s). 10.2 10.2.1 Overall efficiency &finition The overall efficiency is the ratio of the carrier power to the input power. expressed as a percentage.
Note. For amplitude modulation, the amplitude deviation shall be specified.

or phase modulated

equipment

shall be measured

without

equipment,

the input power shall be measured

at specified

It is usually

11. 11.1

Inter-transmitter intermodulation Definition Intermodulation between transmitters is the process by which intermodulation products are generated in a transmitter's output circuits due to the presence of an unwanted signal from another transmitter. For the purpose of this standard, inter-transmitter intermodulation is expressed in terms of the ratio, in decibels, of the value specified for the interfering power which is incident upon the output of the disturbed transmitter to the power of the third-order intermodulation product. :
Note. This ratio is sometimes known as the "transmitter intermodulation conversion loss".

11.2

Method of measurement a) Connect the equipment
Nore. -

as shown in figure 8, page 33.

The impedance of all components in the measuring arrangement (with the possible exception of the output impedance of the transmitter under test) shall be the same as the characteristic impedance of the measuring arrangement transmission line. The directional couplers shall be used to measure the incident and the reflected powers, and to make certain that there is not a gross mismatch between the test load and the measuring arrangement.

b) Operate the transmitter without modulation at rated power output and adjust the selective voltmeter (3) for maximum indication at the operating frequency of the transmitter. l?ecord the carrier level with switch (4) in position A. c) Adjust the frequency of the radio-frequency test signal source (9) to a frequency above the operating frequency of the transmitter. 100 kHz

d) Change the switch (4) to position B. Adjust the selective voltmeter for maximum reading at the frequency of the radio-frequency test signal source (9) and adjust the test signal level to produce a value 30 dB below the level recorded in step b).
Note. In some cases it will be difficult in step d) to generate a level 30 dB below that recorded in step b). Since results are not appreciably affected by the test signal levc. he measurement can be performed at a lower level, for example 40 dB below that recorded in step b). The exact level shall be stated in the test report.

26

IS IS0

10820 489-2

(

Pat-t 2) : 1996
( 1991 )

e) With the switch (4) in position A and the transmitter operating at rated power, adjust the selective voltmeter for maximum reading at the frequency of the third-order intermodulation product which is 100 kHz below the transmitter operating frequency. fl Adjust the line stretcher obtained. (5) until the maximum level of the intermodulation product is

g) Repeat source.

step d) and record

the level of the signal from the radio-frequency product.

test signal

h) Repeat step e) and record the level of the intermodulation

i) Change the switch (4) to position B and note the reading of the selective voltmeter. A level less than IO dB lower than that measured in step h) indicates a source of intermodulation other than the transmitter under test, for example the radio-frequency test signal source (9) or the circulator (7). This shall be eliminated and step h) must then be repeated.

r---I

1

I

oL__--J

I

I 23456789IO II -

transmitter under test two calibrated directional couplers (see notes I and 2) selective voltmeter switch line stretcher (see note 3) attenuator (if needed) circulator test load radio-frequency test signal source Faraday cage (if needed) attenuator (if needed)

Nores 1. - M dB is the coupling loss, typically 20 dB, and N dB is the directivity, typically 40 dB. 2. - A dual directional coupler can be used in lieu of the two directional couplers. Alternatively, it is possible to use a single directional coupler rotated to measure power from either direction, thereby making the switch (4) unnecessary. 3. - A line stretcher is used to maximize the intermodulation distortion.

FIG. 8. -

Inter-transmitter

intermodulation

measuring arrangement.

27

IS 10820 ( Part 2) : 1996

IS0 489-2 ( 1991 ) J The ratio, in decibels, of the level of the unwanted signal measured in step g) to the level of the intermodulation product measured in step h) is the inter-transmitter intermodulation.
Note. - The method of measurement
can be used for other frequency spacings and levels of the radio-frequent) test signal source (9). The selective voltmeter (3) shall have a selectivity sufficiently high so as not lo be influenced by the carrier level when measuring the intermodulation product.

12. 12.1

Modulation Definirion

characteristic

The modulation characteristic is the change of the transmitter function of the modulating frequency. 12.2 Method of measurementfor a) Connect the equipment amplitude orfrequency modulation as illustrated in figure 9, page 35.

output-signal

deviation

as a

b) Set the audio-frequency generator (2) to 1000 Hz and adjust its output level to obtain 30% of the maximum permissible frequency (or phase) deviation, or a modulation depth of 30%. c) While maintaining the output level of the generator (2) established in step b), vary the frequency over the specified range and record the deviation at each frequency. 12.3 Method of measurementforphase a) Connect the equipment modulation

as illustrated in figure 9.

b) Set the frequency of the generator (2) to 1000 Hz and adjust its output level to obtain 30%/o of the maximum permissible frequency (or phase) deviation. c) While maintaining the output level of the generator (2) established in step b), vary the frequency over the specified range below 1000 Hz and record the deviation at each frequency. d) While maintaining the deviation established in step b), vary the audio-frequency over the specific range above IO00 Hz and record the output level of the generator at each frequency. Calculate the deviation for the generator (2) level established in step b).

28

IS IS0

10820 489-2

( Part 2 ) : 1996

( 1991 )

Legend l - transmitter under test 2 - audio-frequency generator 3 - coupler/attenuator 4 - test load Nore. -

5 - modulation monitor 6 - de-emphasis network and band-limiting filter 7 - distortion factor meter

There is ambiguity in this method of measurement depending upon whether de-emphasis and/or limiting is used in the modulation system. For example: u) if the maximum permissible frequency deviation is 5 kHz for any modulating frequency, then 30% is I.5 kHz and the audio-frequency signal level that produces I.5 kHz at IO00 Hz is the reference signal level; 6) if the maximum permissible frequency deviation is 5 kHz at a modulating frequency of 3000 Hz and if de-emphasis and/or limiting is not employed, the resulting deviation at a modulating frequency of I 000 Hz is: 5kHzx1000 3000 - 1.66 kHz

then 30% of the deviation for a modulating frequency of IO00 Hz is 500 Hz. The intention of this method of measurement is to prevent limiting or inadquate signal-to-noise ratios over the audio-frequency band to be measured. Either of the two methods cited may be useful, but alternative a) is preferred.

F1ci.9. -

Measuring arrangement for modulation.

12.4

Presentation ofresults Plot the deviation obtained in 12.2 and 12.3 on the linear ordinate versus audio-frequency on the logarithmic abscissa. The input signal level shall be stated. Alternatively, the deviations may be plotted as variations from a specified characteristic.

29

IS 10820 ( Part 2 ) : 1996 IS0 13. 13.1 489-P (`1991 ) Total distortion factor (of a sine-wave at audio frequencies)

Definirion The ratio, expressed as a percentage, of the r.m.s. value of a distorted sinusoidal signal without its fundamental component, to the r.m.s. value of the complete signal. The distorted sinusoidal signal includes harmonically related components, supply ripple and non-harmonically related components.

13.2

Method of measurement a) Connect the equipment as illustrated generator in figure 9, page 35. (2) to produce standard test modulation. b) Adjust the audio-frequency

c,J Mesure the total distortion factor with a distortion factor meter (7) connected to tile output of a modulation monitor (5) or a separate demodulator. The equipment used for measuring `the distortion shall be preceded by a network having the appropriate de-emphasis characteristic and by the band-limiting filter described in appendix A. If required, the measurement may be repeated with other values for the modulating frequency, with the same or other constant values for the resultant modulation level.

14.
14.1

bk:fative audio-frequency

intermodulation

product level

Definition The ratio, expressed in decibels, of: a) the level of an unwanted, non-harmonic component present in the linearly demodulated ourput signal, as a result of transmitter non-linearity when two specified signals are applied to the input, to b) the level of the wanted, lower frequency, output signal.

14.2

Method of measurement a) Connect the equipment as shown in figure 10. page 37. b) In the absence of an output from the audio-frequency generator (2), adjust the audiofrequency generator (1) to obtain a modulation depth of 30% or 30% of the maximum permissible frequency (or phase) deviation at a modulating frequency Fl of 1000 Hz. Record the output levei of the generator (1).

cl Reduce the output of the generator (1) to zero and adjust the output of the generator (2) to obtain a modulation depth of 3O'Yo or 30% of the maximum permissible frequency (or phase) deviation at a modulating frequency Fz of 1600 Hz. d) Restore the output ot the generator (1) to the value recorded m step b). e) With the selective voltmeter, measure the level of each of the unwanted intermodulation products and of the wanted 1000 Hz component at the output of' the modulation monitor fi (7). Correct the results to compensate monitor. for the amplitude-frequency response ot the moaulatlon

IS IS0

10820 489-2

( Part ( 1991

2 ) : 1996 )

g) Calculate and record the ratio, in decibels, of each of the intermodulation product levels corrected as in stepa to the level of the 1000 Hz component. A'ofes1. - The audio-frequency bandwith should be limited in accordance with appendix A of this standard.
2. 3. This method deviation. of measurement is valid for other modulating frequencies and other values of

To ascertain that the two audio-frequency sources do not, by insufficient decoupling, produce intermodulation products which could have a detrimental effect on the accuracy of the measurement, it is recommended that the following test be carried out: Modify the arrangement of figure IO by connecting the audio-frequency selective voltmeter (8) to the output of the combining unit (4) to measure the relative inter-modulation product levels. These should be appreciably less than the re!ative level specified for the iransmitter subjected to the test (-50 dB for instance if the specified level for the transmitter is -40 dB).

4. -

The relative ievels for the intermodulation products introduced should be appreciably less than the relative level for the transmitter

by the modulation monitor subjected to the test.

(7)

1

b
Sf

0
V I = 2345= 6789audio-frequency generator No. I audio-frequency generator No. 2 transmitter under test audio-frequency combining unit test load coupler/attenuator modulation monitor audio-frequency selective voltmeter audio-frequency voltmeter

8

FIG. 10. -

Example of an arrangement modulation product level.

for measuring

relative audio-frequency

inter-

14.3

Presentation

ofresults at which they

List the ratios recorded in step g) of 14.2 in a table, showing the frequencies occur. State whether pre-emphasis has been incorporated in the transmitters.
Note. -

The intended transmission system characteristics, be taken into account in interpreting the results.

for example any pre-emphasis

and de-emphasis,

should

15. 15.1

Modulation limiting Definition Modulation limiting is the process, usually accomplished in the audio-frequency that prevents the modulation from exceeding the maximum permissible deviation. stages,

31

IS 10820
IS0
489-2

(Part 2) : 1996 ( 1991 )

15.2

Method of measurement

4 Connect the equipment as illustrated in figure 9, page 35. b) Adjust the audio-frequency generator (2) to produce the standard test modulation. 4 Increase the input signal level by a specified amount, e.g. 10 dB, in one step.

4 Record the steady-state deviation.
4 With the input maintained
a specified frequency 15.3 Presentation of results Plot the deviation on the linear ordinate logarithmic abscissa. 16. 16.1 16.1-l
Residual modulation (due to hum and noise)

at the value established in step c), vary the audio-frequency range and record the steady-state deviation at each frequency.

over

of a graph and the modulating

frequency

on the

Residualfrequency Definition

modulation

The residual frequency modulation of the signal at the output of the transmitter, due to hum and noise, is the frequency modulation in the absence of any external modulating signal. It is expressed as the ratio in decibels of the output voltages of the modulation monitor with and without external modulation.
Nore. Some specifications may require the measuring equipment to be preceded by a band-limiting section one. filter. See

16.1.2

Method of measuremenf

4 Connect the equipment as illustrated in figure 11, page 39. b) With the switch in the calibrate position, adjust the frequency-modulated

signal generator (4) to a radio frequency equal to the nominal frequency of the transmitter under test and at a level of 60 dBuV. Modulate the generator with 1000 Hz at a frequency deviation of 1000 Hz.

4 Record the level r/, indicated on the r.m.s. voltmeter (8). 4 Switch the input of the FM monitor to the unmodulated transmitter under test and adjust
its level to approximately 60 dBuV.
(8).

4 Record the residual noise and hum level Vindicated on the r.m.s. voltmeter
16.1.3. Presentation of results Calculate the residual frequency modulation, the deviation of 1000 Hz, from the formula:

N, expressed as a ratio, in decibels, relative to

N = 20 log i
c 16.2

(dB)

Residual amplitude modulation Definition The amplitude modulation in the absence of any external modulating signal. It is expressed as the ratio, in decibels, of the output voltages of the amplitude modulation monitor with and without external modulation.
Note. Some specifications may require the measuring equipment to be preceded by a band-limiting section one. filter. See

16.2.1

IS 10820 ( Part 2 ) : 1998 Iso 489-2 ( 1991 ) 16.2.2 Method of measurement a) Connect the equipment as illustrated in figure 11. b) With the switch in the calibrate position, adjust the AM signal generator (1) to a radio frequency equal to the nominal frequency of the transmitter under test. Adjust its level to obtain a reference deflection on the d.c. component meter (3). c) Modulate the AM generator (1) with 1000 Hz to a depth of 60%.

6

x,

Legend I - amplitude-modulated signal generator 2 - amplitude-modulation monitor 3 = d.c. component meter 4 - frequency-modulated signal generator 5 = frequency-modulation monitor 6 - transmitter under test 7 - band-limiting filter 8 - true r.m.s. voltmeter (ax. coupled)

FIG. 11. -

Measuring arrangement

for residual modulation.

d) Record the level CJ,indicated on the r.m.s. voltmeter. e) Switch the input of the AM monitor (2) to the unmodulated transmitter under test. Adjust the level of this signal until the d.c. component meter indicates the same reference deflection as noted in step b). Record the residual noise and hum level U indicated on the r.m.s. meter. 16.2.3 Presentation of results Calculate the AM noise and hum level, N, expressed as a ratio in decibels, to a modulation depth of 60% from the formula: N2Olog;(dB) c

33

IS 10820 (Part 2) : 1996 IS0 489-2 ( 1991 ) 17. 17.1 Transmitter attack time Definition The transmitter attack time is the elapsed time from: I) the instant of changing the state of the transmitter from standby to transmit, until 2) the instant at which the unmodulated carrier power reaches a value which is 3 dB below the steady-state value. 17.2 Method of measurement a) Connect an oscilloscope, having a calibrated horizontal scan, in parallel with the test load to display the envelope of the transmitter output signal. b) Simultaneously, initiate the transmit function and trigger the horizontal scan of the oscilloscope. Initiation of the transmit function may be by a voice-operated device. c) The transmitter attack time isthe elapsed time from the instant of initiating the transmit function until the envelope displayed on the osciiloscope reaches 70.7% of its steady-state value.

18.

Transmitter performance under conditions deviating from standard test conditions The performance of the transmitter standard test conditions. can be evaluated under conditions deviating from

The performance characteristics and the external conditions at which the measurements are made shall be those explicitly specified for this purpose in the equipment specification. The results can be compared with those obtained under standard conditions. Some performance characteristics may reach a maximum degradation external condition and not necessarily at the extreme. 18.1 Initial measurements under standard test conditions Before beginning the tests described in the following subclauses, the relevant performance characteristics should be evaluated first under the standard test conditions, in accordance with the methods detailed in this section. No readjustment 18.2 of the transmitter shall be made during the following tests. at some intermediate

Variation of supply voltage The required characteristics eight of IEC 489-l. shall be measured in accordance with the provisions of section

18.3

Variation of ambient temperature The measurements shall be made under the environmental conditions eight of IEC 489-1, with the following additional requirements. specified in section

18.3.1

Cold After the equipment has been switched on, the required characteristics shall be measured, unless otherwise specified, after a 15 min standby warm-up, except for the frequency error which may be measured after the period of time stated in the equipment specification.

IS IS0

10820( 489-2

Part2): ( 1991 )

1996

18.3.2

Dry heat

After the equipment has been switched on, the required characteristics shall be measured after a 15 min standby warm-up, except for the frequency error and the carrier power, unless otherwise specified, which shall be determined at intervals as stated in the equipment specitication. 18.4 Variation of relative humidity The required characteristics shall be measured specified in section eight of IEC 489- 1. under the environmental conditions

_

After the equipment has been switched on, unless otherwise specified, the measurements, except for the frequency error, shall be made after a 15 min standby warm-up. Unless otherwise specified, the frequency error shall be determined after the minimum time stated in the equipment specification, if this minimum time is less than I5 min. 18.5 Vibration For equipment intended to have immunity to vibration, the required characteristics shall be measured after the vibration test has been performed in conformity with 30.1 of IEC 489- 1. 18.6 Shock For equipment intended to have immunity to shock, the required characteristics shall be measured after the shock test has been performed in conformity with 30.2 of IEC 489- 1. 18.7 Drop Cfreefall) For personal equipment intended to have immunity to damage from drop, the required characteristics shall be measured after the drop test has been performed in conformity with 30.3 of IEC 489- 1. 18.8 Dust and sand For equipment intended to have immunity to dust and sand, the required characteristics shall be measured after the dust and sand test has been performed in conformity with 30.4 of `IEC489-1. 18.9 Driving rain For equipment intended to have immunity to driving rain together with strong wind, the required characteristics shall be measured after the driving rain test has been performed in confdrmity with 30.5 of IEC 489- 1. 18. IO Corrosion (salt fog) For equipment intended to have immunity to corrosion (salt fog), the required characteristics shall be measured after the corrosion test has been performed in conformity with 30.6 of IEC 489- 1.

35

IS

10820

( Part 2)

: 1996

IS0 489-2 ( 1991 )

APPENDIX
RECOMMENDED A 1.
Modulation monitor

A
EQUIPMENT

CHARACTERISTICS

OF THE MEASURING

The modulation

monitor shall be capable of indicating with an accuracy of 5%: deviations of the carrier, for amplitude modu-

a) the peak positive and negative amplitude lation measurements, and/or b) the peak positive and negative frequency modulation measurements.

deviation

from the carrier frequency, signal.

for angle

Output terminals should be provided for the demodulated A2.
True r.m.s. voltage meters

For the measurement of the signal-to-noise ratio, the characteristics of the indicating meter are important. In addition, for certain characteristics, measurement of the true r.m.s. voltage is required. A3.
Distortion-factor meter or SINAD meter

The distortion-factor

meter or SINAD meter shall have the following characteristics: range 50 Hz

-

The wide-band to 20000 Hz.

response shall not vary by more than 0. IdB over the frequency

The band elimination filter attenuation shall be at least 40 dB at 1000 Hz, but not more than 0.5 dB between 50 Hz and 500 Hz, and between 2000 Hz and 20000 Hz. If the SINAD meter has a fixed filter, it shall have 40 dB attenuation band of 980 Hz to 1020 Hz. over the frequency 300 Hz and

-

The noise signal level from a constant amplitude noise source 3 000 Hz shall not be attenuated by more than 1 dB by the filter. The indicator
Nore. -

between

shall be a true r.m.s. type for a crest factor of 3 or less.

As a result of the differe'nt characteristics of the band elimination filters, the measurement results obtained with the distortion-factor meter or SINAD meter specified above may differ from those obtained with the measuring equipment specified in the previous edition of this standard.

A4.

Selective measuring The selective

device

measuring device may be either a frequency selective voltmeter, a spectrum analyzer, or a calibrated field-strength meter. The bandwidth of the measuring device shall be appropriate for the measurement being made or shall be adjusted to the value stated in the method of measurement. A5.
Audio-frequency band-limiting filter

Unless otherwise specified, the upper cut-off frequency of the audio-frequency bandlimiting filter shall be about three times the upper frequency limit of the band of modulation frequencies specified for the transmitter. The lower cut-off frequency shall be the lowest modulation frequency specified, with an allowable attenuation of 3 dB at the cut-off frequency. To be effective, the attenuation slope of the filter shall be at least 12 dB/octave.

36

IS 10820 (Part2) : 1996 IS0 489-2 ( 1991 )

A6.

Standard test receiver The standard test receiver shall be designed to receive signals of the emission class produced by the transmitter under test. Its selectivity, Type BI, shall be measured according to IEC 489-3, except that the unwanted signal shall be unmodulated. The minimum selectivity slope, between the points where the ratios of the unwanted to the wanted signals are 6 dB and 85 dB, shall be determined by the channel spacing as follows:
Channel L15

spacings

Minimum selectivity slope

kHz >15 kHz

12 dB/kHz 6 dB/kHz input signal ratio of 6 dB shall be indicated.

The bandwidth at the unwanted-to-wanted

A7.

Power measuring receiver The adjacent-channel power of transmitters can be measured with a power measuring receiver. Block diagrams for a measuring arrangement which is referred to as a power measuring receiver are shown in figures 4 and 7, pages 19 and 3 1. The power measuring receiver shall be capable of measuring the ratio of the carrier power to the adjacent-channel power with an accuracy of f3 dB. The following characteristics of the power measuring receiver are required to meet this accuracy:
-

The measurement of the reference frequencies and the setting of the local oscillator (4A) frequency shall be within f 50 Hz. The linearity of the power measuring receiver shall be such that an error in the reading of not more than 1.5 dB will be obtained over an input level variation of 100 dB.
The if. attenuator (4C) shall be adjustable over a range of 80 dB.

-

-

The combination of attenuator and meter shall permit 0.5 dB reading resolution. The r.m.s. meter shall have a crest factor of at least IO. Ideally, the power measuring receiver should have a rectangular selectivity characteristic. This can be approached with a power measuring receiver having an amplitude and frequency characteristic shown in figure Al and in table A 1 of this appendix. The error due to the noise of the local oscillator, of mixer (4A) and any amplifiers shall be less than 1.3 dB. This noise will limit the maximum ratio that can be measured, e.g. 80 dB unless exceptional measures are taken to minimize the noise level.

-

-

The error in the measurement due to noise will be acceptable if the noise power of the power measuring receiver is less than one-fourth (-6 dB) of the total power at the output of the power measuring receiver. To verify that the power measuring receiver meets this requirement: a) Connect a signal source having a noise power density approximately 140 dB/Hz (see note) relative to the signal level at the adjacent-channel spacing to the input of the power measuring receiver.
Note.-

value of the noise power density. expressed in decibels/hertz relative to the output power source. and which may not be exceeded when a specific adjacent-channel power ratio has to be measured. is given by the following relationship:

The maximum

of the signal

dBMz(signalsource)---A-

lOlogE-

37

IS 10820 (Part 2) : 1996 IS0 489-2 ( 1991 )
where: A is the required adjaccntchanncl Bis the power measuring power ratio in decibels in hertz receiver bandwidth

b) Measure the adjacent-channel standard_

power of the signal source as per 8.5.2 or 9.5.2 of this on a transmitter is 6 dB less than the value

The greatest ratio that may be measured nieasured in step b).

TABLE Al Tablefor selectivity limits for power measuring receiver

l l

Values usually

spcciticd

in national

regulations.
at which the attenuation is 6 dB on the side close to the carrier

* The `reference (point D2).

frcqucncy"

is the frequency

Reference Carrier 04

trcquency

$6
D4'

I

--ktiz

FIG. Al.

-

Selectivity limits for power measuring

receiver.

38

IS 10820(
IS0 489-2

Part2): ( 19'91)

1996

AS. A& I

Spectrum

analyzer

Spectrum analyzerfor

use in the adjacent channelpower measurement which allows the display of the power or the

A spectrum analyzer is an equipment amplitude of a signal versus frequency.

Some spectrum analyzers are equipped with digital sampling devices. They can digitize and store values representing theindications shown on the display. Typically up to 1000 samples are stored and the data samples are available for processing. Ag.2 Spectrum analyzer noisepowerperformance In principle, spectrum analyzers have a noise power sufftciently low so as not to hinder adjacent channel power measurements on transmitters. With any type of spectrum analyzer, the total noise power due to the spectrum analyzer and the transmitter allows for measurements of adjacent channel power ratios up to: 10 lg (carrier power/noise power in the selected resolution bandwidth) -3 dB.

where the noise power in the selected resolution bandwidth is the sideband noise power (see note below) of the spectrum analyzer specified in a 1 Hz bandwidth centered on an offset from the carrier equal to the specified channel spacing, multiplied by the noise bandwidth of the selected resolution bandwidth of the spectrum analyzer.
Note. The value of the sideband noise power is normally given in the technical spccitication spectrum analyzer. of the

With digital storage spectrum analyzers, the residual noise power due to the transmitter is taken into account in the measurement. Therefore, the noise power due to the spectrum analyzer allows for measurements of adjacent channel power ratios up to: 10 Ig (carrier power/noise power in the specified adjacent bandwidth) -3 dB

where the noise power-in the specified adjacent bandwidth is the sideband noise power of the spectrum analyzer specified in a 1 Hz bandwidth centred on an offset from the carrier equal to the specified channel spacing, multiplied by the specified bandwidth.

A8.3

Maximum adjacent channel power ratio (digital storage spectrum analyzer) Where the noise power of the digital storage spectrum analyzer is not specified, the following measuring method can be used to determine the suitability of the analyzer for adjacent channel power ratio measurement. The measurement method requires the use of a signal generator with a specified noise power performance at the carrier frequency of interest of better than - 120 dB (referred to the carrier)/Hz at an offset equal to the channel spacing of the radio equipment to be tested. a) Connect the output spectrum analyzer. of the signal generator directly to the input of the digital storage

6) Adjust the signal generator to produce an unmodulated output of 0 dBm at a frequency equal to that of the transmitter the analyzer will be expected to measure. c) Adjust the spectrum analyzer as follows: - resolution and video bandwidth to the lowest possible setting, but not less than the

39

IS 10820 ( Part 2 ) : 1996
IS0 489-2(1991)

specified bandwidth divided by 200 nor greater than the specified bandwidth by 40 and record this as R;
-

divided

total swept bandwidth to the lowest possible setting which is equal to or greater than the specified bandwidth and record this as B; the sweep time to greater than 3 B/R*.
The
specified bandwidth is that which is applicable to the intended adjacent channel power ratio measurement.

Note.

Adjust the digital storage spectrum analyzer so that the centre of the displayed figure coincides with the carrier frequency of the signal generator. Adjust the sensitivity of the digital storage spectrum analyzer to a value which provides a displayed figure on the screen which is in the linear range of the spectrum analyzer. Activate the digital storage spectrum analyzer to record the values C in dBm for at least 200 samples uniformly distributed throughout the specified bandwidth. Calculate and record the indicated carrier power PCusing the following relationship:
in

PC= 1Olg t
iI

10""

dBm

where n is the number of samples Adjust the digital storage spectrum analyzer so that the centre of the displayed coincides with the centre.frequency of the upper adjacent channel. figure

Activate the digital storage spectrum analyzer to record the values A, in dBm for the same number of samples used in step e) uniformly distributed throughout the specified bandwidth. Calculate and record the indicated adjacent channel power Pa using the following relationship:
iin

P, = 1Olg x 10 `I"'
I

dBm

where n is the number of samples h) Calculate the maximum adjacent channel power ratio using the following relationship:
PR=
where: PCis the value recorded in step e) in step g)

PC-

P,--338

P, is the value rxorded

Where the maximum adjacent channel power ratio calculated in step h) exceeds the limit measurement requirement for adjacent channel power ratio, then the digital storage spectrum analyzer measurement method may be used.

40

IS 10820 ( Part 2) : 1996

IS0

489-2 ( 1991 )

APPENDIX

B

GUIDE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF A 30m RADIATION TEST SITE FOR EQUIPMENT EMITTING RADIO-FREQUENCY ELECTROMAGNETIC ENERGY

Emission measurements can be made for all radio-frequency parameters pertaining radio-frequency electromagnetic energy, for example, transmitter radiated power, radiated spurious power, receiver radiated spurious power.

to radiated transmitter

B I.

Test site characteristics
Limits

Useful frequency range: Nominal site attenuation:
Nofe. The nominal

25 MHz to 1000 MHz 20 dB to 46 dB for 25 MHz 52 dB to 78 dB for 1000 MHz

attenuation of the test site for a half-wave dipole is 26dB for 25 MHz and 58dB for
Limits

1000MHz. The actual attenuation may vary due to ground reflections.

Equipment size: Radiation angle:

6 m maximum, excluding the antenna Only apply to the horizontal plane

B2.

Radiation test site The radiation test site shall be on level ground having uniform electrical characteristics and be free from reflecting objects over as wide an area as possible to ensure that extraneous electromagnetic fields do not affect the accuracy of the test results. The minimum boundary of the test site shall be an ellipse having a 60 m major axis and a 52 m minor axis. The equipment under test and the transmitting antenna shall be located at the foci. No extraneous conducting objects having any dimension in excess of 15 cm for measurements over the frequency range of 25 MHz to 300 MHz, or 5 cm for measurements over the frequency `range of 300 MHz to 1 GHz, shall be in the immediate vicinity of the equipment under test or the transmitting antenna. The distance between the vertical axis through the centre of the antenna of the equipment under test and the vertical axis through the centre of the transmitting antenna shall be 30 m. All test equipment if located above ground shall preferably be powered by batteries. If the equipment is powered from the mains, each of the mains supply cables shall be provided with a suitable radio frequency filter. The cable connecting the filter and the measuring equipment shall be screened and shall be as short as possible. The cable connecting the filter and the supply mains shall be either screened and be at ground level, or shall be buried to a depth of approximately 30 cm.

B3.

Position of the equipment under test (see figure B I, page 49) A pedestal shall be placed on a turntable so that the pedestal's upper horizontal surface is 1.5 m above ground. The equipment under test in the cabinet or housing in which it normally operates shall be placed on the upper horizontal surface of the pedestal. Both the turntable and the pedestal shall be made of non-conducting materials.

41

IS 10820 ( Part 2 ) : 1996 ISO 489-2 ( 1991 ) For equipment having an integral antenna, place the equipment position which is closest to its position in normal use. For equipment having a rigid external antenna is in a vertical position. For equipment having a non-rigid with a non-conducting support
on the pedestal

in a

integral ant.enna, mount the equipment integral antenna, mount the antenna

so that the vertically

external

If the equipment has a power cable, it should extend down to the turntable, cable length should be coiled on the turntable.
B4. Measuring antenna support

and any excess

The measuring antenna support shall consist of a horizontal boom supported by a vertical mast, both made of non-conducting materials. The boom shall project at least 1 m from the vertical mast in the direction of the equipment under test and shall be arranged so that it may be raised and lowered between 1 m and 4 m.

BS.

Measuring antenna
The measuring antenna shall be suitable for the reception of linearly polarized waves. It may consist of a half-wave dipole, the length of which is adjusted for the frequency concerned. For practical reasons, however, or to increase the sensitivity of the measurements, it may be preferable to use a number of separate fixed broadband dipoles or more complex antennas.

The measuring antenna shall be mounted at the end of a horizontal boom. The mounting shall permit the antenna to be positioned for measuring both the horizontal and the vertical components of the electrical field. The lower end of the antenna when oriented for vertical polarization and placed in its lowest position shall be at least 0.3 m above the ground. The cable from the antenna shall be routed along the horizontal boom for at least 3 m and should preferably extend, whiie being at ground level, at least 3 m beyond the minimum boundary of the test site before it is connected to the selective measuring device. Alternatively, the cable may be routed underground. B6.
Auxiliary antenna

antenna replaces the equipment under test during part of the measurement. The auxiliary antenna shall be a half-wave dipole and shall be arranged in a manner similar to that of the measuring antenna, except that the centre of the auxiliary antenna should coincide approximately with the normal position of the centre of radiation of the equipment under test. At frequencies below about 60 MHz, the above condition is impossible to achieve when the antenna is arranged for vertical polarization. In this case, the lower end of the dipole shall be placed 0.3 m above ground. B7. Radio-frequency
signal generator

The auxiliary

A well-shielded radio-frequency signal generator, with a matching or combining network (if required) and its associated output cable, shall be placed in a position such that it will not affect the accuracy of the test results and shall be connected and matched to the auxiliary antenna. B8.
Selective measuring device

The selective measuring device may be either a frequency seiecttve voltmeter. a spectrum analyzer or a calibrated field-strength meter, and shall be placed, together with its associated input cable, in a position such that it shall not affect the accuracy of the test results.

42

IS 10620(Part2):1996 IS0 489-2(1991)

FIG. Bla

6

5

?

FIG. Bib
Legend

1 2 3 4 5

-

equipment under test selective measuring device

measuringantenna auxiliary antenna
radio-frequency signal generator selective measuring device optional cailbrated attenuator for measuring the effective radiated power, or fundamental rejection filter for measuring oscillation non-essentlai emissions

6 7 -

FIG. B 1. -

Measuring arrangement magnetrc energy (30 m).

for equipment

emitting

radio-frequency

eiectro-

43

IS 10820 ( Part 2) : 1996 ISO 489-2 ( 1991 )

APPENDIX
EXAMPLE Cl. OF A MAINS POWER LINE

C
STABILIZATION NETWORK

IMPEDANCE

Introduction A mains power line impedance stabilization network (also known as artificial mains network) is required to provide defined impedances at high frequencies between the mains terminals of the transmitters and between each of these terminals and earth. The network also provides a suitable filter to isolate the transmitter circuit from unwanted radio-frequency voltages that may be present on the supply mains. The impedance of this the combination of filter an impedance having a between the terminals of and earth. The symmetrical Cl). The asymmetrical figure C 1). page 52. filter section at the measuring frequency shall be sufficiently high for and associated network as represented in figure Cl, page 52, to give modulus of 150 f 20 51 and a phase angle not exceeding ZO", both the transmitter and, between these two terminals connected together, between terminals between terminal A and B (see figure C and the earth (see

voltage is the voltage appearing voltage is the voltage appearing in a theoretical

These voltages may be represented

vector diagram as indicated in figure C2,

c2.

Method of measuring interference voltage For practical measurements, a mains power line impedance stabilization network, similar to the example given in figure C3, page 52, may be used. This network is suitable for measuring both symmetrical (position 1 of switch S) and asymmetrical (position 2 of switch S) components, with an unbalanced selective voltmeter.

44

IS 10820(Part2):1996 IS0 489-2 ( 1991 j
TABLE

CI

Resistance, attenuation and impedance values of the artificial mains network of figure C3, page 52 (note 1). for three different input impedances, Z, of the measuring equipment z50R Resistonce (note 2)
RI RJ -R2 Rs

Z-60Q

Z-75n

R?R, RJI RIO R12

R9 &I

118.7(120)R 152.9(150)Q 390.7 (390) R 275.7 (270) R 22.8 (22)n 107.8(llO)fi 5OSI
Alrenuation

ll2.2(110)R 169.7(160)R 483.9 (470) n 230.3 (220) R 27.6 (27)R 129.1 (130)R 60R (note 3) 20(19.7)dB 20(19.8)dB

I
ih figure

107.1(llo)n 187.5 (180)Q 62 I .4 (620) fi 187.5(180)Q 34.5 (36) Q 161.3(150)R 75R

Symmetrical Asymmetrical

Alym
Anrym

20(20) dB 20(19.9)dB

20(19.8)dB 20(20) dB t 150(151.2)Q lSO(l45.2)n

Artificial mains network impedance (note 3)

Symmetrical Asymmetrical

2;,, Lrm

I50(l50)R 150(148)R

lso(l45.7)n 150(143.4)R

Nores 1. - The ratio of turns d2.5 1 with centre tap.

of the balanced

to unbalanced

transformer

C3 is assumed

to be

2. - Resistance values shown in brackets are the nearest preferred values (tolerance 3. - Values shown in brackets are calculated, values. using the preferred

f 5%).

resistance values nearest to the theoretical

Allowance shall be made for the attenuation introduced by this network. For all pertinent values, refer to figure C3 and table CI in this appendix. An additional filter section may be required in the case where mains-borne radio-frequency interference influences the measurements to a substantial extent.

45

IS IS0

10820 489-2

(

Part 2 ) : 1996
( 1991 )

W rF
300 Mains Radio-frequency isolating filter

1_
loon

0

II

3000

0

E:
n
C
1000 0 0.1 rF -r`

A

Transmitter

JMPJ

FIG. Cl.

-

Mains power line impedance mains network).

stabilization

network

(also known

as artificial

FIG. C2.

-

Vector diagram of interference

voltages.

i

L

I tI
I
filter sections

r
r
I

k

Legend

P 2 -

connections for transmitters asymmetrical component

I - symmetrical component

Measuring set

FIG. C3. -

Example of a mains power line impedance

stabilization

network.

46

IS 10820 (Part 2) : IS0 489-2 ( 1991 )

1996

APPENDIX
GUIDE

D

FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF A 3 m RADIATION TEST, SITE FOR MEASUREMENTS ABOVE 100 MHz OF EQUIPMENT EMITTING RADIO-FREQUENCY ELECTROMAGNETIC ENERGY to radiated transmitter

Emission measurements can be made for all radio-frequency parameters pertaining radio-frequency electromagnetic energy, for example, transmitter radiated power, radiated spurious power, receiver radiated spurious power.

D 1.

Test site characteristics
Limits

Useful frequency range: Nominal site attenuation:
Note. The

IQ0 MHz to 1000 MHz 12 dB to 38 dB for 100 MHz 32 dB to 58 dB for 1000 MHz
of the test site for a half-wave dipole is 18 dB for 100 MHz and 38 dB for

nominal attenuation

I OO!l MHz. The actual attenuation may vary due to ground reflections.
Limifs

Equipment size: Radiation angle: D2. Radiation test site

6 m maximum, excluding the antenna +40" to - 10"

The 3 m test site described in this standard provides consistent results regardless of time or location. It permits an accuracy over the useful frequency range comparable to that achievable on larger test sites while requiring less sensitive instrumentation than on those larger sites. The radiation test site shall be on level ground having uniform electrical characteristics and be free from reflecting objects over as wide an area as possible to ensure that extraneous electromagnetic fields do not affect the accuracy of the test results. A continuous ground screen (either sheet metal or wire mesh having openings of no greater than 1 cm, in order to maintain good electrical contact between the wires) shall be used to establish a uniformly conducting ground over part of the test site. The minimum ground screen area is shown in figure D!, page 55. No extraneous conducting objects having any dimensions in excess of 5 cm shall be present within the minimum ground screen boundary. Objects between the minimum ground screen boundary and the test site boundary shall not be such as to affect the test resulis. The test site shall have a turntab!e and a measuring antenna mast. The distance in the horizontal plane between the vertical axis through the centre of the turntable and the vertical axis through the centre of the measuring antenna mounted on the measuring antenna mast shall be 3 m. A shelter may be provided for all or part of the test site. All such construction (except for nails, hinges, etc., having no dimension greater than 5 cm) shah be of wood, plastic, or other non-conducting material. The wood should be impregnated to ensure minimum water absorption. All test equipment if located above ground shall preferably be powered by batteries. If the equipment is powered from the mains, each of the mains supply cables shall be provided with a suitable radio-frequency filter. The cable connecting the filter and the measuring equipment shall be screened and shall be as short as possible. The cable connecting the filter and the

47

IS 10820 ( Part 2 ) : 1996 IEC 489-2 (1991) supply mains shall be either screened and be at ground level, or shall be buried to a depth of approximately 30 cm.

D3.

Position of the equipment

under test (see figure D2, page 56)

The equipment in its cabinet or the housing in which it normally operates shall be placed on a horizontal platform, the upper side of which is 1.5 m above the ground. The platform and its support shall be made of non-conducting materials. For equipment having an integral antenna, place the equipment position which is closest to its position in normal use. For equipment having a rigid external antenna is in a vertical position. For equipment having a non-rigid with a non-conducting support. integral antenna, on the platform in a

mount the equipment mount the antenna

so that the vertically

external integral antenna,

It shall be possible to rotate the equipment about the vertical axis through the centre of the antenna of the equipment under test. It is recommended that a platform in the form of a turntable, preferably remotely controlled, should be used for this purpose. If the equipment has a power cable, it should extend down to the turntable, cable length should be coiled on the turntable. and any excess

D4.

Measuring

antenna support

The measuring antenna support shall consist of a horizontal boom supported by a vertical mast, both made of non-conducting materials. The boom shall project at least 1 m from the vertical mast in the direction of the equipment under test and shall be arranged so that it may be raised and lowered between 1 m and 4 m.

DS.

Measuring

antenna

The measuring antenna shall be suitable for the reception of linearly polarized waves. It may consist of a half-wave dipole, the length of which is adjusted for the frequency concerned. For practical reasons, however, or to increase the sensitivity of the measurements, it may be preferable to use a number of separate fixed broadband dipoles or more complex antennas.

The measuring antenna shall be mounted at the end of a horizontal boom. The mounting shall permit the antenna to be positioned for measuring both the horizontal and the vertical components of the electrical field. The lower end of the antenna when oriented for vertical polarization and placed in its lowest position shall be at least 0.3 m above the ground. The cable from the antenna shail be routed along the horizontal boom for at least 3 m and should preferably extend, while being at ground level, at least 3 m beyond the minimum boundary of the test site before it is connected to the selective measuring device. Alternatively, the cable may be routed underground.

D6.

Auxiliary

antenna

The auxiliary antenna replaces the equipment under test during part of the measurement. The auxiliary antenna shall be a half-wave dipole and shall be arranged in a manner similar to that of the measuring antenna, except that the centre of the auxiliary antenna should coincide approximately with the normal position of the centre of radiation of the equipment under test.

46

IS 10820 ( Part 2 ) : 1996 IEC 489-2 (1991) D7.
Radio-frequency signal generator

A well-shielded radio-frequency signal generator, with a matching or combining network (if required) and its associated output cable, shall be placed in a position such that it will not affect the accuracy of the test results, and shall be connected and matched to the auxiliary antenna.

D8.

Selective measuring device The selective measuring device may be a frequency selective voltmeter, a spectrum analyzer or a calibrated field-strength meter, and shall be placed, together with its associated input cable, in a position such that it shall not affect the accuracy of the test results.

Equipment under test or auwihary antenna

Minimum ground screen

TOPvevv

`/ ,,,,,,,,,

TurTc

3m

jtzi;; ,,,,,,,,

Side view

FIG. DI. -

3

m site dimensions inside the ground screen boundary.

49

IS 10820 ( Part 2 ) : 1996 IS0 489-2 ( 1991 )'

FIG. D2a. -

Measuring arrangement

for the equipment

under test.

k-

Q--+
5

I

Vatcable l-4 tn

G

&

1.5 m

\\

`W!!?z!?

AL

-;&!!!z!!!z!z!

u!!r:iz!!G!!!
6 -ii--j--ii-; l---l 2

r&_-J -

I

FIG. D2b. -

Measuring arrangement

for substitution

measurement.

Legend I - equipment under test 2 - selective measuring device 3 - measuringantenna 4 - auxiliary antenna 5 - radio-frequency signal generator 6 for calibrated attenuator optional measuring the effective radiated power, or fundamental oscillation rejeuion filter for measuring non-essential emissions

FIG. D2. -

Measuring arrangement magnetic energy (3 m).

fol

equipment

emitting

radio-frequency

electro-

50

( Continued from second cover page )

(199 1) as well as to take into account the latest technological developments in this field. The text of the IEC standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not indentical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particualarly drawn to the following: Wherever the words `International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. CROSS REFERENCES In this Indian Standard, the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their respective places the following:
International Standard Cortwponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence

IEC 244- 1( 1968) Methods of measurement for radiotransmitters : Part 1 General conditions of measurement, frequency, output power and power consumption IEC489-l(l983) Methods of measurement for radio equipment used in the mobile services : Part 1 General definitions and conditions of measurement

IS 10853 ( Part 1) : 1984 Methods of measurement for radio transmitters : Part 1 General conditions of measurement IS 10820 (Part 1) : 1984 Methods of measurement for radio equipment used in mobile services : Part 1 General definitions and conditions of measurement

TechnicaIfy equivalent

TechnicaIly equivalent

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of following standards referred in this adopted standard and has decided that these are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: (1) IEC 244-6 (1976) : Methods of measurement for radio transmitters : Part 6 Cabinet radiation at frequencies between 130 kHz and 1 GHz. (2) IEC 489-3 (I 988) : Methods of measurement for radio equipment used in the mobile services : Part 3 Receivers for A3E or F3E. (3) CISPR 13 (1990) : Limits and methods of measurement of radio interference characteristics of sound and television broadcast receivers and associated equipment. Only the English language text in the International Standard has been retained while adopting it in this Indian Standard.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ofIndIan StandardsAct. I986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard these publications may be reproduced in any form without preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to BIS

has been developed from Dot : No. LTD 20 ( 1663 ),
Amendments Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

Amend No.

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 83 75

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

I 32376 17 3233841 I 337 84 99, 337 85 OI 337 86 26, 337 X6 62 I 60 3X -I? 60 20 25 235 02 16, 23.5 04 12 23s 1s 19.235 23 1:; 8329295.X327X5X 832 7x 9 I, x32 7x 0::

Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, MADRAS Andheri 160022 6001 13

: C. I. T. Campus,

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, MUMBAI 400093 Branches

(East)

BHUBANESHWAR BHOPAL. BANGALORE. : AHMADABAD. HYDERABAD GUWAHATI. GHAZIABAD. FARIDABAD. COIMBATORE PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM LUCKNOW. KANPUR. JAIPUR.

