INATT HTA IS 16648 (Part 5) : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


afaa aire mda — fajri 


a 5 Wen qg 


Concentrated Solar Thermal — 
Specification 
Part 5 Test Methods 


ICS 27.160 


© BIS 2017 


ARMA AH ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HM WH, 9 Fergus BHC AM, Ae feeci#-110002 
wi MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2017 Price Group 5 


Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee, MED 4 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 5) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division 
Council. 


This standard has five parts under general title Concentrated Solar Thermal — Specification. Other parts in this 
series are: 

Part 1 Paraboloid dish concentrator 

Part 2 Scheffler concentrator 

Part 3 Parabolic trough concentrator 

Part 4 Non-imaging concentrator 


The relevant SI units and corresponding conversion factors are given below for guidance: 


Pressure | Pa (Pascal) 1 N/m? 
1 kgf/mm? = 9.806 65 MPa 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16648 (Part 5) : 2017 


Indian Standard 


CONCENTRATED SOLAR THERMAL — 
SPECIFICATION 
PART 5 TEST METHODS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 5) covers the determination of 
thermal performance of tracking concentrating solar 
collectors and non-tracking non-imaging concentrator 
(NIC). 


1.2 This test method applies to one or two-axis tracking 
reûecting concentrating collectors and non-imaging 
concentrator (NIC) in which the duid enters the 
collector through a single inlet and leaves the collector 
through a single outlet, multiple collectors in series 
having single inlet and outlet may also be used. 


1.3 This test method is for outdoor testing only, under 
clear sky, quasi-steady state conditions. 


1.4 This test method covers alignment, preconditioning 
and calculation of efficiency and analysis of data 
generated to give efficiency equation. 


1.5 The rating of the collector is beyond the scope of 
this standard. 


1.6 Specification of component, their sampling and 
analysis methods are covered in the other parts of this 
standard for different types of collector. 


1.7 This test method does not provide a means of 
determining the durability or the reliability of any 
collector or component. 


1.8 This standard does not purport to address all of the 
safety concerns, if any, associated with its use. It is the 
responsibility of the user of this standard to establish 
appropriate safety and health practices and determine 
the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to use. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard listed below contains provision which, 
through reference in this text, constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, edition was 
valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties 
to agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate possibility of applying the most recent 
edition of the standard indicated below. 


IS No. Title 
12933 (Part 3): Flat plate collector — Specification: 
2003 Part 3 Measuring instruments (first 


revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For purpose of this standard, following definitions shall 
apply: 


3.1 Solar Concentrating Collector — Solar collector 
that uses reflectors, lenses or other optical elements to 
redirect and concentrate the solar radiation passing 
through the aperture onto an absorber. 


3.2 Receiver — A part of concentrating collector to 
which solar radiation is finally directed comprising of 
absorber and any associated glass cover through which 
radiation is passed. 


3.3 Transmittance — Ratio of the radiant flux passing 
through a body to that of incident radiation. 


3.4 Absorptance — Ratio of the radiant flux absorbed 
to that of incident radiation. 


3.5 Emittance — Ratio radiant existence of body to 
that of a black body at same temperature. 


3.6 Reflectance — Ratio of the radiant flux reflected 
to that of incident radiation. 


3.7 Aperture Area — Maximum projected area 
through which non-concentrated solar radiation enters 
the collector. Net area available for transmission of solar 
radiation through the outer air cover interface. 


3.8 Geometric Concentration Ratio — Ratio of 
aperture area of a concentrating collector, to the 
absorber area. 


3.9 Paraboloid Dish Concentrator — Point focus 
collector having a paraboloid dish-shaped reflector. 


3.10 Parabolic Trough Collector (PTC) — Line focus 
collector that focuses solar radiation by means of a 
cylindrical reflector having a parabolic cross section. 


3.11 Scheffler Dish (Point Focus Collector) — 
Concentrating collector that focuses solar radiation 
essentially to a point. 


3.12 Non-Imaging Concentrator (NIC) — 
Concentrating collector that concentrates solar radiation 
onto a relatively small receiver without bringing the 
solar radiation to focus, that is without creating an image 
of the sun on the receiver. 


3.13 Solar Tracker — Power driven controls operated 


IS 16648 (Part 5) : 2017 


movable two axes support which shall be employed to 
keep the parabolic dish oriented with respect to sun. 


3.14 Collector Tilt Angle — The lower angle between 
the aperture plane ofa solar collector and the horizontal 
plane. 


3.15 Quasi-steady State — Solar collector test 
conditions when the flow rate, fluid inlet temperature, 
collector temperature, solar irradiance and the ambient 
environment have stabilized to such an extent that these 
conditions may be considered essentially constant. 


3.16 Clear-sky Conditions — Refer to minimum level 
of direct normal solar irradiance of 450W/m/7and a 
variation in both direct and total irradiance within +4 
percent during the specified times before and during 
each test. 


3.17 End Effect — In linear single axis tracking 
collectors, the loss of collected energy at the ends of 
the absorber when the direct solar rays incident on the 
collector make a non zero angle with respect to a plane 
perpendicular to the axis of collector. 


3.18 Time Constant —The time required for a first order 
system to have its output change by 63.2 percent of its 
final change in output following a step change in its input. 


3.19 Symbols 


Q — Rate of energy W 

Ap — Aperture area m? 

Ton — Direct normal solar W/m? 
irradiance 

Ig — Global solar irradiance W/m? 

la — Diffuse solar irradiance W/m? 

y — Intercept factor Dimensionless 

p — Reflectivity Dimensionless 

a — Absorptivity Dimensionless 

T — Transmitivity Dimensionless 

0 — Angle of incidence Degree 

Ay — Temperature W/mK 


dependence first degree 
heat loss coefficient 


Ay — Temperature W/m?°K? 
dependence first degree 
heat loss coefficient 

Tm — Mean temperature at °C 
receiver 

Ta — Ambient temperature °C 

No — Optical efficiency Dimensionless 

n — Thermal efficiency Dimensionless 

Ko, — Transversal incidence Dimensionless 
angle modifier 

Ko, — Longitudinal incidence Dimensionless 


angle modifier 


m — Mass flow rate of heat kg/s 
transfer fluid 

Cp — Specific heat of heat J/kg°C 
transfer fluid 

Tout — Temperature at exit of °C 
receiver 

Ti — Temperature at inlet of G 
receiver 

X  — Dryness fraction of Dimensionless 
steam 

Cyr — Final specific heat of J/kg°C 
water at 7; in calorimeter 

Cpi — Initial specific heat of J/kg°C 
water at 7; in calorimeter 

Cpe — Specific heat of J/kg°C 


calorimeter container 


he — Enthalpy of water at J/kg 
receiver inlet 


hp — Enthalpy of water at J/kg 
receiver outlet 

M; — Initial mass in kg 
calorimeter 

Mç — Final mass in calorimeter kg 

m; — Mass of steam added in kg 
calorimeter 

Qi — Initial energy in Joule 
calorimeter 

Qr — Final energy in Joule 
calorimeter 

T, — Initial temperature in °C 
calorimeter 

Ts — Finial temperature in °C 
calorimeter 

©  — Angle ofsun declination Degree 

n  — Day of year Dimensionless 

r — Radial focal distance metre 

X  — Axial distance metre 

F  — Focal length metre 

Lo — Length per collector metre 

0: — Longitudinal angle of Degree 
incidence 


5 SUMMARY TEST METHOD 


Thermal performance is the rate of heat gain ofa collect 
or relative to the incident solar power. This test method 
contains procedures to measure the thermal 
performance of a collector for certain well-detined test 
conditions. The procedures determine the response of 
the collector for various angles of incidence of solar 
radiation, and the thermal performance of the collector 
at various operating temperatures. The test method 
requires quasi-steady state conditions, measurement of 
environmental parameters and rate of useful heat gain 


(sensible and latent) by the fluid. The solar power 
incident on the collector is determined by the collector 
area, its angle relative to the sun, and the irradiance 
measured during the test. 


6 MEASURINGINSTRUMENTS 


6.1 Measurements of Solar Radiation 


Class I or better, pyranometer(s) shall be used to 
measure the solar radiation. Before each test the 
pyranometer(s) should be checked for dust, soiling etc 
on the outer dome and it should be cleaned, if necessary. 
Class I or better pyranometer(s) equipped with a 
shading ring or alternatively a pyrheliometer together 
with a pyranometer shall be used to measure the diffuse 
short-wave radiation. 


6.2 Temperature Measurements 


Three temperature measurements are required for solar 
collector testing. These are the fluid temperature at the 
collector inlet, the fluid temperature at the collector 
outlet, and the ambient air temperature. The temperature 
of the heat transfer fluid at the collector inlet and outlet 
shall be measured to a standard uncertainty of 0.1 K 
[see IS 12933 (Part 3)]. 


6.3 Flow Rate Measurement 


Mass flow rates may be measured directly or, 
alternatively, if the density is known, they may be 
determined from measurements of volumetric flow rate 
and temperature. The standard uncertainty of the liquid 
flow rate measurement shall be within + 1 percent of 
the measured value, in mass per unit time. The flow 
meter shall be calibrated over the range of fluid flow 
rates and temperatures to be used during collector 
testing. For measuring instruments specification and 
procedures [see IS 12933 (Part 3)]. 


7 PREPARATION OF APPARATUS 


7.1 The collector shall be installed and aligned properly 
according to a test method approved by the 
manufacturer. 


7.2 Collector surfaces exposed to the environment shall 
be cleaned at the beginning of each test day according 
to the manufacturer’s recommended procedures. 


7.3 The geographical location (latitude and longitude) 
of the collector shall be determined and reported to an 
accuracy of +0.1°. Where applicable, the orientation 
of any axed collector axis shall be measured to an 
accuracy of +0.1 percent and reported. 


7.4 The pyrheliometer and pyranometer shall be 
inspected at the beginning of each day at which time 
the outer glass surface shall be cleaned and dried if 


IS 16648 (Part 5) : 2017 


dirt or moisture is present. Any evidence of moisture 
or debris in the interior of the instrument shall be cause 
to remove it from service. 


7.5 Calibration of instruments shall be checked before 
starting the tests. 


8 TEST CONDITIONS 


8.1 Ambient Conditions 


The following test conditions shall be observed for 
conducting the efficiency and incident angle modifier 
tests: 


a) The direct normal solar irradiance (Z) shall 
not be less than 450 W/m’. 

b) The average value of the surrounding air speed 
shall be below 5 m/s. 

c) The ambient temperature will vary place to 
place, however care should be taken so that 
the fluid in the piping and receiver does not 
get condensed/frozen. 


The system shall be tested over its operating 
temperature range under clear sky condition for 
determining its efficiency. The measurements are 
carried out under quasi steady state conditions as shown 
in Table 1. 


Table 1 Quasi-steady State Conditions 
(Clauses 8.1) 


SI Parameter Deviation from the Mean Value 
No. Over the Test Period 
O © © 
i) Thenormalbeam +4 percent during the interval of 
radiation measurement 
ii) Surrounding air 1°C 
temperature 


iii) Fluid mass flow The flow rate shall be held stable to 
rate within 1 percent of the set value 
during each test period and shall not 
vary by more than + 10 percent of the 
set value from one test period to 

another 


iv) Receiver fluid inlet +0.2°C or 1 percent of change in 
temperature temperature (Af) 


8.2 Quasi-steady State Conditions 


A collector may be considered to have been operating 
in quasi-steady state conditions over a given test 
period if none of the experimental parameters deviate 
from the mean values over the test period by more 
than the limits given below. For the purpose of 
establishing that a quasi-steady state exists, average 
values of each parameter taken over successive 
periods of 60s shall be compared with the mean value 
over the test period. 


IS 16648 (Part 5) : 2017 


9 TEST PROCEDURE 


Start operation of the collector as per the procedure given 
by manufacturer and record data. Data points which 
satisfy the conditions given under quasi-steady state 
conditions shall be obtained for at least four inlet 
temperatures spaced evenly over the operating range of 
receiver. One inlet temperature shall be selected such 
that the mean fluid temperature in the receiver lies within 
+ 3°C of the ambient temperature in order to obtain an 
accurate determination of optical efficiency. At least four 
independent data points shall be obtained for each fluid 
inlet temperature to collect a total of 16 data points. 


10 MEASUREMENTS 
The following measurement shall be obtained: 


a) Collector aperture area (4,), 

b) Global solar irradiance (/,), 

c) Diffused solar irradiance at the collector 
aperture (Z), 

d) Direct normal irradiance (DNI) (/,,), 

e) Surrounding wind speed, 

f) Surrounding air temperature (T), 

g) Temperature of heat transfer fluid at the 
receiver inlet (T), 

h) Temperature of heat transfer fluid at the 
receiver outlet (7,,,), 

j) Mass flow rate of the heat transfer fluid (m), 
and 


k) Pressure of fluid in receiver. 


11 COMMENCEMENT OF 
ACQUISITION 


DATA 


The data acquisition shall be commenced after start of 
the system, typically 3 h before and after solar noon 
shall be used for data collection. The data shall be used 
for analysis during the quasi-steady state. The data shall 
be collected at minimum 10 s interval. A data point for 
any variable shall be the average of at least 10 
observations. 


12 BASIC PERFORMANCE EQUATION 


The performance of CST based solar collector 
operating under steady state conditions can be described 
by the following equation: 


2- I„xyxplar)xCosð —a, x(T,-T,) 


p 


-a,x(T,-T,) 


The values p, œ, tare for normal incidence of solar 
radiation. In order to predict the system performance 
at other incident angles, as would be the case with actual 
field installations, multiplying factor called the incident 


angle modifier (Ky; and Ky,) are introduced in 
equation 1. Where Ką, is the longitudinal incidence 
angle modifier and Kg; is transversal incidence angle 
modifier. Also the effect of angle of incidence on the 
intensity of beam radiation is introduced in the equation 
in form of Cos@, where 0 is the angle of incidence. 


Q 
A Lon Ny X COSO x Korx Ko, -a X(T, =T, ) 
P 


-a x(T -TÙ 


12.1 Incident Angle Modifier 


The intent of following procedure is to generate 
sufficient incident angle modifier data Kp, and Kor to 
characterized the collector thermal performance over 
the full range of actually operating angles that will be 
encountered. 


12.1.1 Longitudinal incidence angle modifier Ko, can 
be calculated with the angle of incidence caused by 
declination of sun. 


12.1.2 Transversal incidence angle modifier Ky; can 
be calculated with angle of incident of sun movement 
from morning to evening. 


12.2 Useful Heat Gain 
12.2.1 Thermic Fluid / Water (Without Phase Change) 


The useful energy extracted by the receiver for hot water 
or thermic fluid based system may be expressed as 
follows: 


Q = i x Cy (Tour Tin) 


ut 


where, rn is the mass flow rate of heat transfer fluid 
in kg/s, C, is the specific heat of the heat transfer fluid 
in J/(kg°C) and T „and T, are the temperature of heat 
transfer fluid leaving and entering the collector 
respectively in °C. 


12.2.2 Steam (Phase Change) 


A calorimeter is equipment which measure heat contents 
of wet, dry or superheated steam. As per design water 
is taken in calorimeter at room temperature. The solar 
wet steam shall be injected in to the calorimeter. The 
increase in temperature and level of water due to 
condensation of steam is measured to get the heat 
content of steam. 


The useful energy extracted by the receiver for steam 
based system and collected in calorimeter are expressed 
as follows: 


Q = Q-Q; 
Q; = Mex Cpe” Tet Cpo * Te 
Q; M; x Cpi X Ti + Cpo X T; 


Q M; x Cpe% Te— M; x Cpi x Ti+ Cpe (Te— Ti) 


where 


Q = useful heat gain, 


Qp = heat content of calorimeter after the test, 


Q; = heat content of calorimeter before the test, 
and 
Cpo = heat capacity of the container of the 


calorimeter which shall be determined for 
the specific calorimeter design. 


12.3 Efficiency Equation 


The thermal efficiency solar collector system is defined 
as a ratio of the actual useful energy collected to that 
of the solar energy intercepted by the solar collector, 
then the efficiency of the CST based concentrator 
system may be defined as follows: 


Gao zi TT 2 
= n.74 -a 
n No % I, 2^ fbn is 


or 
(T-Y 
I 


n 


| 
3 
° 
Q 
Z 
N 
~ i 
Se 
Sy 
| 
Q 
N 
x 


bn 


The later equation is used for temperature more than 
200°C. 


13 COMPUTATION OF THERMAL EFFICIENCY 


The instantaneous efficiency n shall be calculated from 
the following expression: 


mxC, (Zou -T,,) 
qs Ty, XA, 


An appropriate value of Cp at mean fluid temperature 
shall be used in the above expression. If r is obtained 
from volumetric flow rate measurement, then the 
density shall be determined for the temperature of the 
fluid in the flow meter. 


The instantaneous efficiency shall be presented 


graphically as a function of | a 7 . All the data 


bn 
points shall be plotted along with a statistical curve 
fitting using the least square 


14 COMPUTATION OF OPTICAL EFFICIENCY 


The optical efficiency shall be calculated from the 
equation given in 12.3. 


For calculating optical efficiency of the systema graph 
is plotted between instantaneous efficiency versus 
AT/I,,- The intercept of curve on Y-axis is optical 
efficiency. Alternatively data is collected by maintaining 
near zero heat loss condition by selecting inlet 
temperature such that the mean fluid temperature in 
the receiver lies within + 3°C of the ambient 
temperature (Tp = T,). 


IS 16648 (Part 5) : 2017 


15 COMPUTATION OF 
COEFFICIENTS (a,, a,,) 


HEAT LOSS 


The test shall be conducted at at least four inlet 
temperatures spaced evenly over the operating 
temperature range of solar collector to determine the 
values of a, and a,. Multiple linear regression (MLR) 
shall be used to determine a, and a, using the data 
collected. 


16 DETERMINATION OF INCIDENT ANGLE 
MODIFIER 


Determination of incident angle modifier shall be done 
by collecting data on heat gain by the mass flow rate 
specific heat product (M,,) and temperature difference 
between inlet and outlet of the collector. While 
maintaining the collector within + 2.5°C all the angle 
of incidence specified bellow, the inlet temperature of 
heat transfer fluid shall be maintain within 1°C. The 
collector shall be made to track within the allowable 
tracking error. The angle of incidence may be measured 
or calculated using sun position angle. Repeat above 
for incident angle from 0 to 60 or as specified by 
manufacturer. Between 3 to 5 number of angle of 
incident shall be chosen to get the effect of angle on 
performance. 


Incident angle modifiers (IAM) can be determined from 
the following equation: 


n, (0) 


KO)= iG =) 


The efficiency values are determined in pairs, where 
each pair includes a value of efficiency before solar 
noon and second value after solar noon. The average 
incident angle between the collector and the solar beam 
for both data points is the same. The efficiency of 
collector for the specific incident angles should be 
considered equal to average of two values. Data shall 
be collected for incident angle of about 0°, 30°, 45° 
and 60°. 


17 MODIFIED EQUATION FOR DIFFERENT 
CST’s 


17.1 Paraboloid Dish and Fresnel Dish 
Concentrator 


Paraboloid dish and fresnel dish concentrator are 
moving point focus, dual axis tracking systems. Due to 
dual axis tracking the reflector is always normal to solar 
radiation thus making the value of equal to unity. The 
performance of the system can be expressed by 
following equation: 


Bap, xn-a Ty T)-0* (Ty T 


p 


IS 16648 (Part 5) : 2017 


17.2 Parabolic Trough 


Parabolic trough is a moving line focus, single axis tracking 
system. It tracks the sun from morning to evening. Due to 
single axis tracking, the value of equals to unity. Also, 
since the system doesn’t track the sun’s declination, some 
fraction ofa receiver tube will not receive solar radiation 
due to longitudinal angle of incidence. This loss is known 
as end loss. The performance of the system can be 
expressed by following equation: 


Lor x m, x (1- End loss ) x Ko, -a; (Ta — T) 


P 
-aX (Ta LY 


where 


7 
End loss = I x tan 6, 
C 


For determination of incidence angle modifier, 
procedure given in 17 shall be used. It would be 
recommended to test the system during the period when 
longitudinal angle of incidence is less than 30° so that 
the effect of is negligible on the system efficiency. 


17.3 Scheffler Reflector 


Scheffler reflector is a fixed point focus, polar axis 
tracking system. It tracks the sun from morning to 
evening. Due to polar axis tracking, the value of Cos0 
equals to unity. The performance of the system can be 
expressed by following equation: 


2a 1,, 1, x Cos8 Ko, aX (Tn T.) az X (Tn TY 
p 
where 


solar sectinarion ) 
2 
The equation with least error (<0.035°) is used for the 


Cos® = Cos (a323 


determination of solar declination for any day of the year. 


6 =180/ 7 0.006 918 — 0.399 gin ee ae 


365 
+0.070 257 init 20 
365 
~ 0.006 758. 982" -D22 9 ogg 997Sin (2 = D27 
365 
0.002 679° -D2T 0.00148 Sin Pu - v2 


where n is the day of the year. 


Incident angle modifier will always be there throughout 
year. The optical efficiency on 22nd of December can 
be taken as reference for determining the value of 
throughout the year. 


7, (0) 
K= 7, (on 22nd December) 


The report shall mention the date of testing in order to 
consider the effect of K (6). 


17.4 Non-imaging Concentrator (NIC) 


NIC is a non-tracking concentrating solar thermal 
technology. NIC works with global irradiance instead 
of direct normal irradiance. The performance of the 
system can be expressed by following equation: 


2- I, X N, X Cos® x Kor X Kg —a, X (Ta —T,) 


P 
-a, x (T, -Y 
While Kor needs to be determined, effect of Kg, can be 
neglected if the system is mounted at the latitude of 
that location 


18 TEST REPORT 


The following information should be reported in the 
test report. 


Collector Information 


1 Technology Type 
2 Manufacturer 
4 


Model and Serial Number 


a Dimension and Area 


Receiver Data — Shape, dimensions, material, coatings. 


Re? ector or Refractor — Shape, dimensions, material. 


Glazings — Shape, dimensions, materials 


e}ra|anitu 


Tracking and drive mechanism description as applicable, 


IS 16648 (Part 5) : 2017 


Test Data and Results 


Location — Latitude, Longitude 


EA 

12. | Ambient conditions — Solar radiation, ambient temperature, operating temperature etc. 
13. 
14. 
15. 


Operating conditions — Operating temperature, pressure, flow etc. 


Calculated optical efficiency 


Calculated first order heat loss coefficient (a1) 


16. | Calculated second order heat loss coefficient (a2) 


17. | Calculated thermal efficiency at different mean temperature of receiver 


18. | Calculated incidence angle modifier at different incidence angles (graph) 


19. | Performance graph between efficiency 


IS 16648 (Part 5) : 2017 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee, MED 04 


Organization Representative(s) 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, New Delhi Suri SOHAIL AKTHAR (Chairman) 
Biogas Forum India, New Delhi Dr A. R. SHUKLA 
Bipin Engineers Pvt Ltd, Pune Suri H. S. REVANKAR 


Suri A. K. BAIKERIKAR (Alternate) 


Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Jodhpur Dr ANIL Kumar SINGH 
Dr PRIYABRATA SANTARA (Alternate) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Suri D. K. Turanı (Alternate) 


Centre for Wind Energy Technology, Chennai DR S. GOMATHINAYAGAM 
SHRI A. SENTHIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur SHRI BHOPLAB CHOUDHARY 
Suri Sıva Prakasuris (Alternate) 


Consumer Coordination Council, Noida SHRI ARUN KUMAR MISHRA 
Suri R.K. Karesu (Alternate) 


Directorate General of Meteorology, New Delhi Dr DEVENDRA PRADHAN 
EMMVEE, Bangalore Suri Vay Kumar C. R. 
Gujarat Energy Development Agency, Vadodara Suri K.V. Dosui 


Suri S. B. Pati, (Alternate) 


Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai Suri J. K. NAYAK 
SHRI SHIREESH KEDARE (Alternate) 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi ProF S. C. MULLICK 
Dr T. C. Kanppat (Alternate) 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi Dr Kanchan K SINGH 
Dr Anı Kumar Durey (Alternate) 


Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Ltd, New Delhi Suri B. M. CHAUHAN 
Suri SomPaL (Alternate) 


International Copper Association India, Mumbai Suri V. K. Gupta 
SHRI SANJEEV RANJAN (Alternate) 


Karnataka Solar Manufacturers Association, Bangalore Suri A. PALANI 
Mechanical Engineering IIT BHU, Varanasi Suri S. K. SHUKLA 
Maharashtra Solar Manufacturers Association, Pune SHRI SUHAS GHOTIKAR 


Suri MANGAL AKOLE (Alternate) 


National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, Mumbai Dr A. R. KHAN 
Suri R. ANAND (Alternate) 


Regional Test Centre, Pune ProF (Dr) SANDESH R. JADKAR 
Dr Anagua M. Patuak (Alternate 1) 
Dr ApinatH Funne (Alternate 2) 


Regional Test Centre, Indore Dr S. P. SINGH 
Pror R. N. Sincu (Alternate) 


Rajgiri School of Engineering Technology, Kochi Dr V. PANTHALOOKAN 
Suri JOEL GEORGE (Alternate) 


RITES Ltd, Gurgaon Suri G. S. SWAROOP 
Suri Rasiv Miuinp (Alternate) 


Sardar Patel Renewable Energy Research Instiuite, Vallabh Vidyanagar Dr Mukut Kumar DuBey 
Dr Jay Panpey (Alternate) 


Solar Energy Centre, New Delhi Dr B. BANDYOPADHYAY 
Dr S. K. Sincu (Alternate) 


Organization 


Solar Energy Society of India, New Delhi 


Solchrome Systems India Limited, Parwanoo 


The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 


The Maharashtra Energy Development Agency (MEDA), Pune 


In personal capacity (C-103 A, JVTS Garden Chaterpur Extention, 


New Delhi 110074) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16648 (Part 5) : 2017 


Representative(s) 


Suri A. P. SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri RAJINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. SINGLA 


SHRI GIRISHRI GARUD 
Dr IsHAN Puronir (Alternate) 


Suri Manos A. PISE 
Suri H. MANIK KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI ATAM KUMAR 


Suri A. RENGA RaJAN Scientist ‘E’ and Head (MED) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI CHANDAN GUPTA 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Solar Thermal Energy Sub-Committee, MED 04:1 


Regional Test Centre, Indore 


Bharat Heavy Electricals, Hyderabad 


Bipin Engineers Pvt Ltd, Pune 


Borosil Glass Works Ltd, Mumbai 


Bosch Limited, Bangalore 


EMMVEE, Bangalore 
Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Jain Irrigation System Ltd, Jalgaon 


Karnataka Solar Manufacturers Association, Bangalore 
Karnataka Renewable Energy Development Ltd, Bangalore 
Lloyd Insulations (I) Ltd, New Delhi 


Maharashtra Solar Manufacturers Association, Pune 


Non-Conventional Energy Development Agency (U.P.), Lucknow 


Planters Energy Network-Pen, Tamil Nadu 


Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 


Punjab Energy Development Agency, Chandigarh 
Racold Thermo Ltd, Pune 


Regional Test Centre, Pune 


Rohitas Electronics, Kanpur 


Dr S. P. SINGH (Convener) 
Pror R. N. Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri M. R. PAWAR 


Suri H. S. REVANKAR 
SHRI A. K. BAIKERIKAR (Alternate) 


Suri Das Gupta S. 
SHRI SHREEVAR KHERUKA (Alternate) 


SHRI GANGADHAR N. H. 
SHRI RAMAKRISHNAPPA K. T. (Alternate) 


Suri Visay Kumar C. R. 
Suri J. K. Nayak 
Prof S. C. MULLICK 


SHRI SANJEEV HANUMANT 
SHRI Y. SHRIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI A. PALANI 
DIRECTOR 


Suri K. K. MITRA 
Suri A. K. RasTtoGI (Alternate) 


SHRI SUHAS GHOTIKAR 
Suri MANGAL AKOLE (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
SHRIMATI NAMRATA Karra (Alternate) 


Dr C. PALANIAPPAN 


Dr V. P. SETHI 
Suri V. S. Hans (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 


SHRI MAHESH BHANGALE 
Ms TrIsHALA CHANGULE (Alternate) 


Pror (Dr) SANDESH R. JADKAR 
Dr AnaGua M. Patuak (Alternate 1) 
Dr AbINATH FUNDE (Alternate 2) 


Suri C. K. ROHATAGI 
SHRIMATI NIHARIKA Routac! (Alternate) 


IS 16648 (Part 5) : 2017 


Organization 


Society for Energy, Environment and Development (SEED), 
Hyderabad 


Solar Energy Society of India, Delhi 


Solar Thermal Federation of India, Pune 
Solchrome Systems India Limited, Parwanoo 
SSVPS BSD College of Engineering, Dhule 


Thermax Limited, Pune 


In personal capacity (C-103 A, JVTS Garden Chaterpur Extention, 
New Delhi 110074) 


Representative(s) 


Suri M. RAMAKRISHNA RAO 
Pror D. P. Rao (Alternate) 


Suri A. P. SHRIVASTAVA 
SHRI RAJINDER KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVINDRA R. KULKARNI 
Suri K. K. SINGLA 
Dr Ajay CHANDAK 


SHRI KIRAN DESHPANDE 
SHRI YASHAVANT Josni (Alternate) 


SHRI ATAM KUMAR 


Concentrated Solar Thermal Test Methods Panel, MED 04:1/P-5 


National Institute of Solar Energy, MNRE, Gurgaon 
IIT, Mumbai 

SSVPS BSD College of Engineering, Dhule 

Biogas Forum, Delhi 


10 


Suri S. K. Smau (Convener) 
Dr S. B. KEDARE 
Dr Asay CHANDAK 


Dr A. R. SHUKLA 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 04 (11241). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


AMENDMENT NO. 1 JUNE 2019 
TO 
IS 16648 (PART 5) : 2017 CONCENTRATED SOLAR THERMAL — 
SPECIFICATION 


PART 5 TEST METHODS 


(Page 2, clause 3.19, symbols A, A.) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘a; — Temperature dependence first degree heat loss coefficient W/mK 
a,— Temperature dependence second degree heat loss coefficient W/m’K”’ 


(Page 5, clause 12.3, equations) — Substitute: 


‘N = No X Cos O X Kg, X Kg, — a4 Gao ~ a> X In aa 


or 
4 
TaT, Tm —Ta)*s 
1 = Mp X Cos © X Ko, X Ko, — ay (™ 2) — a, xe 
n 
for 
oe Tm Ta Tm —Ta\* 
n =n -u — Az X lpn 
Ton Ton 
or 
4 
Tm h Tm —T; 
n= No -a (= 2) — x Fin a)» 
Ton Ton 


(Page 6, clause 17.2, third sentence) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
‘Due to single axis tracking, the value of Kg, equals to unity.’ 
(Page 6, clause 17.2, equation) — Substitute: 


“2 = Tyn X Mo X Cos© x (1 — End loss) x Kẹ, — a; X (Tm — Ta) — az X (Tm — Ta)?” 
P 


for 


“2 = Igy X Mo X (1 — End loss) x Ka, — a; X (Tm — Ta) — 2 X (Tm — Ta)?” 
P 


(MED 04) m= 
Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


