**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



) : Ferrophosphorous [MTD 5: Ferro Alloys] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 66«'15779-188 ( First Reprint NOVEMBER 1993) IS : 1471 - 1918 



, ^ ~a j j ( Reaffirmed 1999) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR FERROPHOSPHORUS 

( Second Revision ) 



1. Scope — This standard covers the requirements and condition of delivery for ferrophosphorus 
commonly used in iron and steel industry. 

2. Terminology — For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Cast ( Melt ) — The product of any of the following: 

a) One furnace heat, or 

b) One tap of continuous furnace, or 

c) A number of furnace or crucible heats of similar composition mixed in a ladle or holding 
furnace and used for making a cast. 

2.2 Batch — A group of ferroalloy lump of one grade cast from the same cast/melt as given in 2.1. 

3. Definition — A master alloy of iron and phosphorus with phosphorus contents in the range 
from 20 to 30 percent by mass, obtained by reduction from the corresponding raw materials or their 
concentrates and commonly used as alloying additive material in the manufacture of phosphorus 
bearing steels. 

4. Grades — This standard covers the following grade of ferrophosphorus; 

Grade Constituents Percent 

FeP25 Phosphorus 20-30 

Carbon, Max 1*0 

4.1 The maximum limit of the residual elements shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the 
manufacturer. 

5. Particulars to be Specified While Ordering — For the benefit of the purchaser, particulars to 
be specified while ordering for the material to this specification shall be as follows: 

a) Quantity of the material, 

b) Name of the material, 

c) Grade, 

d) Size range, and 

e) Necessary requirements for analysis reports, packing, etc, as appropriate. 

6. Supply of Materials — General requirements relating to supply of the material to this specification 
shall be as laid down in IS : 1387-1967 'General requirements for the supply of metallurgical materials 
(re vised)'. 

7. Chemical Composition — Each batch of material shall conform to the requirements of chemical 
composition specified in 4, and if so specified by the purchaser at the time of enquiry and order, shall 
supply a test certificate of chemical analysis of the sample of material for each melt. 

7.1 If specified by the purchaser at the time of enquiry and order that each lump of the batch should 
conform to the chemical composition specified in 4, it shall be agreed to between the purchaser and 
the manufacturer. 

7.2 The chemical composition given in 4 shows only main constituent element and the usual 
impurity. If the purchaser requires closer range for the main element contents and/or different 



Adopted 6 June 1988 



© January 1989, BIS 



Or 1 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 1471 -1988 

limits for specified elements and/or nan-specified elements, this shall be agreed to between the 
purchaser and the manufacturer* 

7.3 The chemical composition of the material shall be determined either by the method specified in 
IS :1559-1961 'Methods of chemical analysis of ferroalloys' or any other established instrumental/ 
chemical method. In case of dispute, the procedure given in the latest version of TS : 1559 shall be 
the referee method. However, where the method is not given in IS : 1559, the referee method shall 
be agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 

8. Size Range — The material is supplied in lumps or as crushed and screened particles. The particle 
size ranges and tolerances shall be as given in Table 1. The undersize values shall be valid at the point 
of delivery to the purchaser. 

TABLE 1 PARTICLE SIZE RANGE 

Grad* Size Range Undersize, 

mm Percent by Mass 

Max 

Fe P 25 35 to 75 ± 10 

9. Extraneous Contamination —The material shall be reasonably free from extraneous contamina- 
tions like slag and non-metalic inclusions, etc. 

10. Sampling — Each- batch of material shall be sampled in accordance with IS : 1472-1977 'Method 
of sampling ferroalloys for determination of chemical composition ( first revision )'. 

11. Packing — The material shall be supplied packed in suitable container in quantities mutually 
agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser. 

12. Marking — The material shall be marked with the following: 

a) Supplier's name or trade-mark, 

b) Grade designation and size, 

c) Quantity, and 

d) Date of manufacture. 

12.1 Standard Marking — Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard was first issued in 1960 and subsequently revised in 1972. In view of the 
experience gained during these years, it was felt necessary to revise this standard. In this revision 
the following main modifications have been made: 

a) Definition of ferrophosphorous has been included, 

b) Clauses pertaining to chemical analysis and size range have been modified and aligned with 
the latest Indian Standards on ferroalloys, and 

c) New clauses have been incorporated to avoid wide segregation of the chemical constituents, 
thereby safeguarding the small consumers of this product. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New DcJhi, India 



