( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 11447- 1985

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION WITH LARGE PANEL PREFABRICATES
Prefabricated and Composite

Construction

Sectional Committee, BDC 32
Representing

Chairman SHRI A. RAMAKRISHNA Members SHRI S. SUBRAMANIAN ( Alternate to Shri A. Ramakrishna) SHRI P. S. AMHIKE DR N. S. BHAL

Larsen & -Toubro Limited Group ), Madras

( ECC

Construction

Ambike Consultants, StruFo;rLEtgineermg

New Bombay Research Centre

( CSIR ),

SHRI K. C. NAITHANI( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( Engineer-in-Chief's Branch ) BRIG C. A. BARETTOO SHRI K. S. TECKCHANDANI ( Alternate ) Ministry of Shipping and Transport (Roads Wing ), SHRI L. S. BLSSI New Delhi SHRI R. GOPALAKRISHNAN ( Alternate ) Housing & Urban Development Corporation, SHRI B. K. CHAKRAB~RTY New Delhi SHRI S. M. GOEL ( Alternate ) CentraaoFetding Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI S. C. CHAKRABAR~I SHRI A. K. CHATTERJFB SHRI A. C. Roy ( Afternate ) DR P. RAY CHAUUHRY
SHRI A. K. GARG ( Alternate ) CHIEF ENGINEERS( DESIGNS) SHRI C. S. DABKE

Gammon India Ltd, Bombay Centr$Joad
Ccntg,[;blic

Research Institute
Works Department

( CSIR ), New ( CD0 ), New

SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER( DESIGNS) ( Alternate ) Howe India ( Private ) Ltd. New Delhi SHRI B. RAMAMURTHY ( Alternate ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi DIRECTOR( C & MDD-I ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR( C $r MDD-I ) ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1986 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Cop)vight Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of rhe oublisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of cooyright under the said Act.

IS : 11447 - 1985
( Continuedfrompage Members SHRI A. GHOSHAL
SHRI G. K. MAJUMDAR JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS (B&S)~CB DEPUTY DIRECTORSTANDARDS ( B & S ) CB ( Alternate ) DR V. PARAMASIVAM DR A. G. MADHAVA RAO

1) Representing
In personal capacity ( 12 Darga

Road, 6th Floor,

Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation ( India ) Ltd, New Delhi Research, Designs and Standards Organization, Lucknow Indian Institute of Technology, Madras StructMur;;angineering Research Centre

Calcuita 1

( CSIR ),

SHRI G. ANNAMALAI ( Alternate ) SHRI K. S. RAKSH!T Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi DR N. RAGHAVENDRA Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi SHRI H. K. JULKA ( Alternate ) &RI H. N. SUBRA RAO Hindustan Steel Works Construction Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. N. ADHIKARI ( Alternate ) DR R. C. SOYPAL Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta BKIG L. V. RAMAKKISHNA ( Alternate ) SHRI SHIRISHB. PATEL Shirish Pate1 & Associates, Bombay SHRI P. H. QRINIVASACHAR ( Alternate ) SH~I K. A. PATNAIK Bureau of Public Enterprises ( Ministry of Finance ), New Delhi SHR~ K. S. SRINIVASAN National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI SUNIL BERY ( Alternate ) STUP Consultants Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. C. TANNIN Bharat Heavv Electricals Ltd. Hvderabad SHRI K. VEERARAGHAVACHARY Hindustan Piefab Ltd, New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE SHRI M. KUNDU ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member ) SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg )

Secretaries
SHRI S. K. JAIN Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1 SHR~ A. K. AVASTHY Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1 Prefabrication Convener SHRI G. K. MAJUMDAR Consultancy Hospital Services ( India ) Ltd, New Delhi Corporation Systems Subcommittee,

BDC 32 : 1

Members SHRI P. S. AMBIKE

LT-COL ARUN KUMAR

Ambike Consultants, New Bombay Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters ( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi

SHRI DINESHSIKAND, EE ( Alternate )

( Continued on page 39 )

2

IS : 11447- 1985

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION WITH LARGE PANEL PREFABRICATES
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 September 1985, after the draft finalized by the Prefabricated and Composite Construction Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 This is a brief review of the proposed code of practice for the structural analysis, design and construction of buildings with large panel prefabricates for non-seismic and seismic zones. At present there is no national standard for the design of large panel buildings. In this context, the present code will serve as guidelines for the design of large panel buildings in India. 0.3 This code is to be read in conjunction with other relevant such as IS : 456-1978*, IS : 1343-19807 and IS : 1905-19802. standards,

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960s. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This code deals with the design, structural analysis of members and buildings constructed with large panel prefabricates. 1.2 The requirements given in this code shall be applied in the design of precast units made of plain, reinforced and lightweight concrete and in the design of apartment and public utility buildings with these units. 1.3 Special requirements of panels for walls, facades, sanitary code and staircase, etc, used in large panel construction are not covered in this code.
*Code tCode $Code gRules of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ). of practice for prestressed concrete (firs/ revision ). of practice for structural safety of buildings: Masonry walls ( second revision ). for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

3

IS : 11447 - 1985 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this code, the definitions given in IS : 456-1978* and the following shall apply. 2.1 Large Wall Panel Units or Wall Panel - An element primarily of height not less than one storey height and width usually between walls. 2.2 Large Floor Slab Unit or Floor Slab - An element primarily loaded perpendicular to its plane with its length equal to the span of the room. 2.3 Large Panel Building defined in 2.1 and 2.2. A building using wall and floor panel as

2.4 Load-Bearing Wall - A wall designed to carry an imposed vertical load in addition to its weight together with any lateral load. 2.5 Shear Wall - A wall designed to carry horizontal forces acting in its plane with or without vertical imposed loads thus assuring the stability of the building. 2.6 Non-Load Bearing Walls - A wall panel used for partition which does not transfer any load other than its self-load. 2.7 Tie Beams - A beam generally provided at floor level all along the structural walls and along the perimeter of the building to obtain monolithic action of walls and floors. 2.8 Progressive Collapse - Progressive collapse is the consequence of a local failure which precipitates failure of a major area of several floors of a building. 3. SYMBOLS 3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following letter symbols shall have the meaning indicated against each; where other symbols are used, they are explained at the appropriate place:
A -

Area Breadth of beam or shorter dimension of a rectangular column Effective width of slab

b b ef -

br - Effective width of flange b, Breadth of web or rib

*Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ). 4

IS:11447 - 1985
D -

Overall depth beam or slab or diameter of column; dimension a rectangular column in the direction under consideration Thickness of flange Dead load Effective depth of beam or slab Depth of compression reinforcement face Modulus of elasticity of concrete Earthquake load Modulus elasticity of steel Eccentricity Modulus of rupture of concrete ( flexural tensile strength ) Split tensile strength of concrete

of

Df DL-

dd -

from the highIy compressed

Et EL -

E* efCr-

fck- Characteristic compressive strength of concrete
fct -

fd - Design strength f,, - Characteristic strength of steel
Icf -

Moment of inertia of the gross section excluding reinforcement

Ir - Moment of inertia of cracked section
Kk Ld -

Stiffness of member Constant or coefficient or factor Development length Live load or imposed load Length of a column or beam between adequate traints or the unsupported length of a column lateral res-

ru

II=r cX1 IcY&I', IX -

Effective span of beam or slab~or effective length of column Effective length about x-axis Effective length about y-axis Clear span, face-to-face of supports For shorter of the two spans at right angles Length of shorter side of slab 5

IS : 11447- 1985

4J10 I, 12I', M mrr P -

Length of longer side of slab Distance between points of zero moment in a beam Span in the direction in which moments are determined centre-tocentre of supports Span transverse to 1', centre-to-centre Bending moment Modular ratio Number of samples Axial load on a compression member of supports

I, for the shorter of the continuous spans

40 - Calculated maximum bearing pressure of soil r - Radius s Tfw vWWLwwd WI -

Spacing of stirrups or standard deviation Torsional moment Thickness of wall Shear force Total load Wind load Distributed load per unit area Distributed dead Ioad per unit area Distributed imposed load per unit area Depth of neutral axis Lever arm Angle or ratio

x 2a, 8 -

2 -- Modulus of section

Yr - Partial safety factor for load Ym - Partial safety factor for material 8m- Percentage reduction in moment I; cc - Creep strain of concrete 6

IS : 11447- 1985 oCbC Permissible stress in concrete in bending compression

- Permissible stress in concrete in direct compression QCC ~~~ csc Gst Permissible stress in metal in direct compression Permissible stress in steel in compression Permissible stress in steel in tension

=a1- Permissible tensile stress in shear reinforcement 7bd - Design bond stress 7. rcmax -

Shear stress in concrete Maximum shear stress in concrete with shear reinforcement Nominal shear stress Diameter of bar REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN PRINCIPLES

7V # -

4. STRUCTURAL

4.1 Building Stability and Assembly of Prefabricates 4.1.1 The safety and serviceability of the prefabricates and the entire structures shall be checked both for construction stage which includes production, storage, transportation and assembly of the prefabricates as well as the stage after which the building has been completed. 4.1.2 Building stability shall be provided by means of frames, shear walls, shear cores or by any other suitable methods connected by horizontal diaphragms provided by the floors or by any other means. Where shear walls are used these shall preferably be distributed evenly over the whole building to reduce deformation due to torsion. The shear walls should extend from the foundation to the top of the building to avoid torsion in the floors.
4.1.3 In the stage of the completed building, all the prefabricates offering stability of the building as a whole shall be mutually connected by proper joints and/or tie-beams over supports of floor and around the building to ensure their interaction and offer structural response under both horizontal and vertical loads.

4.1.4 The detailing of the joint shall take into account the behaviour of the structure after local failure of a room size portion of the wall. In order to diminish the risk of progressive collapse an alternate load path capable of maintaining the stability of the structure shall be provided. 7

IS: 11447 - 1985 4.1.5The joints shall be so designed as to take care of shrinkage, temperature changes and any other aspects. Vertical joints between external wall panels shall be so designed and built that water tightness and structural integrity are assured. Due consideration shall be given to the capillary action, pressure built up by the beating of rain, shrinkage of joint, etc, provision of external sealants, water barrier and a vertical drainage canal are suggested. Some suggested configurations of joints are given in Fig. 1. It is also necessary that the in-situ joints have a minimum of width for concreting have loops or projecting reinforcements from side panels, and vertical bars in joints ( see 4.6.5 ).

MEMBRANE WATER PROOFING MASTIC FILL E AVlTV

FIG. 1 TYPICAL JOINTS 8

IS : 11447 - 1985 4.1.6 For panels the adequacy of reinforcement should be checked for frictional forces due to adhesion between mould and panel during demoulding. 4.1.7 It is recommended that the wall panels are cast on a tilting mould so that the demoulding of the panels done vertically. 4.2 Expansion Joints - Provisions of expansion joints as specified in 26 of IS : 456-1978* shall be followed. 4.3 Tolerances Permissible tolerances shall be as per 4.3.1 and 4.3.2. 4.3.1 Casting Tolerances a> Length/breadth b) Thickness
: f0.1

percent subject +5 mmor--1Omm *2 mm up to 300 mm &3 mm > 300 mm

to

maximum

of

c) Bow to straightness : & d) Squarenss in plane
: Longer

of the larger dimension

subject

to

maximum of 55 mm side considered straight, the shorter side may not be out of square line ~for more than +2 mm and -5 mm at end of the line. Imperfections along the considered square lines to the same extent of +2 mm and -5 mm may be ignored ( see Fig. 2 )

e) Twist in plane

: Straight

lines joining the four corners of plane shall not show deviation out of plane && of the dimension or

more than

&Is mm, smaller of the values shall be considered as the permissible tolerances ( see Fig. 3 )

-=TOLERANCE

FIG.

2

SQUARENESS IN PLANE

FIG.

3 TWIST IN PLANE

*Code of practice for

plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision). 9

IS:11447-

1985

f) Flatness
4.3.2 Erection Tolerances

: The maximum deviation from a straight edge placed between two points, I.5 m apart, shall not be more than 13 mm

a) Level differences between suppport

f5mm &5 mm &5 mm *5 mm of height/length or

lines of floor or ~$11 panels

b) Plumb lines of wall panels c) Bearing for precast floor panels d) Joint dimensions e) Maximum accumulated deviation&g

&20 mm whichever is smaller
4.4 Floor Panels 4.4.1 Requirements on Concrete Strength and Geometry - For reinforced concrete floors, concrete of minimum grade M 20 is recommended. Prestressed concrete floor units shall satisfy the strength requirements followed in usual design practice, namely, a minimum of M 35 for posttensioned works and a minimum of M 40 for pretensioned work. However, when reinforced concrete panels are prestressed, for resisting handling stresses using deformed bars, a lower concrete strength may be acceptable subject to the approval of designer. For floor using cellular concrete blocks as filler blocks, a minimum strength of 5 N/mm2 is recommended. Floors incorporating clay blocks or other fillers shall have such blocks of a minimum strength of 5 N/mm".

4.4.2 The thickness of the floor panel shall be such that the aerviceability requirements are satisfied. The minimum thickness of concrete layer for cored slab is 35 mm. Rlbbed slabs shall have a minimum thickness of 35 mm for the compression flange. In cases where structural screeding concrete is laid on the precast units, its minimum thickness shall be 35 mm. In case of non-structural screed a thickness of 25 mm for the screed may be sufficient.
NDTE -

depending

Tn corrosive climates, upon cover requirement.

the

minimum

thickness

should

be

increased

4.4.3 Panels may be designed in accordance with the recommendations given in IS : 456- 1978" governing reinforcement and detailing. In addition, the anchoring of lifting hooks, provisions of distribution steel around
*Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ).

10

LS:11447-1985

lifting anchors, -minimum steel for its location and shape near supports and at joints with in-situ beams around shall also be considered and provided for. 4.4.4 The end cover for the bottom reinforcement shall be not more than 5 mm to avoid undesirable displacement of the reinforcement during production. The reinforcement at the bottom of floor panel shall also have sufficient anchorage at the support. When the cross reinforcement is not welded to the main reinforcement, the minimum length of the bar behind the support edge shall be at least 5 times the diameter of the bar (, see Fig. 4 A). When the cross reinforcement is welded to the main reinforcement, the minimum length may be reduced to 4 times the diameter of bar. In case of supports formed by brackets these values may be increased by 25 percent. The above values correspond to panels not reinforced for shear. At least l/3 of the total main reinforcement at midspan shall be taken up to the support. When the panels are to be reinforced for shear, the minimum length of the bar behind the support edge shall be at least 15 times the diameter of bar provided that not less than l/3 of the total bars at midspan are taken up to the support. This may be reduced to IO times the diameter of bar when 2/3 of the total bars at midspanare taken up to the support ( see Fig. 4B).

FLOOR

PANEL

4A FIG. 4

48
ANCHORAGE LENGTHFORREINFORCEMENT

4.4.5 When the floor is continuous, the area of cross-section of the top bars of the panel is provided as per the calculations and in accordance with general requirements for reinforced concrete. In this case the length of the projected bar shall be such that it will develop full anchorage. In the case of simply supported floor panels in which negative bending moment is caused due to fi.xity provided by the wails at the supports, the top reinforcement of the panel shall be at least 0.2 times the area of the main reinforcement at bottom. This reinforcement may be in the form of projected bars or loops. It may also be welded. When top bars are projected the length of the bar beyond the support shall be at least 15 times the diameter of the bar for anchorage. The length of the top bars shall not Abeless than 0.15 of the span of the floor panel. 11

IS:11447 - 1985
shall be provided 4.4.6 For cellular concrete panels, top reinforcement throughout the length of the panel ( see IS : 6073-1971* ). The crosssectional area of the top reinforcement shall be at least l/3 of the main reinforcement. Anchorage of main reinforcement by welded cross bars is essential for cellular concrete panels and they shall be placed at close spacings near the ends. The number of distribution bars that are to be provided at the ends depends on the diameter of longitudinal and distribution reinforcement, and the density of the concrete. 4.4.7 General - The requirement for width of support for floor panels depends on whether they are spanning in one direction or two directions and whether they have top reinforcement for anchorage. The width of the support shall be sufficient to ensure proper anchorage for the bottom reinforcement. For floors supported freely on two edges, a minimum bearing of 80 mm is recommended. In particular cases of good workmanship this may be reduced to 60 mm. For continuous supports the bearing for individual panels on either side of supports shall be at least 60 mm in general and may be reduced to 40 mm in case of good workmanship and if there are temporary supports and projected bars with full anchorage. For floors supported on three or four edges, a minimum width of 40 mm for support is recommended ( see Fig. 5 ).

FLOOR -.. . : i ::. +..,\; --a60mm (60mm) -END

PANEL I

FLOOR

PANEL I

1.1:;' ... .`.:`. ... (, .:

SUPPORT

>,60mm 120mm) k

-e-MIDDLE SUPPORT

5A Floor Panel Supported
Freely on Two Edges

58

Floor Panel with Continuous Supports

FIG.5 BEARINGLENGTH FOR FLOORS 4.4.8 In case mortar layer is required for levelling, the thickness of mortar layer shall not exceed 15 mm. The mortar shall have a minimum compressive strength of 20 N/mm2 -or equal to the strength of panel it supports. 4.4.9 The joint along the longitudinal edges of the floor panel ( in the direction of the span in between the supports ) shall be able to resist the *Specificationfor autoclaved reinforced cellular concrete floor and roof slabs. 12

IS : 11447 - 1985 forces acting in the joint due to differential loading of connected panels and to interact in the transverse direction. They shall also resist shear forces in the plane of the floor. The details of the keyed joint as shown in Fig. 6 which may or may not be provided with screeding. A minimum gap of 40 mm for these joints is recommended between the panels. The depth of the joint shall be at least 75 percent of the total depth of the floor panel. When screeding concrete is provided for structural purposes it is recommended to provide screeding concrete over the precast units with a positive connection with the joint or as an alternative a minimum reinforcement of 0.5 cm2/m length of the panel. The gap in the joint shall be filled with cement mortar having a maximum compressive strength one grade higher than the connecting members.

PLAIN

JOINT

KEYED

JOINT

6A FIG. 6

6B

JOINTBETWEEN FLOORPANELSALONG LONGITUDINAL EDGES

4.4.10The joint between floor panel over support may be continuous or hinged depending upon the type of structure ( see Fig. 7 ). In the case of floor panel, it is recommended to project top steel bars into the joint. For buildings in high seismic zones, continuous connection may be achieved by projected or overlapped bars or by welding the bars with adequate steel plates or by providing loops ( when loops are provided they shall be tied to the longitudinal bars in the joint as shown in Fig. 7D ). 4.5 Walls 4.5.1 General - Internal structural walls may be homogenous walls of cement concrete ( reinforced or unreinforced ) or light-weight concrete. It is recommended to design walls as plain concrete with secondary reinforcement for production and erection purposes only and which is not taken into account while checking the safety of the wall. For plain concrete wails, concrete of grade not less than than M 10 shall be used. In case steel is required in the panel, the joint should be designed to provide continuity in bars. 4.5.2 Slenderness EfSects - The minimum thickness of walls shall be 100 mm from the slenderness and production points of view. Smaller thickness may be applied to concrete box ribbed or other similar units. While designing the structural walls, their slenderness ratio shall also be 13

IS:11447-

1985

consldered. Where the wall is stiffened by cross walls, the ratios may be determined as in IS : 1905-1980*.

slenderness

4.5.3 Reinforcement in Plain Concrete Walls - The wall panels designed as plain concrete walls shall be provided with minimum reinforcement so as to resist the forces in the wall panel including those due to shrinkage of concrete occurring during different stages of production, transportation, storage and assembly. In case of wall panels having a width greater than 2 m reinforcement along the perimeter is recommended ( see Fig. 8A ). The area of vertical and horizontal reinforcement along the perimeter shall be 1 cm2 and shall consist of a minimum of 2 bars. The two bars shall be connected by means of ties at a spacing of not less than 0.5 m. For panels of length over 3.6 m it is recommended to provide additional vertical reinforcement in the middle similar to the vertical peripheral Teinforcement ( see Fig. 8B ). In case of wall panels with openings additional reinforcement around the openings shall be provided ( see Fig. 8C ). The bars around the opening shall be provided for a distance of not less than 50 times the diameter of bars behind the edges of the opening. Inclined reinforcement may also be provided at the corners. The vertical segments of wall panels ( for example, separated by openings ) and having a width less than 500 mm shall be reinforced with _a minimum of 4 numbers of 12 mm diameter bars with stirrups at a distance of 300 mm ( see Fig. 8D ) segments wider than 500 mm shall follow reinforcement as for around openings. 4.5.4 Reinforcement in Reinforced Concrete Walls - The amount of reinforcement in reinforced concrete wall panels shall be designed according to normal design practice. The minimum ratio of the vertical reinforcement to gross concrete area shall conform to IS : 456-1978t. 4.6 Joints 4.6.1 Joints between internal and external wall panels shall be designed to resist the forces acting on them without excessive deformation and cracking. They shall also be able to accommodate the deviations in the dimensions of the wall panels during production and erection. 4.6.2 The horizontal joint for wall panels depends on their method of positioning. Wall panels may be positioned on mortar bed, on bolts projecting from the lower panel or on projections from the floor panels. When wall panels are positioned on mortar bed laid on lines which are marked on the layout prior to positioning ( Fig. 9A and 9B ), the thickness of mortar shall not exceed 15 mm. The minimum compressive strength of the mortar shall be 20 N/mm2 or be of the same grade as of panel.
*Code of practice for structural safety of buildings: Masonry walls ( second revision ). tCode of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision).

.

15

STOREY HEIGHT

I-2.clm .-_I
AREA OF STEEL NOT LESS =420 N/mm') THAN l-00 cm2Wssy 8A Reinforcement in Walls Having Width Greater than 2 m but Less than 3'6 m
.

c

,'

ADDITION STEEL 1 cm2

AL

c_

2-L m max.

1

b8B Vertical-Bars

3.6 m

-4

in Walls]Having

Width:3-6

m or More

FIG. 8

REINFORCEMENT IN PLAINCONCRETE WALLS-CO?Z?~ 16

IS : 11447- 1985 When the panels positioned by means of levelling bolts, care should be taken to release the load on the bolts after the concrete has set.

INCLINED

BAR

-T

STOREY HEIGHT

8C

Reinforcement

Around

Openings

7
A,=lcmZ

STOREV HEIGHT

T
1

t

c _
I

I
8D
FIG. 8
Reinforcement

FULLY

OPEN -+j SO&+-

L CONNECTING PIECE FOR HANDLING in Narrow Segments

REINFORCEMENT IN PLAIN CONCRETE WALLS

17

IS:11447 - 1985

A

MORTAR FLOOR PANEL MORTAR LAYER SPREAD BEFORE POSITIONING WALL PANEL BEFORE WALL

LAYER POSITIPANEL

*-WALL PANEL A. -

MORTAR PACKIN AFTER PLACING THE FLOOR PAN

9A FIG. 9

95

HORIZONTAL JOINTBETWEEN WALL PANELS POSITIONING ON MORTAR BED

4.6.3 Vertical joints between wall panels shall be designed for the vertical shear forces induced in the joints by horizontal Ioading of the structure

like wind force, seismic force, etc, as well as by differential vertical loading of the wall panels. Vertical joints may be desig:led with vertical grooves ( Fig. 10A ) or with keys ( Fig. 10B ). In the case of grooved joints the resistance is by the friction between the wall panel and the concrete in the joint and by the interaction of the tie-beam. In the case of keyed joints the shear forces will be resisted by the projections or castellations which act as shear-keys in addition to the friction between the concrete and the wall panels. 4.6.4 The shape and dimensions of the keyed joint shall be at least 100 mm. Its area of cross-section shall be at least 120 cm2. The minimum compressive strength of concrete in the joint shall be same as of panels. 4.6.5 From the point of view of sealing of joints in external walls two essential types of joints may be suggested, namely, filled and open joint. Open joints may be unprotected or protected against direct entiance of water. In case of open joints, the width of the gap shall be MFiciently wide to allow movement of the panels due to temperature changes. Filled joints require flexible sealing compounds or plastic seals capable of absorbing long-term and cyclic movements. Polysulphide compounds or other sealants which take up movement of the panel and prevent water penetration are preferred ( see Fig. 11 ). Continuity of protective membrane in the joints shall also be ensured ( suggested scheme given in Fig. 12 ). 18
.

IS : 11447-- 1985

GROOVED

JOINT

KEY433

JOINT

105 IOA FIG. 10 VERTICAL JOINTBETWEEN WALL PANELS 4.7 Tie-Beams
4.7.1 The tie-beams shall be provided at each floor level along all structural walls and along the perimeter of the building to obtain a monolithic action of walls and floors, and to limit the possibility of progressive collapse. Tie-beams may be designed as monolithic ones constructed at site during assembly or hidden ones constructed by connecting the bars placed on the floor panels ( see Fig. 13 ). The reinforcement in the tie-beam shall be at least 2.5 cm2 when the distance between the internal longitudinal structural walls is not more than 4.5 m. In case the distance between the longitudinal structural walls is between 4.5 and 6 m, the reinforcement shall be increased to 4.0 cm2. The effective cross-sectional area of the tie-beam shall not be less than 75 ems. Concrete of minimum grade M20 shall be used for the tie-beam.

4.7.2 When hidden tie-beams are used, the tie-beam reinforcement shall be provided as near to the support or longitudinal edge as possible and shall be provided within a distance of 500 mm from the ends. The reinforcement of the tie-beam shall be continuously connected ( see Fig. 14 ). 4.8 Erection and Assembly - The erection and assembly of wall panels and floor panels shall be done as per design. The sequence of erection and -assembly shall be planned in advance taking into consideration the stability 19

MEMBRANE WAT E R PROOFING

.

FIG. 11 TYPICALDETAILSOF FILLED JOINTSWITH SEALANTS of the panels during erection and shall have the approval of the engineerin-charge. Adjustable steel props are recommended for supporting the wall panels after erection till the joints attain enough strength to withstand the~erection stresses. The adjustable in plumb of wall panels are done with the help of wall props. For the purpose of lifting and erection, inserts or other suitable devices have to be buried inside the panels at the time of casting. Mild steel inserts and hair pin loops are normally used. Some typical inserts are shown in Fig. 15. The location of such inserts also needs to be carefully and optimally designed so that the stresses in the panels during handling will be minimum. Inserts required for services can be planned and fixed wherever necessary. The stresses induced in the panels due to erection shall be within the permissible limits. Joints for external walls, in addition to their structural efficiency, shall be watertight 20

IS:11447 - 1985

EXT~ERNAL WALL -

l--+

EXTERNAL WAi_L

uWALL

12B 12A FIG. 12 TYPICAL DETAILS OFJOINTS

FIG. 13

TIE-BEAMS AT FLIER LEVEL 21

AOOlTlONAt REINFORCEMENT AT TOP AND BOTTOM

C--------_-b-A

-bda--

FIG. 14

DETAILSOF REINFORCEMENT IN HIDDENTIE-BEAMS

IN SLABS

FbR

FAN h PROPS

. FAN ti00~ THREADED

IN WALLS

.u, 4
I?@.1
.. 9. :.: P ; . ,.' FOR

-; -TO

NUT

IN SLABS .

FOR FAN

PROPS.

All dimensions in millimetres.
FIG. 15 TYPICAL SKETCHFORINSERTS FORSUPPORTING PROPS AND FANS

22

IS:

11447-1985

and This The shall

shall allow free movement of the walls due to temperature changes. can be achieved by suitably shaping the joint or by sealing compounds. sealing compound shall be approved by the engineer-in-charge and have a long life to avoid frequent repair of the joints.

The load factor for evaluating of structural strength during erection can be assumed as 1.2. However, in case of inserts and fixtures left in precast element for handling and erection purposes dynamic effects due to erection have to be taken into consideration in the design. 4.9 Special Requirements for Buildings in High Seismic Zones
4.9.1 Large panel buildings in high seismic zones are recommended to be constructed with closed symmetrical layout. The verandahs shall be designed, as an integral part of the building or as separate construction with pliable connections with the remaining part of the building. The height of the building shall generally be restricted to 10 storeys in Zone IV and 7 storeys in Zone V. Buildings up to 5 storeys in Zone IV wrth a close symmetrical layout and load-bearing cross walls at not more than 4 m spacings and with floor panels supported on the longitudinal walls ( in addition to the support on the cross walls ) may be designed as per the structural requirements for high-rise buildings in low seismic zones.
NOTE For

made.

taller buildings more than specifiedin 4.9.1 model analysisshall be

4.9.2 It is recommended to use solid concrete panels for floors for buildings in high seismic zones. In case of ribbed panels the thickness of flange shall not be less than 50 mm and they shall be connected together by joints in between the ribs only. The floor panels shall be designed with continuous connection over supports. The continuous reinforcement shall consist of projected bars at top and bottom with a minimum cross-sectional area of 1.5 cmz/m length of the panel. The projected bars may be welded or in the form of loops. The edges of the floor panels shall also have castellations to provide keyed joint.

4.9.3 Concrete walls shall be reinforced forces developed by earthquake.

to resist the shear and tensile

4.9.4 The vertical and horizontal joints for wall panels shall be designed as keyed joints. The vertical joint shall be reinforced with projected bars welded or overlapped or loops and with vertical bar. The minimum area of transverse reinforcement in the vertical joint shall be 2.0 cm2 for one storey height. The joint shall have access for connecting the reinforcement. For the horizontal joint, the wall panels shall be connected by a minimum vertical reinforcement of O-7 cmZjm length of the horizontal joint. 23

IS : 11447 - 1985 4.9.5 The building shall have tie-beams along the external edges in vertical and horizontal directions to ensure interaction of prefabricates. The floor and wall panels shall have keys along their edges and shall be A minimum reinforcement of connected by continuous reinforcement. 4.0 cm3 shall be provided in the tie-beams and the connections shall be provided by loops or by welding and not by overlapping.

5. STRUCTURAL

ANALYSIS

5.1 General - The design of prefabricated components should be undertaken primarily to ensure an adequate margin of safety against the limit state of collapse being reached. Generally, this is achieved by ensuring that the design strength of member is greater than or equal to the design load. Characteristic and design values and partial safety factors shall be in accordance with IS : 456-1978". In addition the following complimentary safety factor shall be applied:
Ys = YSl9 Ysz, Y.93

-

For wall panels with a horizontal cross-sectional

area

< 0.06 sqm,ys1 = 1.1 - For wall panels with percentage of vertical range of 0.14 < P - 0.4, ysz = 1 - 0.7 P reinforcement in the

For the stages of construction including verification of stability during construction and during accidental damages

ysg = 0.8 In all other cases
ys3 = ys3 =

YE1 =

1.0

The designer responsible for the overall stability of the structure should ensure the compatibility of design and details of parts and components. To ensure a robust and stable design, it will be necessary to consider the layout of structure on plan, interaction between intersecting walls and rigidity of joints. 5.2 Loads - Analysis for the stability of large panel buildings covers mainly two types of lateral forces, namely, wmd and earthquake forces. The magnitude and distribution of the wind and earthquake loads shall be *Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision >. 24

IS : ll447 - 1985

taken in accordance with IS : 875-1964* and 1s : 1893-19757 respectively. In the case of earthquake forces the base shear calculated in accordance with IS : 1893-1975t, shall be increased by 5 percent for each storey beyond the fifth storey subject to a maximum value of 25 percent. 5.2.1 Distribution of Lateral Forces - The distribution of lateral forces among individual shear walls is based on the following assumptions: a) The direction considered, of lateral forces is parallel to the shear walls

b) The shear walls are connected by infinitely rigid horizontal diaphragms provided by the floors, and c) The shear walls behave elastically under the action of lateral forces and the distribution of lateral forces occurs according to the rigidity of the shear walls. - ..__i The distribution of the loads shared by the shear walls on the assumptions made above is valid so long as the rigidity of the shear wall under consideration is not reduced below 70 percent of its rigidity before cracking. 5.2.2 For buildings with closed-layout
wi=
Qi

the load shared by wall is given as
... ( 1 )

j=l where

c

W n .

1

-~@-i

W = total lateral forces on the building, and
al =

flexibility coefficient defining the magnitude of deflection of wall i due to uniformly distributed load of w = 1.

5.2.3 For building with open-layout the load shared by wall i is given as

where

r Cci* f Cci ti 1 Wi=H' -' i x al Erj2 t(l b J 1
j=l j=l

,

. .. ( 2 )

r = distance of the point of action of W from

the centre of

rotation, and *Code of practice for structural safety of buildings: Loading standards ( revised ). tcriteria for earthquake resistant design of structures ( third revision ). 25

Is : 11447- 1985

ri = distance of the shear wall i from the centre of rotation.
ai = __

a0
W

where
a0 =

flexibility coefficient of the least rigid wall, and oi = as defined in Eq. (I). of the centre of rotation are given by n
1 j=l n c--

The Cartesian coordinates

c

-

aj

x1

a,

=

j = 1 where
xJ =

1 "1

.. .

(4)

distance of the wall i from the y-axis, and flexibility coefficient defining the magnitude of deflection of wall j under a unit force w = 1 parallel to y-axis n c YJ

al =

y.

=

j:l"

l
cj=l QJ

. .. ( 5 )

where yi = distance of the wall j from the x-axis i = flexibility coefficient defining the magnitude of deflection of wall i under a unit force w = 1 parallel to x-axis For buildings over 50 m in height, a more precise analysis preferably coupled with dynamic and model analysis for distribution of lateral forces is recommended. 5.3 Analysis of Shear Walls - In the computation of stiffness and structural response of shear walls it is permitted to neglect the influence of: a) deformability of the wall in its own plane; b) deformability of horizontal joints; and 26

IS : 11447- 1985
c) deformability

of lintels if their height to clear span ratio ( hi/s ) is greater than O-8. In this case, the statical model for analysis shall be assumed as a solid cantilever.

When hi/s < 0.8, any one of the following statical models for shear walls may be assumed: a) banded cantilever model with discrete lintels represented continuous laminae, b) multi-storey frame model, and c) interconnected mesh using finite element technique. The banded cantiliver method is recommended for the analysis of shear walls in large panel buildings. The interaction of mutually connected walls can be considered in the analysis of shear walls. The segments of intersecting walls perpendicular to the considered ones measured in both directions from the axis of vertical joint shall not be greater than the width of the perpendicular wall to the nearest row of opening or O-2 ;H whichever is less. In the case of composite shear walls, their equivalent cross-sectional dimensions based on their respective modulii of elasticity shall be considered. The statical model for a shear wall with plastic joints shall be a banded cantilever with the plastic joints represented by a continuous laminae subjected to tangential shear forces. 5.3.1 Usually the joints in wall panels are consider to be rigid. However, when the magnitude of shear forces caused by the lateral loads is such as to cause plastic deformations of the joints, the analysis of walls shall be based on the assumption of plastic joint. 5.4 Floors 5.4.1 In structural analysis floors are to be checked at the serviceability as well as ultimate states. A check on deflection is very essential at the serviceability state since excessive deflections are likely to cause cracking in the partition walls, cladding, finishes, etc. Allowable deflections and span to depth ratios of floor slabs shalLconform to IS : 456-1978*. 5.4.2 Ultimate State of Floor Panels - The values of bending moments in floor panels supported along two edges shall be calculated for the ultimate state as follows: a) Floor panels made continuous by providing top reinforcement by a

*Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( t&d revision). 27

IS : 11447- 1985

- interior spans middle span moment support moment
-

_

41 P 8

k g 16

.. .

(6)

... (7)
12 q2 12 = Bg-+ T
.

end spans

middle span moment support moment on the continuous end where I = span of floor panel,

(8)
)

92 =7r

la

. . . t-9

q, = load acting on floor panels before connecting the reinforcement over supports, and q2 = load on floor panels after connecting the reinforcement supports. over

When the floor spans in a continuous floor do not differ by more than 15 percent the longest span shall be taken as I in the above calculations. b) Simply supported floors span moment where q = total load acting on floor panels ( q1 + q2 ) For floor panels supported on three or more edges it is recommended that the design moments are to be calculated as for freely supported members. 5.4.3 Fixity Due to Walls at the Serviceability State - The floor panels should be provided with top reinforcement to meet fixing moments created by walls. The fixing moments created by walls at the serviceability state for the end support of continuous floors and simply supported floors shall be taken as given below: for floors with a bearing less than 100 mm 41 I2 -fixing moment at support = 30 28 . . . ( 14 )
-

-

412 8

. . . ( 10)

Is : 11447- 1985 -

for floors with bearing more than 100 mm
92 F fixing-moment at support = 16 . . . ( 12)

where
qa = load acting on floor panels after the walls have been built

without enhancing by safety factors. 5.44 Distribution of Loads in the Direction Perpendicular to the Plane of the Floor - When the load applied to one of the floor panels is greater than the loads applied to the neighbouring ones, the interaction of the floor panels may be considered provided they are connected. a) Ultimate state - Additional loads acting on individual floor panels at ultimate state shall be assumed to be distributed to the adjacent panels at the ultimate state as given in Fig. 16. P

I

+
15% 70% 15% I

P I

FIG. 16 DISTRIBUTION OF LOADSON FLOORPANELS ULTIMATESTATE

b) Serviceability state - For the purpose of checking deflection, the distribution of load may be assumed as shown in Fig. 17. When the number of floor panels is less than that given in Fig. 17, load 29

IS : 11447- 1985
I tb

a

s3 >3 15% 25% 15% 10% 5% 0 0

b

s3 >3 10% 16% 23% 23% 16% 11% 0

C

s3 >3 :Y.

10 % 10%

15%

50%

17%

3&O/o

15% 17%

10% 1D %

0 6%

FIG. 17 DISTRIBUTIONOF LOADSON FLOOR PANELS SERVICEABILITY STATE
WI carried by the considered floor panel shall be computed the formula:

from

p = load other than the dead load of floor panels. xi = number expressing the percentage of load transferred by a considered floor panel, assuming the number of floor panels as in Fig. 17.
xi = 1

k

js

c

sum of xi values for given number of floor panels k.

5.5 Walls 55.1 Scope of Analysis - While analyzing~the structural walls the safety of the following portions of the wall shall be checked:

a) in zone close to the mid-height of the wall ( Zone 1 ), b) at supports of floors ( Zone 2 ), 30

IS : 11447 - 1985 c) lintels, and d) vertical and horizontal joints. While calculating the structural response of load-bearing walls, the interaction of self-supporting walls placed in a perpendicular direction is usually neglected hut it can also be considered when the exact analysis is required. 5.52 Zone I of the WuN - The structural response in the Zone 1 of the wall is a function of the eccentricity, slenderness and support conditions. Walls can be supported on horizontal edges and on one or both of its vertical edges as shown in Fig. 18. The most common case is a wall supported along its horizontal edges only.

FIG.

18 SUPPORT CONDITIONS OF WALL

a) Eccentricities - A simplified approach for calculating the response of the wall in Zone 1 is based on the assumption that the wall is a bar loaded with equal eccentricities from above and below. The total eccentricities shall be assumed as given below: for external walls e = 0.20 tw subject to a maximum of 30 mm for internal walls e = 0.15 tw subject to a maximum of 20 mm . . . (14) . . . (15)

NOTE- The provision given in 5.5.2(a) are the minimum design eccentricities for external and internal wall panel. The actual eccentricities due to gravity, superimposed seismic or wind load, have to be calculated for the actual conditions of loading.

31

IS:11447 -1985

b) Stiffening along vertical edges - A wall panel is said to be stiffened along a vertical edge if it is connected along that edge to another wall component or stiffener which can prevent any displacement of that edge perpendicular to the plane of the wall. For such fixing to be effective, the stiffening panel shall be at right angle to the considered panel and should have a width at least equal to quarter of its depth. The influence of boundary conditions on the effective height of wall is expressed by the following formula:
Iwd = KI &r ... (

16)

where lWd=
I, = CffeCtiVe

height Of Wall

actual height of wall as follows:

Kl

= reduction factor which is computed

for panels unstiffened along vertical edges
Kl = 1.0

for panels stiffened along one vertical edge when I, c b,, K, = 1.0 when bw < I, Q 2b,
Kl = ,*4-0.4%

W

. . . ( 17)

when 1, > 2b,
Kl =2/ 1 +:5(k)' b,-

. ..(18)

-

in which b, = breadth of wall panel for panels stiffened along both vertical edges when I, -C 0.5 bw, Kl = 1.0 when 0.5 b, < Iw < b,
. . . ( 19)

32

IS:11447 -1985 when I, > b, &=

.. . (
c) Loud

20>

bearing capacity - The load bearing capacity of Zone 1 in wall panels with longitudinal main reinforcement Q 0.40 percent shall be calculated according to the following formula:

1) Plain concrete walls
RzA+ . . . . (21 )

where
R = load-bearing

capacity of wall strength of
COnCrete

bkc = characteristic
A, = horizontal

in wall

cross-sectional

area of wall

`p = reduction factor ym = strength reduction factor. In case of composite walls the equivalent characteristic strengths of the composite material based on tests is to be taken When load is non-uniformly distributed ( for example, when wind load is taken into account), it can be assumed that adequate uniformly distributed load acts along the width b,. The value of b, calculated from the edge of panel or from the edge of strips separated by openings, shall be assumed as follows: bH = l,, when the panel is stiffened along the vertical edge along the vertical edge In both cases, b, shall be less than the width of strips between openings. The values of coefficient for panels with rectangular cross-sections are given in Table 1. 2) Reinforced concrete wall - The load-bearing capacity of reinforced concrete walls shall be calculated in accordance with IS : 456-1978* taking into account the appropriate strength reduction factors. 5.5.3 Zone 2 of the Wall - -Load-bearing capacity of Zone 2 of the wall shall be calculated according to the following formula neglecting the
*Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ).

b, = 1.0 m, when the panel is unstiffened

33

IS : 11447- 1985
TABLE

1 REDUCTION
[Chuse

COEFFICIENT

5.5.2 (c)]

_--

1wd
r-------fw
----A_

e&
0.10
0.69 O-57 0.65 0.63 0.60 O-57 0.54 0'50 0.46 0.15 0.59 0.67 0.55 0.53 o-50 047 0.42 0.38 0.35

------------0.20 O-50 0.48 O-46 0.43 0`39 0.34 0.31 0.28 0.26

8
10

12 14 16 18 20 22 24

influence of transverse reinforcement . . . ( 22 ) where R= load-bearing capacity of the wall dkc = characteristic strength of concrete ym = strength reduction factor A, = horizontal cross-sectional area of the wall considered $1 = coefficient depending on the type of joint +2 = coefficient depending on the reinforcement = 1 + 0.7 2/n d

s
where n = number of meshes in the zone of the joint ( subject to a minimum of 3 ) ti = dia of transverse reinforcement s = distance between transverse bars If in a composite wall, the thickness of top concrete rib is not less than l/3 of the distance between vertical ribs then values of I as given for normal concrete in Table 2 can be adopted. In the case of non-linear distribution of vertical loads on the wall panel caused due to wind~load, it can be assumed that adequate uniformly distributed load acts on the length of the joint bi. In that case the value 34

IS : 11447- 1985

of b, shall not be greater than 2-O m-or the distance openings.

between

the rows of

The transverse reinforcement is normally placed at the top of the wall panel in the form of closely spaced meshes arranged in at least three horizontal layers.
TABLE 2 VALUES OF COEFFICIENT 0,

( Clause 5.5.3 ) KIND OF JOINT l,f < 4.8 m ~_~~~-~~ External Internal' Wall Wall 0.80 0'80 48 < l,r 6 6.0 m _-_*____-, . External Internal Wall Wall 0.80 @80 REMARKS

. .,, I!!!!+
-JC
:a. -AC

Wall panels resting on homogenous cast in-situ structures

0.75

O-75

0.70

0.75

Walls of normal concrete

s l!PB ..i

0.50

0.60

0.45

O.50

-

liib
-I
c

0'60

-

@50

-

Walls of normal concrete c>4cm

O.40

O.55

0.35

@50

Walls of lightweight concrete and composite walls

@45

0'65

0.40

35

IS:11447 - 1985
For wall panels produced in battery moulds, when concrete is compacted by means of external vibrators the value of R in Eq. 22 shall be reduced by 10 percent. In case when the horizontal joint is designed otherwise than what is given in Table 2, the load-bearing capacity of the wall in the zone of the joint shall be determined empirically.
NOTE - Calculation of the strength of the wall panels in Zone 2 is based on the The analysis is more complex results of empirical formulae derived from test results. since the behaviour of the zone is predominantly dependent on the characteristics ot the joint, its shape and the strength of mortar used in the joint.

5.5.4 Lintels - Load-bearing capacity of lintels shnll be calculated for the shear and bending moment taking into account the influence of both vertical and horizontal loads. Load-bearing capacity shall be computed according to simple bending theory applicable to reinforced concrete members taking into account the appropriate strength reduction factors. 5.5.5 Vertical Joints - Shear resistance of vertical joints shall be checked by the following formulae: a) Keyed joints 1) Unreinforced keyed joint with a minimum steel of 250 mm* in the tie-beam.
Rj = 0.1%

(Ak + Act)

. . . (23)

Where
RI = ultimate shear capacity of the joint

QkC= characteristic

strength of concrete

ym = strength reduction factor Ak, Acr = total area of cross-section of shear-keys in the joint and area of cross-section of tie-beam respectively. 2) Shear strength of reinforced keyed joint
Rj = 012 %(
Ak + Act ) +

2 000 n A,

1.. (24)

where
Ri, bkC,ym, Ak, Act are as defined in Eq. 23. A, = amount of additional reinforcement

over 2.5 cm2

= (A

- 2.5 ) 36

IS : 11447- 1985 A, = steel area provided ( the maximum value for this calcula-

tion is limited to 9.5 cm2 ) b) Grooved joints Rj = 0.02 = ( Aj + AC*). . . . (25)

where Rj, bkc, ym, Act are as given in Eq. 23.
Aj = area of cross-section through the joint, while calculating A, the portion of a joint of width less than 30 mm

shall be neglected. 5.5.6 Horizontaal Joints - In case of joints without keys the shear resistance of horizontal joints shall be checked by the following formula if the entire wall is in compression
Rj = 2.0 Aw . . (26)

If higher resistance is needed, the horizontal joint is to be provided with keys. The shear resistance of keyed joint shall be checked by the following formulae : When compressive of lateral forces forces are produced in the key due to the action < 1.4 Rcl . . . (27) in the key due to the action of

Rhl = R,l + 2.5

&$F When tensile forces are produced lateral forces

in where

which

&

=

O-06

bkC) ( Qka 1"'
Yw YW

... ( 291

&,I = strength ofan individual key in horizontal joint R,1 = strength of the key when acted upon by shear forces parallel to the length of the joint as given by Eq. 30 NC, Nt = normal compression and tensile forces in the key respectively due to the lateral forces characteristic strength of concrete reduced by the corresQks - Yi = pending strength reduction factor in joint or key 37

IS : 11447 - 1985 of transverse reinforcement characteristic strength reduced by the corresponding strength reduction factor in the key n, d = number and diameter of transverse bars in the key
oks

Yw

The value of RCl in Eq. 27 is derived from Eq. 24 which is given as below:
R,I = 012 5.

Ak' + 2 000 As'

. . ( 30 1

where
Ak' = area of the key under consideration A,' = area of the transverse reinforcement

in the key

5.6 Accidental Forces 5.6.1 In addition to designing the structure to support loads arising from normal use, there should be a reasonable probability that it will not collapse under the effect of misuse or accident. No structure can be expected to be resistant to the excessive loads or forces that could arise due to an extreme cause, but it should not be damaged to an extent disproportionate to the original cause. Assessment of residual stability and spread of damage following the removal of a load-bearmg element or alternatively, provision within the structure of tensile ties is recommended. 5.6.2 Partial safety factors yr for accidental loads Design dead load Design imposed-load = O-95 ( FA Or 1.05 Fd_) = 0.35 Fi = 1.05 Fi in case of buildings and predominantly for storage or where the imposed load is of permanent nature = 0.35 Fw

Design wind load

where Fd == characteristic dead load Fi = characteristic imposed load F, = characteristic wind load 56.3 Partial Safety Factor ym for Accidental Loads - While considering the probable effects of misuse or accident, the value of ym recommended in IS : 4561978* may be halved except where otherwise required. 5.64 Location of Tie-Beams -- The location of transverse tie-beams for large panel buildings is as shown in Fig. 13. The amount of reinforcement shall be in accordance with 4.7 or 4.9.5. *Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision 38
).

IS :11447 -1985
( Continued from page 2 )

SHRIA. &IARADWAJ
SHRI J. A. D'C~STA SHRI ARUN V. 0~34~~ (Alternate

In personal capacity

( 207 GoIf Links, New Delhi )

Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay
)

SHRI R. A. DESHMUKH SHRI A. D. GUPTE ( Afternate ) &RI P. M. DESHP.4NDE
SHRI Zac~aRra

United Precast Products, Pune City and Industrial Development Corporation of Maharashtra Ltd, Bombay Structutu;~a~ngmeermg Research Centre ( CSIR ),

GEORGE

DR A. G. MADHAVA RAO ( Alternare ) Engineers India Limited, New Delhi C!ent;~or~lding Research Institute SHRI B. K. JINDAL

SH;U N. K. GUP~A

( CSIR

),

SHARI N. N. BHISE ( Alternate ) Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi SHR~ H. K. JULKA Engineering Consultants ( India ), New Delhi SHRI MAHENDRARAJ SHRI B. R. CHAUDHARY ( Alternate ) B. G. Shirke and Co, Pune SHRI B. G. SHIRKE SHRI R. T. PAWAR ( Alternate ) Tamil Nadu HoUSing Board, Madras SHRI L. R. SAS~RI SHRI S. K~JMARESAN ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI K. S. SRINIVASAN SHRI SUNIL BERY (Alternate) & Toubro Limited ( ECC Construction Larsen SHRI S. SUBRAMANIAN Group ), Madras SHRI A. C. DAT~AR ( Alternate ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SUPERINTENDTYG SURVEYOROF WORKS ( NDZ ) SURVEYOROF WORKS V ( NDZ ) ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavey Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI K. VEERARAGHAVACHARY SHRI V. MALVIYA ( Alternate ) Hindustan Prefab Ltd. New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE SHRI M. KUNDU ( Alternate )

Panel

for Connection in Prefabricated Construction Prefabricates, BDC 32 : P2

and Large

Convener
SHRI A. RAMAKRISHNA Larsen & Toubro Limited Group ), Madras ) ( ECC Construction

Members
Shri A. Ramakrishna SHRI D. I. D~SAI SHRI R. A. DESHMUKH
SHRI S. SUBRAMANIAN (

Alternate to

Gammon India Limited, Bombay
United Precast Products, Pune

( Continued on puge 40 )

39

IS:114471985 (Contim4edfiom
Members
SHRI P. M. DESHPANDE SHRI ZACHARIA GEORGE

page 39 ) Representing
City and Industrial Development ( CIDCO ), Bqmbay StructMu;mugmeermg Research Research Corporation Centre Ltd

( CSIR ) , ( CSIR ),

DR A. G. MADHAVA RAO ( Alternate ) Centr~~o~;e~ding SHRI R. C.MANGAL

Institute

SHRI S. C. CHAKRABAR~Y ( Alternate ) Shirish Pate1 & Associates, Bombay SHRI SHIRWI B. PATEL SHRI P. H. SRINIVASACHAR ( Alternate ) B. G. Shirke and Co, Pune ' SHRI R. T. PAWAR Bharat Heavy Electricah Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI K. VEERARAGUAVACHARY Hindustan Prefab Limited, Bombay REPRESENTATWE SHRI M. KUNDU ( Alternate) Ambiie Consultants, New Bombay REp~s.s~~~Arivs

40

NO. 1 DECEMBER 2006 TO IS 11447:1985 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION WITH LARGE PANEL PREFABRICATES
(Page 3, clause 0.2) -- Insert the following para at the end

AMENDMENT

"The various structural schemes are possible using large panel prefabricates. A reference to Part 6 Structural desi~ Section 7A Prefabricated concrete of SP 7 : 2005 `National Building Code of India 2005' may be made in this regard."
(Page 3, clause 0.4) -- Insert the following clause at the end

`0.5 All standards, whether given herein above or cross-referred to'in the main text of this standmd, are subject to revision. The parties to agreement based on this standad m encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards.' (Page 7, clause 4.1.2) -- Insert the following at the end: "The structural design of elements shall be required to take care the provisions specified for earthquake resistant design of buildings in IS 1893 (Rut 1) :2002 `Criteria for earthquake resistant design of stmcture s Part 1 General provisions and buildings (fij?hrevision) '."
(Page 9 clause 4.1.7) -- Insert the following at the end

`4.1.8 The panels shall be designed and fabricated considering the design and laying requirements of various services, such as electrical, public healw mechanical and HVAC for the building.'
(Page 13, c[ause 4.5.1) -- Substitute the following for the existing clause:

`4.5.1 The walls may be designed as unreinforced or reinforced It is recommended to design walls as plain eonerete reidorcement for production and erection purpose only which account while checking the safety of wall. For walls concrete than M20shaUbeused.'

cement concrete. with secondary is not taken into of grade not less

1

Amend No. 1 to IS 11447:1985 4.5.1.1 External walls The external walls, their horizontal and vertical joints/junctions and junctions at doors/windows shall satis~ the following requirements: a) b) c) They should provide resistance to loads either vertical or horizontal, if n@re@ this depends on the layout of the building The fire resistance, thermal comfort and natural lighting shall t% in accordance with the requirements of relevant Indian StandaK@ and They should provide adequate protection against weathwto the building and its occupants.

External walls may be classified as homogeneous walls and non-homogenous walls. They may be load bearing as well as non-load bearing w~s. The thickness of the walls shall depend on the minimum structural needs as well as the thickness needed at joints to ensure water tightness. Non-homogenous walls may be sandwich panel type, composed of two leaves separated by a layer of insulation, or they may be framed infill type. In sandwich panels, the external and internal walls are both of concrete, appropriately intercomected through the central layer of insulation. All walls shall be designed and detailed to adequately resist the effects of temperature and shrinkage. In infiil walls, where there is a perimeter fiarne enclosing masonry infills, the frame shall be strwtmlly adequate to carryall imposed loads. Intermediate ribs may be introduced to improve the structural action For sandwich panels, the minimum thickness of external concrete layer shall be 40 mm when its movement is constrained. When it has free movement, its minimum thickness shall be 60 mm and it should be connected with internal layer by means of suitable clips allowing free movement. Different shapes of panels are possible for external walls. Windows maybe cast into the panel itself, or they maybe fixed at site. 4.5.1.2 Internal walls Internal structural walls may be homogeneous walls of cement concrete (reinforced or unre~orced) or light weight concrete. In case steel is required across panel joints the joint should be designed to provide continuity in bars.'

2

Amend No. 1 to IS 11447:1985
(Page 13, clause 4.5.2) -- Insert the following at the end:

`However the thickness of walls shall meet the requirements for earthquake resistance in accordance with 1S 1893 (Rut 1) :2002.'
(Page 24, clause 4.9.5) � Insert the following at the end:

`4.9.6 While using large panel prefabricates, the structural integrity of the whole structure has to be ensured. For various applications, for ensuring diaphragm actio~ the provisions specified in IS 1893 (Rut 1) :2002 and IS 4326: 1993 `Code of practice for earthquake resistant design and construction of buildings (second revision)' shall be followed.'

(CED 51)
Reprography Uni~ BIS, New Dell& India

