( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR CALIBRATION OF PENDULUM IMPACT TESTING MACHINES FOR TESTING METALS

( First Revision)
Methods
Chairman
SNRI P. K. CRAKRAVAKTY

of Physical

Tests

Sectional

Committee,
Refkvscnting

SMDC

3

The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur

L mbars
National Test House, Calcutta DR A. S. BHADURI SHRI B. C. BISWAS ( Alternate 1 Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI R. N. BOSE DR M. K. MAUKEKAR ( Alternate ) SHRI D, Y. MOGHF ( AIkrnnte ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( MET )-II, Ministry of Railways RDSO, I,UCKNOW ASSISTANT DII~PCTOR ( MET ) , RDSO, LUCKNOW ( Alternate ) The Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SARI D. DUTTA Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) FHRI P. K. G~N~OP~DHYAY SHRI D. K. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate) Ministry of Defence ( R & D j SHRI N. T. GEORGE S111tr G. K. K. MOIZTY ( Alternate) Direr;t;elhcneral of Supplies & Disposals, SHRI A. K. GUHA e SHRI P C. MUSTAF~ ( Alternate ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SRRI M. h. DAS GUPT~ Blue Star Limited, Bombay SH~I S. B. IDNANI SHRI A. L. CHADRA ( Alternate ) Fuel Instruments & Engineers Pvt Ltd, Ichalkarnji SHRI S. V. KULKAKNI SHRI J. V. KULKARNI ( Alternate ) Usha Martin Rlack ( Wire Ropes ) Ltd, Calcutta SBR~ V. M. KULKARNI DR A. CAAKRABORTY ( Altrrnate ) The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRT M. C. KUMARASWAMY DR T. MUKEERJEE ( Alternate ) The Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur DR D. M. LAKHIANI SHRI R. DUTTA ( Alternate ) Avery India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI K. S. LAKSHD~INAI~AYAN SHRI R. D. SHARMA ( Alfernate )

SHRI R. N.

L)XCTA

Ministry of Defence

( DGOF )

( Continued on page 2 )
@
INDIAN

Copyright 1978
INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement

of copyright

under the said Act.

IS 23766-1977
( Continued from page 1) Members Representing Indian Sugar & General Engineering Corpn, Yamunanagar SHRI MADAN SHARX~ ( Alternate ) SHRI R. A. PADMANABHAN Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Durgapur M. N. Dastur & Co ( P ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI N. A. PRABHU Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SERI M. PRASAD SRRI D. P. GAOSH ( Alternate ) National Aeronautical Laboratory ( CSIR ), SHRI S. RADHAKRISHNAN Bangalore Mining & Allied Machinery Corpn Ltd, Durgapur SHRI N. V. RACWAVAN SHRI S. KUMAR ( Alternate ) Union Carbide India Ltd, Calcutta REPRESENTATIVE Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SERI F. C. SEARMA Bharat Steel Tubes Ltd, Ganuar SBRI K. C. SRIVASTAVA Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay SHRI H. K. TANEJA SHRIV. N. PANDEY (`Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI A. UMAMAHESWARAN New Delhi National Metallurgical Laboratory DR VIED PRAKASH ( CSIR ), Jamshcdpur DR D. J. CHA~RAVARTI ( Alternate ) Associated Instrument Manufacturers' ( India ) Pvt SHRIH. C. VERXA Ltd, New Delhi SHRI 0. P. CRIJQR ( Alternate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-o&-io Member ) SHRIC. R. RAMA RAO, Director ( Strut & Met )

SHRIY. L. MIDHA

Secretary Srrtu B. MUERERJI Deputy Director ( Metals ), IS1

2

IS t 3766- 1977

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR CALIBRATION OF PENDULUM IMPACT TESTING MACHINES FOR TESTING METALS

(First Revision)
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 12 December 1977, after the draft finalized by the Methods of Physical Tests Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first published in 1966. It was taken up for review by the Committee and is now being issued as a revised standard with certain modifications for requirements relating to: a) inspection of machine framework, b) verification of the pedulum, and c) Test piece supports. In the preparation of this standard, due account has been taken of latest international agreements concerning the use of SI units in relation to impact testing. 0.3 This standard prescribes the requirements for the inspection, calibration and verification of pendulum impact testing machines employed for conducting notched bar impact tests. The method of calibration specified in this standard is essentially static in nature and is intended for the purpose of verifying machines by means of measuring the potential energy after the test piece has been struck. This standard does not take into account the energy absorbed, other than when fracturing the test piece, corrected to cover air resistance and friction losses. 0.4 This standard also includes direct method of checking points on the measuring scale of a bean-type machine by comparison tests on unnotched test pieces in the machine under test and in a previously calibrated This method may also be used to check the performance of machine. the machine over a period of time, without reference to any other machine. This method, however, is not intended as an alternate method to complete verification and shall not be used without the consent of the parties concerned. 3

IS:3766

-1977

0.5 This standard is based on ISO/R 442-1965 `Verification of pendulum impact testing machines for testing steels' issued by the International Organization for Standardization, which represents the consensus of international opinion on the subject. In the preparation of this standard assistance has also been derived from BS 131 : Part 4 : 1972 `Calibration of pendulum impact testing machines for metals' published by British Standards Institution. 0.6 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the method for calibration of pendulum impact testing machines employed for carrying out notched bar impact tests on metals. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, 19697, shall apply. 3. CALIBRATION 3.1 The calibration of the machine shall be carried out after installation and shall cover the verification of the following elements which are illustrated in Fig. 1, 2,, 3, and 4: a) Machine framework ( the. structure excluding the foundation ); b) Pendulum; c) Test piece supports; and d) Indicating equipment for the absorbed scale and friction pointer ). 3.2 Machine Framework of the machine framework shall consist of determining level of the test piece supports, impact energy ( namely, supporting the pendulum the definitions given in IS : 5069-

9.2.1 Inspection the following: a) Horizontal

b) Free position of the pendulum,
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). tGlosrary of terms relating to methods of mechanical testing ofmet&

4

IS : 3766 - 1977 c) Location of the pendulum and d) Side play of the pendulum in relation bearings.
AXIS OF ROTATION SCALE BEARING OF PENWLUM

to the test piece supports,

FRICTION

POINTER

ROD OF PENDULUM

ANGLE OF TIP

DIUS OF CURVATURE ENLARGED SECTION AT XX

L FOUNDATION
FIG. 1 CHARPY IMPACT TEST

OIR@ZTION OF IMPACT

I

/-TEST

PIECE

DISTANCE BETWEEN SUPPORTS FIG. 2 CHARPY IMPACT

TEST PIECE

5

SS:3766-1977

AXIS

OF ROTATION POINTER

RICTION

L FOUNDATION

FIG. 3

TZOD IMPACT TEST

3.2.2 Tlie axis of rotation of the pendulum shall be horizontal within 1/1000. In the case of beam-type machinism, test piece supports should be such that the axis of the test piece is parallel to the axis of rotation of the pendulum within 1 /l 000. The plane of swing of the pendulum shall be perpendicular to the transverse axis of the Charpy specimen anvils or Izod vice within 3 : 1000. 3.2.3 A gauge in the form of a bar, approximately 55 mm in length and of section 10 & 0.01 mm square, shall be located in the test piece supports. When the striking edge is brought into contact with the bar, the coincidence between the striking edge and the face of the bar shall be within 0.03 mm over the full width. 3.2.4 The pendulum for Charpy and beam V-notch tests shall be so located that the striking edge of the pendulum is within 0.5 mm of the centre of the gap between the test piece supports. 6

IS:3766

-1977

RADIUS OF CURVATURE OF STRIKING EDGE

/-

ANGLE

OF

TIP

ANGLE BETWEEN UNDERSlOE OF STRIKER AND FACE OF TEST PIECE

FIG.

4

Izon

IMPACT TEST PIECE

3.2.5 The pendulum for Izod tests shall be so located that the point of contact between the striking edge and the test piece is 22 f 0.5 mm above the reference surface of the test piece supports. The angle between the bottom side of the striker and the face of the test piece shall be 100 Ii_ 1" ( see Fig. 4 ). Any gauge used for checking shall be within 0.2". For all types of machine, the side-play in the pendulum bearings shall not exceed 0.25 mm, and the radial play shall not exceed 0.03 mm. 3.3 Pendulum ( including striker ) shall

3.3.1 The verification of the pendulum consist of determining the following: a b,

Initial potential energy; Error in the indicated absorbed energy; Impact velocity; :] Energy absorbed by friction; e) Positton of centre of percussion ( that is, distance percussion to axis rotation ); of the striking edge; f) Radius of curvature g) Angle of tip of striker ( see Fig. 1 and 4 ); and of striker. h) Direction 7

from centre

of

IS : 3766 - 1977 3.3.2 The initial potential energy A shall not differ from the nominal The initial potential energy is value by more than & 1 percent. determined by the following formula:
A=M(l-cosa) where

M = moment

of the pendulum,

and

CC = angle of fall ( see Fig. 5 ). The moment of the pendulum is determined by supporting the pendulum at a chosen distance 12 which should preferably be greater than l/2 from the axis of rotation by means of a striking edge on a balance or dynamometer in such a manner that the line through the axis ofrotation which joins the centre ofgravity of the pendulum is horizontal The force F and the length 12 shall be determined ( see Fig. 6 ). The moment M is the product F x 12. to an accuracy of 0.2 percent. The angle of fall (M) shall be measured to an accuracy of 4 minutes of arc. NOTE- In certain carts, it may be necessary to remove the pendulum from the machine to determine its moment by the method described above. Other methods of determining Mare not precluded.

PENDULUM

1

FIG. 5

DIAGRAM ILLUSTRATING SWING OF PENDULUM

8

IS : 3766 - 1977

P

LENGTH OF PENDULUM I

-+

'1

OF TEST PIECE

FIG. 6

DIAGRAM ILLIJS~RATING SWING OF PENDULUM

3.3.3 The graduation marks of each scale corresponding to 0, 10, 20, 30, 50 and 70 percent of the full range of the scale shall be verified. For each of these graduation marks, the pendulum shall be so supported that the graduation mark is indicated by the pointer, and the angle of rise p then determined to within 4 minutes of arc. The indicated absorbed energy A" is given by the following formula: A" = M ( Cos p - Cos a ) 1.I The degree of inaccuracy of measurement 12, F and 6 when specified, yields a mean total error of measurement of A, of approximately * O-3 percent of the full scale value. The error in A", shall not exceed 3-O percent of the indicated value or 1.0 percent of the full scale value, whichever is greater. ( The potential energy after the test pieces has been struck should never be less than one-tenth of the potential energy before the test piece was struck. ) 3.3.4 The impact formula: velocity u shall be determined * = 2/ 2gl( 1 Cos a ) from the following

g = acceleration of free fall; its value may be taken as @81 m/s*, to save measurement at the site of each testing machine; and 1 = distance from the axis of rotation of the pendulum to the centre of the test piece for Charpy and beam V-notch tests, and to the point of impact for the Izod test. 9

IS:3766-1977
The impact velocity shall 3 to 4 m/s for Izod machines. be 5 to 5.5 m/s for Charpy machines and

NOTE - For charpy machines manufactured before publication an impact velocity of 4'5 to 7 m/r is permissible.

of this standard,

3.3.5 The energy absorbed by friction includes air resistance, bearing friction and the friction of the indicating pointer. The frictional losses due to the indicating pointer and to the remainder of the machine may be estimated as given in 3.3.5.1. 3.3.5.1 The machine is operated in the normal manner, but without a test piece in position, and the angle of rise PI noted as indicated by the pointer. A second test shall then be carried out without resetting the indicating pointer and the new angle of rise pa noted. For a simple swing of the pendulum from the angle of fall a, the losses by friction (p) of the indicating pointer during the rise is given by the following formula:

P- M (

cosp1 - cospa)
(p'), during the fall

The losses by bearing friction and air resistance and the rise is given by the following formula:

P` -

A4 ( Cos /3z -

Cos a )
of p and p' shall be

The values of Pi and fig used for the calculation the mean values of four determinations.

The total losses by friction and air resistance, for one swing, shall not exceed 0.5 percent of the initial potential energy of the pendulum. 3.3.6 The distance 11 from the centre of percussion to the axis of rotation is derived from the time ofswing of the pendulum, and it should be within -& 1 percent of 1. The distance shall be determined by swinging the pendulum through an angle not exceeding 5" and by measuring the time t of a complete oscillation in seconds. Ir is derived from the following expression:
h= 23

.!P

where

the value of 7rs = 9'87, and 5 P. g = 9.81 m/s*.

Therefore,

11 in metres

=

0.248 10

IS:3766

-1977

3.3.7 The value of t shall be determined within 0.1 percent. For instance with a pendulum having a periodic time of approximately 2 seconds this accuracy may be achieved by ascertaining the mean value oft derived from four determinations, each of a total duration T of 100 complete oscillations, provided the quantity ( TM~S - TMin ), which represents the repeatability, is not more than 0.2 second. 3.3.7.1 The radius of curvature of the striking edge shall be checked with a gauge. Any gauge used for checking shall be within f 0.1 mm diameter. For Charpy and beam V-notch tests, the radius of curvature For Izod tests, the radius of curvature shall be shall be 2 to 2'5 mm. 0.5 to 1'0 mm. 3.3.7.2 The angle of the tip of the striker shall be checked with a gauge. Any gauge used for checking shall be within 0.2". For the Charpy and beam V-notch tests, the angle shall be 30 & 1". For Izod tests, the angle shall be 75 & 1". 3.3.8 When the striking edge of the pendulum makes contact with the test piece, it shall be perpendicular to the longer dimensions of the test piece within 2". 3.4 Test Piece Supports
3.4.1 Charpy and Beam V-notch Tests -

The following

dimensions

of the

test piece supports a) Distance

shall be checked: between supports,

b) Taper of supports, and c) Radius of curvature of supports. 3.4.1.1 The distance between supports shall be 40?_:' gauge used for checking shall be withln * 0'1 mm. mm. Any

3.4.1.2 The taper of supports shall be 1 & 0.1 in 5, that is, a slope of 0.18 to 0.22 ( approximately 11 & 1" ). Any gauge used for checking shall be within 2.0". The radius of curvature of supports shall be 1 to 1.5 mm. Any gauge used for checking shall be within + 0.1 mm on the diameter.
3.4.2 Izod Tests -

The

following

dimensions

of the test piece supports the horizontal end,

shall be checked: a) Angle and b) Width between supporting face of grips and

of locating

slot for test piece. 11

IS : 3766 - 1977 3.4.2.1 A square or circular section shall be clamped in the grips. If square, the bar shall be of the dimension as given in 3.2.3; a bar of circular section shall be of diameter Il.4 + 0.014 mm and of length 65 mm.
3.4.2.2 The angle between of the grips shall be 90 f 0.5". the face of the test piece and the surface Any gauge used shall be within 0.1".

3.4.2.3 The width of the locating groove shall be lO?g$rnrn for For circular test pieces, it shall be of semisquare section test pieces. circular cross section having a diameter of 11.506 to 11.557 mm. Any gauge used shall be within f 0*025mm. 3.5

Indicating

Equipment
of the indicating equipment shall consist of the

3.5.1 The following:

verification

a) Examination b) Examination

of the scale graduations, and of the indicating pointer.

3.5.1.1 It is recommended that for new machines the scale intervals represents a maximum of 1 J for machines having a capacity of 150 J or less and 2 J for machines of greater than 150 J capacity for the Charpy machines.
3.5.1.2 For Izod machines, the scale intervals for machines of 80 J or less, and 2 J for machines capacity. shall not exceed 1 J of greater than 80 J

3.5.1.3 It is recommended that the length of the smallest division shall be not less than 2 mm. The scale may also be graduated in degrees or fractions of a degree. 3.5.1.4 Tests shall be carried out to determine whether the centre The thickof circular scale is at the centre of the axis of the pendulum. ness of the graduation marks and the thickness of the indicating pointer shall not exceed 0.2 of the minimum scale spacing. The indicating pointer shall permit a reading free from parallax. 4. DIRECT

CHECK

BY TESTS ON UNNOTCHED
the following:

TEST PIECES

4.1 This method

involves

a) Selection and preparation of test pieces, b) Tests in a previously cahbrated machine, c) Measurements of dimensions and tests checked, and d) Assessment of performance.

in the machine

to be

NOTE - If the method is being employed to check the perfdrmance ~ over a period of time, tests under (b) shall not be required.

of a machine

12

b.,

,_(

,,

*

I.

IS:3766

-1977

4.2 For each scale point to be checked, 5 Jv test pieces are required. Jv is preferably 6 and should not exceed 10. The test pieces may be cut in consecutive order from the selected bar of metal and numbered in sequence so that two consecutive numbers are given to continuous test pieces. The test pieces should be heat-treated to possess uniform properties such that they withstand bending without fracture or formation of cracks, and such that the edges of the grips do not make deep indentations. After treatment the test pieces shall be machined together to the dimensions given below: Dimensions Length Width Thickness Variable Value 55 mm 10 mm ( see Note ) Tolerance + 0.1 mm f 0'05 mm

& O-01 mm

NOTE - It has been found that thicknesses of 3 mm, 5 mm and 7 mm are suitable for checking at absofbed energy levels of approximately 20 J, 70 J and 140 J respectively, using a mild steel in the normalized condition.

4.3 The test pieces numbered 1Jlr + 1, 2.X + 1,3.M + 1 and 4N + 1 are bent in the reference machine. Each test piece is mounted in the machine so that the striker strikes a 10 mm wide face (see Fig. 7). Let 7-1, Tz, T8, Td and Tj be the quantities of absorbed energy, arranged in If Ti - Tl is less than 5 percent of Tl, the uniformity increasing order. of metal is considered satisfactory and the remaining ~JV5 test pieces may be used for checking. It is assumed that bending each of these 5Jv-- 5 test pieces shall absorb a quantity of energy T3.

FRONT VIEW OF IZOD TEST PIECE

TEST

PIECE

dz3.5

OR 7mm

FIG. 7

TEST PIECES
13

4.4 It shall be Bscertained that the niachine to be checked complies with the requirements of 3.4. To verify the graduation mark corresponding to the value Is, fitie of the 5.N - 5 test pieces are tested. Let Tim, Tzm, Tam, Tdrn and Tsm be the quantities of absorbed energy corresponding to readings made on the scale of the machine being checked, arranged in increasing order. 4.4.1 For these tests, each test piece shall be placed on the supports in such a way that the striking.edge of the striker strikes it exactly in the middle of its length. 4.4.2 Different graduation marks on the machine may be checked in this manner by varying the thickness of the test piece, the value of T being determined in each case by the method described in 4.3. by the difference 4.5 Repeatability is characterized Accuracy is characterized by the following quantity: T.m - T, T3 Tsm Tim.

x 100

If T.5m - T,m does not exceed 10 percent of Tim, the repeatability of the machine at the graduation mark corresponding to Ia is considered satisfactory. If the difference between Tam and Ta does not exceed 5 percent of Ts, the accuracy of the machine at the graduation mark corresponding to Ts is considered satisfactory. If either of the above conditions is not satisfied, the machine shall be verified and serviced as described in 3.

14

AmDMENT NO. 1 TO

JUNE 1980

IS:376601977 METHOD FOR CALIBRATION OF PENDUi.Un IMPACT TESTINGWUiIC(ES FOR TESTINGRETMS

Alterations ___'lr_L Page 0, ckuu
`9.81 m/s28

3.3.4, tirsrr 4) - substitute

for '0.81./s2~.
for the existin - SPbrtitute the
chme:

following

wuge 12, cktur S.4.2.2)

`3.h .2.2 The aaglc betuecn face of the test piece utd the surface of the @rips sl!mlZbe 90 21'. Aay grugr used shall be v5tb.b 0 .I'. *

i

&i' cl

AMENDMENT NO. 2 TO

SEPTEMBER 1982

IS:3766-1977 HETIIUD FOR CALIBRATION OF PEtIDULUtl IllPACTTESTING WKHINES FOR TESTING METALS (First Revision)

1

Corricgzndum _--(Pmp 3) ____--____--Repro~rny~lly hit, ISI, New Jklhi, IndiK

1

11,

chme

3.4.1.2,

line

3) - Substitute

1'0.2O' jiw

'2.00'.

f

,(sMM!

f

I

