**************** 


-k  t^^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  4381  (1967):  Pathological  Microscope  [MHD  10:  Medical 
Laboratory  Instruments] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  :  4381  .  1967 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 
PATHOLOGICAL  MICROSCOPE 


UDC    535-82: 61 5-47: 616-09 


©  Copyright  1968 

INDIAN     STANDARDS    INSTITUTION 

MANAK   BHAVAN.   9  BAHADUR   SHAH    ZAFAR    MARO 
NEW  DELHI    1 


February  1968 


AMENDMENT  NO.  2    FEBRUARY  2004 

TO 

IS  4381  :  1967    SPECIFICATION  FOR 

PATHOLOGICAL  MICROSCOPE 

(  Page  4,  clause  4.5  )  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing  Note  1: 

*Note  I     The  value  of  numerical  aperture  stipulated  above  are  the  nominal/ 

(  Page  8,  clause  6.2.8,  last  sentence  )  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the 
existing  sentence: 

The  measured  values  shall  not  differ  from  the  specified  values  by  ±5  percent.' 
(  CHD  35  )  


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


IS  t  4381  •  1967 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 
PATHOLOGICAL  MICROSCOPE 


Optical     and    Mathematical     Instruments 
Sectional  Committee,  EDC  36 

Chairman  Representing 

Dr  C.  S*  Ba.0  The  Andhra  Scientific  Co  Ltd,  MaauUpatam 

Members 

Shbi  p.  V.  SuBBA  Bao  (  Aliernate  to 
Dr  C.  8.  Rao ) 
Sbbi  R.  R.  Ohakbaborty  \    The  National  Instruments  Limited,  Jadavpur 

Shbi  J.  Sanyal  ( Alternate^ 
Chjbv  Hydboobaphbb  (  Navy  )    Indian  Navy 

Staff  Offiobb  (  Hydbo  )  {^Alternate  ) 
DBPtrxY  Dibbotor   STAXPABsii    Research,    Designs    8t>    Standards    Organisation 
(  Tback  )  ^  (  Ministry  of  Railways ) 

Assistant  Dibbctob  Stakp 
DABD8  (  Track  )  (  Alternate  )  t 

Dibbctob,    Instbumbntb    Ri.    Ministry  of  Defence  (R&D) 

SBABCH        k        DsVBLOPMKtrt 

ESTABLISHBfBKT  • 

Shbi  S.  S.  Dhabmayya  (  Aiternate )  J 

Maj  S.  Ganottli  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI ) 

Maj  p.  S.  Bbahmachareb  ( Aiternate )  I 

TBI  8.  K.  Gaxttam  Quality    Marked     Goods      Manufacturers'     Co- 

operative Association  Ltd,  Roorkee  '^ 

Shbi  Jai  Pbakash  (  Aiternate  ) 
HBi  A.  Ghosh  National  Test  House,  Calcutta 

j:bi  D.  D.  Khosi* a  Directorate  of  Industries,  Government  of  Haryana, 

Chandigarh 
OL  K.  L.  KnoaiiA  Survey  of  India,  Dehra  Dun 

jHBi  V.  Kbishkamoorthy  Directorate  General  of  Technical  Development, 

New  Delhi 
Shbi  D.  Majvmdab  Office  of  the  Development  Commissioner,  Small 

Scale     Industries,    Ministry    of    Industrial 
Development  &  Company  Affairs 
Shbi  G.  B,  Jakhbtia  (  Aiternate ) 
Shbi  B.  R.  Makkrand  The     Koh-i*Noor     ( India )     Private    Limited, 

Varanasi 

(  Continued  on  page  2 ) 


INDIAN   STANDARDS    INSTITUTION 

MANAK   BHAVAN.   9   BAHADUR    SHAH   ZAPAR   MARC 

NEW   DELHI   I 


IS  :  4381  -  1967 

(  Continued  from  page  1 ) 

Members  Representing 

Db  J.  Pbasad  Central     Scientific     Xnstnunents      Organisation 

( OSIR ),  Chandigarh 
Shri  B.  L.  Sha&ma  ( Alternate ) 
Shbi  PaBM  Fbakabh  National    Physical     Laboratory    (  CSIB ),   New 

Delhi 
8hbi  p.  C.  Jain  (  Alternate ) 
Shbi  £.  B.  Rajdbbkab  Baj-Der-Kar  &  Co,  Bombay 

Shbi  Subhas  Bajdbbkab  ( Alternate ) 
Db  I.  Ramabbishva  Rao  In   personal   capacity   ( /5-i-5    Official   Colony, 

Visakhapatnam  2 ) 
Sbbz  M.  M.  Rao  Madras  Institute  of  Technology^  Madras 

Rbpbesbmtativb  Directorate  General,  Ordnance  Factories  ( Minis* 

try  of  Defence ) 
SUBVBYOB  OF  WoBKS  II  UiTDiBB    Central  Public  Works  Department 

SXJPEBINTBNDINO      SUBVBVOB 
OF  WOBKS  I 

Shbi  H.  C.  Vbbma  Associated    Instrument    Manufactvirers    ( India  ) 

Private  Limited,  New  Delhi 
Shbi  J.  A.  Ukvala  ( Alternate ) 
Shbi  M.  V.  Patakkab,  Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-officio  Member  ) 

Director  (  Mech  Engg ) 

Secretary 
Shbi  S.  M.  Razvi 
Deputy  Director  (  Mech  Engg ),  ISI 

Optical  Instruments  Subcommittee,  EDC  36 : 2 

Convener 
Shbi  A.  N.  Bhattachabyya         Ministry  of  Defence  (  R  A:  D  ) 

Members 
Shbi  0.  L.  Batba  Towa  Optics  ( India )  Pvt  Ltd.  Delhi 

Shbi  B.  M.  8.  Chopba  Department  of  Industries,  Government  of  Punjab, 

Chandigarh 
Shbi  R.  C.  Jain  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI ) 

Shbi  S*  N.  Das  Gupta  (  Alternate ) 
Shbi  V.  Kbishkamoobthy  Directorate  General  of  Technical    Development^ 

New  Delhi 
Shbi  S.  K,  Mahbswabi  Government    Precision     Instruments     Factory, 

Lucknow 
Shbi  P.  C«  Mibha  Small  Industries  Service  Institute,  New  Delhi 

Shbi  D.  R.  Goyal  (  Alternate ) 
Shbi  S.  K.  Mu&hbbjkb  Instrument  Renearoh  Laboratory  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Db  J.  Pbasad  Central     Scientific     Instruments     Organisation 

( OSIR  ),  Chandigarh 
Shbi  J.  L.  Mathitb  (  Alternate ) 
Shbi  Ram  Pbabhad  National    Physical    Laboratory   (  OSIR ),   New 

Delhi 
Shbi  S.  V.  Gupta  (  Alternate ) 
RvFBBSBHTATivB  Directorate       General.       Ordnance       Factories 

(  Ministry  of  Defence  ) 
Sbbi  D.  C.  Roy  The  National  Instruments  Limitedp  Jadavpur 

Shbi  P.  V«  Subba  Rao  The  Andhra  Soientifie  Co  Ltd,  Maiulipatam 


IS  :  4381  -  1967 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 
PATHOLOGICAL  MICROSCOPE 

0.     FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards  Insti- 
tution on  24  November  1967,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Optical 
and  Mathematical  Instruments  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved 
by  the  Mechanical  Engineering  Division  Council. 

0«2  This  standard  deals  w|th  the  requirements  of  pathological  microscope 
used  as  a  clinical  instrun|ent  for  identification  and  study  of  microscopic 
pathological  specimens.    , 

0.3  This  standard  is  one|)f  a  series  of  Indian  Standards  on  microscopes. 
Other  standards  published  so  far  in  the  series  are: 

18:3081-1965    Dimensions     and    marking    of    general    purposes 
micr(^copes  ; 

IS :  3099-1965     Specillcation     for     slides     and     cover     slips  *  for 
microscopes 

IS  :  3686-1966    Specification  for  student  type  microscope  \ 

IS  :  4328-1967     Specification  for  monocular  dissecting  microscojbe 

IS  :  4329-1967    Specification  for  measuring  ( travelling  )  micro$copc 

0.3,1  A  separate  standard  dealing  with  the  research  microscope  is 
also  under  preparation. 

0.4  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of 
this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated, 
expressing  the  result  of  a  test,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with 
IS  :  2-1960*.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded 
off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this 
standard. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  covers  the  general  and  functional  requirements  of  the 
monocular  pathological  type  of  microscope. 


^'Bubs  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised). 

3 


IS  :  4381  - 1967 

2.  TERMINOLOGY 

2.1  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  definitions  given  in  IS  :  1399- 
1959*  shall  apply. 

3.  DIMENSIONS 

3.1  The  dimensions  for  pathological  microscope  shall  conform  to 
IS:308I.1965t. 

4.  GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS 

4.1  Pathological  type  microscope  shall  conform  to  the  general  require- 
ments laid  down  in  IS  :  988-19591  and  IS  :  2754-1964§. 

4.2  The  microscope  shall  either  be  of  the  hinged  limb  type  with  the 
limb  carrying  the  tube  in  which  case  il  shall  be  possible  to  tilt  the  limb 
from  the  vertical  to  the  horizontal  position  without  affecting  the  equili- 
brium of  the  whole  system,  or  it  may  be  with  a  non-tilting  limb  in 
which  case  provision  shall  be  made  for  fitting  a  suitably  inclined  tube 
for  viewing  comfortably.  There  shall  be  provision  for  coarse  and  fine 
movement  of  the  microscope  relative  to  the  stage  and  it  shall  be  so 
restricted  by  a  suitable  slide  protecting  device  that  it  may  not  at  any 
time  damage  the  microslide  placed  on  the  stage.  The  construction 
shall  be  such  as  to  make  it  possible  to  move  the  condenser  relative  to 
the  stage. 

4.3  All  the  materials  used  in  the  construction  of  microscope  sliall  con- 
form  to  the  requirements  stipulated  in  IS:  2754-1964§. 

4.4  The  interior  surfaces  of  the  microscope  shall  be  finished  dull  black 
and  suitable  stops  or  baffles  should  be  provided  to  eliminate  stray  light, 

4.5  The  magnification  and  numerical  aperture  of  objectives  shall  be 
as  under: 

a)  16  mm  (lOxNAO-25), 

b)  4    mm  (  40  X  N  A  0*65  )  or  (  45  X  NA  065  ),  and 

c)  2    mm  ( 90x  NA  1*25 )  or  {  lOOx  NA  1*25  )  oil  immersion. 

The   objectives   shall   be    corrected   for    cover    glass    thickness  of 
0-17  mm. 

Note  I  —  Tho    vahies    of    numerical    aporture    stipulated    abovo    are    the 
minimum. 

Note  2  —  Distinguishing  mark  for  (c)'~groove  filled  with  rod  paint  ehould  be 
made  for  quick  identification. 


♦GlosMiiy  of  terms  used  in  optical  technology. 
tDimenstons  and  markmg  of  general  purposes  microscopes. 
^General  requirements  for  optical  components. 
^General  requirements  for  optical  instruments. 


IS  :  4381  -  1967 

4.6  The  eyepieces  shall  be  of  the  following  type  and  magnification: 

a)  Huygenian  5x  or    6x 

b)  Huygenian  10  X  or  12  X 

c)  Huygenian  15  X 

d)  Compensation  eyepiece  10  X 

4.7  A  condenser  with  its  numerical  aperture  not  less  than  that  of  the 
highest  power  objective  shall  be  provided  and  it  shall  be  complete  with 
iris  diaphragm  and  a  filter  holder  which  may  be  swung  out  of  the 
system  when  desired.  Three  screws  may  be  provided  in  the  condenser 
cell  for  centring  purpose.  Rack  and  pinion  arrangement  shall  be  pro- 
vided for  up  and  down  movement. 

4.8  The  objectives  shall  be  supplied  in  suitable  containers. 

4.9  The  case  carrying  the  microscope  shall  be  made  of  well-seasoned 
wood;  teak,  ply  or  board  may  also  be  used.  It  shall  be  complete  with 
lock  and  key  arrangement  with  a  suitable  locking  screw  for  securing  the 
microscope  and  a  crosspiece  to  retain  it  in  position  during  transit.  The 
case  shall  be  of  a  good  general  condition  with  a  carrying  handle  at  the 
top  and  internal  brackets  and  shelves  to  accommodate  the  objectives, 
eyepieces  and  other  accessories.  It  should  contain  a  cleaning  brush  and 
a  bag  of  activated  silica  gel  to  keep  the  interior  moisture  free. 

4.10  A  suitable  substagc  plane  and  concave  mirror  shall  be  provided 
with  the  microscope.  The  concave  mirror  should  be  able  to  concen- 
trate a  beam  upon  a  small  area  of  the  object  when  the  condenser  is  not 
used. 

5.  FUNCTIONAL  REQUIREMENTS 

5.1  The  coarse  and  the  fine  focusing  motions  of  the  objective  relative  to 
the  stage  or  vice-versa  and  the  movement  of  the  condenser  shall  be 
smooth  and  even.  The  focusing  movement  shall  remain  unaffected  by 
the  load  of  the  accessories  likely  to  be  used  with  this  type  of  microscope. 
The  iris  diaphragm  of  the  condenser  shall  open  and  close  centrally  and 
smoothly. 

5.2  The  fine  motion  shall  be  0*1  mm  per  revolution  of  the  corresponding 
knobs  over  a  range  of  1  to  2  mm. 

5.3  The  hole  in  the  stage  shall  be  located  centrally  with  respect  to  the 
microscope  axis. 

5.4  The  nosepiece  shall  be  smooth  in  movement,  without  any  shake  in 
it  and  shall  not  be  displaced  by  any  jerk. 


IS  :  4381  - 1967 

5.5  The  objectives  and  eyepieces  should  be  parfocal  to  within  half  a 
turn  of  the  fine  motion  knob.  It  is  essential  that  these  parfocal  dis- 
tances be  maintained  at  the  values  given  in  IS  :  3081-1965*. 

5.6  The  optical  axis  of  the  microscope  shall  coincide  with  the 
mechanical  axis. 

5.7  Tlie  image  of  the  object  shall  be  well-defined  with  good  contrast- 
rendition  and  practically  free  from  spurious  colour  effects,  curvature  of 
field  over  two-thirds  of  the  field  of  view  and  inadmissible  distortion. 

5.8  The  resolving  power  of  each  objective  shall  correspond  closely  to 
the  theoretical  limit. 

5.9  The  edge  of  the  eyepiece  stop  should  appear  in  focus  and  it  shall  be 
dull  black. 

5.10  The  movement  of  the  mechanical  stage  in  two  perpendicular 
directions  shall  be  easy  and  smooth  and  shall  not  have  excessive 
backlash. 

5.11  The  mechanical  stage  shall  be  provided  with  well-defined  and 
distinct  vernier  graduations  having  a  O'l  mm  least-count. 

6.  TESTS 

6.1  Mechanical 

6.1.1  The  mechanical  tube  length  shall  be  within  ±1  mm  of  the 
standard  nominal  value  of  160  mm. 

6.1.2  The  stage  shall  be  checked  for  its  squareness  to  the  axis  of  the 
microscope  maintaining  the  objective  parfocal  distance.  The  deviation 
from  the  sequareness  shall  not  exceed  five  minutes  of  arc. 

6.1.3  In  changing  from  one  objective  to  another  or  reintroducing  the 
same  objective  by  rotation  of  the  nosepiece,  the  object  at  the  centtc  of 
the  field  shall  not  appear  displaced  by  more  than  0*02  mm  in  the  object 
plane  in  any  direction. 

6.1.4  Operation  of  fine  motion  screw  through  its  full  range  shall  not 
appear  to  displace  an  object  by  more  than  0*01  mm. 

6.1.5  Centring  of  the  condenser  shall  be  checked  by  rotating  it  in  its 
holder.  The  rotation  of  the  image  of  the  distant  object  formed  by  the 
condenser  shall  be  within  1  mm. 

6.1.6  Parfocality  of  the  objectives  and  the  eyepieces  shall  be  within 
half  a  turn  of  the  fine  motion  knob. 


*Dimeu8iori8  and  marking  of  general  purposes  microscopes. 

6 


IS  :  4381  -  1967 
6.2  Optical 

6.2.1  Resolving  Power  and  Definition  —  Depending  upon  the  numeri- 
cal aperture  of  the  objective,  an  appropriate  test  slide  (  diatom  )  illumi- 
nated by  a  beam  of  nearly  the  same  numei  ical  aperture  is  observed  with 
the  microscope.  The  fine  structure  shall  appear  resolved  and  well- 
defined.  ( The  emphasis  on  a  well-defined  image  is  for  protection 
against  misleading  results  due  to  spurious  resolution. )  The  test  object 
shall  be  carefully  and  judiciously  chosen  in  the  test  diatom  slide.  The 
following  diatoms  arc  recommended  for  objectives  with  various 
magnifications: 

Magnification! Numerical  Recommended  diatom 

aperture 

lOx/0-25  Navicula  lyra 

40X/0-65  or  45x/0*65  Pleurosigma  angulatum 

90X/1-25  or  lOOx/1-25  Amplipleura  pellucida 

6.2.2  Star  —  The  objectives  shall  be  tested  separately  for  aberration 
over  two-thirds  of  the  field  of  view  by  examination  of  the  intrafocal  and 
extrafocal  images  of  a  '  Star'  object.  The  'Stai  '  may  be  pioduced  arti- 
ficially by  suitably  illuminating  very  minute  mercury  globule  on  a  piece 
of  glass  painted  black  placed  on  the  sta^e  of  the  microscope  under  test. 
For  observing  the  diffraction  pattern  formed  on  either  side  of  the  focus 
of  the  objective  under  test,  an  auxiliary  testing  microscope  may  be  used 
in  place  of  the  eyepiece  to  provide  a  magnification  higher  than  15  X  in 
doubtful  cases,  otherwise  the  15  X  eyepiece  may  be  used. 

6.2.3  Colour  —  The  image  of  a  black  and  white  test  object  shall 
appear  free  from  colour  when  observed  )jy  illumination  with  white  light 
over  two-thirds  of  the  field  of  view. 

6.2.4  Curvature  of  Field  —  The  image  should  be  free  from  curvature 
of  field  to  the  extent  of  two-thirds  of  the  total  field.  A  microslide  with 
two  millimetres  divided  into  200  parts  or  one  millimetre  divided  into 
100  parts  shall  be  focused  under  the  objective  and  nearly  two-thirds  of 
the  number  of  graduations  visible  in  the  field  of  view  shall  appear  well- 
defined  and  be  symmetrically  located  in  the  field  of  view. 

6.2.5  Distortion  —  The  image  shall  be  free  from  distortion.  A  count- 
ing chamber  slide  or  a  cross  line  grating  shall  be  focused  in  order  to 
judge  the  distortion. 

6.2.6  Clarity  of  the  Field  of  View —  No  shadow  zones  along  the  peri- 
phery of  the  field  of  view  shall  be  present.  These  may  arise  due  to 
improper  location  of  stray-light  baffles. 


IS  :  4381  - 1967 

6.2.7  Condition  of  Optics  —  The  optics  shall  be  checked  for  con- 
formity to  the  requirements  laid  down  in  IS:  988-1959*. 

6.2.8  Magnification  and  Numerical  Aperture  of  Objective — The 
magnification  and  numerical  aperture  of  objectives  shall  be  measured 
by  the  methods  specified  in  4.2.2  and  4.2.3  of  IS  :  2754-1 964t  respective- 
ly. The  measured  values  shall  not  differ  from  the  specified  values  by 
more  than  five  percent. 

6.2.9  Eyepiece  Magnification  —  The  equivalent  focal  length  of  eye- 
pieces shall  be  measured  by  any  of  the  methods  given  in  Appendix  C  of 
IS  :  988-1959*  and  then  the  measurement  of  magnification  shall  conform 
to4.2.5ofIS:2754-1964t. 

6.2.10  Field  Number  of  Eyepiece  —  The  eyepiece  shall  be  removed 
from  the  microscope  and  the  diaphragm  shall  be  illuminated  by  diflfused 
light  from  the  eye  lens  side.  The  diameter  of  the  image  of  the  dia- 
phragm formed  by  the  field  lens  shall  be  measured  in  millimetre  with  a 
measuring  ( travelling  )  microscope  placed  towards  the  field  lens  of  the 
eyepiece.  This  value  shall  be  in  conformity  with  that  calculated  by  the 
formula  given  in  IS  :  2754-1964t. 

6.3  Optional  Tests  —  When  agreed  upon  between  the  manufacturer  and 
the  purchaser  the  following  tests  may  be  conducted. 

6.3.1  Vibration  Test  —  The  microscope  in  its  fully  assembled  condi- 
tion shall  be  clamped  on  to  a  vibrating  table  giving  approximately  450 
vibrations  per  minute  with  a  maximum  amplitude  of  1*5  mm  for  a 
period  of  five  minutes.  After  the  test  the  performance  of  the  microscope 
shall  remain  unimpaired. 

6.3.2  Bump  and  Shock  Test  —  The  test  shall  be  conducted  as  specified 
in  IS :  2352-1963J. 


7.  MARKING 

7.1  The  microscope  shall  be  marked  at  a  suitable  place  with  the  manu- 
facture!'s  name  or  trade-mark  and  the  year  of  manufacture. 

7.2  The  markings  of  the  objectives  and  eyepieces  shall  be  according  to 
IS:308M965§. 


•General  requirements  for  optical  components. 

tOeneral  requiremente  for  optical  instruments. 

^Procedure  for  basic  climatic  and  durability  tests  for  optical  instruments. 

^Dimensions  and  marking  o£  general  purposes  microsoopes. 

8 


IS  :  4381  - 1967 

7.2.1  Microscope  may  also  be  marked  with  the  ISI  Certification  Mark. 

Note  —  The  use  of  the  ISI  Certification  Mark  is  governed  by  the  provisions 
of  the  Indian  Standards  Institution  (  Certifination  Marks  )  Act^  and  the  Rules  and 
Regulations  made  thereunder.  Presence  of  this  mark  on  products  covered  by  an 
Indian  Standard  conveys  the  assurance  that  they  have  been  produced  to  comply 
with  the  requirements  of  tl^iat  standard,  under  a  well-defined  system  of  inspection, 
testing  and  quality  control  during  production.  This  system,  which  is  devised  and 
supervised  by  ISI  and  operated  by  the  producer,  has  the  furtlior  safeguard  that  the 
products  as  actually  marketed  are  continuously  chocked  by  ISI  for  conformity  to 
the  standard.  Details  of  conditions,  under  which  a  licence  for  the  use  of  the  ISI 
Certification  Mark  may  be  granted  to  manufacturers  or  processors,  may  be  obtained 
from  the  Indian  Standards  Institution. 

8.  PACKING 

8.1  The  microscope  shall  be  deliveied  in  a  tlioioughly  clean  and  dry 
condition,  free  fiom  all  traces  of  foreign  mateiial. 

8.2  All  the  objectives  shall  be  placed  in  cylindrical  containers 
which  in  turn  shall  be  held  in  w^ooclen  shelf  fixed  or  sliding  inside  the 
wooden  case  of  the  microscope.  The  eyepieces  shall  be  placed  in  their 
respective  locations  in  the  shelf.  Other  accessories  shall  be  placed  in 
their  respective  plac  es  and  secured  with  cellophane  tape  during  transit. 

8.3  The  microscope  tube  or  limb,  whichever  is  movable,  shiill  be 
brought  to  its  lowest  position  by  means  of  the  coarse  knob  before  being 
put  into  the  case. 

8.4  The  minor  shall  be  wrapped  in  clean,  dry  and  acid-free  tissue  paper 
which  shall  be  retained  in  position  witli  cellophane  tape. 

8.5  The  condenser  unit  shall  be  wrapped  with  clean,  dry  and  aci^-free 
tissue  paper  and  secured  in  position  with  cellophane  tape. 

8.6  The  microscope  shall  then  be  placed  in  its  case  and  held  in  position 
securely  by  suitable  arrangement. 

8.7  A  bag  containing  requisite  amount  of  regenerated  silica  gel  shall  be 
placed  inside  the  case. 

8.8  The  empty  spaces,  if  any,  shall  be  filled  with  suitable  size  bags  stuff- 
ed with  dried  cotton. 

8.9  The  wooden  box  with  its  contents  shall  be  locked  duiing  tiansit  and 
the  keys  attached  to  the  handle. 

8.10  The  wooden  box  shall  then  be  packed  in  a  packing  case  lined  with 

xAT'Ai  f*rr\rr\{\f  ry^rM^y    iicincT  r\r{f*f\  mitnn  lATiste  ;i  s  f  iisViionina  rriMlpilnl       l^hp 


INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

The  Indian  Standards  Institution  (  ISI  ),  which  started  functioning 
In  1947,  Is  the  national  standards  organization  for  India.  Its  principal 
object  Is  to  prepare  standards  on  national  and  International  basis  and 
promote  their  general  adoption. 

The  overall  control  of  ISI,  which  Is  run  and  financed  Jointly  as  • 
non-profit  making  body  by  the  Government  and  private  enter* 
prise,  Is  exercised  by  the  General  Council,  composed  of  representa- 
tives of  Central  and  State  Governments;  leading  trade,  scientific  and 
technological  organizations;  and  subscribing  members.  The  Union 
Minister  of  Industry  Is  the  ex-officlo  President  of  ISI. 

The  present  technical  activity  of  iSI  Is  carried  out  through  8 
Division  dounclls  for  Agricultural  and  Food  Products;  Chemical;  Civil 
Engineering;  Consumer  Products;  Electrotechnical;  Mechanical 
Engineering;  Structural  and  Metals;  and  Textile.  All  technical  work 
relating  to  the  formulation  and  revision  of  standards  Is  done  by 
committees  appointed  by  and  under  the  direction  of  their  respective 
Division  Councils.  These  committees  consist  of  experts  drawn  from 
manufacturing  units,  technical  Institutions,  purchase  organizations 
and  other  concerned  bodies. 

To  make  available  benefits  of  Indian  Standards  to  the  common 
man,  ISI  has  Introduced  its  Certification  Marks  Scheme  under  the  Indian 
Standards  Institution  ( Certification  Marks )  Act,  1952,  as  amended  by 
the  Amtndnnent  Act,  1961,  According  to  this  Act,  quality  goods  con- 
forming to  Indian  Standards  can  carry  the  ISI  Certification  Mark.  This 
Mark  Is  a  third-party  guarantee  of  quality  of  marked  goods.  Licences 
to  use  the  ISI  Certification  Mark  are  granted  to  manufacturers  using 
reliable  methods  of  quality  control  subject  to  overall  Inspection 
by  ISI 

In  the  international  field,  ISI  represents  India  on  the  International 
Organization  for  Standardization  (  ISO  )  and  the  International  Electro- 
technical  Commission  (  lEC  ).  ISO  and  lEC  respectively  link  54  and 
40  countries,  and  function  through  1 18  and  58  technical  committees; 
ISI  participates  In  83  technical  committees  of  ISO  and  all  the  technical 
committees  of  lEC.  The  committees  and  subcommittees  of  lEC  and 
ISO  for  which  ISI  holds  the  secretariat  deal  with:  Electric  Fans,  Lac, 
Mica,  Pictorial  Markings  for  Handling  of  Goods.  Liquid  Flow  Measure- 
ments In  Open  Channels*  Procedures  for  Inter-converslon  of  Values, 
Spices  and  Condiments,  and  Stimulant  Foods. 


AMENDMENT  NO.  1         OCTOBER  1980 

TO 

IS  :  4381-1967  SPECIFICATION  FOR 
PATHOLOGICAL  MICROSCOPE 

Alceratioot 

(  Page  6,  claust  6.1.3  )  —  Substituie    ihe    following    for    the    exiiung 
cJauje: 

*d,1.3  In  changing  from  lower  magnification  to  next  higher  magnifica- 
cion  or  rc*iniroducing  ilie  >jnie  objective  by  roiation  ol  (he  nosepiece, 
ihc  object  at  the  centre  of  ihe  field  shall  be  well  withm  ihe  field  ol 
view.* 

(  Page  6,  clause  6.K6  )  —  bubiiiiuce    the    following    for    the   existing 
clause: 

*6.1.6  Parfocality  of  the  objeciivea  and  i)je  eyepieces  shall  be  within 
half  a  turn  of  the  (u\e  motion  knob  except  for  ^X  and  lower  power 
objectives  and  e>cpicccs  * 

(  Page  7,    clause  6.2.3  )  —  Substitute    the    following    foi    the  existing 
clause: 

•6J.3  When  observed  under  wlme  light  illumination,  ihe  image  shall 
appear  clear  and  well  defined  The  image  shall  be  totally  free  from 
colour  defects  up  to  half  the  held  of  view  and  siiall  be  reasonably  free 
from  colour  up  to  two-thirds  held  of  view  * 

(  Page  7,  clause  6.2.4,  jinl  senUme  )  —  Subsiaulc  the  lollowmg  for  the 
existing  sentence. 

*Thc  image  should  be  lea^onably  free  Irom  curvature  of  field   to  the 


ex 


tent  of  iwo-iliirds  of  the  total  held.' 


{  EOC  36  ) 


Kc:prograptiy  Ualc,    ttlS,   New  Ueihl,    ladlm 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  INDI/JN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

INDIAN  STANDARDS 

About  4  500  Indian  Standftrde,  broadly  nlaaflified  under  the  followmg  mAin  boeuii, 
have  bp©Lk  ie^aod  bo  ^»r: 

Agriculture  Sc  Food  Klectrotcchnical 

Chemical  Mechanical  Engineering 

Civil  Engineering  Structural  &  Metals 

Consumer  Products  Textile 

Of  tb«i«d,  tbf^  standftrde  belongiag  to  the  Moohauic>al  Engineering  Group  £n\l 
under  the  foUowing  categories: 

Bariio  Enginftwring  Standards  MacJimo  Tools  and  Small  Tools 
Abrasive**  Marin©    Enginoering    and  Ship- 
Air- Ponditioning  b'ldding 
Beaungs  MechanicaJ  Handling,  Lifting 
Bicyclo  CoinpnnoAtH  Pumps 
Ohemi<;al  Kmi;In<»oiing  li(*tiigoration 
Engmoonnpr  Metrology  Sciew  Tbreadfi 
Fastenr^rri  iSowuii^  Maobmert 
Gas  Tyhnders  and  Fxttingy  J^lnam  Tables 
GaHkets  and  I'aokingB  Transmmnion    Oevioes,    Palloys 
(i^ars  and  Bolts 
Hand  Tools  VVwighU  and  M^asurew 
IC  Knginos  and  Automoliv©  Vftbiol©$  Wjfo         Hopoa          and        Wiro 
Inetrumenis       ( Drawing,       Optmal  Prodaotn 
and  Survoyng  )  Unola^ftifiod 


OTHER  PUBLICATIONS 


R« 


181   Bulletin  (  Pubhehod   Kvery  Month  ) 

Bmglc  Copy      ..,  2"00 

Annual  Subaonption  ,, *.  I5'i>« 

Annual  KeportH  (  fiom  1918-49  Onwards  2-i>0  to  3*00  ^aob 

Handbook  of  ISI  PubhcationH.   Um .,         ..,  f>-00 


Avaliable  from 

INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

Headquarters 

Manak  Bbavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  Now  Delhi  1 

T*l«pbonM  £7  M  11-30  T«Ugraoi«  M*a«k«ao«tht 

Branch    O  f  f  i  c  e  » 

T«ilef  ratnt  Maniik«ftattb» 


(Mil  S»r4«t  V«U«bbi>b«J  P«t«l  R(»fi4 

Homb«y  1 

T»l«pbo»« 

ss7on 

6  Choiivriiiftt««  Api^roacb 

Calcutt*  U 

•• 

23^18  2) 

Indatfriat     Estate     Admioiotrtttltr* 
Biiildittf,  Sftoatnaf nr 

Hya«rab«id  18 

" 

3B2  2S 

I17/41V  B  S«rvo4«yii  N*«.»y 

K«npuv 

f » 

I7C9S 

&4  G»»»r«l  Pttt*r«  Roed 

W^AtM  I 

•• 

8  72  78 

frtutod'areUadard  Frrutiiig  WorkB.  Now  Oelbt  i,  Indlik 


