( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 8270 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR PREPARATION OF DIAGRAMS, CHARTS AND TABLES FOR ELECTROTECHNOLOGY
PART 8 UNIT WIRING DIAGRAMS AND TABLES ETDC 1

Basic Electrotechnical
Chairman SHRI S. G. RAMACHANDRA Members
SHRI V. K. BATRA

Standards Sectional Committee,
Representing Rot;zSyachinery

Sectional Committee,

ETDC

9
National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi Department Telegraphs Indian Posts and SHRI T. L. BHATIA ( Ministry of Communications ), New Delhi SHRI .l. L. BANDOPADHYAY ( Alternate ) Low Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional SHRI V. S. BHATIA Committee, ETDC 57, IS1 Secondarv Cells and Batteries Sectional Committee, CHAIRMAN ETDC 11, IS1 Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta BRIM N. DAYAL Designs & Standards Organization, DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( ELECTI~I- Research Lucknow CAL) JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS (ELECTRICAL)/CG ( Alternate ) Central Electricity Authority, Department of DIRECTOR (TED) Power (Ministry of Energy), New Delhi DEPUTY DIRECTOR (TED) ( Alternate ) Power Cables Sectional Committee, ETDC 59, IS1 SHRI M. L. D~N~RIZ Conductors and Accessories for Overhead Lines SHRI R. D. JAIN Sectional Committee, ETDC 60, IS1 Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SIIRI S. K. KASLIWAL SHRI PRAKAS~ SINGH ( Alternate ) SHRI S. K. MUKHERJEE National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. MUKHOPADHYAY ( Alternate ) Relays Sectional Committee, ETDC 35, IS1 SHRI N. NATH ( Continued on page 0 INDIAN Copyright 1983 INSTITUTION

2)

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the nublisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copvright under the said Act.

Is : 8270 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 ( Continuedfrom page 1)
Members SERI H. M.
PA1

Representing Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sect ional Committee, ETDC 58, IS1 Electrical Wiring Accessories Sectional Committee, ETDC 44, IS1 Electronics and Radar Development Establish.ment ( Ministry of Defence ), Bangalore Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) High

SHRI D. N. PURANDARE SERI V. L. SASTRY SHRI K. V. BHAT ( Alternate ) BRIG K. S. SRIVASTAVA COL K. V. KUDVA ( Alternate ) SHRI C. R. VARIER SERI H. N. VENKOBJXARAO

Transformers Sectional Committee, ETDC 16, IS1 Electrochemical Research Institute Central (CSIR), Karaikudi SHRI Y. M.U~ADEVA IYER ( Alternate ) Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, SERI M.P. WAGH Bombay SHRI S.D. MEDREKAR ( Alternate) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o$cio Member ) SHRI S. P. SACHDEV, Director ( Elec tech ) ( Secretary )

IS : 8270 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

indiun Standard
GUIDE FOR PREPARATION OF DIAGRAMS, CHARTS AND TABLES FOR ELECTROTECHNOLOGY
PART 6 UNIT WIRING DIAGRAMS AND TABLES

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 6 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 may 1983, after the draft finalized by the Basic Electrotechnical Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 A number of standards have been published on graphical symbols for use qn diagrams in the field of electrotechnolDgy (see various parts of IS : 2032* ) . After having covered most of the needs for graphical symbols, with the exception of those for new fields of electrotechnology still under it has been found advisable to supplement the Indian consideration, Standards on graphical symbols with standards for the preparation of diagrams. 0.3 This standard includes definitions and classification of diagrams, charts and tables; guiding principles for use and combination of graphical symbols; guiding principles for preparation of diagrams; guiding principles for supplementing or replacing diagrams by charts and tables; item designation; etc. 0.4 This standard Part Part Part Part Part Part
*Graphical

is being brought and

out in several

parts as follows:

1 2 3 4 5 6

Definitions General Circuit

classification for diagrams and tables

Item designations requirements diagrams diagrams diagrams and tables

Interconnection Unit wiring
symbols used

in electrotechnology

( issued in several parts ).

3,

IS : 8270 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 0.4.1 This standard shall therefore parts as they are all concerned with and provide additional guidance.
be read in conjunction with the other various aspects of drawing practices

0.5 Unit wiring diagrams and tables provide information on the internal They are intended electric connections of a unit or assembly of units. primarily for manufacturing and maintenance purposes. Information on the external connections between units is usually not included, but references to the appropriate interconnection diagrams or tables may be provided. Unit wiring diagrams and tables may supplement one another and both may also contain information from other documents, such as working drawings, circuits diagrams, parts lists, etc. 0.6 Some of the methods for the marking of conductors, given in IS : 55781970* are used in the figures in this standard. These figures, however, are examples only, and are not intended to be mandatory for the choice of a designation and marking method. -In these examples, item designations for components, devices and However, parts are shown in accordance with IS : 8270 ( Part 2 )-1976t. in accordance with that standard other designations may be used, provided they are explained. 0.7 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Pub 113-6 (1976) ` Diagrams, charts, tables Part 6 : Preparation of unit wiring diagrams and tables `, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 6 ) lays down the guidelines for preparation unit wiring diagrams and tables used in electrotechnology.
1.2 The representation of printed circuits is not included in this standard. of

SECTION
2. LAYOUT

1

UNIT WIRING

DIAGRAMS

2.1 Unit wiring diagrams
cal representation.

are generally

drawn in approximate

topographi-

*Guide for marking of insulated conductors. tGuide for preparation of diagrams, charts Item designation;.

and

tables

for electrotechnology

: Part

2

4

IS : 8270 ( Part -6 ) - 1983 3. EQUIPMENT VIEWS

that are required for a unit wiring diagram are those which will most clearly show the terminals or wiring sides of the component devices or parts as they are mounted in the equipment. In most instances, one view as seen from the wiring side of the items should This view will generally correspond to the view of the items be sufficient. More than one view may be required when the as seen during wiring. . . cqulpment 1s wired from both front and rear. Component devices or parts with more than one level of terminals may aIso require more than one view.

3.1 The view or views of equipment,

4. COMPONENTS,

DEVICES AND PARTS

wiring diagrams employ straight lines and simple outlines like Sometimes squares, circles or rectangles to depict equipment items. graphical symbols may be used. Mechanical details, such as the fastening for an item, should be shown only if this helps in the understanding of the diagram. 4.2 If items are located above each other at several levels, these items may be shown in the diagram as flipped, turned or moved in such a way that the terminals may be seen by the reader of the diagram. The method used shall be appropriately indicated. 4.2.1 For example, Fig. 1 shows a soldering terminal strip, the end of which is viewed in the equipment, flipped to the left by 96". The long line on the right indicates the hinge of flipping.

4.1 Unit

.

I
Cl

c2

Vl

E

I
FIG. 1 SOLDERING TERMINAL

I

I1
Rl

STRIP

5

IS : 8270 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
4.2.2 Another example is given in Fig. 2 which contains a no$e indicating that the movable part to the right of the long chain boundary line is wired from the front of the bay. This part is connected by means of a loop. 5. TERMINALS

5.1 Terminals
the outline sufficient.

may be represented by graphical symbols. In some cases, on depicting a device, the terminal designation alone may be

5.2 If a convention is used to distinguish between detachable and nondetachable connections, it shall be shown or referenced on the diagram.

6. WIRING
cases, the connections between items may be depicted by individual lines, for example, see Fig. 3. The unit wiring diagram may show technical data for the conductors, such as type of wire and crosssectional area.

6.1 In simple

6.2 It should show where conductors are to be twisted, shielded, separated from other conductors, etc. In the representation of a shielded conductor, the diagram should show whether the shield is to be isolated or connected and, in that case, a clear distinction should be made between the termination of the conductor and the shield. 6.3 Grouped
conductors like cables, cable forms, etc, may be represented by a common line [see 4.3 of IS : 8270 ( Part 3 )-1977* 1. If a unit contains several conductor groups ( cables, cable forms, etc. ), these must be properly distinguished from one another. In the equipment represented in Fig. 2, the individual conductors are identified by colours and are grouped in two cable forms, A and B. The reference figures where the lines representing individual conductors join those representing cable forms are provided to assist in the reading of the diagram. 6.4 Interrupted line technique in accordance with 4 of IS : 8270 (Part 3 )Provision shall be made for the 1977* may be used to clarify the diagram. association of the broken lines ( see the example given in Fig. 4 ). In this equipment, the independent marking system described in IS : 5578-19701_ is used for the conductors.
*Guide for preparation of diagrams, charts and tables for electrotechnology General requirements for diagrams. +uide for marking of insulated conductoys.

: Part 3

6

*
Orange
0

1

Red

Grgen-red I

wo !

Green-black

1 Q,
10

NOI

1

Red -

I

K

Green-red R&d Red-black

, _ _..

IO,

._

_._I..

-0,

r

c
OP OVI om 40 loo wo 6 Blue Green Red Brown w * cl

Orange-blue a g ti Blue-black Blue

N I w

Green

ON

-

Blue

g UI

1S:8270(Part6)-1983 SECTION 7. ITEMS 7.1 Item designations appearing on the wiring diagrams or tables #hall be the same as those on the corresponding circuit diagrams and assbciated documents.
8. TERMINALS

2

DESIGNATION

8.1 Each point of termination
a) a marking appearing b) a designation c) an arbitrary The ambiguity designation arises.

should be identified on the actual item; in associated explained

by: or

appearing designation

documentation;

in the wiring may

information. be omitted ifno

of terminals

in a diagram

9. CONDUCTORS conductors should be suitably identified, for example, by any marking appearing on the actual conductor or by a designation Identificaassigned in accordance with the appropriate Indian standards. tion by colour may be employed. 19. CODE

9.1 Lines representing

FOR THE REPRESENTATION COLOURS - ( Cinder consideration ) SECTION 3 UNIT WIRING

OF CONDUCTOR

TABLES

11. GENERAL 11.0 The information given by unit wiring diagrams can conveniently be In many cases, a table is more satisfactory than a given by tabular listing. diagram. The detail of tabular arrangement will depend on the circumstances of each case.
Because many satisfactory shown in this standard. variants are possible, by location no examples diagrams. are

11.1 Unit wiring tables may be supplemented

10

