IS 13407 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian Standard

TECHNIQUES OF WORK
PART 1 METHOD STUDY

STUDY

UDC 65'015

0

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR
DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 4 ZAPAR MARG

NEW

October

I992

Management

and Productivity

Sectional

Committee,

BSD 3

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Management and Productivity Sectional Committee had been approved by the Basic Standards, Systems and Services Division Council. The aim of this as agricultural, quality of work problems in any standard is to promote the use of method improvement procedures in all fields such industrial, commercil, service activity, etc, and thereby increase productivity and It is essentially a practical discipline, applicable to method improvement life. work activity. and work of unproreduction
manner as

Method study Work study is a &eneric term for method study and work measurement. Method study is mainly concerned with the reduction measurement are closely linked. is concerned with the investigation and ductive work elements whereas work measurement of any infietive time and hence establishing time standards for the operation in improved For the definitions of the terms work study, method study determined by method study. measurement, see IS 6363 : 1972 `Glossary of terms in work study'. The application a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) j) of method study would lead to : and procedures; and methods;

and

work

Improvement Improvement Improvement Economy Improved Development Improvement Improvement Cost reduction.

in systems in processes in quality;

in human layout

effort and reduction handling; working

of fatigue;

and materials

of better physical

condition;

in safety and work environment; in the use of resources ( man-power, materials, machine and money ); and

In reporiing the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with `Ku]es for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

if the final IS 2 : 1960

IS 13407 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

Indian Standard

TECHNIQUESOFWORK
PART 1 SCOPE This standard (Part 1) describes the methodology and basic techniques used in method study. It also gives various other techniques for informatIon collection, analysis and problem x~lviug. 2 REFERENCES
The

STUDY
capacand high

1 METHOD

STUDY

4

pooruse of labour, material 0rmachiIIe ity, resulting in high cost; movcmcnt cost in work-in-process of material inventory;

b) unnecessary

following Indian Standards arc necessary adjuncts to this standard: IS NO. 6363 : 1972 12801 : 1989 Title Cibssary of terms in work study Paretodiagramandcauseandeffect diagra In

c) high work fatigue; 4 frequent accidents; e) lackof flow of information
lays; excessive overtime;

and procrdurc

de-

higher rejections excessive

and rework; and

paper work, etc.

4.2.1.1 Problems identification The following aspects maybe considered ing a problem for method study : while select-

3 TI:RMINOI,OGY Fo`c the purpose this standard, the definitions IS 6363': 1+72 shall "pply.
4 given in

a) social, b) economic, c) technical, d) human. and

PROCEDIJHKY Prelin~insry

Al

4.2.1.2 Systems approach Before the application of method study to a problem, it is necessary to state : a> objrctive, b) time span, c) cost, and d) resources. involved in carrying out the study and the likely benefits to llow from the study.
4.2 The basic a) h) Selccl,

The objective and functions of the system or subsystem to which the problem areas form a component part should be kept in view while selecting and solving the problems. 4.2.1.3 Prrrequi~ites of 11strrdy

Having identified the problem for study it would be necessary to ensure that it is properly dove-tailed with the organizational requiremerits in consultation with ' the management. It will also be essential to ensure that the affected persons arc also involved to acceptihe need to undertake the study. This may bc followed by issuance of project authorization by the management. 4.2.2
4.2.2.1

steps of the method study arc :

Record,

c) ELaIIIiIIc, d) DC\ rlop, C) Dcl'inc.
I) 11~\1;111, and

Record
Genercll

`I-he fact!, rccr>rdcd should bc comprehcn~ivc and accurate a4 the! Iorlu ILK basis t'trr analysis nf the present

g) Maiutaiu.

nlcthod and dcvclopmcnt of lhc proposed method. Thr collectinn of facts should bc done by direct
c.+scrvations, analysis ofpast recmds using the method study recording techniques which mostly c'ovcr activity sequence, relationship and lime scale as given in 4.2.2.2, k2.2.4, aud 4.$&3 respectively.

1

IS 13407( Part 1) : 1992 4.2.2.2 Charts indicating sequence
Charts in this group are used to record a series of events or happenings in the order in which they occur but which do not.depict the events on time scale.

a)

Outlineprocess chrt -This is used to give an overview of the principal operations and inspections to indicate if more detailed studies are required. Tbe chart records tbc main activities, namely,

their inter-relationship. By using the number of columns to represent the activities, the chart shows clearly periods of idleness on the part of any of the subjects duting the process. A study of these charts makes it possible to reschedule these activities so that ineffective time is reduced. Tbe chart can be used to determine the number of machines which the operator(s) should be able to look after.

b)
`0' ' 0 -r' op&ations in$Ltion

b)

Flow process chrt - This chart is used to depict activities of man, processing of materials/documents or use ofequipment. All events affecting the operations and flow of a product or document are recorded by five process chart symbols, that is

Simo-Chart --The simo &art is based on film analysis used to record simultaneously the activities of hands, leg and other body movements of one or more workerqon a time scale. A video film technique may also he used. Charts using the activity relutionship

4.2.2.4

:

0
cl P 3 V

Tbesc charts show the ratb, quantum of movement of men and material on a scale plan of the working area. model substana) Fiowdingram-Adiagramor tially to scale, which shows the location of specific activities and the paths of movement of ~ICII, materials or equipment. These arc prepared by putting (be symbols of the flow process chart on a pIall, carb syrubol being located where the activity takes place. The arrow headc of the transport symbol sbotvs the direction~)fmovenlcnt while the length of Ihe line joiI;ing other activity symbols indicakes distance moved. h) Sfring dicr,qrclm ---A scale plan or model o11 which a thrc;tJ is used to trace and measure the path of workers, material or equipment during specified sequence of event. It is very useful to examine work situations involving frequent movements. &fore a study is carried out, an identification code is used to define each work, obstruction and change in direction. c) Travel clznrt - A tabular record for presenting quantitative data about ~bc movements of workels, materials and equipment between any number of places over any given period of lime. reltrtionship chart - A relationship d) Achity chart provides a method for identifying, displaying and evaluating the many relationships which need to be taken into account to enburc that the various functiom and services are physically located in the best possible rc'Iatiomhip IV racb other. l3ch fun~li<>~~aI activity is idrntified and tested in a row. Tbc tl~~xcnrxs required for each activity to cvrry other activity is ralrd and reasons arc stated for any particular closrncss rating. The vtrwrl IcIttn code is used to denote closeness rating and is marked at intersection of the concerned activities. 2

operations inspection delays transport storage

cl

Two-handedprocess chart - This chart pxovides a simultaneous record of how both hands of a worker are used. It is primarily used for recording a situation where the worker is working at a fixed pos.ition on repetitive short cycle operation like assembly. Tbe inspection symbol is not used here, as an inspection would usually involve delay in band movement. Flow process chclrt (ofice work) -- This chart is used for recording the flow of forms and documents by setting out the sequence of the flow of work (office work of human activity) through the office by recording all the events under review, using the appropriate symbols. Additional symbols used are :

4

Forms

W

A Form : Original t 2 copies El

Ledger/Regis+r 4.2.2.3

Charts using time scule

These charts depict sequence of activities performed against a time scale. They are used 10 study the intrrrelationship between subjects (men and machines). a) Multiple activity chart - Tbc multiple activity chart reflects activities of men and/or machines on a common time scale to show

IS 13407 ( Part

1) : 1992

4 Cycle graph

- A record of movement traced by continuotis source of light attached to a moving element on a still photograph. This technique is particularly useful for high speed short cycle operaticIns and is used to improve the work station layouts for bench type assemble work. graph

variation of micro motion in which single frames are exposed at regular time intervals. This provides a short record of events. Analysis of the film provides information about the activities which have taken place, their sequence and duration. 4.2.3 Extrminta

0

-A cycle graph in which the light source is suitably interrupled so that the path appears as a series of pearshaped> dots, the pointed end indicating thr direction of movement and spacing indicating the speed of movement.
Clrronocyck

This is the crucial stage of method study application when all recorded facts have to be properly sifted and arranged in terms of the physical achievements, mealls, sequence and place of achieving and the person(s) who achieve. 4.2.3.1 Criticrrl
c~xumination

4.2.2.5

Models

These include all methods of representing actual situation which could be manipulated and expetimentcd in order to study the implication of different alternatives.

4

Scale models and tcmplrrr~s -

These are used to investigate layout and movement problems where space, position, rtcarance, etc, are important. Simrrlntion

The purpose of critical examination is to determine the true reasons underlying each event and to draw up a systematic list of all possible improvements. It consultation with everyone in requires extensive each position to offer useful information and also full use of the available technical knowledge. It is carried out by means of two sets of questions:

a) Primary questions - The primary questions
seek to establish the need for activities. They form the first stage of the questioning technique where the purpose, means, sequence, place and person of every activity recorded is systematically carried out and a reason for each reply is sought. From analysis of the answerS improvements arc made by eliminating, combining, re-arranging or simplifying the activities. The model primary questions arr shown in Table 1. The primary questions ensure that no aspect of activity is missed and establish the reasons for the existing procedures.

b)

A simulation model is a simplified represt ntation of real life situation which allows the understanding of the proposed solutions of a problem to be approached by trial and error method.
models-

C) Anctlog

mud& With these models, the situation is studied by physical devices or whit!; behave in a similar processes manner. For example, analog trial circuit which simulates a ventilation system.

4.2.2.6

Pl~otogrcrpl~yl~~id~~~ recording

This is used as a recording aid. This is ideal for dcpcription of work locations, new equipment and sequences. It provides a true record and covers much more than a written description.

b) Secondury

4 Micro motion plrotogryl!y -

A record of detailed movement of a single operator on a tine film or video tape. By this means, the distinct motion of the operator and their sequence arc identified and duration is measured.
motion -

b)

Memo

This

photography

is a

yucvtions --The secondary questions seek alternatives and select those which will lead to acceptable solution. They cover the second stage of the question technique during which the answers to the primary questions are subjected to further query IO determine whether possible afternatives of place, sequences, persons and/or means are practicable and preferable as a means of improvement upon the existing method. The model secondary questions are shown in Table 2.

3

IS 13407 ( Part 1) : 1992 Table 1 Primary Questions in Critical Examination ( Clorrse 4.2.3.1

j

PURPOSE (What is being achieved ?)
Enunciate physical achievement. DO NOT mention reasons, ultimate aim or the modrtr operandi(means. person, place).

MFANS (Ilow is it being achieved ?) MATERIALS List complete details of specifications (quality, quantity, dimension, weight, COSI. etc). source of supply and
functional efficiency.

EQUIPMENT

Complete spccifiealions, rapacily. serviceability, loration, etc.

SE:RVICES

Dclails

of sources of energy, for example.

power. indusirtal gas, steam. compressed air, telephones.

intercommunication,

internal transport, closed TV-circuit.

METHOD

Nomenclature or brief statement of the method. Details by elen~rnls in sequence of their occurrence with timings and distances where applicable. _ WORKING .-_.

CONDITION

(As P direct cwsequeare

d melhod)

POSTURE
HEALTH

Posture of working. awkward reaches, strain. Affected through inhalation, contact. heat. cold or humidify. From falls, weight dropping, pressures. explosion or bursts. shocks. parrties striking or collision

SAFETY

SEQUENCE
AFTER Preceding key operation(s). Succeeding key operation(s). Of entire cycle of opcetion.

(When

is il

achieved ?)

BEFORE FREQUENCY OkURRENCE

Of the same or similar operation(s) within the cycle repetitions or duplications.

PLACE (Wbcre Is it m ILkATiON
MOVEMENTS ENVIRONMENT

rcblcved 7)
in room. hall or hay, dimensions of working area.

Locality. building, rooms. hall or bry. Specificarea

All to and fro rnovennmts cwnceted with the key operation. together with distances. Illumination, ventilation. temperature. humidity. noise frtor. odour. colour. dynamics, surroundings. altitude. obstruction to movements. dust. atmospheric conditions, radiation hazards, amenities.

-_

------_~.~
PERSON (Who Rhkves il?)
and

DETAILS OF INDIVIDUAIS

Designation.

trade, grade, category. 1ype of employment, sex. pay and physical disabilities, attitu&

aptitude. Composition of team or gang.
-1-

4

IS 13407 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 Table 2 Secondary Questions in Critical Examination ( C!NM.W 4.2.3.1)
ALTERNATIVES WHAT ELIMINATE DIVERT AVOID the need (0 INVERT ELSE ?

Totally. Find subtitute for each operative word of the purp)se. DO NOT execute the `physical performance' and yet accepting the necessity of its achievement. Execute the `physical performance` Iheotherway roundwithoutcompromisingthe ultimateaim. for example, removing finger off the ring instead of dng off the linger. lh modificationof thequantity oLquality leading to alternative suggesting `more' or `Less'. `all' or `better', or `higher' (rr `lower', etc. Find all possible combinations of tt~ alternatives arrived at under `modify'. _______ HOW El 1 SF" >.

MODIFY
COMPROMISE

ELIMINATE SURSTITIJTE MODIFY

Do without. Use somethingelse fhat ischeaperand

meets the requirement or meets the requirement better but not costlirr

or may be costlier in case the existing one is not satisfactory or not easily procurable. In lerms of `more' or `less' etr : Quanrity Quality number, volume or dimensioa weight. grade or finish, tint, tone pr shade, density. temperature, functional efficiency. state solid, liquid, gaseous or compressed. pressure shape. form or finish.

COMPROMISE: COMBINE MODIFY

by changingqliality, quantity, stale, brand, make or source of st!pply. Cast Possible combinaliona of alternatives under `modify' (for one or more malerials). Cajnposite materials or combined functions of two or more materids. In terms of `more-.'or `less' etc : Construction sire, weight, simplemechaaism,easieroperation. effort. ease of installation and maintenance. better quality, greater through.put. simplemntrots,

lessphysical and mental

Performaoce

-

SUBSTITUTE COMBINE

Less initial cost for new equipment, less running cost. COSI Foigreatereconomy, less physical and mental effort, grearer safety, better quality and higher rate of rhroughput. Multipurpose equipment or increased utilisation.

Headings for MaterhIs Apply

_-

Prm as a whole for better quality, reducing time, increasmg through-put, saving effort and reducing cost, etc (for example, shot-blasting instead of caustic cleaning). MOMFY COMBlNE s IMPLIFY

I Various

~&II element for iecreirsing or decreasing work, efforl, time, quality and number of activities. elements.

For improving quality, quantity and safety, and reducing effcui. time and cost.

Chak

AlternaUves Generated Under `Mctbod' Ikure Better Workhq Coudltioms WHEN ELSE f

COMBINE
REARRANGE

With preceding 01 succeeding operations. With respect to preceding or succeeding key operations. frequency and timing.

WHERE

EISE

?

MODIFY
RELOCATE

More or less area, better environment, better layout.

For reducing movementsand providing better environmen@ work place relayout.

WHO

ELSE ?

SUBSTlTuTE
MODIFY COMBINE

Ditferenl person(s) or art equipment. More or less number 01 peopk. Simultaneous activities; one parson for two jobs.

5

IS13407(Part1):1992 4.2.4 Development will have to be drawn up to cover the equipment, materials and measurements planned to, he used in various improved ,methods@ocedures. This ctkp bas two physical stages :

The purpose of this step is to develop an alternative, easier and more economic ways of achieving the desired objectives. This is done in yollaboration with otkr experts and the line management and preferably those wbo wiI1 he involved in the operations of the new procedures. Experiments and trials may be necessary and model.may also be used to prove and illustrate points under consideration_ Specifications
Table 3 Reasons, Implkations

a) development of alternative methods, b) evaluation ofahernatives and selection

of the alternative method to he implemented for short term and long term respectively (as given in Table 3).

and Notations For Development

FUts

Reasons

AltmdiVCS

ImpUcntiws a) Techalcal

Nobtlw

for lkvebpmeat alternatives not suitable for development.

As

io

WHY WHY WHY WHY WHY a) b) 4 d)

is it achieved 7 tIm1 way ? then ? there ? by IhaI person ? vatid reason5 only ultimate reasons

Table 1

As in Table 2

:

Desirability, feasihiiiry and practicability; Icchnical `know-how' required and training problems; mainlcnance, repairs and component - replacement problems; invenlory trol fac4ors. control problems; quality' con-

a) X -

`why' far the entire governing factor `why' for each operative word or details of the facts individually why of `why' to at the r001 cause

b)

Ecooomic

:

Cosl of Irails; capital investment in plant and machinery; runningandmainIenati msrs; 0x1 of training; loss during changeover period: rate of emnomic regains.

b)

I.1

-

alternalives found suitable but cannot be developed or implernenled in a short time.

e)

c)

Humw

Physicaland mental effort; motion econoiny; heatth, safety; comfort; assimilalion of training; motivation; increased earnings; working environments; job satisfaction.

c)

ST

-

altcrnalives Ihatcanbedeveloped and implemented in a short lime.

d)

Soeido&al

: Reaction and resistance to
change management customer/user. and

e)

O~aniuthmal

: Every management structure assures clear definition of work, authority and responsibility. Advantageous changes arising from r&hod study and investigations may be impossible IO implemenf because of demarcation bctween levels of authority and responsibility.

f)

statatory
proVlSitiS

:

Proposals

being

consid-

ered for further develop men;, must Ix checked to ensure that they comply with statutory provision and codes of practice.

g)

IlJlle

constrahtts

Will enable decision on developmenl of shorl term plans and/or plans. long term

6

IS -13407 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 42.5 Other Managerial tions to Problems Techniques to Dwelop Solu4.2.6 Defoe A corollary sage after `develop' is to define the proposed a&hod. A&r the improved method is evolved, it should be subjected to critical examination. When de&opment is complete, the results should be summarized and presented\ to management for installation of the improved method. 4.2.7 Install The installation of an improved method is a combined management/management services function and change over plans and schedules should be provided. The preparation is done in three parts :

A few managerial techniques which can aid development of alternative methods are given below :

-a) Networkanalysis-

A group oftechniques for `presenting information relating to time and resources so as to assist in the planning, scheduling and controlling of pmjects. The information usually represented by a network inchdes the sequences, interdependen&s, inter-relationships and criticality of various activities of the project. Cause and effect diagram -These diagrams map out all the variables present in the process. In this diagram, the main diagonal lines represent principal operations or subdivisions of the activities. To these lines there are other lines attached which represent subactivities or variables. The diagram enables systematic scrutiqy of these variables in propr perspective. Detailed analysis and experimentation will lead to important causes on which effective actions can be planned (see IS 12801 : 1989).

a) Provisionofthe b) Arrangement
4

time table which identifies the start and finishing dates of activities; of the supporting services for the new method including plant, tools, operating procedures, training and wages; and

Testing of the new method, if possible. can be divided into three parts :

4.2.7.1 Installation

a) change-over when the existing process is dismantled and replaced by the new system, b) operating period when supervisors and opera101~ get to know the new system, and c) modification period when any deficiency of the system observed and suggestions from operatols considered. 4.2.8 Maintain Even after an improv.ed method is installed and is operating satisfactorili, there may be a need to further effect improvement. The deviations from the new method can arise on account of:

cl

Decision tree (Ginzanto chart) - Decision tree is used for applying logical thought to the choice and evaluation of alternatives. The branches of each fork represent the alternative actions available at that stage and the probability. of overall success, following any continuous series of branches, can be determined and the best course of actions indicated. Decision matrix - This is a table which considers two or more compone+ of a strategic plan and evaluate the probable outcome of cach'pair, that is, row and column within the table. It will provide indication of the most advantageous solution to the problem. analysis system techniques (FAST diagram) - One of the very special techniques in a VE,study designed to establish the inter-relationship between various functions. a process which also helps to determine the basic function(s), identify missing function(s) or eliminate duplicate function(s), The exercise results in a diagram called FAST diagram.

4

a-)deliberate

alterations

and improvements, made by opwork eleme&hod.

b) change 4
4

e) Function

as a result of suggestions erators and supervisors, operators introducing ments, and additional

workers reverting

to the original

It is essential that the work study practitioner should review the job from time to time to identify discrepancies between the job specification and current practices and to develop further improvements.

I

I
Standard The Mark use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau q/O~Jiart 1986 and the Rules and Regtllations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard coveys the assurance that they have been produced t'.) comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised arid supervised by RIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked pl-oducts al-e also continusly chcckcd by 131s for conformity to that stand:lrd as a fur thcr safeguard. Details of condltlons under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may bc ~I-~I~wI to manufacturers or produceIs may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards Act,

I

Bureau of Indian Standards
BIS is 5~ statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ). BIS. designations, Revision of Indian Standards if any, are Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the the latest amendments or edition. following reference : Dot : No. BSD 3 ( 250) Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar : 331 01 31. 331 13 75 Telephones Regional Central Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur I 10002 NEW DELHI

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg. New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Shah Zafar

Marg

331 01 31 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 53 23 84 235 02 16, i 235 15 19, 632 92 95, { 632 78 91, 37 85 61, 3186 62 53 16 40, 235 04 42, 235 23 15 632 78 58, 632 78 92

Eastern

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, : C. 1. T. Campus, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol,

Maniktola

Northorn Southern Western

160036 600113

MADRAS

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOM BAY 400093

Andheri

( East 1

Branches

: AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COIMBATOIIE, JAIPUR, KANPUR,

Printed

at Printrade.

New

Delhi.

India

