Indian Standard FOOD HYGIENE - MICROBIOLOGICAL CRITERIA - PRINCIPLES FOR ESTABLISflMENT AND APPLICATION

ICS 67.020

0 BIS 1998

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARC

h/y

I998

Price

Group

2

Food Hygiene

Sectional

Committee,

FAD 45

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Food Hygiene Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. Safety of` food is principally assured by control at the source, product design and process control, and the application of` good hygienic practices during production, processing (including labelling), handling, distribution, storage, sale, preparation and use, in conjunction with the application of the HACCP system [see IS 15000:1998 `Food hygiene - Hazard analysis and critical control point (HACCP) - System and guidelines for its application']. The preventive approach offers more control than microbiological testing because the effectiveness of microbiological examination to assess the sjfety of foods is limited. Microbiological criteria should be established according to these principles and be based on.scientific analysis and advice, and where sufficient data are available, a risk analysis appropriate to the foodstuff and its use. Microbiological criteria should be developed in a transparent fashion and meet the requirements of fair trade. They should be reviewed periodically for relevance with respect to emerging pathogens, changing technologies and new understanding of science. Microbiological criteria may be used to formulate design requirements and to indicate the required microbiological status of raw materials, ingredients and end-products at any stage of the food chain as appropriate. They may be relevant to the examination of foods, including raw materials and ingredients, of unknown or uncertain origin or when other means of verifying the efficacy of HACCP-based systems and good hygienic practices are not available. Generally, microbiological criteria may be applied to define the distinction between acceptable and unacceptable raw materials, ingredients, products, lots, by regulatory authorities and/or food business operators. Microbiological criteria may also be used to determine that processes are consistent with the general principles of food hygiene [see IS 2491:1998 `Food hygiene - Genera1 principles - Code of practice (.second revision)`]. Microbiological criteria are not normally suitable for monitoring critical limits as defined in IS 15000: 1998. Monitoring procedures must be able to detect loss of control at a critical control point (CCP). Monitoring should provide this information in time for corrective actions to be taken to regain control before there is a need to re_iect the product. Consequently, on-line measurements of physical and chemical parameters are often preferred to microbiological testing because results are often available more rapidly and at the production site. Moreover, the establishment of critical limits may need other considerations than those described in this standard. To provide the needed guidelines, this Indian Standard has been formulated based on the Codex Standard Principles fol- the establishment and application of microbiological criteria for foods CAC/RCP-22 (1997), and is identical to it. The standard is subject to the provisions of the appropriate food safety of Food Atlulterution Act, 1954 and Rules framed thereunder. legislations, such as Prevention

IS 14595 : 1998

Indian

Standard

FOOD HYGIENE - MICROBIOLOGICAL CRITERIA - PRINCIPLES FOR ESTABLISHMENT AND APPLICATION
1 SCOPE This standard provides guidance on the establishment and application of microbiological criteria for foods at any point in the food chain from primary production to final consumption. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions which through refercnce in this text, constitute provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: IS i-lo.
2491 : 1998 Title

4.2 To fulfil the purpose of a microbiological criterion, considerahon' should be given to:

4 the evidence
to health;

of actual

or potential status

hazards raw

b) the microbiological
material(s);

of the

c) the effect of processing on the microbiological
status of the food;

4 the likelihood and consequences

of microbial contamination and/or growth during subsequent handling, storage and use; cost/benefit ratio associated application of the criterion; and use of the food. Criteria for with the

e>the

f) the intended
4.3 Components Foods

hygiene General Food principles - Code of practice
(second revision)

of Microbiological

15000 : 1998

Food hygiene - Hazard analysis and critical control point (HACCP) - System and guidelines for its application

4.3.1 A microbiological

criterion

consists

of:

a>a statement

of the microorganisms of concern and/or their toxins/metabolites and the reason for that concern (see 4.4); (see 4.5);

3 DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this standard definition shall apply. 3.1 Microbiological Criteria the following

b) the analytical methods for their detection and/
or quantification

c>microbiological

limits considered appropriate to the food at the specified point(s) of the food chain (see 4.6); unit (see

Acceptability of a product or a food lot, based on the absence or presence, or number of microorganisms including parasites, and/or quantity of their toxins/ metabolites, per unit(s) of mass, volume, area or lot. 4 PRINCIPLES FOR ESTABLISHING AND APPLYING MICROBIOLOGICAL CRITERIA GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 4.1 A microbiological criterion should be established and applied only where there is a definite need and where its application is practical. Such need is demonstrated, for example, by epidemiological evidence that the Good under consideration may represent a p~hl~c health risk and that a criterion is meaningful for consumer protection, or as the result of` a risk asscssmeat. The criterion should be technically attainable by applying good manufacturing practices (codes ot practice).

4 a plan defining the number of field samples
to be taken, size of the analytical 4.7.1 and 4.7.2); and

e) the number
conform 4.3.2

of analytical units that should to these limits (see 4.7.3). criterion should also state: applies, where the

A microbiological

a) the food to which

the criterion chain

b) the point(s) in the food criterion applies, and

c) any actions to be taken when the criterion is not met. 4.3.3 When applying a microhioloeical criterion for assessing products, it is essential, Tn order to make the hest use of money and manpower, that only

IS

14595 points

: 1998 tests be applied to those foods and at 4.6.1

appropriate
those

in the food chain that offer maximum hencfit in providing the consumer with a food that is safe and suitahlc for consumption. 4.4 Microorganisms
4.4.1 For the microorganisms, of concern in viruses, yeasts, and helminths of Concern

Limits used in criteria should be used on microbiological data appropriate to the food and should be applicable to a variety of similar products. They should therefore be based on data gathered at various production establishments operating under good hygienic practices (see IS 2491) and applying the HACCP system (see IS 15000). 4.6.2 In the establishment of any changes m the microflora storage and distribution, such in numbers should be taken microbiological limits, likely to occur during as decrease or increase into account.

purpose of this standard, the parasites and their toxins/ metabolites a particular food include bacteria, moulds, and algae, parasitic protozoa and their toxins/metabolites.

4.4.2 The microorganisms included in a criterion should he widely accepted as relevant - as pathogens, as indicator organisms or as spoilage organisms- to the particular food and technology. Organisms whose significance in the specified food is doubtful should no{ he included in a criterion. 4.4.3iThe mere finding, with a presence-absence test, of certain organisms known to cause foodborne illness, such as Clostridilrm pet-fringens, Staphylococcus ourcus xnd Vihrio purahaemolyticus does not necessarily indicate a threat to public health. 4.4.4 Whcrc pathogens can be detected directly and reliably, consideration should be given to testing for them ih prei'erencc to testing for indicator organisms. II' a test ~OI-an indicator organism is applied, there sho~~ld he a clear statement whether the test is used to indicate unsatisfactory hygienic practices or a health hazard. 4.5 Microbiological Methods

4.6.3 Microbiological limits should take into consideration the risk associated with the microorganisms, and the conditions under which the food is expected to be handled and consumed. Microbiological limits should also take account of the likelihood of uneven distribution of microorganisms in the food and the inherent variability of the analytical procedure. 4.6.4 If a criterion requires the absence of a particular microorganism, the size and number of the analytical unit as well as the number of analytical sample units should be indicated. 4.7 Sampling
4.7.1 Plans, Methods and Handling

4.5.1 Whenever possible, only methods for which the reliability (accuracy, reproducibility, inter-and incra-laboratory variation) has been statistically cstahlished in comparative or collaborative studies in several laboratories should be used. Moreover, preference should be given to methods which have hcen validated for the commodity concerned preferably in relation to reference methods. While methods should he most sensitive and reproducible for the purpose. methods to he used for in-plant testing might of'tcn sacrifice to some degree of sensitivity and reproducibility in the interest of speed and simplicity. They should, however, have been proved IO give a sufficiently reliable estimate of the information needed. 4.5.2 Methods used to determine the suitability for consumption of highly perishable foods, or foods with a short shelf-life, should be chosen wherever possible so that the results of microbiological examinations are available before the foods are consumed or exceed their shelf-life. 4.5.3 The microbiological methods specified should be reasonable with regard to complexity, availability of media, cquipmcnt, ease of interpretation, time required and costs. 4.6 Microbiological
Limits 2

A sampling plan includes the sampling procedure and the decision criteria to be applied to a lot, based on examination of a prescribed number of sample units and subsequent analytical units of a stated size by defined methods. A well-designed sampling plan defines the probability of detecting microorganisms in a lot, but it should be borne in mind that no sampling plan can ensure the absence of a particular organism. Sampling plans should be administratively and economically feasible. In particular, the choice of sampling plans should take into account the following: risks to public hazard, the susceptibility consumers, health associated with the group of

of the target

the heterogeneity of distribution of microorganisms where variables sampling plans are employed, and

4 the acceptable

quality statistical probability conforming lot.
many

level and the desired of accepting a non-

NOTE - For

appliccltions. 2-or 3-class attribute plans

may prove useful.

4.7.2 The statistical performance characteristics or operating characteristics curve should be provided in the sampling plan. Performance characteristics provide specific information to estimate the probability of accepting a non-conforming lot. The sampling method should be defined in the sampling plan. The time between taking the field samples and analysis should

IS

14595

: 1998

hc as short as reasonably possible, and during transport to the I;~horatory the conditions, such as temperature should not allow increase or decrease of the numbers 01` the tarfcl organism, so that the results reflect, within rhc limitations given by the sampling plan, the Illicl-obicllo~ical conditions of the lot. 4.7.3 The number and size of analytical units per lot tcstcd should be as stated in the sampling plan

and should not be modified. However, a lot should not hc subjected to repeated testing in order to bring the lot into compliance.
4.8 Reporting

The test report shall give the information needed for complete identification of the sample, the sampling plan, the test method, the results and, if appropriate, their interpretation.

3

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for reyision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from DOC : No. FAD 45 (903).

Amendments Amend No.

Issded Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 Telephones : 323 01 3 1, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 Regional Central Offices : Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17 323 38 41 337 84 99, 337 85 61 337 86 26,337 91 20 60 38 43 60 20 25

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110 002

Eastern

: Ii14 C. LT. Scheme VII M. V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700 054 : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A. CHANDIGARH 160 022

Northern

1 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 1 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, MUMBAI 400 093 Marol, Andheri (East)

235 02 16,235 04 42 235 15 19,235 23 15

832 92 95,832 78 58 { 8327891,8327892

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printograph, New Delh, Ph.: 5726847

