Indian Standard GUIDELINES FOR HYDRAULIC MODEL STUDIES OF BARRAGES AND WEIRS

ICS 93.160

@ BIS 2001

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

July 2001

Price Group

3

River Training and Diversion

Works Sectional Committee,

WRD 22

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the River Training and Diversion Works Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. For construction of new barrages/weirs or remolding of existing barrageslweirs, it is necessary to carry out model studies to get a comprehensive idea regarding hydraulic conditions, layout of the barrage/weir and its appurtenant structures. Many aspects of a barrage/weir are finalized after detailed study of different alternatives on a model. A need has, therefore, been felt to lay down the recommendations for various requirements for model studies so that a methodical uniform approach could be followed by all concerned. There is no 1S0 Standard on the subject. This standard has been prepared based on indigenous data/practices prevalent in the field in India. The composition of the committee responsible for formulating manufacturers'

this standard is given in Annex A.

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, should be rounded off in accordance with IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

Is 14955:2001

Indian Standard GUIDELINES FOR HYDRAULIC MODEL STUDIES OF BARRAGES AND WEIRS
1 SCOPE This standard covers the requirements for model studies of barrages/weir. It includes types of model, selection of scale, data required for model studies and observations to be taken on the model and the parameters to be finalized from model studies. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standard IS 6966 (Part 1) :1989 `Guidelines for hydraulic design of barrges and weirs: Part 1 Alluvial reaches (fir.st revision)' contains provision which through reference in this text, constitutes provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standard. 3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions and those given in IS 6966 (Part 1) shall apply. A typical layout plan of a barrage with its appurtenant is shown in Fig. 1. 3.1 Divide Wall A straight and long wall constructed usually at right angles to the barrages axis for separating undersluice pocket from other bays, in order to maintain deep channel infront of head regulator. 3.2 Head Regulator A gated structure located on the upstream of the undersluices of the barrage for regulating the supplies of the canal. 3.3 Silt Excluder A diaphragm structure constructed in the extreme undersluice bay of the barrage in front of the head regulator for excluding coarser sediment from entering into the head regulator. 3.4 River Training Works The training works include guide bunds, afflux bunds and approach embankments, etc. River training works are required to check the out flanklng of structures and to guide the river to flow axially through the barrages. 4 MODEL 4.1 Hydraulic models are mainly of two types, namely (a) geometrically similar, and (b) distorted or vertically exaggerated. In the former, all dimensions are reduced to the same scale whereas in the latter, the scales for vertical and horizontal dimensions are different. 4.2 The models may be rigid, semi-rigid according to requirement of study. 4.2.1 Rigid Models In these models, the sides and bed are made rigid. 4.2.2 Semi-rigid Models In these models, the sides and sometimes bed are made rigid. 4.2.3 Mobile Models In these models, both the bed and the sides are erodible. 4.3 Choice of Scale for Models 4.3.1 Longitudinal scale is determined from consideration of river regime, discharge and space available. 4.3.2 The depth scale should be so fixed that sufficient tractive force is developed for the general movement of bed material used in the model. The movement should start at the discharge corresponding to which bed movement occurs in the prototype. The depth of water at the lowest design discharge in model should be sufficiently large as compared to ripple height. Usually a depth of 8 to 12 cm is considered adequate at lower discharges. 4.3.3 The longitudinal and depth scales in the end decide the requirement of discharge which may be a governing factor. Various scales adopted for some typical model studies of barrages is given in Table 1. 4.3.4 The scale for sediment injection has not been developed so far. As such, the injection rate is found out by trial and error. method in model itself. 4.4 Choice of Bed Material Model bed material is generally kept freer than or the same as that of prototype, the density being almost the same. If the velocities in models are not enough to affect bed movement, lighter material such as coal dust, saw dust, etc, maybe used and, if necessary, slope exaggeration may be resorted to. part of the or mobile

1s 14955:2001

]WJIUE -.--- ,-.. :. :..: : ~.-=-: :=, , . ... , ,.... .. .. . . .. . .. . .

OVOM

.c.~ ..,-..

E&v . t
z : y

<

AIE!il

2

Is 14955:2001 4.5 Selection of Models a) b) c) d) Purpose of the barrage/weiL Behaviour of the river at the proposed during last 10-20 years; site

4.5.1 The model studies for the location of a barrage/ weir, orientation of its axis, waterway and required training works such as, guide buds, aftlux bunds and approach embankments, etc, are generally conducted on distorted models, wherever possible, geometrically similar models may be prefemed. However the studies of other appurtenant works such as optimisirtg the length of divide wall, width of undersh.tice poeke$ regulation or operational sequences of gates, silt excluders and ejectors, angle of offlake of canal, ete, are conducted on geometrically similar fill or part width model. 4.5.2 The model studies for deciding the profile of the undersluice and barrage bays, length of downstream floors, shape of glacis, piers, energy dissipators, etc, are generally conducted on two dimensional geometrically similar scale models. 4.5.3 In some cases, the model requires to be, tilted where consideration of correct reproduction of water surface slopes in the model and adequate bed movement would require a slope, scale to be different from the vertical exaggeration. In vertically exaggerated models, the natural river slope is magnified to the same extent as the vertical exaggeration. Thus, a scale for the slope in addition to those of length and depth come into consideration. Value of the slope exaggeration is generally equal to the vertical exaggeration. Tilting introduces complexicity in the construction and operation of the model and interpretation of results from such models would require considerable experience and skill. 5 DATA REQUIRED 5.1 General It should include general information in respect of the project. The information may be compiled in the form of a project report which should include the following:

Photos depicting behaviour of the river during floods, if available; Hydraulic design calculations for the waterway including barrage and undersluice bays; and Proposed gate operation schedule of barrage.

e)

5.2 Survey Data The survey data of site should include the following: a) Index plan to a scale 1:250000 showing the reach under consideration with latitudes and longitudes. The state, district, important towns or villages tributaries of the river, catchment area, etc, may also be shown on the plan; Survey plan preferably with contour to a scale 1:10000 covering sufficient reach of the river to be reproduced in the model. The upstream reach should cover at least 2 meander lengths. In the downstream of the proposed site, at least one meander length reach will be sufficient. The survey plan should depict the following: i) Latitudes, longitudes south line; ii) Lean weather channel; iii) High flood water spread (indicating month, year and discharge); iv) Formation of rapids, sections, etc; pools, control and the north-

b)

v) Different channels in case of a braided river; vi) Tributaries vii) Locations important vicinity; joining the river; and of gauge -- discharge sites, towns and villages in the

Table 1 Typical Model Scales Adopted for Various Barrages (Clause 4.3.3)
S1 Name of Barrage No. State River Design Flood (cumecs) Remarks Scales Number of Bays ,--"--. ~ Ver. Spill- UnderHer. way sluice (6) (lo) (7) (8) (9) 1/150 1/50 10 8 One Fish ladder touching right side divide wall 1/350 1/70 24 6 One Excluderon leftundershsicebay 1/150 1/30 17 6 l/150 1/30 22 5
1/150 1/30 22 10

(1) i) ii) iii) iv) v) vi)

(2) Hotnikund Samal Wazirabad Okhla Indraprastha Naraj

(3) UPIHaryana

(4) Yamuna Brahmani Yamuna Yamuna Yamuna Kathjuri

(5) 22000 24600 7079 8495 8495 29500

Orissa
Delhi Delhi Delhi Orissa

l/4oo

1/66

33

13

3

Is 14955:2001 viii) Shoals and submersible land including the extent and nature of vegetation; of existing and proposed ix) Position structures, namely, bridges, dams, weirs, barrages, ghats, spurs and revetments, etc; and x) Cross-section lines giving its distance and orientation with respect to some fixed point and reference line; c) River Cross-Sections The cross-sections should indicate its chainages from some reference line and extend up to affluxed highest flood level. The distance between cross-sections may be kept 50-100 m in a reach of 3 km upstream to 2 km downstream of the barrage site. In the remaining reach on the upstream, the distance may be increased up to 500 m. Bed levels along cross-section should be given at interval of 5 to 10 m in the deep channel and 25 to 50 m in the remaining width. The crosssection should show HFL and LWL. The cross-sections should be taken in such a way that all important features of the river channel and the flood plan such as mouth of an off-taking channel, their confluence, high grounds if any, less erodable or vertical banks, thick vegetation, etc, are indicated. For this purpose, the distance or orientation or both, between the consecutive sections may be suitably altered, but such alterations must be duly qualified on the survey plan; and d) Survey plan showing past river courses for as many years as possible, or, if such data are not available, satellite imageries of dry weather channel for different years should be supplied preferably in 1:50000 scale. c) d) e) Yearly HFL and corresponding discharge with dates of occurrence for the last 10 years; Maximum flood on record with date of occurrence and corresponding HFL; Discharge distribution in various channels of the river at important stages during the year for which survey plan has been supplied; Proposed pond level or levels; Water surface slope; River discharge above which the off-taking canal/canals should be closed and all the barrage gates fully opened due to excessive sediment charge; and In case of tidal reach, information regarding HTL and LTL of spring and neap tide both during freshets and-d~-season. Data

9 g) h)

j)

5.4 Sediment a)

Bed Material -- A minimum of three representative bed material samples 1.5 kg each, across a section in the study reach, one at either end and one in the deep channel may be taken at a suitable depth below the bed level considering scour and deposition at site during flood for assessing realistic value of Lacey's silt factor `f. Suspended Load-- An assessment of concentration and characteristics of suspended load may be given at least at l/3rd, 213rd and peak discharges experienced at the proposed site. Information regarding nature of banks whether of unifo% material, stratified, rock out-crops kankar, etc, along with their location marked on the plan. Gradation curve of bank material wherever protection is required should also be given.

b)

c)

5.3 Hyd raulic Data a) Gauge Discharge Curve -- Daily gauge and discharge data for as many years as possible for all sites existing in the study reach be given. In case a site does not exist within the above reach, install new gauge/discharge sites, one at the proposed site, one at 1.5 meander length on upstream and one at 0.5 meander length in the downstream and gauge levels at various discharges at the above sites during the first available monsoon season should be noted. The cross-sections of river at the new gaugeldischarge sites indicating nature of riverbed and the value of Manning's `n' be supplied; Design and high flood discharges with corresponding water levels; 4

5.5 Data of Structures a) General arrangement of drawing showing layout plan of the barragelweir, head regulator and its appurtenant works; Longitudinal-section and cross-sections of the barrages/weir, head regulator, etc, showing details of all the works; Longitudinal section and representative cross-sections of the canal in a reach of about 2 km from head; and Detailed drawing and hydraulic design calculations of the appurtenant works, namely: (a) guide bunds, (b) divide wall, (c) silt excluder and silt ejector, (d) head regulator (e) fish ladder, (f) navigation locks, and (g) canal.

b)

c)

d)

b)

Is 14955:2001 6 TERMS OF REFERENCE the model after reproducing related structures: a) the barrage/weir and

Exact terms of reference should be stated by the sponsoring authority. The major aspects of a barrage which will be finalized in the model after studying different alternatives are: a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) j) k) Orientation and waterway of the barrage;

Water levels at different locations and discharge for finding out depth of flow, water surface slope and afflux, etc; Velocities at different sections and in bays for determining discharge distribution and concentration of flow including at exit of stilling basin; Velocities stability; along structures for assessing the the

b)

Location of the abutments with respect to the river banks; Crest level and profile of spillway and undersluice bays; Coefficient of discharge mergence ratio; for various subc) d) e) f) @ h) j) k)

Angle of approaching obliquity;

flow to assess

Alignment and length of the divide wall both upstream and downstream; Position of canal off-take point and its offtaking angles; Lengths and alignments of the right and left guide bunds both upstream and downstream; Energy dissipation arrangements in spillway bays, undersluice bays and head regulators; Type, levels and lengths of the stilling basins; Silt excluder details, such as length, number of bays, etc;

Surface and bed lines of flow for estimating curvature of flow; Erosion on the upstream and downstream the barrage; Locating areas where sediment deposition scour may take place; Differential Bed configuration the hydrography; of or

head at the piers and divide wall; during and after running

Afflux in the river due to structures;

m) Gate operation schedule during medium and low floods; and n) Alignment of the afflux bunds, approach embankments, protection upstream and downstream of structures and river training works.

m) Coefficient of discharge for sluicebays, weir bays and head regulator under free flow/ critical flow and sub-mergeq flow conditions; n) Energy dissipation in hydraulic jump under different inflow and tailwater conditions. And also for different operating condition of gates; Performance of the basin approach flow, if any; under oblique

P) 7 MODEL STUDIES 7.1 Proving of the River Model After constructing the river model without barrage according to supplied data, the model is proved before taking pertinent observations in the model. The model is taken as proved if the following observations of model and prototype tally: a) b) c) d) e) f) g) Water levels at different sections with* 0.3 m of prototype values, Curvature of flow, Zone of attack by the current, Tendency of scouring and deposition, and at a particular Overall flow pattern, Sediment movement, Activation discharge. of channels d r)

Flushing of sediments deposited vis-a-vis gate operation; Negative head/pressure on spillway nappe/ weir glacis and at the toe of spillway near energy dissipation arrangement wherever required; Selection of proper energy dissipation arrangement; and Profile of undersluice and barrage bays.

s) t)

7.3 Limitation

of Model Studies

7.2 Generally the following observations

are taken on

Model studies only help in finalization of structures. They have their own limitations like difficulties in the reproduction of silt content of water, etc. Hence for some of the studies, the results would give only qualitative idea. Therefore, the designer needs to incorporate the recommendations of the model studies only after careful consideration.

5

Is 14955:2001

ANNEX A (Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION

River Training and Diversion Works, WRD 22
Choinnan SHRIA. K. SHANGLE Members SUPUUNENDNG ENGINEER SEiiIOR DESIGN ENGmTER(B&B) (Ahernde) SHIU P. K. TALUKDAR Representing

Central Water Commission, New Delhi Bhakm Beaa Management Board, Nangal Punjab Flood Control Department,Government ofAaaarn+ Guwahati Kolkata Port Tmst, Kolkata Central, Water &Power Research Statio~ Pune Cenbal WaterCommiaaion,New Delhi DamodarValley Corporation,Dhsmbad,Bihar GasigaFlood Control Commissio~ Patna (Bihar) Irrigation&Waterways Directorate,Governmentof West Bengal, Kcdkata FC) (Alremate) IrrigationDepartment GovernmentofUbPrad~ Roorkee

SHRIP. K. DAS(,4//ems/e)
CWEF HYDRAULIC ENGNXR DEPUTYCtVILENGmEER (RSVER TRNNNG) (,4hemare) SHRIV.K. KUWARN SHSU M. S. SHITOLE (,4/wrnrrte) Dtw.noR, FLOOD MANAGEMENT, IDTE DIRECTOR (BCD E&NE) (Alfemare) CHH EXGINEER(CML) MEMt+ERCOOROINATtON DIRECTOR (MP) (Ahemate) DIRECTOR (CDO} DCPUTV DIRZCTOR (C & DIRECTOR JWSEARCH OFFIC'SR (Alternate) DtRKTOR(CEAmAL DESIGN) JOINTDIRECIYJR (CFXMAL DESIGNS) (Alternate) SHRI JANCI RAMAN PRASAD Sm_tm DIRECTOR (B& F~P ASSISTANT DESIGN E~GtXEER (B&F) (,4/krnafe) CHEF ENGUWSR (DESIGN) %1oR hhiiAGFR(Aherrlate) EXGN+WNCHEF %U v. U. KAUNTIANA SW ASHMTBARKATAKJ (Ahmate) DR~AYAN%%RAfA SHRtCHAF.mER VFRMA SHRI T. B. SHRIN.

Irrigationllepartrnen~ Governmentof Punjab, Charrdigarh Water ResoureeaDepartment,Governmentof Bihar, Patna Ministry of Railways(RDSO), Lucknow NationalHydroelectricPowerCo~ration Lt~ Faridabad

Public WorkaDepartmerrt,Government ofTarnilNad~ Chermai BmharnputraBm@ Aaaam UniveraityofRoorkee, Roorkee ContinentalConatmetionCo (P) Ltd, New Delhi CorrardtimgEngineeringServieea(India) Ltd New Delhi Delhi Collegeof Engineering,Delhi Indian Instituteoffeehnology, New Delhi ItTigationf)epartmetr~Governmentof Haryanz Chandigarh IrrigationDepartment.Governmentof Andhra Pradesh, Hydembad IrrigationDepartment,Government of Maharaahtra,Naaik IrrigationDepartrnenLGovernmentof Jamtnu & Kashmir, Jamrnu [CT Pvt Ltd, New Delhi RiTES, New Delhi Sardar SarovarNarmada NigarnLtd, Government of Gujarat, Gandhinagar Tehri HydroDevelopmentCorporation,Rishikeah Water ReaoutcesDepartment,Governmentof Madhya Pmdea&Bhopal DireetorGerreral (&oj7cioMembei)

S. RAO (Alremate) PARTHA SARTHY

SHru S. R. TOLEY(Ahemate) HEAO, CtvIL ENW. DEPARTMSN
HEADCrvrL EIWSWENNG DsPARmmw CHEF ENGNER (PROJECT)

DIRECTOR (E~Gtsm.ImG)fA/A?rnate) SUPHUiWE~DtNG ENGtNIZ& (BARRAGES & CAWS)CDG EriGm%sR(DWis)( Akrnate) SuPmohTIIKDuiti

SUPERINTENDING Erwin- (NIP) (GmF..s)(A/A?nra/e) SUPERtA~BCiG ENGNZSR,
SHRIN. N. MEERA
SHRIS. K. MAJUMDAR

SHRIG. SETHURAMAN (A/femafe) SHRtMUKI!SH KUMAR CHIEFE~GmwR SHRIM. K. V. SHARMA

SHRI A. K. f@Hl DIRECTOR (BODHI) (A/fenra/e)
SHRtS. S. .WHI,

Director& Head (WRD)

Stmr B. K SmnA Joint Direetor(WRD), BIS

6

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form -without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaftlmed when needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision. Users of Indian Standards or edition by referring to the latest issue of of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods

WRD 22 (174).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 { 3233841 3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131,3233375,323 9402 Regional OffIces : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi CALCUTTA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Prabhat Offset Press , Darya Cianj, New Delhi-2

