IS:1885(Partl,yl)-l!38l [ Supersodlng
IS : 1885 ( Part XIIUSoc 1 ) - 188& and IS : 1886 ( Part XIIUSec 2 ) - 1887 ) ]

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IndianStandard
ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY
AND ACCESSORIES
1996 )

PART LVI MICROWAVE COMPONENTS ( First Reprint NOVEMBER

UDC 621.31.029.6 : 001.4

BUREAU
MANAK

0 Copyright 1982 OF INDIAN STANDARDS
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

Gr8

March 1982

I?3:188s(PartLvI)-1981 [ Superseding IS : 1888 ( p-t Xlll/Sec 1 ) - 18SS and I8 : 1885 ( Part XIII/Set 2 ) - 1887 ]

Indian Standard
ELECTROTECHNICAL
PART
LVI MICROWAVE

VOCABULARY
AND ACCESSORIES

COMPONENTS

Basic Standards on Electronics and Telecommunication Committee, LTDC 1
MAJ-GEN K.

Sectional

Chainnan K. MWTA ( Ram ) Members

Representing Chairman. Electronics and Division Council

T&communication

SHRI D. C. BHAT~ACHAR~~
DR V. P. KODALI ( Alternate ) DR K. CHANDRA SHRl B. A. CHEl'TY DIREC~R DR C. G. KHOT SHRI RAWNDRA NATH ( Alternate SHRI 0. P. KHUSHU GP-CAPT J. S. LAMBA

Institution of Electronics and TeIecommunication Engineers, New Delhi

National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi Department of Electronics. New Delhi Department of Science & Technology, New Delhi Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) ) All India Radio, New Delhi Directorate of Technical Development & Production ( Air ), Ministry of Defence New Delhi SJRO R. S~MASUNDARAM ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence SHRI M. H. V. MURH~Y SHRI K. C. NAGPAL ( Alternate ) Posts and Telegraphs Department. New Delhi SHRI J. V. SASTRY Vice-Chairman, Electronics and TelecommunicaSHRI T. V. SRIRAN~AN tion Division Council Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member > SHRI R. C. JAIN, Head ( Electronics ) ( Secrefary ) ( Conrinued on puge 2 )

.
@j Copyrighr 1982 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Acr ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an iofrigement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 1885 ( Part LVI ) - 1981 ( ConritIuedfiom page 1 )

Microwave Components and Accessories Sectional Committee, LTDC 19
Chairman

Representing
Defencc Electronic Research Labdratory of Defence ( R & D ) 1, Hyderabad [ Ministry

SHRI V. NARAYANA RAO Members
DR J. K. SINHA ( AIlernare Shri V. Narayana Rao ) to

SHRI R. K. AROR~ . SHRI S. M. SHAKEEL( Afrernafe )
DR K. CHANDRA DR V. K. AGARWAL ( AIternore ) SHRI D. R. CHANDRAN SHRI J. S. PASSI ( A/fern&e ) SHRI N. CHANDRASEKARAN SHRI A. K. GHOSE SHRI H. S. ANANTHANARAYANA RAO ( Alternote )

Department National

of Electronics, Laboratory

New Delhi ( CSIR ), New Delhi Disposals

Physical

Directorate General of Supplies and ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi Bharat Electronics Indian Telephone

Ltd. Bangalore Industries Ltd. Bangalore

Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay SHKI B. L. GUPTA Railway Board. Ministry of Railways DR C. G. KHOT \ SHRI H. M. AGARWAL ( Alternare I ISRO Satellite Centre (Department of Space ), DR S. P. KOSTA Bangalore SHRI SIHARAN DE ( Alternate ) Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute DR R. C. KUMAR

< CSIR ). Pilani Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI A. K. MISRA SHRI S. C. DU~~AL ( Alternate ) KLB Electronics, New Delhi SHRI I. D. PAUL SHRI VIDYA SAGAR ( Alternote ) The Scientific Instrument Co Ltd. Allahabad DR A. S. RAJPUT Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. Hyderabad SHR~ K. K. REDDY SHRI C. P. GUPTA ( Airernate ) Posts and Telegraphs Department, New Delhi SHRI P. S. SARAN SHRI P. R. K. RAO ( AIfernafe ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI P. K. SHUKLA \ SHRI S. SIVASUBRAMANIAN( Alterrzare I Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bombay PROF R. V. S. SITARAM SHRI P. B. TOLE ( AIrernore ) Department of Physics, Delhi University, Delhi DR G. P. SRIVASTAVA Solidstate Physics Laboratory [ Ministry of Defence DR PREM SWARUP ( R & D ) 1, New Delhi
WG CDR K. V. PADMANABHAN ( AIrernate )

SHRI R. C. JAIN. Head ( Electronics )

Director General, ISI ( Ex-oficio Member )

Secretary
SHRI PAVAN KUMAR Assistant Director ( Electronics ).

ISI

2

Indian Standard
ELECTROTECHNICAL PARTLVI
MICROWAVE

VOCABULARY
AND ACCESSORIES

COMPONENTS

O.FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part LVI ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 18 September 1981, after the draft finalized by the Basic Standards on Electronics and Telecommunication Sectional Committee in consultation with the Microwave Components and Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This standard is one of the series of Indian Standards on electrotechnical vocabulary. 0.3 This standard supersedes IS : 1885 (Part XIII/Set 1 )-1968* and IS : 1885 ( Part XIII/Set 2 )-1967t the requirements of which have been covered in this standard. 0.4 This standard has been prepared on the basis of IEC document - `Draft-transmission lines and wave1 ( IEV 726 ) ( Central Office ) 1107 . Electrotechnical guides, Sections 01 to 21' issued by International Commission. 0.5 Historically, the term `transmission line' was used to describe any device for conveying electromagnetic energy with a minimum of loss. Presently, terms such as `parallel-wire line', `coaxial line', `waveguide', are used to represent particular examples of the more genera1 transmission line. These terms are used in this vocabulary only when discussing those specific structures, whereas the general term `transmission line' is used when discussing a multiplicity of varieties collectively.
1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part LVI ) includes terms and definitions that specifically apply to or are important to the field of microwave passive
*Electrotechnical waveguides, Section tElectrotechnica1 waveguides, Section vocabulary: Part XIII Telecommunication transmission lines and 1 General transmission lines. vocabulary: Part XIII Telecommunication transmission lines and 2 Microwave transmission lines and waveguides.

3

IS:l@JS(PartLVI)-1981

components and accessories including
waveguides.

microwave

transmission

lines and AND

2. MICROWAVE TRANSMISSION LINES, WAVEGUIDES CAVITY RESONATOR CONFIGURATIONS 2.1 Transmission Line

a) A means for conveying electromagnetic energy between two points with a minimum of radiation. b) Commonly, a system of two conductors or two groups of conductors in which the conduction currents between the end points are associated with electromagnetic energy transfer, 2.2 Waveguide - A transmission line consisting of a system of material boundaries or structures for guiding electromagnetic waves.
NOTE - The most common form of waveguide is a metallic tube; other forms arc dielectric rod, or a mixed structure of conducting and diekctric materials.

2.3 Uniform Transmission Line ( Uniform Waveguide ) - A transmission line ( waveguide ) in which the physical and electrical characteristics do not change with distance along the transmission line ( waveguide ). 2.4 Exponential Transmission Line - A tapered transmission line whose characteristic impedance varies exponentially with distance along the line. 2.5 Rectangular ( Circular ) ( Elliptic ) Waveguide - A waveguide in which the transverse cross-section is rectangular ( circular ) ( elliptic ). 2.6 Beam Waveguide ( Transmission Line ) - A waveguide ( transmission line ) consisting of a sequence of lenses or mirrors that can guide an electromagnetic wave. 2.7 Septate Waveguide - A waveguide formed from two coaxial metal cylinders with a radial metal septum or fin connecting the inner to the outer cylinder along their length.
- A rectangular waveguide with an interior con2.8 Ridge Waveguide ducting projection of one or both broad walls extending along the length of the waveguide.

2.9 Dielectric Whguide - A waveguide consisting entirely of one or more dielectric materials without metallic boundaries.
2.10 Periodically Loaded Waveguide -

A waveguide in which propagation by periodically spaced variations of the properties of the media, the dimensions of the media, or the boundaries. is determined

4

Is;lsss(PartLvI)-1981 2.11 Coaxial Line -

A transmission line consisting of two coaxial cylinstrip

drical conductors. 2.12 Strip Lime - A transmission line consisting of a conducting between two parallel extended conducting surfaces.

2.13 Microstrip - A transmission line consisting of a conducting strip and a parallel extended conducting surface bounded to opposite sides of a thin dielectric substrate. 2.14 Rod Line; Slab Line - A transmission line consisting of a conductor of circular transverse cross-section along a parallel extended conducting surface or between two such surfaces. 2.15 SurfaceWave Waveguide; Surface Waveguide - A waveguide in which the waves are constrained to follow a guiding surface, with the energy flow confined to the vicinity of that surface.
2.16 Siigle-Wire Line; Surface-Wave Transmission Line ( Deprecated in this Sense ) - A surface-wave waveguide consisting of a single conductor

with a specially treated surface. 2.17 Goubau Lii; `G' Line ( Deprecated ) - A uniform single-wire line of circular transverse cross-section in which the surface treatment consists of a coating of dielectric material. 2.18 Radial Transmission Line - A pair of parallel conducting planes used for propagating a cylindrical wave.
2.19 Flexible Wavegnide -

A waveguide constructed to permit limited bending, twisting, stretching or any combination thereof during use, without appreciable change of its electrical properties. 2.20 Rendable Waveguide -A waveguide constructed so as to permit limited bending, twisting, stretching qr any combination thereof during installation, without appreciable change of its electrical properties. 2.21 Semi-rigid Coaxial Line - A coaxial line constructed so as to permit very limited bending or twisting without appreciable change of its electrical properties. 2.22 Cavity Resonator; Cavity - A volume bounded by conducting surfaces, capable of supporting at least one mode of resonance. 2.23 Wavegaide Cavity - A cavity resonator uniform waveguide.
5

consisting of a section of

IS:QB5(PartLVI)-1981 3. PR&AGATION IN TRANSMISSION LINES AND WAVEGUIDES

3.1 Waves in Transmission Lii 3.1.1 Direction of Propagation - The normal to an quiphase a wave taken in the direction of increasing phase lag.

surface of

3.1.2 Traveling Wave ( in a Transmission Line ) - An electromagnetic wave propagating in a transmission line in a mode such that the normalized complex wave amplitude of any field vector frequency component has a linear variation of phase and an exponential decrease in magnitude due to losses, as a function of distance in the direction of propagation. 3.1.3 Standing Wave ( in a Transmission Line ); Stationary Wave ( DepreA field pattern created by the interference of two waves having the same frequency propagating in the same mode in opposite directions along a uniform transmission line.
cated ) -

3.1.4 Incident Wave ( at a Discontinuity ) a discontinuity in a propagation medium.

A wave that travels toward

3.1.5 Reflected Wave ( at a Discontinuity ) - A wave that travels away from a discontinuity in a direction opposite to that of the incident wave. 3.1.6 Transmitted Wave ( at a Discontinuity) - A wave that travels away from a discontinuity in the same direction as the incident wave. 3.1.7 Standing- Wave Minimum ( Maximum ) : Node ( Antinode ) - ( of a Standing Wave ) - The location in a propagation medium where the vectorial sum of specified field quantity of two waves creating a standing wave is a minimum ( maximum ). 3.1.8 Backward Wave - An electromagnetic wave having a group velocity in opposite direction to that of its phase velocity. 3.19 Guided Wave - An electromagnetic wave that propagates along or within physical boundaries or structures. 3.1.10 Surface Wave - An electromagnetic wave which travels along the surface separating two media in a manner determined by the geometrical shape of the surface, the properties of the media near that surface, or both. 3.1.11 Slow- Wave - An electromagnetic wave that propagates in a bounded medium with a phase velocity below the phase velocity in the same medium when unbounded. 3.1.12 Slow- Wave Structure A structure that can support a slow wave. 6

IS : 1885 ( Part LVI ) - 1981 3.2 Modes in Transmission Lines and Cavity Resonators 3.2.1 ( Electromagnetic ) Mode - Each of the possible conf@rations of the electromagnetic field in a given domain of space of specified electromagnetic characteristics. 3.2.2 Mode of Propagation ( in a Transmission Line ); Transmission Any mode characterizing the electromagnetic field of a travelling wave in a transmission line.
Mode -

3.2.3 Waveguide Mode -

A mode in a uniform waveguide.

NOTE 1 - Depending on the particular field configuration, a waveguide mode is classified as a transverse electric mode or TE mode, a transverse magnetic mode or TM mode, or a hybrid mode. NOTIZ 2 - For a given waveguide mode, the electric field configuration is the same in all transverse cross-sections of [he waveguide as is the magnetic field configuration.
NOTE3 - When the electric and magnetic field vectors are in phase quadrature, transmission of energy takes place and the mode is an evanescent mode.

no

3.2.4 TE Mode; Transverse Electric Mode; H-Mode ( Deprecated ) - A waveguide mode in which the longitudinal component of the electric field vector is everywhere zero and the longitudinal component of the magnetic field vector is not. 3.2.5 TM-Mode; Transverse Magnetic Mode; E-Mode ( Deprecated ) - A waveguide mode in which the longitudinal component of the magnetic field vector is everywhere zero and the longitudinal component of the electric field vector is not. 3.2.6 TEM- Mode; Transverse Electromagnetic Mode; Principal ( Deprecated ) - A mode in which both the longitudinal components electric and magnetic field vectors are everywhere zero. 3.2.7 Hybrid Mode - A waveguide mode such that both the electric and magnetic field vectors have components in the direction of propagation. 3.2.8 Normal Mode - Anyone of the infinite set of waveguide modes for which either the electric field or the magnetic field is mainly transverse with a negligible longitudinal component. 3.2.9 Mode qf Resonance ( in a Cavity Resonator ); Cavity Mode - A form of free electromagnetic oscillation in a cavity resonator characterized by a particular field configuration.
NOTE- In a waveguide cavity, a mode of resonance having no axial component of the electric or magnetic field is classified as a TE-mode or a TM mode respectively; the corresponding transverse field pattern resemble that of a mode of propagation in the corresponding uniform waveguide.

Mode

of the

7

IS:1885(PartLvI)-1981 3.2.10 Mode Designation - A convention whereby a normal mode or a mode of resonance is identified by adding numerical subscripts to the abbreviations TE and TM.

NATE -This notation strictly applies only to modes in structures expressed in a simple way in an adequate coordinate system.

which can be

X2.11 T&m ( TM,, ) Mode ( in a Waveguide ): H,,,, (I?,,,,, ) Mode ( Deprecated ) - A normal mode where the subscripts m and n added to the

abbreviations TE ( TM ) are assigned by observing the cross-sectional variation of the mainly transverse electric (magnetic ) field vectors. a) In a rectangular waveguide subscripts m and n, in that order, indicate the number of half-period variations of the mainly transverse field vector along paths parallel to the wide and narrow walls respectively.
NOTE- In some countries, the reverse convention is used, the m and n paths being parallel to the narrow and wide walls respectively.

b) In a circular waveguide subscript m indicates the number of fullperiod variations of the mainly transverse field vector along a circular path concentric with the wall, and subscript n indicates the number of reversals of the same vector along a radial path, p!%s one.
3.2.12 TILmnl, ( TMnnp ) Mode ( in a Waveguide Cavity ) - A mode of resonance in a uniform waveguide closed by two metal planes perpendicular to the axis, where the subscripts m and n identify a normal mode in the waveguide and p indicates the number of half-period variations for the same vector along the waveguide axis between the two metal planes.

3.2.13 Dodinant Mode; Fundamental Mode ( Deprecated ) - The mode of propagation which has the lowest critical frequency in a given uniform waveguide. 3.2.14 Evanescent Mode ( in a Waveguide ); Cut-@7 Mode ( Deprecated) A waveguide mode such that the magnitude of the field vectorsdiminish rapidly along the longitudinal axis of the waveguide and their phases are independent of the position along the axis.
3.2.15 Degenerate Mode ( in a Uniform Transmission Line ) - One Of a Set Of modes of propagation having the same exponential variation of the field Components along the longitudinal axis of a uniform transmission line, but having different configuration in any transverse CrOSS-Section. 3.2.16

Degenerate

Mode ( in a Cavity

Resonator ) -

One Of Set Of modes

of resonance having the same natural frequency. 8

3.2.17 Waveguide Below Cut-Off; Evanescent Waveguide ( Deprecared ) Cut-Of Waveguide ( Deprecated ) - A waveguide used below the waveguide

cut-off frequency.
3.2.18 Over Moded Waveguide - A waveguide used for transmission in a single mode of propagation but which is capable of transmission in more

than onk mode of.propagation

at the same frequency.

3.2.19 Multimode Waveguide - A waveguide used for transmission is more than one mode of propagation at the same frequency. of an electromagnetic 3.2.20 Mode Conversion - The transformation wave from one mode of propagation to one or more other modes. 3.3 Polarization of Waves and fields
3.3.1 Polarization ( of a Wave or Field Vector ) - The property of a sinusoidal electromagnetic wave or field vector defined at a tied point in space by the direction of the electric flux density vector or any specified field vector; when this direction varies with time the property may be characterized by the locus described by the extremity of the considered field vector.

3.3.2 Polarization ( of a Degenerate .Mode ) - The polarization of a specific field vector of a particular mode within a set of degenerate modes.
NOTE - The main application of this concept is to waveguide having circuit or square cross-sections, where there are two independent modes of propagation. In these particular cases, the polarization of the mode may be taken as that of the electric field strength vector on an axis of symmetry of the waveguide.

3.3.3 Elliptical ( Circular ) ( Linear ) Polarization - A polarization for which the extremity of the electric flux density vector of a specified field vector at a fixed point in space describes a fixed ellipse (circle ) ( straight line ). 3.3.4 Elliptically ( Circularly ) (Linearly ) Polarized Pertaining to a wave or field vector for which the extremity of the electric flux density vector of the specified field vector at a fixed point in space describes a fixed. ellipse ( circle ), ( straight line ). 3.3.5 Direction of Polarization ( in a Waveguide ) a) The direction of the electric flux density vector if this direction is constant in a transverse cross-section of a waveguide. b) The direction of the electric flux density vector of a mode at, or close to the intersection of two axes of symmetry, if these axes are the only axes of symmetry at right angles of the mode in any transverse cross-sections.
9

Is : 1885( Part LVI ) - 1981 3.3.6 Polarization Ellipse - The ellipse described by the extremity of the electric flux density vector or of the specified field vector of an elliptically polarized wave or field.

3.3.7 Axial Ratio polarization ellipse.

The ratio of the major axis to the minor axis of a The plane containing the polarization

3.3.8 Plane of Polarization ellipse or circle.
Non! - In the flux density vector polarization.

case of a linearly polarized wave, the plain containing the electric and the direction of propagation may be considered as the plain of

3.3.9 Polarization Ratio ( of a Field Vector ) - The ratio of the two complex numbers that represent the components of a field vector along two orthogonal directions in the plane of polarization.

3.3.10 Polarization Ratios ( of a Degenerate Mode ) - The ratio of the coefficients of the linear combinations of independent modes of propagation that represents a degenerate mode.
NOTE 1 - If there are exactly n independent the most n-1 independent ratios that describe degenerate mode. modes of propagation there wijl be at completely the polarization of a given two indeof a given

NOTE 2 - In a waveguide with square or circular cross-section there are pendent modes of propagation. and a single ratio describes the polarization degenerate mode.

33.11 Orthogonal Polarization; Cross Polarization a) The polarization of an elliptically polarized wave or circularly polarized wave for which the electric flux density vector at a given point in space rotates in the same plane and in an opposite sense to that of a reference elliptically polarized wave of the same direction of propagation, the axial ratios of both polarization ellipses being the same and their major axis at right angles. b) The polarization of a linearly polarized wave for which the. electric flux density vector at a given point in space is normal to that of a reference linearly polarized. wave of different or same direction of propagation.
NOTE- The term `orlhogonai polarization' or `cross poiarizatioh' is also used to describe the state of two electromagneric waves which show mutually orthogonal polarizations at a given point m space.

33.12 Orthogonal Modes - Two modes for which the total crossing any transverse cross-section is &qua1to the total flux, through that cross-section, of the sum of the individual Poynting vectors of the modes; in other tern% 10

IS : 1885 ( Part LVI ) - 1981,

the total flux across that cross-section, of the sum of the two cross-products --f --f 3 E1 x gS + E, x H, in the total Poynting vector, is zero. 3.3.13 Right-Hand ( Left-Hand ) Polarization; Clockwise ( Anti-clockwise ) Polarization - Polarization such that the electric flux density vector or a
specified field vector rotates in function of time in a clockwise ( anti-clockwise ) sense in any fixed plane normal to the direction of propagation or to a specified reference direction, as seen by an observer looking in this direction. The reference direction shall be specified when the direction of propagaNOTE tion is parallel to the plane of polarization. 3.3.14 Right-Hand ( Left-Hand) Polarized Wave; Clockwise ( Anti-ciockwise ) PoIarized Wave - An elliptically or circularly polarized wave in

which the electric flux density vector, observed in any fixed plane normal to the direction of propagation, whilst looking in this direction, rotates with time in a right-hand or clockwise ( left-hand or anti-clockwise ) sense.
NOTE - For a right-hand ( left-hand ) circularly polarized plane wave: the ends of the electric vectors drawn from any points along a straight line normal to the plane of the wave front, form, at any instant, a left-hand ( right-hand ) helix.

3.4 Wave Quantities

and Characteristics

in Transmission

Lines

3.4.1 Waveguide Wavelength; Guide Wavelength ( Deprecated ) - For a travelling wave in a uniform waveguide at a given frequency and for a given mode, the distance along the longitudinal axis between adjacent points at which a field component differs in phase by 2n radians.

3.4.2 Wave Number - The reciprocal of the waveguide wavelength or the reciprocal of the wavelength for a plane wave.
NOTE 2x/x is used sometimes, instead of l/x.

3.4.3 Critical Frequency ( of a Mode in a Waveguide ); Mode Cut-Of Frequency - That frequency in a given lossless waveguide, below which a

travelling wave in a particular mode of propagation cannot exist. 3.4.4 Critical Wavelength ( of a Mode in a Wavegtiide ); Mode Cut-off Wavelength - That free space wavelength corresponding to the critical frequency for a mode in a waveguide. 3.4.5 ( Waveguide ) Cut-Of Frequency - That frequency below which the dominant mode cannot exist in a given uniform waveguide. 3.4.6 Natural Frequency ( in a Cavity ) - Any frequency at which free oscillation can exist in a cavity resonator when the excitation has been removed.
Nore -The natural frequency may be expressed as a complex number, the logarithmic decrement due to losses constituting the imaginarv part thereof. 11

IS : 1885( Part LVI ) - 1981 3.4.7 Resonance Frequency ( in a Cavity ) - In a cavity resonator the real part of the natural frequency of a particular mode of resonance.

3.4.8 Normalized Complex Wave Amplitude; ( Complex ) Wave Amplitude ( Deprecated ) - At a given point in a transmission line or waveguide, the complex ratio of a specified field vector component in an electromagnetic wave in a given mode to the same field vector component in a reference wave in the same mode.
NOTE 1 - For a mode of propagation, the reference wave may be one that carries unit power and in which a specified field component has zero phase at a specified Usually, the transverse component of point in the reference transverse cross-section. the electric field vector at the centre point of the reference cross-section is chosen for that purpose. For an evanescent mode, the power carried by the wave is zero. One Nors2can then make the integral of the longitudinal complex Poynting vector, over the reference cross-section, equal to ttie imaginary unit, or use any other well-defined normalization. NOTE 3 - It is preferable to consider separately the modes of propagation and the evanescent modes because the normalized complex wav6 amplitude concept is mostly applied to the former. In rare cases where the scattering matrix has to be extended to evanescent No-m4modes, it is better to give the user freedom to choose and define his own'reference waves.

3.4.9 Propagation Constant ( for a Mode ); Propagation Coeficient (for a Mode ) ( Deprecated ) - For a given mode at a given frequency in a trans-

mission line, the natural logarithm of the ratio of a specified field vector component at one transverse cross-section to that at another transverse cross-section, at unit distance from the first one in the direction of propagation, when the transmission line 5is infinite in length or terminated in its characteristic impedance. 3.4.10 Attenuation Constant 3.4.11 Phase Constant The real part of the propagation constant.
The imaginary part of the propagation constant.

3.4.12 Electrical Length ( of a Waveguide EIement or Component ) - The iength of an equivalent waveguide expressed in waveguide wavelengths which would provide the same total phase shift as a given waveguide, element or component at the frequency of interest.. 3.4.13 Phase Velocity ( in a Transmission Line ) - For a given mode of propagation at a single frequency, the velocity of an cquiphase surface along a transmission line. 3.4.14 Envelope Delay - The time of propagation between two points of a wave envelope representing a signal in a transmission system. 12

Is : 1885 ( Part LVI ) - 1981
The envelope delay is significant only if the envelope is relatively NOTE Itorted by the transmission system.
tely

undis-

NOTE 2 -

The envelope delay is equal to the group delay if the latter is

constant for all the

significantspectral componentsof the signal.

approximaThe ratio

3.415 Envelope Velocity ( in a Untform Transmission Line ) of the path length to the envelope delay for that path length.

3.4.16 Group Delay - The rate of change with angular frequency of the total phase shift at a given frequency through a transmission system. 3.4.17 Group Velocity ( in a Uniform Transmission Line ) the path length to the group delay for that. path length. 3.5 Power and Energy of Waves
in

The ratio of

Transmission Lines

The surface integral of the complex Poynting vector over a transverse cross-section of a transmission line. 3.5.2 Average Power ( in a Transmission Line ) - For a periodic wave, the time average of the instantaneous power passing through a given transverse cross-section of a transmission line in an interval equal to the fundamental period. 3.5.3 Instantaneous Peak Power ( in a Transmission ) - The maximum instantaneous power passing through a given transverse cross-section of a transmission line during the interval of interest. 3.5.4 Direction ofPropagation of Energy ( in a Transmission Line ) direction of the time-average Poynting vector at a fixed point.
NOTE 1 - In a uniform transmission line, the direction often taken along the longitudinal axis. of propagation

3.5.1 Complex Power ( in a Transmission Line ) -

The

of energy is

NOTE 2 - In a uniform lossless waveguide, the direction of propagation of energy at every point of a transverse cross-section is parallel to the longitudinal axis.

3.5.5 Absorption - In a propagation medium, the conversion of electromagnetic wave energy into another form of energy, for instance heat.

3.5.6 Attenuation ( in a Transmission Line ) - The power reduction along a transmisson line for the mode or modes under consideration, usually expressed quantitatively as the ratio of an input power at the initial point to the corresponding output power at the final point.
NOT@The attenuation is generally expressed in decibels.

3.5.7 Insertion Loss ( Gain) - Resulting from the insertion of a network into a transmission system, the ratio of the power delivered to that part of

13

IS :

1885 ( Part LVI ) - 1981

the system following the network, before (after) insertion of the network, to the power delivered to that same part after ( before) insertion of the network.
NOTE-

The insertion loss ( gain ) is generally expressed in decibels.

3.5.8 Mode Conversion Loss ( Gain ) a mode conversion.
NOTE -

The loss ( gain ) of power due to

The m6de conversion loss ( gain ) is generally expressed in decibels. Transmission and Transfer Characteristics in

3.6 Impedances, Reflection, Transmission Lines

3.6.1 Characteristic Impedance ( of a Transmission Line or Waveguide ) A quantity defined for a mode of propagation at a given frequency in a

specific uniform transmission Jine or uniform waveguide by one of the three following relations: where Z is the complex characteristic impedance, S the complex power and U and I are the values, usually complex, respectively of a voltage and a current conventionally defined for each type of mode by analogy with transmission line equations.
Examples: a) For a parallel-wire transmission line, U and I can be uniquely defined and the three equations are consistent. If the transmission

line is lossless, the characteristic impedance is real. b) For a waveguide, the conventional definitions for U and I depend on the type of mode and generally lead to three different values of the characteristic impedance. c) For a circular waveguide in the dominant mode TE,,, U = rms voltage along the diameter where the electric field vector is a maximum, I = the rms longitudinal current.
d) For a rectangular waveguide in the dominant mode TE,,, U = the rms voltage between midpoints of the two conductor faces normal to the electric field, Z = the rms IongitudinaJ

current flowing on one surface normal to the electric field. 3.6.2 Characteristic Wave Impedance ( of a Transmission Line ) - The ratio of the transverse component of the electric field strength to that of the magnetic field strength at a point in a specified transverse cross-section of a transmission line. 14

IS : 1885( Part LM ) - 1981
In a uniform transmission line with homogeneous NOTE fhe characteristic wave impedance is the same at every point. transverse cross-section

3.63 Normalized Impedance - The ratio of an impedance to the characteristic impedance of a given transmission line.

3.6.4 Normalized Admittance - The reciprocal of the normalized impedance of a given transmission line. 3.6.5 Surfbce Impedance ( of an Isotropic Material ) - The ratio of the electric field strength component parallel to the current along the surface of a propagation medium consisting of an isotropic material to the current per unit width along that surface. 3.6.6 Skin Depth - At a given frequency, the depth at which the current density in a conducting material is reduced to l/e time the surface current density. 3.6.7 ( Amplitude ) Transmission Factor - ( in a Transmission Line ); ( Amplitude ) TranQmission Coeficient ( Deprecated) - The ratio of the normalized complex wave amplitude of the transmitted wave at one port or transverse cross-section to that of the incident wave at another port or transverse cross-section of a transmission line. 3.6.8 ( Amplitude ) Reflection Factor ( in a Transmission Line j; ( Amplitude) Reflection Coe#cient ( Deprecated ); Voltage Rejection Coeficienl ( Deprecated ) -The ratio of the normalized complex wave amplitude of the

reflected wave to that of the incident wave at a port or transverse cross section of a transmission line. 3.6.9 Standing Wave Ratio ( in a Transmission Line ); SWR ( Abbreviation ) Voltage Standing Wave Ratio; VSWR ( Abbreviation ) - The ratio, along a transmission line, of a maximum to an adjacent minjmum magnitude of a particular field component of a standing wave.
NOTE 1 -

amplitude

This ratio is equal to: ( 1 + r )/( 1 -- r ) whxe r is the modulus of the reflection factor.

NOTE 2 - The standing wave ratio expressed as the reciprocal of the ratio defined above is occasionally used.

3.6.10 Power Transmission Factor ( in a Transmission Line ); Power Transmission Coeficient ( Deprecated) - The ratio of the power of the transmitted wave at a specified port of transverse cross-section to the power of the incident wave at another specified port of transverse cross-section of a transmission line. 3.6.11 Power Rejection Factor ( in a Transmission Line); Power Reflection Coeflcient ( Deprecated ) - The ratio of the power of the reflected wave to the power of the incident wave at a specified port or transverse cross-section of a transmission line. 15

IS : 1885 ( Part LVI ) - 1981 3.6.12 Scattering Matrix - A square array of complex number consisting of the amplitude transmission factors and the amplitude reflection factors at the ports of a multiport structure.
NOTE - The scattering matrix is the array of the coetiicients of the linear equations which expressed the normalized complex wave of the amplitude transmitted wave and the reflected wave at each port 1, 2, i. . . . . . ..A considered as an output port in terms of the normalized complex wave amplitudes of the incident waves to the ports 1, 2, j, n considered as input ports.

3.6.13 Scattering Parameter; Scattering Coeficient;

Stj ( Symbol ) -

An

element of a scattering matrix. Nare - The subscript j and i of a typical scattering parameter Sg refer to the input and output ports respectively.
4. WAVEGUIDE

CONNECTIONS

4.1 Flanges and Flange Joints 4.1.1 Waveguide Flange - A flange designed to be mounted on the end of a waveguide and to accept means for aligning with and clamping to a mating flange.

4.1.2 Socket Flange - A waveguide flange having an aperture on its mating face identical to that of the waveguide interior and having on its other face, self jigging features for aligning the flange aperture with the waveguide interior. 4.1.3 Through Flange - A waveguide flange in which the plane of the waveguide aperture is coincident with the mating surface of the flange.
Flange -

4.1.4 Flat Flange; Plain Flange; Contact Flange; Plane Flange; Cover A waveguide flange having a flat mating face.
NOTE- The term cover with a choke flange. flange is used to designate a flat flange to be assembled

4.1.5 Choke Flange; Choke Connector ( Deprecated) - A waveguide flange designed with auxiliary transmission line elements to provide without metallic contact the almost complete transfer of power within a given frequency band when used with a flat fiange.

4.1.6 FIanFe Assembly -- A waveguide flange mounted on the end of a waveguide for the purpose of aligning and connecting the waveguide aperture to a mating waveguide aperture. 4.1.7 Flange Joint; Flange Coupling ( Deprecated ); Coupling ( Deprecated in this Sense) - A flange assembly fastened to a second flange assembly or its functional equivalent for the purpose of mechanically connecting and 16

1S:1885(PartLvI)-1981 aligning two waveguide apertures to provide efficient power transfer between the waveguides.
cated)

4.1.8 Plain Joint; Contact Coupb'ng (Deprecated ); PIain Coupling ( Depre- A flange joint composed to two flat flanges.

4.1.9Butt Joint; Contact Joint - A flange joint ensuring metallic continuity between the inner walls of the waveguides. 4.1.10 Choke Joint; Choke Coupling ( Deprecated ) posed to a choke flange and a flat flange. 4.1.11 Flange Type the flange outline. A flange joint comdetermined by A

A waveguide flange characterization

4.1.12 Flange Stvle `C,; Pressurizable Choke Flange ( Deprecated ) waveguide flange with a groove for a waveguide gasket.

4.1.13 Flange Style `P'; Pressurizable Flange ( Deprecated j - A waveguide flange having a groove for a waveguide gasket but no choke groove. 4.1.14 Flange Style `U'; Unpressurizable Flange ( Deprecated ) - A waveguide flange having neither a groove for a waveguide gasket nor a choke groove. NOTE - Sometimes this flange is used with a flat gasket. that can provide electrical sealing, gas-tight sealing or both. 4.1.15 Waveguide Gasket - An insert between waveguide flanges intended to serve one or more of the following primary purposes: a) To reduce gas leakage affecting internal waveguide pressure, b) To prevent intrusion of foreign material into the waveguide, and c) To reduce power leakage and arcing. 4.1.16 Metal Plate Air Seal Gasket - A metal waveguide gasket intended to reduce gas leakage affecting internal waveguide pressure. 4.1.17 Plate Gasket - A thick metallic plate having seals built into its faces, a very short waveguide section normal to those faces, and locating bolt holes normal to those faces to allow for mounting between mating waveguide flanges. 4.1.18 Knurled Plate Gasket; Knurled Gasket - A plate gasket having a knurled surface surrounding the waveguide openings of the gasket to ensure contact between mating waveguide flanges. 4.1.19 Waveguide Shim - A thin resilient .metal sheet inserted'between waveguide flanges to ensure electrical continuity. 17

IS : l&5
or

( Part LVI ) - 1981

A device for joining two transmission lines of identical different transverse cross-sections that are terminated with connected devices of different types or dimensions.
NOTE- A waveguide adapter may consist of a conveniently short length of waveguide having the required mating flanges. If the waveguides to be connected have different transverse cross-sections the adapter may be also include a matching conver. sion section. If the modes of propagation also differ, the adapter may function v a mode converter.

4.1.20 Adapter -

4.2 Junctions, Bends and Corners 4.2.1 Waveguide Bend ( Corner ); Elbow - A section of waveguide in which the direction of the longitudinal axis changes gradually ( abruptly ).
Nope -The waveguide corner is sometimes referred to as practice is deprecated.

a waveguide bend but this

4.2.2 H-Plane Bend ( Corner ); H-Bend ( Corner ) - A waveguide bend ( comer ) in which the longitudinal axis of the guide remains in a plane parallel to the electric field vectors throughout the bend ( corner ).

4.2.3 E-Plane Bend ( Corner ); E-Bend ( Corner ) - A waveguide bend ( corner ) in which the longitudinal axis of the guide remains in a plane parallel to the electric field vectors throughout the bend ( corner ).
4.2.4 Binomial Corner A composite waveguide bend formed by more than two waveguide corners in succession approximately a quarter of a wavelength apart, each causing by Itself an amplitude reflection factor approximately proportional in magnitude to a coefficient of a binomial series. NOTEcornus. The exponent of the binomial will be ( n 1 ) where n is the number of

4.2.5 T Junction; Tee Junction; Tee - A junction of waveguide in which the longitudinal waveguide axes form a `T'.

4.2.6 E ( H ) Plane T Junction; Series ( Shunt ) T - A waveguide T junction in which the electric field vectors of dominant mode in all arms are parallel ( orthogonal ) to the plane containing the longitudinal axis pf the arms.
4.2.7 Y Junction; Wye Junction -

A junction of waveguides in which the

longitudinal axis forms a `Y'.
4.3 Wavegoide Transitions 43.1 Tapered Waveguide - A waveguide whose transverse cross-section dimensions change progressively with distance along its longitudinal axis.

IS:1885(PartLVI)-198! ' 4.3.2 *Waveguide Twist - A section of waveguide in which there is pro gressive rotation of the transverse cross-section about the longitudinal axis.

43.3 Step Twist -A device formed by abruptly rotating about the waveguide longitudinal axis one or more waveguide sections, each normally a quarter wavelength long. 4.3.4 Binomial Twist - A step twist such that the amplitude reflection r'actor of each step is proportional in magnitude to a coefficient of a binomial series.
NOTE - i-hi: exponent of the binomial will be ( n abrupt rotations.

1) where n is the number of

4.3.5 Quarter- Wave Transformer - A quarter-wave length of transmission line that serves as an impedance transformer.

4.3.6 Crossbar Transformer; Bar and Post Transformer; Crossbar Transition - A transition from a coaxial line to a rectangular waveguide in which the outer conductor of the coaxial line terminates in a circular hole in one of the broad walls of the waveguide, and the inner conductor partially traverses the waveguide to connect with a metal rod perpendicurar to and connected to each of the narrow walls. 4.3.7 Door-knob Transformer - A transition from a coaxial line to a rectangular waveguide in which the outer conductor of the coaxial line terminates in a circular hole in one of the broad walls of the waveguide and the inner conductor traverses the waveguide with a progressive increase in diameter and terminates in the opposite side. 4.3.8 Stepped-Impedance Transformer - A waveguide whose transverse cross-section dimensions change abruptly in a number of steps with each section between steps usually being a quarter-wave length long. 5. WAVEGUlDE COMPONENTS
5.1 Terminations and Loads 5.1.1 Piston; Plunger; Adjustable Short Circuit - In a transmission line, a longitudinally movable obstacle which reflects essentially all of the incident energy.

5.1.2 Contact Piston; Contact Phu#ger contact to the walls of a waveguide.

A piston having rubbing metallic

5.1.3 Choke Piston: Choke Piunger - A piston in which metallic contact between the edges of the reflecting surface and the waveguide walls is replaced by a low impedance path created by a choke system. 19

IS : 1885 ( Part LVI ) - 1981 51.4 Quarter- Wave Contact Piston; Bucket Piston; Bucket Plunger - A contact piston in which rubbing contact is made at the free ends of thin quarter-wave length long metal strips which extend from the plunger face and lie close to the waveguide.walls.
NOTE - The actual contact is thus made in a region of low current and high voltage, so that the effects of contact resistance are minimized. 51.5 Port - A place of access in a device or network where energy may be supplied or withdrawn or where the device or network variables may be observed or measured. NOTE- In the case of a transmission line or waveguide, a port is characterized by a specified reference plane and a specified mode, as a separate port is assigned symbolically to each independent mode.

5.1.6 Open Circuit Termination - An essentially non-radiating transmission line termination which provides an infinite impedance or zero admittance in a specified reference plane. 5.1.7 Short Circuit Termination - An essentially non-radiating transmission line termination which provides a zero impedance or infinite admittance in a spectied reference plane. 5.1.0 Mismatched Termination - A transmission line termination which reflects a specified amount of energy. 5.1.9 Matched Termination; Matched Load nation which does not reflect any energy. A transmission line termi-

5.1.10 Sliding Shutter - A movable metallic plate placed between two waveguide flanges, in one position the plate acts as a short-circuit termination and its other position permits free and interrupted passage of incident waves. 5.1.11 Dummy Load - A dissipative, non-radiating transmission line termination that simulates the immittance characteristics of the actual load, for example, the load presented by an antenna. 5.1.12 Sltiing Load - A dissipative transmission line termination which is continuously movable along the transmission line.
'

5.1.13 Water Load - A matched termination in which the electromagnetic energy is absorbed by water. 5.2 Attenuators 5.2.1 Attenuator - A two-port device designed to supply at the output port a power less than the incident power at the input port. 20

TS:l885(PartLvI)-1981 5.23 Resistive Attenuator; Absorptive Attenuator - An attenuator employing a dissipative mat'erial. 5.2.3 Pad Attenuator; Bugler Attenuator ( Deprecated ) A resistive attenuator inserted between two elements of a transmission system to reduce interaction. 5.2.4 Vane Attenuator - A variable resistive attenuator in rectangular wave-guide in which an absorbing plate parallel to the narrow side of the waveguide can be displaced in a direction perpendicular to its plane. 5.2.5 Flap Attenuator - A variable resistive attenuator in which a plate of absorbing material is introduced through a longitudinal slot in a waveguide wall by rotating the plate about a pivot near one end of the slot. 5.2.6 Guillotine Attenuator - A variable resistive attenuator in which a plate of absorbing material is introduced through a longitudinal slot in a waveguide wall by translating it in a direction perpendicular to the axis of the waveguide. 5.2.7 Disc Attenuator - A variable resistive of attenuator comprising a slotted waveguide section having an eccentrically pivoted disc of absorbing material which may be inserted into the waveguide with variable penetration. 5.2.8 Rotary Vane Attenuator - A variable resistive attenuator comprising a circular waveguide section operating in the TE,, mode in which an absorbing septum located diametrically can rotate about the waveguide axis.
NOTE - When used with a rectangular waveguide such a device is provided with appropriate transitions.

5.2.9 Reactive Attenuafor - A non-absorbing attenuator attenuation by reflecting a portion of the incident power.
or

which provides

5.2.10 Cut-Off Attenuator - A reactive attenuator in the form of a fixed variable length of waveguide used below the waveguide cut-off frequency.

5.2.11 Piston Attenuator - A variable cut-off attenuator in which a conpling device is carried on a piston. 5.2.12 Residual Attenuation; Residual Loss ( Deprecated ) - The attenuation in a variable attenuator when it is set to its minimum attenuation position. 5.3 Reactive Elements 5.3.1 Waveguide Tuner - An adjustable waveguide impedance transformer. 21

IS :

1885 ( Part LVI ) - 1981

5.3.2 Tuning Screw; Tuning Probe - A screw or post inserted with variable penetration into the electromagnetic field of a transmission line to cause reflection in a controlled manner.

5.3.3 Tuning Slug - A mean for varying the resonance frequency introducing a slug of material into a resonant structure.

by

5.3.4 Slug Tuner - An impedance transformer comprising one or more longitudinally adjustable pieces of metal or dielectric in a transmission line. 5.3.5 Slide Screw Tuner - A twing screw adjustable in position along the longitudinal axis of a transmission line. 5.3.6 E-H Tuner - A waveguide tuner comprising an hybrid T whose E plane and H plane arms are terminated by adjustable short circuits. 5.3.7 Mat'rhing Section - A length of transmission line of modified transverse cross-section or with metal or dielectric inserts, used for impedance transformation. 5.3.8 Iris ( in a Waveguide ) - A partial obstruction consisting of one or more metal or dielectric thid plates at a transverse cross-section of a waveguide used for impedance transformation. 5.3.9 Resonant Iris; Resonant Window - An iris designed to pass without attenuation in a waveguide incident waves at a particular frequency. 5.3.10 Waveguide Window - A gas or liquid tight barrier or waveguide cover designed to be essentially transparent to the transmission of electromagnetic waves. 5.3.11 Waveguide Post - A cylindrical rod placed in a transverse crosssection of a waveguide and behaving substantially as a shunt susceptance. 5.3.12 Stub Tuner, Stub - An adjustable length of transmission line shorted or open-circuited, connected electrically in parallel or in series with the main line. 5.3.13 Coupling Loop; Loop ( Deprecated ) - A small single turn inductor which is inserted into a transmission line, a cavity resonator or a waveguide for the purpose of transferring power to or from an external circuit. 53.14 Coupling Aperture; Coupling Slot; Coupling Hole - An aperture in the wall of a cavity resonator or a waveguide for the purpose of transferring energy to or from an external circuit. 5.3.15 ( Coupling ) Probe - A probe which is inserted into a transmission line, a cavity resonator or a waveguide for the purpose of transferring energy to or from an external circuit. 22

Is:1885(PartLvI)-1981 5.3.16 Choke - An impedance transforming device for preventing within a given frequency band from taking an undesired path. 5.4 Directional Couplers 5.4.1 Coupling systems. A means or a device for transferring power between energy

5.4.2 Directional Coupler A four port device consisting of two transmission lines coupled together in such a manner that a single travelling wave in any one transmission line will induce a single travelling wave in the other, the direction of propagation of the latter wave being dependent upon that of the former. 5.4.3 Directivity ( of a Directional Coupler ) The ratio, usually expressed in decibels, of the power output measured at the appropriate port of one of the transmission lines of a directional coupler, when power is fed into the other transmission line in the preferred direction, to the power output measured at the same place when the same power is fed into the same line in the opposite direction, matched terminations being connected to all ports. 5.4.4 Hybrid Junction - A four port device in which power fed into any port is equally divided between two other ports having matched terminations; furthermore, power fed into the remaining port is equally divided between the same two ports. 5.4.5 Hybrid T: E-H Tee - A hybrid junction composed of an E plane T junction, an H plane T junction where in the side arms intersect at a common point in the main guide. 5.4.6 Magic T - A hybrid T provided with internal matching elements making it reflectionless for an incident wave at any pact when the remaining ports have matched terminations. consisting of a trans5.4.7 Hybrid Ring; Rat Race - A hybrid junction mission line formed into a rectangular or circular path into which lead four transmission lines appropriately spaced around the rectangular or circular configuration. 5.4.8 Quadrature Hybrid - A hybrid junction which has the property that the wave leaving the two output ports, each having a matched termination, are in phase quadrature. 5.4.9 Three dB Coupler; 3 dB Coupler - A directional coupler in which one half of the power incident on one port of one transmission line is diverted to one port of the other transmission line. 23

1s : 1885( Part LVI ) - 1981 5.410 Short SIot Coupler; Riblet Coupler - A three d0, coupler in which two waveguides are coupled by an electrically short single aperture in their common narrow wall.

5.4.11 Bethe Hole Coupler - A directional coupler in which two skewed waveguides are coupled by a circular coupling aperture in their contacting broad walls. 5.5 Miscellaneous Components 5.5.1 Mode Converter; Mode Changer ( Deprecated ); Mode Tramformer ( Deprecated ) - A device for converting an electromagnetic wave from one mode of propagation to another. 5.5.2 Mode Filter - A device designed to pass electromagnetic waves along a waveguide in one or more selected modes of propagation, and substantially to reject waves in other modes. 5.5.3 Resonant Mode Filter - A mode filter which selects a desired mode of propagation by using a resonant structure. 5.5.4 Reflection Mode Filter - A mode filter which selects a desired mode of propagation by reflecting other modes. 5.5.5 Echo Box - In a radar, a calibrated cavity resonator which stores part of the transmitted pulse energy and gradually feeds this energy into the receiving system after completion of the pulse transmission. 5.5.6 Detector Mount - A terminated transmission line section loaded with a detecting device such as a semiconductor diode provided with an output for the detected signal. 5.5.7 Crystar Mixer - A crystal diode mount which can be fed simultaneously from a local oscillator and a signal source, to produce a frequency translation on the signal. 5.5.8 Balanced Mixer ( in a Waveguide ) - A hybrid junction with crystal diodes in one pair of uncoupled arms, the arms of the remaining pair being fed respectively from a signal source and a local oscillator; the resulting signals from the diodes are added in such a manner that the effects of noises issuing from the crystal mixers are minimized at the common output., 5.5.9 Phase Changer; Phase Shifter - An essentially lossless device for adjusting the phase of a forward travelling wave at the output port of the device relative to the phase at the input port. 5.5.10 Rotary Phase Changer; Rotary Phase Shifter - A phase changer that alters rhe phase of a transmitted wave in proportion to the rotation of one of its elements generally consisting of a rotating half-wave plate located between two fixed quarter-wave plates. 24

IS:1885( PartLvI)-

1981

5.5.11 Half- Wave ( Quarter- Wave ) Plate ( in a Waveguide ) - A device, in a waveguide capable of propagating two waves in orthogonal modes having the same phase constant, which introduces a phase-shift of z [ 742 ] radians of one wave with respect to the other. 5.5.12 Duplexer - A transmission line device allowing the same antenna to be used for transmission and reception. 55.13 T-B Cell; Transmitter Blocker Cell - A gas-filled device which acts as a short circuit in a transmission line when ionized but as an open circuit when non-ionized. 5.5.14 T-R Cell; Transmit-Receive Cell- A gas-filled device which acts as a short circuit in a transmission line when ionized but is transparent to low power energy when non-ionized. 5.5.15 T-R Switch; Transmit-Receive Switch;. Radar Duplexer - A device comprising one or more T-B cells or T-R cells for automatically connecting a common antenna to the transmitter during the transmitting period and to the receiver during the receiving period no matter what the transmitter impedance may be, the receiver also being protected from the high power of the transmitter. 5.5.16 Anti-TR Cell - A gas-filled device, employed when a common transmitting and receiving antenna is used, which automatically decouples the transmitter from the antenna during the receiving period. 5.5.17 Waveguide Switch - A device in a waveguide system for stopping or diverting electromagnetic waves as desired. 5.5.18 Ring-Switch - A waveguide switch in which the switching element is one or several resonant metallic rings. 5.5.19 Squeeze Section - A length of rectangular waveguide so constructed as to permit variation of the broad dimensions to obtain a corresponding alteration in the electrical length. 5.5.20 Line Stretcher physical length. A section of transmission line having an adjustable

5.5.21 Line Lengthener - A device for altering the electrical length of a transmission line without altering the physical length between its terminal ports. 5.5.22 Waveguide Filter - A section of waveguide in which one or more tuning elements have been included to provide a desired frequency characteristic. 5.5.23 DeIay Line - A section of transmission line which by virtue of its electrical length deliberately introduces a specified group delay. 25

IS : 1885 ( Part LVI ) - 1981 5.5.24 Power Divider; Power Splitter - A multiport devihe where the power of a source connected to one of the ports is distributed in given proportions among the other ports. 5.5.25 Rotary Joint; Rotating Joint - A joint for efficient transmission of electromagnetic waves between two transmission lines designed to permit the continuous mechanical rotation of one with respect to the other. 5.5.26 Bead ( in a Coaxial Line ) - An electrically short dielectric support for the inner conductor of a coaxial line. 5.5.27 Artificial Dielectric - A composite material comprising conducting or dielectric elements distributed throughout a dielectrical to produce a desired permittivity. 6. NON-RECIPROCAL EFFECTS AND DEVICES

6.1 Gyromagnetism and Non-reciprocal Effects 6.1.1 Gyromagnetic Efict - The phenomenon by which the magnetization of a material or medium subjected to a magnetostatic field upon dist.urbance relaxes back to equilibrium by damped precessional motion about the direction of that field, and by which this precessional motion can be maintained by an alternating component added to the magnetostatic field. 6.1.2 Gyromagnetic Medium ( Material ) - A medium ( material ) capable of displaying the gyromagnetic effect and in which a tensor permeability characterizes the electromagnetic wave propagation properties. 6.1.3 Faraday E&t; Faraday Rotation - The phenomenon of rotation, around the direction of propagation of the electric flux density vector of a linearly polarized electromagnetic wave when it passes through a gyromagnetic medium magnetized by a magnetostatic field having a component along the direction of propagation.
NOTE- The angle of rotation of the plane of polarization propagation is given by:
a=CIH

around

the directiqn

of

where C = a coefficient which may or may not depend on frequency; it is called in optics the Verdet constant; I = the length of the ray path ,in the gyromagnetic medium; and

H = the algebraicvalue of the magnetic field strength component along the

direction of propagation.

26

IS : 1885 ( Part LVI ) - 1981 6.1.4 Gyromagnetic Ratio; y ( Symbol ) The ratio of the magnetic area

moment to the mechanical gyromagnetic material.

angular momentum

of active particles in a

NOTE- The gyromagnetic ratio may also be defined as the ratio of the magnetic dipole moment to the mechanical angular momentum; this value y is then p@times the value y defined above, t+, being the magnetic constant.

6.1.5 Gyromagnetic Resonance Frequency - For a gyromagnetic material to which a magnetostatic field of large magnitude H and an alternating magnetic field ?f different direction and small amplitude are applied, a frequency of resonance given, in the International System of units ( SI ) by

y is the gyromagnetic ratio of the material,
po

is the magnetic constant.

NOTE- If the gyromagnetic ratio Y' is defined in terms of the magnetic dipole moment, the formula expressing the gyromagnetic resonance frequency becomes:

6.1.6 Field Displacement - The production by a gyromagnetic effect in a uniform waveguide of two waves of entirely different modes propagating in opposite directions, for instance in a rectangular waveguide partially and asymmetrically filled with a ferrite longitudinal plate.

6.2 Gyromagnetic and Non-reciprocal Devices
6.2.1 Gyromagnetic Device; Gyromagnhtic Resonator; Gyrator ( Deprecated in this Sense ) - A device that utilizes a gyromagnetic material to produce a

gyromagnetic effect for a specific purpose.
6.2.2 Non-reciprocal Phase-Shifter; Directional Phase Changer ( Deprecated ); Directional Phase-Shifter ( Deprecated ) - A two-port device whose

propagation medium provides different phase shifts for the two directions of propagation of waves from one port to the other. 6.2.3 Analogue ( Digital ) Phase-Shifter - A non-reciprocal phase-shifter by which the amount of phase-shift may be changed continuously ( stepwise ). 6.2.4 Non-reriptocal Polarization Rotator; Non-reciprocal Wqve Rotawaveguide structure, usually of circular cross-section, whose propagation medium provides that the plank of polarization, for a linearly
tor -A

27

IS : 1885 ( Part LM ) - 1981 polarized wave, is rotated clockwise in one'direction of propagation and anticlockwise in the opposite direction. 6.2.5 Gyrator - A non-reciprocal phase-shifter which provides phaseshifts differing by x radians for the two opposite directions of propagation. 6.2.6 Circulator; Junction Circulator - A multiport device in which the incident wave to any port is transmitted to the next port according to an or-der of sequence determined by the sense of a static magnetic biasing field.
NOTE 1 -

By reversing the magnetic biasing field, the order of sequence is reversed. This property may be used to switch electromagnetic waves.

NOTE2 -

6.2.7 Phase-Shift

Circulator -

A circulator containing at least one nonA circulator containing at least one

reciprocal phase-shifter. 6.2.8 ( Wave ) Rotation Circulator non-reciprocal polarization rotator.
6.2.9 T ( Y ) Circulator -

A circulator in the form of a T ( Y ) junction. A circulator in the form of a E ( H )

6.2.10 E ( H ) Plane T Circulator pJane T junction.

6.2.11 E ( H) Plane Y Circulator - A circulator in the form of a E ( H ) plane Y junction. 6.2.12 Lumped-Element Circulator - A circulator in which the ports are connected to a network of lumped impedance elements. 6.2.13 Isolator; One-Way Attenuator - A two-port device having much greater attenuation in one direction of propagation than in the opposite direction. 6.2.14 ( Wave ) Rotation Zsolator - An isolator containing at least one non-reciprocal polarization rotator. 6.2.15 Resonance ( Absorption ) Isolator - An isolator whose operation depends upon absorption in a gyromagnetic material at gyromagnetic resonance frequency. 6.2.16 Field-Displacement Zsolator - An isolator whose operation depends upon field displacement in a gyromagnetic material. 6.2.17 Lumped-Element Isolator - An isolator in which the two ports are connected by a network of lumped impedance elements. 6.2.18 Gyromagnetic Filter; YZG Filter ( Deprecated ); Garnet Filter ( Deprecated ) - A filter whose operation depends on a gyromagnetic effect. 6.2.19 Gyromagnetic Power Limiter - A power limiter whose operation depends upon saturation effects in one gyromagnetic material.

IS: 188S(PartLvI)-1981 6.3 Characteristics of Non-reciprocal Devices

6.3.1, Diflerential Phase-ShiJt - The difference in phase-shifts provided in the two opposite directions of propagation by a non-reciprocal phase-shifter. - The use of this tern for other types of phase differences such as between NOTE states in a digital phase-shifter is deprecated.
6.3.2 Forward ( Reverse ) Direction ( in a Circulator or Isolator ) - That direction of propagation between two ports of a circulator or isolator for which attenuation of waves is lower ( higher ) than in the opposite direction.

6.3.3 Forward ( Reverse ) Loss ( in a Cirmlator or Isolator ) - Attenuation of waves in the forward ( reverse ) direction in a circulator or isolator.
NOTE The forward ( reverse ) loss is usually expressed in decibels.

6.3.4 Cross Coupling ( of a Circulator ) - In a circulator having four or more ports, the attenuation between input port and any other port that is, not adjacent to the input port according to the order of sequence fixed for the ports.
NOTE - The cross-coupling between adjacent ports. should not be confused with the reverse loss occurring

6.3.5 Loss Ratio - The ratio of reverse loss to forward loss, along a transmission path in an isolator or a circulator.
No'm The loss ratio is usually expressed in decibels.

29

Is;

1885(PartLv1)-1981 INDEX

This index has been nrepared in accordance numbers are clause numbers.

NOTE -

with IS : 1275-1976..

Index

A
Absorption 3.55 isolator 6.2.15 Absorptive attenuator 52.2 Adapter 4.1.20 Adjustable short circuit 51.1 Admittance, Normalized 3.6.4 Amplitude reflection coefficient 3.68 factor 3.6.8 transmission coefficient 3.6.7 factor 56.7 voltage reelection coefficient 3.6.8 Analogue phase shifter 6.2.3 Anti clockwise polarization 3.3.13 clockwise polarized wave 3.3.14 TR cell 55.16 Aperture, Coupling 53.14 Artificial dielectric 55.27 Assembly. Flange 4.1.6 Attenuation 3.5.6 constant 3.4.10 Residual 5.2.12 Attenuator 5.2.1 Absorptive 5.2.2 Buffer 5.2.3 Cut-off 5.2.10 Disc 5.2.7 Flap 5.2.5 Guillotine 5.2.6 One-way 6.2.13 Pad 5.2.3 Piston 5.2.11 Reactive 5.2.9 Resistive 5.2.2 Rotary vane 5.2.8 Vane 5.2.4 Average power 3.5.2 Axial ratio 3.3.7 B Backward wave 3.1.8 Balanced mixture 5.5.8 Bar and post transformer

Bead 5.5.26 Beam waveguide 2.6 Be;d4(2cy ) ;-$i+; 4.2.3

4.3.6

H-plane 4.2.2 Waveguide 4.2.1 Bendable waveauide 2.20 Bethe hole coupler 5.4.11 Binomial corner 4.2.4 twist 4.3.4 Blocker cell, Transmitter 5.5.13 Box, Echo 5.5.5 Bucket piston 5.1.4 plunger 5.1.4 Buffer attenuator 5.2.3 Butt joint 4.1.9 C Cavity 2.22 mode 3.2.9 resonator 2.22 Waveguide 2.23 Cell Anti-TR 5.5.16 T-B 5.5.13 T-R 5.5.14 Transmit-receive 5.5.14 Transmitter blocker 5.5.13 Changer Mode 55.1 Phase 5.5.9 Rotary phase 5.5.10 Characteristic impedance 3.6.1 wave impedance 3.6.2 Choke 5.3.16 connector 4.15 coupling 4.1.10 flange 4.1.5 joint 4.1.10 piston 5.1.3 plunger 5.1.3 Circular polarization 3.3.3 waveguide 2.5

*Rules for making alphabetical indexes ( first revision ).

30

IS : 1885( Part LVI ) - 1981
Circularly polarized 3.3.4 Circulator 6.2.6 E &Hi ~1;; Y ii.11 Junction 6.2.6 Lumped-element 6.2.12 Phase-shift 6.2.7 Rotation 6.2.8 T (Y) 6.2.9 Wave 6.2.8 Clockwise polarization 3.3.13 polarized wave 3.3.14 Coaxial line 2.11 Semi-rigid 2.21 Coefficient _ Power reflection 3.6.11 Propagation 3.4.9 Scattering 3.6.13 Complex Normalized 3.4.8 power 3.5.1 wave amplitude 3.4.8 Connector, Choke 4.1.5 Constant Attenuation 3.4.10 Phase 3.4.11 Propagation 3.4.9 Contact coupling 4.1.8 flange 4.1.4 joint 4.1.9 oiston 5.1.2 r Quarterwave 5.1.4 plunger 5.1.2 Conversion, Mode 3.2.20 Converter. Mode 5.5.1 Corner ' Binomial 4.2.4 E-bend 4.2.3 E-plane bend 4.2.3 H-bend 4.2.2 H-plane bend 4.2.2 Waveguide bend 4.2.1 Coupler Bethe hole 54.11 Directional 5.4.2 Riblet 5.4.10 Short slot 5.4.10 Three dB 5.4.9 Coupling 5.4.1 aperture 5.3.14 Choke 4.1.10 Contact 4.1.8 Coupling ( Con?d) Cross 6.3.4 hole 5.3.14 loop 5.3.13 Plain 4.1.8 probe 5.3.15 slot 5.3.14 Cover flange 4.1.4 Critical frequency 3.4.3 wavelength 3.4.4 Cross coupling 6.3.4 polarization 3.3.11 Crossbar transformer 4.3.6 transition 4.3.6 Crystal mixture 5.5.7 cut-off attenuator 5.2.10 frequency, Waveguide 3.4.5 mode 3.2.14 D Degenerate mode in a cavity resonator 3.2.16 in a uniform transmission line 3.2.15 Delay Envelope 3.4.14 ;;-~;p~3~4.16 3 Depth, &in 3.6.6 Designation, Mode 3.2.10 Detector mount 5.5.6 Device. Gyromagnetic 6.2.1 Dielectric Artificial 5.5.27 waveguide 2.9 Differential phase-shift 6.3.1 Digital phase-shifter 6.2.3 Direction Forward 6.3.2 of polarization 3.3.5 of propagation 3.1.1 of energy 3.5.4 Directional coupler 5.4.2 phase 6.2.2 changer 6.2.2 shifter 6.2.2 Directivity 5.4.3 Disc attenuator 5.2.7 Displacement, Field 6.1.6 Divider, Power 5.5.24

31

Dominant mode 3.2.13 Door knob transformer 4.3.7 Dummy load 5.1.11 Duple~55.5;2

. .

E E-band corner 4.2.3 Echo box 5.5.5 E-H olane ' c-r circulator 6.2.10 Y circulator 6.2.11 tee 5.4.5 tuner 5.3.6 Elbow 4.2.1 Electrical length 3.4.12 Electromagnetic mode 3.2.1 Ellipse, Polarization 3.3.6 Elliptical polarization 3.3.3 waveguide 2.5 Elliptically polarized ,3.3.4 E mode 3.2.5 Emn mode 3.2.11 Envelope delay 3.4.14 velocity 3.4.15 E-plane bend ( corner ) 4.2.3 Evanescent mode 3.2.14 Exponential transmission line 2.4 F Factor, Power reflection 3.6.11 Faraday effect 6.1.3 rotation 6.1.3 Field displacement 6.1.6 isolator 6.2.16 Filter Garnet 6.2.18 Gyromagnetic 6.2.18 Mode 5.5.2 Reflection mode 5.5.4 Resonant mode 5.5.3 Waveguide 5.5.22 YIG 6.2.18 Flange assembly 4.1.6 Choke 4.1.5 Contact 4.1.4 Cover 4.1.4 Flat 4.1.4 joint 4.1.7

Flange ( Conrd ) Plain 4.1.4 Plane 4.1.4 Pressurizable 4.1.13 choke 4.1.12 Socket 4.1.2 style `C' 4.1.12 `F 4.1.13 `U' 4.1.14 Through 4.1.3 type 4.i.11 Unpressurizable 4.1.14 Waveguide 4.1.1 Flap attenuator 5.2.5 Flat flange 4. I .4 Flexible waveguide 2.19 Forward direction 6.3.2 loss 6.3.3 Frequency Critical 3.4.3 Cut-off, Waveguide 3.4.5 Gyromagnetic resonance 6.1.5 Mode cut-off 3.4.3 Natural 3.4.6 Resonance 3.4.7 Fundamental mode 3.2.13 G Gain Insertion 3.5.7 Mode conversion 3.5.8 Garnet filter 6.2.18 Gasket Knurled 4.1 .18 Knurled plate 4.1.18 Metal plate air seal 4.1.16 Plate 4.1.17 Waveguide 4.1.15 Group delay 3.4.16 velocity 3.4.17 Guide wavelength 3.4.1 Guided wave 3.1.9 Guillotine attenuator 5.2.6 Gyrator 6.2.5 Gyromagnetic device 6.2.1 effect 6.1.1 filter 6.2.18 medium 6.1.2 power limiter 6.2.19 ratio 6.1.4 r&onance frequency 6.1.5 ,r&onator 6.2.1

32

IS:1885(PartLvI)-1981
H Hole coupler, Bethe 5.4.11 Coupling 5.3.14 Half-wave plate 5.5.11 H-bend ( corner ) 4.2.2 H mode 3.2.4 Hmn mode 3.2.11 H-plane bend ( comer ) 4.2.2 Hybrid junction 5.4.4 mode 3.2.7 Quadrature 5.4.8 ring 5.4.7 T 5.4.5 I Impedance Characteristic 3.6.1 wave 3.6.2 Normalized 3.6.3 Surface 3.6.5 Incident wave 3.1.4 Insertion gain 3.5.7 loss 3.5.7 Instantaneous peak power 3.5.3 Iris 5.3.8 Resonant 5.3.9 Isolator Absorption 6.2.15 Field-displacement 6.2.16 Lumped-element 6.2.17 Resonance 6.2.15 Rotation 6.2.14 Wave 6.2.14 J Joint Butt 4. I .9 Choke 4.1.10 C,ontact 4. I .9 Flange 4.1.7 Plain 4.1.8 Rotary 5.5.25 Rotating 5.5.25 Junction circulator 6.2.6 I&b;if 5.4.4 Tee'4:2.5 Wye 4.2.7 Y 4.2.7 K Knurled gasket 4. I .18 Knurled plate gasket 4.1.18 L Left-hand polarization 3.3.13 polarized wave 3.3.14 Length, Electrical 3.4.12 vngthener, Line 5.5.21 k-;$er, Gyromagnetic power 6.2.19 Coaxial 2. I I Delay 5.5.23 E$g-$ential transmission Gouba 2.17 lengthener 5.5.21 pota21 ltymission

2.4

2.18

Semi-hgid coaxial 2.21 Single-wire 2.16 Slab 2.14 stretcher 5.5.20 Strip 2.12 Transmission 2.1 Beam waveguide 2.6 Uniform transmission 2.3 Linear polarization 3.3.3 Linearly polarized 3.3.4 Load Dummy 5.1. I I Matched 5.1.9 Sliding 5.1.12 Water 5.1.13 Loaded waveguide, Periodically 2.10 Loop Coupling 5.3.13 Loss Forward 6.3.3 Insertion 3.5.7 Mode conversion 3.5.8 ratio 6.3.5 Residual 5.2.12 Reverse 6.3.3 Lumped-element circulator 6.2.12 isolator 6.2.17
M

Magic T 5.4.6 Matched load 5.1.9 termination 5.1.9

33

IS:1885(PartLVI)-1981
Matching section 5.3.7 Matrix, Scattering 3.6.12 Metal plate air seal gasket 4.1.16 Microstrip 2.13 Mismatched termination 5.1.8 Mixer Balanced 5.5.8 Crystal 5.5.7 Mode Cavity 3.2.9 changer 5.5.1 converter 5.5.1 conversion 3.2.20 gain 3.5.8 loss 3.5.8 cut-off frequency 3.4.3 wavelength 3.4.4 Degenerate in a cavity resonator 3.2.16 in a uniform transmission line 3.2.15 designation 3.2.10 Dominant 3.2.13 E 3.2.5 Electromagnetic 3.2.1 Em,, 3.2.11 Evanescent 3.2.14 filter Reflection 5.5.4 Resonant 5.5.3 Fundamental 3.2.13 H 3.2.4 Hmn 3.2.11 of propagation 3.2.2 of resonance 3.2.9 Orthogonal 3.3.12 Principal 3.2.6 TEmn 3.2.11 TEmn, 3.2.12 TMmn 3.2.11 Tmnr, 3.2.12 transformer 5.5.1 Transverse electric 3.2.4 electromagnetic 3.2.6 magnetic 3.2.5 Waveguide 3.2.3 Over 3.2.18 Mount, Detector 5.5.6 Multimode waveguide 3.2.19 N ;+I:",": lfr7quency 3.4.6 .qon-reciprocal phase-shifter 6.2.2 polarization rotator 6.2.4 wave rotator 6.2.4 Normal mode 3.2.8 Normalized admittance 3.6.4 complex wave amplitude 3.4.8 impedance 3.6.4 Number, Wave 3.4.2 0 One-way attenuator 6.2.13 Open-circuit termination 5.1.6 Orthogonal modes 3.3.12 polarization 3.3.11 Over moded waveguide 3.2.18 P Parameter, Scattering 3.6.13 Pad attenuator 5.2.3 Peak power, Instantaneous 3.5.3 Periodically loaded waveguide 2.10 Phase changer 5.5.9 Rotary 5.5.10 constant 3.4.11 shift circulator 6.2.7 Differential 6.3.1 shifter 5.5 9 Analogue 6.2.3 Digital 6.2.3 Directional 6.2.2 Non-reciprocal 6.2.2 Rotary 5.5.10 velocity 3.4. I3 Piston attenuator 5.2.11 Bucket 5.1.4 Choke 5.1.3 Contact 5.1.2 Quarter-wave contact 5.1.4 short circuit 5.1.1 Plane coupling 4.1.8 flange 4. I .4 joint 4.1 8 of polarization 3.3.8 T circulator 6.2.10 Y circulator 6.2.11

. .

34

IS:1885(PartLM)-1981
Plate air seal gasket, Metal 41.16 nasket 4.1.17 " Knurled 4.1.18 Half-wave 5.5.11 Quarter-wave 5.5.11 Plunger Bucket 5.1.4 Choke 5.1.3 Contact 51.2 short circuit 5.1.1 Polarization Anti-clockwise 3.3.13 Circular 3.3.3 Clockwise 3.3.13 cross 3.3.11 Direction of 3.3.5 ellipse 3.3.6 Elliptical Left-hand 3.3.13 Linear 3.3.3 of a degenerate mode 3.3.2 of a field vector 3.3.1 of a wave vector 3.3.1 Orthogonal 3.3.11 Plane of 3.3.8 ratio of a degenerate mode 3.3.10 of a field vector 3.3.9 Right-hand 3.3.13 rotator. Non-reciprocal 6.2.4 Polarized Circularly 3.3.4 Elliptically 3.3.4 Linearly 3.3.4 wave Anti-clockwise 3.3.14 Clockwise 3.3.14 Left-hand 3.3.14 Right-hand 3.3.14 Port 5.1.5 Post. Waveguide 5.3.11 Power Average 3.5.2 Complex 3.5. I divider 5.5.24 limiter, Gyromagnetic 6.2.19 reflection coefficient 3.6.11 factor 3.6.11 splitter 5.5.24 Pressurizable choke flange 4.1.12 flange 4.1.13 Principal mode 3.2.6 Probe 5.3.15 Coupling 5.3.15 Tuning 5.3.2 Propagation coefficient 3.4.9 constant 3.4.9 Direction of 3.1.1 Mode of 3.2.2 of energy, Direction of 3.5.4

Q
Quadrature hybrid 5.4.8 Quarter-wave contact piston 5.1.4 plate 5.5.11 transformer 4.3.5 R Race, Rat 5.4.7 Radar duplexer 5.5.15 Radial transmission line 2.18 Rat race 5.4.7 Ratio Axial 3.3.7 F;;r;;g5letic 6.1.4

. .
Polarization of a degenerate mode 3.3.10 of a field vector 3.3.9 Standing wave 3.6.9 Voltage standing wave 3.6.9 Reactive attenuator 5.2.9 Rectangular waveguide 2.5 Reflected wave 3.1.5 Reflection coefficient, Amplitude 3.6.8 factor. Amplitude 3.6.8 mode filter 5.5.4 Residual attenuator 5.2.12 loss 5.2.12 Resonance frequency 3.4.7 Gyromagnetic 6.1.5 isolator 6.2. I5 Mode of 3.2.9 Resonant iris 5.3.9 mode filter 5.5.3 window 5.3.9 Resonator Cavity 2.22 Gyromagnetic 6.2.1

35

IS:188!!(PartLVI)-1981
Resistive attenuator 5.2.2 Reverse direction 6.3.2 loss 6.3.3 Riblet coupler 5.4.10 Ridge waveguide 2.8 Right-hand polarization 3.3.13 polarized wave 3.3.14 Ring-switch 5.5.18 Road line 2.14 Rotary joint 5.5.25 phase changer 5.5.10 shifter 5.5.10 vane attenuator 5.2.f Rotating joint 5.5.25 Rotation circulator 6.2.8 Faraday 6.1.3 isolator 6.2.14 Rotator., Npn-reciprocal T~~$IF&X 6.2.4 . . S Scattering coeflicient 3.6.13 matrix 3.6.12 parameter 3.6.13
SCl%W

tuner, Slide 5.3.5 Tuning 5.3.2 Section Matching 5.3.7 Squeeze 5.5.19 Semi-rigid coaxial line 2.21 Septate waveguide 2.7 Fhy;;( shunt ) T 4.2.6 Analogue phase 6.2.3 Digital phase 6.2.3 Non-reciprocal phase 6.2.2 Phase 5.5.9 Rotary phase 5.5.10 Shim, Waveguide 4.1.19 Short circuit Adjustable 5.1.1 Piston 5.1.1 Plunger 5.1.1 termination 5.1.7 slot coupler 5.4.10 Shutter, Sliding 3.1.10

Single-wire line 2.16 Skin depth 3.6.6 Slab line 2.14 Slide screw tuner 5.3.5 Sliding load 5.1.12 shutter 5.1.10 Slot coupler, Short 5.4.10 Coupling 5.3.14 Slow wave 3.1.11 structure 3.1.12 Slug tuner 5.3.4 Tuning 5.3.3 Socket flange 4.1.2 Splitter, Power 5.5.24 Squeeze section 5.5.19 Standing wave 3.1.3 maximum 3.1.7 minimum 3.1.7 ratio 3.6.9 Stationary wave 3.1.3 Step twist 4.3.3 Stepped-impedance transformer Stretcher, Line 5.5.20 Strib line 2.12 Str&ture, S&-wave 3.1.12 Stub tuner 5.3.12 Style C. Flange 4.1.12 P, Flange 4.1.13 U. Flange 4.1.14 Surface impedance 3.6.5 wave 3.1.10 waveguide 2.15 Switch Ring 5.5.18 TR 5.5.15 Transmit-receive 5.5.15 Waveguide 5.5.17 T T

4.3.8

. junction 4.2.5
Magic 5.4.6 Tapered waveguide 4.3.1 TB cell 5.5.13 Tee E-H 5.4.5 plane 4.2.6 junction 4.2.5

Hybrid 5.4.5

I!3:1w5(PartLvI)-1981
TEmn mode 3.2.11 TEmnD mode 3.2.12 Termination Matched 5.1.9 Mismatched 5.1.8 Open circuit 5.1.6 Short circuit 5.1.7 Three dB coupler 5.4.9 Through flange 4.1.3 TMmn mode 3.2.11 TMmnD mode 3.2.12 TR cell 5.5.14 switch 5.5.15 Transformer Bar and post 4.3.6 Crossbar 4.3.6 ~o~;k;,;4.3.1 U Uniform transmission line 2.3 waveguide 2.3 Unpressurizable flange 4.1.14 V Vane attenuator 5.2.4 Velocity Envelope 3.4.15 Group 3.4.17 Phase 3.4.13 Voltage standing wave ratio 3.6.9 W Water load 5.1.13 Wave amphtude Complex 3.4.8 Normalized complex 3.4.8 Backward 3.1.8 circulator 6.2.8 Guided 3.1.9 Incident 3.1.4 isolator 6.2.14 number 3.4.2 ratio Standing 3.6.9 Voltage standing 3.6.9 Reflected 3.1.5 rotator, Non-reciprocal 6.2.4 Slow 3.1.11 Standing maximum 3.1.7 minimum 3.1.7 Stationary 3.1.3 structure, Slow 3.1.12 Surface 3.1.10 Transmitted 3.1.6 Travelling 3.1.2 Wavelength Guide 3.4.1 Mode cut-off 3.4.4 Waveguide 3.4.1 Waveguide Beam 2.6 below cut-off 3.2. I7 bend ( corner ) 4.2.1 Bendabk 2.20 cavity 2.23 Circular 2.5

. .
Quarter-wave -1.3.5 Stepped-impedance 4.3.8 Transition, Crossbar 4.3.6 Transmission coefficient, Amplitude 3.6.7 factor. Amplitude 3.6.7 line 2:1 _ Exponential 2.4 Radial 2.18 Uniform 2.3 Transmit-receive cell 5.5.14 switch 5.5.15 Transmitted wave 3.1.6 Transmitter blocker cell 5.5.13 Transverse electric mode 3.2.4 electromagnetic mode 3.2.6 magnetic mode 3.2.5 Travelling wave 3.1.2 Tuner E-H 5.3.6 Slide screw 5.3.5 Slug 5.3.4 Stub 5.3.12 Waveguide 5.3.1 Tuning probe 5.3.2 screw 5.3.2 slug 5.3.3 Twist Binomial 4.3.4 Step 4.3.3 Waveguide 4.3.2 T ( Y ) Circulator 6.2.9 Type, Flaw 4.1.11

37

Waveguide ( Coned ) Cut-off 3.2.17 frequency 3.4.5 Dielectric 2.9 Elliptical 2.5 Evanescent 3.2.17 filter 5.5.22 flange 4.1.1 Flexible 2.19 g.a;t;;t3421i15 Multimode 3.2.19 Over moded 3.218 Periodically loaded 2.10
post

Waveguide ( Co& ) Surface 2.15 wave 2.15 switch 5.5.17 Tapered 4.3.1 tuner 5 3.1 twist 4.3.2 uniform 2.3 wavelength 3.4.1 window 5.3.10 Window Resonant 5.3.9 Waveguide 5.3.10 Wye junction 4.2.7

5.3.1 i Y
Y junction 4.2.7

Rectangular 2.5

38

BUREAU

OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Headquarters:
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 8375,323 9402 Fax : 91 11 3234062,91 11 3239399 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephone Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 0-77 00 32

Central Laboratory :
Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad

Regional Otfices:
Central *Eastern Northern Southern

: Manak : l/14 : C.I.T.

Bhavan,

9 Bahadur

Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 CALCUlTA 700054

32376

17

CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, MADRAS EQ, Behind Marol

337 86 62 60 31343 23523 15

: SC0 335-336, Campus,

160022 606113 Exchange, Andheri (East),

tWestern : Manakalaya, MUMBAI 400093

Telephone

832 92 95

Branch OiYices::
`Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD Road, 462003 380001 550 13 48 839 49 55

SPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur BANGALORE 560058 Gangoti Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada

Road, T.T. Nagar. BHOPAL 751001 641037 121001

55 40 21 40 36 27 210141 0-20 88 01 8-71 19 96

Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi 16 A, Mathura Road, COIMBATORE Road, FARIDABAD 201001

Plot No. 43, Sector Saviti Complex,

116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD

53/5 Ward No.29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, 5-8-560, L.N. Gupta Marg. Nampally Marg, C-Scheme, Station JAIPUR

GUWAHATI

761003 500001

54 1137 201063 37 29 25 21 68 76

Road, HYDERABAD 302001

E-52, Chitaranjan

117/418 B, Sarvodaya Seth Bhawan. 2nd LUCKNOW 226001 Patliputra Industrial

Nagar, KANPUR Floor, Behind

208005 Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road,

23 89 23

Estate, PATNA 600013 P. 0. Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034

26 23 05 62i 17

T.C. No. 14/l 421, University

inspection Oftices (With Sale Point)
Pushpanjali, NAGPUR Institution 1st Floor, 440010 205-A, West

:
High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, 52 51 71

of Engineers

(India) Building

1332 Shivaji Nagy,

PUNE 411005

32 36 35

`Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee CALCUTTA 700072 tSales Office is at Novelty

Approach,

P.O. Princep Street,

27 10 85

Chambers,

Grant Road, MUMBAI Narashimaraja

400007

309 65 26 222 39 71

*Sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, BANGALORE 560002

Square,

Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi, India

