IS 6044 (Parti): 2013 


^ —^^fi%cTT 

’TFT 1 arr^TTfhT, cupuil^cb' w sfhrtfw r^Pd^r 
( ^ 5^OT ) 

Indian Standard 

LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS STORAGE 
INSTALLATIONS — CODE OF PRACTICE 

PART 1 RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL 
CYLINDER INSTALLATIONS 

(Second Revision ) 


ICS 75.200 



© BIS 2013 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


Price Group 7 


M’V' .--- 

PO/r 


October 2013 



Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division 
Council. 

This standard was first published in 1971 and subsequently revised in 2000. In this revision scope has been 
enlarged to include the liquid withdrawal from the cylinder. New clauses for point of delivery, maintenance and 
handling and use have been added. 

Cylinder location, cylinder manifolds, pressure regulators and piping, tubes and fittings have been modified. A 
new Annex A has been added to include requirements of liquid off take valve multi cylinder installation. 

While implementing this standard, compliance with statutory regulations shall be ensured. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values {revisedy .The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 6044 (Part 1): 2013 


Indian Standard 


LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS STORAGE 
INSTALLATIONS — CODE OF PRACTICE 

PART 1 RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL 
CYLINDER INSTALLATIONS 

( Second Revision} 


1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Part 1) lays down the code of 
practice for the installations of LPG cylinders for 
vapour withdrawal from cylinders, the associated 
piping and equipment in commercial and industrial 
premises and for liquid withdrawal from cylinders, 
piping and equipment in industrial premises. 

1.2 This Code applies to installations in commercial, 
industrial, educational, institutional premises and 
domestic/residential complexes installations including 
wherever, cylinder manifold is provided. The 
installation for Liquid withdrawal shall be provided 
only in industrial premises. The specific requirements 
for installation of Liquid withdrawal from cylinders 
are covered in Annex A. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below: 


IS No. 


Title 


383 : 1970 

1239 (Parti): 
2004 

2171 : 1999 

2379: 1990 
2501 : 1995 


Specification for coarse and fine 
aggregates from natural sources for 
concrete {second revision) 

Steel tubes, tubulars and other wrought 
steel fittings — Specification: Part 1 
Steel tubes (sixth revision) 

Portable fire extinguishers, dry 
powder (cartridge type) (fourth 
revision) 

Colour code for identification of pipe 
lines (first revision) 

Solid drum — Copper tubes for 
general engineering purposes (third 
revision) 


2878 : 2004 

3043 : 1987 
3601 : 2006 

4576 : 1999 

6044 (Part 2): 
2001 

7241 : 1981 
9573 : 1998 

13849 : 1993 


Fire extinguisher, carbon dioxide 
type portable and trolley mounted 
(third revision) 

Code of practice for earthing (first 
revision) 

Steel tubes for mechanical and 
general engineering purposes 
(second revision) 

Liquefied petroleum gases — 
Specification (second revision) 
Code of practice for liquefied 
petroleum gas storage installations: 
Part 2 Commercial, industrial and 
domestic bulk storage installations 
(first revision) 

Glossary of terms used in gas 
cylinder technology (first revision) 
Rubber hose for liquefied petroleum 
gas (LPG) — Specification (second 
revision) 

Specification for portable fire 
extinguisher dry powder type 
(constant pressure) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 7241 and the following shall apply. 

3.1 Installation — A designated premises in an 
establishment where the complete multi cylinder 
system comprising of cylinder, piping manifold, 
vapourisers, etc, is installed. 

3.2 Manifold — A pipe header provided with several 
opening to which the cylinders are connected by using 
suitable pipe fittings. 

3.3 Distribution/Distributing Company — The 
company which is in the field of marketing LPG and 
is the owner of cylinders. 

3.4 Competent Authority — The Authority designated 
or otherwise recognized under Gas Cylinder Rules, 
2004 for approving LPG cylinders, valves and 
regulators. 


1 



IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2013 


3.5 Approved Agency — Person or agency or a 
corporate body approved by competent authority or 
distribution company to execute the job of designing, 
erection and maintenance of multi cylinder installation. 

4 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 

4.1 The system shall be installed by an approved 
agency. The approved agency shall have trained 
manpower that is well versed with the characteristics 
of LPG and is trained in good practice of handling, 
installing and maintaining installations. 

4.2 The system shall be installed in line with the 
specifications and requirements stated in this standard 
and shall conform to the approved layout (approved 
by the distributing company or by local authorities 
wherever applicable). 

4.3 The maintenance, inspection, repair, etc, of the 
system shall be done by agencies approved by the LP 
gas distribution company or by the LP gas distributing 
company themselves. 

4.4 Cylinders and cylinder valves shall comply with 
the relevant standard and shall be approved by the 
statutory authorities. All other equipment such as 
pressure regulators and other installation material shall 
comply with the statutory provisions or relevant Indian 
Standards. In the absence of any such provisions or 
Indian Standards, equivalent international norms shall 
be followed. For LPG lines, threaded joints shall not 
be provided except for special fittings like excess flow 
check valve, TRV, pressure gauges. 

4.5 Point of Delivery 

Location of cylinder bank and point of delivery of LPG 
cylinders shall be acceptable to the Distributing 
Company. Proper motorable approach to the point of 
delivery/Bulk LPG storage installation shall be 
provided for ease in delivery/receipt of filled/empty 
cylinders through vehicles. The approach is also 
required to provide free access to fire tender and fire 
fighting personnel in case of any emergency. 

The access route to the point of delivery must be firm 
and compact even in wet conditions and adequate space 
must be provided for parking of cylinder truck making 
delivery of cylinders. 

4.6 The colour coding of LPG liquid and vapour lines 
shall be as per IS 2379. The colour coding shall be 
clearly stated on an instruction board provided in the 
shed and also at the main office. The direction of flow 
shall be indicated on the pipeline with a black colour 
paint. 

4.7 Fire extinguishers of powder type (see IS 2171) or 
carbon-dioxide (see IS 2878) type or stored pressure 


Type A, B, C (IS 13849) shall be provided in places 
where LPG cylinder installations are situated and shall 
be located near such installations. Two buckets filled 
with sand and two with water shall also be installed 
nearby. The number, type and size of the fire 
extinguishers shall be as follows: 


SI LPG Installations 
No. 

Number Type Capacity 

kg 

a) For installations with 
LPG 40 to 200 kg 

2 

Dry powder 10 

b) For installations with 
LPG more than 200 
and up to 320 kg 

3 

Dry powder 10 

c) For installations with 
LPG more than 320 
and up to 1 000 kg 

4 

Dry powder 10 

NOTE — For electrical installation 1 No. C02(4.5 kg capacity) 
fire extinguisher shall be provided. 

4.8 Safety cap shall be put on all cylinders not in use. 


whether empty or filled with gas. Storage of filled 
cylinders shall be as per statutory requirement. 

4.9 The storage room shall have caution signs such as 
‘DANGER’, ‘HIGHLY INFLAMMABLE GAS 
SHED’, ‘NO SMOKING’, etc, painted in luminous red 
paint, outside at a prominent place. 

5 CYLINDER LOCATION 

5.1 Stationary Installations 

5.1.1 Stationary installation not exceeding 50 kg of 
LPG may be installed indoors on any floor. It is 
recommended to have a minimum floor area of 5m' 
for such an installation. 

5.1.2 Stationary installations each not exceeding 50 
kg of LPG may be installed indoors on any floor and 
within the same workspace provided the minimum 
distance between two such installations is 3 m, the 
proportion of such installations to floor area is one 
installation per 5 m^ and the aggregate quantity of gas 
of all such installations does not exceed 200 kg. 

5.1.3 Stationary installation not exceeding 100 kg of 
LPG may be installed indoors on any floor provided 
the floor area for such an installation is not less than 
12 ml 

5.1.4 Stationary installations each not exceeding 100 
kg of LPG may be installed indoors on any floor and 
within the same workspace provided the minimum 
distance between two such installations is 3 m, the 
proportion of such installations to floor area is one 
installation per 12 m^ and the aggregate quantity of 
gas of all such installations does not exceed 200 kg. 


2 



IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2013 


5.1.5 Stationary installation not exceeding 400 kg of 
LPG may be installed indoors in an enclosed section 
of a building or a room reserved exclusively for this 
purpose and ventilated at low level directly to the 
outside air. 

5.1.6 Stationary installations above 400 kg (200 kg in 
case provision as in 5.1.5 is not possible) but not 
exceeding 1 000 kg shall be installed outdoors on 
ground floor level only. A minimum distance of 3 m 
shall be maintained between an installation and any 
building, public place, roadways, and other 
surroundings. The installation shall be protected from 
excessive weathering by sun, rain, etc and from 
tampering by unauthorized persons. A lean-to roof with 
expanded metal on angle-iron framework on the sides 
is considered suitable for this purpose. In any case, 
adequate ventilation at ground level to the outside air 
shall be provided. 

5.1.7 If the storage per installation is more than I 000 
kg, installations in multiples of 1000 kg with manifold, 
safety devices, change over mechanism may be 
provided with minimum inter distance of 3 m from all 
sides. Total number of such installations shall not 
exceed 4 including stand by installation. If more than 
two installations are used, then number of cylinders 
per installations should not exceed 30. 

5.1.8 For storage installations of 1 000 kg or 
installations in multiple of 1 000 kg the number of 
cylinders to be connected per manifold shall not exceed 
15 and for each 1 000 kg installation two such 
manifolds shall be provided. 

5.1.9 Cylinders shall be installed upright with the valves 
uppermost. 

5.1.10 Cylinder containing more than 20 kg of gas shall 
not be located on floors above ground level. 

5.1.11 Cylinders shall be located on a concrete or brick 
floor, preferably raised in case of outdoor installations. 

5.1.12 In order to prevent the hazardous collection of 
gas, cylinders shall be placed at least 1 m away from 
culverts, depressions, or openings leading to below 
ground level compartment and drains. 

5.1.13 Cylinders which have safety relief valves or 
similar devices incorporated in them shall be so 
positioned so that if the relief device operates, escaping 
gas is not hazardous. 

5.1.14 Cylinder installation for commercial/industrial/ 
domestic/residential complexes, etc, or at any public 
place shall meet the following requirements: 

a) For commercial and industrial cylinder 
installation for any public places like mall, 
buildings, industries, hotels, etc, the sum total 


of all stationery installations inside the 
building shall not exceed 400 kg of LPG in 
any case. In case sum total of net weight of 
all the cylinders installed indoors exceed 400 
kg provision for outdoor installations shall be 
made. For installations where the sum total is 
less than 400 kg of LPG provisions of 5.1.2 
to 5.1.5 shall apply. 

b) For commercial and industrial cylinder 
installation for any public place, industry, etc, 
if the net weight of all the cylinders installed 
is more than 400 kg but less than 1 000 kg, 
than the installation shall be provided 
outdoors in line with 5.1.6. The cylinder 
installation shall be provided in a covered 
industrial shed but open from all sides for 
proper ventilation. In case the installed 
capacity increases more than 1 000 kg, than 
the installation shall be provided in line 
with 5.1.7. Two separate installations shall be 
provided and distance between each of the 
installations shall be minimum 3 m (this 
distance shall be between the outer edge of 
the two sheds). 

c) For multi-storied buildings, flats housing 
society the reticulated installation of any 
capacity shall be provided at a safe place 
especially earmarked for this purpose. The 
installation shall not be provided by the side 
of road where there is continuous movement 
of vehicles or is approachable to residents 
especially children. The installation should be 
secured and should be provided in a covered 
shed open from all sides for ventilation. The 
area shall be demarcated by 1.5 m high chain 
link fencing having one gate. There should 
be minimum 3 m clear space all around the 
fencing and the space between the fencing and 
the edge of the shed should be minimum 2 m 
all around. 

d) If the requirement is more than 1 000 kg, 
installations in multiples of 1 000 kg with 
manifold, safety devices, change over 
mechanism, not exceeding 4 such installations 
(including stand by) may be provided with 
minimum distance of 3 m from all sides. The 
number of cylinders per installations should 
not exceed 30. 

e) Location of cylinder bank: 

1) The site for LPG cylinder manifold shall 
be located away from the kitchen/LPG 
utility area/residential building. 
Installation shall be slightly raised 
minimum 100 mm from surrounding 
ground level. 


3 



IS 6044 (Part 1): 2013 


2) Cylinders installation should not be 
located in inaccessible location, under a 
stairway, basements, cellars, where air 
movement across cylinders is very low/ 
not present, to prevent the cylinders from 
getting inadequate latent heat and un¬ 
approachable during emergency. 

3) Cylinders installation should not be close 
to steam pipes, boilers, transformers, DG 
sets, etc, to prevent cylinders from getting 
affected due to radiant heat. 

4) Cylinders shall not be installed at a place 
where they are likely to cause 
obstruction, suffer damage or be exposed 
to conditions likely to affect safety. 

5) Cylinders installation should not be 
located along the drive way. Under 
unavoidable conditions, minimum 
distance of 3 m from drive way shall be 
maintained. Brick masonry (minimum 
230 mm thick)/concrete (minimum 100 
mm thick) walls or metallic Shields/ 
barriers (minimum 1.63 mm sheet) and 
of minimum 2 m height should be erected 
between drive way and cylinder 
installation for the safety and security of 
the installation. 

6) Cylinders shall be located on a concrete 
or brick floor that is firm, at level, 
smooth, drained in case of outdoor 
installation. 

7) The cylinder shall be installed in upright 
position with the valve pointing upwards 
and minimum 1 m away from any 
combustible materials. 

54-15 Cylinder Storage Room 

a) The cylinder storage room shall be made out 
of non flammable material that is concrete 
(minimum 100 mm thick) or brick masonry 
walls (minimum 230 mm thick) or steel 
structures made out of minimum 5 mm thick 
MS angle iron structure and 1.63 mm MS wire 
mesh of size minimum 11. 

b) Since LPG is heavier than air, ventilation shall 
be provided at floor level, that is 100 mm 
above inside cylinder bank room, open to 
atmosphere. The ventilators shall be provided 
with 2 layers copper or non-corroding metal 
wire mesh not less than 11 to the linear 
centimeter. The size of the ventilators should 
be minimum 500 mm long and 300 mm 
height. 

c) The storage room shal 1 be well ventilated, that 
is openings/ventilators shall be provided in 


the walls of cylinder storage covering 
minimum 25 percent of wall area. It should 
also have adequate lighting. Both exteriors 
and interiors should be painted with weather 
proof paints. FLP fittings, approved by 
statutory authorities shall be provided for 
electrical use. 

d) The doors of the room where cylinders are 
installed shall open outwards and shall have 
louvers/wire mesh to ensure visibility and 
ventilation. 

e) Flammable materials like wood and plastic 
shall not be used. The cylinder bank storage 
room shall not used for storing any other 
materials. 

5.2 Portable Installations 

When portability of cylinders is necessary, the 
following requirements shall be fulfilled: 

a) The sum total of capacity of the cylinders 
connected to each manifold shall not exceed 
100 kg of LPG. The total quantity of gas thus 
installed in a workspace shall not exceed 
200 kg. 

b) If cylinders are mounted on a trolley, the 
trolley shall be stable. Where necessary, the 
cylinders shall be secured to prevent them 
from falling. 

c) The regulator shall be connected directly to 
the cylinder valve or to a manifold which shall 
be connected to the cylinder valves by means 
of rigid connections to give adequate support 
to the regulator. The only exception to this 
requirement is where cylinders are mounted 
on a trolley and the manifold is rigidly 
supported on the trolley. In such a case 
flexible or semi-flexible connections may be 
used between the cylinder valves and the 
manifold but not between the manifold and 
the regulator. 

d) Anytime the total quantity of gas at portable 
installations shall be in proportion to the floor 
area as specified in 5.1.1 to 5.1.7. 

e) At any time the provision at 5.1.1 to 5.1.15 
shall be ensured for all installations. 

5.3 Point of Delivery 

Location of cylinder bank and point of delivery of LPG 
cylinders shall be acceptable to the distribution 
company. Proper road shall be provided for easy 
movement of trucks carrying cylinders. The approach 
is also required to provide free access to fire tender 
and fire fighting personnel in case of any emergency. 

The access route to point of delivery must be firm and 
compact even in wet conditions and adequate space 


4 



IS 6044 (Part 1); 2013 


must be provided for parking of cylinder truck for 
making delivery of cylinders. 

The distance from point of delivery to cylinder bank 
should not be more than 75 m and the path should firm 
and compact even in wet condition and min 600 mm 
wide for easy movement of cylinder trolley. 

6 CYLINDER MANIFOLDS 

6.1 All materials, fittings, etc, used in cylinder manifold 
systems shall comply with the statutory provisions or 
relevant Indian Standards. In absence of any such 
provisions or Indian Standards, equivalent international 
norms shall be followed, 

6.2 The individual component parts of manifolds, that 
is piping, fittings, pigtails, etc, which are subject to 
cylinder pressure shall be capable of withstanding a 
test pressure without bursting of 25 kgf/cm^ or one 
and a half times the developed pressure at 65'^C, 
whichever is more. 

6.3 Where cylinder installations are made up with 
service and reserve batteries of cylinders, suitable 
change-over devices or valves shall be incorporated 
in the manifold header to prevent undue escape of the 
gas when cylinders are changed. 

6.4 In case pressure regulators, manifold headers and 
automatic change-over devices are connected to 
cylinder by semi-flexible connectors, these shall be 
rigidly supported. Copper tube pigtails are considered 
to be semi-flexible for this purpose. 

6.5 It is recommended that joints in manifold headers 
which do not have to be broken in normal use should 
be welded or brazed using a material which shall have 
a melting point of at least 540"C. 

6.6 All joints between manifold headers and cylinder 
connectors shall be readily accessible. 

6.7 All joints in the manifold should be welded (except 
for valve fixation) and be easily accessible for 
inspection/repairs, etc. 

6.8 Each manifold arm shall be fabricated in such a 
way that minimum joints are provided. Only seamless 
pipes are recommended for use in manifolds. There 
should be a minimum gap of 300 mm between the 
manifold and valve protection ring of the LPG 
cylinders. 

6.9 The cylinders connected to a manifold shall be 
safely spaced for easy and safe replacement of cylinder 
when empty. A minimum distance of 400 mm shall be 
maintained between two nipples provided on the 
manifold for connecting the cylinders to the manifold. 
In case the diameter of the cylinder is higher than 400 


mm then the distance between the two nipples shall be 
diameter of the cylinder plus 100 mm. 

6.10 A pressure gauge of 10 cm dial shall be provided 
in the manifold to indicate the gas pressure in the 
manifold. The pressure gauge shall be suitable for a 
pressure range 0 to 10 kgf/cm“. 

7 PRESSURE REGULATORS 

7.1 Pressure regulators and other devices used to 
control the gas shall comply with the statutory 
provisions or relevant Indian Standards. In absence of 
any such provisions or Indian Standards, equivalent 
international norms shall be followed. 

7.2 If the regulator is fitted with a relief valve, care 
should be taken in positioning the regulator to avoid 
unnecessary hazards, if the relief valve functions. 

7.3 Pressure regulators and other control devices shall 
be adequately supported. 

7.4 The pressure regulators installed shall be accessible 
for servicing and they shall be protected against any 
physical damage. 

7.5 Venting 

An independent vent to the outside of the building sized 
in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions/oil 
company’s guidelines will be provided where the 
location of a regulator is such that a ruptured diaphragm 
shall cause a hazard. Where more than one regulator is 
installed, then each regulator shall have separate vent 
to the outside. The vent shall be designed to prevent 
the entry of water, insects, or other foreign material 
that could block the passage. The height of the vent 
shall be 1.5 m above the eaves end of the shed or from 
the bottom of the roof. 

The regulator shall not be vented to the gas equipment 
flue or exhaust system. 

7.6 Parallel Regulators 

Where uninterrupted supply is required two pressure 
regulator in parallel along with non-return valves, 
double isolation valves may be installed. Both 
regulators may be set at slightly different pressures so 
that one of the regulators shall act as a stand by. 

7.7 Identification 

When multiple regulators are installed in a building/ 
system, then they shall be marked by a metal tag or 
other permanent means designating the building or part 
of the building/gas utilizing equipment being supplied. 

7.8 Over Protection Devices 

Over pressure shut-off (OPSO) protection required to 


5 



IS 6044 (Part 1): 2013 


protect the downstream appliances from hazardous 
pressure or the failure of the regulator shall be 
provided. 

13 Under Protection Devices 

Under pressure shut-off (UPSO) protection shall be 
provided in regulator near gas utilizing appliances. This 
shall shut-off gas flow in case of low pressure in the 
down stream gas supply. 

8 PIPING, TUBING AND FITTINGS (EXCLU¬ 
DING MANIFOLDS) 

8.1 All piping, tubing and fittings shall comply with 
the statutory provisions or relevant Indian Standards. 
In absence of any such provisions or Indian Standards, 
equivalent international norms shall be followed. 

8.2 Copper Tube 

Solid drawn copper tubes of outside diameter 10, 12 
or 20 mm, as suitable, conforming to IS 2501 shall be 
used. The minimum wall thickness of the tubes shall 
be 1 mm. 

8.3 Steel Tubes 

Cold drawn seamless, electric welded, cold drawn 
electric resistance welded (ERW), or oxyacetylene 
welded tubes of suitable sizes conforming to IS 3601 
shall be used. 

8.4 Mild Steel Tubes 

Hot finished seamless, or electric resistance welded 
(ERW) mild steel tubes of suitable size, conforming 
to medium or heavy class of IS 1239 (Part 1) or any 
other steel tube approved by statutory authority shall 
be used. 

8.5 The material used for flexible tubing and hose 
which are not subjected to full cylinder pressure shall 
be such that the tubing may withstand a test pressure 
without bursting of 3.5 kgf/cm^ to 7 kgf/cm^ or five 
times the maximum operating pressure to which it may 
be subjected in normal use, whichever is greater. 

8.6 The material used for shut-off valves and similar 
equipment which are not subjected to fill cylinder 
pressure shall be such that they may withstand a test 
pressure of 14 kgf/cm^ or one and a half times the 
maximum operating pressure to which they may be 
subjected in normal use, whichever is greater. 

8.7 Cast iron and aluminium fittings shall not be used. 

8.8 In the case of flange connections, the flanges shall 
be machined and should preferably have raised face. 
Metallic/spiral wound metallic gasket of minimum 
thickness or 1.5 mm is preferable to be used. 


8.9 For any kind of movable appliance or burner, 
flexible connectors shall be used and they shall be of a 
type that resists abrasion. 

8.9.1 Where the operating pressure of the appliance or 
burner exceeds 100 gmf/cm^, both ends of the 
connectors shall be positively attached (for example, 
by suitable clips) to prevent them from coming off the 
hose nipples because of pressure or tension in the hoses. 

8.10 Emergency Shut-Off Valve 

A quarter turn emergency shut-off valve (ESOV) 
designed to work on LPG, shall only be used for 
mainline for shut-off operation. These are quick shut¬ 
off valves like ball/plug valves. They should be installed 
as close as practicable to the point where gas enters 
the premises to which adequate access shall be 
provided. If it is installed inside the building it should 
be close to the entry point. 

In open position, the lever/key of the ESOV shall be in 
parallel to the axis of the pipeline on which it is 
installed. An emergency operating procedure is 
distinctly displayed near the ESOV. 

8.11 Flanges 

In case of flange connections, the flanges shall be 
machined and should preferably have raised face. For 
LPG lines subjected to full cylinder pressure of LPG 
liquid lines the minimum flange rating shall be 300 
class rating. 

8.12 Flange Gaskets 

The acceptable materials for gaskets are metal or spiral 
wound metallic gaskets. Whenever flange connection 
is opened, gasket should be replaced. For liquid lines 
only spiral wound metallic gaskets shall be used. 

8.13 Used Pipes, Fittings 

Used pipe, fittings, valves or other materials shall not 
be used again unless they are free of foreign materials 
and have been ascertained to be adequate for the service 
intended. 

9 INSTALLATION OF PIPING AND VALVES 

9.1 Flexible Hose 

9.1.1 Installations on which flexible hose is used shall 
satisfy the following conditions: 

a) Cylinder and the appliances connected to it 
shall be in the same room/shed; 

b) Length of hose shall be kept as short as possible 
and should normally not exceed 2 m; and 

c) Appliances connected shall be of portable 
type and not mounted in a fixed position. 


6 



IS 6044 (Part 1): 2013 


9.1.2 Flexible hose shall not be extended from one room 
or verandah or one space to another and, therefore, shall 
not be passed through doors, windows, walls, partitions, 
ceilings, or floors. 

9.1.3 Flexible hose shall be accessible for easy 
inspection and shall not be connected from view in 
walls, cupboards, cabinets and other obstructions. 

9.1.4 Flexible hose shall not be used in conditions 
where ambient temperature exceeds 52‘’C. 

9.1.5 Flexible hose shall be so installed that it is not 
twisted, looped or kinked and is not subjected to any 
external pressure. Periodic inspection to be carried out 
by the supplier of the gas. 

9.2 Appliances which are rigidly fixed in position shall 
be connected by means of rigid piping. 

9.3 Appliances which are portable, if connected to rigid 
piping, shall be connected through flexible or semi 
flexible connections. 

9.4 Cylinder Pigtails 

Flexible reinforced synthetic rubber pipes can also be 
used. The quality of braided synthetic rubber tubes shall 
be such that it is least affected by LPG. The 
reinforcement braiding should be able to withstand the 
same pressure as that of cylinder manifold. The design 
and test criteria shall be same as that of cylinder 
manifold. The hydrostatic test pressure shall not be less 
than 25 kgf/cm^. The free nut at the end shall be of 
non-corrosive metal. 

9.5 Adaptor 

If an adaptor is used to connect the pigtails to the 
cylinder valves (self-closing) of the LPG cylinders then 
it shall have non-return device and shall have prior 
approval of the oil industry. 

9.6 Pressure Gauge 

A good quality pressure gauge with a range of 0-5 kgf/ 
cm^ shall be provided in the pipeline after the first stage 
pressure regulator. The joint at which pressure gauge 
is fixed shall be thoroughly checked for leakage. Milli 
bar pressure gauges (0-500 milli-bar) shall be provided 
in the pipelines after second stage regulation. 

9.7 Excess Flow Valve 

The excess flow check valve shall be provided on each 
arm of the manifold to ensure stoppage of LPG 
supplies in case of heavy leakage/damage to the 
pipeline in the downstream facilities. The capacity of 
the excess fow valve shall be 50 percent more than 
the maximum designed flow rate required through the 
manifold, etc. 


9.8 Piping 

9.8.1 Piping shall be free internally and externally of 
cutting burrs, loose scales, dirt, dust and other foreign 
matter before the installation is completed. 

9.8.2 It is recommended that, where possible, joints 
should not be placed beneath ground level in 
inaccessible places, confined places (for example 
cellars), air or ventilating ducts, space under flooring 
or lift shafts. 

9.8.3 If joints have to be used in piping beneath ground 
level in inaccessible places or confined places, they 
shall be welded or brazed to minimize the risk of 
leakage which may lead to hazardous collection of gas. 

9.8.4 Where welded or brazed joints are used, they shall 
be of adequate mechanical strength, and the material 
used for welding or brazing shall have a minimum 
melting point of 540''C. 

9.8.5 Joints other than welded or brazed shall be readily 
accessible. 

9.8.6 Piping shall be so located or protected as to avoid 
extremes of temperature which might give rise to 
condensation or cracking of the gas. 

9.8.7 Provision shall be made to avoid damage to the 
piping from its expansion, contraction and vibration 
and by settlement of the building by which it is carried. 

9.8.8 Piping shall be protected against corrosive 
atmospheres and materials. 

9.8.9 As far as possible, concealed piping shall be 
avoided. If concealed piping is used, it shall be protected 
against inadvertent damage, such as from nails and 
knocks, by its location, type of material used or sheathing. 

9.8.10 Piping shall not be run in or through an air or 
ventilating duct, chimney, flue or lift shaft. 

9.8.11 Piping up to an outside diameter of 12 mm shall 
be supported at intervals of about 50 cm by means of 
pipe saddles or clamps in a way to avoid sagging and 
shifting. For larger diameter pipes, suitable longer 
supporting intervals may be used. 

9.8.12 It is recommended that if the pipes are run along 
a surface of a structure, the supports should be so 
designed that the joints are sufficiently clear of the 
surface to permit the use of tools without damage to 
the surface. 

9.8.13 It is recommended that when installing pipes 
along a surface of a structure, the installation is done 
in such a way that moisture is not trapped between the 
surface and the pipeline. 

9.8.14 It is recommended that the piping passing 
through walls should be protected by a covering sleeve. 


7 



IS 6044 (Part 1): 2013 


If it is necessary to pack the space between the piping 
and the sleeve, a moisture-proof material which does 
not corrode the piping shall be used. 

9.8.15 The distance between gas piping and electrical 
wiring system shall be at least 600 mm and, where 
necessary; they shall be securely fixed to prevent 
contact due to movement. The gas piping should run 
below the electrical wiring. 

9.8.16 The distance between the gas piping and steam 
piping, if running parallel, shall be at least 150 mm. The 
gas piping should preferably run below the steam piping. 

9.9 Suitable line shut-off valves shall be fitted for each 
appliance or burner. 

9.10 A main valve shall be fitted in the piping as near 
as possible to its point of entry into building with proper 
sealing arrangement. 

9.11 It is recommended that the number of fittings used 
in an installation should be kept to a minimum in order 
to reduce the risk of gas leakage. As far as possible, 
straight lengths of piping should be used. Where there 
are bends in the pipeline, these should have a radius of 
at least five times the diameter of the pipe. 

9.12 The open ends of piping and fittings (with the 
exception of terminal taps or valves in regular use) shall 
always be made gas-tight by means of either an 
appropriate terminal fitting or a plug, welded or brazed 
in position. Welding or brazing material shall have a 
melting point of at least 540°C. 

9.13 The distribution pipeline in residential buildings 
shall always be laid on walls with proper cleat 
supports/hanged from the roofs with adequate clearance 
from wall surface so that surface preparation and 
painting will be easier. The piping shall be anchored to 
prevent undue strains on connected equipment and shall 
not be supported by other piping. The spacing of 
supports in gas piping installations shall not be greater 
than 1.8 m for 12/15 mm dia pipe, 2.4 m for 20 mm/25 
mm dia pipe, 3 m for 40 mm dia pipe and above. 

9.14 The pipeline connecting the storage shed to the 
main installation should preferably be brought 
overhead without creating any hazard for the people/ 
vehicles passing through the same. In case of any 
foreseen hazard the pipeline can be laid underground 
in a trench filled up with sand of Grading Zone IV as 
per IS 383 having MS/RCC cover. The underground 
pipe shall be provided with adequate protection like 
wrapping coating, etc, for protection against corrosion. 

9.15 The single stage pipeline network (down the range 
of first stage pressure regulator) from the storage shed 
onward should work at pressure very close to the 
working pressure of the appliances. Under no 


circumstances, the pressure of the pipelines should 
exceed 1.5 kg/cm^. This should be obtained by double 
stage regulation of pressure, if necessary, 

10 LEAK TESTING 

10.1 Before any system of gas piping is finally put 
into service, it shall be carefully tested to ensure that it 
is gas-tight. Where any part of the system is to be 
enclosed or concealed, the test shall precede the work 
of closing in. 

10.2 Naked flames shall never be used for checking 
gas-tightness of the installations. 

10.3 It is recommended that the location of leaks should 
be detected by the use of soap solution or similar 
materials. 

10.4 Defective pipes or fittings shall be replaced and 
shall not be repaired in-situ. 

10.5 Electronic gas leak detectors duly approved by 
statutory authorities along with control panel for giving 
audio/visual alarms shall be used for leak detection 
especially in commercial/industrial installations and 
in domestic/residential housing complexes where 
combined capacity of all installations is exceeding 
1 000 kg or where reticulated system has been provided. 

11 MAINTENANCE 

11.1 The distribution company shall design a elaborate 
work permit format for the maintenance work which 
shall be used by the service provider for carrying out 
any maintenance work. It shall be the responsibility of 
the service provider to make necessary inspection in line 
with the work permit before commencement of the work. 

11.2 The user shall get the inspection of the cylinder 
manifold, distribution piping, safety system, 
equipment, valves fittings, auto change over system, 
gas monitoring system, hydrant hoses, etc, regularly 
as per the periodicity defined by the Distributing 
Company. However, minimum periodicity of 
inspection shall be once a year and the records have to 
be maintained. The inspection shall include checking 
the health, performance of all equipment like valves, 
regulators, auto change over system for proper 
operation, underground piping, etc. Work permit 
system developed by the LPG distribution company 
shall be followed. 

11.3 The repair, maintenance of any defective piping, 
manifold or any other equipment has to be carried out 
by agencies approved by the LPG distribution company 
or distributing company itself 

11.4 Pneumatic testing and hydro testing of piping shall 
be done once in five years by agencies approved by 
distribution company. 


8 



IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2013 


11.5 All regulators shall be throttled once a year for 
it’s accurate throttled pressure and safe operation. 

11.6 The pigtails shall be checked visually every time 
empty cylinder is replaced. 

11.7 Hydro test of pigtails shall be carried out once in 
two years. The flexible LPG hose shall also be checked 
once in two years. 

11.8 The distribution company shall conduct a safety 
awareness camp once in year for the consumers 
particularly for residential and commercial consumers. 

11.9 A fire hydrant line shall be provided in the near 
vicinity of the installation and a hydrant point with hoses 
to take care of any exigency or emergency situation. 

12 INSTRUCTIONS TO CONSUMERS 

12.1 Consumers shall be instructed by the distribution 
company on the following: 

a) Operation of the whole system; 

b) How to recognize gas leaks; 

c) Action to be taken in case of leakage; 

d) Action to be taken in case of fire; and 

e) Action to be taken in case of damage to, or 
failure of, any part of the installation, 

12.2 Parts or Installation Subjected to Cylinder 
Pressure 

Test pressure of 25 kgf/cm^ or one and a half times the 
developed at 65°C, whichever is more. 


12.3 Portions of Installation Downstream of 
Adjustable RegidatOFs 

Test pressure of one and a half times the maximum 
outlet pressure that may be given by an adjustable 
regulator or 2 kgf/cm^, whichever is more. 

12.4 Test pressure for portions of installation not 
subjected to cylinder pressure but carrying gas at 
pressure more than 30 gf/cm^—1.5 times the working 
pressure. 

12.5 Portions of installation subjected to gas pressure 
of 30 gf/cm^ or less — Test pressure of 150 gf/cm^. 

12.6 Handling and Use 

a) Cylinders shall be adequately supported 
during handling and shall not be dropped or 
should not be allowed to fall upon one another. 

b) Trolleys and cradles of adequate strength shall 
as far as possible be used when moving the 
cylinders. 

c) Use of high powered magnets for lifting the 
cylinders and chains for slinging the cylinders 
shall not be permitted. 

d) No lubricant should be used on the valve or 
any other fitting on the cylinder. 

e) Open flames, lights, lighting of fires, welding 
and smoking shall be prohibited in close 
proximity. 


‘ANNEXA 
{Clause 1.2) 

REQUIREMENTS OF LIQUID OFF TAKE VALVE MULTI CYLINDER INSTALLATION 


A-1 GENERAL 

a) The Liquid withdrawal or liquid off take 
(LOT) valve multi cylinder installation shall 
meet the requirements given in IS 6044 
(Part 2) and this standard. 

b) Total number of cylinders in an installation 
shall be such that the total quantity of LPG in 
all cylinders is not more than 1 000 kg. Two 
such installations can be provided, provided 
these are separated by a distance of 5 m. 

c) The liquid off take valve installation shall be 
as provided only for Industrial-stationery 
installation that fulfils safety norms. 


d) The cylinder and the valve shall be approved 
by statutory authority. The valve used for 
liquid off take shall also be approved by 
statutory authority separately. 

e) For any additional cylinders which are to be 
kept loose, the customer can store them within 
stipulations as provided for in Gas Cylinders 
Rules, 2004. 

f) The manifold and the LOT valve installation 
shall be certified by the officer of the 
distributing company or third party inspection 
agency approved by distribution company 
prior to commissioning. 


9 



IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2013 


c) The pipe used for liquid line that is up to 
vapourizer and from vaporizer to second. 
Stage regulation regulator shall be seamless 
steel pipes as per specifications approved by 
distribution company/statutory body/local 
authorities. Pipes of below 50 NB shall be of 
SCH 80 and pipes of 50 NB and above shall 
be of SCH 40. Copper tubing manifolds shall 
not be allowed. 

d) No screwed connection shall be allowed. In 
case due to any reason screwed connection is 
used, the pipe used shall be of SCH 80 only. 

e) The valves, sight flow indicator, thermal relief 
valve, NRV, etc, shall be of 300 class rating. 
Only cast steel ball valves with fire safe 
feature shall be used. 

f) All flanges used shall be of carbon steel, SA 
105, 300 class rating with dimensional 
standard as per specifications approved by 
distribution company/statutory body/local 
authorities. No screwed connections should 
be provided. 

g) All weld joints provided on the line shall be 
accessible and shall be hydro-tested for 25 
kgf/cm“ pressure. The welding shall be fusion 
welding. 

h) Only metallic/spiral wound metallic gaskets 
shall be used for liquid line that is up to 
vapourizer and also down stream of 
vapourizer. 

j) Each arm of the manifold shall have a control 
valve. To each arm of the cylinder manifold, 
cylinders shall be connected through a pigtail. 
A check valve and a isolation valve shall be 
provided with each cylinder pigtail connection 
to protect the system from back flow of LPG 
in event of any flexible pigtail rupture. The 
distance between two pigtail connections on 
manifold shall be minimum 500 mm. 

k) Cylinder manifold is subjected to full cylinder 
pressure at all times. The fabrication/welding 
of the manifold should be of the best available 
quality. All such manifolds shall be designed 
to a pressure equivalent to the maximum 
possible cylinder pressure (assessed at 65“C) 
of LPG that is 16.87 kgf/cm^. The test pressure 
should be 1.5 times the maximum pressure 
(assessed at 65‘^C) that is 25 kgf/cml 

m) Painting — Piping manifolds and the 
supporting structure shall be painted with two 
coats of red oxide primer and with two coats 
of first quality synthetic enamel paint. The 
colour of the LPG lines shall be as per 
IS 2379. 


A-5 VAPOURIZER 

a) The vapourizer used shall be approved by 
statutory authorities and shall be as per IS 6044 
(Part 2). Vapourizers may be low pressure 
steam heated, hot water heated, electrically 
heated type. In case electrical vapourizer is 
used, it shall have FLP connections. However, 
direct fired vapourizers are not recommended. 

b) A minimum safety distance of 5 m of 
vapourizer from cylinder installation shall be 
maintained. 

c) The vapourizers shall be provided with 
suitable automatic means to prevent liquid 
LPG passing from the vapourizer to gas 
discharge piping. 

d) Vapourizer shall be marked to include details 
as per 7.2.2 of IS 6044 (Part 2). 

e) Vapourizer shall be designed to facilitate 
testing, inspection and servicing of both LPG 
and heating units without undue disturbance 
of the whole vapourizer. 

f) Safety relief valve shall be provided on the 
vapourizer. 

A-6 PIPING, TUBING AND FITTINGS AFTER 

SECOND REGULATION 

a) All pipe fittings after second stage regulation 
shall be in line with 8. 

b) Steel tubes used shall be as per IS 3601 and 
shall be cold drawn seamless, electric welded, 
ERW or oxyacetylene welded type. 

c) Mild steel tubes used shall be hot finished 
seamless or electric resistance welded (ERW) 
type of medium or Heavy section as per 
IS 1239 (Part 1). 

d) No cast iron or aluminium fittings shall be 
used. 

A-7 FLEXIBLE HOSE 

a) The hoses connecting cy 1 inder with manifold 
shall be in line with IS 6044 (Part 2) and shall 
be used for connecting the cylinder to 
manifold. The hoses shall be Type 4 as per 
IS 9573, or as approved by statutory authority. 
The hoses shall be hydrotetsed at 25 kg/cm^ 
pressure once in six months. 

b) The design, material and construction of hoses 
shall be suitable for grade of LPG, Currently, 
it is envisaged that LPG as per IS 4576 shall 
be supplied. 

c) The flexible hoses should have electrical 
continuity of 0.75 Q/m. 

d) All flexible hoses used before first stage 


12 



IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2013 


regulation and after second. Stage regulation 
shall be tested at 3.5 MPa (35 kgf/cm^) during 
initial manufacture and should be designed 
to withstand a minimum bursting pressure of 
four times the maximum pressure. 

e) The flexible hose/pigtail shall be in the same 
room and its length shall not exceed 2 m. 
Flexible hose/pigtail shall not pass through 
doors, windows, walls, ceiling (or) floors. The 
pigtails shall be accessible for inspection. 

f) In case the ambient temperature exceeds 50‘'C, 
flexible hose shall not be used. 

g) The flexible hose shall not be twisted, looped 
or kinked. It should not be subject to any 
external pressure. 

h) The hose shall be tested half yearly and proper 
records of testing, etc, shall be maintained. 

A-8 SAFETY AND INSPECTION 

a) The consumer has to be trained to use the LOT 
cylinder installation. A trained personnel who 
has minimum qualification as Diploma in 
Engineering shall be responsible for the 
installation from customer’s end. 

b) Distributing company shall assist the 
consumer in organizing regular safety 
programmes, drills, etc, and will also provide 
regular training on use of LPG. 

c) After empty cylinders shall be placed in a safe 
place and proper safety cap shall be provided 
on the valve so as to ensure that no leakage 
takes place. 

A-8.1 Maintenance of Cylinder Manifold 

Maintenance of the cylinders manifold and the 
equipments shall be undertaken regularly and the 
periodicity of the maintenance shall be as under: 

A-8.1.1 Periodicity of Checks and Maintenance 

a) Valves 

1) All the valves that is safety valves, TRY 
shall be checked once a year by a 
Competent Authority approved by 
statutory authority. 

2) All the other valves should be checked 
once a year for free and full range of 
movement, positive shut off, mechanical 
damage, etc. 

Piping and manifold 

1) It should be checked once a year visually 
for corrosion, any physical damage. All 
supports of manifold should also be 
checked for any corrosion, etc. 


2) The manifold should be internally 
cleaned once a year and should be free 
from contaminants. 

3) The strainer provided on the manifold 
should be cleaned at least once in six 
months. 

4) Hydro testing of manifold and pneumatic 
testing of pipelines should be done once 
in 5 years. 

c) Vapourizer shall be checked as per 
maintenance schedule given by the 
manufacturer and the strainers, etc, should be 
cleaned at least twice a year. 

d) The burners shall be regularly cleaned. 

e) Pigtails shall be checked every time empty 
cylinder is replaced by a filled cylinder and 
replaced in case of any physical damage. 

f) The regulators should be checked once in a 
year for correct settings and performance as 
well as for corrosion and mechanical damage. 

g) The pressure gauges should be calibrated once 
in a year and proper records should be 
maintained. The dial of the gauge should be 
clearly visible. 

A-8.2 Inspection 

a) All the manifold installations shall be checked 
once in six months by the Approved Agency 
or the LPG distributing company and record 
maintained at the installation location. 

b) The installation shall be checked once in a 
year by the Sales Officer of the Gas Supplying 
Company or by their authorized Third Party 
Inspection Agency. 

c) The area of LOT installation should be free of 
any uncontrolled weed growth and 
accumulation of waste products. 

d) Regulator settings should be checked as per 
norms given in 8.1.1 (f). 

A-8.3 Leak Testing 

a) It shall be ensured that the manifold provided 
has been subjected to the hydro test pressure 
of 25.35 kgf/cm^ at least for a minimum 
period of 30 min and inspected by the 
approved agency or the distribution company. 

b) It shall be ensured that the fire extinguishers 
and sand buckets are provided and 
installations are adequately protected from 
weather conditions. 

c) The gas piping system should be carefully 
tested for ensuring gas tightness. 

d) Naked flames shall never be used for checking 
gas tightness of the installation. 


b) 


13 



IS 6044 (Part 1): 2013 


e) Leak detection should be done using soap 
solution or similar material. 

f) All defective pipes should be replaced and no 
repair should be carried out in-situ. 

A-8.4 Warning Signals 

a) Smoking or naked flames shall not be permitted 
within the Safety Zones of the installation. ‘NO 
SMOKING’, ‘HIGHLY INFLAMMABLE 
GAS’, ‘DANGER’, boards shall be provided, 

b) Sign boards, instruction boards for ‘DOs’ and 
‘DONTs’ shall be provided. 

c) Instruction board with emergency telephone 
numbers and important telephone numbers 
shall be provided. 

d) Instruction board prohibiting unauthorized 
entry shall be provided. 

e) It shall be ensured that all signage are in place 
and are legible. 

A-8.5 Source of Leakages 

a) Cylinders: 

1) Welded seams; 

2) The cylinder/valve connection bung 
joint; and 

3) Cylinder valve. 

b) Check Leakage from Pressure Regulator at: 

1) Near the joints; 

2) In the pressure regulator itself; 

3) Check leakage from the piping and 
manifold regulator and the appliance inlet 
nozzle; 

4) Check leakage from cooking appliances at, 

i) all threaded connections; and 

ii) the appliances itself. 


A-8.6 Action to be Taken when Leakage is Detected 

a) Leakage of Cylinder — Any cylinder which 
develops a leak should be promptly removed 
to an isolated open place away from any 
source of ignition. 

b) In case of leakages of piping, appliances or 
pressure regulators, close the valves and 
isolate the part, disconnect the cylinders and 
place the safety cap on the valve of the 
cylinder. Never repair the appliance or any 
other part of system when in use. 

c) The matter should be immediately reported 
to the In-charge and the officer of gas supply 
company. 

A-9 EARTHING AND ELECTRICAL PROTEC¬ 
TION 

a) The cylinder manifold installation, the 
vapourizer installation and the down stream 
installation shall be earthed at two places. Two 
earth pits as per IS 3043 shall be provided 
and the earthing resistance should not exceed 
1 D. 

b) The system should be tested for electrical 
continuity and resistance to earth. 

c) The earthing resistance shall be checked twice 
a year once during the summer season and 
once during winter and records for same shall 
be maintained. 

d) Only flame proof electrical fittings approved 
by statutory authorities shall be used in the 
area segregated for LOT installation. These 
shall be earthed at two points. 

e) Only flame proof hand torches shall be used. 

f) Copper jumpers shall be provided at flange 
joints in manifold for electric continuity. 


14 



IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2013 


ANNEX B 

(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 

Organization Representati ve( s) 

Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur Shri T. R. Thomas {Chairman) 

Shri D. K. Gupta {Alternate) 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New 

Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 

Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd, Allahabad 

BOC India Ltd, Kolkata 

Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 

Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 

Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 
International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 

Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 

Kosan Industries Ltd, Mumbai/Surat 

LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 

Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 

Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Ltd, Mumbai 

Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 

Praxair India Ltd, Bangalore 

Research & Development Establishment (Engineers), Pune 

Sakha Engineers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
SICGIL India Ltd, Chennai 

Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), New 

Steel Authority of India Ltd, Salem 

Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 

Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 
Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 

Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


Delhi Shri Karan Bhatia 

Smt Veena Peter {Alternate) 

Shri J. Vedagiri 

Shri Sanjay Phulli {Alternate) 

Shri J. P. Sinha 

Shri P. G. Choudhury {Alternate) 

Shri K. Manoharan 

Shrj Ramana Vutukuru {Alternate) 

Shri P. M. Samvatsar 

Shri A. K. Khamkar {Alternate) 

Shri P. P. Nadkarni 

Shri Alok Kumar Gupta {Alternate) 

Shri Shankar Sharan 

Shri S. M. Rambhal {Alternate) 

DGM (Operations) 

Shri Devendra K. Garg 

Shri Nikhilesh K. Garg {Alternate) 

Shri Satish Kabra 

Shri S. Gopalaiah {Alternate) 

Shri S. K. Dey (Surat) 

Shri S. B. Bomal {Alternate) 

Shri G. P. Gupta 

Shrimati Karobi Mukherjee {Alternate) 

Shri Raghunath Kulai 

Shri A run Nayak {Alternate) 

Shri Nitin J. Thakkar 

Shri A. S. Saran {Alternate) 

Shri J. P. Tiwari 

Lt Col B. V. Ravi Kumar {Alternate) 

Shri Milan Sarkar 

Shri Arindam Das {Alternate) 

Shri P. K. Chattopadhyay 
Shri A. Basu {Alternate) 

Shri Amarjit S. Kohli 

Shri Farooque Dadabhoy 

Shri R. Padmanaban {Alternate) 

Delhi Shri K. K. Gandhi 

Shri Pankaj Kumar Karn {Alternate) 

Shri T. Kalyanasundaram 

Shri N. K. Vijayavargia {Alternate) 

Shri Debashis Karmakar 
Dr B. K. Jha {Alternate) 

Shri M. L. Fathepurta 

Shri P. K. Banerjee 

Shri Amul Verma {Alternate) 

Shri Y. K. Behani 

Shri R. Behani {Alternate) 


15 



IS 6044 (Part 1): 2013 


Organization 


Representative(s) 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 

Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd, Hyderbad 

Vanaz Engineers Ltd, Pune 

In personal capacity {Menon &. Patel, 14/1, Mile, 
Mathura Road, Faridabad) 

In personal capacity {303, Shantikunj, Pandav 
Bunglows Lane, Athwalines, Surat) 

BIS Directorate General 


Shri K. Chaudhari 

Shri S. S. Thipse (Alternate) 

Shri A. K. Jain 

Shri Anuj Jain (Alternate) 

Shri S. K. Khandekar 

Shri S. R. Sarvate (Alternate) 

Shri Ebrahim M. Patel 

Shri L. D. Thakkar 

Shri C. K, Veda, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Shri Vishal Tomer 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Dissolved Acetylene Cylinders, Generators, Acetylene Pipelines and High Pressure 
Gas Cylinders Subcommittee, MED 16:3 

BOC India Ltd, Kolkata Shri Vutukuru Ramana (Convener) 

Al-Can Exports Pvt Ltd, Distt Thane Shri Vijay K. Parikh 

Shri D. C. Dave (Alternate) 

All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi Shri Karan Bhatia 

Shrimati Veena Peter (Alternate) 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd, Allahabad 
Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 
Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai 
International Industrial Gases Ltd, Howrah 
Jai Maruti Gas Cylinders Gases Ltd, Gwalior 
Klas Technology Ventures Ltd, Bangalore 
KVK Corporation, Mumbai 
Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 
Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Ltd, Mumbai 
Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Shri J. P. Sinha 

Shri P. G. Choudhury (Alternate) 

Shri P, M. Sam vats ar 

Shri A. G. Khamkar (Alternate) 

Shri Subhank.\r Gupta 

Shri S. Devadoss (Alternate) 

Shri D. K. Garg 

Shri N. K. Garg (Alternate) 

Shri Ashok K. Nigam 

Shri Vaishnav Nigam (Alternate) 

Shri K. G. Krishnamurthy 

Shri K. J. Kulkarni (Alternate) 

Shri R, Chandgothia 

Shri V. Chandgothia (Alternate) 

Shri Raghunath Kulai 

Shri Arun Nayak (Alternate) 

Shri Nitin J. Thakkar 

Shri A. S. Saran (Alternate) 

Shri J. P, Tiwari 

Lt Col Ravi Kumar (Alternate) 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 

Praxair India Ltd, Bangalore 

Rama Cylinders Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

Sicgil India Ltd, Chennai 

Strategic Engineering (P) Ltd, Chennai 

Techno Valves, Kolkata 


Shri A jai Nigam 

Shri D. K. Gupta (Alternate) 

Shri Milan Sarkar 

Shri Arindam Das (Alternate) 

Shri Sanjay R. Naphade 

Shri Sanjay S. Mande (Alternate) 

Shri Ruqshad Dadabhoy 

Shri R. Padmanaban (Alternate) 

Dr M. Ramakrlshna 

Shri G. S. Viswanath (Alternate) 

Shri Y. K. Behani 

Shri R. Behani (Alternate) 


16 



Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (1067). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. 


Date of Issue 


Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 


Regional Offices; 

Telephones 

Central : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 

NEW DELHI 110002 

f 2323 7617 
\2323 3841 

Eastern : 

1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi J 

KOLKATA 700054 1 

r 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
1^2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : 

SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

/260 3843 
\260 9285 

Southern : 

C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 ^ 

r 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
[2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : 

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) J 

MUMBAI 400093 1 

r 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
[2832 7891,2832 7892 

Branches: 

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 





