( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS : 9002 ( Part 9 ) - 1984

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FO-R EQUIPMENT FOR ENVIRONMENTAL ~TESTSFOR ELECTRONIC AND * ELECTRICAL ITEMS
PART 9 ACCELERATION (STEADY STATE) TEST MACHINE

Environmental
Chairman LT-GEN D. SWAROOP Members

Testing Procedures Sectional Committee, LTDC 2
Representing Ministry of Defence ( R&D )

Electronics Regional Test Laboratory ( North ), New Delhi SHRI K. C. CHHABRA ( Alt~rnnte) Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay DR P. K. DUTTA SHRI V. NARAYANAN ( Alternate ) Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute SHRI GRASITA SINGH ( CSIR ), Pilani National Test House, Calcutta SERI B. P. GHOSH SRRI B. C. MUKHERJEE ( Ahrnale) Society of Environmental Engineers, Bangalore SHRI G. R. GHOSH National Radio & Electronics Co Ltd, Bombay SRRI T. C. GOSALIA DIRECTOR STANDARDS Research, Designs & -Standards Organization, JOINT Ministry of Railways, Lucknow ( S&T )/TESTS, RDSO JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( S&T )/LAB, RDSO ( Altmtutc ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), Bangalore BRIG L. G. KETKAR SHRI P. N. LABRU ( Akwnata ) Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' SHRI S. P. KULKARNI Association, Bombay DR P. K. DIJTTA ( Alternate ) Directorate of Technical Development & Production SHRI I. C. MATHUR ( Air ), Ministry of Defence SQN LDR K. N. SAMPATH KUMAR ( Alternate ) Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRI H. V. MEHTA SHRI S. RAMALINUAN ( Alternate ) SJSRI K. R. ANA~~DAKTJM~RAN Lucas-TVS Limited, Madras NAIR SHRI C. RAN~ANATHAN ( Alternate ) BRIG R. C. DHINQRA ( RETD )

( Continuedon page 2 ) @ copyighf 1985
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION Thii pubIication is protected under the Z&m Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9002 ( Part 9 ) - 1984 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members Instrumentation BRIQ Y. NIRULA SHRI A. P. GUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI N. v. Representing

Ltd, Kota

SRRI B. K. MAHAJAN ( Alternate II ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Tromhay, Bombay SHRI D. V. PETKAR SRRI JAQDISH LAL ( Altervzzfe) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD SERI D. ~.~GOPALAKRISHNA ( Alternate ) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI V. RAMARAO SHRT T. D. VEERVANI ( Alternate ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. V. RAO SHRI B. VIRESALINGAM ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SIXRI K. K. TANEJA New Delhi SERI H. S. DUBEY ( Alternate ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi SHRI R. C. TIXPATHI SERI A. K. JAIN ( Ahernate ) Ministry of Defence ( R&D ), Bangalore BRIG J. VAR~EESE SRRI P. K. SHUKL.~ ( Alternate ) All India Instrument Manufacturers' & Dealers' SHRI H. C. VER~MA Association, Bombay DEPUTY SECRETARY, IMDA ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI N.~SIEINIVASAN, Director ( Electronics ) Secretary SRRI HARCRARAN SIN~H Senior Deputy Director ( Electronics ), IS1

Da 0. P. CHHABE<

PANtIlT

A

( Alternate I )

Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal

Panel

for Equipment

for Environmentak
Peico Electronics

Test, LTDC

2 : P6

Convener *DR P. K. DUTTA Members SBRI V. NARAYANAN ( Alternate to Dr P. K. Dutta ) Electronics Regional Test Laboratory ( North ), SRRI K. c. CRH.4BRA New Delhi SBRI C. L. KAUL ( Alternate ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SKRI D. S. GOPALAKRISHNA Kasco Industries, Pune SHRI D. S. KAMLAPUR~AR Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), Bangalore DR A. MUKHERJEE LT-COL G. R. MALEAN ( Alternate ) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI D. H. B. R. PRASAD SRRI T. D. VEERVANI ( Alternate) *For the meeting in which this standard was recommended for finalization. ( Cov&ued on page 11 ) & Elactricals Ltd, Bombay

2

IS : 9002 ( Part 9 ) - 1984

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR EQUIPMENT FOR ENVIRONMENTAL TESTS FOR ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS
PART 9 ACCELERATION (STEADY STATE) TEST MACHINE

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard ( Part 9) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 14 May 1984, after the draft finalized by the Environmental Testing Procedures Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunicat.ion Division Council.

0.2 The object of this standard ( Part 9 ) is primarily to guide the environmental equipment manufacturers with respect to broad specihcations for their equipment and to assist the users of such equipment to properly define their requirements in the indent for the equipment. However, the requirements of the equipment for a particular application largely depend on the conditions of the environmental tests to be simulated or created. This specification, therefore, gives only the salient features of an acceleration test machine that are basically essential to carry out the tests as required by IS : 9000 ( Part 9 )-1984*. 0.3 Certain requirements of practical difficulties in is presumed that with the will be laid down for such have been specified in a general form In view defining such requirements quantitatively. It experience gained, more precise requirements equipment.

0.4 An overall performance assessment of the complete equipment for a short duration has been included although it may be realized that it may This will at least ensure the functional not be entirely sufficient. performance and operatability of the equipment. Many of the construe tional requirements specified can be checked through visual examination. 0.5 In view of the subjective nature of some of the requirements, care shall be taken in using this standard. *Basic environmental testing procedures
( steady state ) test. for electronic and electrical

sufficient

Acceleration

items: fart

9

3

IS : 9002 ( Part 9 ) - 1984 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether standard is complied with, the final ~expressing the result of a test or analysis, ance with IS : 2-19GO*. The number of rounded off value should be the same as this standard. a particular requirement of this value, observed or calculated, shall be rounded off in accordsignificant places retained in the that of the specified value in

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 9 ) lays down the salient features of an acceleration ( steady state ) test machine required for carrying out acceleration ( steady state ) test in accordance with IS : 9000 ( Part 9 )-1984t. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions and terms given in IS : 9000 ( Part 1 )-1977: shall apply. 3. TEST APPARATUS explanation of

acceleration ( steady 3.1 General - A centrifuge is used for conducting state ) test. In a centrifuge, the acceleration is always directed towards However, certain type of items such the centre of the rotating system. as gyros, space control platforms, etc, are difficult to test on a centrifuge, even when a counter rotating fixture is employed, as these items are In such cases, a machine capable of sensitive to gyroscopic couples. such as, a rocket sled run may be more producing linear accelerations, suitable. However, the requirements for such a machine are not included in this specification due to the specialized nature of such machines and the relevant specification should be referred for such requirements. 3.2 Tangential Acceleration - When increasing the rotational speed of a centrifuge from zero to the value necessary to achieve the specified acceleration, or when decreasing back to zero, the centrifuge should be so controlled that the item is not subjected to a value of tangential accelerat ion greater than 10 percent of the specified acceleration. 3.3 Acceleration Gradient - The dimensions of the centrifuge and its rotating mechanism relative to the item under test shall be such that no part of the item other than flying leads shall be subjected to a value of acceleration outside the tolerance specified.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). tBasic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical .ricceleration ( steady state ) test. asic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical GenEl. items: items: Part Part 9 1

4

IS : 9002 ( Part 9 ) - 1984 3.4 Acceleration Severities ( steady in 6 of

3.4.1 The centrifuge shall be capable of producing acceleration state ) values corresponding to any of the severities specified IS : 9000 ( Part 9 )-1984*, as desired by the indentor.

3.4.2 The control of the required acceleration is usually implemented through the control of RPM of the rotor assembly. The relationship between these two parameters is as follows: G = 0'000 where G =z acceleration, r = radius ( cm ) of gyration of the test object, AND and 028 4 f-n2

n = rev/min.
4. CONSTRUCTION, WORKMANSHIP FINXSH

4.1 General - The manufacture of a centrifuge involves a highly skilled technology and the specifications for the same depend upon the acceleration value required, load capacity and type of items to be subjected to the acceleration ( steady state ) test. It may, therefore, be not possible to achieve the testing requirements for all types of items ( component type and equipment type ) using a single centrifuge. The details of the centrifuge specified herein are only the salient features that are to be considered while ordering the same. 4.2 Cabinet - The to give the necessary 4.3 Drive System of the rotor dynamically. and the motor which cabinet shall be made of heavy gauge mechanical strength. steel designed

4.3.1 The drive system consists drives it and appropriately balances

4.3.2 The motor should be of sufficient capacity assembly to the required speeds and at the required as specified by the indentor.

to drive the rotor acceleration times,

NOTE - The acceleration time is the time required for the rotor assembly with its rated payload to attain the full speed corresponding to the desired acceleration and the deceleration time is the time required to bring back the same from a particular speed to a stand still position. As the acceleration times depend upon the rotor inertia, large rotor assemblies require longer time than smaller rotor assemblies to attain the desired speed. The test procedure does not specify the acceleration times. However, in case of continuous production testing, where a large number of items have to be tested, this factor assumes importance. The requirements of the accelcration times should, therefore, be stated while procuring centrifuges for continuous production testing. These times vary from 30 to 300 s based on the inertia of the rotor assembly. *Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic Acceleration ( steady state ) test. 5 andzelectrical items: Part 9

IS : 9002 ( Part

9 ) - 1984

~4.3.3 The rotor assembly consists of the rotating arm and suitable The item mounting platform should be couplings to the drive shaft. There shall be a similar platform rigidly attached to the rotating arm. on the other side of the rotating arm for mounting counter balancing weights ( or a dummy test item ). The rotating arm and the item mounting platforms shall be of suitable materials, such as, steel or aluminium alloy. 4.3.4 The dimensions of the item mounting platform type of items shall be 300, 503, 750 or 1 000 mms.
NOTE ments.

for

equipment
require-

For testing of very large systems, the user may specify the actual

4.3.5 The mounting platform as well as the counter balancing platform shall have threaded holes of suitable dimensions spaced equidistant in a square pattern for mounting the item and counter balancing weights. The holes shall also be equipped with stainless steel inserts for added strength. 4.3.6 For centrifuges required to test component type of items, such etc, circular rotors are usually microcircuits, relays, as, transistors, employed. These circular rotors will have centrifuge rotor inserts and These fixtures which physically hold and support the items during tests. inserts/fixtures will be in the form of round plugs or cubes or they may be circular rings attached to the rotor with cavities to hold the items. The actual dimensions of these inserts/fixtures/cavities will have to be specified by the indentor depending upon the type of components desired The dimensions of the rotor depend upon the size and to be tested. While it is not practicable to number of items to be tested at a time. standardize the sizes of rotors for these applications, the recommended sizes are as 50, 100, 200, 350 or 500 mm diameter. 4.4 Radius of -Gyration

4.4.1 The term `radius of gyration' is used for centrifuge operation to signify the distance from the axis of the main rotor shaft to the point where the centre of gravity of the test item is located on the mounting Therefore, the `radius of' gyration' for a particular test is platform. simply the radius of the circle in which the centre of gravity of the test object is rotating. 4.4.2 Generally, two limits while ordering a centrifuge. the radius of gyration. are specified for the radius The indentor should specify of gyration the limits of

4.5 Capacity of the Centrifuge expressed in terms of the product and the corresponding maximum

- The capacity of the centrifuge is of the maximum acceleration required weight of the payload ( test item and 6

IS : 9002 ( Part 9 ) - 1984 fixtures ) and is called the centrifugal capacity. Within the above limitations of acceleration and payload any intermediate values of acceleration and the corresponding payload that can be tested or vice versa can be computed by dividing the centrifugal capacity by the desirThe indentor should specify all ed value of acceleration or payload. the above parameters while ordering a centrifuge. 4.6 Door - The centrifuge shall have a door either at the side or at the top with full access to the interior and shall be engineered for maximum safety, preferably, by the use of continuous hinges on one side and heavy duty latches on the other side. 4.7 Castors - The centrifuge shall be equipped castors, if required, for ease of movement. with four swivel

4.8 Speed of Rotor - The centrifuge shall be designed for optimum speed depending upon the severity of acceleration required and the safety features built into the system. 4.9 Accuracy of Speed - The accuracy of the speed setting shall be within k ( 0. I to 0.5 ) percent at any speed setting in the desired acceleration range. 4.10 Slip Rings - There shall be a number of slip rings on the rotor assembly with shielded leads. The number and their current carrying capacity shall be specified by the indentor. 4.11 Static Rotor Arm Balance - There shall be a provision to check the rotor arm balance before starting a test. The amount of unbalance in terms ofweight the centrifuge can withstand shall be clearly specified by the supplier. There shall also be a provision in the control system to prevent the rotor from starting when the unbalance is beyond the accepted limits. 4.12 Workmanship engineering practice. The workmanship shall be of good current so as to

4.13 Finish - The finish of the machine shall be as specified ensure protection against corrosion and other similar effects. 4.14 Miscellaneous

4.14.1 The centrifuge shall be designed for optimum performance and continuous operation with minimum maintenance requirements. It shall occupy minimum floor area. 4.14.2 The electrical and electronic components and cables conform to the relevant Indian Standards, wherever applicable. should

4.14.3 Wherever counter balancing weights are specified they shall be supplied in standard ranges to counter balance any specified test item load. 7

IS : 9002 ( Part

9 ) - 1984 should be provided,

4.14.4 Suitable vacuum and braking arrangements as specified by the indentor. 5. INSTRUMENT CONSOLE '

5.1 An instrument console consisting of all the required instruments and control switches shall be provided either as an integral part of the Among centrifuge or as a separate unit housed next to the centrifuge. other items, the console shall consist of the following: a) A counter, preferably electronic ( rev/min ) of the rotor; ( digital ) to indicate speed

b) A hand wheel or thumb wheel control for varying the speed of the rotor; and c) Slip ring terminations for connecting the items under test to measuring instruments. 6. SAFETY 6.1 Adequate safety provisions shall be incorporated to prevent damage to machine/personnel. 6.2 The following features shall be included in the centrifuge requirements:

as mandatory

a) The walls and ceiling of the centrifuge shall be of adequate mechanical strength to prevent break through of test objects and fragments of machine parts to the outside of the shell, b) A door interlocking microswitch shall be provided to prevent rotor operation while the door is open, c) A rotor unbalance interlock microswitch shall be provided to deactivate the power to the rotor assembly in case of rotor unbalance beyond the specified value, and d) There shall be a provision for the protection against supply voltage variations. 7. POWER SUPPLY REQUIREMENTS of the centrifuge

7.1 The centrifuge shall be capable of working either from a source of 240 V & 10 percent single phase 50 Hz ac mains; or from a source of 415 V & 10 percent three phase 50 HZ ac mains. In either case, the total power requirement of the centrifuge shall be indicated by the supplier. 8. MARKING 8.1 The machine shall be marked with the following details: name or trade-mark, 8 a) Manufacturer's

b) Type designation,

IS : 9002 Centrifugal Maximum Maximum Maximum Power 8.I.l Mark. The Any other capacity, acceleration, payload capacity, and as required marked with speed ( rev/min ), requirements, may also additional markings be

( Part 9 ) - 1984

supply machine

by indentor. the IS1 Certification

NOTE The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rutes and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuousIy checked by ISI for conformity to that Details of conditions under which a licence for the standard as a further safeguard. use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

9. INSTALLATION 9.1 The manufacturer of the centrifuge shall indicate if any special foundation or floor preparation is required to install the machine. The machine shall be secured according to the installation drawings which are to be supplied by the manufacturer. IO. TESTS 10.1 The centrifuge shall be subjected and to the following tests: a) Visual examination,

b) Performance. shall be carried 10.2 Visual Examination - The visual examination out to check defects in manufacture, damages due to transit and other non-conformities in relation to the ordered data. 10.3 of 4 the with Performance - The centrifuge shall be operated for a minimum hours continuously and the performance of the whole system and various controls, indicators interlocks, etc, evaluated to conform the ordered requirements. MANUAL with an instruction and layout, 9 manual which

11. INSTRUCTION

11.1 Each centrifuge shall be provided shall contain the following: a) Description b) Operating of the centrifuge instructions,

IS : 9002 ( Part 9 ) -1984 c) Maintenance
d) Installation and service instructions, information, schematic diagrams and actual circuit

e) Electrical/electronic diagrams, and 12. INFORMATION

f) Spare parts list with the addresses of suppliers.

TO BE FURNISHED BY THE INDENTOR
shall be furnished by the indentor:

12.1 The following information

4 Acceleration values ( see 3.4 ); b) Details of drive system required ( Jee 4.3 ); 4 Required acceleration and deceleration times 4 Dimensions of the item mounting platform 4 f > Dimensions

( see 4.3.2 ); for equipment type

items ( see 4.3.4 ); Hole pattern for mounting platform ( sel 4.3.5 );

Centrifugal capacity, the maximum acceleration value required and the corresponding value of payload in terms of kg ( see 4.5 ); .i> Door ( see 4.6 );

d

of the inserts, jigs, fixtures, cavities for component type of items mounting and dimensions of the rotor ( see 4.3.6 ); Radius of gyration of rotor ( see 4.4.2 );

h)

k) Castors ( see 4.7 ); m) Slip rings ( see 4.10 );
n) Power supply requirements p) Any other characteristics ( see 7 ); and or parameters desired for the centrifuge.

10

IS : 9002 ( Part 9 ) - 1984
( Continued from page 2 ) Members
SHRI

Representing

N. RAM PRASAD Vijayalakshmi Industries, Bangalore SHRI MOSES XAVIAR ( Alternate ) SHRI C. RAXWANATHAN Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madras SHRI A. S. C. SHEKAR Kashinath and Co, Hyderabad SHRI R. SIVAKUMAR( Alternate ) SHRI P. K. SHUELA Ministry of Defence ( R&D ), Bangalore SHRI D. SUBRAMANYAN Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI B. VIRESALINGAM( Alternatc )

11

INTERNATIONAL
Base Uults
QUANTITY

SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS )
UNIT &7hfBOL

~Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary
QUANTITY

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

m kg s A K cd mol

Units
UNIT SYMBOL

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units
QUANTITY

radian steradian

rad sr

UNIT

SYBfBOL

DEFINITION 1 N = 1 kg.m/s2 J = 1 N.m 1

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress force

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal
J"

W Wb T HZ s V Pa

1 W = 1 J/s 1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 1 1 T= 1 Wb/ms 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-l) S = 1 A/V V = 1 W/A

1 Pa = 1 N/m'

