**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 688 (1988) : Method for determination of colour fastness 
of textile materials to organic solvents [TXD 5: Chemical 
Methods of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



rS : 688 - 1988 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 



METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO ORGANIC 

SOLVENTS 

{First Revision) 



UDC 677-016-473-4: 535-684-6 



O Copyright 1989 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 1 March 1989 



IS : 688 - 1988 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO ORGANIC 

SOLVENTS 

( First Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
20 July 1988, after the draft finalized by the 
Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1956 
and has been revised to align it with ISO 105/ 
X 1984 Textiles — Tests for colour fastness 
X05 Colour fastness to organic solvents', issued 
by the International Organization for Standardiza- 
tion (ISO) and also to incorporate changes in line 
with other standards on colour fastness tests. 



0.3 Colour fastness of textile materials is of con- 
siderable importance to the consumer. The 
fastness depends not only upon the nature and 
depth of shade of dyestuff used but also upon 
the nature of the fibre and the method of dyeing 
or printing employed; the same colouring matter, 
when used in dyeing or printing different fibres 
or when applied by different methods upon the 
same fibre, may give vastly different results. For- 
mulation of standard methods of test for deter- 
mining colour fastness of textile materials to 
different agencies likely to effect change in colour 
is, therefore, necessary. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for 
determination of colour fastness of textile 
materials of all kinds and in all forms to 
organic solvents commonly used in cleaning 
or mill processing. If dry-cleaning is involved, 
use the method prescribed in IS : 4802 - 1988*. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 A specimen of the textile in contact with 
adjacent fabrics is agitated in the solvent and 
dried. The change in colour of the specimen and 
the staining of the adjacent fabrics are evaluated 
with the grey scales. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sample to determine the conformity of a lot 
of coloured textile material to a specification 
shall be selected so as to be representative of the 
lot. 

3.2 Sample drawn in compliance with the relevant 
material specification or as agreed to between 
the buyer and the seller to evaluate the colour 
fastness of the material in the lot shall be held 
to be representative of the lot. 



4. APPARATUS 

4.1 Suitable Container — with means of agita- 
tion. 

Note — A 500 ml beaker or other suitable open con- 
tainer may be used for the test, agitation being by hand 
with a glass rod flattered at one end. A closed vessel 
agitated by shaking or tumbling in a hand or motor- 
driven machine may also be used. 

4.2 Two Adjacent Fabrics — each measuring 
10 cm X 4 cm, one piece made of same kind of 
fibre as that of the textile to be tested, or that 
predominating in the case of blends, the second 
piece made of the fibre as indicated in the table 
below or, in the case of blends, of the kind of 
fibre second in order of predominance or as other- 
wise specified. ( see Appendix A of IS : 10251 - 
1982*):, 



If the First Piece is 


Second Piece to be 


Cotton 


wool 


wool 


cotton 


silk 


cotton 


linen 


wool 


viscose 


wool 


acetate or triacetate 


; viscose 


polyamide 


wool or viscose 


polyester 


wool or cotton 


acrylic 


wool 



♦Method for determination of colour fastness of textile 
materials to dry cleaning. 



tests. 



♦General principles of testing textiles for colour fastness 



IS: 688- 1988 



4.3 Grey Scales for Evaluating Change in Colour 
and Staining 

5. REAGENT 

5,1 Solvent — any one of tlia solvents commonly 
used in cleaning or mill processing. 

Note 1 — It is anticipated that the test will be made 
with trichloroethylene or with perchloroethylene and 
with Stoddard solvent ( specially specified naphtha for 
the use of dry cleaners ). Other solvents for which the 
information is desired may be used. The use of trich- 
loroethylene is recommended for rating dyestuffs. 

Note 2 — Halogenated hydrocarbons should be stored 
over anhydrous sodium carbonate to neutralize hydro- 
chloric acid. 

6. PREPARATION OF COMPOSITE 
SPECIMEN 

6.1 If the textile to be tested is fabric, place a 
specimen 10 x 4 cm between two adjacent fabrics 
and sew along all four sides to form a composite 
specimen. 

6.2 If the textile to be tested is yarn, knit or 
weave it into the fabric and treat as in 6.1, or 
form a layer of parallel lengths of it between 
the two adjacent fabrics, the amount of yarn 
taken being appro xiniately equal to half the com- 
bined mass of the adjacent fabrics, sew along 
all four sides to hold the yarn in place and to 
form a composite specimen. 

6.3 If the textile to be tested is loose fibre, comb 
and compress an amount approximately equal 
to half the combined mass of the adjacent fabrics, 
into a sheet 10 x 4 cm. Place the sheet between 
the two adjacent fabrics and sew along all four 
sides to hold the fibre in place and to form a 
composite specimen. 

7. PROCEDURE 

7.1 Place the composite specimen and the solvent 
in the container, the liquor ratio being 40 : 1. 



Agitate the specimen by hand or by a machine 
continuously for 30 minutes in the solvent at 
room temperature. If the agitation is by hand, 
the specimen should be pressed against the con- 
tainer every 2 min with a glass rod without re- 
moving the specimen from the solvent. Remove 
the specimen, squeeze excess solvent from it and 
dry it in air in shade at 80 ± 2T Without unstit- 
ching . Take the precautions necessary for 
safety in drying inflammable or explosive solvents. 
Remove the stitching. 

7.2 Evaluate the change in colour of the treated 
specimen by the method prescribed in IS : 768- 
1932* and the degree of staining of two pieces of 
adjacent fabrics by the method prescribed in 
IS : 769 - 1982t. 

Note 1 — Treated test specimens and the pieces of 
adjacent fabrics should have cooled after drying and 
should have regained their normal moisture content 
before evaluation. 

Note 2 — In cases of doubt in the assessment of colour 
fastness ratings by a single observer, the assessijicfet 
should be done by at least three observers and the overall 
average rating should be reported. 

8. REPORT 

8.1 The report- shall include the following: 

a) The solvent used, 

b) The numerical rating for change in coloi^ 
of test specimen, and 

c) The numerical ratings for staining of two 
pieces of adjacent fabrics use^ in the pre- 
paration of the composite specimen. 



*Method for evaluating change m colour ( first revision ). 
JMethod for evaluating staining ( first revision ). 



The Central Electric Press, DeUvi-T 



