IAT WS IS 3438 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


SMT TAS 3b fera, Wailea Slat an 
«dor — fate 
( HRT FRAT ) 


Silvered Glass Mirrors for General 
Purposes — Specification 
( Third Revision ) 


ICS 81.040.20 
© BIS 2023 
anc gier Sat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF HAM, 9 FR SITE AH unt, AE elt - 110002 
‘ene’ MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2023 Price Group 11 


Glass, Glassware and Laboratoryware Sectional Committee, CHD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Glass, Glassware and Laboratoryware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 


This standard was originally published in 1965 and later revised in 1977 and 1994. In this revision, the following 
modifications have been incorporated: 


a) Presence of copper in coatings is not permitted; 

b)Scope has been modified; 

c) Terminology has been expanded; 

d)To protect the users form lead exposure, requirement of lead for paints used as protective coatings have 
been added; 

e) Reference to IS 14900 has been given for requirements like base pane, thickness, dimensions, squareness 
etc.; 

f) Requirement for faults have been added; 

g)Requirement for waviness has been removed; 

h)Copper accelerated acetic acid salt spray test has been added; 

j) Hot water test has been removed; 

k)Spectrophotometric method added for determination of reflectance. Also, the requirement for reflectance 
has been modified; 

m) Requirements and methods of test for protective coatings adhesion, condensation water and pendulum 

damping have been added; 

n)Method for determination of silver coating in mirror during production has been added; and 

p)Informative annex on mirrors has been added. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following publications: 


ASTM C1503-08 Standard specification for silvered flat glass mirror 


BS EN 1036-1 : 2007 Glass in building — Mirrors from silver coated float glass for internal use — 
Part 1: Definitions, requirements and test methods 


ISO 1522 : 2006 Paints and varnishes — Pendulum damping test 

ISO 2409 : 2013 Paints and varnishes — Cross-cut test 

ISO 9227 : 2017 Corrosion tests in artificial atmospheres — Salt spray tests 
ISO 25537 : 2008 Glass in building — Silvered, flat-glass mirror 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of the standard is listed in Annex J. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’ .The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


SILVERED GLASS MIRRORS FOR GENERAL PURPOSES — 


SPECIFICATION 
( Third Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This standard prescribes requirements and methods 
of sampling and test for mirrors from silver coated 
float glass for interior application. 


This standard applies only to mirrors from silvered 
glass manufactured from flat annealed clear or tinted 
float glass, supplied in standard sizes as cut finished. 


NOTE — This standard is not applicable for mirrors from 
silvered glass used in aggressive and/or constantly high 
humidity atmospheres like horse riding halls, swimming 
pools, medical baths, saunas, high humidity baths etc. This 
standard is also not applicable to reflective glass for external 
glazing applications. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 

IS 133 : Enamel, interior: (a) undercoating 

2013 (b) finishing — Specification (fifth 
revision) 


IS 264 : Nitric acid (third revision) 
2005 


IS 266 : Sulphuric acid (third revision) 
1993 


IS 513 Cold reduced carbon steel sheet and 
(Part 1) : strip: Part 1 Cold forming and 
2016 drawing purposes (sixth revision) 


IS 1070 : Reagent grade water (third 
1992 revision) 


IS 1382 : Glossary of terms relating to glass 
1981 and glassware (first revision) 


IS 2932 : Enamel, synthetic, exterior: (a) 
2013 undercoating (b) finishing — 
Specification (fourth revision) 


IS 7809 Specification for pressure sensitive 
(Part 2) : adhesive tapes for electrical 
1977 purpose: Part 2 Methods of test 


IS 14900 : Transparent float glass | — 
2018 Specification (first revision) 


IS 16231 Use of glass in buildings — Code 
(Part 2) : of practice: Part 2 Energy and light 
2019 (first revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in IS1382 and IS 14900, in 
addition to the following shall apply. 


3.1 Blister 


Separation of silver coating or the protective 
coating. 


3.2 Cloud 


Frosted appearance in the reflected image from a 
silver coating. 


3.3 Cluster 

Group of not fewer than three spot faults separated 
by not more than 50 mm. 

3.4 Colour Spots 

Alteration of the reflective coating in the form of 
small, generally coloured spots. 

3.5 Copper-Free Mirror from Silver-Coated 
Float Glass 


Flat annealed clear or tinted float glass whose rear 
surface has been coated with a protected reflective 
silver deposit without use of copper. 


3.6 Corner On/Off 


Protrusion or indentation in the depth direction of 
the edge of the corner of mirror from the cut line. 


3.7 Cut Size 


Mirror cut to a size that is intended for final use. It 
is not intended for re-cutting, but may be subject to 
further processing like edge working, drilling, face 
decoration, etc. 


3.8 Drip 


Spot faults generated due to dropping and adhering 
of tin with the glass surface. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


3.9 Edge Corrosion 


Change in the colour or level of reflectance along 
the mirror edge as a result of degradation of the 
silver coating from external sources. 


3.10 Edge Fault 

Fault that affects the as-cut edge of the silvered 
glass, which includes slicing on/off, corners on/off, 
chips, shell chips, flare etc. 

3.11 Flare 

Protrusion in the length or width direction of the 
edge of a piece of mirror from the cut line. 

3.12 Glass Appearance Faults 

Faults which alter the visual quality of the mirror 
from silver-coated float glass. They can be spot 
and/or linear and/or enlarged area faults. 

3.13 Hairline Scratch 

Very fine linear or circular scratch or line which can 
barely be seen. 


3.14 Halo 


Distortion zone around gaseous inclusion or stone. 


3.15 Optical Faults 

Faults directly associated with the distortion of the 
reflected image. 

3.16 Paint Peel Off 


Loss of the silver coating or the protective coating. 


3.17 Pinhole 

Holes in silver coating or protective coating. 

3.18 Protective Coating(s) Fault 

Pinhole, burst bubble, scratches or loss of adhesion 
of the protective coating(s). 

3.19 Reflective Silver Coating Faults 


Faults in the reflective silver layer which will alter 
the appearance of the silvered glass. They consist of 
scratches, stain, colour spots and edge corrosion. 


3.20 Shell Chip 


Circular indentation in the mirror edge due to 
breakage of a small fragment. 


3.21Slicing On/ Off 


Protrusion or indentation in the depth direction of 
the edge of the piece of mirror from the cut line. 


3.22 Stain 
Alteration of the reflective coating characterized by 


a more or less brownish, yellowish or grayish 
colouration of zones which can sometimes cover 
the whole reflective surface. 


3.23 Stock/Standard Size 


Mirrors supplied with as-cut edges, which are 
intended for further processing. 


3.24 Weathering 


Discoloration of the silver coating caused due to the 
surface properties of a material flat glass. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 General 


Mirrors shall consist of glass sheet coated with silver 
on one surface. The silver shall be protected by a 
suitable protective paint coating. The paint used as 
protective coating may be tested as per IS 101 (Part 
8/Sec 5) and when thus tested the material shall not 
contain lead or compounds of lead or mixtures of 
both, calculated as metallic lead, exceeding 90 ppm. 


4.2 Base Pane 


The base glass/pane used for mirrors shall be flat, 
transparent and clear or tinted. In case of clear glass, 
it shall comply with the requirements prescribed in 
IS 14900. 


4.3 Thickness 


Thickness of silvered glass mirror shall be as 
prescribed in 4.3.1 of IS 14900. The actual thickness 
shall be the average of four measurements, taken to 
the nearest 0.01 mm, one taken at the center of each 
side. 


4.4 Dimensions 


Dimensions of silvered glass mirror shall be as 
prescribed in 4.3.2 of IS 14900. 


4.5 Squareness 


Squareness of silvered glass mirror shall be as 
prescribed in 4.3.3 of IS 14900. 


4.6 Silvering 


Silvering shall be a coating of deposited silver. It 
shall be free from defects or blemishes in the 
reflecting surface such as lifting or separation of the 
silver from the glass, sulphide or other spots, haze or 
any other visible defects. The amount of silver 
deposit shall not be less than 700 mg/m? when 
determined in accordance with the method 
prescribed in E-5.2. 


4.7 Protective Coating 


4.7.1 A suitable protective paint coating shall be 
applied over the base silver coating. This paint 
coating shall not crack or peel the silver coatings 
due to change in the atmospheric temperature or 
age-drying. 

4.7.2 There shall be no copper used as a coating in 
the mirror. Protective coating shall be tested for 
presence of copper as prescribed in E-5.3. 


4.8 Requirements for Glass, Reflective Coating, 
Edge and Protective Coating Faults 


4.8.1 Glass 
Faults 


Glass faults shall be assessed using the inspection 
method prescribed in 4.8.5. The dimension and 
number of hairline scratches, scratches and spot 


IS 3438 : 2023 


faults which cause disturbance to vision shall be as 
per Table 1. 


4.8.2 Reflective Silver Coating Faults 


Reflective silver coating faults shall be assessed 
using the inspection method prescribed in 4.8.5. 
Note the presence of scratches, stains, color spots 
and edge deterioration that cause disturbance to the 
image. Acceptance level for reflective coating faults 
shall be as per Table 1. 


4.8.3 Protective Coating(s) Faults 


Using the inspection method prescribed in 4.8.5, the 
presence of pin holes, burst bubbles, flaking of the 
protective coating along the edges or other faults in 
the protective coating(s) shall be noted looking at 
the protective-coated side (backside) of the mirror. 
Acceptance level for protective coating(s) shall be 
as per Table 1. 


Table 1 Acceptance Levels for Glass Faults, Reflective Silver-Coating Faults and Protective Coating(s) 


Faults 


(Clauses 4.8.1, 4.8.2 and 4.8.3) 


Defects /m?, Max, for all Sizes of Mirror with Clear or Tinted 


Linear Defects (mm) Glass Substrate 

Brush marks <50 0.375 
>50 0 

Scratches <50 0.139 
>50 0 


Defects /m?, Max, for all Sizes 


Dimension of Spot Faults” (mm) Mirror with Clear Glass | Mirror with Tinted Glass 
Substrate Substrate 
< 0.6 Accepted ? Accepted ? 
> 0.6 and < 1.5 1 1.5 
> 1.5 and «3 0.1 0.15 
>3 0 0 
1) The dimensions stated are with effect of the halo. 
2) Accepted, provided they do not form a cluster. 
4.8.4 Edge Faults 
4.8.4.2 Corners on/off 


4.8.4.1 Chips or shells 


For stock sizes, entrant or emergent chips or shells, 
visible under the conditions in 4 shall be accepted 
provided they do not exceed a maximum length or 
height of 10 mm and depth of half the nominal glass 
thickness. For cut sizes, entrant or emergent chips or 
shells, visible under the conditions in 4.8.5 shall be 
accepted provided they are not greater than 1.5 mm 
deep. 


For stock sizes, occasional corners on/off visible 
under the conditions in 4.8.5, as per Fig. 1 shall be 
allowed. For cut sizes, corners on/off shall not be 
allowed. 


NOTE — It is recommended that not more than 5% of 
sheets in a lot in case of stock sizes may be affected by 
corners on/off. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


All dimensions are in mm 
FIG. 1 DIMENSIONS OF CORNER ON/OFF 


4.8.4.3 Vented (cracked) edges 


Vented (cracked) edges, visible under conditions 
described in 4.8.5, shall not be allowed with either 
stock/standard sizes or cut sizes. 


4.8.5 Visual Inspection Method 


The silvered mirror shall be observed in a vertical 
position, with the naked eye and under normal 


diffused daylight conditions (300 lux to 600 lux at 
the silvered mirror), from a distance of 1 000 mm. 
The direction of observation shall be at right angles, 
to the silvered mirror. The use of an additional 
lighting source, for example, spotlight, is not 
allowed. 


4.9 Silvered glass mirror shall also satisfy the 
requirements prescribed in Table 2. 


Table 2 Requirements for Mirror Coating Quality and Durability 
(Clause 4.9, Table 3, Annexes A, B, C, D and G-1.5) 


SI No. Requirement Acceptance Criteria Method of 
Test, Ref to 
Annex 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Reflectance (For clear float Table 3 A-1 or A-2 
glass!) 
ii) Protective coating adhesion Classification number 2, if brush is used B 
or 
Classification number 3, if tape is used 
iii) Copper accelerated acetic acid Stain or cloud in silver coating — None C 


salt spray test 


iv) Condensation water test 


Bubbles in protective coating — None 


Edge corrosion - < 1.5 mm 
Number of colour spots — 
> 3mm - None 
> 0.5 mm and < 3mm - 2 
> 0.2 mm and < 0.5mm - 3 


After 480 h, D 
Edge corrosion < 0.2 mm 


Spots — 1 allowed, if diameter of spot < 0.3 mm 


v) Pendulum damping test 


> 125s F 


1) Silvered mirrors made from tinted float glass have a reflectance lower than those made from clear glass. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


Table 3 Requirement for Reflectance 


(Table 2) 
SI No. Nominal Thickness, Reflectance, 
mm percentage, Min 
(1) Q) (3) 
i) <2 83 
ii) 2.5 83 
iii) 3 83 
iv) 3.2 83 
v) 3.5 83 
vi) 4 83 
vii) 5 83 
viii) 5.5 83 
ix) 6 83 
x) 8 80 
xi) 10 80 
xii) 12 80 


5 PACKING AND MARKING 
5.1 Packing 


5.1.1 Mirrors shall be packed as agreed to between 
the purchaser and the supplier. 


5.1.2 Each box/package shall be marked with the 
following information: 


a) Quality of glass used as ‘F’ for float; 

b) Indication of the source of manufacture; 

c) Lot number or batch number or date of 
manufacture for traceability; and 

d) Thickness, in mm. 


5.2 Marking 
Each mirror shall be marked with the following 
information: 


a) Quality of glass used as ‘F’ for float; 
b) Indication of the source of manufacture; 


c) Lot number or batch number or date of 
manufacture for traceability; and 


d) Thickness, in mm. 


5.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


6 SAMPLING 


Representative samples of mirrors shall be drawn 
and conformity of the material to the requirements 
of this specification shall be determined in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed in Annex 
G. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
[Table 2, Sl No. (i)] 


REFLECTANCE TEST FOR MIRRORS 


A-1 PROJECTOR METHOD 
A-1.1 Apparatus 
A-1.1.1 Light Source 


A 500 watt projector with a standard lamp which can 
project almost parallel incident light and having a 
diameter of at least 19 mm. 


A-1.1.2 Light Receptors and Indicator 


The accuracy including the receptor shall be not 
more than + 2 percent of the maximum scale value 
or not more than + 10 percent of the magnitude of 
reading, whichever is less. However, the reflectance 
may be obtained by calculation after measurement 
with the illuminance meter. 


ZERO ADJUSTMENT DIAL 


PROJECTOR , 219mm min 
da em A 
— —— Lt —— — 


/ 
Ər + ^ \oMIRROR AND 


6i = 8r = 2545 


~ 


L- RECEPTOR(POSITION iN 


A-1.2 Procedure 


The receptor is arranged on the optical axis of the 
projector of a light source as given in below fig. 
when there is no incident light on the receptor, the 
scale of an indicator is aligned with the zero by a 
zero-adjustment dial. Further when the light of the 
projector is directly received the scale with 100 
percent by an indication adjustment dial. 


Then, the mirror to be measured is placed before the 
projector as shown in Fig. 2. The reflected light is 
received by moving a receptor and the scale of the 
indicator at the time is read out. 


A-1.3 Result 
The reflectance of the mirror shall be measured as 


the percentage of the indicator reading without 
mirror. 


— INDICATOR 
(REFLECTANCE) 


__—— INDICATION 


ADJUSTMENT DIAL 


RECEPTOR({ POSITION 
IN MEASUREMENT 
OF DIRECT LIGHT) 


e 


we 


MEASUREMENT OF REFLECTED LIGHT) 


FIG. 2 REFLECTANCE TEST FOR MIRRORS 


A-2 SPECTROPHOTOMETRIC METHOD 


Measurement of reflectance shall be undertaken 
with the angle of incidence of the light within 8° of 
normal and D65 Illuminant [see 6.1 of IS 16231 
(Part 2)]. Any commercially available calibrated 
spectrophotometer may be used for reflectance 
measurement. 


The wavelength calibration and the photometric 
linearity of commercial spectrophotometers shall be 


checked periodically using reference materials 
obtained from metrological laboratories. 


The wavelength calibration shall be performed by 
measuring glass plates which feature relatively 
sharp absorption bands at specified wavelengths; the 
photometric linearity shall be checked using grey 
filters with a certified transmittance. 


The light reflectance shall be calculated using the 
following equation [see 6.1 of IS 16231 (Part 2)], 


IS 3438 : 2023 


780nm 


X AWAM 
— A-380nm 
p v 780nm 
3 DVAJA 
A=380nm 
where V(A)= spectral luminous efficiency for photopic 
p(A) = spectral reflectance vision defining the standard observer for photometry 
AA = wavelength interval. 

= relati tral distributi f 

B; . p eee m Normalized relative spectral distribution values 
illuminant D65. shall be as per Table 5 of IS 16231 (Part 2). 


IS 3438 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
[Table 2, SI No. (ii)] 


PROTECTIVE COATING ADHESION 


B-1 GENERAL 


The adhesion of the protective coating(s), excluding 
the metallic layer, shall be assessed by means of the 
‘cross cut test’. The test shall be carried out 
manually, using the six bladed cutting tool (see Fig. 
3) with a cut spacing of 1 mm. The specimen may 
be evaluated using either the soft brush or the 
pressure sensitive tape. 


30" 2 


] Cutting edges 

a Width across all six cutting edges 

b Guide edges and cutting edges lie on same diameter 
c Direction of cut 


B-2 APPARATUS 

B-2.1 Cutting Tool 

A multi-blade cutting tool shall have six cutting 
edges spaced 1 mm apart (see Fig.3). The width 
across the six cutting edges, a, shall be 5 mm for a 
tool which has a cutting-edge spacing of 1 mm. 
When the cutting edge has worn to 0.1 mm, it shall 
be reground. The guide edges and the cutting edges 
shall lie on the same diameter. 


FiG.3 MULTI BLADE CUTTING TOOL 


B-2.2 Soft Brush 


B-2.3 Pressure Sensitive Adhesive Tape 


Unless otherwise agreed, adhesive tape with an 
adhesive strength between 6 N per 25 mm width and 
10 N per 25 mm width [determined in accordance 
with IS 7809 (Part 2)] may be used. The tape shall 
be at least 50 mm wide. 


NOTE — Transparent tape is recommended. 


B-3 TEST SPECIMEN 


The dimensions of the specimen shall be mutually 
agreed upon between the purchaser and the 
supplier, but the specimen shall have a minimum 
area of 10 000 mm, for example, 100 mm x 100 
mm, 70 mm x 150 mm, 150 mm x 150 mm. 


B-4 PROCEDURE 


B-4.1 Place the test panel on a rigid, flat surface to 
prevent any deformation of the panel during the test. 
Before the test, inspect the cutting edge of the blade 
and maintain its condition by sharpening or 
replacement. 

Hold the cutting tool with the blade normal to the 
test surface. With uniform pressure on the cutting 
tool, cut the coating at a uniform cutting rate. All the 
cuts shall penetrate to the substrate surface. 

Repeat this operation, making further parallel cuts 
of equal number, crossing the original cuts at 90? to 
them so that a lattice pattern is formed. 

B-4.2 Evaluate the protective coatings adhesion 
using either the soft brush (see B-4.3) or the pressure 
sensitive tape (see B-4.4). 

B-4.3 Brush 


Brush the panel lightly with the soft brush several 


a) Position of adhesive tape 
with respect to grid 


Key 

] Tape 

2 Coating 

3 Cuts 

4 Substrate 

a Smoothed down 

b Direction of removal 


IS 3438 : 2023 


times backwards and several times forwards 
along each of the diagonals of the lattice pattern. 
B-4.4 Tape 

Remove two complete laps from a reel of the 
adhesive tape and discard. Remove an additional 
length at a steady rate and cut a piece approximately 
75 mm long. 


Place the centre of the tape over the lattice in a 
direction parallel to one set of cuts and smooth the 
tape into place over the area of the lattice and for a 
distance of at least 20 mm beyond with a finger. To 
ensure good contact with the coating, rub the tape 
firmly with a fingertip or fingernail. The colour of 
the coating seen through the tape is a useful 
indication of overall contact. Within 5 min of 
applying the tape, remove the tape by grasping the 
free end and pulling it off steadily in 0.5 s to 1.0 s 
at an angle which is as close as possible to 60? 
(see Fig. 4). 


b) Position immediately prior to 
removal from grid 


FIG. 4 APPLICATION OF ADHESIVE TAPE 


NOTES 


1 For coatings made up of more than one layer, it is 
recommended that the tape application and removal 
operation be carried out at least once in each direction of the 
lattice pattern. 


2 It is recommended that the tape be retained for reference 
purposes, for example by attaching it to a sheet of 
transparent film. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


SI No. 


Classification 


(2) 


B-5 CLASSIFICATION OF TEST RESULTS 


Description 


(3) 


Appearance of Surface of 
Cross-Cut Area from which 
Flaking has Occurred 


(4) 


iii) 


iv) 


v) 


vi) 


The edges of the cuts are completely smooth; 
none of the squares of the lattice is detached. 


Detachment of small flakes of the coating at 
the intersections of the cuts. A cross-cut area 
not greater than 596 is affected. 


The coating has flaked along the edges and/or 
at the intersections of the cuts. A cross-cut 
area greater than 5%, but not greater than 
1596, is affected. 


The coating has flaked along the edges of the 
cuts partly or wholly in large ribbons, and/or 
it has flaked partly or wholly on different 
parts of the squares. A cross-cut area greater 
than 1596, but not greater than 35%, is 
affected. 


The coating has flaked along the edges of the 
cuts in large ribbons and/or some squares 
have detached partly or wholly. A cross-cut 
area greater than 35%, but not greater than 
65%, is affected. 


Any degree of flaking that cannot even be 
classified by classification 4. 


Ex 


IS 3438 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
[Table 2, SI No. (ii1)] 


COPPER-ACCELERATED ACETIC ACID SALT SPRAY TEST 


C-1 TEST SOLUTION 
C-1.1 Salt Solution 


A salt solution having a concentration of 50 + 5 g/l 
shall be prepared by dissolving sodium chloride in 
distilled or deionized water (see IS 1070). Sodium 
chloride used shall not contain a mass fraction of the 
heavy metals copper (Cu), nickel (Ni) and lead (Pb) 
in total more than 0.005%. It shall not contain a mass 
fraction of sodium iodide more than 0.196 and a 
mass fraction of total impurities more than 0.5%, 
calculated for dry salt. 


C-1.2 Adjustment of pH 


C-1.2.1 Dissolve a sufficient mass of copper(II) 
chloride dihydrate (CuCl2-2H20) in the salt solution 
(see C-1.1) to produce a concentration of 0.26 g/l + 
0.02 g/l [equivalent to 0.205 g + 0.015 g of CuCl 
per litre]. 


C-1.2.2 Add a sufficient amount of glacial acetic 
acid to the salt solution (C-1.1) to ensure that the pH 
of samples of sprayed solution collected in the test 
cabinet (C-2.2) is between 3.1 and 3.3 at 25 °C +2 
°C. If the pH of the solution initially prepared is 3.0 
to 3.1, the pH of the sprayed solution is likely to be 
within the specified limits. Check the pH using 
electrometric measurement. Measurements of pH 
shall be done using electrodes suitable for measuring 
in weakly buffered sodium chloride solutions in 
deionized water. Make any necessary corrections by 
adding glacial acetic acid, sodium hydroxide, or 
sodium bicarbonate of analytical grade. 


C-1.2.3 If necessary, filter the solution before 
placing it in the reservoir of the apparatus, to remove 
any solid matter which might block the apertures of 
the spraying device. 


C-2 APPARATUS 
C-2.1 Component Protection 


All components in contact with the spray or the test 
solution shall be made of, or lined with, materials 
resistant to corrosion by the sprayed solution and 
which do not influence the corrosivity of the sprayed 
test solutions. 


The supports for the test specimen shall be 
constructed such that different substrate types do not 
influence each other. It shall also be constructed so 
that the supports themselves do not influence the test 
specimens. 


C-2.2 Spray Cabinet 


The cabinet shall be such that the conditions of 
homogeneity and distribution of the spray are met. 
Due to the limited capacity of cabinets smaller than 
0.4 m°, the effect of the loading of the cabinet on the 
distribution of the spray and temperature shall be 
carefully considered. The solution shall not be 
sprayed directly onto test specimens but rather 
spread throughout the cabinet so that it falls 
naturally down to them. The upper parts of the 
cabinet shall be designed so that drops of sprayed 
solution formed on its surface do not fall on the test 
specimens being tested. 


The size and shape of the cabinet shall be such that 
the collection rate of solution in the cabinet is within 
the limits measured as specified in C-5.5. Preference 
shall be given to apparatus that has a means for 
properly dealing with fog after the test, prior to 
releasing it from the building for environmental 
conservation, and for drawing water prior to 
discharging it to the drainage system. 


C-2.3 Heater and Temperature Control 


An appropriate system shall maintain the cabinet 
and its contents at the specified temperature (see 
Table 5). The temperature shall be measured at least 
100 mm from walls and radiant heat sources. 


C-2.4 Spraying Device 


The device for spraying the salt solution comprises 
a supply of clean air, of controlled pressure and 
humidity, a reservoir to contain the solution to be 
sprayed, and one or more atomizers. 


The compressed air supplied to the atomizers shall 
be passed through a filter to remove all traces of oil 
or solid matter, and the atomizing pressure shall be 
at an overpressure of 70 kPa to 170 kPa. The 
pressure is typically 98 kPa + 10 kPa but can vary 
depending on the type of cabinet and atomizer used. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


In order to prevent the evaporation of water from the 
sprayed droplets (aerosol) the air shall be 
humidified before entering the atomizer by passing 
through a suitable humidifier. The humidified air 
shall be saturated such that the concentration of the 
fallout solution falls within the specifications of 
C- 1.1. The humidified air shall also be heated such 
that when mixed with the salt solution, there is no 
significant disturbance of the temperature in the 
cabinet. The appropriate temperature depends on the 


pressure used and on the type of atomizer nozzle. 
Temperature, pressure or humidification, or a 
combination thereof, shall be adjusted so that the 
rate of collection of the spray in the cabinet and the 
concentration of the collected spray are kept within 
the specified limits (see C-5.5). A commonly used 
humidifier is the saturation tower, where 
temperature and pressure are controllable. Table 4 
gives guiding values on temperature and pressure 
combinations for the saturation tower. 


Table 4 Guiding Values for the Temperature of the Hot Water in the Saturation Tower 
(Clause C-2.4) 


SI No. Atomizing Guiding Values for the Temperature of 

Overpressure, the Hot Water in the Saturation Tower 

kPa when Performing the Different Salt 

Spray Test, 

RS 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 70 61 
ii) 84 63 
iii) 98 64 
iv) 112 66 
v) 126 67 
vi) 140 69 
vii) 160 70 
viii) 170 71 


The atomizers shall be made of inert material. 
Baffles may be used to prevent direct impact of the 
spray on the test specimens, and the use of 
adjustable baffles is helpful in obtaining uniform 
distribution of the spray within the cabinet. For this 
purpose, a dispersion tower equipped with an 
atomizer may also be helpful. 

The salt solution supplied to the nozzle shall be kept 
stable to ensure a continuous and uniform fall out as 
described in C-5.5. A stable level of spraying can be 
achieved by either controlling the level of salt 
solution in the reservoir or restricting the flow of salt 
solution to the nozzle such that a continuous spray is 
achieved. 

Distilled or deionized water with conductivity not 
higher than 20 uS/cm at 25 °C + 2 °C shall be used 
for humidification of spray air. 


C-2.5 Collecting Devices 
At least two collecting devices shall be used to check 


the homogeneity of the spraying of the cabinet. 
Suitable funnels shall be made of chemically inert 
material, with the stems inserted into graduated 
cylinders or other similar containers and have a 
diameter of 100 mm, which corresponds to a 
collecting area of approximately 80 cm?. The 
collecting devices shall be placed in the zone of the 
cabinet where the test specimens are placed, one 
close to an inlet of spray and one remote from an 
inlet. They shall be placed so that only mist, and 
not liquid falling from specimens or from parts of 
the cabinet, is collected. 


C-3 METHOD FOR EVALUATING CABINET 
CORROSIVITY 


C-3.1 To check the reproducibility and repeatability 
of the test results for one piece of apparatus, or for 
similar items of apparatus in different laboratories, 


it is necessary to verify the apparatus at regular 
intervals as described in C-3.2 to C-3.4. 


NOTE — During permanent operation, a reasonable time 
period between two checks of the corrosivity of the 
apparatus is generally considered to be 3 months. 


To determine the corrosivity of the tests, reference 
specimens made of steel shall be used. 


C-32 Reference Specimens 


To verify the apparatus, use at least four reference 
specimens of 1.0 mm x 0.2 mm thickness and 150 
mm x 70 mm of CR4-grade steel in accordance with 
IS 513 (Part 1) with an essentially faultless surface) 
and a matt finish (arithmetical mean deviation of the 
profile Ra 2 0.8 um x 0.3 um). Cut these reference 
specimens from cold-rolled plates or strips. 


Thoroughly clean the reference specimens with an 
appropriate organic solvent (such as a hydrocarbon 
with a boiling point between 60 °C and 120 °C), 
using a clean soft brush or soft cloth, non-woven lint 
free cloth that does not leave any remains, or an 
ultrasonic cleaning device. Carry out the cleaning in 
a vessel full of solvent. After cleaning, rinse the 
reference specimens with fresh solvent and then 
dry them. Cleaning shall eliminate all those traces 
(dirt, oil or other foreign matter) that can influence 
the test results. 


Determine the mass of the reference specimens to 
+ 1 mg. Protect one face of the reference specimens 
with a removable coating, for example, an adhesive 
plastic film. The edges of the reference specimens 
may be protected by the adhesive tape as well. 


Each reference specimen shall be used for 


evaluating cabinet corrosivity only once. 


C-3.3 Arrangement of the Reference Specimens 


Position at least four steel reference specimens in 
four quadrants (if six specimens are available, place 
them in six different positions including four 
quadrants) in the zone of the cabinet where the test 
specimens are placed, with the unprotected face 
upwards, and at an angle of 20 + 5? from the vertical. 
The support for the reference specimens shall be 
made of, or coated with, inert materials such as 
plastics. The lower edge of the reference specimens 
shall be in level with the top of the salt spray 
collector. 


The cabinet should be verified during the testing of 
test specimens. If this is the case, great care shall be 
taken that the specimens do not affect each other. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


Otherwise, the cabinet shall be filled with substitute 
specimens to maintain the homogeneity of the 
The verification procedure shall be 
performed using the same settings as for the test 


cabinet. 
runs. 


C-3.4 Determination of Mass Loss (Mass Per 
Area) 


The test duration shall be 24 h. At the end of the test, 
immediately take the reference specimens out of the 
test cabinet and remove the protective coating. 
Remove the corrosion products by mechanical and 
chemical cleaning. An option for chemical cleaning 
is the use of a solution with a mass fraction of 2096 
[(NH4)2HC6Hs07] 
(recognized analytical grade) in water for 10 min at 
23 °C. 


of diammonium citrate 


After each stripping, thoroughly clean the reference 
specimens at ambient temperature with water, then 
with ethanol, followed by drying. 


Weigh the reference specimens to the nearest 1 mg. 
Divide the determined mass loss by the area of the 
exposed surface area of the reference specimen in 
order to assess the metal mass loss per square metre 
of the reference specimen. 


It is recommended that freshly prepared solution be 
used during each procedure for the removal of 
corrosion products. 


C-3.5 Satisfactory Performance of Cabinet 


The cabinet shall be deemed to have performed 
satisfactorily if the mass loss of steel reference 
specimen is within the allowed range of mass loss of 
55 + 15 g/m’. 


C-4 TEST SPECIMENS 


The dimensions of the specimen shall be mutually 
agreed upon between the purchaser and the supplier, 
but the specimen shall have a minimum area of 10 
000 mm?, for example, 100 mm x 100 mm, 70 mm 
x 150 mm, 150 mm x 150 mm. 


C-5 PROCEDURE 


C-5.1 Arrangement of Test Specimens 


The test specimens shall be placed in the cabinet so 
that they are not in the direct line of travel of the 
spray from the atomizer. The angle at which the 
surface of the test specimen is exposed in the cabinet 
is very important. The specimen shall, in principle, 


IS 3438 : 2023 


be flat and placed in the cabinet facing upwards at 
an angle as close as possible to 20? to the vertical. 
This angle shall, in all cases, be within the limits 15? 
to 25°. [n the case of irregular surfaces, for example, 
entire components, these limits shall be adhered to 
as closely as possible. 

The test specimens shall be arranged so that they do 
not come into contact with the cabinet and so that 
surfaces to be tested are exposed to free circulation 
of spray. The specimens may be placed at different 
levels within the cabinet, as long as the solution does 


not drip from specimens or their supports at one 
level onto other specimens placed below. However, 
for a new examination or for tests with a total 
duration exceeding 96 h, location permutation of 
specimens is permitted. 


The supports for the test specimens shall be made of 
inert non-metallic material. If it is necessary to 
suspend specimens, the material used shall not be 
metallic but shall be synthetic fibre, cotton thread or 
other inert insulating material. 


C-5.2 Operating conditions shall be as prescribed in 
Table 5. 


Table 5 Operating Conditions 
(Clause C-5.2, C-5.5, C-2.3) 


SI No. Operating Parameter Prescribed Value 
1) Temperature 50 °C +2°C 
ii) Average collection rate for a horizontal collecting area of 80 cm? 1.5 + 0.5 ml/h 
iii) Concentration of sodium chloride (collected solution) 50 5 g/l 
iv) pH of collected solution 3.1 to 3.3 


NOTE The + tolerances given are the allowable operational fluctuations, which are defined as the positive and negative deviations 
from the setting of the sensor at the operational control set point during equilibrium conditions. This does not mean that the set value 


may vary by plus/minus the amount indicated from the given value. 


C-5.3 Check the collection rate and other test 
conditions in the test cabinet, filled to a similar 
extent as during the test. An empty or a completely 
filled cabinet behaves differently. After it has been 
confirmed that the test conditions are within a 
specified range, stop spraying the salt solution, fill 
the test cabinet with test specimens and start the test. 


Evaporation of collected solution inside the cabinet 
can have an effect on the concentration and pH. Care 
should be taken to only measure solution that has not 
been subject to significant evaporation. 


C-5.4 The duration of test shall be 120 h. 
Interruptions of the test shall be minimized. The 
cabinet shall be opened only for brief visual 
inspections of the test specimens in position and for 
replenishing the salt solution in the reservoir, if such 
replenishment cannot be carried out from outside the 
cabinet. The total opening time per day shall not 
exceed 1 h. 


NOTE — A periodic visual examination of specimens under 
test for a predetermined period may be carried out, but the 


14 


surfaces under test shall not be disturbed, and the period 
for which the cabinet is open shall be the minimum 
necessary to observe and record any visible changes. 


C-5.5 The solution collected in each of the 
collecting devices (see C-2.5) shall have a sodium 
chloride concentration and a pH value within the 


ranges given in Table 5. 


The average rate of collection of solution in each 
device shall be measured over a minimum period of 
24 h of continuous spraying. A daily checking of the 
collection rate during the operation of the cabinet is 
recommended. 


C-5.6 The test solution which has been sprayed 
shall not be re-used. 


C-5.7 During operation, the tank for the salt solution 
shall be covered by a lid to prevent dust or other 
contaminants from influencing the solution and to 
prevent the concentration of sodium chloride and the 
pH from fluctuating. 


C-6 TREATMENT OF SPECIMENS AFTER 
TEST 


At the end of the test period, remove the test 
specimens from the cabinet and allow them to dry 
for 0.5 h to 1 h before rinsing, in order to reduce the 
risk of removing corrosion products. Before they are 


IS 3438 : 2023 


examined, carefully remove the residues of spray 
solution from their surfaces. A suitable method is 
to rinse or dip the test specimens gently in clean 
running water, at a temperature not exceeding 40 ? 
C, and then to dry them immediately in a stream of 
air, at an overpressure not exceeding 200 kPa and 
at a distance of approximately 300 mm. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
[Table 2, SI No. (iv)] 


CONDENSATION WATER TEST IN CONSTANT ATMOSPHERE 


D-1 GENERAL 


This test method describes the general conditions 
which have to be observed when submitting 
specimens to 
atmospheres, in order to ensure that the results of 
tests carried out 


condensation — water-constant 
in different laboratories are 
reproducible. The tests are designed to determine the 
behaviour of the specimens in humid ambient 
atmospheres, and to pinpoint any defects of the 
protection of the specimens against corrosion. The 
behaviour of the specimens in these test atmospheres 
does not, however, enable any direct assertions to be 
made in respect of the service life expectation of the 
components tested under real conditions of use. The 
shape and the preparation of the specimens, the 
duration of the test, the evaluation of the test and the 
assessment of the test results do not form part of the 
subject matter of this test method. 


D-2 TEST CONDITIONS 


Condensation water test atmospheres promote the 
condensation of atmospheric humidity on the 
surfaces of specimens, the temperatures of which are 
lower than the temperature of the saturated air in the 
test cabinet, due to radiation onto the cabinet walls 
or to the cooling of the specimen. The constant 
atmospheric temperature in the test cabinet during 
the condensation process of the condensation water 
test shall be 40 °C + 3 °C. The quantity of 
condensation water formed on the surface of the 
specimen may also have an important influence on 
the action of the condensation water; this quantity 
will be affected by the ambient temperature in the 
installation room or by the cooling of the specimen. 
The condensate which drips off the specimen 
consists of condensation water and also in some 
instances of solid and liquid constituents of the 
specimens dissolved in the condensation water or 
mixed in it. Reproducible results can only be 
expected on condition that the test atmosphere is the 
same and that the test procedure is the same. 


D-3 CLIMATIC TESTING DEVICE 


D-3.1 Climatic Chamber 
A vapour-tight climatic chamber is essential for 


16 


testing with a warm and humid atmosphere. The 
material of the inner walls shall be corrosion- 
resistant and shall not affect the specimens. The 
climatic chamber shall be usually equipped with a 
floor trough which acts as the receptacle for the 
quantity of water prescribed in D-4.1. The test 
cabinet conditions shall be achieved by heating the 
water in the floor trough. 


If the quantity of heat introduced via the water is 
insufficient to heat up the air in the test cabinet to 
the required temperature, then this air shall be heated 
up additionally. 
NOTE — The heating-up time will depend on the nature and 
quantity of the specimens, and also on the ratio of the water 


surface of the floor trough to the wall surface of the test 


cabinet, and on the water temperature. The water 


temperature shall not exceed 60 °C. The dimensions of the 
climatic chamber and the arrangement of its temperature 
measuring and control equipment can be modified, provided 
that the test conditions in accordance with D-2 and D-4.3 
are observed and that the temperature of the test atmosphere 
in the useful space is measured. The climatic chamber shall 
be provided with a suitable door or other aperture capable 
of being closed, which allows the test room to be charged 
with specimens and to be ventilated. An example of a 
condensation water climatic testing device is illustrated in 
Fig. 5. 


Climatic testing devices not equipped with water- 
filled floor troughs shall be designed in such a way 
that an adequate formation of condensation water on 
the specimens is achieved in them. 


D-3.2 Installation of the Climatic Chamber 


The climatic chamber shall be installed in a room 
with an ambient atmosphere not containing any 
corrosive constituents (for example, it shall not be 
installed in a chemical laboratory) at a room 
temperature of 26 °C + 2 °C and at a relative 
atmospheric humidity not exceeding 85% relative 
humidity, in such a way that it is protected against 
draughts and solar radiation. In the case of 
comparison tests, the ambient temperature in the 
installation room shall be 26 °C € 2 °C. 


NOTE — A decrease in the ambient temperature will result 
in an increase in the quantity of condensation water. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


1 Temperature measuring device 


2 Pressure relief valve 


3 Floor trough filled with water 


FIG. 5 EXAMPLE OF A CONDENSATION WATER CLIMATIC TESTING DEVICE WITH GLASS 


D-3.3 Device for the Accommodation of the 
Specimens (Specimen Holder) 


The device for the accommodation of the specimens 
shall consist of a corrosion resistant material and 
shall not promote the corrosion of the specimens. It 
shall allow the specimens to be arranged in 
accordance with the requirements of D-4.3. 


D-4 PROCEDURE 
D-4.1 Filling the Floor Trough 


The floor trough shall be filled with pure water 
(distilled water or de-ionized water) in such a way 
that at least 10 mm depth of water is present at all 
times during operation. 

D-4.2 Specimens 


Only specimens which are not capable of 
influencing one another mutually shall be tested 
together at any one time. The test specimens shall 
have a dimension of 100 mm x 100 mm. If the 
amount of condensation water formed is likely to 
additionally affect the specimens, then the quantity 
of condensation water shall be ascertained over a 24 
h period, with the aid of a suitable device 
(see E-4.4), for the purpose of describing the test 
conditions. 


D-4.3 Arrangement of the Specimens 


The specimens shall be positioned such that they 


have an inclination of 20? to the vertical. They 
shall be arranged in the test cabinet in such a way 
that they are not in close contact with each other 
and that they are able to radiate heat adequately. 
The following minimum  spacings shall be 
observed: 


a) distance from the walls not less than 100 
mm; 

b) distance of the bottom edge of the 
specimens from the surface of the water not 
less than 200 mm 
spacing between adjoining specimens not 

less than 20 mm; and 

C) Steps shall be taken to ensure that no 
condensation water is allowed to drip onto 
the specimens from the walls of the test 
cabinet or from other specimens arranged 
overhead, when the specimens are 
positioned. 


D-4.4 Device for the Determination of the 
Comparison Quantity of Condensation Water 
(Optional) 


The device described below is suitable for the 
determination of the comparison quantity of 
condensation water, 
condensation water formed is likely to additionally 
affect the specimens. An 18 mm x 180 mm test tube 
of glass, filled with water, shall be used as the 


in case the amount of 


IS 3438 : 2023 


standard specimen. The condensate dripping from 
the test tube shall be collected in a graduated 
measuring cylinder with a nominal capacity of 10 
ml, via a glass funnel with a diameter of 55 mm. The 
device shall be arranged in the test cabinet amongst 
the other specimens in the same way as described in 
D-4.3 for the arrangement of the specimens, and the 
bottom of the test tube (which shall itself be 
suspended from a thread of polyamide for example), 
shall be situated 50 mm above the rim of the funnel 
placed in the graduated measuring cylinder. 


D-4.5 Test Sequence 
D-4.5.1 Start-Up 


After the specimens have been positioned and the 


climatic chamber has been closed, the heating for the 
floor trough water or for the climatic testing device 
shall be switched on, and the test cabinet shall be 
heated up to 40 °C + 3 °C. This temperature shall be 
attained within 1.5 h. Condensation water shall be 
formed on the specimens. 


D-4.5.2 Condensation Water Constant Atmosphere 
The temperature prescribed in D-2, and therefore the 
condensation process, shall be maintained in the test 
cabinet for the entire prescribed duration of the test. 
D-4.5.3 End of Test 


The test shall be terminated after 480 h. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clauses 4.6 and 4.7.2) 


TEST FOR SILVER AND COPPER COATINGS 


E-1 PRINCIPLE 


The silver and copper deposits are dissolved in nitric 
acid. Silver is estimated by titrating with ammonium 
thiocyanate Copper is estimated by 
comparing the intensity of cuproammonium 
complex of the test solution with that of a standard 
copper solution. 


solution. 


E-2 QUALITY OF REAGENTS 


Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and 
distilled water (see IS 1070) shall be employed in 


tests. 
NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 


contain impurities which affect the results of analysis. 


E-3 APPARATUS 


Nessler cylinders - Two, of 100 ml capacity. 


E-4 REAGENTS 
E-4.1 Concentrated Nitric Acid — See IS 264. 


E-4.2 Standard Ammonium Thiocyanate 
Solution 


Dissolve 0.76 g of ammonium thiocyanate in 1 litre 
of water. Standardize against 0.01 N silver nitrate 
solution using ferric ammonium sulphate solution as 
indicator. 


E-4.3 Ferric Ammonium Sulphate Solution 


Dissolve 8 g of ferric ammonium sulphate in 400 ml 
of water containing 3 ml to 5 ml of concentrated 
sulphuric acid (see IS 266). 


E-4.4 Standard Copper Solution 


3.93 g of copper sulphate (CuSO4.5H2O) in 200 ml 
of water and add with stirring 50 ml of concentrated 
sulphuric acid (see IS 266). Cool, transfer to a 1 000 
ml volumetric flask and dilute with water up to the 
mark. Further dilute 100 ml of this solution to 1 000 
ml in a volumetric flask. One ml of this diluted 
solution is equivalent to 0.1 mg of copper (as Cu). 


NOTE — AR Grade copper sulphate of purity 99.5 percent 
(Min) is to be used. 


E-4.5 Ammonium Hydroxide Solution — 
Approximately 10 N. 


E-5 PROCEDURE 


E-5.1 Take a sample of known area for analysis. 
Remove any paint or varnish from the mirror back 
with benzene or denatured spirit. Dissolve the 
copper/silver deposits using minimum quantity of 
nitric acid distributing the acid over the mirror back 
with a glass rod. Wash the nitric acid containing 
copper/silver into a 200 ml porcelain basin and 
evaporate the solution to dryness carefully on a 
sand-bath. Dissolve the residue in 3 to 5 drops of 
nitric acid and a little water. Boil the solution, cool 
and transfer to a 250 ml volumetric flask and make 
up the volume to the mark with water. 


E-5.2 Determination of Silver 


E-5.2.1 The amount of silver deposit may be 
determined either in accordance with the manual 
titration method prescribed in E-5.2.2 or with the 
use of any commercially available auto titrator. 
However, in case of any dispute, the manual titration 
method prescribed in E-5.2.2 shall be the referee 
method. 


E-5.2.2 Take a 50 ml aliquot of the solution prepared 
in E-5.1, and titrate with standard ammonium 
thiocyanate solution, using 5 ml of ferric ammonium 
sulphate solution, until the brown colour appears. 


E-5.2.3 Calculation 
Silver deposit (expressed as mg/m?) = 


DOR 100 


where 
V = volume of standard thiocyanate solution 
added, in ml; 
N z normality of the standard ammonium 
thiocyanate solution; and 
A = area of the mirror specimen, in square 
decimetres. 


E-5.3 Determination of Copper 


E-5.3.1 Take a 10 ml aliquot of the solution prepared 
in E-5.1 and transfer it to a 100ml Nessler cylinder. 
Add 10 ml of ammonium hydroxide solution and 
make to 100 ml mark with water. Transfer 10 ml of 
ammonium hydroxide solution and 5 ml of water to 
a second 100 ml Nessler cylinder. Add standard 
copper solution (see E-4.4) to this Nessler cylinder 
drop by drop until on dilution to the mark with 
water, the blue colour of the solutions in both 
Nessler cylinders matches. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


E-5.3.2 Calculation 
Copper deposit (expressed as g/m”) = 


25xV 1 
x a aan 
A 10 
where 


V = volume of standard copper solution used, 
in ml; and 

A = area of the mirror specimen in square 
decimeter. 


NOTES 

1A sample mirror 150 mm x 150 mm is usually taken for 
analysis. 

2 It is essential that the evaporation takes place in the 
absence of hydrochloric acid fumes. 

3 Even though the solution of copper/silver deposits may be 
slightly cloudy, the solution is transferred to the flask 
without filtering. 


E-6 METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF 
SILVER COATING IN MIRROR DURING 
PRODUCTION 


E-6.1 General 


This method for determination of silver coating in 
mirrors is to be carried out during production and is 
intended for factory production and process control. 
Silver coated sample is to be taken out from mirror 
production line, prior to paint application. The 
manufacturer should keep an adequate record of this 
test. Alternatively, the manufacturer may also use an 
auto-titrator for the determination of silver coating 
in mirror during production. 


E-6.2 Apparatus 
E-6.2.1 Burette 
E-6.2.2 Beaker or Porcelain Cup 


20 


E-6.2.3 Stirrer 


E-6.3 Reagents 


E-6.3.1 Concentrated Nitric Acid (68-70%) — See 
IS 264. 


E-6.3.2 Potassium Thiocyanate Solution — 0.01 N. 
E-6.3.3 Ferric Alum Indicator 
E-6.3.4 Demineralized Water — see IS 1070. 


E-6.4 Procedure 


E-6.4.1 Take a 100 mm x 100 mm sample. The 
edges of the sample must be free from silver deposit. 


E-6.4.2 Place the sample in a beaker or porcelain 
cup and dissolve the silver film with the help of 
nitric acid to collect the silver deposits in the 
beaker/cup. 


E-6.4.3 Rinse the sample with least quantity of 
demineralized water and collect the same in that 
beaker to ensure that all the silver has been removed 
off the glass. 


E-6.4.4 Add 8 to 10 drops of ferric alum (indicator) 
and stir well. 


E-6.4.5 Take 0.01N potassium thiocyanate in 
burette for titration. 


E-6.4.6 Titrate until the first permanent brownish- 
orange (peach) color is obtained, which is the end 
point. Note the burette reading. 


E-6.5 Calculation 


Silver deposit (expressed as mg/m?) = burette 


reading x 108. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


ANNEX F 
[Table 2, SI No. (v)] 


PENDULUM DAMPING TEST 


F-1 GENERAL 


A pendulum resting on a coating surface is set into 
oscillation and the time for the oscillation amplitude 
to decrease by a specified amount is measured. 
Shorter the damping time, the lower the hardness. 


F-2 APPARATUS 


F-2.1 Persoz Pendulum (see Fig. 6), consisting of 
an open framework with an upper cross-bar with two 


stainless steel balls, 8 mm + 0.005 mm in diameter 
and of hardness 59 HRC x 1 HRC or two tungsten- 
carbide balls of (5 + 0.005) mm diameter and of 
hardness (1 600 + 32) HV 30, inset to form a 
fulcrum, and with a lower cross-bar that also forms 
the pointer. The two balls shall be set 50 mm + 1 mm 
apart. The total mass of the pendulum shall be 500 g 
+ 0.1 g, its center of gravity at rest shall be 60 mm + 
0.1 mm below the fulcrum, and the pointer tip shall 
be 400 mm + 0.2 mm below the plane of the fulcrum. 


st EN 
"P 5 
bs So +1 - 
1 EY 
| 
z 
ur HUE ] C 
V $ v 


FIG. 6 PERSOZ PENDULUM 


F-2.2 Instrument Stand 


The stand for supporting test panel and pendulum 
comprises a heavy supported vertical rod to which is 
attached a horizontal table with a flat working 
surface, the dimensions of which may conveniently 
be 95 mm x 110 mm and not less than 10 mm thick. 
The stand also has a stirrup to support the pendulum 
away from the table and a mechanism for shock-free 
lowering of the pendulum on to the test panel. 


F-2.3 Scale 


The front of the stand shall be marked to show 
angular displacement of the pendulum from a centre 


21 


point, indicating the rest position of the pendulum, 
through 12° and 4° for the Persoz pendulum. The 
scale may be moved horizontally, and locked in 
position so that the zero marking and the test 
position of the pendulum tip coincide. This scale 
may be marked on a mirror, or a mirror may be 
placed behind the scale, to assist in eliminating 
parallax errors during observation. 


F-2.4 Stopwatch, or other timing device, for timing 
the oscillation damping of the pendulum. 


F-2.5 Polished Plate (Float) Glass Panel, 
calibrating the pendulum. 


for 


IS 3438 : 2023 


F-2.6 Test Panel, 100 mm x 100 mm. 


F-3 CALIBRATION OF THE PENDULUM 


F-3.1 Place the polished glass panel on the panel 
table and gently bring the pendulum to rest on the 
surface of the glass. Be sure the pendulum oscillates 
freely. 


F-3.2 Place a spirit level on the glass panel surface. 
Level the glass panel by means of the adjusting 
screws at the base of the instrument. 


F-3.3 Clean the glass panel by wiping with a soft, 
lint-free cloth wetted with a suitable solvent. 


F-3.4 Clean the fulcrum balls by wiping them with 
a soft tissue wetted with a suitable solvent. Leave the 
pendulum in ambient conditions and then bring it to 
rest on the glass panel. 


F-3.5 Deflect the pendulum through 12°, release it 
and simultaneously start the stopwatch or other 
timing device. 


F-3.6 Determine whether the time for 100 swings of 
the pendulum is 100 s x 1 s. 


F-3.7 If this value cannot be achieved, re-clean the 
glass panel and the bearing balls of the pendulum, 
recheck that the glass panel is level, and retest. Do 
not adjust the instrument scale at this point. 


F-3.8 Deflect the pendulum through 12°, release it 
and simultaneously start the stopwatch or other 
timing device. 


22 


F-3.9 Determine whether the time for the amplitude 
of swing to decrease from 12? to 4? is 430 s € 15 s. 


F-3.10 If this value cannot be achieved, repeat the 
glass panel and instrument checks described in F- 
3.7. 


F-4 PROCEDURE 


F-4.1 Unless otherwise specified, determine the 
hardness at 27 °C + 2 °C and 65% + 5% relative 
humidity, after holding the test panels (see F-2.6) 
under these conditions for at least 16 h. 


F-4.2 Place the test panel on the panel table and 
gently bring the pendulum onto the panel surface. 


F-4.3 Deflect the pendulum through 12° and release 
it. Simultaneously start the stopwatch or other 
timing device. 


F-4.4 Determine the time for the amplitude of swing 
to decrease from 12° to 4°. This is the Persoz 
hardness. 


F-4.5 Check for skidding of the pendulum. If the 
pendulum skidded during the test the obtained result 
should be considered invalid, and the test repeated. 


F-4.6 Repeat steps F-4.2 to F-4.5 on at least two 
other areas of the test panel. 


F-4.7 Report the mean and range of the Persoz 
hardness values in seconds obtained for the test 
panel. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


ANNEX G 
(Clause 6) 


SAMPLING OF SILVERED GLASS MIRROR 


G-1 SCALE OF SAMPLING 


G-1.1 Lot 

In a single consignment, all silvered glass mirrors of 
the same quality of glass used and belonging to the 
same batch of manufacture shall be grouped together 
to constitute a lot. 


G-1.2 The conformity of the lot to the requirements 
of this specification shall be ascertained for each lot 
separately. The number of glass mirrors to be 
selected for this purpose shall depend on the size of 
the lot and shall be in accordance with col 2 and 3 of 
Table 6. 


G-1.3 The glass mirrors selected according to col 2 
and 3 of the below table shall be examined for visual 
characteristics (testing for appearance) in two 
stages. A glass mirror failing to satisfy any of these 
requirements shall be considered as defective. The 
lot shall be considered as conforming to the 
requirements if the number of defective glass 
mirrors found in the sample at the first stage is less 
than or equal to the corresponding acceptance 
number given in col 5 of the Table 6. The lot shall 
be rejected without any further testing if the number 
of defective glass mirrors in the sample is greater 


than or equal to the corresponding number given in 
col 6 of the Table 6. 


G-1.4 If the number of defective glass mirrors found 
in the sample lies between 'a' and 'r', a second 
sample of the size given in col 3 of the below table 
shall be selected. The lot shall be considered as 
conforming to these requirements if the number of 
defective found in the cumulative sample (first and 
second sample combined) is less than or equal to the 
corresponding acceptance number given in col 5 of 
the Table 6; otherwise the lot shall be rejected. 


G-1.5 The lot which has passed visual requirements 
shall be further examined for characteristics 
requiring destructive testing. For this purpose, a sub- 
sample of size given in col 7 of the below table shall 
be taken from those examined for the visual 
acceptance and found satisfactory. Each of the glass 
mirrors in sub-sample shall be tested for 
characteristics given in the Table 2. The test 
specimens of required dimensions shall be cut from 
each glass mirror in the sub-sample and subjected to 
the tests given in annexes and the lot shall be 
considered as meeting the requirements under this 
clause if none of the glass mirrors in the sub-sample 
fails to meet any of these requirements. 


Table 6 Scale of Sampling and Permissible Number of Defectives 
(Clauses 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4) 


SI No of Mirrors Number of Defectives Sub 
No. in the Lot Visual Requirement Sample 
piace Sample Cumulative a h Size 
Size Sample Size 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) Up to 1 000 First 8 8 0 2 2 
sheets Second 8 16 1 2 - 
ii) 1 001 to 3 000 First 13 13 1 3 3 
sheets Second 13 26 2 4 - 
iii) 3 001 to 5 000 First 20 20 2 4 3 
sheets Second 20 40 3 5 - 
iv) 5001 sheets and First 32 32 3 5 5 
above Second 32 64 6 7 - 


23 


IS 3438 : 2023 


ANNEX H 
(Informative) 
MIRRORS 


H-1 GENERAL 


The type of mirror and fixing should be suitable for 
the environment. Consideration and recognition 
should be given with regard to durability of the 
coating and distortion free image. For all 
installations, especially on ceilings the appropriate 
building safety and fixing regulations should be 
followed. 


H-2 FACTORS AFFECTING DURABILITY 


The reflective silver layer and the protective 
coatings(s) of the mirror are susceptible to being 
damaged or corroded. This will largely depend on 
the environment in which the mirror is used. The 
following rules should always be considered. 


H-2.1 Between the mirror and wall or any other 
mounting surface air circulation should be allowed 
for. There should be a gap of at least 5 mm for 
mirrors less than 1m high or a gap of 5 mm to 10 
mm for mirrors with height of more than 1m in order 
to ensure good ventilation. 


H-2.2 Where more than one mirror is fixed to the 
same surface, it should be ensured that there is a gap 
between all butting edges. As an assembly guide, a 
suitable 1 mm distance piece might be inserted 
during fixing. 


H-2.3 The mounting materials used should not be of 
an aggressive nature. 


H-2.4 When mirrors are inserted into profiles, the 
edges can be corroded by condensation, bathing 
lotions, cleaning chemicals etc. which may remain 
within the profile. To avoid this, the mirror should 
be mounted on small suitable blocks within the 
profile. 


H-2.5 The surface and body of the substrate material 
to which the mirror is to be fixed should be clean, 
dry, free of humidity, acid, alkali and any other 
aggressive materials and, when required, should be 
appropriate for the use of adhesives. 


H-2.6 Surfaces to be in contact with adhesives 
should be adequately prepared. For cleaning, 
surgical spirit can be used. 


H-2.7 The adhesive manufacturer's instructions 
should always be strictly observed. 


H-2.8 All adhesives used should be compatible with 
the mirror coating. By using the recommended 


24 


adhesives for the appropriate use, mirror coating 
damage will be minimized. 


H-2.9 All adhesives, double sided tapes etc. used for 
fixing should be applied vertically. 


H-2.10 The selection and application of adhesives, 
along with the choice of substrate and preparation 
for fixing the mirror, is solely at the discretion and 
risk of the fixer. 


H-2.11 If a mirrors effect is enhanced by 
illumination (for example, by spotlight), excessive 
warming of the mirror should be avoided to prevent 
deterioration of the silver, or fracture of the glass. 


H-2.12 When using mirrors in horse riding halls, 
swimming pools, medical baths, saunas and rooms 
adjoining them and any other rooms with constantly 
high humidity, no guarantee for the durability of the 
coating can be assumed, except for warranted 
mirrors specific to those applications. 


H-3 FACTORS 
DISTORTION 


AFFECTING IMAGE 


In order to ensure a mirror image free of distortions, 
the mirror should be fixed flat, stress free and in 
accordance with the following principles. 


H-3.1 Mirrors should be fixed so that the weight is 
not supported by the edges in order to avoid bending 
and thus distortion. 


H-3.2 When adhering a mirror to a substrate 
material, flatness should be ensured to avoid 
distortion. 


H-3.3 When fixing a mirror using adhesive tape, 
care should be taken that pressing does not cause 
distortion. If possible, the support base material 
should be adhered to the mirror (not the other way 
around) and subsequently the assembled mirror 
fixed mechanically. 


H-3.4 When placing several mirrors next to each 
other to create a mirror wall, optical breaks in the 
image at the joints can be positively influenced by 
using the adjustment tolerances of the fixing system. 


H-3.5 The mirror should be fixed securely but free 
from stress to avoid distortion and risk of breakage. 
Wall unevenness should be levelled by using 
suitable soft spacers. 


IS 3438 : 2023 


ANNEX J 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE 


COMPOSITION 


Glass, Glassware and Laboratoryware Sectional Committee, CHD 10 


Organization 


CSIR - Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute, 
Kolkata 


AGI Glaspac 


Asahi India Glass Limited 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Borosil Ltd 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion 
Council 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Centre for the Development of Glass Industry 


Confederation Construction Products and Services 
(CCPS) 


Controllerate of Quality Assurance(Materials) 


CSIR - Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute 


Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 


Trade 


Federation of Safety Glass 


Glazing Society of India 


Gold Plus glass industry Ltd 


Representative(s) 
DR SUMAN KUMARI MISHRA (Chairperson) 


SHRI RAJESH KHOSLA 
SHRI VISHWANATH AMBADIPUDI (Alternate) 


SHRI NAGENDRA KUMAR 
SHRI NAVIN RAI (Alternate) 


DR (SHRIMATI) MADHUMITA GOSWAMI 
DR P. N. NANDI (Alternate) 


SHRI SHRIKANT GANGAN 
SHRI SATISH CHITRIV (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. TIWARI 
DR AMIT RAI (Alternate) 


DR NAVJEEV SAXENA 
SHRI AJAY CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV CHINMALLI 
SHRI DEVENDRA SAH (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
SHRIMATI SARITA BALODHI (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KUMAR 
SHRI BRIJESH SINGH TOMAR (Alternate) 


DR K. ANNAPURNA 
SHRI SITENDU MANDAL (Alternate) 


SHRI T. S. G. NARAYANNEN 
SHRI UDAY SINGH MINA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHARANJIT SINGH 
SHRI GURMEET SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI G. N. GOHUL DEEPAK 


SHRI VIVEK DUBEY 
SHRI PREM DUTT (Alternate) 


25 


IS 3438 : 2023 


Organization 


Govt College of Engineering and Ceramic 


Technology 


Hindustan Glass Works Ltd 


Hindustan National Glass & Industries Ltd 


Indian Institute of Packaging 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Office of the Development Commissioner (MSME) 


Saint - Gobain Glass India Ltd 


Schott Glass India Pvt Ltd 


Shree Labware and Process Systems 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research 


SISECAM Flat Glass India Pvt Ltd 


The All India Glass Manufacturers Federation 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE) 


In Personal Capacity (C/O Sawmi Atmanand Tirtha 


Representative(s) 


DR RITUPARNO SEN 
DR (MS) KABERI DAS (Alternate) 


SHRI VARUN GUPTA 
SHRI K. ARVIN (Alternate) 


SHRI PAWAN BHARADWAJ 
SHRI PRASANTA ASH (Alternate) 


DR TANWEER ALAM 
SHRI BIDHAN DAS (Alternate) 


DR S. K. KULSHRESTHA 
SHRI D. V. S. PRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI R. K. BHARTI 
SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. R. UNNIKRISHNAN 
SHRI CHIRANJIT Roy (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND BAKSHI 
SHRI HANSRAJ GOUD (Alternate) 


SHRI A. N. S. KUMAR 


SHRI ANEESH KUMAR 
SHRI JOY BANERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI PARAG SHAH 


SHRI SOURABH KANKAR 
SHRI VINIT KAPUR (Alternate) 


SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
SHRI K. C. CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


PROFESSOR DEVENDRA KUMAR 


Siddhayogashram D 60/23 Chhote gaivi 
Varanasi 221010) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND HEAD 
(CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL 
(Ex-officio)] 
Member Secretary 
SHRI MOHIT GARG 


SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(CHEMICAL), BIS 


26 


IS 3438 : 2023 


Flat and Coated Glass Subcommittee, CHD 10:6 


Organization 
In Personal Capacity 


Asahi India Glass Limited 


CEPT University, Gujarat 


CSIR - Central Glass & Ceramic Research 
Institute, Kolkata 


Federation of Safety Glass 


Glazing Society of India 
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras 


Sisecam Flat Glass India Pvt Ltd 


Gold Plus Glass Industry Ltd 


Gujarat Guardian Itd. 


M/s Diamond Tuff Glass 
Saint - Gobain Glass India Ltd 


The All India Glass Manufacturers Federation 


27 


Representative(s) 
PROF DEVENDRA KUMAR (Convener) 


SHRI RUPINDER SHELLY 
SHRI NAGENDRA KUMAR (Alternate) 


PROF RAJAN RAWAL 
DR KAUSHIK BISWAS 
SHRI TARIQ KACHWALA 
SHRI FARHAT KAMIL (Alternate) 
SHRI G. N. GOHUL DEEPAK 
PROF ARUL JAYACHANDRAN 


SHRI PARAG SHAH 
SHRI PANKAJ NUWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK DUBEY 
SHRI PREM DUTT (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP SINGH 


SHRI PRAVEEN SAINI 
SHRI CHIRANJIT ROY 


SHRI SOURABH KANKAR 
SHRI VINIT KAPUR (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 10 (13649). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


