NAT HIAF IS 17092 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Raa sat Harg won aT: 
mar aaaAaTy 


Electrical Energy Storage Systems: 
Safety Requirements 


ICS 13.020.30 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2019 Price Group 11 


Energy Storage Systems Sectional Committee, ETD 52 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft, finalized by Energy Storage 
Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 


This standard provides guidance to the industry and manufacturers of storage systems regarding the safety 
requirements of Electrical Energy Storage (EES) Systems. The manufacture and use of storage systems is on the 
increase in the country and hence the need for formulation of Indian Standard has been realized. 


Considerable assistance has been obtained from UL-9540 : 2016 in preparation of this standard. This standard 
corresponds to the requirements of UL-9540 : 2016, but certain modifications has been made in relation to the 
cross referred standards, included content therefrom, and ambient conditions were also modified. 


Certain articles are also taken from IEC 62933-5-1 : 2017, for example, Hazard considerations for EES Systems, 
Cyber Security, etc. 


The standards provided in Annex B of this standard are for information only. 


IS 17092 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


ELECTRICAL ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS: 
SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the safety requirements of 
Electrical Energy Storage (EES) systems that are 
intended to receive electric energy and then to store 
the electrical energy so that the energy storage system 
can provide electrical energy to loads or to the local/ 
area Electric Power System (EPS) up to the utility grid 
when needed. The types of energy storage covered 
under this standard include electrochemical, chemical, 
mechanical and thermal. The energy storage systems 
equipment (constructed either as one unitary complete 
system or as matched assemblies that when connected 
are the system) may include equipment for charging, 
discharging, control, protection, power conversion, 
communication, controlling the system environment, 
air, fire detection and suppression system, fuel or other 
fluid movement and containment, etc. The system 
may contain other ancillary equipment related to the 
functioning of the energy storage system. 


1.2 The systems covered by this standard include 
those intended to be used in a standalone mode ( for 
example, islanded) including ‘self-supply’ systems to 
provide electric energy and those used in parallel with 
an electric power system or electric utility grid such 
as ‘grid-supply’ systems, or applications that perform 
multiple operational modes. 


1.3 Requirements for installation and transportation, 
with the exception of installation manuals and 
documents for installation provided with the system 
that are integral to the tested system are outside the 
scope of this standard. The installation instructions 
indicate that the electrical energy storage systems 
are to be installed in accordance with the national 
and local electrical codes and other applicable codes. 
This standard assumes that the final installation of the 
energy storage system will be performed by qualified 
service personnel in accordance with the applicable 
installation instructions, installation practices and 
Indian installation codes. Energy storage systems are 
intended for installation subject to approval by the 
concerned regulator. Compliance to all the relevant 
statutory requirements, rules and regulations would be 
as applicable. 


NOTE — Units of Measurement: Values and their 
respective units of measurement that are stated without 
parentheses constitute the requirement of the standard and 
those in parentheses constitute explanatory or approximate 
information. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Standards provided in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of the standards. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
Standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 GLOSSARY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Electric Power System (EPS) — Electric Power 
System means all aspects of generation, transmission, 
distribution and supply of electricity and includes one 
or more of the following, namely: 


a) generating stations; 

b) transmission or main transmission lines; 

c) sub-stations; 

d) tie-lines; 

e) load despatch activities; 

f) mains or distribution mains; 

g) electric supply-lines; 

h) overhead lines; 

j) service lines; and 

k) works. 
3.2 Energy Storage (ES) System — Equipment that 
receives electrical energy and then provides a means 
to store that energy in some form for later use in order 
to supply electrical energy when needed. EES are 
classified into mechanical, electrochemical, chemical, 


electrical and thermal energy storage systems, as 
shown in Fig. 1. 


IS 17092 : 2019 


a) Electrochemical 


b 


wm 


Pumped hydro - 
PHS 
| CAES 


Flywheel - FES 


Power 
conversion 
subsystem 


Accumulation 
subsystem 


Secondary batteries 
Flow batteries 


Double-layer Capacitor 
- DLC 
Superconducting 
magnetic coil - SMES 


Sensible heat storage 
Molten salt / A- CAES 


Communication 


Fic. 2 EEs SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE WITH Two Poc TYPES 


energy storage system 
Consists of a secondary (rechargeable) battery 
electrochemical capacitor, flow battery or hybrid 
battery-capacitor system that stores electrical 
energy and any associated controls or devices 
that can provide the stored electric energy upon 
demand. 


Chemical energy storage system — Consists 
of hydrogen storage, the hydrogen generator to 
supply the hydrogen for storage, and a fuel cell 
power system to provide electric energy upon 
demand. 


c) 


d) 


interface 

Auxiliary 

connection Auxiliary POC 
terminal 
Primary 

connection Primary POC 
terminal 
Mechanical energy storage system — Consists 


of a mechanical means to store energy such as 
through compressed air, pumped water or fly 
wheel technologies and associated controls and 
systems, which can be used to run an electric 
generator to provide electric energy upon demand. 


Thermal energy storage system — Consists of 
a system that uses heated fluids such as air as 
a means to store energy along with associated 
controls and systems, which can be used to run 
an electric generator to provide electrical energy 
upon demand. 


IS 17092 : 2019 


Examples: 
Technology Input Energy Conversion Energy Storage Output of Energy Storage 
Mechanism Mechanism Mechanism 
Electrochemical | Charger Battery system Converter 
Chemical Water electrolysis hydrogen | Hydrogen storage Combustion generator fuel 
generator cell 
Mechanical Air compressor, Pumped | Flywheel, upper reservoir Motor generator 
Storage 
Thermal Heat pump Thermal storage Heat generator or heat 
exchanger. 


There can be two different EES Architectures as shown 
in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. 


The terms and definitions explaining the block diagram 
of the two architectures of Electrical Energy Storage 
Systems (EESS), as shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. 


3.3.1 Point of Connection (POC) — Reference point 
on the electric power system where an EES system is 
connected. 


NOTE— An EES system may have several POCs in two 
different classes: primary POC and auxiliary POC. From an 
auxiliary POC, it is not possible to charge electrical energy, in 
order to store internally and, finally, discharge to the electric 
power system, but a primary POC can be used to feed the 
auxiliary subsystem and the control subsystem. In absence of 
an auxiliary POC, the primary POC can be named simply as 
POC. 


Communication subsystem 
Protection subsystem 


. 
. 
. 
H 
. 


Primary subsystem 


a 5 ca RRL SRL 

i 

! | Accumulation ; 

i conversion 

! subsystem 

- subsystem 

L ARNE atten arora rarer 
scien tes lie cl ak. decals hf ne 


See ee ee eed an Ge ete ee 


3.3.2 Primary POC — Point of connection where the 
EES system charges electrical energy from the electric 
power system, in order to store it internally and, finally, 
discharge it to the electric power system. 

NOTE — Generally, the primary POC is connected with 


the EES system primary subsystem through the primary 
connection terminal. 


3.3.3 Auxiliary POC — EES system point of connection 
with the electric power system used to feed the auxiliary 
subsystem and, so, the control subsystem, respectively, 
only if primary POC is not used to feed each subsystem. 

NOTE — Generally, an auxiliary POC can be replaced with 


another source of electrical energy ( for example, a diesel 
generator). 


3.3.4 Connection Terminal — Component of an EES 
system used for the connection to a POC. 


Communication 
interface 


Connection 
Primary POC 


terminal 


Fic. 3 EEs SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE WITH ONE Poc TYPE 


IS 17092 : 2019 


NOTE— An EES system may have several connection 
terminals in two different classes: primary connection 
terminals and auxiliary connection terminals. In absence of an 
auxiliary POC, the primary connection terminal can be named 
simply as connection terminal. 


3.3.5 Primary Subsystem — EESS subsystem 
consisting of the components/subsystems that are 
directly responsible for storing electrical energy and 
extracting electrical energy. 
NOTE — Generally, the primary subsystem is connected to 
the primary POC and comprises at least the accumulation 
subsystem and the power conversion subsystem. 


3.3.6 Accumulation Subsystem/Storage Subsystem — 
EESS subsystem, comprising at least one EES, where 
the energy is stored in some form. 


NOTES: 
1 Mechanical energy, electrochemical energy, electromagnetic 
energy are frequent forms of stored energy. 


2 Generally, the accumulation subsystem is connected to the 
power conversion subsystem that performs the necessary 
power conversion to electrical energy; however, in some 
cases, a power conversion is embedded in the accumulation 
subsystem ( for example, in electrochemical secondary cells 
the energy is directly available in the electrical form). 


3.3.7 Power Conversion Subsystem — EESS subsystem 
where energy is converted from the available form at 
the output of the accumulation subsystem of the EES 
system to electrical energy. 

NOTE — Generally, the power conversion subsystem is 


connected to the accumulation subsystem and to the primary 
POC through the primary connection terminal. 


3.3.8 Auxiliary Subsystem — FESS subsystem 
containing equipment intended to perform particular 
functions additional to storing/extracting electrical 
energy which is done in the primary subsystem. 


NOTES: 

1 Generally, the auxiliary subsystem is connected to the 
auxiliary POC through the auxiliary connection terminal. 

2 The equipment of the auxiliary subsystem (auxiliary 
equipment) are normally indispensable for setting up all the 
EESS operational states and assessing the correct performance 
(operation) of the primary and control subsystems during any 
operating mode. 


3 Auxiliary subsystem can be configured to take the energy 
from primary subsystem. 


3.3.9 Control Subsystem — EES subsystem serving for 
monitoring and controlling the EES, by including all 
equipment and functions for acquisition, processing, 
transmission, and display of the necessary process 
information. 


NOTES: 


1 Generally, the control subsystem may be connected to 
the communication interface and it comprises at least the 
management subsystem, the communication subsystem and 
the protection subsystem. 


2 Control subsystem is normally fed by the auxiliary subsystem. 


3.3.10 Communication Subsystem — EES subsystem 
containing an arrangement of hardware, software, and 
propagation media to allow the transfer of messages 
from one EES component/subsystem to another one, 
including the data interface with external links. 


3.3.11 Management Subsystem — EES subsystem 
providing the functionality needed for the safe, effective 
and efficient EES system operation. 


3.3.12 Protection Subsystem — EES subsystem 
containing an arrangement of one or more protection 
equipment, and other devices intended to perform one 
or more specified protection functions. 


NOTES: 


1 The protection subsystem includes one or more protection 
equipment, instrument transformer(s), transducers, wiring, 
tripping circuit (s), and auxiliary supply. Depending upon the 
principle(s) of the protection subsystem, it may include one 
end or all ends of the protected section and, possibly, automatic 
reclosing equipment. 


2 The switches and fuses are excluded. 


3.4 Arc Flash Boundary — The area within which a 
hazardous arc could occur, and which requires the use 
of Special Protective Equipment (SPE). 


3.5 DUT — Device under test. 


3.6 Electric Energy Storage System Integrator — 
The entity typically responsible for ensuring the various 
parts of the energy storage system work together, and 
that the energy storage system works with the external 
systems that either supply energy into the energy 
storage system or use energy from the energy storage 
system. 


3.7 Enclosure — The outer cover of the Energy Storage 
System that provides protection to its contents. 


3.8 Failure Modes and Effect Analysis (FMEA) — 
A rigorous and systematic methodology for analyzing 
reliability and impact, the failure of any one component 
associated with the technology and its installation, 
has on safety. For the purposes of this standard, only 
the impact to safety is considered. The reference for 
conducting FMEA study shall be provided as per IEC 
60812. 


3.9 Fuel Cell Power System — Equipment that 
converts chemical energy in the form of a fuel and 
oxidant into electrical energy with heat and by-products 
from the reaction. 


3.10 Hazardous Are — An electrical arc with sufficient 
energy to result in physical hazards to someone coming 
in contact with it. 


3.11 Hazardous Fluid — A hazardous material (for 
example, toxic, combustible, etc.) that is either a liquid 
or a gas. 


3.12 Hazardous Voltage — Voltage exceeding 30 V 
/42.4 V AC peak or 60 V cis considered hazardous. 


3.13 Insulation Levels — The following are levels of 
electrical insulation: 


a) Basic insulation — A single level of insulation that 
is intended to provide protection against electric 
shock when the insulation has not failed. 


b) Double insulation — Insulation comprising both 
basic insulation and supplementary insulation. 


c) Functional insulation — Insulation that is 
necessary only for the correct functioning of 
the equipment that can reduce the likelihood of 
ignition and fire, and that does not protect against 
electric shock. 


d) Reinforced insulation — Single insulation system 
that provides a degree of protection against 
electric shock equivalent to double insulation 
under the conditions specified in this standard. The 
term ‘insulation system’ does not imply that the 
insulation has to be in one homogeneous piece. It 
may comprise several layers that cannot be tested 
as basic insulation and supplementary insulation. 


e) Supplementary insulation — Independent 
insulation applied in addition to basic insulation 
in order to reduce the risk of electric shock in the 
event of a failure of the basic insulation. 


3.14 Non-Combustible Dielectric Medium — A 
transformer fluid that does not ignite, burn, give off 
flammable vapors or support combustion in air. 


3.15 Restricted Access Location — Location for 
energy storage system equipment as identified in the 
installation manual and equipment markings, or as 
required by local codes, where both of the following 
apply: 

a) Access can only be gained by service persons 
or by users who have been instructed about the 
reasons for the restrictions applied to the location, 
the hazards present at the location, and about any 
precautions that shall be taken; and 


b) Access is through the use of a tool or lock and key, 
or other means of security, and is controlled by the 
authority responsible for the location. 


3.16 Ambient Temperature — Considered to be a 
temperature in the range of 35 + 5°C. 


3.17 Safety Critical Circuits/Components — Those 
circuits or components that are relied upon for critical 
safety ( that is, mitigating a potential hazard to persons) 
as identified in the safety analysis of 14.2. 


3.18 Safety Extra Low Voltage (SELV) Circuit — A 
circuit that exhibits voltages that are not in excess of 
those in Table 1 and are safe to touch both under normal 
operating conditions and after a single fault. Another 


IS 17092 : 2019 


term used for similar circuits is Protective Extra Low 
Voltage (PELV). 


Table 1 SELV Voltage Limits 
( Clause 3.18 ) 


Voltage Limits 


Normal Single Fault 


Open circuit voltage with 
generally sinusoidal shape of 
42.4 Vpeak/30 Vrms or 60 VDC 


Open circuit voltage with 
generally sinusoidal shape of 
42.4 V peak/30 Vrms or 60 V 
DC with excursions up to 71 
Vpeak/50 Vrms or 120 VDC 
for periods up to 200 ms 


3.19 Special Purpose Utility-Interactive (Inverter 
/ Converter / Product) — An inverter / converter 
/ product that is functionally similar to a utility- 
interactive inverter except that it is evaluated for 
specific applications different from those where utility- 
interactive inverters are generally used. These units 
may have specific utility interconnection protection 
settings that allow them to provide grid support and 
operate during abnormal grid events such as low voltage 
ride through (LVRT). These products may rely upon 
internal or external utility interconnection protection 
functions or devices, as identified for the particular 
product. External utility interconnection protection 
may be provided by means of utility protection relays 
as required by the local electric utility. 


3.20 Utility-Interactive (Inverter) — An inverter 
intended for use in parallel with an electric utility to 
supply common loads and sometimes deliver power to 
the utility. 


3.21 Hazard — Potential source of harm. 


3.22 Hazardous Substance — Hazardous material 
substance which can affect human health or the 
environment with an immediate or retarded effect or is 
capable of posing an unacceptable risk to health, safety, 
property or to the environment. 


3.23 Fire Hazard — Condition of an EES system with 
a potential for an undesirable consequence from fire. 


3.24 Explosion Hazard — Condition of an EES 
system with a potential for an undesirable consequence 
from explosion. 


3.25 Mechanical Hazard — Condition of an EES 
system with a potential for an undesirable consequence 
from physical force. 


3.26 Thermal Hazard — Condition of an EES system 
with a potential for an undesirable consequence from 
thermal effect. 


3.27 Utility-Interactive Inverter/Converter, Grid 
Support — An inverter or converter intended for 


IS 17092 : 2019 


use in parallel with an electric utility, that is, a Utility 
Interactive inverter that is additionally evaluated for 
specific grid support functions different from those 
as defined in the IEEE 1547 and UL 1741. Inverter 
or converter applicable for solar power system shall 
conform to IS 16221. These units have specific utility 
interconnection settings that allow them to provide grid 
support functionality such as voltage and frequency 
regulation functions and voltage and frequency ride 
through. 


4 HAZARD CONSIDERATIONS FOR EES 
SYSTEMS 


4.1 Electrical Hazards 


Electricity travels in closed circuits, normally through 
a conductor. But sometimes a human body and, when 
proximate, water and even air can be conductors of 
electricity and inadvertently become part of the electric 
circuit. Electrically caused pain or injury (electric 
shock) may occur when electrical energy capable of 
causing pain or injury is transferred to a body part. 


Electrical energy transfer occurs when there are two or 
more electrical contacts to the body: 


a) Between a body part and a conductive part of the 
equipment; and 

b) Between another body part and earth and water or 
another conductive part of the equipment. 


When a person receives a shock, electricity flows 
between parts of the body or through the body to the 
ground or the earth. Depending on the magnitude, 
duration, wave shape, and frequency of the current, the 
effect to the human body varies from undetectable to 
detectable to painful to injurious. Burns are the most 
common shock-related injury but electric shock may 
also cause ventricular fibrillation. In addition to shock 
and burn hazards, electricity poses other dangers. For 
example, arcs that result from short circuits during 
work on energized systems, referred to as ‘arc flash’, 
can cause injury or start a fire. Thermal burns can also 
be caused when clothing catches fire, as may occur 
when an electric arc is produced. Arc flash boundaries 
should be determined to establish appropriate levels of 
personal protective equipment for workers involved in 
maintenance and other actions on energized equipment. 
Extremely high-energy arcs can damage equipment, 
causing fragmented metal to fly in all directions. 
Even low-energy arcs can cause violent explosions 
in atmospheres that contain flammable gases, vapors, 
or combustible dusts. Static electricity can also cause 
shocks or can just discharge to an object with serious 
consequences, as friction causes a high level of static 
electricity to build up at a specific spot on an object. 
This can happen simply through handling plastic 
pipes and materials or during normal operation of 
rubberized drives or machine belts found in many 
worksites. In these cases, for example, static electricity 


can potentially discharge when sufficient amounts 
of flammable or combustible substances are located 
nearby and can cause an explosion. 


Electric hazards can also arise from inappropriate 
electric firefighting procedures. 


4.2 Mechanical Hazards 


Mechanically caused injury is due to kinetic energy 
transfer to a body part when a collision occurs between 
a body part and an equipment part. The kinetic energy 
is a function of the relative motion between a body part 
and accessible parts of the equipment, including parts 
ejected from the equipment that collide with a body 
part. 


Examples of kinetic energy sources are: 
a) Body motion relative to sharp edges and corners; 


b) Part motion due to rotating or other moving parts, 
including pinch points; 

c) Part motion due to loosening, exploding, or 
imploding parts; 

d) Equipment motion due to instability; 


e) Equipment motion due to wall, ceiling, or rack 
mounting means failure; 


f) Equipment motion due to handling failure; 
g) Part motion due to an exploding battery; 


h) Equipment motion due to cart or stand instability 
or failure; 


j) Displacement due to mechanical vibration; and 


k) Equipment motion due to interaction with natural 
risks (flood, earthquake, etc.). 


Mechanical trauma includes friction, pressure, 
abrasions, lacerations and contusions causing more or 
less serious injuries. 


4.3 Explosion Hazards 


An explosion is a rapid expansion of gases resulting in 
a rapidly moving pressure or shockwave. Explosions 
are Classified according to the nature of the system 
‘transformation’, and usually explosions of physical 
origin and chemical origin are distinguished. Physical 
explosions include BLEVE (Boiling Liquid Expanding 
Vapor Explosion) which is a violent explosive 
vaporization leading to the rupture of a tank containing 
a liquid at a temperature significantly above its normal 
boiling point at atmospheric pressure. In this case the 
‘transformation’ is a variation of internal energy. 


Chemical explosion can result from the runaway 
of exothermic chemical reaction or from the 
decomposition of unstable substances. The burning of a 
fuel/air mixture’s combustible vapors (gas explosions) 
and burning of a suspension’s air/fuel particles (dust 
explosions) are also involved, and the transformation is 
a combustion reaction of an explosive atmosphere. The 
potential hazards associated with explosive atmosphere 


are released when ignited by an effective ignition 
source. 


In general explosions of solids, liquids or gases are 
divided into two types: 


a) Deflagrations, and 
b) Detonations. 


In both types a reaction zone propagates through the 
reactant(s). Owing to the density difference, the energy 
release per unit of volume is much higher for liquids 
and solids than for gaseous reactants. Explosions 
endanger the lives and health of those exposed as a 
result of the uncontrolled effects of flame and pressure, 
the presence of noxious reaction products, the discharge 
of projectiles, and the consumption of the oxygen in the 
ambient air. 


4.4 Hazards Arising From Electrical, Magnetic, and 
Electromagnetic Fields 


In addition to the conventional electrical hazards 
high-level electromagnetic energy produced by Radio 
Frequency Radiation (RFR) can also induce electrical 
currents or voltages that may be a source of disturbance 
on other equipment, cause electrical arcs that may 
ignite flammable materials, or act as an ignition source 
in explosive atmospheres’ hazardous areas. IEC 61000 
may be referred for Electromagnetic Compatibility 
(EMC) related issues. 


4.5 Temperature Hazards 


Thermal energy transfer occurs when a body touches a 
hot equipment part or hot liquids. The extent of injury 
depends on the temperature difference, the thermal 
mass of the object, rate of thermal energy transfer to 
the skin, and duration of contact. The perception of 
the human body varies from warmth to heat that may 
result in pain or injury (burn).Hot smoke inhalation 
can cause burn injury. In fact, 60 percent to 80 percent 
of burn fatalities come from major smoke inhalation. 
The immediate effects can include fainting, blockages 
of airways, singed facial and/or nose hair, and burns 
around the face and neck. Smoke inhalation can also 
lead to pulmonary (lung) injury. Exposure to thermal 
radiation can cause burns to the skin. The radiation 
types of greatest concern are thermal radiation issued 
from open flames and explosions. Exposure to extreme 
cold temperatures could also generate some injury 
to skin and body parts. Normal operations as well as 
abuse conditions can both generate dissipation of heat 
and therefore potential thermal hazards 


4.6 Chemical Hazards 


Injury caused by hazardous substances is due to a 
chemical reaction with a body part. The extent of injury 
by a given substance depends on both the magnitude 
and duration of exposure and on the body part’s 
susceptibility to that substance. A worker’s skin and 
eyes may be exposed to hazardous chemicals through 


IS 17092 : 2019 


direct contact with contaminated surfaces, deposition 
of aerosols, immersion, or splashes. 


Chemical agents are divided into two types: primary 
irritants and sensitizers. Primary or direct irritants 
act directly on the skin though chemical reactions. 
Sensitizers may not cause immediate skin reactions, 
but repeated exposure can result in allergic reactions. 
Contact with strong acids or alkaloids or other corrosive 
or caustic materials can eat away or ‘burn’ skin and 
deeper tissue. These can be caused by various chemicals 
used in workplaces. There are also the immediate 
and long-term dangers from inhaling, swallowing or 
absorbing toxic chemicals through the skin. 


Chemical effect may be fire induced (for example, 
fire gases toxicity) or not (release of effluents during 
normal operations) or may be induced through heating 
chemicals beyond decomposition temperature in either 
normal or abuse conditions. Chemical effect may 
also encompass creating an explosive atmosphere 
by production of flammable gases (for example, 
hydrogen). Discharge of previously accumulated toxic 
gas can generate serious hazards in terms of massive 
exposure to humans in the area. In addition, leaching 
in to soil and severe corrosion issues may be triggered. 


4.7 Fire Hazards 


A fire hazard occurs if combustible materials, oxidizer 
and ignition energy are available in sufficient quantities 
at the same place and at the same time. The fire hazard 
depends on the interaction of these three items. Certain 
materials are inherently unstable, or have extraordinary 
oxidizing properties, or are capable of self-heating. 
This affects the fire hazard. 


Variation in the oxygen concentration (for example, 
oxygen enrichment) can also significantly affect the 
fire hazard. The fire hazard can arise from the materials 
used or released by the EES system, from materials in 
the vicinity of the EES system, or from materials used 
in the construction of the EES system. Combustible 
materials can occur as solids, liquids or gases of organic 
or inorganic nature. It should be determined whether 
combustible materials exist or can exist and in what 
quantity and distribution. 


The ease of combustion of materials is affected by 
the size, shape and deposition of the materials. For 
example, small pieces of a material loosely collected 
together can be more easily ignited than a large piece 
of that material. The combination of materials can also 
have an influence on the ignitability and the burning 
behavior. Consideration should be given as to whether 
the properties of the materials can change over time or 
with use. Such changes can include the possibility of 
decomposition of the material releasing combustible 
gases and vapors. This can lead to an increased fire 
hazard. 


In assessing the fire hazard, the existence and quantity 
of fire supporting substances, for example oxygen 


IS 17092 : 2019 


producing substances, and the probability of their 
occurrence should be determined. The most common 
oxidizer is air but there are other oxidizers which 
support combustion, for example, potassium nitrate 
(KNO,), potassium permanganate (KMnO,), per 
chloric acid (HCIO,), hydrogen peroxide (H,O,), and 
nitrous oxide (N,O). 


It should be determined which ignition sources exist or 
can occur. Possible ignition sources can arise due to the 
influence of: 


a) Heat energy; 

b) Electrical energy; 

c) Mechanical energy; and 
d) Chemical energy. 


Electrically caused fire is due to conversion of electrical 
energy to thermal energy where the thermal energy heats 
a fuel material followed by ignition and combustion. 
Electrical energy is converted to thermal energy either 
in a resistance or in an arc and is transferred to a fuel 
material. Fire initiation is produced when sufficient 
energy release allows the heating of a fuel element 
by conduction, convection, or thermal radiation to 
a temperature such that a combustion reaction starts. 
It should be noted that the combustion reaction will 
always occur between the oxygen and the gaseous fuel. 


Depending on the nature of the fuel (gas, liquid or 
solid), the ignition process will be different. For gases, 
the initiation occurs in a fuel oxidizer mixture with 
proportions between the Lower Flammability Limit 
(LFL) and the Upper Flammability Limit (UFL). The 
energy input to initiate combustion mixture is often 
very low. This energy is commonly measured in the 
stoichiometric proportions of the combustion reaction. 
Hence, it is called Low Energy Flammability (LEF). 
This energy is often of the order of a few milli Joules. A 
spark may be enough to ignite the mixture. For liquids, 
combustion occurs from the vapor emitted, provided 
that the vapor emission rate is sufficient to create a 
flammable mixture with the ambient air. In addition, 
ignition of the mixture will only occur if enough 
energy (= LEF) is provided when the temperature of 
the liquid is higher than its temperature flash point. 
For solid fuels, the initiation phenomenon is more 
complex because it is governed by heat transfer within 
the material. The energy received by the fuel increase 
the temperature of the solid until the sublimation or 
decomposition temperature is reached. This process is 
called the pyrolysis phenomenon. The initiation time 
depends on the intensity of the thermal flow, of the 
thermal properties, of the ignition temperature and of 
the water content. The propagation phase corresponds 
to the rise of fire related to the path of combustion of 
the flammable items. During this phase the position of 
the fuel elements plays an important role as a criterion 
that enables or impedes the development of the fire. The 
fire hazard can result for example from the fire itself, 


the thermal radiation, the fire effluent, or the escaping 
materials. An explosion hazard may exist in addition 
to the fire hazard. Thermal and chemical fire-induced 
hazards threaten people and the environment. These 
fires may vary highly in nature and intensity according 
to the material that is burning (nature, geometry, and 
quantity) and burning conditions. 


5 CYBER SECURITY 


Cyber security is important not only for remote 
monitoring but also for the system connected to the 
internet. Refer to international standards for additional 
guidance. 


6 CONSTRUCTION- 
MATERIALS 


NON-METALLIC 


6.1 Polymeric materials employed for enclosures of 
electrical equipment shall comply with 6.2 and the 
enclosure requirements as given in UL 746C, Path III. 


6.2 In addition to the items in 6.3, polymeric electrical 
enclosures shall have the following properties: 


a) Minimum 5 VA flame rating, or the enclosure 
complies with the 127 mm Flame test of UL 
746C, and may require flame spread testing per 
the Enclosure Flammability - Large Surface Area 
Considerations test of UL 746C; 


b) Insulation material properties as per the Material 
Property Considerations table of UL 746C; 


c) Compliance with the Strain-Relief Test after Mold 
Stress-Relief Distortion of UL 746C if serving as 
a securement means for a strain relief; 


d) Compliance with the Ultraviolet Light Exposure 
test of UL 746C if exposed to UV rays in the end 
use; 


e) Compliance with the Water Exposure and 
Immersion test of UL 746C if exposed to rain in 
the end use; and 


f) Compliance with the Conduit Connections in 
the Enclosure Requirements table of UL 746C if 
mounting conduit connections. 


6.3 The following factors from (a) to (e) are taken 
into consideration when an enclosure employing 
nonmetallic materials is being examined. For a 
nonmetallic enclosure, all of these factors are to be 
considered with respect to thermal aging. Dimensional 
stability of a polymeric enclosure is ensured by 
compliance to the mold stress relief test. Compliance 
with factors (a) to (e) as follows may be determined 
by the tests of this standard or by UL 746C or UL 
1973: 


a) Resistance to impact; 
b) Crush resistance; 
c) Abnormal operations; 


d) Severe conditions; and 
e) Mold-stress relief distortion. 


6.4 Materials employed as electrical insulation in the 
system shall be resistant to deterioration that would 
result in an electrical shock, fire or other safety hazard. 
Insulation materials that are in direct contact with or 
close proximity to hazardous live parts in accordance 
with Fig. | of UL 746C, shall additionally meet the 
insulation criteria outlined in standard unless employed 
as part of a component that has been evaluated to a 
component standard that has comparable safety criteria. 
Insulated wiring is subjected to the requirements 
outlined in 10. 


6.5 Gaskets and Seals relied upon for safety, shall be 
determined suitable for the environmental conditions 
and chemical substances they are anticipated to be 
exposed to in their end use. 


7 METALLIC PARTS RESISTANCE TO 
CORROSION 


Metallic enclosures shall be corrosion resistant to 
prevent deterioration that would affect the ability of 
the enclosure to provide physical protection to EES 
System components or access to hazardous parts that 
could result in a hazardous condition. A suitable plating 
or coating process can achieve corrosion resistance. 
Additional guidance on methods to achieve corrosion 
protection is given in ISO 12944-2. The enclosure 
material selection shall be based on IS 14321. 


8 ENCLOSURES AND GUARDING OF 
HAZARDOUS PARTS 


8.1 The enclosure (s) of an Energy storage system 
shall have the strength and rigidity required to resist 
the possible physical abuses that it will be exposed to 
during its transportation, installation and intended use. 


8.2 Openings in the enclosure of an electric energy 
storage system shall be designed to prevent inadvertent 
access to hazardous parts. Compliance shall be 
determined in accordance with clause 12 of IS/TEC 
60529. 


Exception — An electrical energy storage system 
intended for restricted access locations need not meet the 
accessibility criterion if permanent warning markings 
for service and other personnel having access to the 
system are provided directly on the system. Protection 
from access to live parts in restricted locations shall be 
in accordance with SP 30, Suitable cautionary warnings 
and signage for identifying exposed hazardous voltage 
circuits shall be provided for protection of service 
personnel. 


8.3 In service access areas, bare parts of hazardous 
voltage circuits, shall be located or guarded so that 


IS 17092 : 2019 


accidental shorting across circuits at opposite polarity, 
or to ground, or to SELV circuits or communications 
circuits, that could be caused by items such as, but 
not limited to, tools or test probes used by service 
personnel, is unlikely. Parts in class 2 or limited power 
circuits need not be located or guarded from accidental 
contact by service personnel. 


8.4 Enclosures of systems and components of systems 
located where they will be subject to exposure to 
water and other elements shall be rated for the level 
of intended exposure Installation instructions shall 
indicate restrictions with regard to limiting ingress 
from the environment based upon the enclosure rating. 


9 GENERAL ELECTRICAL SAFETY AND 
WALK-IN SYSTEMS 


9.1 The instructions shall include measures and 
procedures for worker safety in, on or adjacent to the 
energy storage system according to the SP 30. 


9.2 Where persons can access the hazardous areas 
within the energy storage system enclosure, procedures 
for safe entry into and exiting the system shall be 
provided in the product’s instructions. Means, such as 
but not limited to a placard (s) and lock (s), shall be 
provided to prevent unauthorized persons from entering 
these hazardous areas. 


9.3 Entrances to the enclosure shall be designed to 
prevent persons from becoming trapped within the 
enclosure (that is, entrances shall be able to be opened 
from inside the enclosure without use of a tool or 
key should they become closed). Personnel door (s) 
intended for entrance to, and egress from an enclosure, 
shall open in the direction of egress. The egress door 
shall be marked with the word ‘Exit’ and the line- 
of-sight to an exit sign shall not be interrupted. Any 
doorway or passage that might be mistaken for an exit 
shall be marked ‘Not an Exit’ or with an indication of 
its actual use. 


9.4 Work space dimensions and requirements within an 
energy storage system, including walk-in enclosures, 
shall be in accordance with SP 30. The space 
requirement shall also provide for appropriate arc flash 
safety under specified Personal Protective Equipment 
(PPE). 


9.5 Areas of access to walk in enclosures of energy 
storage systems shall be designed to prevent tripping, 
slipping or falling when persons enter, exit or while 
within the system enclosure. Surfaces and parts 
within a walk in energy storage system enclosure 
shall be designed to prevent inadvertent hazards to 
personnel within the enclosure through appropriate 
guarding, electrical and thermal insulation methods 
and cautionary warnings and signage in accordance 
with this standard. 


IS 17092 : 2019 


9.6 Protection against contact with hazardous voltage 
parts in the energy storage system including walk-in 
enclosures shall be in accordance with 8.2 or through 
the use of guarding to prevent access with cautionary 
warnings and signage where only qualified personnel 
are allowed access. Entrances to walk-in enclosures 
that contain exposed live parts shall be marked with 
conspicuous warning signs forbidding unqualified 
persons to enter. See also 11.2 with regard to disconnect 
criteria for servicing, etc. 


9.7 The type of protection equipment to be provided 
for arc flash hazards shall be determined by an arc flash 
risk assessment conducted according to SP 30. The 
assessment shall determine: 


a) The arc flash incidental energy level; 
b) The restricted approach boundary; and 


c) The required arc flash personal protective 
equipment. 


9.8 An arc that can create a second degree burn to 
unprotected skin and therefore considered the level for 
determining an unprotected arc flash boundary, has an 
arc rating above 5 J/cm? incident energy level. 


9.9 Energy storage system enclosures that can be fully 
entered by persons shall have adequate ventilation for 
persons working within the enclosure. The amount of 
airflow determined adequate is based upon the floor area 
of the energy storage system and the maximum number 
of persons that can enter the walk-in enclosure at one 
time in accordance with SP 7. ASHRAE 62.1 provides 
a formula for calculating this based upon different types 
of occupancies. As guidance for determining suitable 
airflow in a normally unoccupied energy storage system 
enclosure, the values for a storage space of dry goods 
may be used as a close approximation for estimating 
airflow in an area that is not routinely occupied, and 
using Table 6.2.2.1 of ASHRAE 62.1 for values. If the 
number of persons to occupy the space is not known, it 
is recommended to use 2 persons/100 m? as a default 
amount. 


9.10 Electrical circuits that are an integral part of the 
energy storage system including those that are part of 
a walk-in enclosure including lighting, controls, power, 
HVAC (heating, ventilation and air-conditioning), 
emergency lighting, alarm circuits, and the like shall 
comply with the appropriate requirements for the type 
of equipment and the specific application within the 
energy storage system. 


9.11 Electrical equipment including electrical 
equipment that is located in the walk-in enclosure in 
areas that will be subject to condensation, or the effects 
of condensation from equipment or systems that are 
provided with and installed in, on or around the energy 
storage system enclosure, shall be suitable for outdoor 
use or suitably protected against contact with water 


10 


and protected against unsafe conduction of hazardous 
voltages to personnel via water as a conduction path. 


9.12 Lighting shall be provided in enclosed working 
spaces. Lighting must be adequate and lighting outlets 
shall not be controlled by automatic means. Additional 
lighting outlets shall not be required where the work 
space is illuminated by an adjacent light source. 
Lighting within an energy storage system including 
lighting within a walk-in enclosure shall be installed in 
accordance with SP 30. 


9.13 Where there is more than one source of supply 
energizing the energy storage system, the energy 
storage system shall be provided with information 
and markings to indicate which disconnect device 
or devices are required to be operated to completely 
isolate the equipment. 


9.14 Protection against lightning surges shall be provided 
in accordance with the requirements of the SP 30. 


10 WIRING AND ELECTRICAL SUPPLY 
CONNECTIONS 


10.1 Wiring shall be insulated and acceptable for the 
purpose, when considered with respect to temperature, 
voltage, and the conditions of service to which the 
wiring is likely to be subjected within the equipment 
or when supplied with the equipment and intended for 
installation exterior to the equipment. 


10.2 Wiring methods and electrical supply connections 
of the energy storage system shall be in accordance 
with the SP 30. 


10.3 An energy storage system or component of 
the energy storage system shall have provision for 
connection of the system to an external wiring system 
consisting of: 


a) Wiring terminals or wiring leads; or 


b) A means for connection of cable or conduit in 
accordance with the codes in 10.2. 


10.4 A wiring terminal or lead that is supplied as a 
component of the energy storage system shall be rated 
and sized for connection to a field wiring conductor 
having an ampacity of no less than 125 percent of the 
AC or DC current that the circuit carries during rated 
conditions and in accordance with the codes in 10.2. 


10.5 A field-wiring lead shall not be more than two wire 
sizes smaller than the copper conductor to which it is 
to be connected, and shall not be smaller than 2.0 mm”. 
A field-wiring lead shall not be less than 150 mm long. 


10.6 Field-wiring compartments in which branch 
circuit connections are to be made shall: 


a) Permit the connection of the supply wires after the 
energy storage system is installed; 


b) Permit the connection to be introduced and 
connected easily and safely; and 


c) Be located so that the connections may be readily 
inspected after the energy storage system is 
installed. 


10.7 Internal wiring shall be routed, supported, clamped 
or secured in a manner that reduces the likelihood of 
excessive strain on wire and on terminal connections; 
loosening of terminal connections; and damage of 
conductor insulation. In safety critical circuits, for 
soldered terminations, the conductor shall be positioned 
or fixed so that reliance is not placed upon the soldering 
alone to maintain the conductor in position. 


10.8 A hole by which insulated wires pass through the 
system enclosure or elements providing separation 
within the enclosure shall be provided with a smoothly 
rounded bushing or shall have smooth surfaces, free of 
burrs, fins, sharp edges, and the like, upon which the 
wires may bear, to prevent abrasion of the insulation. 


11 GENERAL ELECTRICAL 
EQUIPMENT 


SERVICE 


11.1 For operator replaceable fuses, a fuse replacement 
marking with the fuse ratings shall be located adjacent 
to each fuse or fuse holder, or on the fuse holder, or in 
another location provided that it is obvious to which 
fuse the marking applies. Where operator replaceable 
fuses with special characteristics such as time delay or 
breaking capacity are necessary, the type shall also be 
indicated. Information on proper fuse replacement of 
operator replaceable fuses shall also be included in the 
routine service manual instructions. 


11.2 Exposed hazardous voltage in an energy storage 
system should have a lockable manual disconnect 
to enable lock-out-tag-out during servicing or 
for emergency procedures. The lockable manual 
disconnect shall have sufficient interrupt ratings, shall 
be accessible to the technician servicing the system or 
first responders and as close to the exposed hazardous 
voltage conductor as possible. If not provided directly 
on the system, the installation instructions shall indicate 
the type and ratings of the disconnect to be provided in 
the installation, how it is to be installed and connected 
in the circuit and where it is to be located in regard to 
the energy storage system. 


Exception: A lockable disconnect is not required where 
it may be infeasible based upon the design of the 
system ( for example, interspersed in the middle of a 
high voltage battery string, within a battery system, to 
segment the string into segments less than the minimum 
hazardous voltage). 


11.3 Fuses, circuit breakers and disconnect devices 
shall be rated for the application including fault 
current ratings, suitability for disconnect under load, 


11 


IS 17092 : 2019 


etc., as applicable to the device and application in the 
system. 


11.4 Transformers installed as part of the energy storage 
system shall be of the dry type or type filled with a 
noncombustible dielectric medium. Such transformers 
shall be installed in accordance with SP 30. 


Exception: Oil filled transformers may be utilized if 
located outdoors and in accordance with the local codes 
or utility requirements. 


11.5 Convenience receptacles provided for maintenance 
and servicing of the energy storage system shall be rated 
for outdoor use if the system is intended to be installed 
where the receptacle is exposed to the environment. 


12 ELECTRICAL SPACINGS 
SEPARATION OF CIRCUITS 


AND 


12.1 Electrical circuits within the energy storage 
system at opposite polarity shall be provided with 
reliable physical spacing to prevent inadvertent short 
circuits or potential for arc flash (that is, electrical 
spacing on printed wiring boards, physical securing of 
uninsulated leads and parts, etc.). Insulation suitable 
for the anticipated temperatures and voltages shall be 
used where spacing cannot be controlled by reliable 
physical separation. 


12.2 Electrical spacing in circuits shall have the 
following minimum over surface and through air 
spacing as outlined in Table 2 or as outlined in IS 13252 
(Part 1). 


Exception No. 1: Electrical spacing within components 
and parts of an energy storage system previously 
determined to comply with an appropriate safety 
standard for the equipment need not be evaluated. 


12.3 There are no minimum spacing applicable to 
parts where insulating compound completely fills 
the casing of a compound or subassembly if the 
distance through the insulation, at voltages above 60 
V or above 30 V „is a minimum of 0.4 mm thick 
for supplementary or reinforced insulation, and 
passes the dielectric voltage withstand test. There 
is no minimum insulation thickness requirement for 
insulation of circuits at or below 60 V,,, or for basic or 
functional insulation. Some examples include potting, 
encapsulation, and vacuum impregnation. Materials 
employed as electrical insulation shall meet the 
requirements of 6.4. 


12.4 Conductors of circuits operating at different 
voltages shall be reliably separated from each other 
through the use of mechanical securements such as 
barriers or wire ties to maintain spacing requirements 
unless they are each provided with insulation acceptable 
for the highest voltage involved. An insulated conductor 
shall be reliably retained so that it cannot contact an 


IS 17092 : 2019 


Table 2 Electrical Spacing 


( Clause 12.2 ) 


Voltage AC Through 
RMS Air Over Surface 
Part Vv mm mm 

Live parts and dead metal parts that are | 0 -50° 1.6 1.6 
separated by functional or basic insulation. 51-130 32 48 

131 - 300 6.4 9.5, 
Accessible dead metal parts and dead metal | 0 - 50° 1.6 1.6 
parts separated from live parts by basic 51-13 32 48 
insulation only - this ordinarily is a spacing - i 
resulting from supplementary insulation. 131 - 300 6.4 9.5 
Live parts and accessible dead metal parts | 0 - 50° 3.2 3.2 
separated by double insulation or by reinforced 51-130 48 64 
insulation. i 

131 - 300 2.8 12.8 
Between any uninsulated live part and an | 301 - 600 9.5 12.7 
uninsulated live part of opposite polarity, 
an uninsulated grounded part other than the ein Si HS 
enclosure, or an exposed metal part (basic | 1001 - 1500 21.6 30 
insulation). 
Between any uninsulated live part and the | 301 - 600 12.7 12.7 
walls of a metal enclosure, including fittings 
for conduit or armored cable (basic insulation). LN 203 DA 

1001 - 1500 30.5 41.9 
® Spacings at these voltages may be decreased from those indicated in the table if it can be determined 
through test or analysis that there is no hazard ( that is, circuits supplied by limited power sources as 
defined IS 13252 (Part 1). 


uninsulated live part of a circuit operating at a different 
voltage. 


13 INSULATION LEVELS AND PROTECTIVE 
GROUNDING 


13.1 Hazardous voltage circuits shall be insulated 
from accessible conductive parts and safety extra low 
voltage (SELV) circuits as outlined in 13.2 through the 
following: 


a) Basic insulation and provided with a protective 
grounding system for protection in the event of 
a fault of the basic insulation that complies with 
13.3; 


b) Asystem of double or reinforced insulation; or 
c) Acombination of (a) and (b). 


13.2 Safety Extra Low Voltage (SELV) circuits, as 
defined in 3.18 that are insulated from accessible 
conductive parts through functional insulation only are 
considered accessible. 


13.3 Accessible non-current carrying metal parts 
of an energy storage system containing hazardous 
voltage circuits that could become live in the event of 
an insulation fault shall be bonded to the equipment 
ground terminal. 


12 


13.4 The protective grounding methods of an energy 
storage system shall be in accordance with SP 30 as 
applicable to where the system is located. 


13.5 Parts of the protective grounding system shall be 
securely fastened and provided with metal-to-metal 
contact that will ensure the continuity of the grounding 
system (see 27). 


14 SAFETY ANALYSIS AND CONTROL 
SYSTEMS 


14.1 Energy storage systems shall be provided with 
a report based on various safety analysis techniques 
such as, but not limited to, a Failure Modes and 
Effects Analysis (FMEA) that identifies critical safety 
components and circuits of the system. The analysis 
shall consider the compatibility of the parts of the 
energy storage system ( for example, battery system, 
charger, inverter, etc.) with regard to safety of the 
overall system. The analysis shall be performed by the 
manufacturer of the energy storage system or the entity 
that integrates the components comprising the energy 
storage system. Guidance for analysis can be found in 
IEC 60812 and IEC 61025. 


14.2 Electrical and electronic controls of the energy 
storage system that are determined to be critical for 


safety shall comply with an appropriate safety standard 
for the control and used within their ratings. Electronics 
and software controls determined to be critical for 
safety shall be evaluated for functional safety to an 
appropriate Safety Integrity Level (SIL) or similar 
safety classification for the system as determined 
by the system safety analysis conducted as per 14.1. 
Compliance to functional safety requirements shall 
be demonstrated through evaluation to the following 
standards as applicable to the system: 


a) IS/TEC 61058 (all parts), or 
b) ISAEC 60730 (Part 1). 


15 REMOTE CONTROLS 


Energy storage systems which have the ability to 
be controlled remotely shall be provided with an 
accessible means to disconnect the system from the 
remote control. The remote control disconnect shall 
be provided either on the system or at the location 
mentioned in the installation manual specifying the 
location and type of disconnect. The use of a remote 
control systems shall not lead to an unsafe condition 
as determined by the system safety analysis and shall 
not be able to override local safety controls. If the 
remote control disconnect is to be provided as part 
of the installation (not built into the energy storage 
system), the instructions shall include information on 
the electrical connections including means to prevent 
disconnection from being overridden by the remote 
control system. 


16 COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 


Instructions for installation and operation of the energy 
storage system shall identify the communication 
protocols used by the energy storage system for 
communication between external systems intended to 
be connected to the energy storage system. 


17 HEATING AND COOLING SYSTEMS 


Energy storage systems that rely upon integral thermal 
management systems to prevent overheating or 
operation outside the specified safe operating range 
of the energy storage technology shall be designed 
to safely shutdown upon failure of the thermal 
management system unless it can be demonstrated, that 
the thermal management system failure does not result 
in a hazardous situation. 


18 CONTAINMENT OF MOVING PARTS 


Energy storage systems having moving parts with 
the capacity to store kinetic energy shall be provided 
with a means to contain the parts in the event. They 
could become loosened during operation or through 
the influence of external forces. If it is possible for 
moving parts to become dislodged upon breakage or 
damage to their securement means, the containment 


13 


IS 17092 : 2019 


mechanism shall adequately contain the loosened parts 
to prevent hazards to persons or the surrounding built 
environment. 


19 HAZARDOUS FLUID CONTAINMENT 


19.1 Where the system design is such that there is a 
potential for spills of hazardous liquids, provisions 
for containment and/or neutralization of those liquids 
shall be provided. Methods utilized for containment 
shall be sufficient to hold the maximum anticipated 
quantity of liquid that could occur and designed to 
prevent inadvertent filling with rain if located outdoors. 
Instructions regarding the provision of suitable spill 
containment and neutralization shall be provided by the 
system manufacturer with the installation instructions, 
if required containment and/or neutralization is 
not provided as part of the energy storage system. 
Where flammable liquids are contained, provision for 
applicable fire detection and protection systems should 
be provided as per 21. Automatic leak detection to 
indicate the release of a hazardous/flammable liquid 
shall be provided. 


19.2 Energy storage systems that contain fluids shall 
be designed to prevent venting of toxic vapors in 
concentrations considered to be hazardous based on an 
evaluation conducted in accordance with 31 and 32. 


19.3 Where multi-battery energy storage systems use 
conductive fluids that may come in contact hazardous 
voltages, containment shall be provided separately for 
each battery. 


20 COMBUSTIBLE CONCENTRATIONS 


20.1 Enclosures of energy storage batteries that 
vent hydrogen to the atmosphere shall be ventilated 
to prevent hazardous concentrations of flammable 
materials unless equipment located within the classified 
area/zone within the enclosure is suitable for the 
classification area/zone. Concentration in nonhazardous 
zones of the energy storage system shall be limited to 
25 percent Lower Flammability Limit (LFL) under 
normal maximum operating conditions. Mechanical 
ventilation relied upon to maintain concentrations 
below the required limits shall be interlocked, so that 
the system shuts down upon failure of the ventilation 
system. 


Exception: Vented battery systems such as lead acid or 
nickel that are provided with mechanical ventilation in 
accordance with 20.2, need not comply. 


20.2 For battery and similar systems, openings to prevent 
hazardous concentrations of flammable gases within 
an enclosure can be used. Openings in the enclosure 
provided for ventilation shall be constructed to prevent 
accumulation of flammable gases that could lead to a 
hazardous condition from concentrations of hydrogen 


IS 17092 : 2019 


gas due to electrolysis of aqueous electrolytes for 
applicable battery technologies, such as vented or valve 
regulated lead acid and nickel batteries and applicable 
electrochemical capacitor technologies, greater than 25 
percent of the LFL of hydrogen (equivalent to | percent 
concentration in a volume of air). 


20.3 As an alternative to 20.2, ventilation openings 
shall have a minimum opening area of: 


A= 0.005NC, (cm”) 
Where, 
A =Total cross sectional net free area of ventilation 
openings required (cm); 
N = Number of cells in battery; and 
C, = Capacity of battery at the 5-h rate (Ah). 


Exception: The area of ventilation openings can be 
reduced if it can be demonstrated that there is sufficient 
ventilation within the battery to prevent hydrogen 
accumulations above 25 percent of the LFL ofhydrogen. 


20.4 Electrical compartments adjacent to classified 
zones within the energy storage system enclosure shall 
be maintained at positive pressure in accordance with 
the IEC 60079 (Part 2). 


21 FIRE DETECTION AND SUPPRESSION 


21.1 The level and type of fire detection and suppression 
required for an energy storage system is dependent 
upon the size, technology and location of installation 
as well as the local building and fire codes or utility 
requirements. The fire detection and suppression system 
shall be built into the energy storage system’s enclosure 
as determined from the fire risk analysis. Also, as a 
result of these various factors, small energy storage 
systems such as single package residential systems 
located in accordance with local residential and fire 
codes, may only need to be provided with instructions 
regarding the appropriate fire extinguishing materials 
to maintain within the location and housekeeping and 
safety procedures to follow. 


21.2 To determine the level and type of fire detection 
and fire suppression systems required, an analysis 
such as a fire risk assessment with consideration to 
the applicable building and fire code requirements for 
the installation site, and other appropriate design and 
installation standards, shall be conducted for energy 
storage system installations to ensure that suitable 
fire prevention and fire protection requirements for 
protecting persons and property are met. Guidance on 
fire risk analysis can be found in SP 7. 


21.3 Energy storage system installations required to be 
provided with fire suppression shall be provided with a 
means for fire detection and suppression in accordance 
with the siting of the system (that is, indoors, etc.), 
the energy storage technology and the applicable 


14 


installation, building and fire safety codes. If not 
provided as part of the energy storage system, guidance 
based on scientific data shall be provided for choosing, 
installing, operating and maintaining suitable fire 
detection and suppression systems in the installation, 
operation and maintenance instructions for the energy 
storage system. 


22 UTILITY GRID INTERACTION 


22.1 General 


22.1.1 Energy storage systems under rid so as to export 
energy to the Electric Power Systems (EPS)/electric 
utility. These products fall into several groups; utility- 
interactive inverters, grid support utility-interactive 
inverters, or special purpose utility-interactive inverters. 


22.1.2 Energy storage system inverters rated for 
connection and operation with an EPS shall be 
evaluated for the intended purpose as specified in this 
section. ‘This section does not require compliance 
with a specific grid interconnection standard, but 
does require that the system operate safely over the 
manufacturer’s specified range of grid interconnection 
operation including utility transient response ratings, 
such as Zero Voltage Ride Through (ZVRT), Low 
Voltage Ride Through (LVRT), High Voltage Ride 
Through (HVRT) or other defined limits of operation. 
This shall be verified by operating the system of energy 
storage system inverters or its subassemblies under 
operating parameters including the minimum and 
maximum voltage, frequency, and duration limits of the 
manufacturer’s specified range of operation. 


22.1.3 The inverter shall also be designed to properly 
interconnect with the particular energy storage 
technology it is connected to as determined by the 
system’s safety analysis. 


22.1.4 Products that rely upon internal or external 
utility interconnection protection functions or devices 
shall be specifically identified for the particular 
product. External utility interconnection protection 
may be required by means of utility protection 
relays as defined by specific product ratings and 
instructions. 


22.1.5 It is intended that the acceptability of grid 
support utility interactive inverters shall be determined 
by the local electric utility. 


22.2 Utility Grid Interactive Inverter 


22.2.1 A utility-interactive inverter, grid support 
utility-interactive inverters, or subassembly of an 
energy storage system shall comply with the UL 1741, 
or IEC 62019 in case of electricity generation from 
solar photovoltaic system. These utility-interactive 
products may also include additional special purpose 


utility-interactive features and/or functions that may be 
enabled in accordance with local utility interconnection 
protection requirements. 


22.2.2 The utility-interactive inverters or converters 
may also include additional grid support and or special 
purpose utility-interactive features and/or functions 
that may be enabled in accordance with local utility 
interconnection protection requirements. 


22.2.3 Grid support utility-interactive inverters or 
converters may also include additional grid support 
utility-interactive functions addressed through other 
standards, and other functions that may be enabled in 
accordance with local utility SRD(s). IEEE 1547 A and 
IEEE 1547.1 A allow for grid support functionality. 


22.2.4 Energy storage system inverters that are rated for 
and or specify compliance with other specific electric 
utility interconnection document(s) or standard(s) 
shall be evaluated for compliance with the specified 
document(s) or standard(s). 


22.3 Special Purpose Utility-Interactive Energy 
Storage System Inverters 


22.3.1 Special purpose utility-interactive energy 
storage system inverters shall comply with all of 
the standard for inverters, converters, controllers 
and interconnection system equipment for use with 
distributed energy resources, UL 1741 construction 
requirements defined for utility-interactive products. 


22.3.2 Special purpose utility-interactive products 
are intended for use in specific power production 
applications that export power to the electric 
utility. These units are often installed in power 
farm applications. These units may be evaluated 
for compliance to a subset of IEEE 1547 and IEEE 
1547.1 requirements and they may also include 
additional special purpose _ utility-interactive 
features addressed through other standards, and 
other functions that may be enabled in accordance 
with local utility interconnection protection 
requirements. Special purpose utility-interactive 
energy storage system inverters shall comply with 
UL 1741 construction requirements defined for 
utility-interactive products. 


22.3.3 Special purpose utility-interactive energy storage 
system inverters are only required to be evaluated for 
compliance with the requirements in the IEEE 1547 
and IEEE 1547.1 that are supported by the system’s 
ratings and markings. 


22.3.4 Special purpose utility-interactive energy storage 
system inverters shall be evaluated for compliance with 
specific documents or requirements (in addition to the 
IEEE 1547 and IEEE 1547.1) only if those specific 
documents or requirements are referenced in the 
product ratings. 


15 


IS 17092 : 2019 


23 ENERGY 
TECHNOLOGIES 


STORAGE SYSTEM 


23.1 Electrochemical Energy Storage Systems 


Batteries, electrochemical capacitors, hybrid battery- 
capacitor systems or flow batteries used in an 
electrochemical energy storage system shall comply 
with the requirements of UL 1973. Testing and 
evaluation of the battery system, which would include 
the battery and its battery management system is 
conducted as part of evaluation to UL 1973. Inverters 
and charging equipment that are part of the energy 
storage system shall be designed for use with the 
battery system employed in the energy storage system. 
For general information on battery safety, see also 
informative Annex C. 


23.2 Chemical Energy Storage Systems 


23.2.1 A chemical energy storage system consists of 
storage of hydrogen fuel and the means to change the 
fuel into electrical energy using a fuel cell system or 
a hydrogen generator. To convert electrical energy 
into hydrogen fuel, a hydrogen generator using water 
electrolysis is also part of the overall system. Fuel 
cell systems that are part of a chemical energy storage 
system shall comply with IEC 62282-3-100. 


23.2.2 For example Water electrolysis type hydrogen 
generators used in an energy storage system to provide 
hydrogen for storage shall be evaluated and found to be 
in compliance to an appropriate safety standard for the 
equipment. 


23.2.3 Hydrogen fuel containing parts of a chemical 
energy storage system shall be constructed of materials 
suitable for gaseous hydrogen service at the pressures 
and temperatures of use. 


23.3 Mechanical Energy Storage Systems 


23.3.1 Mechanical energy storage systems such as, but 
not limited to, flywheel systems or Compressed Air 
Energy Storage (CAES) systems shall be evaluated to 
determine that hazards associated with moving parts 
with the capacity to store kinetic energy, and high 
pressure and high temperature fluids contained in the 
system are mitigated. Compliance is determined by 
evaluation to the requirements of this standard. 


23.3.2 Flywheel systems and other systems with 
moving parts with the capacity to store kinetic energy 
shall comply with 30 and 32. Parts containing hazardous 
fluids shall comply with 31 and 32. 


23.4 Thermal Energy Storage Systems 


Thermal energy storage systems shall be evaluated 
to determine hazards associated with containment of 
high temperature and high pressure and potentially 
hazardous fluids are mitigated. Compliance is 


IS 17092 : 2019 


determined by evaluation to the requirements of this 
standard. Parts containing hazardous fluids and fluids 
at high temperatures and pressures shall comply with 
31 and 32. 


24 PERFORMANCE 


24.1 General 


The energy storage technologies employed as part of an 
energy storage system shall be tested and determined 
compliant to an applicable technology safety standard. 
Where no applicable safety standard exists, they shall 
be tested in accordance with this standard. 


24.2 All tests conducted in accordance with this 
standard shall be conducted in an environment with 
an ambient temperature of 35 + 5°C unless otherwise 
noted in the test method. Any cooling systems or 
other auxiliary systems that are part of the energy 
storage system shall be operating during testing 
when their operation can affect the outcome of the 
test or when otherwise noted in the test method. 
For testing purposes, samples and parameters used 
for testing shall consider smallest size conductors 
and maximum allowed overcurrent protection in 
addition to worse case loading and temperatures 
conditions. 


24.3 Temperature shall bemeasuredusing thermocouples 
consisting of wires not larger than 0.21 mm’ and not 
smaller than 0.05 mm? connected to a potentiometer- 
type instrument. Temperature measurements shall be 
made with the measuring junction of the thermocouple 
held tightly against the component/location being 
measured. For those tests that require the sample to 
reach thermal equilibrium (also referred to as steady 
state conditions). Thermal equilibrium is considered 
to be achieved if after three consecutive temperature 
measurements taken at intervals of 10 percent of the 
previously elapsed duration of the test but not less than 
15 min, indicate no change in temperature greater than 
xo 2°C. 


24.4 The tests contained in this standard may result 
in explosions, fire and emissions of flammable and/or 
toxic fumes as well as electric shock. It is important 
that personnel use extreme caution and follow local and 
regional worker safety regulations when conducting 
any of these tests and that they be protected from flying 
fragments, explosive force, and sudden release of heat 
and noise that could result from testing. The test area is 
to be well ventilated to protect personnel from possible 
harmful fumes or gases. As an additional precaution, 
the temperatures on surfaces of parts that may get hot or 
cold during testing may be monitored during the test for 
safety and information purposes. All personnel involved 
in the testing shall be instructed to never approach 
the Device under Test (DUT) until temperatures have 
returned to within ambient temperatures. 


25 NORMAL OPERATIONS TEST 


25.1 A normal operations test can be waived for those 
energy storage systems where a similar evaluation such 
as a temperature test has already been conducted under 
the specific technology standard. 


25.2 In conducting the electrical tests required in this 
standard, the energy storage system shall be operated 
through a minimum of 2 cycles of charge and discharge 
of the system at the maximum loading rates as specified 
by the manufacturer. During the test, consideration 
shall be given to maximum and minimum ambient 
conditions. During operation, temperatures on critical 
components that are temperature sensitive shall be 
monitored and operating parameters of components 
of the system monitored to determine that they are 
operating within their ratings. 


25.3 During the normal operations test, the 
manufacturer’s specified limits shall not be exceeded 
during the charging and discharging cycles. 
Temperatures measured on components shall not 
exceed their specifications in accordance with Table 3. 
Temperatures on accessible surfaces of the energy 
storage system shall not exceed the limits in accordance 
with Table 4. 


Table 3 Temperatures on Components 
( Clause 25.3 ) 


Part 


Maximum Temperatures on Components (Tmax) °C 


Synthetic rubber or PVC insulation of internal and external wiring 


— without temperature marking 


75 


— with temperature marking 


Temperature marking 


Components, insulation and thermoplastic materials 


a) 


Cell/capacitor casings 


b) 


material. 


d The temperatures measured on components and materials shall not exceed the maximum temperature rating for that component or 


») The internal battery cell or capacitor case temperature shall not exceed the manufacturer’s recommended maximum temperature. 


16 


IS 17092 : 2019 


Table 4 Temperatures on Accessible Surfaces 
( Clause 25.3 ) 


Accessible Surfaces Maximum Surface Temperatures 
Metal °C Glass, Porcelain and Plastic and Rubber? °C 
Vitreous Materials °C 
External surfaces of equipment which may be 70 80 95 
touched?) 
Parts inside equipment which may be touched” 70 80 95 


in normal use, temperatures up to 100°C are permitted. 


d For each material, account shall be taken of the data from that material to determine the appropriate maximum temperature. 


» For areas on the external surface of equipment and having no dimension exceeding 50 mm (2.0 in), and which are not likely to be touched 


information. 


° Temperatures exceeding the limits are permitted provided that the following conditions are met: 
1) Unintentional contact with such a part is unlikely such as equipment located in restricted access locations or due to its location; 


2) The part has a marking indicating that this part is hot. It is permitted to use the symbol IEC 60417 Database, No. 5041 to provide this 


26 DIELECTRIC VOLTAGE WITHSTAND 
TEST 


26.1 The dielectric voltage withstand test is an 
evaluation of the electrical spacings and insulation 
associated with the hazardous voltage circuits within 
the DUT. 


26.2 Circuits at 42.4 Vpeak/ 30 Vrms or 60 Vdc or 
higher shall be subjected to a dielectric withstand 
voltage in accordance with IS 13252 (Part 1). 


Exception No. 1: Semiconductors or similar electronic 
components liable to be damaged by application of the 
test voltage may be bypassed or disconnected. 


Exception No. 2: The dielectric voltage withstand 
test need not be conducted on integral electric energy 
storage systems, fuel cells, and inverter systems, etc. 
that have already been evaluated in accordance with 
their individual standard requirements. Only those 
electrical parts external to the tested systems and their 
connections not previously evaluated need to be tested. 


26.3 The voltage applied during the dielectric voltage 
withstand test is to be applied between the hazardous 
voltage circuits of the DUT and non-current carrying 
conductive parts that may be accessible. 


26.4 The voltage applied during the dielectric voltage 
withstand test is also to be applied between the 
hazardous voltage charging circuit and the enclosure/ 
accessible non-current carrying conductive parts of the 
DUT. 


26.5 The voltages applied during the dielectric voltage 
withstand test shall be applied for a minimum of | min. 


26.6 The test equipment shall consist of a 500 VA 
or larger capacity transformer, the output voltage, 


17 


which is variable and which is essentially sinusoidal 
if using ac test method, a dc output if using a dc test 
method. There is no trip current setting for the test 
equipment since the test is checking for insulation 
breakdown, which results in a large increase of 
current. Setting a trip current may result in a false 
failure of this test, as it may not be indicative of 
insulation breakdown. 


Exception: A 500 VA or larger capacity transformer 
need not be used if the transformer is provided with 
a voltmeter that directly measures the applied output 
potential. 


26.7 There shall be no evidence ofa dielectric breakdown 
(breakdown of insulation resulting in a short through 
insulation/arcing over electrical spacing) as evidenced 
by an appropriate signal from the dielectric withstand 
test equipment as a result of the applied test voltage. 
Corona discharge or a single momentary discharge is 
not regarded as dielectric breakdown (that is, insulation 
breakdown). 


27 IMPULSE TEST 


27.1 The impulse voltage test is intended to evaluate 
the energy storage system’s ability to withstand 
lightning or similar surges. Systems provided with 
protection that has already been evaluated for voltage 
surges (for example, IEEE 1547 criteria) need not be 
tested. 


27.2 The impulse voltage test shall be performed with 
an impulse generator able to provide voltage having 
a 1.2/50 us waveform with an output impedance not 
exceeding 2 Q at voltages in accordance with Table 5 
and is intended to simulate an overvoltage condition 
due to lightning or switching of equipment. 


IS 17092 : 2019 


Table 5 Impulse Voltages 
( Clause 27.2 ) 


Voltage of Circuit Impulse Test Voltage, Voltage Between Circuits and Accessible Parts 

Under lest Circuits Connected to Mains Circuits Not Connected to Mains 
Basic or Supplementary Reinforced Basic or Reinforced 
Insulation Insulation Supplementary Insulation 

v v v v v 

< 50 500 800 800 1 500 

100 800 1 500 1 500 2 500 

150 1 500 2 500 2 500 4 000 

300 2 500 4 000 4 000 6 000 

500 4 000 6 000 6 000 8 000 

1 000 6 000 8 000 8 000 12 000 

> 1 000 a $ 2 s 
* Interpolation is permitted for circuits above 1 000 V. 


27.3 Pulses shall be applied at 1.2/50 us for each 
polarity in > 1 s time intervals at the peak voltage 
for the rating of the circuit under test + 5 percent per 
Table 5. The test voltage is to be applied between the 
terminal/circuit under test and accessible parts. For 
circuits at 1 000 V or less, three pulses at each polarity 
shall be applied. For circuits over 1 000 V, 5 pulses at 
each polarity shall be applied. 


27.4 As aresult of the applied impulse voltage test, there 
shall be no puncture of insulation (that is, electrical 
breakdown through solid insulation), occurrence 
of flashover (that is, electrical breakdown over the 
surfaces of solid insulation), or spark-over (that is, 
electrical breakdown through fluids such as air). 


28 EQUIPMENT GROUNDING AND BONDING 
TEST 


28.1 The impedance of the system grounding and 
bonding circuit shall be determined using one of the 
following methods: 


a) The circuit between the grounding terminal and the 
part to be grounded is measured using impedance 
measuring equipment; 

b) In accordance with the SP30; and 


c) In accordance with clause 2.6.3.4 of IS 13252 
(Part 1) (measuring voltage drop in circuit using 
a low voltage supply source providing a current 
based upon circuit protection rating). 


28.2 The impedance for all grounding and bonding 
circuits tested shall not exceed 0.1 Q. 


29 INSULATION RESISTANCE TEST 


29.1 The resistance of insulation used on hazardous 
voltage circuits within an energy storage system shall 
be greater than or equal to 1 MQ. 


18 


29.2 The insulation resistance shall be measured using 
high impedance measuring equipment (for example, 
mega ohmmeter) after applying a voltage of 500 V, 
between the live parts of the circuit under test and 
accessible conducting parts including the equipment 
grounding circuit, for 1 min. 


Exception: Energy storage systems need not be tested if 
the insulation resistance has been previously evaluated 
as part of the particular technology safety standard. 


30 CONTAINMENT OF MOVING PARTS 


30.1 Over Speed Qualification Test 


30.1.1 An energy storage system with moving parts 
having the capacity to store kinetic energy that is 
capable of being subjected to over speed conditions 
through a fault in the system controls shall be subjected 
to an over speed test. 


30.1.2 The system controls shall be subjected to a 
single fault in the controls that would allow over speed 
of the moving parts. The DUT shall be operated at over 
speed conditions until a secondary protection control 
operates to stop operation of the DUT. 


30.1.3 As aresult of the over speed condition, the moving 
part(s) shall not become loosened or disconnected in 
a manner that would result in a hazardous condition. 
If any moving part(s) get(s) completely loosened or 
disconnected as a result of the over speed conditions, 
the containment means shall safely contain the part(s) in 
accordance with the Faulted Securement Qualification 
Test in 30.2. 


30.2 Faulted Securement Qualification Test 


30.2.1 An energy storage system with moving parts 
having the capacity to store kinetic energy shall be 
subjected to the faulted securement test when a fault 


in primary securement means of the moving part may 
result in a hazard. 


30.2.2 The moving parts of the system shall be 
subjected to a single fault of the primary means of 
securement, and then shall be operated at maximum 
normal operation. The primary means of securement to 
be removed, such as a failed bearing, shaft, or other part 
of the securement of the moving part with respect to the 
stationary housing, shall be determined through a safety 
analysis that identifies failure of the selected means as 
representing the potential worst case condition. 


30.2.3 The system shall be operated until one of the 
following occurs: 


a) The part has operated for 30 min under the faulted 
condition; 


b) A protection control operates to stop operation of 
the DUT or hazardous moving part; or 


c) The part has loosened and is completely or 
partially disconnected from its securement means. 


30.2.4 As a result of the operation with a faulted 
securement condition, the moving part (s) shall 
not become loosened or disconnected to result in 
a hazardous condition. If completely loosened or 
disconnected, the containment means for the part shall 
safely contain the part(s). 


31 LEAKAGE TESTS 


31.1 Energy storage systems that contain hazardous 
fluids shall be subjected to the leakage test in accordance 
with 31.2 and 31.3. 


Exception: Leakage testing need not be conducted if 
parts containing hazardous fluids and their connections 
have already been evaluated for external leakage as 
part of a component standard such as Annex C of UL 
1973 or IEC 62283 -3-100. 


31.2 Leakage from energy storage systems containing 
hazardous fluids shall not result in the risk of fire, 
electric shock, or injury to persons. 


31.3 Compliance is determined by subjecting the 
fluid-containing parts and their connections to a fluid 
pressure of 1.5 times the maximum pressure (if testing 
with liquid) or 1.1 times the maximum pressure (if air 
pneumatic testing) of intended use during operation 
of the system. There shall be no leaks from fluid- 
containing parts or their connections as a result. 


32 STRENGTH TESTS 


32.1 General 


Energy storage systems that contain hazardous fluids 
shall comply with the strength tests in accordance with 
32.2 and 32.3. 


19 


IS 17092 : 2019 


32.2 Hydraulic Strength Test 


32.2.1 Parts of energy storage system containing 
hazardous fluid (gases or liquids) shall be tested for 
hydrostatic strength under the following conditions: 


Test pressure for hydrostatic pressure = 1.5 times 
design pressure. 

Duration for maximum applied pressure = | min. 
Liquid used for testing = Either the liquid used in 
system or water 

Test temperature = Ambient temperature 
Duration of gradual increase in pressure to reach 
test pressure = | min. 


32.2.2 As a result of the hydrostatic strength test, there 
shall be no fracture, distortion, rupture or other damage 
to the fluid containing parts. 


32.3 Pneumatic Strength Test 


32.3.1 The pneumatic strength test is an alternative to 
the hydrostatic strength test of 30.2 and is conducted in 
accordance with 32.3.2. 


32.3.2 Parts of the energy storage system containing 
hazardous fluids (gases or liquids) shall be tested for 
Pneumatic Strength under the following conditions: 


Test pressure for pneumatic strength test = 1.3 
times design pressure. 


Duration for maximum applied pressure = | min. 
Liquid used for testing = Either air or inert gas. 
Test Temperature = Ambient temperature. 


Duration of gradual increase in pressure to reach 
test pressure = | min. 
32.3.3 As a result of the pneumatic strength test, there 
shall be no fracture, distortion, rupture or other damage 
to the fluid containing parts. 


33 SPECIAL 
INSTALLATIONS 


ENVIRONMENT 


33.1 General 


Energy storage systems intended for installation in 
special environments shall be evaluatedL for their 
ability to operate safely in those environments. These 
environmental conditions can include exposure to 
salt fog for marine environments, testing for seismic 
ratings, high altitudes, etc. depending upon the 
particular special exposure. Environmental standards 
such as the IEC 60068 series shall be used to determine 
compliance. The installation instructions and nameplate 
labels on the energy storage system shall identify the 
special environmental conditions in accordance with 
37.3, 37.8, and 38. 


Exception: Test need not be conducted on systems or 
parts of the system if already covered as part of the 
specific technology safety standard. 


IS 17092 : 2019 


33.2 Outdoors Installations Subject to Moisture 
Exposure 


33.2.1 Energy storage systems installed outdoors are 
subjected to rated levels of moisture exposure therefore 
shall be tested in accordance with their environmental 
ratings outlined in their nameplate labels and installation 
instructions of 37.8 and 38.4. 


33.2.2 Based upon the ratings of the system, moisture 
resistance testing shall be done in accordance with IS/ 
IEC 60529. 


33.2.3 At the conclusion of the test, the sample is to 
be subjected to the electric insulation tests of 26 and 
29 and examined for signs of water in the system that 
could result in a hazardous condition. 


33.2.4 As a result of the water exposure, there shall 
be no evidence of water on parts that could result in 
a hazard and no reduction of spacing or breakdown/ 
deterioration in insulation levels. 


33.3 Outdoor 
Environments 


Installation Near Marine 


33.3.1 Energy Storage Systems installed outdoors near 
marine environments in accordance with 38.6 where 
they are subjected to salt fog exposure, shall be tested 
as follows. 


33.3.2 The systems shall be tested in accordance with 
IEC 60068-2-52. 


33.3.3 At the conclusion of the testing, the systems 
shall be subjected to the electrical insulation tests of 
27 and 29 to determine that insulation has not been 
damaged in a manner that would result in an electric 
shock hazard. 


33.3.4 The system shall be examined for signs of 
damage as a result of salt exposure that would indicate 
a potential for a safety hazard (for example, corrosion 
of parts that could result in weakening of a securement 
or an enclosure, damage to insulation). If operational, 
the system is to be operated to determine that it can do 
so without hazard. 


33.3.5 As a result of the test, the energy storage system 
shall not show evidence of damage from salt fog 
exposure that could result in a hazard such as electrical, 
shock, overheating or damage that could result in a 
physical hazard. 


33.4 Installation in Seismic Environments 


33.4.1 Energy storage systems intended for installation 
where they will be subject to seismic activity shall be 
evaluated and if necessary tested in accordance with 
their seismic ratings and installations instructions as 
per 37.3 and 38.6. The installation instructions shall 


20 


indicate the limitations of the particular seismic rating 
of the equipment. The guidance on seismic evaluation 
can be taken from IEEE 693 or IEC 60980. 


33.4.2 The energy storage system shall be examined 
for signs of explosion, fire, combustible concentrations 
(if applicable to technology), rupture of the enclosure, 
electrolyte leakage, electric shock and loss of protection 
controls that may lead to any of the other non-compliant 
results in 33.4.3. 


33.4.3 As a result of the test, any of the following results 
in (a) to (g) are considered a non-compliant result: 


a) Explosion; 

b) Fire; 

c) Combustible concentrations (if applicable to 
technology); 

d) Rupture (enclosure); 

e) Electrolyte leakage (external to enclosure); 


f) Electric shock hazard (resistance below isolation 
resistance limits or dielectric breakdown); and 


g) Loss of protection controls. 


34 DIELECTRIC VOLTAGE WITHSTAND 
TEST 


A dielectric withstand test as outlined in the dielectric 
voltage withstand test in 26 shall be conducted on 100 
percent production of energy storage systems with 
working voltage exceeding 60 V, or 30 V _„/42.4 V 


peak’ 
Exception No. 1: The time for the production dielectric 
withstand test can be reduced to 1 s. 


Exception No. 2: Testing can be conducted on 
subassemblies of the system. 


Exception No. 3: Testing can be waived if conducted as 
part of the specific technology evaluation (that is, tested 
as per UL 1973, etc.). 


35 GROUNDING AND BONDING 
CHECK 


SYSTEM 


35.1 The grounding and bonding system of an energy 
storage system shall be subjected to a check using an 
impedance measuring device. The measurements shall 
occur between any two locations of the grounding and 
bonding system. 


35.2 No resistance measurements of the grounding and 
bonding system shall exceed 0.1 Q. 


36 MAXIMUM ABNORMAL OPERATING 
SPEED 


Every production mechanical storage element shall 
be subjected to a maximum abnormal operating speed 
test. The test shall be performed at the maximum speed 
reached during the over speed qualification test of 


30.1. The test shall be performed in an environment 
which will safely contain any mechanical failure of the 
mechanical storage element. 


37 MARKINGS 


37.1 General 


The markings including signage required for compliance 
to this standard shall be legible and permanent such as 
metal stamped, etched, adhesive labels, etc. A mark can 
be embossed or silk screened on any colored material 
or printed with the same color used for rating labels 
or carton box markings. Compliance is checked by 
inspection and by rubbing the marking by hand for 15 
s with a piece of cloth soaked with water and again for 
15 s with a piece of cloth soaked with petroleum spirit. 
After all the tests specified in the standards, the marking 
shall be clearly legible, it shall not be easily possible to 
remove marking plates and they shall show no curling. 
NOTE — the petroleum spirit to be used for the test is 
aliphatic solvent hexane having a maximum aromatics content 
of 0.1 percent by volume, a kauri-butanol value of 29, an 
initial boiling point of approximately 65 EC, a dry point of 
approximately 69EC and a specific mass of approximately 
0.66 kg/l. 
An adhesive-backed label shall comply with the 
requirements as below. 


IS 17092 : 2019 


37.2 Markings and signage shall be in lettering that is 
sized so that it is legible from the distance from which 
it must be read and shall have lettering in a color that 
contrasts with the background. Guidance for markings 
and signs can be found in ISO 3864-2 and IEC 60417. 


37.3 Energy storage systems shall be marked with the 
manufacturer’s name, trade name, trademark or other 
descriptive marking which identifies the organization 
responsible for the product, part number or model 
number, and electrical ratings and other ratings in (a) 
to (m). All ratings and rating information necessary 
for the installation and operation of the energy storage 
system shall be provided in the system instructions. If 
the installation location of the system has limitations 
(that is, can only be located indoors where it is 
sheltered from rain and UV or outdoors only), these 
location limitations shall be indicated on the label 
and installation instructions. If the system is intended 
for installation in a location where local regulations 
indicate a need for a seismic rating on equipment, an 
appropriate seismic rating shall be included on the 
label. 


a) Output and input current (maximum), in Amps; 
b) Output and input voltage (maximum), in Volts; 
c) Power input and output (maximum), in Watts; 


Test 


Requirement 


Defacement Test 


Labels or unprinted materials are to be scraped back 
and forth ten times across printed areas and edges, 
with a downward force of between 7.2 and 9 N using 
the edge ofa 1.65mm to 2.54mm thick steel blade held 
at a right angle to the test surface. The portion of the 
blade contacting the test surface shall have a radius of 
curvature of 25.4 to 33.0 mm and the edges of the blade 
shall be rounded to a radius of 0.41 + 0.08 mm.” 


A label or unprinted material, including over-lamination 
or overprint coating, if present, shall remain in place 
and shall not be torn, uplifted, or otherwise damaged. 


Scratching or defacement of unprotected printing, 
either text or background, is not considered a non- 
compliance. 


Adhesion Test: Test strips approximately 12.7 mm wide are to be prepared by making two parallel cuts through 
the sample to the test surface, using a sharp instrument such as a razor blade. Strips are to be cut parallel to the 
length and width of the sample if the size and configuration of samples allows. One end of each strip shall be 
separated from the surface for attachment to the apparatus for test. The remainder of each strip, at least 25.4 mm 
is then to be pulled from the surface at a 90 + 5 degree angle and at a rate of 50.8 + 2.5 mm/min, using a tension 
machine equipped with an automatic recorder that graphs the adhesion profile of the test strip. The average force 
required to remove the strip is to be calculated in N/mm width rounding to the nearest 0.002 N/mm. The value 
obtained for two or more samples is to be averaged and taken as the quantitative adhesion value. Notation shall 
be made if the quantitative adhesion value drops below 0.02 N/mm at any point during the test. 


This test is to be conducted if it is possible to remove 
test strips from surfaces. If removal is not possible 
because of breaking, tearing, or excessive rigidity of 
the label material, adhesion is to be determined by 
attempting to remove the entire sample by hand.” 


The average quantitative adhesion value shall not be 
less than 0.088 N/mm width and the adhesion shall 
not be less than 0.0175 N/mm at any point. If it is not 
possible to separate test strips from the surface, the 
sample shall show good adhesion to the surface when 
removal by hand is attempted. 


d The back of the blade of a pocket knife conforming to the description indicated has been found suitable for performing this test. Other 
devices conforming to the description indicated may be used. 


» Labels intended to be mechanically affixed shall be evaluated by holding the label on a flat test surface for support. 


© The adhesion test is not applicable to labels intended to be mechanically affixed. 


21 


IS 17092 : 2019 


d) Energy output in Wh (maximum); 


e) Auxiliary output and input voltage (V), current 
(A) and frequency (Hz) if applicable; 


f) Number of phases (for input and output); 
g) Frequency, in Hz; 

h) Duty cycle (if applicable); 

j) Maximum short circuit current, in Amps; 
k) Ambient temperature range, in °C; 


m) Special environmental ratings and limitations as 
applicable (for example, seismic, indoor/outdoor 
only, etc.); 

n) Weight (maximum), in kg; and 

p) Maximum dimensions for height, width, and 
length (this dimensions information need not be 
marked on the system as long as it is provided in 
the installation instructions). 


37.4 Energy storage systems shall also be marked with 
the date of manufacture, which may be in the form of a 
code that does not repeat within 20 years. All external 
terminals and connections shall be provided with 
identification. 


37.5 The point of connection to the charger earth 
grounding system shall be identified by the word 
‘Ground’ or the letters ‘G?’ or ‘GR’ or the grounding 
symbol as defined in IEC 60417 (upside down tree 
within a circle) or otherwise identified by a distinctive 
green color. Any other grounding terminals shall also 
be identified in a manner that is distinctive from the 
main earth ground terminal for the charger system. 


37.6 The energy storage system that contains hazardous 
voltage circuits shall be marked ‘WARNING: Hazardous 
Voltage Circuits’ or be marked with the electric shock 
hazard symbol as per ISO 3864 (Part 2) No. 5036 
(lightning bolt within a triangle). Electrical equipment 
parts of the energy storage systems such as control 
panels and the enclosures of disconnecting devices are 
also to be marked with arc flash markings according to 
the SP 30 and arc flash personal protective equipment 
(PPE) requirements, to warn service personnel of 
potential for arc flash hazards arc flash hazards and 
necessary protection to be worn if applicable. 


37.7 Energy storage systems shall be marked as 
follows: ‘WARNING: To Reduce the Risk of Injury, 
read all instructions’ or marked with the symbols W001 
(that is, exclamation point in triangle) and M002 of 
ISO 7010 (Part 2). 


37.8 An energy storage system intended for installation 
where it may be exposed to moisture shall be marked 
with the environmental rating of its enclosure (that is, 
IPX2, Type 4X, etc.) suitable for that type of exposure. 
See 33.2. 


22 


37.9 The control devices and indicators required for 
operation or maintenance shall be marked with their 
function on or adjacent to the control. 


38 GENERAL 


38.1 The energy storage system shall be provided 
with complete instructions for installation, operation 
and maintenance of the system in accordance with 
the technical documentation section, as per Annex D. 
Instructions for installation, operation and maintenance 
of the energy storage system shall address electrical 
safety including arc flash in accordance with the 
standard for electrical safety in the workplace. 


38.2 All cautionary markings and ratings provided on 
the system, as well as system specifications needed 
for installation and operation of the system, shall be 
included in the instructions. 


38.3 Energy storage systems shall be provided with 
complete instructions for installation. The installation 
instructions shall include all information necessary 
for commissioning of the energy storage system. The 
installation information shall include instructions 
for making all necessary connections for electrical, 
communications, piping for fuels and other fluids, etc. 
as well as connections to other equipment that may 
be part of the system. The instructions shall include 
information on electrical disconnects, shut off valves 
and other devices required to be installed with the 
system. The installation instructions shall include the 
parameters required for electrical connections and 
installed devices in electrical circuits (communication 
protocols, circuits and devices) as well as parameters 
for fuel and other fluid connections and control devices 
necessary for the operation of the energy storage 
system. 


38.4 With reference to 37.3, the installations instructions 
shall specify that the system be installed in accordance 
with local electrical, building, fire and other codes or 
utility requirements as applicable to the installation and 
equipment, by qualified service personnel in accordance 
with the installation instructions and appropriate 
practices. Systems intended for installation in restricted 
access locations per 3.15 shall be designated by the 
manufacture if they are to be considered under this 
standard. If restricted access locations are identified 
by the manufacturer, the training required to gain 
access shall also be identified by the manufacturer 
including information in the installation, operation 
and maintenance instructions. The specific application 
location information such as the system being intended 
for utility premise installations or residential and 
commercial installations, etc. shall be identified in 
the installation instructions, if the system limited to 
installation only in those locations. 


38.5 With reference to 37.3, the installation instructions 
for energy storage systems containing large amounts of 
free electrolyte such as flow batteries or lead acid types, 
etc. shall be provided with instructions for location of 
eye wash stations. In addition, ifnecessary in accordance 
with building codes, installation instructions shall 
provide information on spill containment to be installed 
with the system as per 19.1. 


38.6 Energy storage systems intended for installation 
only in certain environments such as indoors only or 
where exposed to moisture, seismic activity or near 
marine environments, or to be installed in restricted 
access locations, shall indicate this in the installation 
instructions. Systems intended for exposure to 
moisture, marine environments or seismic activity per 
installation instructions shall be evaluated as per 32. 


38.7 The installation instruction shall include any 
special handling and safeguard measures to be followed 
during installation and shall include details of support 
structures such as concrete pads, etc. required for 
installation at the site. 


38.8 The operating instructions shall contain 
instructions for decommissioning and disposing of the 
energy storage system at the end of life of the system. 
Instructions shall also include provisions of recycling 
or repurposing, if possible. 


38.9 An energy storage system shall be provided 
with instructions for the proper operation of the 
system including charging and discharging for battery 
systems, and operation of system controls. The 


23 


IS 17092 : 2019 


operating instructions shall include safety measures 
and applicable safety warnings for operation and any 
instructions necessary for emergency procedures. 


38.10 The energy storage system shall be provided 
with maintenance instructions for service personnel 
as well as a separate set of instructions for any basic 
maintenance procedures that would be handled by 
operators of the system. Maintenance instructions 
shall include frequency of routine maintenance to be 
performed including annual checks on any subsystems 
such as HVAC, Fire Suppression System, etc., as well 
as operational tests to be performed. The maintenance 
instructions shall include safety measures to be 
followed during maintenance of the system whether by 
service personnel or for basic maintenance procedures 
handled by system operators. 


38.11 The maintenance instructions shall be 
provided with information on field replacement of 
replaceable materials, components and parts for 
ongoing maintenance and repair of the system. These 
instructions shall include detailed information on where 
to obtain and how to install the replaceable items. 
The instructions shall indicate that all servicing and 
replacement of parts are to be done by qualified persons 
only and that only approved materials, components and 
parts are to be used for replacements. 


38.12 The installation instructions shall contain 
all energy storage system operation mode/settings, 
operation function/settings and _protection/settings, 
which the inverters can provide. 


IS 17092 : 2019 


IS No./Other Publications 
SP 7 : 2016 
SP 30 : 2013 
IS 13252 (Part 1) : 2010 
IS 13252 (Part 21) : 2013 
IS 13252(Part 22) : 2014 


IS 14321 : 1995 
IS 16221 (Part 1) : 2016 
IS 16221 (Part 2) : 2015 


IS/IEC 60529 : 2001 
IS/IEC 60730 — 1 : 1999 


IS/IEC 61058 (all 2000 parts) 
IS/TEC 61508 (all parts) 


IS/IEC 61508 — 1 : 1998 


IS/IEC 61508 — 2 : 2000 


IS/IEC 61508 —3 : 1998 
IS/IEC 61508 — 4 : 1998 


IS/IEC 61508 —5 : 1998 


IS/IEC 61508 — 6 : 2000 


IS/IEC 61508 — 7 : 2000 


IEC 60086-1 : 2015 
IEC 60068-2-52 : 2017 


IEC 60417 : 2002 
IEC 60812 : 2018 


IEC 60980 : 1989 


IEC 61000 (all parts) 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


Standard Title 
National Building Code of India 
National Electrical Code 2011 
Information technology equipment — Safety: Part 1 General requirements 
Information technology equipment — Safety: Part 21 Remote power feeding 


Information technology equipment — Safety: Part 22 Equipment to be installed 
outdoors 


Corrosion of metals and alloys — Recommended values for the corrosively 
categories of atmosphlures 


Safety of power converters for use in photovoltaic power systems: Part 1 
General requirements 


Safety of power converters for use in photovoltaic power systems: Part 2 
Particular requirements for inverters 


Degrees of protection provided by enclosures (IP Code) 


Automatic electrical controls for household and similar use: Part 1 General 
requirements 


Switches for Appliances 


Functional safety of electrical/electronic/programmable electronic safety- 
related systems 


Functional safety of electrical/electronic/programmable electronic safety- 
related systems Part 1: General requirements 


Functional safety of electrical/electronic/programmable electronic safety- 
related systems: Part 2 Requirements for electrical/electronic/programmable 
electronic safety-related systems 


Functional safety of electrical/electronic/programmable electronic safety- 
related systems: Part 3 Software requirements 


Functional safety of electrical/electronic/programmable electronic safety- 
related systems: Part 4 Definitions and abbreviations 


Functional safety of electrical/electronic/programmable electronic safety- 
related systems: Part 5 Examples of methods for the determination of safety 
integrity levels 


Functional safety of electrical/electronic/programmable electronic safety- 
related systems: Part 6 Guidelines on the application of IEC 61508-2 and IEC 
61508-3 


Functional safety of electrical/electronic/programmable electronic safety- 
related systems: Part 7 Overview of techniques and measures 


Primary batteries — Part 1: General 


Environmental testing — Part 2: Tests — Tests Kb, salt mist, cyclic (sodium 
chloride solution) 


Graphical symbols for use on equipment 


Analysis techniques for system reliability — Procedures for failure mode and 
effects analysis (FMEA) 


Recommended practices for seismic qualification of electrical equipment of the 
safety system for nuclear generating stations 


IEC 61000 series reflects Subjects dealt with by basic EMC publications 


24 


IS No./Other Publications 
IEC 61025 : 2006 
IEC 61429 : 1995 


ISO 3864-2 : 2016 


ISO 7010 : 2011 


ISO 12944-2 : 2017 


IEEE 693 : 2018 
IEEE 1547 : 2018 
UL 746 C : 2018 
UL 1741 : 2010 


UL 1973 : 2018 


ASHRAE 62.1 : 2016 


IS 17092 : 2019 


Standard Title 
Fault tree analysis (FTA) 


Marking of secondary cells and batteries with the international recycling 
symbol ISO 7000-1135 


Graphical symbols — Safety colours and safety signs — Part 2: Design 
principles for product safety labels 


Graphical aymbols — Safety colours and safety signs — Registered safety 
signs 


Paints and varnishes — Corrosion protection of steel structures by protective 
paint systems — Part 2: Classification of environments 


IEEE recommended practice for seismic design of substations 
Interconnecting distributed resources with electric power systems 
Polymeric Materials — Use in Electrical Equipment Evaluations 


Inverters, Converters, Controllers and Interconnection System Equipment for 
Use With Distributed Energy Resources 


Batteries for Use in Light Electric Rail (LER) Applications and Stationary 
Applications 


Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality (American Society of Heating, 
Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning Engineers) 


25 


IS 17092 : 2019 


Reference Standard Number 
IS 15549 : 2005 

IS 16046 -1 : 2018 

IEC 60896-21 : 2004 

IEC 60896-22 : 2004 


IEC 62133-1 : 2017 


IEC 62133-2 : 2017 


IEEE 1188 : 2005 


SAE J2464 / 


SAE J2929 


ANNEX B 
( Informative ) 


Standard Title 
Stationary valve regulated lead acid batteries — Specification 


Secondary sells and batteries containing alkaline or other non-acid electrolytes 
— Safety requirements for portable sealed secondary cells, and for batteries 
made from them, for use in portable applications 


Stationary lead-acid batteries — Part 21: Valve regulated types — Methods of 
test 


Stationary lead-acid batteries — Part 22: Valve regulated types — Requirements 


Secondary cells and batteries containing alkaline or other non-acid electrolytes 
— Safety requirements for portable sealed secondary cells, and for batteries 
made from them, for use in portable applications — Part 1: Nickel systems 


Secondary cells and batteries containing alkaline or other non-acid electrolytes 
— Safety requirements for portable sealed secondary lithium cells, and for 
batteries made from them, for use in portable applications — Part 2: Lithium 
systems 


Maintenance, testing, and replacement of valve-regulated lead-acid (VRLA) 
batteries for stationary applications 


Electric and Hybrid Electric Vehicle Rechargeable Energy Storage System 
(RESS) Safety and Abuse Testing 


Electric and Hybrid Vehicle Propulsion Battery System Safety Standard — 
Lithium-based Rechargeable Cells 


26 


IS 17092 : 2019 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 23.1 and 31.1 ) 
GENERAL BATTERY SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS 


C-1 GENERAL 


The battery specific safety requirements for this 
standard is given in UL 1973. See 25.1. The following 
includes some general safety recommendations for 
cells and batteries used in electrochemical type energy 
storage systems. 


C-2 DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS 


C-2.1 Battery systems should have two-fault tolerance 
for all catastrophic failures including overcharge, over 
discharge, short circuit and extreme temperatures. 


C-2.2 The chargers used for charging the energy storage 
battery systems should be designed for the chemistry 
of the battery to be charged. The charging algorithm 
should be verified to ensure that the charging procedure 
is suitable for the battery chemistry and battery design. 


C-2.3 Protection circuits should be verified by test in 
the relevant battery design configuration and worst case 
environments to confirm that they provide the required 
protective functions. 


C-2.4 Cell level protection should not be relied upon for 
battery pack protection unless it can be verified through 
analysis and testing of the battery that the cell protection 
provides sufficient protection at the battery pack level. 


C-2.5 For lithium ion batteries and any other chemistry 
as determined by the battery system safety analysis, 
voltage should be monitored for every series element, 
temperatures should be monitored throughout the battery 
pack, and battery level current monitoring should be 
carried out continuously with alarm and control circuits 
able to react. Thermal runaway protection should be 
provided. Such protection should be verified through 
testing that it provides sufficient protection of the battery 
pack. Any off-nominal values should be recorded by the 
Battery Management System (BMS). 


C-2.6 For aqueous battery chemistries such as lead acid 
or nickel cadmium, battery or module level voltage, 
temperature and current monitoring should be carried 
out continuously with alarm and control circuits able 
to react. If possible, any off-nominal values should be 
recorded by the control system. 


C-2.7 Consideration should be given for conducting 
high fidelity thermal analysis when developing battery 
designs to determine the appropriate locations of the 
thermal sensors used in the battery. 


27 


C-2.8 All temperature sensor readings should be 
continuously recorded and controls set in place to trigger 
a stoppage of charging or discharging of the battery when 
the temperature readings go above the manufacturer’s 
rating of that particular cell or battery design. 


C-2.9 If the battery is used only periodically, the battery 
should be designed to prevent cells from going into 
an over discharge mode due to the long term storage 
conditions. 


C-2.10 For lithium battery designs and other 
technologies as determined through safety analysis, 
cells should be spaced or insulated from other cells 
appropriately or through other mechanisms to prevent 
cell to cell thermal runaway propagation in the event 
that any one cell experiences a thermal runaway 
event. 


C-2.11 If temperature control is required for the battery 
system, the failure of the temperature controls, such as 
failure of heaters, cooling systems, or their controls, 
should not impose a safety hazard. 


C-2.12 For systems requiring heaters for operation, 
heater designs should not result in temperatures that 
exceed specified safe operating temperatures of the 
batteries. 


C-2.13 For systems requiring active cooling systems, a 
failure of the cooling system due to breach or breakage 
in the cooling lines should not result in a leakage 
that will cause short circuiting of the cells inside the 
battery pack leading to a hazardous condition. Coolant 
leakage lines should be routed or secured to mitigate 
the potential for leakage on live parts and if necessary 
fluid monitor and controls of the coolant system may 
need to be provided. 


C-2.14 For lithium batteries and other technologies as 
determined by the battery safety analysis, to prevent any 
unforeseen hazards due to a complex design and usage 
environment, the thermal runaway propagation test 
should be performed on a subset of the battery system 
design. This test should be carried out to understand the 
worst case failure that can occur in the battery design 
due to single cell undergoing thermal runaway and to 
understand how this catastrophic event propagates to 
the other cells in the battery system. This test can be 
carried out by using a heater or other method to induce 
thermal runaway in a single cell and then observing 
surrounding cells. 


IS 17092 : 2019 


C-2.15 All parameters such as cell voltages, battery 
voltage, battery current (sub-module currents, if 


applicable) and temperatures should be verified to be 
within the specification for the cells and battery system. 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 38.1 ) 


D-1 GENERAL 


D-1.1 The information necessary for installation, 
operation, and maintenance of the electrical energy 
storage system shall be supplied in the form of 
drawings, diagrams, charts, tables, and instructions as 
appropriate. For very simple equipment, the relevant 
information shall be permitted to be contained in one 
document provided this document shows all the devices 
of the electrical energy storage system and enables the 
connections to the supply network to be made. 


D-1.2 The electrical energy storage system supplier 
shall ensure that the technical documentation specified 
in this chapter is provided with each electrical energy 
storage system. 


D-1.3 Technical documentation shall be supplied in a 
medium agreed upon by the electrical energy storage 
system supplier and the user of electrical energy storage 
system. 


D-2 INFORMATION 
The following information shall be provided with the 
electrical equipment: 


a) Clear, comprehensive description of the 
equipment, installation and mounting, and the 
connection to the electrical supply; 


b) Electrical supply circuit(s) requirements; 
c) Overview (block) diagram(s) where appropriate; 
d) Schematic diagram(s); 
e) Information (where appropriate) on the following: 
1) Programming, 
2) Sequence of operation(s), 
3 
4) Frequency and method of functional testing, 


wa 


Frequency of inspection 


5) Adjustment, maintenance, and repair, 
6) Interconnection diagram, 
7) Panel layouts, 


8) Instruction and service manuals, and 


9) Physical environment (for example, 
lighting, vibration, noise levels, atmospheric 
contaminants) 


28 


f) A description (including interconnection 
diagrams) of the safeguards, interacting functions, 
and interlocking of guards with potentially 
hazardous motions; 

g) A description of the safeguarding means and 
methods provided where the primary safeguards 
are overridden (for example, manual programming, 
program verification); 

h) Information for safety lockout procedure; 

j) Explanation of unique terms; 

k) Parts list and recommended spare parts list; 

and 


m) Maintenance instructions 


procedures; 


adjustment 


n) Reference information (where appropriate) on the 
following (any applicable): 
1) Lubrication diagram, 
2) Pneumatic diagram, 
3) Hydraulic diagram, and 
4) Miscellaneous system diagrams (for example, 
coolant, refrigerant). 


D-3 REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL 
DOCUMENTATION 


D-3.1 The documents shall be prepared in accordance 
with the requirements of D-2. 


D-3.2 For referencing of the different documents, the 
supplier shall select one of the following methods: 


a) Each of the documents shall carry as a cross- 
reference the document numbers of all other 
documents belonging to the electrical equipment. 
This method shall be used only where the 
documentation consists of four or fewer 
documents. 


b) All documents shall be listed with document 
numbers and titles in a drawing or document list. 


D-3.3 Where appropriate, a table of contents shall 
appear prominently on the first sheet and shall refer to 
all major sections of the electrical drawings. 


D-4 BASIC INFORMATION 


The technical documentation shall be permitted to 
be presented as a separate document or as part of 


the installation or operation documentation. The 
technical documentation shall contain, as a minimum, 
information on the following: 


a) Normal operating conditions of the electrical 
equipment, including the expected conditions of 
the electrical supply and, where appropriate, the 
physical environment; 


b) Handling, transportation, and storage; and 
c) Inappropriate use(s) of the equipment. 


D-5 INSTALLATION DIAGRAM 


D-5.1 The installation diagram shall provide all 
information necessary for the preliminary work of 
setting up the electrical energy storage system. 


D-5.2 The specified position of the electrical supply to 
be installed on site shall be clearly indicated. 


D-5.3 The data necessary for choosing the type, 
characteristics, rated currents, and setting of the 
overcurrent protective device(s) for the supply circuit 
conductors to the electrical energy storage system of 
the machine shall be stated. 


D-5.4 Where necessary, the size, purpose, and location 
of any raceways in the foundation that are to be 
provided by the user shall be detailed. 


D-5.5 The size, type, and purpose of raceways, cable 
trays, or cable supports between the machine and the 
associated equipment that are to be provided by the 
user shall be detailed. 


D-5.6 Where necessary, the diagram shall indicate 
where space is required for the removal or servicing of 
the electrical equipment. 


D-5.7 Where it is appropriate, an interconnection 
diagram or table shall be provided. That diagram or 
table shall give full information about all external 
connections. Where the electrical equipment is intended 
to be operated from more than one source of electrical 
supply, the interconnection diagram or table shall 
indicate the modifications or interconnections required 
for the use of each supply. 


D-6 BLOCK (SYSTEM) DIAGRAMS AND 
FUNCTION DIAGRAMS 


Where it is necessary to facilitate the understanding of 
the principles of operation, a system diagram shall be 
provided. A block diagram shall symbolically represent 
the electrical equipment together with its functional 
interrelationships without necessarily showing all of 
the interconnections. 


29 


IS 17092 : 2019 


D-7 CIRCUIT DIAGRAMS 


D-7.1 Diagrams, including machine schematics, of the 
electrical system shall be provided and shall show the 
electrical circuits on the machine and its associated 
electrical equipment. Electrical symbols shall be in 
accordance with IS 10232 where included therein. Any 
electrical symbols not included in IS 10232 shall be 
separately shown and described on the diagrams. The 
symbols and identification of components and devices 
shall be consistent throughout all documents and on the 
machine. 


NOTE — Wiring schematics shall not be required for 
commercially available or field replaceable components. 


D-7.2 Where appropriate, a diagram showing the 
terminals for interface connections shall be provided. 
Switch symbols shall be shown on the electromechanical 
diagrams with all supplies turned off (e.g., electricity, 
air, water, lubricant) and with the system and its 
electrical equipment in the normal starting condition 
and at 35°C ambient temperature. Control settings shall 
be shown on the diagram. 


D-7.3 Identification of Conductors 
D-7.3.1 General Requirements 


D-7.3.1.1 Conductors shall be identified at each 
termination by number, letter, color (either solid or 
with one or more stripes), or a combination thereof and 
shall correspond with the technical documentation as 
defined in this appendix. Internal wiring on individual 
devices purchased completely wired shall not require 
additional identification. 


D-7.3.1.2 Where numbers are used to identify 
conductors, they shall be Arabic; letters shall be roman 
(either uppercase or lowercase). 


D-7.3.2 Identification of the Equipment Grounding 
Conductor 


D-7.3.2.1 The color green shall be used to identify 
the equipment grounding conductor where insulated 
or covered. This color identification shall be strictly 
reserved for the equipment grounding conductor. 


Exception No. 1: In multi conductor cable-connected 
assemblies where equipment grounding is not required, 
the solid color green shall be permitted for other than 
equipment grounding. 


Exception No. 2: It shall be permitted to use conductors 
of other colors, provided the insulation or cover is 
appropriately identified at all points of access. 


Exception No. 3: For grounded control circuits, use of 
a green insulated conductor or a bare conductor from 


IS 17092 : 2019 


the transformer terminal to a grounding terminal on the 
control panel shall be permitted. 


D-7.3.2.2 Where the equipment grounding conductor 
is identified by its shape, position, or construction ( for 
example, a braided conductor) or where the insulated 
conductor is not readily accessible, color coding 
throughout its length shall not be required. The ends 
or accessible portion shall be clearly identified by the 
symbol in Fig. C-7.4.2.1, the color green. 


Fic. C-7.4.2.1 


D-7.3.3 Identification of the Grounded Circuit 


Conductor 


D-7.3.3.1 Where an a.c. circuit includes a grounded 
conductor, this conductor shall be white or gray. 


Exception: Grounded conductors in multi conductor 
cables shall be permitted to be permanently identified 
at their terminations at the time of installation by a 
distinctive white marking or other equally effective 
means. 


D-7.3.3.2 The use of other colors for the following 
applications shall be as follows: 


a) White with blue stripe for grounded (current 
carrying) de circuit conductor; 


b) White with orange stripe for grounded (current 
carrying) ac circuit conductor, which remains 
energized when the main supply circuit is 
disconnected, means is in the off position; and 


c) Whichever color stripe is selected, that color stripe 
shall be consistent with the ungrounded conductor 
of the excepted circuit described in 5.3.5. 


D-7.4 Circuit Characteristics 


D-7.4.1 Circuits shall be shown in such a way as to 
facilitate the understanding of their function as well as 
maintenance and fault location. 


D-7.4.2 Across-referencing scheme shall be used in 
conjunction with each relay, output device, limit switch, 
and pressure switch so that any contact associated with 
the device can be readily located on the diagrams. 


D-7.4.3 Control circuit devices shall be shown between 
vertical lines that represent control power wiring. The 


30 


left vertical line shall be the control circuit’s common 
and the right line shall be the operating coil’s common. 
Control devices shall be shown on horizontal lines 
(rungs) between the vertical lines. Parallel circuits shall 
be shown on separate horizontal lines directly adjacent 
to (above or below) the original circuit. 


D-7.4.4 An interconnection diagram shall be provided 
on large systems having a number of separate enclosures 
or control stations. It shall provide full information 
about the external connections of all of the electrical 
equipment on the machine. 


D-7.4.5 Interlock wiring diagrams shall include 
devices, functions, and conductors in the circuit where 
used. 


D-7.4.6 Plug/receptacle pin identification shall be 
shown on the diagram(s). 


D-8 OPERATING MANUAL 


D-8.1 The technical documentation shall contain an 
operating manual detailing proper procedures for setup 
and equipment use. 


D-8.2 Where the operation of the equipment is 
programmable, detailed information on methods 
of programming, equipment required, program 
verification, and additional safety procedures (where 
required) shall be provided. 


D-9 MAINTENANCE MANUAL 


D-9.1 The technical documentation shall contain a 
maintenance manual detailing proper procedures for 
adjustment, servicing and preventive inspection, and 
repair. 


D-9.2 Where methods for the verification of proper 
operation are provided (for example, software testing 
programs), the use of those methods shall be detailed. 


D-9.3 Where service procedures requiring electrical 
work while equipment is energized, the technical 
documentation shall refer to appropriate safe work 
practices. 


D-10 PARTS LIST 


D-10.1 The parts list shall comprise, as a minimum, 
information necessary for ordering spare or replacement 
parts (for example, components, devices, software, 
test equipment, technical documentation) required for 
preventive or corrective maintenance, including those 
that are recommended to be carried in stock by the 
equipment user. 


D-10.2 The parts list shall show the following for each 
item: 
a) Reference designation used in the documentation, 
b) Its type designation, 


31 


IS 17092 : 2019 


c) Supplier (and supplier’s part number), 
d) Its general characteristics where appropriate, and 


e) Quantity of items with the same reference 
designation. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 52 (12426). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


