**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10245-1 (1996): Breathing apparatus. Part 1: Closed 
circuit breathing apparatus (compressed oxygen cylinder) 
;CHD 8: Occupational Safety, Health and Chemical Hazards] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS10245(Pai11):1996 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 
BREATHING APPARATUS 

PART 1 CLOSED CIRCUIT BREATHING APPARATUS ( COMPRESSED OXYGEN 

CYLINDER ) — SPECIFICATION 

( First Revision j 



ICS 13.340.30 



OBIS 1996 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHA VAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Dec«mbtr\996 Price Group 7 



Industrial Safety Sectional Committee, CHD 8 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft fmalized 
by the Industrial Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 

This Indian Standard was first published in 1982 and the revision of this standard is required to make this 
standard compatible with the international standard. This standard is harmonized technically equivalent to 

EN 145. 

Breathing apparatus enables a person to remain in irrespirable and poisonous atmosphere for a long or short 
period and to still retain his ftiU physical and mental capacity. It is also known as rescue apparatus, anti-gas 
apparatus, respirator, smoke helmet, and gas mask. The apparatus is req'iired in mines, gas works, chemical 
factories, iron works, steel plants, smelting and metallurgical works, oil refineries and oil tankers. It may also 
be used by fire brigade, municipality, defence personnel and mountaineers. 

Breathing apparatus should be of such efliciency and reliability as to ensure safety in toxic gases, oxygen- 
deficient atmosphere, extreme heat, high humidity, and wreckage and falls during disaster. It is, therefore, 
imperative that breathing apparatus should have an appropriate design, efticiency and safety under various 
conditions including temperature, resistance, quality of materials, and workmanship. Besides, it should ensure 
chemical purity of oxygen breathed and pass rigorous physiological, physical, chemical and mechanical tests. 
These are prescribed in this standard which is being issued in difTerent parts. 

This part deals with closed-circuit breathing apparatus in which the exhaled air is re-breathed by the wearer 
after the carbon dioxide concentration has been effectively reduced and the oxygen concentration enriched. 
It is used either with a ftill face piece or with mouth piece and nose clip. 

A closed -circuit breathing apparatus should not be used in pressures appreciably abov« atmosphere, and 
care should be taken in the choice of breathing apparatus itself where such equipment is to be used in very 
high (45 i: 3°C) or very low (- 6 ± 3X) ambient temperatures. 

Certain toxic substances which may occur in some atmosphere can be absorbed by the skin, where these do 
occur, respiratory protection alone is not sufficient and the whole body should be protected. 

The composition of the Technical Committee and Subcommittee responsible for formulation of this Indian 
Standard is given in Annex G. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding ofT numerical values ( revised)*. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 10245 ( Part 1 ) : 1996 



Indian Standard 



BREATHING APPARATUS 

PART 1 CLOSED CIRCUIT BREATHING APPARATUS ( COMPRESSED OXYGEN 

CYLINDER ) — SPECIFICATION 

(First Revision) 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes requirements of design, 
construction and performance and laboratory and 
practical tests for closed-circuit types of breathing 
apparatus in which the exhaled air is re-breathed by 
the wearer after the carbon dioxide concentration has 
been effectively reduced and the oxygen concentration 
enriched. It is used either with a full facepiece or 
with mouthpiece and noseclip. It uses oxygen from 
a cylinder of compressed oxygen. 

1.2 This standard excludes breathing apparatus which 
operate on liquid oxygen and chemically produced 
oxygen. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The Indian Standards listed in Annex A contain 
provisions which through reference in this text, 
constitute provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate by dated or undated the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the standards. 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1.1 Working Duration 

The maximum period of time for which the apparatus 
should be used. 

3.1.2 Effective Duration 

The time for which the apparatus can be^xpected to 
function satisfactorily. This time will be equal to the 
working duration plus a reserve period of at least 
1 min for the apparatus of less than 45 min working 
duration and IS min for working durations between 
45 and 75 min. For apparatus with a working duration 
of more than 75 min the reserve period shall be at 



least 20 percent of the working duration or 30 min, 
whichever is less. 

3.1.3 Inhaled Air 

The atmosphere breathed in by the wearer. 

3.1.4 Exhaled Air 

The atmosphere breathed out by the wearer. 
4 REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Construction 

4.1.1 Method of Operation 

Closed-circuit breathing apparatus is designed and 
constructed so that exhaled air passes from a facepiece 
or mouthpiece through a breathing tube into a purifier 
containing chemicals which absorb the exhaled carbon 
dioxide. Oxygen is fed into the breathing circuit from 
a cylinder of compressed oxygen. The oxygen and 
purified gases mix and are fed to the wearer who inhales 
from a breathing bag» and any excess gas is released 
through a relief valve. Typical schematic circuit 
diagrams are illustrated in Fig. 1 . 

4.1.2 Materials 

4.1.2.1 All materials used in the construction shall 
have adequate mechanical strength, durability and 
resistance in deteriortion by heat or by contact with 
sea water/mine water. Such materials shall be antistatic 
and fire resistant as far as is practicable. 

Exposed parts of the apparatus, excluding cylinders, 
that is those which may be subjected to impact during 
use, shall not be made of magnesium, titanium, 
aluminium or alloys containing such proportions of 
these metals as will, on impact, give rise to frictional 
sparks capable of igniting flammable gas mixtures. 

Any cylinder making use of such materials shall be 
adequately protected so that, when tested according 
to national regulations for impact and scraping, no 
metal shall be exposed. 



1 



IS 10245 ( Part 1 ) : 1996 



EXHALATION VALVE 



INHALATION VALVE 




mm 




V * i rr« r o 1 ' w r t " ♦ r/ r * *^ > * * * J 

COOLER ••:;.•.•.•••*-•• • • •.'; 



< m »■••»« 



PRESSURE 
GAUGE 



BREATHING BAG 



RELIEF VALVE 



1 •. 





^ 'PURIFIER V ' 



i 
4 
1 




^ 




OXYGEN 



CYLINDER VALVE 



/SW 



EXHALED GAS WITH C02 ^ 

GAS FOR INHALATION LESS CO2 ■— 

GAS FLOW FROM CYLINDER -^ 



r p /bY PASS AND 

^S^ PRESSURE 

REDUCING 

VALVE 



Ba. 1 SEU'-^ONTAiNEDBREATHimAPMiUTUs.CuKEO-CiRCurr Compressed Oxygen Type 

( Typical Schematic Duoram) 



NOTE — It is imporUnt that care is taken in selecting 
material that may come into contact with high pressure 
oxygen. 

4«1.2«2 Materials that may come into contact with 
the skin shall be non-staining, soft, pliable and shall 
not contain known dermatitic substances. 

4.1.3 Strength and Resistance in Water 

The apparatus shall be sufficiently robust to withstand 
the rough usage it is likely to receive in service and 
designed so that it will not be rendered defective if 
temporarily submerged in water. If the apparatus is 
submerged in water some deflation of the breathing 
bag will occur dtie to the automatic operation of the 
relief valve. 

4.1.4 Separation of Parts 

The design and construction of the apparatus shall 
permit its component parts to be readily separated 
for cleaning, examination and testing. The couplings 
required to achieve this shall be readily connected 
and secured, where possible by hand. Any means for 
sealing used shall be xetained in position when the 
joints and couplings are disconneaed during normal 
maintenance. 

4.1.5 Adjustable Parts 

All parts requiring manipulation by the wearer shall 
be readily accessible and easily distinguishable from 
one another by touch. All adjustable parts and controls 
shall be so constructed that their adjustment is not 
liable to accidental alteration during use. 

4.1.6 Mass 

The mass of the breathing apparatus, Kully charged 
and ready for use shall not exceed 16.0 kg (including 
breathing fittings). 

4.1.7 Leak Tightness 

The apparatus shall be so designed and constructed 
as to prevent ingress of the eternal atmosphere within 
the limits set out in this standard. The assembled 
apparatus ^hall be designed and constructed so that 
it can be tested for leak tightness by complete 
immersion in water or suitable testing device. 

4.1.8 Cleaning and Decontamination 

The design of the apparatus shall be sudi as to fimlitate 
cleaning. All exposed surfaces shall be able to 
withstand treatment by one of the methods described 



IS 10245 ( Part 1 ) : 1996 
in Annex B with appreciable deterioration. 

4.2 Facepiecc 

Facepieces are not suitable for persons with beards. 
Unless q)ecial fabrications are made, they will also 
not be suitable for wearers with q>ectacles, having 
side arms. In such situations, mouthpiece with nose 
clips should be preferred. 

Where facepieces are used, they shall be designed 
to meet the following requirements. 

4.2.1 The compoimt parts, including breathing tid)es, 
shall withstand a test imder water at an air pressive 
of 1.7 kN/m and shall be proved from leakage. 

4.2.2 Facepiece shall cover the eyes, nose, mouth 
and chin and shall provide adequate sealing on the 
face of the wearer of the breathing apparatus against 
the outside gas, when the skin is dry or moist, when 
the head is moved and when the wearer is speaking. 

4.2.3 Facepiece shall fit against the contours of the 
face so that, when tested in accordance with 
Annex C, the inward leakage of the test contaminant 
between the facepiece and the wearer's face shall not 
exceed a value of O.OS percent the inhaled air foi 
any one of the ten test subjects. It is unlikely that 
this requirement will be met by wearers with beards 
or with spectacles having side arms. 

4.2.4 Facepieces shall be light in mass and comfortable 
to wear for long periods. The mass shall be 
systematically balanced to ensure the maximum 
retention of Ssiceseal and to minimize muscular strain, 
particularly when worn in circumstances involving 
vigorous movements. 

4.2.5 Facepieces shall have suitable and, preferably, 
replaceable eye-pieces or eyeshields. Eyepieces or 
eyeshields shall be made of non-splinterable, clear 
and nouMnflammable material. 

4.2.6 Facepieces shall be secured to the face by means 
of an adjustable and replaceable head harness and they 
shall be fitted with a strap to support them when not 
being worn. 

4.2.7 Means for speech transmission shall be 
incorporated. 

4.18 The manu&cturer shall provide means to reduce 
misting of the eyepieces or eyeshields in order that 
vision is not interfered with when the apparatus is 
tested in accordance with Annex D. 



IS 10245 ( Part 1 ) : 1996 

4.2.8*1 The dead space in the facepiece shall be as 
low as possible. 

4. 2.8.2 The facepiece shall give wide field of vision. 

4.2.8.3 Where manual wipers are provided in the 
facepiece, they shall be effective, durable, easy to 
operate and should not bit the eyebrow of the wearer. 

4.3 Head Harness 

4.3.1 The head harness shall hold the facepiece or 
mouthpiece firmly and comfortably in position. It 
shall be simply fitted and adjusted, and shall be capable 
of ready cleaning and decontamination. Any fabric 
used in the construction of a head harness shall be 
resistant to shrinkage and shall not cause any irritation 
to the skin of the wearer. 

4.3.2 The head harness shall be adjustable and, if 
consisting only of straps, these shall be adjustable 
and not less than 19 mm (nominal) width at the points 
in contact with the head, and designed so as to ensure 
that the wearer must readjust the straps before each 
occasion of use. 

4.3.3 The head harness strap shall be slip-proof and 
durable. 

4.4 Mouthpiece 

If the apparatus is fitted with a mouthpiece it shall 
be designed to provide a reliable seal with the mouth 
and shall be secured against accidental displacement 
by means of an adjustable head harness. It is 
recommended that a plug or cover be provided to close 
the orifice of the mouthpiece when not in use. It shall 
not be possible to close the orifice of the mouthpiece 
by pressure. 

NOTE — If gastighC eye protectors are required, those 
complying with the requirements of IS 59S3 : 1980, are 
recommended. 

4.5 Nose Clip 

A nose clip shall he provided if a uiouthpiece is used 
and should be designed to afford maximum security 
against accidental displacement; it should not slip 
when the nose becomes moist with perspiration, and 
suitable means shall be provided for attaching it to 
the apparatus to prevent loss. The nose clip shall be 
so designed as to afford reasonable comfort to the 
wearer throughout the effective use of the apparatus. 

4.6 Body Harness 

The body harness shall be designed to allow the user 
to don the apparatus quickly and easily without 



assistance and shall be adjustable for fit. Buckles fitted 
to waist and shoulder harness shall be so constructed 
that once adjusted they will not slip. 

Any fabric used in the construction of a body harness 
shall be resistant to shrinkage. For certain applications 
the body harness shall be detachable to permit water 
immersion testing, or the component parts shall not 
retain water. Where the body harness incorporates 
means for attachment of a life line, the harness, 
together with the snap hook, shall be capable of with- 
standing a drop test of 1 m when loaded to 7S kg. 

4.7 Inhalation and Eihalation Valves 

4.7.1 The design of valve assemblies shall be such 
that valve discs or the assemblies can be readily 
replaced; it shall not be possible to fit an inhalation 
valve assembly in the e>q>iratoiy circuit or an exhalation 
valve assembly in the inspiratory circuit or to fit a 
valve assembly in the reverse manner. 

4.7.2 The inhalation and exhalation valves shall be 
protected against external influence. The design and 
construction of exhalation valves shall be such as to 
prevent inward leakage of contaminated air. Any non- 
return valve (inhalation or exhalation), controlled by 
the breathing action of the wearer, shall have minimum 
slip. The materials used in the construction of valves 
should be such that the efficiency of the valve shall 
not be impaired by any heat or moisture likely to be 
encountered in use. 

4.7.3 The disc valves shall offer least resistance in 
operation. 

4.8 Relief Valve 

4.8.1 General 

Breathing apparatus of the closed-circuit type shall 
be provided with a relief valve operated automatically 
by the pressure in the breathing circuit and designed 
so that inward leakage of the external atmosphere 
shall not exceed 0.002 S percent when the moist 
valve is tested in accordance with Annex F. The relief 
valve, which shall include an additional non-return 
valve, shall be protected against dirt and mechanical 
damage. Means shall be provided for sealing the relief 
valve to permit leak testing. 

4.8.1.1 Breathing apparatus fitted with a manual relief 
valve shall also be permissible. 

4.8.2 Performance Characteristics of Relief Valve 
4.8.2. 1 The opening pressure of the moist relief valve 



measured at a constant flow of I 1/min shall be between 
1 S mm H2O and 40 mm H2O in any position of the 
valve. 

NOTE -- I mm HjO - 10 N/m^ 

4.8.2.2 If the relief valve is positioned in the breathing 
circuit before the regeneration cartridge then the 
pressure between the relief valve and the entry of 
the breathing bag shall be in no case greater than the 
minimum opening pressure of the relief valve. The 
resistance of the relief valve shall not exceed SO mm 
H2O in any orientation of the valve when tested: 

a) at 50 l/m for sets with a continuous flow 
rate greater than 2 l/m, and 

b) at 30 l/m for sets with a continuous oxygen 
flow rate less than 2 l/m. 

4.8.2.3 In apparatus using compressed oxygen, the 
resistance of the relief valve to an air flow of 50 1/ 
min shall not exceed 50 mm H2O in any position of 
the valve. 

4.9 Reducing Valve or Pressure Reducer 

4.9.1 In apparatus using a reducing valve or pressure 
reducer alone that is, without a supplementary lung- 
governed oxygen supply {see 4.10), the flow of oxygen 
shall be not less than 4 1/min for the effective duration 
of the apparatus except that for apparatus with a 
pressure reducer the oxygen flow during the reserve 
period may fall to not less than 1.8 1/min.* 

4.9.2 The flow of oxygen from a reducing valve of 
constant flow type shall remain constant to within 
10 percent of the preset flow at all cylinder pressures 
above ten atmospheres. 

4.9.3 The reducing valve, if adjustable, shall be 
provided with a suitable locking device to prevent 
accidental alteration of the oxygen supply. 

4.10 Lung-Govemed Oxygen Supply (Demand 

Valve) 

4.10.1 The opening pressure of the lung-governed 
supply mechanism measured at a constant flow of 
10 1/min, shall not exceed 35 nun H2O. 

4.10.2 Apparatus (q)erating with a lung-governed 
supply alone or with constant supply of less than 2 
1/min shall have an automatic scavenging device by 
means of which sufficient *air* is removed from the 
circuit to the outside to maintain an oxygen content 
of not less than 21 percent. 



IS 10245 ( Part 1 ) : 1996 

4. 10.3 The lung governed oxygen supply valve shall 
function so as to provide oxygen in accordance with 
the breathing requirements of the wearer of the 
apparatus and be capable ofpassing sufficient oxygen 
to replace the oxygen consumed when he is breathing 
at the rate of 50-90 1/min with any cylinder pressure 
above 1 000 kN/m^. 

4.11 By-Pass Valve 

4. 11. 1 Apparatus equipped with a pressure reducer 
or a reducing valve and/or lung/governed valve, shall 
be provided with a manually operated by-pass valve 
of self-closing type, whereby the wearer can obtain 
a supply of oxygen at a flow of between 50 1/min and 
90 1/min at all cylinder pressures above 5 000 
kN/m^ independently of the reducing valve or lung- 
governed valve. 

4. 11.2 The shape and size of the valve control shall 
be such that it can be operated even with a wet or 
slippery hand. 

4.12 Pressure Gauge 

4. 1 2. 1 Apparatus using compressed oxygen shall have 
a pressure gauge which shall incorporate a suitable 
blow-out release so that in event of an explosion or 
fracture of the pressure element of the gauge, the 
blast will be away from the front. The gauge shall 
have a window of non-splintering glass or of clear 
plastic material. 

4.12.2 An efficient valve shall be provided to isolate 
the gauge and connections to it from the rest of the 
circuit. 

4.12.3 The pressure gauge shall be placed to enable 
the gas cylinder pressure to be read conveniently by 
the wearer. 

4. 12.4 The pressure gauge shall incorporate a means 
of indicating an adequate warning period and shall 
be shown in red colour. 

4.12.5 The pressure gauge ( see IS 3624 : 1987 and 
IS 8457 : 1977 ) shall withstand pressure greater than 
the nuucimum cylinder pressure so that it will operate 
continuously and accurately without overstrain. 
Pressure gauge for use with such iq>paratus shall be 
shock-resistant. 

4.13 WamiBg Device 

4.13.1 The apparatus shall be so designed that the 
wearer is warned immediately if the main vaWe is 
closed or if the cylinder fitted is empty. 



IS 10245 ( Part 1 ) : 1996 

If this warning device is controlled by the oxygen 
pressure, an immediate warning shall be given to the 
wearer when any leakage in excess of 0.4 1/min occurs 
in the parts of the warning device containing oxygen. 
The loss of oxygen from one warning system shall 
not exceed 0.6 1/m at full cylinder pressure. 

As an option, an indication of low cylinder pressure 
is permitted. 

4.14 Flexible Tribes 

Flexible tubes and fittings of the high pressure system 
shall be capable of withstanding without damage a 
best pressure of twice the nuDcimum designed working 
pressure. It shall not be possible to fit in low pressure 
part or those into a higher pressure part of the circuit. 

4.15 Gas Cylinder and Main Valve 

4.15.1 Gas cylinders and the valves fitted thereto 
shall comply with the provisions of Gas Cylinder 
Rules. 1981, as amended from time to time. 

4.15.2 Cylinders shall be coloured in accordance 
with IS 3933 : 1966. 

4.15.3 The main valve shall comply with the 
requirements of IS 7302 : 1974 and shall be so 
designed that the full pressure in the gas cylinder 
cannot be applied rapidly to other parts of the apparatus. 

4. 15.4 The valve shall be so designed that the valve 
spindle cannot be completely unscrewed from the 
assembly during normal operation of the valve. 

4. 15.5 The valve shall be either lockable in the open 
position or designed so that it cannot be closed 
inadvertently by contact with a surface. 

4.15.6 The main valve should be easily accessible 
and distinguished by touch. 

4.16 Oxygen Supply 

The total volume of oxygen available shall be suflficient 
to meet an average consumption of not less than 
4 l/min for breathing apparatus without lung- 
governed demand valve and l.S 1/min for that with 
lung-governed demand valve. In apparatus without a 
supplementary lung-governed oxygen supply an 
additional 10 percent capacity shall be provided to 
allow for the possible use of the by-pass valve. 

4.17 Breathing Bag 

4.17.1 The breathing bag shall be made of strong, 
flexible material and shall be protected against collapse 
of damage by external agencies. It shall be made from 



anti-static material. 

4. 17.2 The breathing bag shall be reliably and tightly 
joined to the couplings. The coupling at the inhalation 
side shall be shaped in such a way that its opening 
cannot be closed by the bag itself. 

4.17.3 In apparatus using compressed oxygen, the 
capacity of the breathing bag, when correctly fitted 
and with the casing closed, shall be at least 5 litres. 

4.17.3.1 In apparatus using compressed oxygen 
without a lung-governed supply, the capacity of the 
breathing bag is measured between the opening 
pressure of the relief valve ( see 4.8.2.1 ) and minus 
20 mm H2O relative to atmospheric pressure. 

4.17.3.2 In compressed oxygen type apparatus with 
a lung-governed oxygen supply, the capacity of the 
breathing bag is measured between the opening 
pressure of the relief valve ( see 4.8.2.1 ) and the 
opening pressure of the lung-governed supply 
( see 4.10.1 ), relative to atmosphere pressure. 

4.17.4 In apparatus using liquid air, the capacity of 
the breathing bag, when correctly fitted and with the 
casing closed shall be measured between the opening 
pressure of the relieve valve ( see 4.8.2. 1 ) and minus 
20 nun H2O relative to atmospheric pressure, and 
shall be: 

a) at least 4.5 litres when the liquid evaporates 
at a rate of 8 1/min or more at STP, and 

b) at least 5.0 litres when the evaporation rate 
is less than 8 1/min at STP. 

The evaporation rate is measured at the end of the 
working duration, when the apparatus if tested in 
accordance with Annex E. 

4.17.5 The number of connections of breathing bag 
with the breathing circuit should be minimum for 
proper maintenance of the breathing bag. 

4.18 Breathing 'Hibes 

4.18.1 Breathing tubes shall be flexible and non- 
kinking and of sufficient length to permit free head 
movement of the wearer. They shall be made from 
anti-static material. 

4.18.2 The breathing tubes shall, preferably, have 
a type of connection which enables either a mouthpiece 
with nose clip or a facepiece to be fitted. 

4«18«3 The design of the breathing tubes shall be 
such as to offer least breathing resistance. 



IS 1024S ( Part 1 ) : 1996 



4. 18.4 The construction of the breathing tubes shall 
be such that in normal use, they shall not flatten to 
impede the flow of gas. 

4. 18«S The dead space of the breathing tube should 
be as low as possible. 

4.18.6 For breathing apparatus carried at the back 
of the wearer, when underarm, deep corrugated tubes 
are used, a loop supporting the breathing tubes shall 
be of a type and so flxed that it shall not damage the 
tubes during use. 

4.19 Condition of the Inhaled Air 

4.19.1 Oxygen Content 

When tested in accordance with Annex D, the oxygen 
content of the inhaled air shall not fall below 2 1 percent 
(by volume). 

4.19.2 Carbon Dioxide Content 

4.19.2.1 When apparatus using a mouthpiece and 
facepiece is tested in accordance with Annexes D 
and E, the carbon dioxide content of the inhaled air 
(including dead space effects) shall not exceed an 
average of 1 .25 percent (by volume) and shall at no 
time exceed IS percent (by volume) during the 
working duration of the apparatus. 

4.20 Temperature and Humidity 

4.20.1 Particular care shall be taken in the choice of 
a closed circuit breathing apparatus when it is intended 
to use it in: 

a) very high temperatures, for example 4SX; 
and 

b) ambient temperatures of -6 i: 3°C. 

4.20.2 The temperature ofthe inhaled air independence 
of humidity shall not exceed 4ST. 

4.21 Breathing Resistance 

Maximum breathing resistance 



4.22 Comfort 



Minute Volume 


Breathing Resistance 




Inhalation 


Exhalation 




mbar 


mbar 


10 resp/min x 1.0 1/resp 


1.0 


3.0 


20 resp/min x IS 1/resp 


3.0 


3.0 


25 resp/min x 2.0 1/resp 


5.0 


7.0 


30 resp/min x 2.5 1/resp 


10.0 


10.0 



During the machine test at 100 l/min (40 x 2.5), the 
apparatus shall function satisfactorily. 



When tested in accordance with Annex D the apparatus 
shall be such that it is worn without avoidable 
discomfort, that the wearers show no undue signs of 
strain attributable to wearing the apparatus, and that 
it impedes the wearers as little as possible when in 
a crouched position or when working in a confined 
space. 

4.23 Purity of Oxygen 

In all closed, circuit breathing apparatus, the purity 
of oxygen to be used shall be not less than 99 percent. 

4.24 Preflushing Device 

Apparatus operating with a lung governed supply alone 
or mixed type with a constant flow of less than 1.5 
l/min shall be equipped with a device which at the 
beginning of breathing or at opening ofthe main valve 
automatically feeds 5 to 10 I of oxygen into the 
breathing circuit. 

4.25 Saliva Trap 

4.25.1 A saliva trap to accumulate saliva ofthe wearer, 
if provided, shall be fixed with the inhalation tube. 

4.25.2 The saliva trap nut shall be so fixed that it 
shall not get lost during cleaning and decontamination. 

4.26 Protective Casing 

4.26.1 If possible, the whole breathing apparatus 
shall be covered by a protective casing to protect 
the breathing bag, regulator, reducing valve and other 
vital parts ofthe apparatus against direct blows and 
falling materials. 

4.26.2 It shall be made of light metal of adequate 
strength or of tough moulded fibre glass. It shall be 
so designed that it permits ease of passage through 
narrow spaces. 

5 INSTRUCTIONS 

5. 1 Breathing apparatus manufactured in compliance 
with this standard shall be supplied/accompanied by 
operating instructions for maintenace and use which 
shall include, where appropriate: 

a) nominal working duration; 

b) guidance on fit of facepiece, and adjustment 
of faceseal where relevant; 



IS 10245 ( Part 1 ) : 1996 



c) a warning that adequate protection may not 
be provided by the apparatus in certain highly 
toxic atmospheres and the guidance should 
be sought from IS 9623:1980; 

d) a warning that allowance should be made for 
the fact that it is likely that faceseal fit may 
not be suitable for persons wearing 
spectacles, or having sideburns or beards; and 

e) grain size of carbon dioxide absorbent {see 
IS 5321:1969). 

6 MARKING 

6.0 Breathing apparatus manufactured in compliance 
with this standard shall be marked with the following 
particulars. 

6.1 Marking on the Facepiece 

The facepiece shall be marked with the following: 



a) Name, trade-mark or other means of 
identification of the manufacturer; 

b) Size (if more than one size is available); and 

c ) Year and month of manufacture. 

6.2 Marking on the Apparatus 

The apparatus shall be marked with the following: 

a) Name, trade-mark or other means of 
identification of the manufacturer; 

b) Class 1 or 2 as appropriate ( see 4.20); 

c) Working duration: 

1) With warning device, 

2 ) Without warning device, and 

d) Year and month of manufacture shall be 
marked legibly on breathing bags, breathing 
tubes, mouthpiece, facepiece and diaphragm 



ANNEX A 

(Clause 2.1 ) 

LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 



IS No. Title 

3624 : 1 987 Pressure and vacuum gauges 

(second revision) 

3933: 1966 Colour identification of gas 

cylinders and related 
equipment intended for 
medical use 

532 1 : 1969 Soda lime (as cartK>n dioxide 

absorbent) 

5983 : 1 980 Eye protectors (first revision) 

7302: 1 974 \^lve fittings for gas cylinder 

valves for use with breathing 
apparatus 



IS No. 
8457:1977 

8522:1977 

8523:1977 

9623:1980 



Title 

Type pressure gauges or 
automobiles (pocket type) 



Respirators, 
cartridge 



chemical 



Respirators, canister type 
( gas masks ) 

Recommendations for 

selection, use and 

maintenance of respiratory 
protective devices 



IS 1024S ( Part 1 ) : 1996 

ANNEX B 

(Clause 4A.S) 

TEST FOR DURABILITY OP MATERIALS WHEN SUBJECTED TO CLEANING AND 

DECONTAMINATION 



B*l PROCEDURE 

B-1.1 Components to be tested are: 

a) Immersed for 10 min in a solution of formalin 
made by placing one part of 40 percent 



formaldehyde solution in nine parts of water 
at a temperature of lO'^C; or 

b) Subjected to a moist atmosphere of antiseptic 
gas, preferably formaldehyde, for a period 
of 10 min at a temperature of lO'^C. 



ANNEX C 

( Clause 4.2.3 ) 

TEST FOR INWARD LEAKAGE OF FACEPIECE 



C*l TEST SUBJECTS 



C-1.1 Ten clean shaven persons are selected, covering 
a broad spectrum of facial characteristics (excluding 
significant abnormalities). It is to be expected that, 
exceptionally, some persons cannot be satisfactorily 
fitted with a full facepiece; such exceptional subjects 
are not used for testing faoepieces. 

C-2 FACEPIECES 

C-2.1 If more than one size of facepiece is 
manufactured, the test subjects are supplied with the 
appropriate size. 

C-3 TEST PROCEDURE 

C-3.1 Each test subject wearing the facepiece under 
test complete with breathing tubes, is enclosed in a 
plastic hood which is loosely tied around his waist 
and around the breathing tubes so that leakage is 



minimized. The inside of the hood is maintained at 
a pressure not more than 3 mm H2O above atmosphere 
by supplying pure argon to the interior of the hood. 
(By preliminary inflation of the hood with argon and 
then by adjusting the argon supply when the hood has 
been fitted, the atmosphere surrounding the facepiece 
is maintained at the concentration obtained from the 
argon cylinder). 

C-3.1.1 Each subject walks on a treadmill at 6.5 
km/h whilst separately carrying out various head 
movements and reciting the alphabet. 

C-3.L2 The subject inhales through a breathing tul>e 
from a lung-governed oxygen supply and exhales 
through a breathing tube and a sampling bladder to 
the atmosphere. The amount of argon in the expired 
gas is determined, for example, by using a mass 
spectrometer, and compared with the argon present 
within the hood obtain the facepiece leakage. 



IS 10245 ( Pan 1 ) : 1906 



ANNEX D 

( Clauses 4 2 8, 4 19 1, 4 19 2 1 awJ 4 22 ) 

PRACTICAL PERFORMANCE TEST 



D-l TEST SUBJECTS 



D-1.1 Breathing apparatus is tested by test subjects 
\\ ho practise regularly \%ilh breathing apparatus and 
w hose mcdtcal history is kno^vn to be satisfactory 
Thc> shall be medical!) examined immediate!} before 
the tests and certified fit to undertake the test 
procedures Each subject is suitably clothed 

0-2 P1EDICAL ATTENTION 

D'2.1 The tests shall be carried out under the 
super\ision of a registered medical practitioner 

D-3 PREPARATION OF APPARATUS TO BE 
TESTED 

D-3.1 In apparatus using compressed oxygen, the 
high pressure c> linders are purged \%ith oxygen before 
being charged A sample of the compressed oxygen 
IS anal) sed for ox)gen content and the flow of ox)gen 
into the apparatus is measured. After the puririer is 
charged and the apparatus assembled, the resistance 
to breathing is measured The apparatus, with the 
c) linder charged to the prescribed pressure and ready 
for use, IS then tested for leak tightness 

D-3.2 In apparatus using liquid air, the purifier is 
charged, the apparatus assembled and the resistance 
to breathmg is measured The apparatus is tested for 
leak tightness, then charged with liquid air. 

D-4 TEST PROCEDURES 

D-4.1 Two kinds of test are made, one m which two 
subjects weanng the apparatus walk at a regular rate 
of 6 5 km/h on a level course (walking test), and one 
in which two different subjects work in practical 
conditions (work simulation test). Each test is 
continuous, without removal of the apparatus, for a 
period equal to the working duration of the apparattis, 
except that rest periods of 5 min are taken after each 
I S min period of usage. 

D-4.K1 The work simulation tests shall comprise' 

a) Carrying sand bags over a distance of at least 
9 m and building of the top section of a 
I 4 m high stopping; 



b) Negotiating a circuit of the gallery which 
comprises 

1) Steps and a ramp, 

2 ) A restricted height carrying from I 2 ni 
to I m, 

3 ) A restricted height varying from 4 to 
1 m, and 

4) An opening 6 m high x 9 m wide 
and 3 7m long 

c) Carrying, pushing or pulling on a stretcher 
a dummy body weighing 68 kg around the 
same circuit of the gallery, 

d) Passing sandbags through a steel tube 
3 7m long x 7 m in diameter. 

e) Repeated raising the lowering of a weight 
of 25 4 kg to and from a height of 1 8 m b) 
means of a rope and pulley, 

f) Climbing over three 1 2 m high hurdles, 

g) Climbing up and down a vertical ladder with 
a 460 mm square opening around the ladder, 
and 

h) Carrying and buiMing chock (wtxxlen slipper) 
pieces in still air in a climatic chamber where 
the temperatures measured by hygrometer 
are 

1) Dry bulb 45 ± 3°C, and 

2 ) Wet bulb 3 - 5X lower than the dry bulb 

D-4.2 During the test periods and at the end of each 
test, the inhaled air is sampled and tested, the 
temperature, cylinder pressures and ambient 
temperatures arc recorded, and the medical practiuoncr 
asks such clinica) observations considered necessary 
by him. When a focepiece is worn the test includes 
a period of speech by each subject and the inward 
faces leakage is checked subjectively using a suitable 
vapour of characteristic smell At the end of each 
test the subjects are medically examined, and the 
apparatus is examined for leak tightness, oxygen/air 
flow, resistance to breathing, excessive wear of parts 
and physical damage 



10 



IS 1024S ( Part 1 ) : 1996 



ANNEX E 

( Clauses 4 17.4 and 4 \9 2 \ ) 

LABORATORY PERFORMANCE TEST 



E-1 GENERAL 



E-1.1 This test should be carried out by a lung 
simulator machine designed to provide sinusoidal air 
flows and operating at a rate corresponding to 20 
respirators per minute 

E*2 LUNG SIMULATOR MACHINE 

E-2. 1 The machine delivers to the complete apparatus 
under test a tidal volume of 2 litres of a 5 percent 
(by volume) carbon dioxide/air mixture fully saturated 
at a temperature of 3TC, the total delivery being at 
a now of 40 l/min The test is run continuously for 
a period equal to the effective duration of the apparatus 
with the apparatus in an environment with a relative 
humidity of 85-90 percent and temperature of 45^C 

E-2.2 In a separate test the sinusoidal air flow is 
increased to 100 l/min for a period sufficient for an 



assessment to be made of the functioning of the 
breathing apparatus at this flow 

E-2.3 In the case of apparatus in which the material 
used for absorbing carbon dioxide is contained in a 
canister or cartridge, the laboratory test is made on 
the apparatus after the purifler has been subjected 
for 3 mm to simulated rough usage as follows 

E-2.3.1 The canisters or cartndges are placed in a 
tray and arranged so that each has a movement of 6 mm 
The tray is then subjected to a honzontal reciprocating 
motion at a rate between 1 85 and 1 90 cycles per minute 
with a stroke amplitude of 83 mm 

E-3 TEST FOR CANISTER OR CARTRIDGE 

E-3.1 These shall be carried out as prescribed in 
IS 8522 1977 and IS 8523 1977 



ANNEX F 

( Clause 4 8 1) 

TEST FOR INWARD LEAKAGE ON RELIEF VALVE 



F-l TEST EQUIPMENT 

F-1.1 A leak tight box connected by a tube to a 
breathing simulator A flow of test gas is maintained 
through the box An instrument capable of measuring 
the concentration of the test gas The breathing 
simulator is as specifled in Annex E, operating at a 
flow of 40 l/min with a back pressure of 50 mm H2O 

F-2 TEST PROCEDURE 

F-2.1 The valve under tesi is fltted in the box with 
a suitable adaptor On the expiration stroke the valve 



opens and air passes into the box containing the test 
gas On the inspiration stroke the valve closes and 
any slip or leakage of the valve allows test gas to 
pass into the inspiratory air stream This air is 
monitored for test gas concentration, the difference 
in concentration at this point and at a suitable reference 
point allows the slip and leakage at this point and at 
a suitable reference point allows the slip and leakage 
of the valve to be calculated The test is run for a 
sufficient time to obtain a steady reading of the test 
gas concentration in the inspiratory air stream 



II 



IS 10245 ( Part 1 ) : 1996 

ANNEX G 

( Foreword ) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Industrial Safely Sectional Committee, CHD (K)8 



Chatnuan 
Shki K C (ihkia 
Metnhers 

Shri Prlm Bawfja 

Shri B Vijay Ki'MAK ( Alterrrite ) 
Shri Bhaowati Prasad 

Shri Satish Chandi-r ( Alternate ) 
DrA K H<irai 

Shri R. Srinivasan ( Alternate ) 
Dr D R. Chawi a 

Shri M K BANtKJhh ( Alternate ) 
Shri R K Polm^ar 
DikbtTOK (Minks Sahhty) 

Shri A K Rudra ( Alternate ) 
Shri V K (ioei 

Shri M L Ahuja ( Alternate ) 
Shri J P Golnka 

Shri S N Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri M Kant 

Shri Kmrr Maru < Alternate ) 
Dr V K Jain 

Shri K Sfmjupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri M K Mmmcttra 

Shri H N Miramii 
Shri A S Ghosh ai 

Shri R H Bhai fkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri A K A< HAkY\ 

Shri P K Nair ( Aheniate ) 
Shri S K. M« KHhkJi 

Shri A K Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri P RAJFNhkAN 

Shri H S Rawai ( Alternate ) 
Shri A Ramami'kimy 
Shri M Srivasiava 

Shri S N Mathhk ( Alternate ) 
Shki H N Gcpia 

Shri R P Bh\ni'shaii ( Alternate ) 
Shri M R Sampaih 

ShriC) N I)a(.a( Alternate ) 
I)k S Saim II A 

Sllkl G SW\MINMMAN 

SHki P N Sank \k \n 

Snki V K SkiVAsuvA ( /\//<r/i£i/f ) 
Shri C P Yadan 

Siiki N J\M*\i I ( Allnnalc ) 
Siiki J N SnvkMA 

l)k S I C H\NM \ 

|)k li B InvKi k ( Altt malt ) 
Shki d S K \Mt> \i 

kl l»kl M M VMM 



Htpresenttnf,! 
National Salety Council. Mumbai 

Hindustan Aeronautics Limited. Bangalore 

Lmployees Stale Insurance Corporation. Calcutta 

Ministry of Defence (IXiQA). New Delhi 

Department of Industnal Policy and Promoti«)n, New IX'lhi 

Larsen and Touhro (ECC Coni»ti\jction (iioup). Madras 
Directorate General of Minen .Safety, Dhanhad 

Central Boiler Board. New l>lhi 

Mining, (leological and Metallurgical Institute ol India. Cakutt.i 

Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association Mumhai 

Steel Authonly of India ] Id. Ranchi 

Directorate General Factory Advice Services and l^ihoiir Institute 

Mumbai 
Directorate of Industnal Safely and Health Muinhai 
Joint Chief Contri»ller of Fxplosives Nagpur 

Central Mining Reasearch Institute Dhanhad 

Standing Fire Advis*»ry Council New Delhi 

Directorate General Civil Aviation ( Nation4il Airport Authority) 
New Delhi 

Bhabha Atomic Reasearch Centre. Mumbai 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas < Oil Industries SaUtv 
Directorate) NewTVlhi 

National Safety Council Mumbai 

Indian Cotton Mills federation. Mumbai 

Central Ix'uther Research Institute Madras 
Confederation ol Indian Industra s Ni w I X Ihi 
Indian Space Resctich Organt/atum (roveiniiK iii ol Irtdi.i 
( iVpailimnt ol Space ) Shnharikola 

National Institute ol ( )ccUpation.il He.ilth Ahnu il.ibad 

Indian Petrochemicals I jmiled Vadodaia 
DirecUvrale ( «eneral i»l Health St rvices N^ vk IX Ihi 

Ollici ol thv IK vi lopmenr C oininiNMi>ntf <SSM Ni vk DiIIm 
C onledeialion ol InJi.m Iniliisliu s Ni vc I K Ihi 



12 



( ( (tntlNHl'tJ UN fUf}it I < 



IS 10245 ( Part 1 ) : 1996 



( Continued from page 1 2 ) 



Members 

Rfpresentativf 

l)R R S RaJATiOPALAN. 

Director ( Chem ) 



Representing 

National Test House, Cakutta 

Director General. BIS ( Ex-offlcto Member ) 



Member Secretary 

ShKI S MAZUMDtR 

Joint Director ( Chem ), BIS 



Gas Detection and Respiratory Protection Equipment Subcommitee, CHD 08 01 



Convenei 
Shri P K Naik 

Metnbei s 

Shki VivhK Bhakcava 

Shki VIKA^ DhaR(.av\ ( Alternate ) 
Shki S Chattopadiiyay 

Shri K K DuiTA ( Airernate ) 
Shki S K Danuwal 

Shri M H FuLhKAR ( Alternate ) 
Shri C Pi^rl'ira 

Shri Gautam Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri A Ramamurthy 
SiiRi S N Mathi'r 

Shki M Srivaj>tav ( Alternate ) 
Shki K B (joswami 

Shri A B W Hussfain ( Alternate ) 
Shri J N Sharma 

DiRFCTOR, MSE 

Shri M Kant 

Shri C Perhra ( Alternate ) 



Central Mining Research Institute, Dhanbad 

Industrial Medical Engineers, New Delhi 

Minstry of Defence (SGQA) New Delhi 

Central I abour Institute. Mumbui 

Jo<;eph Leslie Drager Manufactunng, Mumhai 

Bhabha Atomic Research Centre. Munibai 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas ( Oil Indusines Safely 
Directorate ). New Delhi 

Coal India Ltd. Calcutta 

Indian Petrochemicals L td. Vadodara 

Directorate General of Mine& Safety. Dhanbad 

Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association Mumbai 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS IS a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization^ marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS This docs not preclude the free use. in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments Standards arc also reviewed 
periodically, a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed, if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of *BIS Handbook* and 'Standards Monthly Additions* 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No CHD 8 ( 281 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 
Amend No Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 Telegrams Manaksanstha 

Telephones 323 01 31. 323 94 02, 323 83 75 ( Common to 

all offices ) 

Regional Offices Telephone 

Central Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg / 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110002 \ 323 3841 

Eastern 1/14 C I T Scheme VII M, V I P Road, Maniktola f 337 84 99, 317 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 [ 337 86 26,137 86 62 

Northern SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 18 41 

[ 60 20 25 

[ 235 15 19,235 21 15 
Western Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) f 832 92 95, 812 78 58 



{ 



MUMBAI 400093 ]^ 832 78 9 1 , 832 78 92 

Branches AHMADABAD BANGALORE BHOPAL BHUBANESHWAR 

COIMBATORE FARIDABAD GHAZIABAD GUWAHATI HYDERABAD 

JAIPUR KANPUR LUCKNOW PATNA THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 



Printed at New Indit Printing Preu khuria India 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 SEPTEMBER 2007 

TO 

IS 10245 (PART 1) : 1996 BREATHING APPARATUS 

PART 1 CLOSED CIRCUIT BREATHING APPARATUS 

(COMPRESSED OXYGEN CYLINDER) — 

SPECIFICATION 

( First Revision) 
{Page 1, clause 3) — Insert the following new clause after 3.1.4 and renumber the subsequent clauses: 
'4 Classification 

The Apparatus shall be classified as under: 



Class of A 


uparatus 


Nominal Working 
Duratton, h 


Minute Volume 


Without positive 
pressure 


Positive pressure 


Cyclcs/min 


l/stroke 


l/min 


1 N 


IP 


1 


25 


20 


50 


2N 


2P 


2 


20 


20 


400 


4N 


4P 


4 


20 


15 


30 



(Page 4, clause 4*8.2.1) — Substitute the following for the existing text: 

The opening pressure of the moist relief valve at a constant flow of 1.0 l/min shall not exceed 10 mbar in the 
positive pressure sets and shall be between 1 .0 mbar and 1 .5 mbar in the sets without positive pressure.' 

{Page 5, clause 4.8.2.2) — Substitute the following for the existing text: 

'The resistance of the relief vatve shall not exceed 1 1 mbar in the positive pressure sets and shall not exceed S.O 
mbar in the sets without positive pressure when tested: 

a) at SO l/min for sets with a continuous flow rate > 2 l/min. 

b) at 30 l/min for sets with a continuous flow rate up to 2 l/min.' 

{Page 5, clause 4.10.1) — Substitute the following for the existing text: 

The opening pressure of the lung governed supply mechanism measured at a constant flow of 10 l/min shall not 
be ttegalive in the positive pressure apparatus and shall not exceed 3.S mbar in the apparatus without positive 
pressure.' 

{Page 1, clause 4.21) — Substitute the following for the existing text and table: 



Mmute Volume, l/min 



Test time 
mm 



Measure of Breathing Resistance 



Without positive pressure apparatus 
(mbar) 



Positive pressure apparatv 
(mbar) 



50 (25 cycles/mm, 2.0 l/slrokc) 
75 (30 cycles/mm, 2 5 l/stroke) 



60 
5 



-5 to 7 
-10 to 10 



0to7 
OtolO 



During the machine test at 100 l/min (40 cycles/min x 2.5 l/stroke) the apparatus shall function satisfactorily. 

[Page 8, clause 6.2(b)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 
Class as appropriate (see 4) and for temperature/humidity (see 4.20)' 



(CHD 8) 



Reprogmphy Unit, BIS. New Delhi, India 



