IRRA AH IS 4879 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


SHUT ATA — APART ЭЙЕ THAT 
Rara cht farfir 


(таст TRIAT ) 


Particulate Materials — Sampling 
and Sample Splitting Technique 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 19.120 


© BIS 2023 


“тї ит 2101 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR за, 9 TE Me TH AMT, A feet - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


\ 11%: TUNT РА 


August 2023 Price Group 10 


Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee, CED 55 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


The characterization of particle properties like size, form and specific surface area requires very careful sampling and 
sample" splitting practices to be followed. The distributions of the values of such properties are related to the number 
of particles, which cannot be increased as in sampling for chemical analysis. Deviations from statistical values occur 
due to the presence of particles of different sizes and shapes for each component in a powder obtained from a sampled 
mass of powder. 


This standard was first formulated in 1979 with the title *Method of sub-division of gross sample of powder used for 
determination of particle size’. It covered different methods of sub-division of gross sample down to required quantity 
for further analysis for determination of particle size distribution. In this revision, the standard has been updated in 
line with ISO 14488 : 2007 ‘Particulate materials — Sampling and sample splitting for the determination of particulate 
properties’. It now covers detailed description of principles of sampling and sample splitting, sampling plan, various 
division techniques and validation, apart from other details. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4879 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


PARTICULATE MATERIALS — SAMPLING AND SAMPLE 
SPLITTING TECHNIQUE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies methods for obtaining a 
test sample from a defined bulk of particulate 
material (powder, paste, suspension or dust) that 
can be considered to be representative of that bulk 
with a defined confidence level. It is particularly 
relevant to the measurement of particle size, size 
distribution and surface area. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions, 
which through reference іп this text, 
constitute provisions of this standard. At 
the time of publication, the editions indicated 
were valid. All standards аге subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent edition of 
these standards: 
IS No. Title 


IS 101 (Part 10/ Methods of sampling and test 
Sec 1) : 2022/ for paints, varnishes and 
ISO 13320: 2022 related products: Part 10 


Instrumental analysis, 
Section 1 Particle size 
analysis — Laser diffraction 


methods (first revision) 


IS 8883 (Part 1): Methods of sampling chemical 
2005 and chemical product: Part 1 
General requirements and 

precautions (first revision) 


IS 18100: 2022 Sample preparation — 
Dispersing procedures for 
powders in liquids 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in IS 8883 (Part 1) and the 
following apply. 


31 Analysis Sample — The portion of the 
laboratory sample which is used in the size 
analysis apparatus. 


3.2 Bias — Systematic difference between true 
(or accepted) value and measured value. 


3.3 Critical Size Class — Specific size class, 
whose sampling error, in its fractional mass, has a 
significant influence upon the product properties. 


3.4 Error — Difference between a measured 
value and the true value, which may have a 
random or a systematic nature. 


3.5 Grab Sample — Sample that has not been 
taken under well-defined conditions. 


3.6 Gross Sample — Primary sample, composed 
of several sample increments. 


3.7 Laboratory Sample — The portion of the 
gross sample which is delivered to the laboratory 
for determination of particle size distribution. 


3.8 Primary Sample — Sample (single or 
composed) taken from a defined bulk product. 


3.9 Representative Sample — Sample that has 
the same properties as a defined batch of material 
and represents the bulk material, within a defined 
confidence limit. 


3.10 Sample — Part of a defined bulk product 
taken for the purpose of characterization. 


3.11 Sample Increment — Single sample, taken 
from any of a defined set of locations in a bulk 
product or at any of a defined set of times from a 
production/transportation line, to be mixed with 
other increments to form a gross sample. 


3.12 Sampling Sequence — Sequence of 
sampling, sample division and combination steps 
that result in a test sample for a defined bulk 
product. 


3.13 Spot Sample — Sample, taken at a defined 
location or production time, from a batch of 
material. 


3.14 Test Sample — Sample that is entirely used 
for a property characterization. 


4 PRINCIPLES OF SAMPLING AND 
SAMPLE SPLITTING 


4.1 General 


Particulate materials consist of discrete particles, 
each having its own properties such as size, shape, 
surface area, density and/or composition. 
Sometimes, the material is well mixed and the 
properties show only random variations with 
respect to location in the bulk and/or time of 
production. More often, however, segregation 
occurs due to the free-flowing behaviour of the 
material and/or fluctuations in the production 


IS 4879 : 2023 


process. This can result in a systematic deviation 
between the mean properties at different locations 
and at different times. For representative 
sampling, each of the particles in a bulk product 
must have the same probability of being sampled, 
in their proportions. For well-mixed materials, a 
single sample of adequate quantity may suffice. 
For most materials, some degree of segregation is 
to be expected. Then, several sample increments 
must be taken from different locations or at 
different production times. These are either 
analyzed as such or combined into one primary 
sample. In most cases, there is no recipe for 
representative sampling. The quality of the 
sampling procedure can only be assessed by 
measurement. Often, the primary sample 
collected in this way 15 too large for 
characterization of the required property. Then, 
sample splitting is necessary until the required 
quantity for the test is obtained. 


The total error of sampling and sample splitting 
consists of two parts: 


a) Fundamental error; and 
b) Segregation error. 


The fundamental error is related to the discrete 
nature of particles given their different properties. 
It is a statistical error, related to the random 
variations of the properties with respect to 
location. It represents the lower limit of the total 
sampling error. This error depends on the amount 
(number, mass) of sample taken. 


The segregation error is related to the degree of 
segregation, ог the degree of ‘de-mixing' of 
particles according to their size, shape and 
density. It cannot be predicted, but only assessed 
by measurement of samples taken at different 
locations in the bulk and at different times of 
production. These measurements provide an 
estimation of the segregation error (see 4.3). 


Given the complex behaviour of particulate 
materials, it is required that the complete 
procedure for sampling and sample splitting be 
described in a sampling plan (see 5). 


4.2 Fundamental Error 
4.2.1 Number Distributions Qo (x) 


For number-based size distributions, Ше 
fundamental error [expressed as the variance Var 
or squared standard deviation o of a fraction 
Qo(x;) at any point x;] can be calculated using the 
mathematics of binomial distributions: 


Var[Qo(xi)] = Foi = [1 — Qo(%})]/n 
а) 


If the number of particles in а size class or above 
a certain size is very small in comparison to the 


total number of particles taken into account for a 
measurement, then Poisson statistics may be used 
for estimating the variance or the standard 
deviation: 


Var(ng) = o(nj)? = no ... (2) 


For example, for the number of particles larger 
than Хор, it can be seen that 


no = [1 — Qo (xoo)]n sail) 


and, since 0,(хоо) = 0.9 or almost 1, Equations 
(1) and (3) give approximately the same answers. 


where 


Var = variance; 
Qo(x;) = cumulative number-based particle 
size distribution; 


oO = standard deviation; square root of 
variance (theoretical value); 

n = total number of particles in sample 
or sample increment; 

No = number of particles in a defined 

size class; 

X95 = 95 percentile size of the particles; 

Xs = 5 percentile size of the particles; and 

x = particle size. 


If the fundamental error is the only error, the 
minimum number of particles Nmin required to 


obtain a defined maximum deviation Emax with a 
defined confidence can be derived from: 


Emax = ZcOQoj = ZV Qo (х)[1 A^ Qo x) ]/nuax 
. (4) 


or 


nmin = {Qo(%)[1 — Qo Ga) zz мага 
‚ (5) 


The standard deviation of Х{ сап be calculated 
from Ogoj through multiplication by the 
reciprocal value of the slope of the cumulative 
size distribution at point Xj: 


ба = 09ojdx;/dQoxi) ... (6) 


The coefficient of variation of Xj; can be 
calculated from this standard deviation by 


multiplication by 100 and division by Xj: 
СМа = 1000, ух ... (7) 
where 


Emax  =defined maximum level of 
deviation at defined confidence 
level (half-width of the stated 
confidence interval); 


Ze = critical y-value related to a 
defined confidence level 
according to the Standard 


normal distribution (to be taken 
from statistical tables); 

Zi; = number of particles in a sample or 
sample increment required to 
obtain a defined maximum 


deviation Ема; with a defined 
level of confidence; 
CV = coefficient of variation, that is, 
standard deviation relative to the 
corresponding mean value, 
expressed as fraction ог 
percentage; and 
particles size corresponding to 
percentile i. 


Xi 


4.2.2 Volume or Mass-Based Distributions ©з (х) 


For volume or mass-based size distributions, the 
general calculation of the fundamental error is not 
simple. 


Convert the measured  volume-based size 
distribution of a typical sample into the 
corresponding number distribution. 


This estimation of the minimum amount of 
sample in view of a stated minimum fundamental 
error shall always be the first step in a sampling 
procedure. 


As an example of the results from such 
calculations, Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 are presented for a 


] percent coefficient of variation in X for various 
characteristic sizes as  log-normal size 
distributions. The calculations were conducted for 
distributions around a median size of 30 um with 
a material density of 1 000 kg/m?. A detailed 
calculation is given in Annex A. 


Figure 1 shows that, for a constant percentile, the 
sample mass required to reach a coefficient of 
variation of 1 percent increases with particle size 
distribution width. It increases from about 10 mg 
to 1 kg as the distribution width ratio (Xoo 3/X10,3) 
increases from 2 to 100. The sample mass required 
is also increased if the fundamental error is to be 
maintained for percentiles ever closer to the 
highest limit of the distribution (X99,3, X95,3, X98, 
and Xog з). For a distribution by mass, it should be 
noted that a 10 times higher mean particle size 
requires a 1 000 times higher sample mass and 
vice versa. Note also that acceptance of a 10 times 
larger coefficient of variation in the fundamental 
error requires 100 times less sample mass. 


Figure 2 illustrates that, for larger distribution 
width ratios, larger numbers of particles must be 
counted to ensure a result whose error remains 
below the target of a 1 percent coefficient of 


IS 4879 : 2023 


variation. For a very narrow size distribution, 
counting a few hundred particles is all that is 
required. However, for very broad distributions, a 
number in excess of 10 000 000 will need to be 
assessed and counted. 


Key 
Y | Minimum sample mass (g) 
FIG. 1 MINIMUM SAMPLE MASS FOR 1 
PERCENT FE 


Key 


Y Ratio of total number of particles to the 
number larger than the specified size 


FIG. 2 RATIO OF TOTAL TO FRACTIONAL 
PARTICLE NUMBER 


4.3 Total Error/Number of Samples ог 
Increments 


It is to be expected that some degree of 
segregation will have occurred in the bulk 
product. The total sampling error shall be 
assessed through measurements of the property 
of interest in multiple samples. These samples 
shall have about the same size and come from 
different locations in the bulk or have been taken 
at different times during the production process. 
The minimum sample size shall be calculated as 
indicated in 4.2 and Annex A. From these 
multiple measurements of the value y of a 
property, both the mean value y and its standard 
deviation s, may be calculated from: 


IS 4879 : 2023 


ӯ= 25у 08) 


Е 107-12 
5у = TOME ts (9) 


This total error may first be compared with the 
fundamental error as calculated above and the 
degree of segregation assessed. Secondly, it can 
be converted to a confidence interval indicating a 
maximum level of deviation Емах at a given level 
of confidence using 


and 


Emax = tSy/N N ... (10) 


Equation (10) may be rearranged to calculate the 
number of samples (or sample increments) N, 
required for a deviation £j4, at a defined level of 
confidence between the estimated and the true 
mean value of y. 


2 
N, = (tsy/£uax) ... (11) 
уућеге 
y = mean value of y; 
Sy = estimate of standard deviation of y, 
coming from measurements; 
t = student's t — factor for statistical 


significance, which depends on 
the confidence level taken and the 
number of degrees of freedom 
(N — 1) (to be taken from 
statistical tables); 

t-value= it is dependent upon the 
confidence level taken and the 
number of degrees off freedom 


(N - 1); 
N = number of measured samples; 
N; = number of samples required to 


obtain a defined maximum 


deviation Емах, with a defined 
level of confidence, between the 
estimated and the true mean value 
of a property of interest; and 

FE = fundamental error. 


When the measured values y of a property follow 
a normal Gaussian distribution, which is generally 
true, then the confidence interval of the variance 
of these measurements can be derived from a 
chi-squared distribution, which is not 
symmetrical. This is illustrated in Fig. 3, which 
shows the 95 percent confidence limits for the 
ratio of true standard deviation to calculated 
standard deviation as a function of the number of 
degrees of freedom. 


X Number of degrees of freedom 

Y Ratio of true standard deviation to calculated 
standard deviation 

1 | Upper limit 

2 Lower limit 


FIG. 3 95 PERCENT CONFIDENCE LIMITS FOR 
CONFIDENCE INTERVAL OF STANDARD DEVIATION 


Figure 3 shows stabilization of this confidence 
interval when generally more than 30 samples are 
taken into account for the best estimate of 
precision. 


When measuring particle size and surface area, 
the exercise of estimating the standard deviation 
of the mean measured property is only performed 
at the beginning, when starting with a given bulk 
product or production process, or during 
validation. When products are to be checked on a 
regular basis, the minimum number of samples 
required to assess the product quality may be 
taken as sample increments. These sample 
increments may be combined to create a gross 
sample if they have the same mass. Such a gross 
sample may be too large for characterization and 
thus has to be subdivided to obtain the required 
quantity of test sample. During subdivision 
(sample splitting), the same equations can be 
applied as indicated earlier in this clause. 


5 SAMPLING PLAN 


А sampling plan shall be specified and 
documented. The sampling plan shall consist of a 
general part and a technical part. 


It is recommended, but not mandatory, that the 
sampling plan to be made for the whole sampling 
sequence from primary sampling to the final test 
portions. 


The general part shall address at least the 
following aspects: 


a) Material description; 
b) All known relevant information on the 
powder to be measured (for example, 


variance, hygroscopicity, reactivity, 
cohesion, etc); 

c) All known hazards related to the powder 
(for example, toxicity, flammability); 

d) Description of the task; 

e) The use of the information to be 
estimated from the powder (for example, 
sales contract, internal quality 
measurement); 

f) The random variables to be estimated in 
exact terms (for example, mean 
percentage of material finer than 10 um 
in production batch); and 

g) The variance (coefficient of variation) 
and the related limit of confidence shall 
be specified for all sample splitting 
stages. The total sample splitting 
variance estimate shall also Бе 
computed. 


The technical part shall address at least the 
following aspects: 


a) Physical appearance of powder at 
sampling points; 

b) Sampling sites for all sampling and 
sample splitting stages, including site 


requirements; 
c) Method of primary sampling, if 
applicable (random, systematic, 


stratified, staged, sequential); 

d) Mode of increment withdrawal 
(continuous, discrete); 

e) Type of increment (time, mass, number). 

f) Size of increments (number of particles 
or mass) in sampling and sample 
splitting stages; 

g) Number of increments to be taken in 
primary sampling and subsequent 
sample splitting stages; 

h) Number of increments to be chosen for 
further sample splitting in each stage; 

j) Combination of increments Gf 
applicable); 

k) Required reduction ratios for all sample 
splitting stages and overall reduction 
ratio for test sample; 

m) Method(s) of sample splitting (one or 
more stages); 

n) Detailed description of all other sample 
handling procedures used (that is, 
mixing, sonification, dispersant 
additions, etc); 

p) Method of final analysis; 

q) Number of measurement repetitions for 
each test sample; 

r) All equipment needed for sampling and 
sample splitting stages; 

s) Cleaning procedures for all equipment 
and sample containers; 


IS 4879 : 2023 


t) Qualifications of personnel for each 
stage of the sampling sequence; 

u) Sample marking; and 

w) Sample storage procedure(s) and 
place(s). 


All equipment and methods shall be validated and 
such documents shall be a part of the sampling 
plan. The requirements specified in 6 shall be 
applied. 


6 GENERAL PROCEDURES 
6.1 Safety Precautions 


Safety precautions are necessary when sampling 
and handling hazardous materials. Relevant 
statutory requirements shall be followed and 
reference shall be made in the sampling plan to 
any toxicological data, precautionary measures to 
protect the operator and remedial measures in the 
event of an accident. 


6.2 Primary Sampling 


Representative sampling from a bulk particulate 
product requires that all particles have equal 
probability of being taken into the sample, in their 
given proportions. Sample increments of about 
the same size shall be taken from as many 
locations in the bulk product as practical and 
combined into a single gross sample. These 
locations shall be chosen carefully and be 
described in the sampling plan. In order to 
minimize errors due to segregation, this sampling 
shall be done at a place where segregation is 
minimal. Sampling from a moving stream is a 
preferred method. Some general rules for 
designing sampling equipment are as follows: 


a) The preferred design is one which 
collects the sample over the whole 
particulate stream for part of the time and 
not a fixed part of the stream 
continuously; 

b) The frequency of sampling shall differ 
from that of any major process 
fluctuations or loading sequences. If the 
frequency of such fluctuations is 
unknown, further investigations are 
necessary; 

c) The sampler and sample container shall 
have no constraints, so that even the 
largest particles are easily accepted. 
Thus, the diameter of sampling tubes and 
the distance between cutter edges shall 
be at least three times the size of the 
largest particle and not be smaller than 
10 mm. However, for liquid dispersions 
of small particles, a minimum size of 
2 mm is acceptable; 


IS 4879 : 2023 


d) The sample container shall have 
sufficient volume to easily receive the 
full sample; 

e) Samplers shall have thin walls or sharp 
edges to promote good control of 
acceptance of particles based on their 
centre of gravity; 

f) The speed of a sample cutter or sample 
tube shall be sufficiently low in order to 
avoid large particles being lost by 
collision with the sides of the cutter or 
tube and small particles being carried 
away in the upward air stream. As a rule 
of thumb, cutter speed shall be lower 
than 40 cm/s; 

g) Local sampling tubes in pipelines shall 
be iso-axial to the pipe; and 

h) Localsampling in pipelines shall be done 
iso-kinetically where possible, while 
keeping the linear flow rate about the 
same. The flow in the pipeline shall be 
either undisturbed or mixed thoroughly. 
No intermediate flow regimes shall be 
used. 


NOTE — Manual sampling from heaps always 
leads, with segregating materials, to large sampling 
errors. 


6.3 Sample Handling 


Sample increments shall be entirely utilized at all 
stages of sample division, preparation and 
measurement. No material may be added to or 
taken from the increment. Incomplete ог 
contaminated increments shall not be used. 


Throughout all the procedures and stages, the 
sample shall be protected from any contamination 
by foreign particles. 


Samples shall not be unduly transported or 
handled. If transportation cannot be avoided, 
however, the method of transportation shall be 
agreed upon between the parties concerned. 
Transportation and handling shall be validated to 
ensure that changes in the particle properties of 
interest do not occur. 


Any sample handling procedures, such as 
homogenization by mixing, thermal drying or 
dispersion by sonication or other methods, shall 
be validated to ensure that changes in the particle 
properties of interest do not occur. 


Appropriate and validated thermal drying 
conditions (heat source, temperature, atmosphere, 
ventilation, etc) shall be specified. After thermal 
drying, the material shall be allowed to cool in a 
desiccator. If the material is hygroscopic, it shall 
also be stored in a desiccator. 


Appropriate and validated dispersion conditions 
shall be specified. 


Samples shall be stored so that no alteration in the 
properties of interest takes place. They shall be 
stored away from direct daylight and shall not be 
subject to large temperature changes. Longer 
periods of storage shall be validated. 


Any equipment needed in the process of sampling 
shall be thoroughly cleaned. 


6.4 Sample Containers 


Storage containers used for storing any sample 
shall be capable of holding the entire quantity of 
the sample. The storage container shall be clean 
and sufficiently robust. The storage container 
shall either have a lid to close it securely or be of 
such construction that it can be closed tightly in 
another way. 


6.5 Marking of Sample Containers 


Containers shall be marked if the divided sample 
is not going to be used immediately. The container 
markings shall include the following information: 


a) Sample identification: 
1) Number, and 
2) In the case of parallel samples, the 
total number of samples and the 
sequence number within the total. 
b) Sampling level identification; 
c) Name of commodity; 
d) Identification of lot number and 
producer's name; 
e) Date of sample preparation; 
f) Name of person who carried out the 
sample preparation and the affiliation; 


and 
g) Other necessary information (if 
applicable): 


1) Carrier fluid identification, 

2) Any dispersion and stabilization 
reagents employed, 

3) Other treatments to which the 
sample has been subjected, 

4) Special properties of the material, 
such as hygroscopicity, segregation 
tendency, 

5) Information concerning safety, and 

6) Identification of the sampling plan 
applied. 


An alternate strategy is to mark the sample 
containers with a sample identification number 
which can be related to the above information 
recorded in a sample preparation laboratory book 
or computer file. Computer files shall have a 
backup. In the event of further division of a stored 
sample, the original sample identification shall be 
recorded on the containers containing the newly 
divided samples. Markings on sample containers 
shall be made in such a way that they will not 
become illegible during the storage period. 


7 SAMPLE DIVISION TECHNIQUES 
7.1 General 


Often the size of primary samples is too large for 
property characterization purposes. In such cases, 
the sample shall be divided to give a test sample 
of a suitable size. Several techniques exist for 
sample splitting. Their applicability depends on 
the flow properties and the homogeneity of the 
primary sample from which a representative test 
sample is desired. Sometimes, different 
techniques are used in combination. 


7.2 Spinning Riffler 


Spinning rifflers (rotary samplers) are the best 
choice to sub-sample free-flowing particulate 
materials. Other materials may be made to flow 
freely by the use of additional agents in known 
quantities. Sticky and strongly agglomerated 
powders are excluded. Spinning rifflers are 
available in different sizes; they can provide 
samples ranging from about 0.5 g to 300 g. 


The spinning riffler consists of a feed hopper, a 
vibratory feeder and a turntable or other rotating 
divider ring where the sample holders are located. 


Before sample splitting, the sampler shall be 
clean. The hopper design shall be such that a 
constant, non-segregating, even mass flow of 
sampled material is ensured. The sample holders 
shall be designed in such a way that no material to 
be sampled is lost outside the sample holders or 
remains trapped within the hopper, vibratory 
feeder, divider ring or any other part of the 
sampler. Special care shall be taken in the riffler 
design and its operation that material will not be 
retained between the sample holders. The material 
shall be carefully mixed before being placed in the 
feed hopper. The vibratory feeder is then actuated 
and left to operate until the entire sample has been 
divided. The hopper and the vibratory feeder shall 
be cleaned while the riffler is still running so that 
no material remains in the hopper or in the 
vibratory feeder. 


7.3 Static Riffle Divider 


Static rifflers (table rifflers or chute rifflers) are 
capable of providing large quantities of samples 
for materials that are free-flowing or can be made 
to flow evenly. Their quality of division is 
generally worse than that of spinning rifflers. 
They usually find application with very coarse 
materials. They shall not be used for materials that 
readily liberate dust, nor for friable materials. 


The material shall be carefully mixed in a feed 
container and poured uniformly into the divider 
to divide the sample into parts. Any one of the 


IS 4879 : 2023 


divided parts shall be selected randomly as the 
divided sample. Care shall be taken to prevent 
clogging of the riffles. If clogging does occur, the 
whole sample shall be re-mixed and a new pour 
carried out after cleaning the riffler. 


Slow pouring of sample into the riffler shall be 
avoided. 


The size of the riffle divider shall be in accordance 
with Table 1. 


Table 1 Size of Static Riffler to be used 
(Clause 7.3) 


SI No. Maximum Opening Width 
Particle Size 
mm mm 
а) (2) (3) 
i) 20 to 16 50 
ii) 16 to 10 30 
lii) 10 to 5 20 
iv) 5 to 2.5 10 
v) below 2.5 6 


The static riffler shall be used in accordance with 
one of the two methods illustrated in Fig. 4. 


In method 1, the sample is divided into two parts. 
One of these parts is further divided into two, and 
so on, until the sample size required for final 
analysis is obtained. The reduction ratio for 


ыр з 2. i 
division into l stages is E 


Key 


1 Sample to be divided 
2 Divided sample 


FIG. 4. POURING SCHEMES FOR A RIFFLER 


In method 2, the sample is divided into two parts 
and both parts are separately divided into two. 
Two of the halves produced by this division are 
combined and the resulting combined sample then 
divided again in the same two-step mode. 


The reduction ratio is EY 
2 l / 3 


Method 2 is the preferred method. 


IS 4879 : 2023 


7.4 Coning and Quartering 
7.4.1 General 


The technique of coning and quartering can be 
applied successfully for powders with poor flow 
properties. Due to the manual operations 
involved, the technique tends to be operator 
sensitive. 


7.4.2 Coning and Quartering of Powder 


The material to be coned and quartered shall be 
thoroughly mixed in a mixing container. The 
material is then poured carefully on to a hard, 
clean, nonporous surface. The pouring shall be 
made in a single pass and the pouring point 
(spatial location) shall not be moved from the 
centreline of the cone which forms during the 
pour. 


For quartering, a knife with four crossed blades is 
used. The height of each blade shall be more than 
the height of the sample cone formed by pouring. 
The knife is carefully inserted into the top of the 
sample. The movement of the blade shall follow 
the centreline of the sample cone. Care shall be 
taken that the knife is inserted right to the bottom 
of the cone. A randomly chosen quarter is then 
removed as a sample without moving the knife. 
All the particles shall be removed, using a small 
brush if necessary. 


This method shall not be used for powders having 
a tendency to segregate due to large differences in 
density or in particle size, or for powders that are 
prone to dust liberation. The method shall not be 
used for hazardous materials. 
NOTE — This method tends to give a high random error 
and is operator sensitive. It may also give systematic 
errors. It shall be validated before use. 


7.4.3 Coning and Quartering of a Paste 


When using the coning and quartering method for 
pastes, form the material into a cone shape. A 
conical mould in two halves may be used. 
Otherwise, the procedure is similar to the coning 
and quartering of dry powders. 


Direct quartering of a filter cake shall not be 
carried out. 


7.5 Increment Division Method 


The increment division method can be used not 
only for materials with good flow properties but 
also for those with poor flow properties. Here, too, 
the quality of sample division depends upon the 
ability of the operator. 


The material shall first be mixed thoroughly 
without dust formation. The material is then 
spread on a flat, clean surface and formed into a 
rectangular bed having a uniform thickness as 
given in Table 2. Mark the rectangle into areas of 


equal size, the number of areas corresponding to 
the number of increments required. Take a sample 
from each area, selecting the sampling point 
within the area randomly. Before sampling, insert 
a plate, against which the sample will be taken, 
from the top to the bottom of the powder layer. 
Then, insert a sampling shovel into the sample 
layer down to the bottom of the layer. Use a 
blunt-ended shovel with sidewalls. Take the 
sample in a direction perpendicular to the inserted 
plate, advancing the shovel until it makes contact 
with the plate. When removing the shovel from 
the sample bed, remove the plate and shovel 
together to ensure that no material is lost. 
Combine the sub-samples thus obtained to give a 
combined sample. 


Table 2 Bed Thickness in Manual 
Incremental Division of Sample 


(Clause 7.5) 
SI No. Maximum Thickness of 
Particle Size Sample Layer 
mm mm 
(D Q) (3) 
i) 20 35 to 60 
ii) 16 30 to 45 
iii) 8 25 to 35 
iv) 4 20 to 30 
у) 2 151025 
vi) 1 10 to 15 
уп) 0.5 or finer 5 to 10 


If a different quantity of sample is needed than 
that obtained by the above procedure, either the 
size of the increment or the number of increments 
shall be varied. By weighing the first sub-sample 
obtained, an estimate of the size of the final 
combined sample can be computed. If 
adjustments are necessary, the sub-sample already 
taken is returned to the original material and the 
procedure is re-started with a new increment size 
or number of increments. 


This method shall not be used for powders having 
a tendency to segregate. Nor shall it be used for 
materials that show a large variation in particle 
density or size or for materials that are prone to 
dust liberation. The method shall not be used for 
hazardous materials. 


NOTE — This method tends to give a high random error 
and is operator sensitive. It may also give systematic 
errors. The method shall be validated before use. 


7.6 Scoop Sampling 


Scoop sampling is, in general, subject to large 
errors. Only for well-mixed, sticky powders 
having a fairly narrow particle size distribution, or 


for pastes, might it provide adequate quality. The 
technique tends to be very operator sensitive due 
to the manual nature of the operations involved. 


Before sampling, the particulate material shall be 
mixed well within its container by stirring or 
rotation. Free-flowing materials shall be mixed 
with a few drops of liquid, containing some 
dispersant, to form a paste (see 7.7). Several 
sample increments, preferably at least ten, shall be 
taken by means of a scoop, spoon or spatula and 
combined to form the test sample. 


7.7 Sampling from Paste 


This method allows extraction of very small 
samples from pastes and powders after they have 
been mixed into a (homogeneous) paste. In a 
paste, the high concentration of solids in the liquid 
restricts segregation of particles. 


Small spot samples to be used as test portions may 
be obtained from a well-mixed paste made of fine 
powder. 


Prior to preparing the paste, prepare a dispersing 
liquid containing suitable amounts of dispersants. 
Care shall be taken that the dispersing liquid 
contains no dispersant particles that may interfere 
with the measurement. 


Place a weighed amount of solids onto a clock 
glass. Add a few drops of the prepared dispersing 
liquid and carefully knead the powder to a paste. 
The total amount of liquid shall be such that the 
material is barely in paste form. Care shall 
therefore be taken in adding the final drops of 
dispersing liquid. 


After the paste has formed, it shall be thoroughly 
mixed. 


Samples may be taken from the paste either at 
random or systematically. In systematic sampling, 
the surface of the paste is divided into parts and a 
sample is taken from each part. 


This method shall be validated by comparing it 
with another sample splitting method to confirm 
that no particle breakage or dissolution occurs. 


7.8 Suspension Sampling 


7.8.1 General 


Suspension sampling allows preparation of very 
small samples (10 cm? or less) from suspensions 
and also from powders after they have been mixed 
with a dispersant to give a homogeneous 
suspension. The suspension shall, of course, be 


IS 4879 : 2023 


stable (no sedimentation) during the period of 
sampling. 


7.8.2 Sample Splitting by Pipette 


With powders, prepare the suspension by filling a 
cylindrical vessel with liquid containing a suitable 
amount of dispersant and add the sub-sample 
prepared by any of the methods described earlier. 
Dispersing procedures shall be in accordance with 
IS 18100 ‘Sample preparation —  Dispersing 
procedures for powders in liquids’. Take care that 
the powder is properly wetted and ensure that no 
solids are left on the walls of the vessel. The vessel 
shall be equipped with a stirrer and with baffles to 
prevent symmetrical flow during mixing. Agitate 
the suspension thoroughly and, while agitating, 
withdraw aliquots containing the required test 
portion amounts using a pipette or dropping tube 
of an appropriate volume and orifice diameter. 


After sampling, flush the pipette with particle-free 
suspension liquid and add this liquid to the sample 
aliquot taken. 


Before reinserting the pipette in the suspension, 
clean the outside of the pipette. 


This method is best suited for powders with a 
maximum particle size of about 20 um to 40 um. 
It is not well suited for powders having a large 
variation in particle density, shape or size. 

NOTE — This method may cause systematically low 


contents of coarse particles if used for powders 
containing coarse and/or dense particles. 


The method shall be validated for all new 
materials. 


7.8.3 Sample Splitting Using Multiple Capillary 
Tubes 


Multiple suspension samples may be obtained 
simultaneously by permitting a dispersed sample 
to flow through a set of capillary tubes spaced 
symmetrically in a vessel. Typically, the capillary 
tubes have a bore of 0.7 mm. The sampling 
process may be validated by measuring the 
volume of particle-free suspension liquid which 
comes through each capillary. The volume 
delivered by the capillaries to the sample receivers 
shall be accurate to within 2 percent. 


Check that the suspension sampler is clean. Test 
the sampler, both before and after the sample 
splitting operation, for blocked capillary tubes. To 
do this, add particle-free suspension liquid to the 
sampler and observe the flow of liquid from the 
capillaries while applying an over pressure to the 
sampler. If any blockage is observed, clean the 
blocked capillaries and repeat the check. 


IS 4879 : 2023 


It is recommended that the sampler not be used for 
powders whose maximum particle size exceeds 
about one-third of the capillary tube bore. 


Prepare a suitable amount (about 100 cm?) of 
suspension in a separate container and pour it into 
a glass vessel of about 150 cm? which can be 
tightly sealed and is equipped with a stirrer and 
capillary tubes attached to its base plate. Wash out 
the container, adding the washing liquid to the 
suspension in the glass vessel. Make sure that the 
sample receivers can receive the whole of the 
prepared suspension plus all the washing liquid. 
Mix the suspension thoroughly for 15 s to 30 s. 
While mixing, apply a slight under-pressure to the 
sampler to keep the capillaries free of suspension. 
Place the capillary tubes in the sample receivers 
and, while continuing to stir the suspension, split 
the sample by applying an over pressure to the 
sampler. When splitting is complete, thoroughly 
wash the sampler. 


8 VALIDATION 


The quality of the primary sampling procedure 
shall be validated using the actual material and 
method adopted. The standard deviation and 
confidence interval shall be calculated using the 
procedures given in 4.3 and the maximum error at 


the given confidence level shall be compared with 
the required maximum error. 


The quality of the sample splitting technique(s) 
shall also be validated. 


The simplest validation to be performed when the 
dry riffler splitting technique is used is a mass 
validation. 


Measure the mass of the gross sample together 
with the masses of all the increments. Repeat this 
three times. If the mean loss of material is larger 
than 1 percent, or if the loss in any single 
experiment is more than 1.3 percent, the riffler is 
deemed to be not working properly and this shall 
be corrected before further use. If the coefficient 
of variation in the mass of the increments is larger 
than 1 percent, then the riffler is also deemed to 
be not working properly. 


For a more rigorous validation of the sample 
splitting method, the method given in Annex B 
can be used. The material to be split shall be a 
standard reference material that has a similar 
particle size distribution and similar flow ability 
to the material to be treated. 


The results shall be verified against the required 
total variance. The results can also be used to 
design the sample treatment chain. 


IS 4879 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 4.2.2 and 4.3) 
ESTIMATION OF SAMPLING ERRORS AND MINIMUM MASS OF SAMPLE 


A-1 GENERAL 


This annex provides examples of how to estimate 
sampling errors and the minimum mass of sample 
required for a stated precision. Generally, the total 
sampling error consists of two parts: a fundamental 
error (FE), which is due to the particulate nature of 
the material, and a segregation error, which is 
caused by segregation of the material. In A-2 of this 
annex, a graph is presented which relates, in the case 
of a log-normal particle size distribution, the sample 
mass required for a 3 percent fundamental error in 
the quantity of material larger than Хора to the 
median particle size and the width of the 
distribution. A-3 gives an example of the calculation 
of the sample mass needed for a 3 percent 
fundamental error when sampling glass beads. A-4 
converts a fundamental error in the quantity of 
oversized material into that for the corresponding 
characteristic size. A-5 presents an example of the 
calculation of the total sampling error from a series 
of measurements. A-6 summarizes a procedure for 
estimating the minimum amount of sample 
(increment) and the minimum number of 
samples/increments needed to reach а given 
precision for a given value in a particle size 
distribution. 


А-2 GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION OF 
SAMPLE MASS REQUIRED FOR A 
FUNDAMENTAL ERROR OF 3 PERCENT 


In Fig. 5, the lines indicate, for a log-normal size 
distribution, the sample mass required to reach a 
fundamental error of 3 percent in a quantity of 
material larger than хоо з in relation to the median 
size and the width of the distribution. The width of 
the distribution is expressed as the ratio between 
Xo0,3 and %X19,3, and the material is assumed to have 
a true density of 1 000 kg/m’. Fig. 5 gives a quick 
indication of the sample mass required to obtain an 
FE of 3 percent in the amount above хоо з, provided 
that an adequate estimate of the particle size 
distribution is available. 


Figure 5 also illustrates the considerable increase in 


the required sample mass as the particle size and/or 
the width of the size distribution increases. In the 
sub-micrometre region, the minimum sample mass 
is about 1 ug; for millimetre-sized particles it is 
about 0.1 kg to 1 kg. For materials having a true 
density higher than 1 000 kg/m’, the sample mass 
has to be multiplied by the known particle density 
divided by 1 000. 


A-3 EXAMPLE OF THE CALCULATION OF 
THE SAMPLE MASS NEEDED TO OBTAIN A 
3 PERCENT FE WHEN SAMPLING GLASS 
BEADS 


This example illustrates a procedure for the 
calculation of the sample mass required to reach a 
stated precision for the FE in a quantity of material 
larger than a stated characteristic size in a size 
distribution. The example uses a precision 
(coefficient of variation) of 3 percent for the 
fundamental error and X993 as the characteristic 
size. Other values may be chosen. 


It is assumed that the variance of the fundamental 


error and the number of particles n are related in 
accordance with Poisson statistics [see Equation 


(2)]: 
Var(ng) = a(n)? = ng 
о(по) = Ми) 

and 
СУ(по) = [100v (n;)]/n, 96 
CV(n9) = 100v (ng) 96 


Thus, for a precision of 3 percent, the number of 
particles greater than xoo, will require ny = 1 111. 


The method of calculating the fundamental error is 
illustrated in Table 4. The true density p of the beads 
is taken as 2 600 kg/m?. A preliminary PSD analysis 
of the glass beads is shown in columns A, B and D 
of the table; columns B and D are normalized to 
100 percent. 


IS 4879 : 2023 


= = i a ит | 
ne = m z 


Хр = 100 um +h 


Y | Хора! Х 10,3 
Кеу 
Y — sample mass required (2) 


FIG. 5 GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION OF SAMPLE MASS REQUIRED FOR A FUNDAMENTAL ERROR OF 3 PERCENT 


12 


IS 4879 : 2023 


Table 4 Particle Size Distribution Calculations 
(Clause A-3) 


SI No. A B С р Е Е G H I J 
x Q3 <x> dQ; «Mi» Nj dQo Qo Number if FE Mass if FE (Amount 
um % by um % by G Number in Size Class i % by % by (Amount > Ходз) > 90,3) to be 3 % g 
Mass Mass per 100 g of Sample Number Number to be 3 96 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) 

1) 36 0 39.9 2.2 8.01 x 10% 2.75 x 10’ 17.7 0.0 3.89 x 10° 3.11 x 10? 
ii) 42 22 44.9 2.7 1.23 x 107 2.19 x 107 14.1 17.7 3.10 x 10° 3.82 x 10? 
iii) 48 4.9 52.3 6.0 1.95 x 107 3.08 x 107 19.8 31.8 4.36 x 10° 8.49 x 103 
iv) 57 10.9 62.7 9.0 3.36 x 107 2.68 x 107 17.3 51.6 3.79 x 10° 1.27 x 103 
v) 69 19.9 74.8 8.8 5.70 x 107 1.54 x 107 9.9 68.9 2.19 x 10° 1.25 x 103 
vi) 81 28.7 88.2 12.2 9.34 x 107 1.31 x 107 8.4 78.8 1.85 x 10° 1.73 x 10? 

vii) 96 40.9 104.6 14.6 1.56 x 10° 9.37 x 106 6.0 87.3 1.33 x 10° 2.07 x 10? 
viii) 114 55.5 124.1 15.0 2.60 x 10% 5.77 x 106 3.7 93.3 8.17 x 10? 2.12 x 10° 
ix) 135 70.5 146.5 12.3 4.28 x 10° 2.87 x 10° 1.9 97.0 4.06 x 103 1.74 x 10? 

x) 159 82.8 171.1 7.2 6.81х 10% 1.06 x 10° 0.7 98.8 1.50 x 10° 1.02 x 103 

Xi) 184 90 188.0 23 9.04 x 10° 2.54 x 10° 0.2 99.5 3.60 x 10: 3.25 x 10? 
xii) 192 92.3 209.2 5.0 1.25 x 10? 4.01 x 10? 0.3 99.7 5.67 x 10? 7.07 x 10? 
xiii) 228 97.3 248.1 2.7 2.08 x 10° 1.30 x 10° 0.1 99.9 1.84 x 10? 3.82 x 10? 
xiv) 270 100 100 
Xv) Total 100 1.55 x 105 100.0 2.20 x 10? 1.41 x 107 
xvi) Total rows 11 to 13 10.0 7.86 x 105 0.5 1111 1.41 x 10? 


NOTE — The values in col C and E to J have been calculated, from which the rounded values have been included in the table. Values calculated directly from those given in col A, B and D may, therefore, show 
small deviations. 


13 


IS 4879 : 2023 


Columns A, B and D give the results of a 
preliminary analysis. The sum of dQ, has been 
normalized to 100 percent. 


The 90th percentile has been added to the data set. 
The corresponding particle size (cell Axi) has been 
calculated by linear interpolation from the adjacent 
size and percentile values: 


Axi = Ах + (90 – Bx) х (Axii – Ax)/(Bxii – Bx) 


Thus, an extra (artificial) size class has been added 
to the table. 


Column B provides the cumulative results for the 
percentage by mass, while column D shows the 
differential results. Column С provides the 
calculated geometric mean size for each size class 
(the square root of the products of the size class 
limits). 

NOTE — It has been assumed in further calculations that 

all particles within a size class have the same diameter, this 

being taken as the geometric mean size (< x >). In cases 


where the classes have a linear scaling, the arithmetic mean 
size gives a better representation. 


In column E, the average mass per particle in each 
size class has been calculated from the formula 
1/6пр(< x >)? by assuming spherical particles. 


Column F gives the number of particles in each size 
class per 100 g of sample, for example. 


Fi = (Di)/(100Ei) 


Cell Fxv gives the total number of particles per 
100 g of sample. This sum of Fi to Fxiii permits the 
calculation of the normalized differential and 
cumulative number-based size distributions, 
presented in columns G and H. The value of Fxvi 
which equals SUM(Fxi, Fxii, Fxiii), gives the total 


number of particles larger than Хоо з per 100 g of 


sample. It was used for the normalization of Ixvi to 
1111. 


Both mass-based and number-based particle size 
distributions are illustrated in Fig. 6. Note the large 
differences between the two distributions. 
NOTE — Column H shows that the number fraction Qo (x;) 
smaller than x; = xoo is 0.995 (Hxii) while the number 
fraction larger than x; = X993, [1 — Qo (xi)], is 0.005. 
Binomial statistics can be used to give another possibility 


for calculating variance and standard deviation of Qo (xi) 
[see Equation (1)]: 


Var[Qo03)] = доба) х [1 — Qo )]/n 
and 
о[0(х)1 = (доба) x [1 — доба )]/пј о 


For the total number of particles n given in Ixv), this results 
for x, = 184 umin 0(0,,184 um) = 0.000 15, which 
gives a CV of the number fraction of [1 — Qo (x;)] = 0.005: 


CV =0.000 15 x 100/0.005 = 3.0 percent. 


It is clear that this is equal to the 3 percent taken as the 
starting point, using Poisson statistics. 


Particle size (um) 

Cumulative particle size distribution (46) 
Mass-based 

Number-based 


We ов 


FIG. 6 PRELIMINARY SIZE DISTRIBUTION 
RESULTS FOR GLASS BEADS 


Column I gives the calculated number of particles 

per size class larger than Хора, if their total were 
1 111. The number in I xi) was calculated from Ixi) 
= (1 111 x Fxi)/(Fxvi). The numbers in Ixii) and 
Ixiii) were calculated similarly. The normalization 
with Fxvi was used to ensure that Ixvi 2 SUM (Ixi), 
Ixii), Ixiii)) = 1 111. Column J gives the mass of the 
particles in each size class, obtained Бу 
multiplication of the numbers of particles in column I 
and their corresponding mass (given in column E). 
Cell Jxvi gives the total mass of the 1 111 
particles assumed to be larger than Хора. The total 
sample mass is given in cell Jxv. The value in cell 
Jxv can also be calculated by multiplying the 
summed mass of the particles larger than хоо 4 given 
in cell Jxvi by 10, since the total sample mass is, by 
definition, 10 times the mass above Хора. This leads 
to a total sample mass of 1.41 x 101 = 0.141 g 
(141 mg) for the case where an FE (coefficient of 
variation CV) of 3 percent is taken for the quantity 
of material larger than the stated characteristic size 


Х90,3: 
МОТЕЅ 


1 As stated above, all particles within a size class were 
assumed to have the same size. Also, linear interpolation 
was used to divide the number in size class Fxi + Fxii to 
give a number smaller than Хора (Fxi) and a number larger 
than хора (Fxii). This will have resulted in a (small) bias. 
Such bias is not considered significant in providing a 
robust prediction of the minimum sample mass required to 
achieve a given precision of FE. 


2 The procedure for calculating the data in support of 
Fig. 5 followed the same basic procedure as for Table 4, the 
exception being that an analytically generated log-normal 
distribution was produced for each mean size and 
distribution width, calculated over 99 size channels. 


The calculated minimum sample mass requires an 
adequate estimate of the width of the particle size 
distribution. If the preliminary measurement is 


executed with a significantly smaller sample mass, 
then a new measurement should be performed using 
at least the required minimum mass. 


A-4 CONVERSION OF FUNDAMENTAL 


ERROR IN QUANTITY OF OVERSIZED 
MATERIAL TO THAT OF 
CHARACTERISTIC SIZE 


Often, the interest is not in the precision of the 
quantity of material above a stated characteristic size 
but in the precision of that size itself. This 
fundamental error іп е corresponding 
characteristic size X99 з can be calculated by division 
of the standard deviation value calculated above by 
the slope of the cumulative size distribution at this 
point of the distribution [see Equation (6)]. The 
slope of the cumulative size distribution at 
Хооз Was again obtained by linear interpolation: 


Slope at Хора = (Bxii – Bx)/(Axii — Ax) = 0.29jum 


A 3 percent FE for the amount larger than Хәоз, 
which is by definition 10 percent by mass, leads to a 
standard deviation for Q3 at 184 um given by: 


с[0з(184 um)] = 3 x 10/100 = 0.30 by mass 


and for the corresponding standard deviation o and 
coefficient of variation CV in the characteristic size 
X993 = 184 um [see Equations (6) and (7)]: 


с(хооз) = 0.30/(0.29 шп!) = 1.04 um 
and 
CV(x90,3) = FE(size) = 0.57 percent relative 


Thus, for this case, an FE (size) of 0.57 percent 


IS 4879 : 2023 


corresponds to 3 percent FE (quantity) at the point 
Хәоз = 184 um. 


A-5 EMPIRICAL ESTIMATION OF TOTAL 
SAMPLING ERROR 


The calculation of the total sampling error may be 
illustrated by a | kg batch of glass beads which 
undergo a degree of segregation. Again, the true 
density p of the beads is taken as 2 600 kg/m?. 


Five independent samples of 500 mg each were 
collected for analysis at different locations in the 
batch of glass beads. For this amount of sample, the 
numbers of particles larger than the characteristic 
sizes and their FE were calculated as indicated in 
А-4 (FEQ). The numbers of particles were: 
70 060 > х5оз; 4 238 > Хора; 1 572 > Хо5з; 
481 > ховз. Note the rapid decrease in the number 
of particles larger than the size indicated as the 
characteristic size increases. The corresponding 
FE,4 values are given in row xi of Table 5. А 
method of analysis was selected that guaranteed 
good precision for such samples, that is a coefficient 
of variation for x193 — X90,3 of better than 1 percent 
and for X99,3 — X9g better than 2 percent. 


The results of the analysis are given in Table 5 
(rows i to v). The mean values of the measured 
results were calculated using Equation (8) and the 
standard deviations (SDs) using Equation (9). The 
coefficients of variation (CVs) were then obtained 
by multiplication of the SDs by 100 and division by 
the mean values [see Equation (7)]. The SD and CV 
of the mean values were obtained by division of the 
SD and CV by УМ (the square root of the number of 
measurements). 


Table 5 Results of Analysis of Independent 500 mg Samples of Glass Beads 
(Clause A-5) 


SI No. Parameters X103 X50,3 X90,3 X953 X98,3 X90,3/%103 
um um um um um 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) 53.7 104.5 182.5 208.8 232.2 3.40 
ii) Resor anes 99:2 106.6 178.7 203.6 226.1 3.24 
iii) 56.5 109.1 179.9 208.9 231.7 3.18 
iv) 57.5 111.1 186.3 215.6 245.6 324 
у) 54.2 106.1 190.2 220.8 251.3 3.51 
vi) Mean 55.4 107.5 183.5 211.5 237.4 3.31 
vii) SD (pop), um 1.6 2.6 4.7 6.7 10.6 0.14 
УШ) СУ (pop), percent 2.9 2.4 2.6 3:2 4.5 4.1 
ix) FE calc percent – 0.22 0.29 0.43 0.59 = 
x) SD (mean), um 0.71 1.2 2.1 3.0 4.7 0.06 
xi) CV (mean), percent 1.3 1.1 1.2 1.4 2.0 1.8 


IS 4879 : 2023 


Comparison of 51 No. (viii) and (ix) in Table 5 shows 
that the overall sampling precision (expressed by the 
standard deviations and coefficients of variation of the 
population) estimated from the five measurements is 
much larger than the calculated FE. This result 
indicates that the batch of material is somewhat 
segregated and/or that the method of sampling was 
sub-optimal. 


A-6 PROCEDURE FOR RELATING 
PRECISION TO A MINIMUM MASS OF 
SAMPLE AND MINIMUM NUMBER OF 
SAMPLES OR SAMPLE INCREMENTS 


The procedure for relating a stated precision of a 
characteristic value of a particle size distribution to a 
minimum amount of sample and/or to a minimum 
number of samples or sample increments can now be 
summarized as follows: 


a) State the characteristic value in the particle 
size distribution that is proven or expected to 
represent product quality. 

b) Give a preliminary statement of the precision 
of this value. 

c) Execute a preliminary measurement of the 
particle size distribution and convert the 
volume-based particle size distribution into a 
number-based distribution. 

d) Check whether Fig. 5 may be helpful for 
estimating the minimum amount of sample 
for the stated FE. 

e) Interpolate the stated characteristic value 
from the measured data, together with the 
number of oversized particles involved in 
relation to the stated precision (FE). 

f) Convert, if necessary, the precision stated for 
the stated characteristic size into a precision 
for the corresponding number-based 
quantity. 

g) Calculate the minimum amount of sample 
related to the stated precision. 

h) Ifthis amount is significantly larger than the 
amount used in the preliminary measurement 
of step c, then perform a measurement with 
at least the newly calculated amount of 
sample and repeat steps d to g. 

j Perform measurements with different 
samples taken from different locations or at 
different times from the same batch and 
calculate the precision of Ше stated 
characteristic value, using an amount of 
sample similar to but not less than the 
calculated minimum amount. 

k) Investigate whether segregation has played 
an important role in the overall sampling 
precision. If necessary, improve the method 
of sampling and start again at step k. 

m) Define the number of samples or sample 
increments necessary to reach the stated 
precision for the stated characteristic value. 


n) Calculate the corresponding confidence 
interval for the measured characteristic 
value. 

p) If necessary from the point of view of cost 
and possible from the point of view of 
quality, reconsider the precision stated in 
step 'b' and redefine the numbers calculated 
in step 'n'. 


In the above procedure, it has been assumed that 
sample dispersion and measurement have a minor 
influence on precision. If there is doubt about this 
assumption, experimental proof should be provided. 


A-7 SIMPLE APPROACH TO THE 
CALCULATION OF THE FUNDAMENTAL 
SAMPLING ERROR (FSE) AND MINIMUM 
MASS REQUIRED FOR A SPECIFIED 
STANDARD ERROR 


This clause provides a method to approximately 
determine the magnitude (mg/g/kg) of the minimum 
mass required to meet a specific standard error. The 
approach approximates the precise calculations 
described in the document. With a knowledge or 
assumption of the actual mass utilized in the particle 
size analysis experiment, the best standard error 
achievable based solely on the heterogeneity of the 
material can also be estimated. 


The fundamental sampling error (FSE) is one of 
8 errors (implies culpability) or variables (implies 
statistical variation) originally described by Pierre Gy 
(see Table 6). It represents the smallest possible 
variation in sample to sample reproducibility based 
solely on the heterogeneity of the material or 
distribution involved. 


Table 6 Old (Gy) and New Notations 
(Pitard/Esbensen) 


(Clause A-7) 


SI No. Errors Old New 
Term Term 
а) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Heterogeneity CE HFE 
fluctuation error 
11) Quality fluctuation QE QFE 
error 
ii) Fundamental sampling FE FSE 
error 
iv) Grouping and GE GSE 
segregation error 
у) Increment weighting WE IWE 
error 
vi) Increment delimitation DE IDE 
error 
Vii) Increment extraction EE IEE 
error 
vii) Increment preparation PE IPE 
errors 


The FSE is identical to the standard error familiar to 
mathematicians and statisticians. The standard error 
(SE) of a parameter is the standard deviation (с, 
theoretical value) or an estimate of the standard 
deviation (s, absolute value coming from 
measurements) of a sampled distribution. If the 
parameter or the statistic is the mean, it is called the 
standard error of the mean (SEM). It represents how 
close the result gets to the ‘true’ mean with repeated 
samplings or an increased proportion of the actual 
distribution. 


In particle size distribution considerations, the FSE is 
inversely proportional to the square root of the 
number of particles present in the distribution or part 
of the distribution. In the following derivations, no 
assumption is made of the form of the original particle 
size distribution; only, that the samples withdrawn are 
normally distributed (as is the standard case). 


SEM а 1/4n orn a 1/o? 


For 1 percent SEM it can be shown that: 


n = 1(0.01)? = 10 000 


Thus, 10 000 particles in total will be needed to 
specify the mean to 1 percent SE. The implication is 
that to specify any other point of the distribution to 
1 percent SE, at least 10 000 particles will be needed 
in the portion of the distribution above that point. The 
worst-case situation is considered first; specifying the 
Xgg point in the distribution to a standard error of 
1 percent. This requires 10 000 particles in the X99+ 
part of the distribution. This x99+ part represents 
only 1/100 of the total sample mass of the entire 
distribution. Thus, only the mass (= volume x 
density) of 10 000 particles needs to be calculated at 
some known or assumed хо» point in the distribution 
and multiplied by the appropriate value to compute 
the total mass of the distribution. Using the value of 
the Xog point 15 more convenient than attempting to 
use a more correct midpoint between the X99 and 
(unknown) X99 point. It will slightly underestimate 
the minimum mass required but calculations show this 
to be minor. 


Making two assumptions, the minimum mass of the 
portion Mg can be calculated: the particles are 
spherical and all particles of the portion have the 
minimum diameter xo. 


Мо = Пит x (1/6) ххдхр 


where 


IS 4879 : 2023 


Тит = Minimum number of particles for the 
specified precision; 


(7/6) = Shape factor for a sphere; 

XQ = Largest point in the distribution that 
is to be specified; and 

р =Density of the particles in the sample. 


NOTE — (7/6) х [xo] is the volume of a single particle 
of size хо and multiplied by the density p gives the mass. 


This gives the minimum required total mass Mot: 


РЕ Мо yis X (0/6) X xQ X p 
v 1=Q3(%q) ——— 1 = Qs (XQ) 
| (n/6) ххӧхр 
_ (SE)? x (1 = Q5(xQ)) 
where 


Q3(%g) = Volume-based cumulative distribution 
for the diameter x. 


NOTE — АП parameters are given in SI units. 


Miot is thus Mg multiplied by a multiplier, which 
takes the calculated mass fraction, Mg to the total 
mass of sample (for example for the хоо point then 
this is 1 percent of the total sample so the multiplier is 
100; for the x95 point this multiplier would be 20. 
Stricter statistical considerations show 98 and 18 
respectively for the multiplier for the хоо and Xos but 
this does not detract from the broad conclusions 
presented here). 


One simple example can illustrate the calculation, 
based on an assumed top end parameter хоо of 
1 000 um (0.001 m) of particles with a density of 
2 500 kg/m?. The required standard error SE is 
1 percent (0.01) and according to its definition 
Q3(X99) = 99: 
(1/6) x (0.001 m)? x 2500 kg/m? 
(0.01)? x (1 — 0.99) 
_ (1/6) х 2.5 x 107 5kg 
= 10-6 


Miot = 


= 1.3 kg 


The minimum total mass Ме; required for an SE of 
1 percent for an xog of 1 000 um is 1.3 kg 
(see Table 7). 


It is easy to spreadsheet such calculations. The 
example above can be expanded to cover sizes lower 
and higher in order of magnitude steps (see Table 7). 


IS 4879 : 2023 


Table 7 Mass of Test Sample Required to Reach 1 Percent Standard Error for the Upper 1 Percent of a 
Volume Particle Size Distribution with Particle Density 2.5 g/cm? 


(Clause A-7) 


SI No. x Mass in Top Size Fraction Total Mass Note 
иш 5 5 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 1 1 309E-08 131E-06 
ii) 10 1 309E-05 131E-03 ~l mg 
iii) 100 1 309E-02 131E+00 ~lg 
iv) 1 000 1 309E+01 131E+03 ~1 kg 
у) 10 000 1 309E+04 131Е+06 ~1 000 kg 
This is the mass of 10 000 | This is where 1 percent of the 
particles assuming spheres particles are in the top size band 
(or 1 percent in last size band — хоо) 


In summary, it can be stated that at least a test 
sample or sample increment of 1 g is required to 
reach a fundamental error (standard deviation) of 
1 percent for а хоз (the 99th percentile of a 
volume distribution). 


Thus, the required sample size mass in mg, g, kg or 
metric tons is based solely on the top endpoint in the 
distribution as given in Table 7. 


In a more practical case, the calculated sample 
masses would be reduced by a factor of 250 to meet 


the 5 percent X90 requirement in 
IS 101 (Part 10/Sec 1)ISO 13320 (25 fold from 
1 percent SE to 5 percent SE and a factor of 10 from 


X9g 10 Х90). 


It is possible to reverse the calculation and to 
calculate the best sample-to-sample precision based 
solely on the heterogeneity of the material. 
Therefore, the following parameters need to be 
known: 


a) the point in the distribution to specify; 

b) the density of the material; and 

c) the amount of sample used in 
experiment. 


the 


Ход, can be taken as an example with sample sizes 
of 0.1 g/1 g/10 g and with various top end sizes from 
1 um to 2 000 um, using a low density of 1.5 g/cm? 
typical of a pharmaceutical (see Table 8). 


IS 4879 : 2023 


Table 8 Standard Error Calculations for the X99 Point of the Distribution with Varying Sample Masses (0.1 2/1 2/10 g) and Density 1.5 g/cm? 


(Clause A-7) 


SI No. x x/10 000 x3 p Mass used Mass of one particle No. particles Calculated SE 
um (conversion to cm) ст? g/cm? g g % 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) 1 0.000 1 1E-12 1.5 0.1 7.853 98E-13 1 273 239 545 0.003 
ii) 1 0.000 1 1E-12 1.5 1 7.853 98E-13 12 732 395 447 0.001 
iii) 1 0.000 1 1E-12 1.5 10 7.853 98E-13 1.273 24E+11 0.000 
iv) 20 0.002 8E-09 1.5 0.1 6.283 19E-09 159 155 0.25 
у) 20 0.002 8Е-09 1.5 1 6.283 19Е-09 1 591 549 0.08 
vi) 20 0.002 8E-09 1.5 10 6.283 19E-09 15 915 494 0.03 
vii) 50 0.005 1.25E-07 1.5 0.1 9.817 48E-08 10 186 0.99 
viii) 50 0.005 1.25E-07 1.5 1 9.817 48E-08 101 859 0.31 
ix) 50 0.005 1.25E-07 1.5 10 9.817 48E-08 1 018 592 0.10 
х) 100 0.01 0.000 001 1.5 0.1 7.853 98Е-07 1 273 2.80 
хі) 100 0.01 0.000 001 1.5 1 7.853 98Е-07 12 732 0.89 
xii) 100 0.01 0.000 001 1.5 10 7.853 98E-07 127 324 0.28 
xiii) 200 0.02 0.000 008 1.5 0.1 6.283 19E-06 159 7.93 
xiv) 200 0.02 0.000 008 1.5 1 6.283 19E-06 1592 2.51 
Xv) 200 0.02 0.000 008 1.5 10 6.283 19E-06 15 915 0.79 
xvi) 500 0.05 0.000 125 1.5 0.1 9.817 48E-05 10 31.3 
xvii) 500 0.05 0.000 125 1.5 1 9.817 48E-05 102 9.9 
XViii) 500 0.05 0.000 125 1.5 10 9.817 48E-05 1019 3.1 
xix) 1 000 0.1 0.001 1.5 0.1 0.000 785 398 1 88.6 
хх) 1000 0.1 0.001 1.5 1 0.000 785 398 13 28.0 
Xxi) 1 000 0.1 0.001 1.5 10 0.000 785 398 127 8.9 
Xxii) 1 500 0.15 0.003 375 1.5 0.1 0.002 650 719 0 162.8 
xxiii) 1 500 0.15 0.003 375 1.5 1 0.002 650 719 4 51.5 
xxiv) 1 500 0.15 0.003 375 1.5 10 0.002 650 719 38 16.3 
XXV) 2 000 0.2 0.008 1.5 0.1 0.006 283 185 0 250.7 
xxvi) 2 000 0.2 0.008 1.5 1 0.006 283 185 2 79.3 
xxvii) 2 000 0.2 0.008 1.5 10 0.006 283 185 16 25.1 


At the larger sizes (> 100 um or so), the minimum variation is substantial if sample masses are kept below ~ 10 g. This has implications for particle size distributions obtained 
by such techniques as electron microscopy. 


At 20 mg total sample mass, the variation on the X99 (the number of calculated particles is in a mass of 0.000 2 g for the X99) is given in Table 9. 


19 


IS 4879 : 2023 


Table 9 Standard Error Calculations for the X99 Point in the Distribution with Sample Mass 20 mg and 


Density 1.5 g/cm? 
(Clause A-7) 


NOTE — The above calculations provide the most suitable sample-to-sample variation based solely on the heterogeneity of the 


material. All other errors or variation will add to this minimum. 


20 


SI x р Mass Used Mass of One Particle No. Particles Calculated SE 
No. um g/cm? g g % 
а) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) 1 1.5 0.02 7.853 98E-13 254 647 909 0.01 
ii) 20 1.5 0.02 6.283 19E-09 31 831 0.56 
iii) 50 1.5 0.02 9.817 48E-08 2 037 2.22 
iv) 100 1.5 0.02 7.853 98E-07 255 6.27 
у) 200 1.5 0.02 6.283 19Е-06 32 17.72 
vi) 500 1.5 0.02 9.817 48E-05 2 70.06 
vii) 1000 1.5 0.02 0.000 785 398 0 198.17 
viii) 1500 1.5 0.02 0.002 650 719 0 364.05 
ix) 2 000 1.5 0.02 0.006 650185 0 560.50 


IS 4879 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 8) 
CALCULATION OF VARIANCES AT DIFFERENT STAGES IN THE SAMPLING SEQUENCE 


B-1 GENERAL 


The variances at the different stages in the sampling 
sequence can be estimated by an experimental 
method covering either the full sequence or part of 
the sequence. 


B-2 FULL SEQUENCE 
In the full sequence, all sub-samples taken are 
further sampled or analysed. The symbols xi xij, Хк 


denote the experimental values of the random 
variable x at the different stages of sampling and 


2 2 2 
Уук (хук — Хш) = Уук (хук = Xy.) + пз dy (xij. = Xix) + птз Ў (хь — x44)? 


or, in a shorter notation, 


2 
Ук (хук — Жы.) = 50 + 51 + 52 


size analysis (see Fig. 7). The notation Xijx« is used 
for the mean over k, x;,, is used for the mean over 
j and k, and x,, is used for the mean over i, j and k. 
The number of primary sample increments (stage 
denoted by 4) is denoted by па, the number of 
secondary sub-samples (stage denoted by Yj) is 
denoted n, and the number of size analyses (stage 
denoted by бук) from each sub-sample is denoted by 
па. Using this notation, the sum of the squares of the 
measurements can be given as: 


(12) 


PU 


The sums of squares represent estimates of the variations in the different phases of the error hierarchy as given in 


Table 3. 
Table 3 The Estimates that the Sums of Squares Represent 
(Clause B-2) 
SI No. Sum of Squares Number of Degrees of Represents an Estimate of 
Freedom 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) So = Yan Gag Xy). тт, (пз — 1) папу (пз — 1)og 
ii) Sica Yu(xij. = х.) па (п — 1) па (n; — 1) (пзо? + 00) 
iii) 52 = птз Xii. Ха) (n, — 1) (па — 1)(nzn302 + пзо202) 


FIG. 7 SAMPLING SEQUENCE ERRORS 


[For meanings of symbols (see B-2)] 


21 


IS 4879 : 2023 


Using Table 3, we can obtain the equations used for 
testing the statistical significance of the variances of 
the different stages of sample preparation and 
division. 
For the statistical assumption that а, = 0, the test 
equation is 

51 


[па (22–1)] __ 
- Зо = Еф, 


[nyn2(n3-1)] 
= Fin, (n2-1)],[nyn2(n3-1)] 
.. (14) 
where 


Fg1@2 = Standard F-distribution value with фу 
and ф,; degrees of freedom. 


In a similar manner, a test function can be 
formulated for the statistical assumption that 
0, =0;0, =0. If this assumption cannot be 
accepted, then 


51 Za Fi; 
[n4 (m2 -1)] 


= F(n,-1)[ni(n2-1)] 


.. (15) 
If the statistical assumption that o» = 0; а! = 0 can 
be accepted, the test function is 
s2/(n3 – 1)] == 
(so + 51)/ [1 (прпа - D] _ Cate 
= F(n,-1) ni (n2n3-1)] 
.. (16) 


The latter equation should be used if the assumption 
of test function (14) is accepted. 


If neither the assumption о» = 0 nor the assumption 
оу = 0 can be accepted, then estimates for the 
variances of different sample treatment tasks can be 
evaluated by solving the equations in Table 3. 


Variances should not be estimated if the estimates 
prove to be without significance. 


22 


B-3 PARTIAL SEQUENCE 


In the case of a partial sequence, only a selected 
number of sub-samples are treated further. Let the 
number of sample divisions be denoted as К; for 
sampling stage i and the number of sub-samples 
taken be nj for stage i. 


The mean value x of the random variable x is then 
(see Fig. 8) 


ў = — ym 


по na 
Anonym #i=1 yt È k-1 Xijk 


...(17) 
The estimates for the variances for the stages are: 


s$ = 


1 n 
iir A X Cae — 


2 
DONC ч) 
(19) 


55 = 


4: Y" 2 52 
Xj — xi) -= 
ni(n;-1) 52 ja у ) 


In these equations 
= 1 пз 
Xij zF у 1 Xij] 


and 


Xi 


1 по 

= 5 x 

по n 

The variance for real sequential sampling is: 


Ki-ni si пә 52 
K4-1 ny 
_1 Кз-пз 


n4n5 K3- —1 n3 


1 к-п» 
ny K2- —1 n5 
пз 52 


бро = 
.. (23) 


The test equations are the same as in full sequence 
calculations. 


IS 4879 : 2023 


K,=4 
п= 2 
K,= 
п;=2 
Кз= 2 

= 1 


FIG. 8 PARTIAL SAMPLING SEQUENCE — EXAMPLE IN THREE STAGES 


3 
о 
I 


23 


IS 4879 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee, CED 55 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (90, Savita Vihar, Vikas 
Marg, New Delhi - 110092) 


AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 

Associated Soapstone Distributing Co Private 
Limited, Jaipur 

Cement Corporation of India Limited, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil & Materials 
NewDelhi 


Research Station, 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


CSIR - National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


Haver Standard India Private Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Industrial Wire Netting Company, New Delhi 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of Ministry of 


Defence, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement 
Materials, Faridabad 


and Building 


National Mineral Development 
Limited, Hyderabad 


Corporation 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Steel Authority of India Limited, Kolkata 


24 


Representative(s) 


DRR. P. SINGHAL (Chairperson) 
SHRI ROHITASH BARUA 
SHRI MADAN KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIKRAM GOLCHA 
SHRI DILIP JHA (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SARASWATHI DEVI 
SHRI ANURAG KUMAR SAINI (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAYAK RAI 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARDEEP SINGH 
SHRI B. К. MUNZNI (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SHARMA 
DR PRADEEP KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR SANJAY YADAV 
DR NITA DILAWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVEN H. SHAH 
SHRI VIKRAM D. SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI М. G. RAUT 
SHRI V. A. SONTAKKEY (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI KESHAV GUPTA 
SHRI SANJAY GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. JAIN 
SHRI SOMESH KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI SURESH KUMAR 


SHRIG. J. NAIDU (Alternate) 


SHRIS. K. SHARMA 
SHRIG. V. RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK SHARMA 
SHRIMATI MAYMOLE BOBEN (Alternate) 


SHRI BIPIN KUMAR GIRI 
SHRI SIBABRATA BASAK (Alternate) 


Organization 


Ultratech Cement Limited, Mumbai 
In Personal Capacity (B-129, F-2, Ramprastha 
Colony, Ghaziabad - 201011) 


In Personal Capacity (Indian Institute of 
Technology, Hauz Khas, New Delhi - 110016) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 4879 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRAN K. P. 
SHRI DEVENDRA PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI VIRENDRA BABU 


PROF B. PITCHUMANI 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
DR MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


25 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 24 (18638). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


