**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11529 (1986): Leather Check Straps for Looms [TXD 14: 
Machinery for Fabric Manufacture] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 11529 -19BB 

(Reaffirmed 2012) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LEATHER CHECK STRAPS TOR LOOMS 



UDC 677054 844^7: 675.114 




© Copyright 1586 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MAHAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAUG 

NEW DELHI 1UMKK2 

g, 2 **r 19i6 



IS : 11529 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR ' 
LEATHER CHECK STRAPS FOR LOOMS 

Cotton Weaving Machinery Components Sectional Committee, TDC 29 

Chairman Representing 

Shri J. C. Agrawal Textile Machinery Manufacturers' Association 

( India ), Bombay 

Members 

Prof D. B. Ajgaonkar Textile Institute, Ichalkaranji ( Maharashtra ) 

Shri S. A. Bandekar The Bombay Millowners' Association, Bombay 

Shri A. R. Date Central India Machinery Manufacturing Co Ltd 

( Textile Division ), Gwalior 
Shri S. S. Joshi ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. J. Devas Khatau Makanji Spg & Wvg Co Ltd, Bombav 

Shri M. G. Ghate Lakshmi Automatic Loom Works Limited, 

Hosur ( Tamil Nadu ) 
Shri R. R. Gorakhia Textile & Allied Industries Research 

Organization, Vadodara 
Shri G. K. Kapadia Textile Association ( India ), Bombay 

Prof K. T. Aswani ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. N. Marchawala L. W. Plastics Moulders, Bombay 

Shri B. K. Joshi ( Alternate ) 
Shri Chandrakant P. Mehta Gujarat Chamber of Commerce & Industr> 

( Gujarat Vepari Mahamandal ), Ahmadabad 
Shri Gautambhai Vimalbhai Shah ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. Moraye Bombay Textile Research Association, 

Bombay 
Shri D. G. Naik Ahmedabad Textile Mills' Association, 

Ahmadabad 
Shri S* S. Nerurkar Textiles Committee, Bombay 

Shri A.M. Doshi ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. C. Paliwal Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research 

Association, Ahmadabad 
Shri N. T. Parikh Bharat Industries, Ahmadabad 

Shri S. T. Parikh (Alternate ) 
Shri Mahesh P. Patel Peass Industrial Engineers Pvt Ltd, Navsari 

Shri M. J. Patwardhan Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 



Shri M. K. De ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11529 - 1986 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Shri M. V. Rangarajan 

Shri Surjit Sen 

Shri Narendra L. Shah 



Representing 



Southern India Mills' Association, Coimbatore 
Sen & Mettenheimer Pvt Ltd, Ahmadabad 
Association of Merchants & Manufacturers of 
Textile Stores & Machinery ( India ), 
Bombay 
Shri Surendra L. Shah ( Alternate ) 
ShriS. K. Shah Loom Drop Pins Manufacturing Company, 

Ahmadabad 
Shri G. S. Shah ( Alternate ) 
Shri Jayantilal D. Sheth 
Dr Mi K. Talukdar 

Prof K. T. Aswani ( Alternate ) 
Shri Rajendra Tikmani Tikelon India, Ahmadabad 

Shri C. N. Vartak Mafatlal Engineering Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R. I. Midha, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Tex ) 

Secretary 

Shri R. K. Dua 
Joint Director ( Tex ), ISI 



Standard Mills Co Ltd, Bombay 

Victoria Jubilee Technical Institute, Bombay 



Textile Mill Leather Articles Subcommittee, TDC 29 : 3 
Convener 



Shri I. N. Rao 

Members 
Shri G. Balasubramaniam 



Bombay Dyeing & Manufacturing Co Ltd, 
Bombay 



Lakshmi Automatic Loom Works Limited, 
Hosur ( Tamil Nadu ) 
Shri H. C. Goyal Standard Mills Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri T. S, Kailasa Mahadevan Central Leather Research Institute, Madras 
Shri J. K. Khanna ( Alternate I ) 
Dr T. S. Ranganathan ( Alternate II ) 
Shri C. D. C. Karaka Pickers Limited, Ahmadabad 

Shpi S. T. Kataria Khatau Makanji Spg & Wvg Co Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri L M. Mansuri All India Picker & Textile Leather Manu- 

facturers' Association, Ahmadabad 
Shri C. D. C. Karaka ( Alternate) 
Shri S. S. Nerurkar Textiles Committee, Bombay 

Shri A. M. Doshi ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ramesh G. Parikh Hides & Leather Products Pvt Ltd, Ahmadabad 

Shri G* N. Srivasiava Central India Machinery Manufacturing Co Ltd 

( Textile Division ), Gwalior 
Shri M. V. Ramlingam ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. K. Talukdar Victoria Jubilee Technical Institute, Bombay 

Prof K. T. Aswani ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. N. Vartak Mafatlal Engineering Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. M. Pure ( Alternate ) 



IS : 11529 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LEATHER CHECK STRAPS FOR LOOMS 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 6 January 1986, after the draft finalized by the Cotton 
Weaving Machinery Components Sectional Committee had been approv- 
ed by the Textile Division Council. 

0.2 This standard is based on the manufacturing practices followed in 
the country in this field. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant place* retained in the rounded 
ofT value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the manufacturing procedure and the require- 
ments for leather check straps for use in loom. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard the definitions given in IS : 1640 - 
1960f shall app.y. 

3. MATERIAL 

3.1 The raw material shall be wet-salted or freshly-slaughtered hide 
of buffalo, ox or cow of good substance free from flay cuts, putrefaction 
warble holes, etc. 



* Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 
f Glossary of terms relating to hides, skins and leather. 



TS : 11529 - 1986 

4. TREATMENT OF RAW HIDE 

4.1 Tanning — Only vegetable or synthetic tanning materials shall be 
used. Mineral acids shall not be used for plumping hides during pre- 
tanning stage. 

4.1.1 The cut-seciion of leather shall be smooth indicative of the 
inside fibres being compact. 

4.2 Scouring or Washing — The tanned butts shall be neatly scoured 
on the grain and flesh sides. Jhese may be skived or shaved on the 
flesh side to remove all traces of loose fibre. 

4.3 Stuffing — The stuffing shall be done with fish oil, tallow, fats or 
waxes of suitable quality. 

4.4 Oiling — The oiling shall be done with vegetable or animal oil of 
suitable quality. 

4.5 Setting — The butts shall be uniformly set during currying to 
minimize stretch and impasting smooth finish to grain side. 

4.6 Seasoning — The seasoning of butts shall be for minimum 8 weeks 
after completion of stuffing process. 

4.7 Stretching — The hide shall be stretched from neck to butt along 
the back bone line after stuffing and the stretch marks should be 
cut off. 

4.7.1 The damp butts shall be dried in the stretched condition, 

4.8 Finishing — The strap butts or bends shall be finished on the flesh 
and grain sides and the protective grease layers left during seasoning 
should be removed so as to avoid any damage to the leather surface. 
The grain side shall not be dope - finished. However, light staining 
may be resorted to. 

5. REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Physical Requirements — The check strap or leather for manufac- 
turing shall meet the following physical requirements : 



IS : 11529 - 1986 



SI No. 



Characteristic 



i) Thickness, mm 
ii) Width, mm 
iii) Tensile strength, Min 



Requirement 

4 to 5 
25 to 28 
20 594 kN/m 2 
(210 kgf/cm 2 ) 



Method of Test 
Given in 



LP 
LP 2 



1} 



iv) Elongation, percent, Max 

a) at break 65 

b) 4 hours after load of 5 
6 865 kN/m 2 (70 kgf/ 
cm 2 ) is removed 

v) Stitch tear strength 1 030 N (105 kgf) 

per cm thickness 

5.2 Chemical Requirements — The check strap or the leather for 
manufacturing shall meet the following chemical requirements : 



Y LP 6 ^ IS : 5914-1970* 



LP 8. 



Si No. 

i) 

ii) 
iii) 



Characteristic 



Requirement 



Method of Test 
Given in 



iv) 



Total ash, percent, Max 2.0 

Oils and fats, percent 8 to 15 

Water soluble matter, 14 
percent, Max 

Insoluble ash, percent, Max 0.5 



LC 3 
LC 4 
LC 6 



LC 8^ IS:582-1970f 
LC 18 



LC 5 
LC21 



v) pH of water soluble 4 to 5 

vi) Differential number, Max 0.6 
vii) Hide substance, percent, 

Max 35 

viii) Degree of tannage 50 to 70 

5.3 Resistance to Mould Growth — The material shall be given a 
suitable proofing treatment. No mildew growth shall be observed 
when the check strap is tested according to IB 2 of IS : 6191-1971$. 

6. MARKING 

6.1 Check strap shall be marked with the following : 

a) Length of roll (m), width (mm) and thickness (mm); 

b) Name or trade-mark of the manufacturer; and 

c) Lot number and date of production. 



♦Methods of physical testing of leather. 

t Methods of chemical testing of leather (first revision ). 

J Methods of micro-biological, colour fastness and microscopical tests for leather. 



IS : 11529 - 1986 

6.1.1 Each roll may also be marked with the 1ST Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing 
and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for confor- 
mity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which 
a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers 
or processors may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

7. PACKING 

7.1 Check strap roll shall be wrapped in polyethylene film and suitably 
packed in a box ( as specified in the contract ). 



