anda HAF IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 
Indian Standard 


vet aed — Alea "feet 


ufreror ug tat 
aM 2 ater Raat ve iao erar & fero 
fear aaee ueo agit — Wert ent 
Ua sia er ueo 


Automotive Vehicles — Vehicle 
Dynamics Test Methods 


Part 2 Steady-State Test Procedure for 
Vehicle Stability and Controllability — 
Open-Loop and Closed Loop Test 


ICS 43.020 


© BIS 2019 


weds Ae Sq 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WA, 9 SERE STH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2019 Price Group 7 


Automotive Braking and Steering System, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, 
TED 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Automotive 
Braking and Steering System, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 
The dynamic behavior of a road vehicle is a most important part of vehicle safety. Any given vehicle, together 
with its driver and the prevailing environment, forms a unique closed-loop system. The task of evaluating 
dynamic behavior is therefore very difficult since there is a significant interaction between these driver-vehicle- 
environment elements, each of which is complex in itself. A complete and accurate description of the behavior of 
the road vehicle must necessarily involve information obtained from a number of tests of different types. Since 
they quantify only a small part of the complete vehicle handling characteristics, the results of these tests can only 
be considered significant for a correspondingly small part of the overall dynamic behavior. 
Less data is acquired to obtain relationship between overall vehicle dynamic properties vs actual driving patterns. 
The effort is going on to do obtain correlation between accident avoidance and vehicle dynamic properties in 
general. Therefore, it is not possible to use this standard for regulatory purposes. Finally, test conditions and tyres 
have a strong influence on test results. Only vehicle dynamic properties obtained under identical test and tyre 
conditions are comparable. 
This Indian Standard is published in five parts. The other parts in this series are: 

Part 1 General test conditions 

Part3 Transient response test methods 

Part4 Ride comfort measurements 

Part5 Subjective evaluation —Vehicle ride, handling, steering and tyre evaluation 
In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from the following 
International Standards: 
ISO 4138 : 2004 Passenger cars — Steady state circular driving behaviour — Open loop test methods 
ISO 7401 : 2003 Road vehicles — Lateral transient response test methods — Open loop test methods 
ISO 7975 : 2006 Passenger cars — Braking in a turn — Open loop test method 
ISO/TR 8725 : 1988 Road vehicles — Transient open loop response test method with one period of sinusoidal 
input 
ISO/TR 8726 : 1988 Road vehicles — Transient open loop response test method with pseudo-random steering 
input 
ISO 9815 : 2003 Road vehicles — Passenger car and trailer combinations — lateral stability test 
ISO 12021-1 : 1996 Road vehicles — Sensitivity to lateral wind — Part 1: Open loop test method using wind 
generator input 


ISO 15037-1 : 2006 Road vehicles — Vehicle dynamics test methods — Part 1: General conditions for passenger 
cars 


ISO 17288-2 : 2004 Passenger cars — Free steer behaviour — Part 2: Steering pulse open-loop test method 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard 1s complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard 


IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — VEHICLE 


DYNAMICS TEST METHODS 
PART 2 STEADY-STATE TEST PROCEDURE FOR 


VEHICLE STABILITY AND CONTROLLABILITY — 
OPEN-LOOP AND CLOSED LOOP TEST 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Indian Standard (Part 2) defines and specifies 
open-loop and closed loop test methods for M1 category 
of vehicles as defined in IS 14272 for determining the 
steady-state circular driving behavior (gradients of 
steering wheel angle, understeer/oversteer, sideslip, roll 
angle, and steering wheel torque with respect to lateral 
acceleration). These properties are used to evaluate the 
vehicle stability and controllability during steady state 
cornering. 


1.2 The manoevours included in this standard may 
not represent the real driving conditions but they are 
useful for obtaining the vehicle stability and control 
parameters. 
NOTE — This standard provides guidelines for various test 
methods used to evaluate steady state vehicle properties and 
not for any regulatory requirements. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


Title 


Automotive vehicles — Types — 
Terminology (first revision ) 


IS No. 
14272 : 2011 


17128-1:2019 Automotive vehicles — Vehicle 


dynamics test methods: Part 1 
General test conditions 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard following terms and 
definitions applies. 
3.1 Open Loop System 


For the purpose of vehicle characterization only open 
loop system is used. Open loop refers to vehicle 


response to the particular steering inputs without any 
driver’s feedback. 


3.2 Closed Loop System 


Vehicle stability and controllability is the measure 
of vehicle and driver combination. Driver along with 
the vehicle forms a closed loop system. Driver observes 
vehicle direction/position and accordingly corrects the 
input (steering, brake and accelerator) to achieve the 
desired path. Normally path feedback is used in closed 
loop system. The test results may vary based on the test 
driver’s response to the closed loop system. 


3.3 Low Speed Path Radius 


Radius of the circular path transcribed by the origin of 
the vehicle axis system when the vehicle is operated at 
constant speed with a given fixed steering-wheel angle 
when both front and rear tyres have approximately zero 
slip angle and vehicle is subjected to approximately 
zero lateral acceleration. 


4 PRINCIPLE 


4.1 Test Methods 
a) Open Loop: 
1) Method 1 — Constant radius test; 
2) Method 2 — Constant steering wheel angle 
test; 
3) Method 3 — Constant speed/variable radius 
test; and 


4) Method 4 — Constant speed/variable steering 
wheel angle. 


b) Closed Loop: 


1) Method 5 — Constant radius test / variable 
speed / variable steering wheel angle. 


All open loop four methods yield substantially similar 
data, but they differ in requirements for testing space, 
driver skill, and instrumentation. Method 1 and 3 
depend upon the path-keeping ability of the driver to 
minimize instrumentation requirements. Method 2 
and 4 use fixed steering wheel angle and measure path 
radius with inertial instruments. Closed loop method 5 
is a continuous path tracking approach. Method 4 is 


IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 


Table 1 Test Methods for Closed Loop and Open Loop 
( Clause 6.1 ) 


Test Method | Constant Varied Measured or Calculated 
Open Loop Test 
Constant radius test Radius Speed Steering wheel angle 
Constant steering wheel angle test Steering wheel angle Speed Radius 
Constant speed/variable radius test Speed Radius Steering wheel angle 
Constant speed/variable steering wheel angle Speed Steering wheel angle Radius 
Closed loop test 
Constant radius test/variable speed/variable steering | Radius Speed, steering wheel angle | Speed, steering wheel angle 
wheel angle 


generally run at 80 to 100 km/h. Method 5 is use to 
acquire the vehicle limiting lateral acceleration and 
may cross the linear range of 0.4 g. The continuous 
data of method 5 also demonstrates most clearly the 
concepts of characteristic speed and critical speed as 
defined in IS 17128 (Part 1). 


5 VARIABLES 


5.1 Reference System 


The provisions given in IS 17128 (Part 1) are 
applicable. 


5.2 Measurement 


5.2.1 Measure the following variables: 
a) Longitudinal velocity (Vx ); 
b)Lateral acceleration (Ay); and 
c) Steering-wheel angle (6,,). 
Alternatively, lateral acceleration may be determined 
from other motion variables (refer 9.2). 


NOTE — The method chosen to determine lateral acceleration 
could require the measurement of additional variables (yaw 
velocity, vehicle roll angle, or sideslip angle) for use in the 
computation. 


5.2.2 The following variables should also be measured: 
a) yaw velocity (dw/dt); 
b) sideslip angle (f) and/or lateral velocity (Vy); 
c) longitudinal acceleration (Ax); 
d) vehicle roll angle (qv ); and 


e) In addition, front steer angle (9,), rear steer angle 
(8,) and steering-wheel torque (M,) may be 
measured. 


6 MEASURING EQUIPMENT 


6.1 Description 


The variables selected for test purposes shall be 
measured using appropriate transducers and the 


data recorded on a multi-channel recording system 
having a time base. Typical operating ranges, and 
recommended maximum errors of the transducer and 
recording system are given in Table 1 of IS 17128 
(Part 1). 


6.2 Transducer Installation 


The transducer installation shall comply with IS 17128 
(Part 1). 


6.3 Data Processing 


The provisions given in 4.3 of IS 17128 (Part 1) shall 
apply. 


6.3.1 Frequency band width in the entire measurement 
system including sensors and recording devices should 
be between 1 Hz to 20 Hz. 


6.3.2 Install test sensors according to their installation 
instructions respectively. Install gyro at vehicle's 
reference point, the vertical gyro axis should be 
coincident or parallel to the vehicle's vertical (Z) axis. 


7 TEST CONDITIONS 


Test conditions shall be in accordance with Annex B of 
17128 (Part 1). General data on the test vehicle shall 
be recorded as specified in Annex A of 17128 (Part 1). 


The tyre type, brand, any special equipment on the test 
vehicle, any deviation in type or operating condition 
of components from the manufacturer's specification, 
the odometer reading at the beginning and end of the 
test, any other condition that may affect test results 
shall also be recorded on the test report for general data 
Annex B of 17128 (Part 1). 


8 TEST PROCEDURE 
8.1 Warm-up 


The warm-up shall be carried out in accordance 
with 6.1 of 17128 (Part 1). 


8.2 Initial Driving Condition 


The conditions shall be in accordance with 6.2 of 17128 
(Part 1). 


8.3 General Test Descriptions 


All necessary variables shall be recorded throughout 
the maneuver. Data shall be taken for both clockwise 
and anti-clockwise steering turns. 


For tests utilizing discrete increments of speed, radius 
or steering-wheel angle, all of the test data may be 
taken in one turn direction followed by all the data in 
the other turn direction as experience has shown that 
this minimizes data scatter. However, to obtain more 
even tyre wear and reduced tyre heating, data may be 
taken in alternating turn directions at each test speed/ 
radius/steering wheel angle. 


The method chosen shall be noted in the section 
for test method specific data on the test report for 
test conditions Annex B of 17128 (Part 1). At a 
minimum; data shall be taken at increments of lateral 
acceleration no larger than 1 m/s?. Increments may 
be reduced at higher level of acceleration based on 
vehicle stability. 


Caution should be exercised during testing so, that tyre 
heating is minimized as much as possible. Tyre heating 
is a particular concern for test methods using continuous 
increase of speed with attendant long periods of data 
acquisition and all test methods at high levels of lateral 
acceleration. The tyres should be cooled to normal 
operating temperatures between test runs. 
NOTE — Where data vary rapidly with changes in lateral 
acceleration, it can be useful to decrease the speed or radius 
or steering wheel angle change. The test should be repeated 
several times so that the results can be examined for 
repeatability and averaged. 


8.4 Open Loop Test — Constant Radius Test 
(Method 1) 


8.4.1 Description 


This test method requires driving the test vehicle at 
several speed over a circular path of known radius. 
The standard radius of the path shall be 100 m but 
larger and smaller radii may be used with 40 m as the 
recommended lower value and 30 m as the minimum. 


The directional control response characteristics are 
determined from data obtained while driving the 
vehicle at successively higher speeds on the constant 
radius path. This procedure can be conducted in a 
relatively small area. The procedure can be adapted to 
existing test track facilities by selecting a circle or a 
path of appropriate radius. Often a constant radius (in 
plane) road will suffice for a test facility. 


The test can be run on any level constant radius path of 
sufficient length to attain and hold onradius steady state 
for at least a measurement period. 


IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 


8.4.2 Procedure 
8.4.2.1 General 


Drive the vehicle on the chosen circular path at 
the lowest possible speed. Record data with the 
steering wheel and throttle positions fixed, so that the 
approximate ackermann steer angle can be recorded. 
Then, drive the vehicle at the next speed at which data 
are to be taken at step of 0.5 m/s? initially till vehicle 
reaches 3 m/s? and then 0.25 m/s? till vehicle is stable 
and can be controlled . 


8.4.2.2 With discrete test speeds 


Drive the vehicle onto the circle at each test speed. 
After attaining steady state in which the desired path 
radius is held within + 0.5 m the steering wheel and 
throttle positions shall be held constant for at least 3 s. 


8.5 Open Loop Test — Constant Steering-Wheel 
Angle (Method 2) 


8.5.1 Description 


This test method requires driving the test vehicle at 
several speeds with a single selected steering-wheel 
angle that is held fixed. The path radius is determined 
by computation: from horizontal velocity and yaw 
velocity, or from horizontal velocity and lateral 
acceleration. The test exists in two variations: a series 
of discrete test runs, or a single continuous test run. In 
the first, the steering-wheel angle is applied with the 
vehicle travelling at discrete speeds and is maintained 
until steady-state conditions are reached. In the second, 
the steering-wheel angle is held fixed while speed is 
increased continuously at a slow rate, up to the limit 
of control. The standard steering-wheel angle shall 
provide a low-speed path radius of 30 m. Other radii 
may be used, with 20 m as the minimum. For testing to 
the limit of control with the standard initial condition, 
the path radius can increase to 100 m or more. 


8.5.2 Procedure 
8.5.2.1 General 


First, drive the vehicle at the lowest possible speed 
to establish the steering-wheel angle for the selected 
low speed path radius. Then, drive the vehicle at 
successively higher speed, with the steering-wheel 
angle held constant or mechanically fixed within + 1° 
of the angle. Run the test through desired range of 
lateral acceleration or until the limits of test space, 
vehicle speed, or vehicle stability are reached. 


8.5.2.2 With discrete test speeds 


At each selected speed the steering wheel shall be 
turned to the preselected steering-wheel angle and 
maintained until steady-state conditions including speed 
and throttle are attained. The steering-wheel angle and 
throttle position shall be held constant for at least 3 s. 


IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 


8.5.2.3 With continuous speed increase 


The steering-wheel angle shall be held constant or 
mechanically fixed at the pre-selected angle while 
the vehicle speed is steadily increased. The rate of 
increase of lateral acceleration should be 0.1 m/s?/s. 
The maximum permissible rate of increase of lateral 
acceleration shall be 0.2 m/s?/s. 


8.6 Open Loop Test — Constant-Speed-Variable 
Radius Test (Method 3) 


8.6.1 Description 


This test method requires driving the test vehicle at one 
speed on circular paths of different radii, utilizing a 
range of steering-wheel angles. The directional-control 
response characteristics are determined from data plotted 
against lateral acceleration. This test method could 
require large test areas depending on the combination 
of speed and lateral acceleration. The discrete turn radii 
method requires a number of marked circles or circular 
segments with different radii, sufficient in number to 
provide 0.5 m/s? lateral acceleration increments at the 
selected speed. An adjustable steering stop should be 
used for maintaining constant steering-wheel angles in 
the discrete method. 


The standard test speed is 60 km/h. If higher or lower 
speeds are selected, they shall be in 10 km/h increments. 


8.6.2 Procedure 
8.6.2.1 General 


From an initial constant speed driving condition, apply 
steering inputs of successively increasing magnitude 
and hold them constant or mechanically fixed within 
+ 1° for 3 s after the measured vehicle motion variables 
reach steady state. Control the throttle in order to 
maintain constant speed within 3 percent throughout 
the test run. Run the test through desired range of 
lateral acceleration or until the limits of test space, 
vehicle speed, or vehicle stability are reached. 


8.6.2.2 With discrete turn radii 


Drive the vehicle onto the circle at the pre-selected 
speed. After attaining steady state, the steering wheel 
and throttle position shall be held constant for at 
least 3 s. 


8.7 Open Loop Test — Constant-Speed-Variable 
Steering Wheel Angle (Method 4) 


8.7.1 Description 


As mentioned in 8.6.1. 
8.7.2 Procedure 


8.7.2.1 General 
As mentioned in 8.6.2.1 


8.7.2.2 With discrete steering-wheel angles 


With the vehicle being driven at the pre-selected speed, 
apply a steering input and hold it constant for at least 
3 s after the measured vehicle motion variables reach 
steady state. Control the throttle in order to maintain 
constant speed throughout the run. 
NOTE — It is possible to use the constant speed test method 
with discrete steering-wheel angles to extract transient 
response measures comparable to those obtained from the 
step input method of IS 17128 (Part 3) , if the steering input 
is applied in accordance IS 17128 (Part 3). However, since 
IS 17128 (Part 3) requires a fixed throttle position versus the 
controlled throttle position in the constant-speed test method, 
the resulting transient response measured might not be identical 
to those obtained from IS 17128 (Part 3). 


8.8 Closed Loop Test — Constant Radius Test/ 
Variable Speed/Variable Steering Wheel Angle 
(Method 5) 


8.8.1 Description 


This test method requires driving the test vehicle on a 
circular path of known radius with varying the vehicle 
velocity. The standard radius of the path shall be 
100 m but larger and smaller radii may be used, with 
40 m as the recommended lower value and 30 m as the 
minimum. 


The directional control response characteristics are 
determined from data obtained while driving the 
vehicle on the constant-radius path with varying 
the velocity. This procedure can be conducted in a 
relatively small area. The procedure can be adapted to 
existing test track facilities by selecting a circle or a 
path of appropriate radius. Often a constant-radius (in 
plane) road will suffice for a test facility. 


In closed loop constant radius test the vehicle remains 
on the circle with a continuous, slow speed increase, 
during which data are taken. The forward longitudinal 
acceleration shall be kept constant to 0.1 m/s?. 


8.8.2 Procedure 
8.8.2.1 General 


Drive the vehicle on the desired circular path at 
the lowest possible speed. Record data with the 
steering wheel and throttle positions fixed, so that the 
approximate ackermann steer angle can be recorded. 


8.8.2.2 With continuous speed increase 


Increase the vehicle speed by forward longitudinal 
acceleration of 0.1 m/s?. The speed is increased 
till vehicle achieves its limiting velocity on the 
circular path. The data is record continuously as long 
as the vehicle remains on the desired circular path with 
the corresponding correction in the steering wheel 
angle. 


9 DATA ANALYSIS 


9.1 General 


The steady state values for all measured variables 
shall be established as their average values during 
any time interval of 1 s to 3 s during which steady 
state is maintained. For each selected time interval 
the limitations on path radius, steer angle, speed, rate 
of increase of lateral acceleration or throttle position 
specified in the description of the test procedure 
being followed shall be observed. In addition, for 
each selected time interval the standard deviation of 
lateral acceleration shall not exceed of its mean value. 
Refer to IS 17128 (Part 1) ‘General conditions for M1 
vehicles (6.2.3)’. 


9.2 Lateral Acceleration 


Theoretically steady state characteristics should be 
determined as functions of centripetal acceleration 
which is measured perpendicular to the path. 
Traditionally these characteristics have been expressed 
as functions of lateral acceleration which is measured 
perpendicular to the intermediate X-axis. At steady 
state, lateral acceleration and centripetal acceleration 
differ only by cosine of the side slip angle. In most 
cases, the vehicle side slip angle is small, so lateral 
acceleration may generally be considered to be equal 
to centripetal acceleration where large values of 
vehicle sideslip angle is observed or greater accuracy 
is desired, centripetal acceleration may be corrected to 
obtain lateral acceleration. 


Steady state centripetal acceleration may be obtained 
by any one of the following three methods: 


a) The product of yaw velocity and horizontal 
velocity: 


Ay = (dy/dt)*v, 
b) The square of the horizontal velocity divided by 


the path radius: 
Ay =v ?/R 
c) The product of the square of the yaw velocity and 
the path radius: 


Ay = (dy/dtP *R 


The method used to determine lateral acceleration shall 
be noted in the test report. 


10 DATA EVALUATION AND PRESENTATION 
OF RESULT 


10.1 General 


General data on the test vehicle shall be presented 
on a summary form using the general data test report 
contained in Annex A of IS 17128 (Part 1) .The 
general test conditions shall be presented using the test 
conditions test report contained in Annex B of IS 17128 
(Part 1). 


IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 


10.2 Plotted Results (Refer Annex A) 


Measured data shall be plotted directly against lateral 
acceleration on figures, as follows: 


a) Steering-wheel angle data points for the constant 
radius and constant speed test methods on 
Fig. A-1; 

b) Path radius data points for the constant steering- 
wheel angle test method on Fig. A-2; 


c) Side slip angle data points, if measured, on 
Fig. A-3; 

d) Vehicle roll angle data points, if measured, on 
Fig. A-4; and 

e) Steering-wheel torque data points, if measured, on 
Fig. A-5. 


Curves may be fitted to the plotted points either 
freehand or by one of the many mathematical routines 
available. The method of curve fitting should be stated. 
This is particularly recommended where the process 
involves fitting smooth curves to experimental data 
for the purpose of evaluating the gradients. The type 
of curve and the method of fitting will influence the 
results obtained. 


10.3 Evaluation of Characteristic Values 


10.3.1 General 


There are a number of ways to further process the 
data presented here. These have been developed as 
conventions over many years and each can be justified 
in its own way for example, the division of steering- 
wheel angle data by a nominal overall steering ratio. 
The following specified variables represent therefore, 
only examples for the evaluation of results, which 
describe vehicle steady-state behaviour. Any one of 
these methods may be used at the option of the user. 
If this evaluation is carried out it will be necessary 
to determine the overall steering ratio. The method 
for determining the overall steering ratio is given in 
Annex B. 


10.3.2 Evaluation of Gradients — Differentiation 
10.3.2.1 General 


A common method of further treating basic 
experimental data is to derive the gradient of the 
curve fitted to the experimental points. The values of 
gradient thereby obtained are then plotted against the 
independent variable (in this case, lateral acceleration) 
to give a response graph. 


As mentioned in 10.2 curves may be fitted to the 
experimental data either freehand or by a mathematical 
routine. If curve fitting is being done for the purpose 
of gradient evaluation, it is strongly recommended that 
the latter method be used otherwise, repeatability of 
resulting gradients cannot be guaranteed. In addition 
because each resulting curve will be described by 


IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 


a mathematical expression it can be differentiated 

mathematically to produce the gradient as a continuous 

function of lateral acceleration. 
NOTE — It has been found that the characteristics of some 
vehicles have discontinuities in slope, which are not easily 
dealt with by standard curve fitting and differentiating 
techniques. By this means the following derived gradients can 
be obtained and plotted as functions of lateral acceleration. 
The gradients are plotted against lateral acceleration using 
the convention: lateral acceleration on the abscissa, with anti- 
clockwise positive, clockwise negative and the gradients on the 
ordinate with normal sign convention. 


10.3.2.2 Steering-wheel angle gradient 


This gradient is expressed by the following equation: 


dp) / d(A,) 


The test is performed using only one steering-wheel 
angle. 


10.3.2.3 Path curvature gradient 


This gradient is expressed by the following equation: 


d(V/R) / d(A,) 
NOTE — This gradient cannot be computed from the results 


obtained using the constant-radius test method if the test is 
performed using only one turn radius. 


10.3.2.4 Sideslip angle gradient 


This gradient is expressed by the following equation: 
d(B) / d(A,) 
10.3.2.5 Vehicle roll angle gradient 


This gradient is expressed by the following equation: 
d(pv) / d(Ay) 
10.3.2.6 Steering-wheel torque gradient 


This gradient is expressed by the following equation: 
d(M,,) / d(A.) 
10.3.2.7 Steering-Wheel/Sideslip Angle Gradient 


This gradient is expressed by the following equation: 
d(6,,) / d(B) 


While, in theory the steering-wheel/sideslip angle curve 
can be produced from ratio of curves of steering wheel 
angle and sideslip angle versus lateral acceleration, this 
method is likely to lead significant errors. It is preferable 
to fit a curve directly to the steering-wheel angle versus 
sideslip angle data and to differentiate it with respect to 
sideslip angle to produce steering-wheel/sideslip angle 
gradient versus sideslip angle, and then to transform 
the latter variable into lateral acceleration by using the 
sideslip angle/lateral acceleration relationship given 
in 10.3.2.4. 


NOTES: 


1 This curve is believed by some experts to relate strongly to 
the vehicle behaviour as perceived by the driver, that is, the 


relationship between the steering-wheel input and the resulting 
vehicle sideslip angle. 


2 This gradient cannot be computed from the results obtained 
using the constant steering-wheel angle test method if the test 
is performed using only one steering-wheel angle. 


10.3.3 Normalisation of Results Comparison of Results 
from Different Vehicles 


10.3.3.1 General 


Gradients obtained by different methods at a given 
steady state equilibrium condition may differ. This 
is because different test methods control lateral 
acceleration by different variables (speed, path radius 
or steering wheel angle). Therefore, only data obtained 
by the same method and at the same speed and radius 
steady state conditions are comparable. 


10.3.3.2 Explanation 


In any general case of a vehicle making a steady state 
turn of given radius, the steer angle required will consist 
of two parts: that due to the ackermann effect, which 
is for a given radius is proportional to the wheelbase 
and that due to handling characteristics of vehicle. 
In addition, steering-wheel angle corresponding to 
required steer angle will depend on overall steering 
ratio. 


Thus, there are three quantities to be taken into account 
in the general case: 


a) Wheelbase, 
b) Overall steering ratio, and 
c) Steering-wheel angle gradient. 


The units of the steering-wheel angle gradient will be 
degree per metre per second square, and by convention 
a vehicle with zero steering-wheel angle gradient 
that is, to say one which needs no movement of its 
steering wheel when changing speed on a curve of 
constant radius is defined as a neutral steer vehicle. The 
steering-wheel angle of a neutral steer vehicle becomes 
a function only of turn radius, steering ratio and 
wheelbase. The steering-wheel angle gradient of any 
vehicle can be normalised by dividing the measured 
responses of actual vehicle by product of its wheelbase 
and steering ratio. The practical benefits of doing this 
are that the steering-wheel angle gradient of vehicles 
of widely different sizes and steering ratios can be 
compared analytically by comparing their normalized 
measured responses. 


Comparison of measurements that have not been 
normalised will not clearly show differences in 
steering-wheel angle gradient because they also 
contain the effects of differences in wheelbase and 
steering ratio. 


In this particular procedure the numerical value of the 
product of wheelbase and steering ratio is the same as 
the product of the test radius and the steering-wheel 
angle in radians, required at zero speed on that radius. 


This steering-wheel angle is the intercept of the curve in 
Fig. A-1 with the zero lateral acceleration line and thus, 
the value of the product of steering ratio and wheelbase 
can be obtained without direct measurement. 


10.3.4 Normalized Steady-State Properties 


10.3.4.1 General 


In the light of the explanation given in 10.3.3.2 it is now 
possible to define normalized steady-state properties 
that correspond to the non-normalized ones of 10.3.2. 
However, there does not appear to be any significance 
in normalized sideslip angle, roll angle or torque 
gradients and therefore only normalized equivalents of 
steering wheel/ sideslip angle gradient are described. 


10.3.4.2 Normalization with respect to steering ratio 


This technique is useful for comparing results from 
vehicles of similar wheelbase. The procedure for 
measuring steering ratio is given in Annex B. 


a) Understeer gradient: 


This gradient is determined by dividing the 
steering-wheel angle gradient by the steering ratio 
and subtracting the dynamic reference steer angle 
gradient: 


((d(8,) / d(A,)) / @)) = (d&n) / d(A,)) 


In a constant-radius test (see 8.4), the dynamic 
reference steer angle gradient is zero, so the 


IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 


equation can be written as: 


(d(8,) / d(A,)) / à.) 


Whereas, in a constant steering-wheel angle test 
(see 8.5), the steering-wheel angle gradient is not 
defined, and understeer can be found most directly 
from the path curvature gradient (see 10.3.2.3) 
as the product of the wheelbase and the path 
curvature gradient: 


1 * (d(1/R)/ d(A,)) 
b) Understeer/sideslip gradient: 
This gradient is determined by dividing 
the  steering-wheel/sideslip angle gradient 


(see 10.3.2.7), by the steering ratio: 
(aè ,) / d(B)) * (1/1) 


10.3.4.3 Normalization with respect to wheelbase — 
Stability factor 


This technique yields response values that can be used 
to compare vehicles of widely different sizes. The 
stability factor is determined by dividing the understeer 
gradient by the wheelbase. 


10.3.4.4 Normalization with respect to sideslip angle 
gradient — Directional coefficient 


The directional coefficient is determined by dividing 
the stability factor by the sideslip angle gradient. 


IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 


ANNEXA 


( Normative ) 
PRESENTATION OF RESULTS 


A-1 The characteristic values ofthe vehicle dynamic reaction shall be presented as functions of steady-state lateral 
acceleration in accordance with Fig. 1 to 5. 


150 


-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 B 6 8 10 
Ay 


bn ER 
Turn radiis (constant-radius test method): ....... cen eter nette ertet ER vehe ERR 
Testispeed: (constant-speed test method): ...i eret D ertet Ir Ern ER Po et Poen ce 


Key 

Ay - lateral acceleration, m/s? 

9, - steering-wheel angle, degrees 
RIGHT - right turn 

LEFT - left turn 


Fic. 1 STEERING- WHEEL ANGLE CHARACTERISTIC 


IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 


bue —————————————— 
Steering-wheel angle (constant steering-wheel angle test method): .................... ss 


Key 

Ay - lateral acceleration, m/s? 
R - path radius, m 

RIGHT - right turn 

LEFT - left turn 


Fic. 2 PATH RADIUS CHARACTERISTIC 


IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 


bu —————————————— 
Turn:radius (constant-radius test method): .......... tret tpe thee rete e Re rete tpe enira 


Steering-wheel angle (constant steering-wheel angle test method): ....................... sse 
Testispeed:(constant-speed test method): .......... ret rero borea RENERE NENESE 


Key 

Ay - lateral acceleration, m/s? 
p - sideslip angle, degrees 
RIGHT - right turn 

LEFT - left turn 


Fic. 3 SIDESLIP ANGLE CHARACTERISTIC 


10 


IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 


pu c —————————————— ÉPRP— 
Turn radius (constant-radius test method): i... ecce tirintrt rhe ssi ranteen eas AS SKEN A VA EEE SEEI ENS 


Steering-wheel angle (constant steering-wheel angle test method): ........................ sse 


Test speed (constant-speed test method): ................ sse nnne enne 


Key 

Ay - lateral acceleration, m/s? 
, - vehicle roll angle, degrees 
RIGHT - right turn 

LEFT - left turn 


Fic. 4 VEHICLE RoLL ANGLE CHARACTERISTIC 


11 


IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 


Vehicle v —Ó—Ó—MM—M 
Turn radiis (constant-radius test method): ......... 2: etie rr etre dite tre rH Ree PE ERE ERR rara TÉ 


Steering-wheel angle (constant steering-wheel angle test method): ................... sse 
Test speed (constant-speed test method): ..... 4... cie ete ier prete pe ie ae rever HE rie eio 


Key 

Ay - lateral acceleration, m/s? 
M, steering-wheel torque, Nm 
RIGHT - right turn 

LEFT - left turn 


Fic. 5 SrEERING- WuEgEL TORQUE CHARACTERISTIC 


12 


IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 


ANNEX B 


( Normative ) 


DETERMINATION OF OVERALL (STATIC) STEERING RATIO 


B-1 STEERING SYSTEMS 


Understeer gradients are stated in terms of the 
difference in cornering compliances between the 
front and rear road-wheel ‘axles’. However, cornering 
compliances include deflections of the steering system 
due to elastic deformations. In order to include steering- 
system compliances, understeer is determined from 
measurements taken at the steering wheel. Steering- 
wheel angles are referred to the road wheels by the 
overall steering ratio. 


Overall steering ratio is a variable which describes 
the geometric relationship between steering-wheel 
angle and average road-wheel angle, measured under 
conditions of zero aligning moment and lateral force. 
If the steering system is significantly non-linear, each 
measured steering-wheel angle must be used together 
with a plot of average road-wheel angle versus 
steering-wheel angle to obtain the corresponding road- 
wheel steer angle. Steer angle gradients are obtained 
from a plot of road-wheel steer angle versus lateral 
acceleration. 


B-2 VEHICLES WITH FOUR-WHEEL 
STEERING 
Current four-wheel steering systems can be 


divided into three general types: rear steer having a 
programmed relationship to steering-wheel angle; rear 
steer programmed according to lateral acceleration; 
and rear/front steer ratio programmed according to 
speed or other, more complex, relationships. The first 
type creates a combined net-effect front/rear steering 


13 


ratio, which is in general non-linear. The second type 
can be treated as only an additional source of (usually 
negative) rear wheel compliance steer. However, the 
third type must be considered as a separate control 
input. For steady-state testing of this third type of 
vehicle it could be necessary to disable the rear steering 
so as to measure basic response parameters, then by 
additional testing with rear steer enabled, determine 
the rear-steer control algorithm, and measure its effect 
on steady-state response parameters. Alternatively, 
tests of vehicles with systems of the third type may be 
conducted by holding the state that affects the rear steer 
ratio constant during the test. For example, vehicles 
with a speed-varying rear steer ratio may be tested 
using the constant-speed test method. Repeat tests 
at several different speeds would define the vehicle 
characteristics at different operating conditions. 


B-3 MEASUREMENT 


The overall steering ratio shall be determined for each 
vehicle test configuration over the range of steering 
wheel angles used during the test. 


The overall steering ratio will not, in general, represent 
the dynamic situation because of additional steering 
system deflections caused by compliance and geometric 
effects. It is, however, suitable for removing the effect 
of different steering-system lever and gear ratios from 
comparisons of measurements from different vehicles. 


The compliance and geometric effects referred to above 
are then quite properly regarded as part of the vehicle 
handling characteristics. 


IS 17128 (Part 2) : 2019 


ANNEX C 


( Informative ) 


GENERAL INFORMATION — THEORETICAL BASIS FOR 
THE TEST METHODS 


C-1 The path curvature of an automobile in steady- 
state turning at a given speed ( that is, in a given state 
of steady-state equilibrium) is determined by speed, 
steering-wheel angle, wheelbase, and the elastic and 
kinematic characteristics of the front and rear steering 
systems, suspensions and tyres. 


In the absence of kinematic and compliance steer 
effects; for example, at very low speeds, the low-speed 
path radius is defined geometrically by wheelbase and 
by front- and rear-wheel steer angles. At increasing 
speed, steady-state turning results in centrifugal force, 
which produces kinematic and compliance steer and 
camber. When expressed in degrees per meter per 
second squared of lateral acceleration and lumped 
together, these “cornering compliances" produce steer 
angles and tyre slip angles in front and rear that modify 
the low speed path radius. Cornering compliances 
subtract from the front and rear Ackermann steer 
angles. Cornering compliances greater in the front than 
in the rear increase path radius from the Ackermann 
condition, and produce under steer; while cornering 


14 


compliances greater in the rear than in the front reduce 
path radius, causing over steer. The difference between 
the total front and rear cornering compliance is called 
the under steer gradient, expressed in degrees per meter 
per second squared. Similarly, the change in steering- 
wheel angle required to maintain a given radius with 
increasing lateral acceleration is called steering-wheel 
angle gradient, the change in roll angle with lateral 
acceleration is called roll angle gradient, etc. 


The test procedures specified by this International 
Standard are designed to be used to measure these 
various vehicle steady-state properties. The sensitivities 
of the vehicle's responses to steering wheel inputs are 
called yaw velocity gain (degree per second per degree 
of steering-wheel movement), lateral acceleration gain 
(meters per second squared per degree of steering-wheel 
motion), sideslip gain, etc. These can be calculated 
from the vehicle speed, steering wheel angle, steering 
ratio, wheelbase and under steer gradient, or they can 
be obtained directly from measured data. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 04 (12576). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


