INRI AAF IS 17377 (Part 2) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


aare — mrha ANA Tatra 
( TA aft ft) UNTER RA STET 
qt 2 Ware aare aca ch 3THTSRUT ay 


una SIÍSRTET aa A Al maeh ferfer — 
Uem Wes (vad) 


Textiles — Nuclear Biological 
Chemical ( NBC ) Permeable 
Protective Clothing 


Part 2 Quantitative Method of Determining Permeation 
Resistance on Exposure to Chemical Warfare Agent — 
Sulfur Mustard ( HD ) 


ICS 13.340.10 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH HM, 4 fereft— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2020 Price Group 5 


Textiles Protective Clothing Sectional Committee, TXD 32 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Textiles 
Protective Clothing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Among the Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD), Chemical Warfare Agents (CWAs) are probably one of the 
most brutal created by mankind. CWAs are extremely toxic synthetic chemicals that can be dispersed as a liquid, 
gas, vapour or aerosol. These CWAs have either lethal or incapacitating effects on humans. Thousands of toxic 
substances are known, but only some of them are considered as CWAs based on their characteristics, namely, 
high toxicity, imperceptibility to senses, rapidity of action after dissemination, persistency are listed as scheduled 
chemicals in the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). The CWAs possess different characteristics and belong 
to various classes of compounds with pronounced physicochemical properties. Thus, they are classified in many 
ways. Based on their volatility, they are classified as persistent, semi-persistent and non-persistent agents. Agents 
like phosgene, hydrogen cyanide, sarin, soman, cyclo sarin and tabun are non-persistent agents whereas the less 
volatile agents like sulfur mustard (HD) and VX are persistent agents. Based on their chemical structure, they can 
be classified as organophosphorus (OP), organosulfur, organofluorine and arsenicals. In general, classifications 
in terms of physiological effects produced on humans by the CWAs have been used for many decades. Thus, the 
CWAs used in warfare are classified as follows: 


a) Nerve agents, 
b) Vesicants (blistering agents), 
c 


— 


Blood agents (cyanogenic agents), 

d) Choking agents (pulmonary agents), 

e) Riot-control agents (tear gases), 

f) Psychomimetic agents, and 

g) Toxins. 
Defence Research and Development Establishment (DRDE) is the nodal laboratory of DRDO working on the 
various aspects of detection, protection and decontamination technologies against chemical and biological 
warfare agents. It has Organization for Prohibition of Chemical Weapon (OPCW) declared Schedule 1 facility to 
synthesize and use CWAs for R and D activities, therefore DRDE has the mandate to establish test and evaluation 
facilities for the chemical-biological threat mitigation technologies. In this context, a facility to evaluate the 
materials used in protective gears for the permeation of CWAs has been established at DRDE, Gwalior. The 
facility and the standard would be beneficial to the R and D organizations and industries for the comparison and 
suitability of materials to be used in various protection technologies depending upon their specific requirements. 
Performance evaluation of protective clothing is carried out by assessment of the performance in the simulated 
test environment which is created by CWAs in liquid/vapour form. In case of liquid/vapour challenge under 
laboratory conditions, the test environment is created by release of definite concentration of a particular agent 
under specified temperature and humidity conditions. The outcome of the testing will ensure the performance 
evaluation of permeable protective clothing. 
This Indian standard covers the quantitative tests of permeable protective clothing against sulfur mustard (HD) in 
liquid and vapour form. 


In the formulation of this standard, technical assistance has been derived from the following standards/publications: 
UK/SC/3346G — Requirements for a non-woven cloth coated on one side with activated charcoal. 
MIL-DTL-32102 — Joint service lightweight integrated suit technology (JSLIST) coat and trouser, chemical 
protective clothing 
Test Operations Procedures (TOP) 08-02-501 — Permeation testing of materials with chemical agents or 
simulants (swatch testing) 

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 

In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 


calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 17377 (Part 2) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


TEXTILES — NUCLEAR BIOLOGICAL 
CHEMICAL ( NBC ) PERMEABLE 


PROTECTIVE CLOTHING 
PART 2 QUANTITATIVE METHOD OF DETERMINING PERMEATION 
RESISTANCE ON EXPOSURE TO CHEMICAL WARFARE AGENT — 
SULFUR MUSTARD (HD) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 2) covers the detailed procedures 
for test and evaluation of permeable chemical protective 
clothing against sulfur mustard (HD). 


1.2 This standard specifies a quantitative test to 
determine liquid/vapour permeation of chemical 
warfare agent (CWA) challenge and vapour/vapour 
permeation of liquid CWA challenge through a swatch. 


1.3 It specifies the method to determine the permeation 
resistance of the permeable protective clothing against 
HD. 


1.4 Test swatch samples shall be taken from protective 
clothing that is new, stored or in use. 


1.5 This standard does not cover any information 
regarding toxic industrial chemicals (TICs) and toxic 
industrial materials (TIMs). 


1.6 The definitions in this standard shall apply only to 
this specification and shall be the determining factor(s) 
when interpreting any word or combination(s) of words. 


1.7 This standard does not cover all the associated 
safety concerns for handling and testing of protective 
clothing against toxic CWA. It is the responsibility 
of the user to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices to determine the applicability of regulatory 
limitations prior to use. 


1.8 Nothing in this standard prevents to have higher 
level of protection for handling of CWAs. 


1.9 These tests shall not only be taken as measure of 
the protection time given by the tested material under 
actual used conditions. 


1.10 This standard alone is not sufficient to assess the 
ability of whole ensembles made from tested materials 
to protect the wearer. These procedures are designed 
to be used as part of an overall assessment program, 
evaluating the material performance, manufacturing, 
and integration with other pieces of the protective 
clothing. 


1.11 Results obtained by using mentioned procedures 
may be compared with results from the standard 
reference materials tested during the same or a previous 
experiment to statistically compare the agent resistance 
of the materials. Additionally, a standard reference 
material shall be used as one of the tested samples in a 
given swatch test. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard listed below contains provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
6359 : 1971 Method for conditioning of textiles 
3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Adsorption — A process in which molecules are 
concentrated on a surface by chemical or physical 
forces, or both. 


3.2 Breakthrough — A mass or concentration of a 
challenge contaminant found on the initially. clean 
side of a contaminated test swatch, indicating that the 
contaminant has permeated or penetrated the material 
being tested. 

NOTE — Breakthrough threshold levels are defined for each 


test program and shall be specified as needed in the test plan or 
other test planning documents. 


3.3 Breakthrough Time — It is the time interval in 
minutes between placement of HD on the test swatch 
sample and the first indication of appearance of blue 
dot on congo red paper (detector paper). 


IS 17377 (Part 2) : 2020 


3.4 Challenge — The chemical agent or agent simulant 
(or other chemical compound) that is placed on one 
side of a test swatch. The challenge can be in liquid or 
vapour form. The challenge concentration is expressed 
in units of g/m? for liquid or mg/m? for vapour. 


3.5 Chemical Warfare Agents (CWAs) — CWA is a 
chemical substance whose toxic properties are used to 
kill, injure or incapacitate human beings. 


3.6 Decontamination — The process of 
making any person, object, or area safe by 
adsorbing, destroying, neutralizing, making harmless 
or removing toxic chemicals to or around it. 


3.7 Penetration — The flow of a chemical through 
closures, pores, seams, pinholes, or imperfections in a 
protective clothing material on a non-molecular level. 


3.8 Permeation — The process by which a chemical 
moves through a protective clothing material on a 
molecular level. Permeation involves the following: 


a) sorption of molecules of the chemical into the 
contacted surface (usually the outside) of a 
material, 


b) diffusion of the sorbed molecules among the 
material molecules, and 


c) desorption of the molecules from the non- 
contacted surface (usually the inside) of the 
material into the collecting medium. 


3.9 Sulfur Mustard (HD) — A chemical warfare agent 
belongs to the class of blister agent (vesicant), that 
causes severe burns on exposure to the skin, eyes and 
respiratory tract. 


3.10 Swatch — A small sample, usually taken from 
test specimen. 


3.11 Test Control Swatch — Both positive and 
negative test control swatches shall be used in each 
trial. The negative control swatch shall be a swatch 
taken from butyl rubber that is conditioned the same 
way as the test swatches. The positive control swatch 
shall have well defined permeation profile which is non 
resistant to CWAs. 


3.12 Test Specimen — All the layers of fabric or 
other materials arranged in the order and orientation as 
used in practice while wearing the chemical protective 
clothing. 


4 PRINCIPLE 


4.1 Liquid Challenge/Vapour Permeation (L/V) 


L/V permeation test of a HD challenge through a swatch 
sample of protective clothing is based on diffusive 
permeation. This standard specifies the use of dual 


flow test cell configuration. The process of permeation 
involves the diffusion of permeant that is HD, through 
a swatch sample for the period of 24 h. It works through 
diffusion; the HD molecules will move from high 
concentration to low concentration across the interface. 
Therefore, it is directly related to the concentration 
gradient of the permeant which is material’s intrinsic 
permeability and material’s mass diffusivity. Only 
molecules or ions with certain properties shall be 
able to diffuse across protective clothing. It measures 
the penetration of HD through protective clothing at 
27 + 2°C temperature, 80 + 5 percent relative humidity 
and at ambient pressure. 


4.2 Vapour Challenge/Vapour Penetration (V/V) 


V/V permeation test of a HD challenge through a 
swatch sample of protective clothing is also based on 
convective penetration of HD vapour challenge for 
the period of 6 h. This standard specifies the use of 
convective flow test cell configuration. The process 
of permeation involves the diffusion of permeant HD, 
through a swatch sample of protective clothing. 


5 CHEMICALS AND TEST SET UP 


5.1 Liquid Challenge/Vapour Permeation (L/V) 


5.1.1 Chemicals 
a) HD >99 percent purity (purity shall be determined 
with 'H-NMR) 
b) XAD-2, Surface area — 300 m?/g, Mesh size — 
20 to 60, pore volume — 0.65 ml/g 
c) Ethyl acetate (HPLC grade). 


d) 2-Chloroethyl phenyl sulphide, (2 98 percent 
purity) or appropriate chromatographic internal 
standard. 


5.1.2 Test Set Up 
Liquid challenge test set up consists of the following 
components as shown in Fig. 1. 


a) Permeation chamber as shown in Fig. 2 A (sealed 
view) and 2 B (exploded view); 


b) Rotameter/mass flow controller; 
c) Adsorbent tube; 
d) Vacuum pump; and 
e) Gas chromatograph (GC) equipped with FPD/GC- 
MS. 
5.2 Vapour Challenge/Vapour Penetration (V/V) 


5.2.1 Chemicals 


a) HD >99 percent purity (purity shall be checked 
through 'H-NMR), 

b) XAD-2, surface area — 300 m?/g, mesh size — 
20-60, pore volume — 0.65 ml/g, 


IS 17377 (Part 2) : 2020 


Flow Meter 


Scrubber 


Adsorbent 
Material 


Larbon Bed 
Upper Cup 


Lower Cup 


Fic. 2 SEALED AND EXPLODED VIEWS OF PERMEATION CHAMBER OF LIQUID 
CHALLENGE/V APOUR PENETRATION (L/V) TEST 


IS 17377 (Part 2) : 2020 


c) Ethyl acetate (HPLC grade), and 

d) 2-Chloroethyl phenyl sulphide, (2 98 percent 
purity) or appropriate chromatographic internal 
standard 


5.2.2 Test Set Up 


The test set up for generation of HD vapours is 
comprised of the following components as shown in 
Fig. 3. 

a) Silica gel and activated carbon filter; 

b) Gas injection unit including calibrated syringe, 
calibrated syringe pump, agent vapourization 
interface and heater rod with control unit; 

Gas dilution unit with calibrated mass flow 
controllers/flow meters, humidifying and dilution 
units and valves; 


c 


— 


d) Pressurized air source, for example an oil-less 
piston air compressor or pressurized synthetic air 
cylinder with suitable pressure reducers and air 


humidity dryers; 


wn 


e) A shut-off and pressure control valve from a 
compressed air source; and 
f) Magnetic 3-way valve. 


The vapour generation test set up is further integrated 
with the cell permeation assembly as shown in Fig. 3. 


6 SAFETY 


As HD is a chemical warfare agent so protective gears 
shall be used by the individual while handling HD. The 
test shall be performed in a fume hood. 
NOTE — These safety precautions are for information purpose 
only. The precautions are ancillary to the testing procedures 
and are not intended to be all inclusive. Good laboratory 
practices shall be followed. 


7 SAMPLING 


7.1 Liquid Challenge/Vapour Permeation (L/V) 


7.1.1 Three circular swatch samples of 55 mm diameter 
shall be cut randomly from various locations of 
subjected chemical protective clothing. 


1 Compressed Air Valve & Purification 


10 Humidifier | 


2 Silica gel and Activated carbon filter 


11 Flow meter 


3 Dilution line Rotameter (0 to 1 Ipm) 


12 Upper Cup 


4 Dilution line Rotameter (0 to 10 Ipm) 


13 Lower Cup 


5 Heating Rod and Temperature Controller 14 XAD Tube 
6 3-Way Valve 15 Vacuum pump 
7 Nent 16 Scrubber 


8 Agent and Dilution Line Mixing Piont 


17 Controller unit 


9 Syringe pump system 


Fic. 3 VAPOUR CHALLENGE/V APOUR PENETRATION TEST SET UP 


7.1.2 Ensure that the test specimens shall be free 
from folds, crease or wrinkles. Avoid the contact of 
oil, water and grease with the specimens during 
handling. 


7.1.3 The swatch samples shall be marked out. 
7.2 Vapour Challenge/Vapour Permeation (V/V) 


7.2.1 Three circular swatch samples of 35.6 mm 
diameter shall be cut randomly from various locations 
of subjected chemical protective clothing. 


7.2.2 Ensure that the test specimens shall be free 
from folds, crease or wrinkles. Avoid the contact of 
oil, water and grease with the specimens during 
handling. 


7.2.3 The swatch samples shall be marked out. 
7.3 Number of Swatch Samples 


A minimum of three swatch samples shall be tested 
for each test material other than one positive control 
sample and negative control sample. Each test shall 
have two sets of control swatches, positive and 
negative. Positive control swatch sample shall have 
well defined permeation profile which is non resistant 
to CWAs. Negative control swatch shall be taken from 
butyl rubber. 


8 CONDITIONING 
PARAMETERS 


AND TESTING 


8.1 Conditioning 


Prior to testing, the specimens shall be conditioned for 
at least 24 h at a temperature of 27 + 2°C and a relative 
humidity of 65 + 5 percent (see IS 6359). 


8.2 Testing Parameters 


8.2.1 Liquid Challenge/Vapour Permeation (L/V) 


SI Parameters Specified Value 
No. 
1) Challenge concentration 10 mg at 10 cm? 
of HD area to achieve 
contamination 
density of 10 g/m? 
ii) Allowed penetration <4 ug/cm? 


ii) Air flow in upper 0.25 litre/min 
chamber 

iv) Air flow in lower 0.30 litre/min 
chamber 


v) Relative humidity 80 + 5 percent 
24h 


27+2°C 


vi) Test duration 


vii) Temperature 


IS 17377 (Part 2) : 2020 


8.2.2 Vapour Challenge/Vapour Permeation (V/V) 


Sl Parameters Specified Value 
No. 
i) Challenge concentration 20 mg/m? at 10 cm? 
of HD area 
ii) Allowed penetration < 500 mg min/m? 
iil) Test duration 6h 
iv) Airspeed 1.6 cm/s to the 


perpendicular of 


fabric surface 
v) Relative humidity 80 + 5 percent 


21 E2°C 


vi) Temperature 


9 TEST PROCEDURE 


9.1 Liquid Challenge/Vapour Permeation (L/V) 


9.1.1 It shall be ensured that liquid challenge test set up 
is kept in fume hood. 


9.1.2 Out of 6 adsorbent tube, fill 3 adsorbent tube 
with XAD-2 in two bed system, one bed shall be larger 
which is required for analysis and a small bed to see 
the saturation analysis of HD. Plug both the end of 
adsorbent tube using glass wool. 


9.1.3 Open the upper half part of all 3 permeation 
chamber using opener. 


9.1.4 Place 50 um polyethylene film in lower part of all 
3 permeation chamber containing swatch sample base 
followed by conditioned test specimen of permeable 
protective clothing in such a way that the outer fabric 
always faces upward. 


9.1.5 After placing swatch sample, drop 18.7 uL of HD 
agent using calibrated micro syringe on the exposed 
sample of 23.74 cm? area in such a way that 18 droplets 
of HD, each of size approximately 1 uL uniformly 
distributes on swatch sample. This system provides a 
10 g/m? contamination density. 


NOTES: 


1 After placing the HD, micro syringe shall be washed with 
dichloromethane or other organic solvent. 


2 One negative control sample and one positive control sample 
shall be tested in the similar manner as carried out for the 
actual sample. 


9.1.6 Close the upper half part of all 3 permeation 
chamber and tighten the chamber. 


9.1.7 Fix the filled adsorbent tubes in lower cup and 
empty adsorbent tubes at upper cups. 


9.1.8 Switch on the electrical power supply and start 
the vacuum pump. 


IS 17377 (Part 2) : 2020 


9.1.9 Keep upper and lower rotameters at a flow rate 
of 0.25 and 0.30 litre/min, respectively. Maintain the 
relative humidity of 80 + 5 percent through water 
bubbler. 


9.1.10 Run the test setup for a period of 24 h. 


9.1.11 After 24 h, remove only the lower adsorbent tube 
from each of the permeation chamber. 


9.1.12 Take out the XAD-2 from lower adsorbent 
tube carefully and extract HD in 1 ml of ethyl acetate 
through vortexing (vortexing at least for 5 min). Repeat 
the same procedure for remaining other two lower 
adsorbent tubes. 


9.1.13 Simultaneously start GC. 


9.1.14. Make a known concentration range of HD 
in order to make standard calibration plot. Add an 
appropriate chromatographic internal standard of 
known concentration [2-chloroethyl phenyl sulphide 
(CEPS)] in each known concentration of HD in order 
to avoid human/manual error. 


9.1.15 Inject HD solutions with chromatographic 
internal standard of known concentrations (one sample 
shall be injected 3 to 4 times in order to get reproducible 
results) into GC, note down the ratio of peak area of 
HD and chromatographic standard for every injection 
and take average for each of the concentrations. Plot 
standard calibration curve using ratio of average peak 
area of different concentrations against concentration 


in ug/ppm. 


9.1.16 Now inject the extracted test sample spiked with 
chromatographic standard of known concentration, one 
sample shall be injected 3 to 4 times in order to get 
reproducible results into GC, note down the ratio of 
peak area for. every injection and take average for each 
of the concentrations and determine concentration of 
per HD using standard calibration plot. 


9.1.17 Report the result in ug/cm?/24 h. 


9.1.18 Report the results for individual swatch 
sample. 


NOTE — Do not average the results of the specimens. 


9.2 Vapour Challenge/Vapour Penetration (V/V) 


9.2.1 It shall be ensured that vapour challenge test set 
up is kept in fume hood. 


9.2.2 Fill adsorbent tube with XAD-2 in two bed system, 
one shall be larger which is required for analysis and a 
small bed to see the saturation analysis of HD in first 
bed. Plug both the end of adsorbent tube using glass 
wool. 


9.2.3 Open the upper half part of permeation chamber 
using opener and place the 50 um polyethylene film 
in lower part of permeation chamber followed by 
conditioned test specimen in such a way that the outer 
fabric always faces upward for permeable protective 
clothing. 


9.2.4 The challenge concentration of HD vapours 
that is 20 mg/m? shall be generated by syringe 
drive vapour generated system. It is operated by using 
compressed and purified/pre-filtered air which is 
divided into two parts that is HD agent and dilution 
lines. The compressed air line pressure is controlled 
with the air filtration unit's (or pressurized air cylinder) 
pressure control valve. 


9.2.5 HD agent is injected slowly from the syringe into 
the agent vapourization interface. The syringe is pushed 
through the glass joint into a thin capillary tube inside 
the interface, where it evapourates from the tip of the 
needle into the compressed air flow coming through 
HD line flow rotameter. 


9.2.6 The air speed shall be kept 1.6 cm/s to the 
perpendicular of fabric surface and the temperature 
and relative humidity shall be kept at 27 + 2°C and 
80 +5 percent respectively. Swatch shall be continuously 
exposed up to 6 h at given challenge concentration. 


9.2.7 The amount of penetrated HD shall be collected 
through XAD-2 sorbent tube by using air sampling 


pump. 


9.2.8 At the end of the test, multiple point 
chromatographic internal standard method shall be 
used to quantify and validate 20 mg/m? concentration 
of HD in XAD-2. 


9.2.9 The challenge concentration of HD shall be 
checked in between in order to quantify and validate 
the require concentration of 20 mg/m’. 


9.2.10 The challenge concentration (mg min/m?) 
as reported shall be calculated by dividing the 
penetrated amount of agent (after test duration) by 
the flow in ml/min. 


10 DECONTAMINATION 


After execution of the test, all the material shall be 
decontaminated as per the following procedure: 


10.1 One container/bucket (20 litre capacity) with 
lid, filled with freshly prepared 10-12 percent sodium 
hypochlorite solution or any suitable decontaminant 
shall be kept in the fuming hood. 


10.2 After completion of the experiment, all used 
glasswares, tubes, joints, tubing, parafilms, swatch 


tested samples and SS chambers shall be put in the 
bucket of decontamination solution and left for 24 hin 
the fume hood. 


10.3 After 24 h, 50 ml solution from the bucket shall 
be taken and extracted 3 times with 20 ml chloroform 
and combined extracts (60 ml) shall be concentrated up 
to 0.5 ml. 


10.4 This concentrated extract shall be analyzed by 
GC (Gas Chromatography) to ensure the complete 
degradation of HD. 


10.5 If the results of GC showed the incomplete 
decontamination, then again fresh solution of sodium 
hypochlorite shall be added in the bucket. 


10.6 It shall be continued till the GC shows complete 
decontamination ofthe HD. 


10.7 Finally the decontaminated swatch samples of 


IS 17377 (Part 2) : 2020 


11 TEST REPORT 


The testreport shall contain the particulars as mentioned 
below: 


a) Name of the test laboratory; 
b) Date; 
c) Reference letter; 


d) Equipment under evaluation with serial number/ 
identification; 


e) Test standard; 

f) Test conditions; 

g) Report prepared by, reviewed by and approved by; 
h) Test witnessed by; 

j) Period of testing ; 

k) Number of pages; and 
m) Test result format for liquid challenge/vapour 


f à permeation and vapour  challenge/vapour 
chemical protective clothing shall be removed from permeation is given in Table 1. 
the decontamination solution and further incinerated. 
Table 1 Test Result Format 
( Clause 11 ) 
SI Sample Code Test HD Permeation in 24 h Remarks 
No; Specified Observed 
(ug/cm’) 
Liquid Challenge / | Maximum allowed permeation 
Vapour Permeation <4 ug /cm’) 
(L/V) 
SI Sample Code Test HD Penetration in 6 h Remarks 
No; Specified Observed 


(mg min/m*) 


Vapour Challenge/Vapour 
Penetration (V/V) 


Maximum allowed penetration 
< 500 mg min/m? 


IS 17377 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Textiles Protective Clothing Sectional Committee, TXD 32 


Organization 


Northern India Textile Research Association, Ghaziabad 


E.I. DU Pont India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Aeronav Industrial Safety Appliances, Noida 
Arvind Limited, Gandhinagar 


Border Security Force, New Delhi 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 


Central Reserve Police Force, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire Explosive and Environment Safety, 
New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Defence Bioengineering & Electromedical Laboratory, 
Bengaluru 


Defence Institute of Physiology & Allied Sciences 
(DIPAS), DRDO , Delhi 


Defence Materials and Stores Research & Development 
Establishment, Kanpur 


Delhi Fire Service, New Delhi 


Department of Jute & Fibre Technology, Institute of Jute 
Technology, Kolkata 


Directorate General Fire Services, Civil Defence & Home 
Guards, Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 


DSM Dyneema Limited, Mumbai 


Fire Retardant Association of India, New Delhi 


Foremost Technico Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dr AniNDAM Basu (Chairman) 
Dn M. S. Parmar (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ JHAVER 
SHRIMATI VEDIKA KAPooR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP HORA 


SHRI SATYAPRIYA DASH 
Surt RAHUL Dev Mat (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH CHANDRA 
Suet TARUN Ravi (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. CHATURVEDI 
SHRI RAVINDRA KUMAR MEEL (Alternate) 


SHRI RANDHIR KUMAR JHA 
SHRI PARTHA S. Sanu (Alternate) 


Dn R. P. SINGH 
SHRI MAHIPAL MEENA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUVENDU MAHAPATRA 


Dr T. M. KOTRESH 
Dr Vinotu. P (Alternate) 


Suri M. PAL 
SHRI T. CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


Dr ANURAG SRIVASTAVA 
Dn K. K. Gupta (Alternate I) 
SHRI A. S. PARIHAR (Alternate IT) 


SHRI ATUL GARG 
Suni VIPIN KENTAL (Alternate) 


Pnor (Dr) A. K. SAMANTA 
Pror D. Das (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. SHAMI 


SHRI MAHENDRA SINGH 
Suri P. DE (Alternate) 


SHRI HARSH WARDHAN SHARMA 
SHRI RAKESH GAIKWAD (Alternate) 


Suri P. V. MURALI MOHAN 


SHRI VINAY KHANNA 
SHRI PRAKASH KHANNA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


IS 17377 (Part 2) : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 


Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai DR Anup RAKSHIT 
SHRI BASANT Lonia (Alternate) 


Intertek India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram SHRI HEMANT PARAB 
SHRI SUNDAR KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Indo-Tibetan Border Police, New Delhi SHRI PRAKASH DANGWAL 
SHRI RAHUL (Alternate) 


JCT Limited, Phagwara Suri K. S. DHILLON 
SHRI ARWINDER SINGH (Alternate) 
Kusumgar Corporates Pvt Ltd, Mumbai SHRI YOGESH K. KUSUMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 
Star Wire (India) Ltd , Faridabad REPRESENTATIVE 
MIDHANI, Hyderabad CoL ASHWANI KUMAR 
MKU Ltd, Kanpur SHRI VAIBHAV GUPTA 
Suni Raj Par (Alternate) 
NBC Eqpt Wing, Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune Suri B. G. SHINDE 
Lt Cor R. S. JHINKWAN (Alternate) 
NSG, New Delhi Suni PREM VisHWAS 
Occupational Safety, Health and Chemical Hazard MEMBER SECRETARY 
Committee (CHD 08), Bureau of Indian Standards, 
New Delhi 
Ordnance Clothing Factory, Avadi SHRI V MATHIVANAN 


SHRI SHANMUGAM B. (Alternate) 


Office of Textile Commissioner, Mumbai SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
SHRI SANJAY CHARAK (Alternate) 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate, Noida SHRI DEVENDRA M. MAHAJAN 

SHRI HARENDRA Y ADAV (Alternate) 
RDSO, Lucknow REPRESENTATIVE 
Reliance Industries Limited, New Delhi SHRI M. S. VERMA 

SHRI VuAY GARG (Alternate) 
SGS India Pvt. Ltd, Chennai SHRIMATI ANITHA JEYARAJ 

DR KARTHIKEYAN K. (Alternate) 
SMPP Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI ASHISH KANSAL 


Dn S. C. Kansat (Alternate) 


System 5S Private Limited, Chennai SHRI SUDHIR TAKKER 
SHRIMATI BHAVNA SR TAKKAR (Alternate) 


TATA Advanced Materials Limited, Bengaluru SHRI NARESH CHANDRA SHARMA 
SHRI BASAVARAJ ANGADI (Alternate) 


Terminal Ballistics Research Laboratory, Chandigarh SHRIMATI Ipsita BISWAS 
Dr DEBARATI BHATTACHARJEE (Alternate) 


Teijin India Private Limited, Gurugram SHRI PRIYARPAN SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI Ravi Kumar (Alternate) 


IS 17377 (Part 2) : 2020 


Organization 


Tex Corporation Limited, Gurugram 
Textiles Committee, New Delhi 


TUV Rheinland India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
In Personal Capacity 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Suni Vay TOLEY 
SHRI SANJAY AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PARVEJ AHMED 
Suri V. K. R. Macuirasu (Alternate) 


SHRI CHARAN SINGH 
Dr V. K. KOTHARI 


SHRI A. K. BERA, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 
SHRI J. K. GUPTA 
Scientist ‘D’ (TXD), BIS 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 32 (14499). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


