did HATAR IS 14518 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


udiciesetss — gen diear 


(TECH TAU ) 


Acetaldehyde — Code of Safety 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 71.080.80; 13.300 


© BIS 2023 


aea AM Sat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 FETE me ste AMT, Ag Reet - 110002 
Nee” ë MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 7 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after by the draft 
finalized by the Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 


Acetaldehyde is an important intermediate in the production of acetic acid, acetic anhydride, ethyl 
acetate, peracetic acid, chloral, alkylamines, pyridines. Because of its high flammability, a complete 
knowledge and understanding of the hazards involved is an essential prerequisite to any one handling 
acetaldehyde. The elimination of accidents is vital to public interest. Accidents produce social and 
economic loss, and impair individual or group productivity. Realization of this loss has led the authorities 
to devote a good deal of attention to safety education. Apart from general precautions, some typical 
precautions are required to be taken during manufacture, storage, and handling of acetaldehyde. This 
code describes the properties of acetaldehyde and nature of hazards associated with it. The standard also 
prescribes safety measures for controlling hazards and essential information on symptoms of poisoning, 
first-aid, medical treatment, storage, handling, labelling and employee safety. This standard is intended 
to guide the users in the recognition of these hazards and in establishing safe handling procedures. 


The properties of acetaldehyde listed in 4 have been taken from literature and have been included for 
information only. Moreover, these properties pertain to pure acetaldehyde. BIS has published a separate 
standard IS 15356 : 2003 on the requirements, methods of sampling, and test for acetaldehyde intended 
for industrial purposes. 


This standard was first published in 1998. With a view to update the standard based on the experience of 
last two decades and on the currently available data the committee felt a need to revise the standard. In 
this revision general properties, safety measures for controlling hazards, and essential information on 
symptoms of asphyxiation, first-aid, medical treatment, storage, handling, labelling and employee safety 
have been incorporated. 


The various clauses of the standard have been aligned with the format being applied for all Indian 
Standards on code of safety of chemicals. 


In the preparation of this code of safety assistance have been derived from the following publications: 


a) Chemical safety data sheet SD-43, Acetaldehyde - Manufacturing Chemists Association, 
Washington; 


b) Dangerous Properties of Industrial Materials by Irving Sax VIIth Edition; and 
c) Encyclopaedia of Occupational Health and Safety, ILO, Geneva. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, is to be rounded off, it 
shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second 
revision)’. 


IS 14518 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
ACETALDEHYDE — CODE OF SAFETY 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers properties of 
acetaldehyde, the nature of hazards associated 
with it and essential information of personal 
protective equipment, storage, handling, 
labelling, transport, spillage/leakage and waste 
disposal, fire prevention and firefighting, 
training, and health monitoring and first aid. 


1.2 This code does not, however, deal with 
specifications for design of buildings, chemical 
engineering, plants, method, and ingredients 
used in the manufacture, equipment for waste 
disposal and operation control. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revisions, and 
parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of these 
standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 1260 Pictorial marking for handling 
(Part 1) : and labelling of goods: Part 1 


1973 Dangerous goods 
IS 2925 : Specification for industrial 
1984 safety helmets (second 
revision) 
IS 4155 : Glossary of terms relating to 
2023 chemical and radiation hazards 
and hazardous chemicals (first 
revision) 
IS 4167 : Glossary of items relating to air 
2020 pollution (second revision). 
IS 5572 : Classification of hazardous 
2009 areas (other than mines) having 


flammable gases and vapours 
for electrical installation (third 


revision) 
IS 8519 : Guide for selection of 
1977 industrial safety eguipment for 


body protection 


IS No. Title 


IS 8520 : Guide for selection of 
1977 industrial safety eguipment for 
eye, face and ear protection 


IS 8807 : Guide for selection of 
1978 industrial safety eguipment for 
protection of arms and hands 


IS 10667: Guide for selection of 
1983 industrial safety eguipment for 
protection of foot and leg 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions 
given in IS 4155 and IS 4167 shall apply. 


4 PROPERTIES 
4.1 General Information 


Colourless liquid with irritant and pungent 
fruity odour. Its vapours are irritating to the 
mucous membranes and can be especially 
dangerous to the eyes. It is a highly flammable 
chemical. Since it oxidises, reduces, and 
polymerizes readily, it forms a variety of 
compounds. Some of these are dangerous. 


4.1.1 Chemical Name — Acetaldehyde 


4.1.2 Common Name and Synonyms — Ethanal, 
Acetaldehyde, Ethyl Aldehyde 


4.1.3 Uses 


Traditionally, acetaldehyde was mainly used as 
a precursor to acetic acid. This application has 
declined because acetic acid is produced more 
efficiently from methanol by the Monsanto 
and Cativa processes. Acetaldehyde is an 
important precursor to pyridine derivatives, 
pentaerythritol, and crotonaldehyde. Urea and 
acetaldehyde combine to give a useful resin. 
Acetic anhydride reacts with acetaldehyde to 
give ethylidene diacetate, a precursor to vinyl 
acetate, which is used to produce polyvinyl 
acetate. 


4.2 Identification 


4.2.1 Formula — CHO 


IS 14518 : 2023 


4.2.2 CAS Number — 75-07-0 
4.2.3 UN Number — 1089 
4.2.4 UN Class — UN Hazard class 3 
4.2.5 Hazchem Code — 2YE 
4.3 Physical Properties 
4.3.1 General 
Colourless liquid with irritant and pungent 
fruity odour. Its vapours are irritating to the 
mucous membranes and can be especially 
dangerous to the eyes. 
4.3.2 Molecular Mass — 44.053 g/mol 
4.3.3 Physical State — liquid 
4.3.4 Colour — colourless 
4.3.5 Odour — pungent, fruity odour 
4.3.6 Boiling Point — 20.8 °C 
4.3.7 Melting Point — (-)123.37 °C 
4.3.8 Vapour Density (Air = 1) — 1.52 
4.3.9 Specific Gravity 
a) Liquid (water = 1) — 0.784 g/cm? 
4.3.10 Viscosity at 20 °C — 0.21 mPa.s 


4.3.11 Vapour Pressure at 20 °C — 740 mmHg 


4.3.12 Heat of Combustion — (-) 1168.79 
kJ/mol 


4.3.13 Refractive Index at 20 °C — 1.3116 


4.3.14 Solubility in Water — freely soluble in 
water 


4.3.15 Solubility in Other Solvents — Miscible 
with ethanol, ether, benzene, toluene, xylene, 
turpentine, acetone, slightly soluble in 
chloroform. 

4.3.16 Light Sensitivity — No change 

4.4 Chemical Properties 

4.4.1 Reactivity 


Acetaldehyde is extremely reactive. Easily 
oxidised and reduced. Violent condensation 


with acetic acid, acid hydrides alcohols, 
anhydrous ammonia, phenol and sodium 
hydroxide. Violent reaction with halogens, 
hydrogen sulphide, ketones. Violent 
exothermic reaction with oxygen. Can be easily 
polymerized to form paraldehyde and 
metaldehyde. Can be regenerated from 
paraldehyde by mild heating in the presence of 
mineral acids. These reactions can be violent 
even in presence of traces of sulphuric acid. 
Acetaldehyde decomposes rubber on extended 
contact. 


Risk of ignition. Vapours can form explosive 
mixtures with air. May form explosive 
peroxides. The material is stable under normal 
ambient and anticipated storage and handling 
conditions of temperature and pressure. 


Violent reaction with alkali hydroxide (caustic 
alkali), alcohols, amines, ammonia (NH3), 
acetic anhydride, iron, iodine, ketone, phenol, 
phosphorus, acids, chlorates, nitrate, oxidisers, 
perchlorates, oxygen. 


In liquid state acetaldehyde is non-corrosive to 
most metals. It oxidises readily, however, 
particularly in vapour state, to acetic acid. 


4.4.2 Polymerisation 
Polymerization may occur. Avoid heat, dust, 
strong oxidising or reducing substances, strong 


acids and alkalis. 


4.4.3 Allotrope Formation — Not available 


4.4.4 Corrosion Properties — In liquid state 
acetaldehyde is non-corrosive to most metals. 
It oxidises readily, however particularly in 
vapour state, to acetic acid. 


4.5 Fire and Explosion Hazard Properties 
4.5.1 Auto Ignition Temperature — 175 °C 


4.5.2 Flash Point — (-) 40 °C (open cup), 
(-) 37.77 °C (closed cup) 


4.5.3 Upper Explosive Limit — 57 percent 
volume 


4.5.4 Lower Explosive Limit — 4 percent 
volume 


4.5.5 Fire Risk 


Extremely flammable. Extremely volatile, 
vapour is heavier than air and may travel a 
considerable distance to a source of ignition and 


flash back. Vapour/air mixtures are explosive, 
explosion-proof electrical equipment and 
lighting required. Do not use compressed air for 
filling, discharging, or handling. Use non- 
sparking hand tools. Contact with air generates 
explosive peroxides. The substance may 
polymerize under the influence of acids and 
alkaline hydroxides in the presence of trace 
metals (iron). This generates fire and explosion 
hazard. The substance is a strong reducing 
agent. It reacts violently with oxidants, strong 
acids, halogens and amines. This generates fire 
or explosion hazard. 


4.6 Electrical Hazard 
Zone 1, Class A (see IS 5572). 


5 HEALTH HAZARD AND TOXICITY 
INFORMATION 


5.1 General Information 


Pure acetaldehyde, particularly in its vapour 
phase, is a local irritant in its action upon body 
tissues. The vapour is irritating to the eyes, 
nose, throat and respiratory tract. Acetaldehyde 
can spontaneously decompose or polymerise to 
form explosive peroxide when heated distilled, 
evaporated and contaminated. Acetaldehyde 
contaminated with other aldehydes such as, 
crotonaldehyde is more irritating than 
acetaldehyde alone. It leaves serious 
inflammation in the eyes, which may be 
followed by blurring of vision. Skin contacts to 
be removed promptly. If not, the skin may 
become reddened and later become white and 
wrinkled followed by peeling of skin. Shows 
chronic intoxication similar to that of chronic 
alcoholism. However, there is no storage in the 
body since it is rapidly oxidised, metabolised 
and eliminated. 


5.2 Routes of Entry 


5.2.1 Skin — Acetaldehyde is slightly irritant, 
risk of absorption via the skin. Long term use 
can cause erythema and burns. 


5.2.2 Eyes — Causes serious eye irritation and 
prolonged contact may cause conjunctivitis. 
May cause transient corneal injury. 


5.2.3 Ingestion — Gastrointestinal complaints, 
vomiting, nausea. 


5.2.4 Inhalation — Irritant effects, cough, 
dyspnoea, pulmonary oedema. Can irritate the 
lungs, higher exposure may cause a build up a 
fluid in the lungs. 


IS 14518 : 2023 


5.2.5 Long Term Effects — Acetaldehyde 
exposure via ingestion and metabolism of 
alcohol has been reported to cause 
bronchoconstriction. 


5.3 Toxicity Information 


Acetaldehyde being highly volatile, emits toxic 
vapours. Available toxicity values areas are as 
following: 


5.3.1 Threshold Limit Value (TLV) — 25 ppm 
(45 mg/m?) 


5.3.2 Time Weighted Average (TWA) — 20 ppm 
(36 mg/m?) 


5.3.3 Short Term Exposure Limit (STEL) — 
150 ppm (270 mg/m?) 


5.3.4 Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health 
(IDLH) — 2 000 ppm 


5.3.5 Lethal Dose 50 (LD50) (median dose) — 
1 930 mg/kg (rat, oral) 


5.3.6 Lethal Concentration 50 LC50 (median 
concentration) — 13 000 ppm (rat), 
17 000 ppm (hamster) 


5.3.7 Inhalation (Acute toxicity) — LC50 (rat) 
13 300 ppm/4 h 


5.4 Antidote 


5.4.1 A disulfiram-like drug, the prototypical 
drug of this group is disulfiram, which acts 
as an acetaldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitor, 
preventing the metabolism of acetaldehyde 
into acetic acid. 


5.4.2 The drug disulfiram inhibits acetaldehyde 
dehydrogenase, an enzyme that oxidizes the 
compound into acetic acid. Metabolism 
of ethanol forms acetaldehyde before 
acetaldehyde dehydrogenase forms acetic acid, 
but with the enzyme inhibited, acetaldehyde 
accumulates. If one consumes ethanol while 
taking disulfiram, the hangover effect of 
ethanol is felt more rapidly and intensely. As 
such disulfiram is sometimes used as a deterrent 
for alcoholics wishing to stay sober. 


5.5 Health Effects 
5.5.1 Signs and Symptoms 


Acetaldehyde is used in the manufacture of 
acetic acid, perfumes, and flavours. It is also an 


IS 14518 : 2023 


intermediate in the metabolism of alcohol. It has 
a general narcotic action and also causes 
irritation of mucous membranes. Large doses 
may cause death from respiratory paralysis. 


5.5.2 Acute Toxicity 
5.5.2.1 Systemic effects 


Repeated or prolonged contact with skin may 
cause dermatitis. The substance may have 
effects on the respiratory tract. This may result 
in tissue lesions. This substance is possibly 
carcinogenic to humans. 


5.5.2.2 Local effects 
5.5.2.2.1 Skin 


Acetaldehyde causes mild skin irritation. It can 
be absorbed through intact skin. 


5.5.2.2.2 Eyes 


It causes severe eye irritation. Eye splashes 
produce painful but superficial corneal injuries 
which heal rapidly. 


5.5.2.2.3 Inhalation 


It causes upper respiratory tract and mucous 
membrane irritation. It decreases the amount of 
pulmonary macrophages. It may cause 
bronchitis. 


5.5.2.2.4 It may cause pulmonary oedema, often 
the cause of delayed death. It may affect 
respiration (dyspnoea) and respiratory arrest 
and death may occur. It may affect 
behaviour/central nervous and cause central 
nervous system depression. Irritation usually 
prevents voluntary exposure to airborne 
concentrations high enough to cause CNS 
depression, although this effect has occurred in 
experimental animals. It may also affect the 
peripheral nervous system and cardiovascular 
system (hypotension or hypertension, 
tachycardia, bradycardia), kidneys 
(albuminuria). 


5.5.3 Chronic Toxicity 
5.5.3.1 Systemic effects 


Acetaldehyde may cause adverse reproductive 
effects and birth defects (teratogenic) based on 
animal test data. Animal studies indicate an 
increased incidence of laryngeal cancer in 
hamsters and nasal cancer in rats following 
exposure to acetaldehyde. Acetaldehyde is 
considered to be potential occupational 
carcinogens. Symptoms of chronic 


acetaldehyde exposure may resemble those of 
chronic alcoholism. Acetaldehyde is a 
metabolite of ethanol in humans and has been 
implicated as the active agent damaging the 
liver in ethanol-induced liver disease. 


5.5.3.2 Local effects 


Exposures to concentrations of acetaldehyde 
greater than | percent in solution were found 
likely to be irritating to the skin. There is no 
clear evidence that acetaldehyde sensitizes skin 
in humans, although animal studies have 
demonstrated such a response. Prolonged direct 
skin contact causes erythema and burns. 
Repeated exposure may cause dermatitis 
secondary to primary irritation or sensitization. 


6 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 


6.1 Availability and Use 


6.1.1 While personal protective equipment is 
not an adequate substitute for good, safe 
working conditions, adequate ventilation, and 
intelligent conduct on the part of employees 
working with acetaldehyde. One should keep 
firmly in mind that personal protective 
equipment protects only the worker wearing it, 
and other unprotected workers in the area 
maybe exposed to danger. 


6.1.2 The correct usage of personal protective 
equipment requires the education of the workers 
in proper employment of the equipment 
available to him. Under conditions which are 
sufficiently hazardous to require personal 
protective equipment, its use should be 
supervised and the type of protective equipment 
selected should be capable of control over any 
potential hazards. 


6.1.3 Wear clothing to prevent repeated or 
prolonged skin contact. 


6.1.4 Wear goggles to prevent any possibility of 
eye contact. 


6.1.5 Employees should wash promptly when 
skin becomes wet. 


6.1.6 Remove clothing immediately that 
becomes wet to avoid flammability hazard. 


6.1.7 Respiratory protection is essential to 
prevent inhalation of gas. 


6.1.8 Suits made of rubber, neoprene plastic to 
be used for complete body protection. 


6.2 Non-Respiratory Equipment 
6.2.1 Eye and Face Protection 


Chemical splash protection as per IS 8520 
category H-4. Use of goggles along with full 
face shield is recommended. Face shield should 
be of sufficient length to cover the neck portion. 


6.2.2 Head Protection 


Hard hats should be worn where there is danger 
of falling objects. If hard hats are not considered 
necessary, soft-brimmed hats or caps may be 
worn to give protection against liquid leaks and 
splashes (see IS 2925). 


6.2.3 Foot and Leg Protection 


Leather safety shoes with built-in steel toe caps 
are recommended for workers handling drums 
and cans of acetaldehyde. Alternately rubber 
gumboots must be used while handling 
acetaldehyde. Leather leg guard is 
recommended. Shoes should be thoroughly 
cleaned and ventilated after contamination 
(see IS 10667). 


6.2.4 Body, Skin, Eye and Hand Protection 


Clothing made of impervious materials may be 
worn to protect the body against the splashes. 
Rubber gloves should be worn for hand 
protection. Fireproof overalls should be worn 
when operations involving acetone fires are 
encountered (see IS 8519 and IS 8807). 


6.3 Respiratory Equipment 


Respirator selection should be as follows 
(at any detectable concentration) based on 
Assigned Protection Factor (APF): 


a) (APF = 10 000) Any self-contained 
breathing apparatus that has a full 
facepiece and is operated in a pressure- 
demand or other positive pressure mode; 


b) (APF = 10 000) Any  supplied-air 
respirator that has a full facepiece and is 
operated in a pressure-demand or other 
positive pressure mode in combination 
with an auxiliary self-contained positive 
pressure breathing apparatus; and 


c) Escape — (APF = 50) Any air-purifying, 
full-facepiece respirator (gas mask) with 
a chin style, front or back mounted 
organic vapour canister. 


IS 14518 : 2023 


Any appropriate escape-type, self- 
contained breathing apparatus. 


7 STORAGE, HANDLING, LABELLING 
AND TRANSPORT 


7.1 General 


All personnel handling acetaldehyde should use 
proper personal protective equipment. 
Appropriate firefighting equipment should be 
available in the vicinity while handling 
acetaldehyde. Persons handling acetaldehyde 
shall have adequate training in use of 
firefighting equipment. 


7.2 Storage 


7.2.1 Stainless steel storage tanks are 
recommended, preferably equipped with 
cooling coils through which refrigerated brine 
may be circulated. The storage temperature 
should be maintained below 20 °C. Large 
storage vessels should be fitted with 
temperature gauges and automatic water 
sprayers. 


7.2.2 If stored without refrigeration, a pressure 
tank is required. The pressure to be maintained 
by a blanket of nitrogen. 


7.2.3 Acetaldehyde, particularly under pressure, 
should be kept away from contact with air to 
prevent the formation of highly explosive 
peroxides. 


7.2.4 There is also a greater tendency to 
polymerize under pressure. 


7.2.5 Avoid use of copper or copper alloys in 
tanks, lines, or fittings. There is a possibility of 
formation of explosive copper compounds. 


7.2.6 Do not use ordinary level indicators unless 
of parallel plate type affording protection. 


7.2.7 Storage tanks should be provided with a 
minimum of 15 m free zone around. 


7.2.8 Storage tanks and connecting lines are to 
be effectively grounded to guard against static 
charge build-up. If tank trucks are to be 
unloaded to drums, these also shall be 
grounded. 


7.2.9 Defective electrical fittings should be 
attended to in the acetaldehyde handling area. 


IS 14518 : 2023 


7.2.10 When filling a tank, a dip tube extended 
to the bottom of the tank which is being filled 
will minimize splashing and static charge build- 


up. 


7.3 Handling 


7.3.1 The low boiling point of the liquid makes 
it difficult to handle without considerable 
vapour losses. To minimize this, a closed 
system should be used. 


7.3.2 Do not apply air pressure to transfer 
acetaldehyde. 


7.3.3 Provision for emergency venting should 
be made. Vent should be connected to a scrubber 
of aflare system. 


7.3.4 Avoid use of copper or copper alloys in 
pipelines or fittings. There is a possibility of 
formation of explosive copper compounds. 


7.3.5 Wear chemical goggles, respiratory 
protective devices such as, canister type masks, 
airline mask, depending on the situation. Use of 
barrier cream on hands and exposed parts of the 
body is recommended. 


7.3.6 Due to polymerization choking of 
equipment’s, lines, relief devices etc, is 
possible. These are to be inspected and 
cleaned regularly. 


7.3.7 Acetaldehyde drums should be opened 
only after thorough cooling below 20 °C. 


7.3.8 Adequate ventilation shall be provided in 
the acetaldehyde handling area to keep 
concentration well below 100 ppm. Water 
showers and eye wash fountain systems shall 
also be provided in this area. 


7.3.9 Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) 
should be available at the sites handling 
acetaldehyde. 


7.3.10 In acetaldehyde handling plants, 
jumpers should be used on the flanged lines for 
electrical continuity. Insulation should be used 
in vessels and pipelines to keep acetaldehyde 
cool. Special seals should be provided in the 
centrifugal pump. 


7.4 Labelling 


7.4.1 Each container (including tankers) should 
carry an identifying label or stencil depicted in 
IS 1260 (Part 1). The storage containers shall be 
labelled or marked to identify as follows: 


a) Contents of the container; 


b) Name and address of the manufacturer or 
importer of the hazardous chemical; and 


c) Physical, chemical and toxicological data 
as per the criteria given in the relevant 
schedule of the Manufacture, Storage and 
Import of Hazardous Chemicals Rules, 
1989. While referring to the statutes, the 
stipulations given in the subsequent 
amendments of those statutes shall be 
taken into account. 


Manufacturers name with label warnings 
required by regulations or ordinances form 
part of the label or placard. 


7.4.2 Each drum must be labelled 
"FLAMMABLE LIQUID". 


7.4.3 Each tanker and each railroad car carrying 
one or more containers of acetaldehyde must 
bear the "DANGEROUS" placard in addition. 


7.5 Transport 


7.5.1 Containers generally used for transport of 
acetaldehyde are as following: 


7.5.1.1 Tankers — which are pressure vessel 
and insulated. 


7.5.1.2 Metal barrels or drums 


7.5.1.3 Acetaldehyde is highly flammable, and 
its UN Number is 1089, UN hazard class 3 and 
EAR (Haz- chem Code - 2YE). 


NOTE — If transport of the hazardous chemical is 
involved it shall be carried out in accordance with the 
Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989. While referring 
to the statutes, the stipulations given in the subsequent 
amendments of those statutes shall be taken into 
account. 


7.5.2 Unloading Tankers 


Unloading stations should be equipped with 
safety showers. The tanker should be spotted 
accurately and levelled. Stoppers/pegs should 
be used to avoid movement of tanker during 
unloading. Supplier's instructions for unloading 
should always be followed and all caution 
markings on both sides of tanker should be read 
and observed. 


Tanker unloading should be preferably to tank 
at same level or at lower level. Tanker should 
not be unloaded to a tank at higher elevation. 


7.5.3 Unloading Drums 


Acetaldehyde drums should be opened only 
after thorough cooling below 20 °C. Ground 
and bond containers when transferring 
material. 


7.5.4 Driver 


Only driver trained in acetaldehyde handling 
should be employed for transportation of 
acetaldehyde. 


Driver should carry TREM card when vehicle is 
on road. 


8 SPILLAGE, LEAKAGE AND WASTE 
DISPOSAL 


8.1 General 


All personal attending to spill/leak should use 
proper personal protective equipment and 
firefighting equipment while handling 
acetaldehyde leak or spillage. 


8.2 Spillage 
8.2.1 Genera/Information 


8.2.1.1 Always proceed with caution. 
Acetaldehyde vapours are irritating to the 
mucous membranes and can be especially 
dangerous to the eyes. It is a highly flammable 
chemical. Since it oxidises, reduces, and 
polymerizes readily, it forms a variety of 
compounds. Some of these are dangerous. 


8.2.1.2 Restrict access to area. Keep 
unprotected personnel away and upwind of spill 
area. Avoid contact with spilled product. 
Protect sewers and waterways from 
contaminated runoff. Notify proper authorities. 
Plan response such that all physical contact and 
inhalation of acetaldehyde avoided. 


8.2.2 Land Spill (Spill on Land) 


8.2.2.1 Containment 


Stop leak if you can do it without risk. Contact 
your local fire department. Eliminate all sources 
of ignition and static, restrict access to area 
until completion of clean-up procedure. 
Wear adequate protective equipment, use self- 
contained breathing apparatus in confined 
poorly-ventilated areas. Large quantities 
should be absorbed on to sand, vermiculite or 
an equivalent absorbent material and removed 
to a safe area for disposal. Flush the 
contaminated area with plenty of water. 
Incineration is the recommended method of 
disposal. 


IS 14518 : 2023 


8.2.2.2 Consequence 


Acetaldehyde vapours are heavier than air and 
may spread along the floors. Development of 
hazardous combustion gases or vapours 
possible forms explosive mixtures with air at 
ambient temperature. 


8.2.2.3 Mitigation 


8.2.2.3.1 The following steps should be taken: 
a) Remove all ignition sources; 
b) Ventilate area to disperse gas; 


c) If in gaseous form, stop flow of gas; 
and 


d) If in liquid form, for small quantities 
absorb on paper towels/rags. 


8.2.2.3.2 Evaporate in safe place (fume hood). 
Allow sufficient time for vapours to completely 
clear hood ductwork, then burn the waste in a 
location away from combustible materials. 
Large quantities can be reclaimed or collected 
and atomized in a suitable combustion chamber. 
Acetaldehyde should not be allowed to enter a 
confined space such as a sewer, because of 
possibility of an explosion. 


8.2.3 Water Spill (Spill in Water) 


8.2.3.1 Containment 


Stop use of water. Notify proper authorities to 
stop water intake or to monitor water for 
contamination. Spilled product will dissolve in 
water. Contaminated water can be filled in 
tanker or other containers for recovery of 
acetaldehyde. 


8.2.3.2 Mitigation 


Cover drains. Collect, bind, and pump off spills. 
Observe possible material restrictions 
(possibility of hazardous reaction with 
metals/chemicals). Take up carefully with 
liquid-absorbent material. Dispose of properly. 
Clean up affected area. 


8.3 Leakages 
8.3.1 General Information 
Do not breathe vapour/spray. Avoid contact 


with skin and eyes. Provide adequate 
ventilation. Avoid or remove ignition source. 


IS 14518 : 2023 


8.3.2 Leak from the Tanker/Drum 


Attempt should be made to plug/isolate the leak 
using all prescribed personal protective 
equipment’s, without taking any risk. The area 
should be cordoned. The area around the 
incident should be vacated to avoid exposure to 
other personnel. If possible, transfer the tanker 
contents to another empty, clean tank. 


8.3.3 Caution 


Acetaldehyde is highly flammable and highly 
volatile. Protect from ignition sources such as 
open fire, static discharge, defective electric 
wiring or equipment. Flooding with water will 
dilute the acetaldehyde to the point where it 
will not support combustion. 


8.4 Waste Disposal 


8.4.1 Burn in a chemical incinerator equipped 
with an afterburner and scrubber but exert extra 
care in ignition as this material is highly 
flammable. Licensed professional waste 
disposal service should dispose off this waste. 
Large quantity can be given to ‘recycler’ for 
recovery of acetaldehyde. 


8.4.2 Water in contact with acetaldehyde should 
be chemically treated before allowing it to flow 
out of the plant. 


8.4.3 Returnable drums should be thoroughly 
washed inside and outside with warm water, 
drained and cover tightly before returning. Non- 
returnable containers, before scrapping, should 
be thoroughly washed with warm water until all 
traces of acetaldehyde have been removed. 


9 FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE 
FIGHTING 


9.1 General 


Acetaldehyde may explode when heated. 
Empty containers retain product residue, liquid 
and vapour. Closed containers may rupture and 
explode during runaway polymerization. 
Accumulation of vapour increase risk of 
explosion. Vapours accumulate in low areas. 
Thermal decomposition can lead to release of 
irritating gases and vapours. Vapours may 
travel to a source of ignition and flash back. 
Sensitive to static discharge. 


All personal engaged in firefighting operation 
must use appropriate PPEs to prevent exposure. 


9.2 Prevention 


9.2.1 Remove heat, sparks, and all sources of 
ignition. Use explosion-proof equipment. Test 
for peroxide formation before distillation or 
evaporation. Test for peroxide formation or 
discard after 1 yr. 


9.2.2 Move container from fire area if without 
risk. Use water from side and from safe distance 
to keep fire exposed containers cool. Ensure 
adequate ventilation. 


9.3 Fire Fighting 


Use water, dry chemical, chemical foam, 
carbon dioxide or alcohol resistant foam. For 
large fires water may be in-effective. 


10 TRAINING 


10.1 Safety in handling acetaldehyde depends 
upon the effectiveness of employee education, 
training and supervision. The education and 
training of employees to work safely and to use 
the personal protective equipment and other 
safeguards provided for them is a responsibility 
of supervision. Employee education and 
training should emphasize the need of handling 
acetaldehyde according to the methods outlined 
in the manual, in order to avoid spilling or 
splashing, leaks, burns, inhalation of the vapour 
of burning material, or ingestion. 


Unauthorised and untrained employees should 
not be permitted in areas where acetaldehyde is 
being handled. 


10.2 Before being placed on the job, all new 
employees should be instructed thoroughly in 
the proper handling of acetaldehyde. Older 
employees should be re-instructed periodically. 


10.3 Each employee should know the location, 
purpose and maintenance of personal protective 
equipment (PPEs) and be thoroughly trained 
when and how to use it. Each employee should 
know the location of safety showers, fountains 
for flushing the eyes, and hose lines. 


10.4 Only reliable, dependable and properly 
trained employees should be given the 
responsibility of all operations involving 
storage, handling, transport and emergency 
management involving acetaldehyde. 


10.5 Employee should be trained to report to the 
proper authority all suspected leaks or 


equipment failure. 


10.6 They should be instructed to inform to 
supervisors any signs of illness or skin related 
problems. 


10.7 Each employee should know do and don’ts 
in emergency and the first-aid measures and 
should realize the necessity for the prompt 
application of first-aid in case of contact with 
acetaldehyde or exposure to its vapours. 


11 HEALTH MANAGEMENT, FIRST-AID 
AND MEDICAL TREATMENT 


11.1 Health Monitoring 
11.1.1 Personal Hygiene 


11.1.1.1 Employees should bath daily after 
finishing work. They should report any 
abnormal condition of the mouth or skin to 
medical department. 


11.1.1.2 Food should not be stored or eaten near 
the place where acetaldehyde is being handled. 


11.1.2 Physical Examination 
11.1.2.1 Pre-placement physical examinations 


Pre-placement medical examination by medical 
professional is directed towards determining if 
the person is fit enough to do that particular job. 
The medical professional may consider 
physical or mental abilities, sensory acuity, 
level of skill, functional limitations. 


11.1.2.2 Periodic examination 


The extent of medical or dental control depends 
upon the amount of exposure to acetaldehyde. 
When there is a prolonged exposure to open 
acetaldehyde, the following procedures are 
recommended. 


11.1.2.3 Medical examination 

An annual physical examination should be 
conducted for each employee who is constantly 
exposed to acetaldehyde. He should be 
instructed to report any illness, or any disorder 
of skin that he experiences. 

11.2 First Aid 

11.2.1 General Principles 


First-aid treatment should be started at once in 
all cases of contact with acetaldehyde. Refer all 


IS 14518 : 2023 


injured persons to a physician even when the 
injury appears to be slight. Give the physician a 
detailed account of the accident. 


First aider is also at risk of exposure to 
acetaldehyde and should wear proper PPEs. 


11.2.2 Contact with Skin 


If acetaldehyde gets on the skin, flush the 
contaminated skin with water. 


If it soaks through the clothing, immediately 
remove the clothing and flush the skin with 
water. 


11.2.3 Contact with Eyes 


If acetaldehyde gets into the eyes immediately 
wash the eyes with large quantity of water for at 
least 15 min, occasionally lifting the lower and 
upper lids. Get medical attention immediately. 
Contact lenses should not be used when 
working with this chemical. 


11.2.4 Ingestion 


If acetaldehyde has been swallowed and the 
person is conscious, immediately give large 
quantity of water to drink. After the water has 
been swallowed, make the person to vomit by 
having him touch the back of his throat with his 
finger. Do not give anything by mouth to an 
unconscious person nor induce to vomiting. Get 
medical attention immediately. 


11.2.5 Inhalation 


11.2.5.1 Move the exposed person to fresh air 
immediately and administer oxygen if 
available. 


11.2.5.2 If breathing has stopped, give artificial 
respiration. 


11.2.5.3 Keep the affected person warm and at 
rest. 


11.2.5.4 Get medical attention as soon as 
possible. 


11.2.6 First-Aid Kit 


No additional medicine to be kept in first aid kit 
for acetaldehyde. 


11.3 Medical Treatment 


No information available. 


IS 14518 : 2023 


12 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION security measures to be taken while handling of 
acetaldehyde etc as essential for controlling 
Additional information essential for particular hazards may be collected and applied. 


equipment used for handling of acetaldehyde, 


10 


IS 14518 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (1204, Bhumika Residency 


Sector 20 Block no. 21 Roadpali Klambolinode, 
Navi Mumbai - 410218) 


Alkali Manufacturers Association of India, Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Food Technological Research Institute, 
Mysore 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire, Explosives and Environmental 
Science, Government of India, Min of Defence, 
New Delhi 


Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 


Defence Research and Establishment, (DRDO), 


Gwalior 


Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Government 
of India, New Delhi 


Department of Space (ISRO), Bengaluru 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 


Labour Institutes, Mumbai 


Gas Industries Association, Mumbai 


Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


11 


Representative(s) 


SHRI K. S. RAMPRASAD (Chairperson) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI H. S. DAs (Alternate) 


MS GARIMA SINGH 
SHRI NISHITH GOSH (Alternate) 


DR DANDAMUDI USHARANI 
DR PRASANNA VASU (Alternate) 


DR M. SURIYANARAYANAN 


SHRI S. P. DOBHAL 
DR AARTI BHATT (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. KARLEKAR 
DR J. C. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT GARG 
DR VIRENDRA VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VISHAL CHOUDHARY 


SHRI MURALEEKRISHNAN R. 
Ms LAKSHMI V. W. (Alternate) 


SHRI H. M. BHANDARI 
SHRI P. G. SATPUTE (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI ANOOP TANDON (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY HARLAKA 
SHRI RAKESH WADALKAR (Alternate) 


DR C. NANDI 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR BANKUPALLI SATYAVATHI 
DR SRIPADI PRABHAKARC (Alternate) 


DR NEERAJ ATRAY 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR KANUJIA (Alternate) 


IS 14518 : 2023 

Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, 
Kalpakkam 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Ministry of Environment and Forest, New Delhi 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


National Institute of Occupational Health, 
Ahmedabad 


National Institute of Technology, Thrichi 


National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate (Min of Pet and 
Natural Gas), Delhi 


Pesticides Manufacturer and Formulators 
Association of India, Mumbai 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, 
Nagpur 


Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, 
Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Tata Chemicals Ltd, Mithapur, Distt, Jamnagar 


In Personal Capacity (-4/2/, Parijat C.HS., 
Spaghetti, Sector-15, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai - 
410210) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


PROF SANDIP ROY 
DR SACHIN GUNTE 


DR D. K. PATEL 
DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


DR K. K. SATPATHY 


DR G. D. YADAV 
DR B. M. BHANAGE (Alternate) 


SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 
DR DINESH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY V. BOKADE 
DR M. MUTHUKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR B. RAVICHANDRAN 


PROF S. P. SIVAPIRAKASAM 
DR SREEJITH MOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 
SHRI K. D. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDAR M. MAHAJAN 


DR ARCHANA KUMARI 
DR SANDIP SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIM. K. JHALA 
DR YOGESH KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI DEVANG MEHTA (Alternate) 


DR JAGDISH KUMAR 
DR DEEP SHANKAR CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SNEHASHISH A. CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI D. K. THAKUR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SOUNDARARAJAN 


SHRI AJAY K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Ms SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 


(CHEMICAL), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 07 (19900). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern :C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


