IS 9216 : 1992
(Reaffirmed 2005)

-hJT TNT +tvT qvT
(
V@rT

-

VfTWh

WmFit

g;rT"fwJT )

Indian Standard

NUTRITION AND NUTRITIOUS FOODSGLOSSARY OF TERMS (First Revision )

UDC

664*38+613*2 : 001.4

(0 BlS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

October 1992

Price %ronp 6

Nutrition

Sectional

Committee,

FAD 21

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Nutrition Sectional Committee had beed approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. Clear descriptions of various terms relating to nutrition and nutritious foods are useful as reference when consulting Indian Standard Specifications in which these terms are employed. In view of this the glossary of terms relating to nutrition and nutritious foods has been prepared. Further this glossary is expected to facilitate common understanding of the terms by all concerned engaged both in internal and export trade as well as by scientists and lay consumers. Educational authorities in schools and colleges may also find such a reference useful for teaching purposes. It should be emphasized that the descriptions in this glossary are meant for common underrelatively free from technical jargon. The standing and are couched in simple language, descriptions are neither intended nor designed for legal use in any manner. This standard was first published in 1979. It is being revised to bring it in line with the latest terminology being used in the area of nutrition.

IS 9216 : 1992

Indian Standard NUTRITION AND NUTRITIOUS FOODS GLOSSARY OF TERMS ( First Revision )
1 SCOPE
2.6 Acidity ( of Stomach )

1.1This standard describes used in the field of nutrition foods.
2 TERMINOLOGY

various terms and nutritious

Production of 1 . acid in the . . hydrochloric . stomach resulting in a burning sensation; excessive production constitutes hyperacidity. 2.7 Aflatoxins A class of toxic compounds produced when moulds such as AspergillusJEavus and Aspergillus parasiticus grow on foodstuffs like oilseeds, oilcakes and cereals; when used in the singular, the commonest aflatoxin, termed B, is usually implied. 2.8 Amino Acids Organic compounds containing at least one amino ( or imino ) group and one carboxyl group which combine together to form proteins ( see also 2.58 and 2.146 ). 2.9 Anaemia, Nutritional Reduced level of haemoglobin in blood caused by insufficiency of iron, folic acid, vitamin Blz, vitamin C and copper, sometimes singly, but usually in some combination of these nutrients. 2.10 Antioxidant A substance which, even when present in minute quantities, can retard considerably the oxidation and spoilage of a fat or fat-containing food. Natural antioxidants include gallates, tocopherols and vitamin C. 2.11 Anti-tryptic This describes foodstuffs, like reduce digestion ( upper intestine enzyme trypsin; moist cooking the foodstuff. 2.12 Anti-vitamin A substance which may inactivate, with or destroy a vitamin. 1 interfere Activity of Foods factors present in certain soyabeans and DALS, which of protein in the duodenum ) by hindering the action of destroying these factors by enhances the protein value of

2.0 The terms are arranged in alphabetica sequence. Some of the terms are related, in such cases, the definition in full has been given in the clause where the terms appear first and appropriate cross reference has been included. 2.1 Acid-Insoluble That portion of ( see 2.14 ) which hydrochloric acid; dioxide, and is an Ash the ash component of foods is insoluble in 10 percent it consists mainly of silicon indication of sand content.

2.2 Acidity ( of Curds ) The quantity of lactic acid during fermentation of curds. 2.3 Acidity ( of Fat or Extracted developed

Fat )

Level of free fatty acids developed in a fat as a result of breakdown of triglycerides by enzyme action or moisture. 2.4 Acidity ( of Fruits ) Acidity is the level of acids in fruits. Many fruits contain acids of which malic acid and citric acid are the most common ( citrus fruits, beetroot, pumpkin, cucumber ). Oxalic acid is present in many foods, particularly in green leafty vegetables ( spinach, amaranth ), in certain fruits ( green plantain, AMLA, PHALSA ) and in some vegetables ( drumstick, lotus stem, plantain flower ). Tartaric acid occurs in certain fruits ( grapes, tamarind pulp ), and succinic and benzoic acids are also sometimes present. 2.5 Acidity ( of Flours ) Level of acidic material developed in the fat component of foods like cereal flours, blended flours and the like, determined in the alcohol or water extract of the material.

IS 9216 : 1992
2.13 Ascorbic Acid

2.22 Basal Metabolic

Rate

The chemical 2.14 Ash

name for vitamin C ( see 2.174 ).

Energy required to keep up the involuntary work of the fully-relaxed body, such as respiration, circulation and maintenance of body tetnperature. 2.23 Beriberi A disease caused by deficiency of thiamine ( vitamin B, ) and characterized by disturbed nervous function and loss of muscle power. 2.24 Beverage A drink, which may be either hot or cold, either alcoholic or non-alcoholic. 2.25 Bio-Assay Estimation of level or potency of a nutrient or drug using living organisms such as animals, bacteria or tissues. 2.26 Biological Value and

Inorganic constituents or mineral matter left over when foods are incinerated, consisting of calcium, mainly of oxides or hydroxides sodium, potassium, magnesium, silicates, etc. 2.15 Available Lysine ?he fraction of lysine present in a protein which is assimilable by the human body; lysine carries a reactive end-amino group which during heating tends to bind with hydroxy groups, for example, those present in carbohydrates, thus reducing lysine availability. 2.16 Avidiu
A protein found in egg white which combines with the vitamin biotin in the intestine thus making it unavailable to the body; cooking will inactivate the avidin.

2.17 Avitaminosis ( Hypo-vitaminosis Clinical conditions deficiency. 2.18 Baby Food caused

)

The efficiency of utilization of a protein by the body, expressed as a percentage of the food nitrogen retained to the food nitrogen absorbed. 2.27 Biological
Potency of Vitamins

by severe vitamin

Concentration of a vitamin preparation mined by using living organisms. 2.28 Biotin
One of the

deter-

General description covering foods designed for babies from birth till about 2 years of age. 2.19 Bacterial Count
The number of bacteria

of all types present in one gram/one millilitre of food, determined by actual counting under magnification, after suitable plating and culturing.
2.20 Bakery Shortening

B-group of vitamins, widely distributed in many animal products, yeast, milk and molasses. Deficiency, which is rare, leads to nerve and skin changes. 2.29 Blanching Heat treatment given mostly to fruits and vegetables to inactivate enzymes, for example by short exposure to boiling water, steam or dry heat; or alternate hot and cold treatment giGen mostly to vegetables such as tomatoes for removal of the skin. 2.30 Calciferol Chemical term ( see 2.175 ). 2.31 Calcium Mineral required by the body for the formation of bone and teeth; milk, RAGI and green leafy vegetables are good sources. 2 for one form of vitamin D

Vunaspati

meant for use as a shortening or leavening agent in the manufacture of bakery products for promoting the development of the desired cellular structure in the bakery product with an accompanying increase in its tenderness and volume. 2.21 Balanced Diet Suitable quantities and combination of various foods which together provide all the nutrients required daily and in quantities needed for healthy growth of a specified age group.

IS 9216 : 1992
2.32 Calorie ( Food Calorie, Kilocalorie ) The quantity of heat energy required to raise the temperature of one kilogram of water through 1�C. The term `Calorie' is used in

nourishment of a person is imbalanced. Examples of such physical indicators are skin appearance, hair condition, eye appearance, oedema ( swelling ) and so on. 2.41 Coliform Count
The

nutrition to calories ).

mean

the

kilocalorie

( 1 000

2.33 Carbohydrates A class of chemical compounds, sugars, starch and cellulose, carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. 2.34 Carotene A yellow colouring matter found in foods. Of these carotenes, B-carotene is the most significant being converted into vitamin A in the body. Other carotenoids, some v:ith and others without such vitamin activity, range from yellow to red in colour. 2.35 Caseiu A protein of high biological quality which occurs in milk as colloidal suspension associated with calcium phosphate; casein is often used as a comparative reference protein standard in nutritional evaluation studies. 2.36 Cellulose A carbohydrate present in the fibrous parts of cereals, vegetable and fruits; it is digested by ruminants but not by man and serves in human diet as roughage or bulk that facilitates bowel movement. 2.37 Cereals Class of starch-rich staple foods which include rice and wheat. Coarse cereals like JOWAR, BAJRA, maize and R.4GI are sometimes called millets. 2.38 Chlorophyll Green colouring 2.39 Citrates Salts of citric acid, a common constitutcnt of foodstuffs like lime and lemons, and an intermediate product in metabolic process in the body. Citric acid is used as an acidulant in soft drinks, and citrates are used for buffering formulated foods against changes in their acid-alkali balance. 2.40 Clinical Signs of Malnutrition Indicators to an examining doctor that the 3 matter of plants. which include composed of

number of coliforms per gram of foodstuffs. Generally indicative of unhygienic conditions of manufacture/handling and storage.

2.42 Crude Eibre The indigestible carbohydrate constituent of foodstuffs. It is kept at low levels in forespecially those meant for mulated foods, infants. 2.43 Cuticles The outer epidermal layer of cells in grains and seeds. Also the red skin present on groundnut kernels. 2.44 Deficiency Disease Condition caused by lack of oae or more specific nutrients in the diet consumed. 2.45 Dextrins Products of lower molecular weight derived from starches by the action of enzymes ( amylases ), acids and moist or dry heat. Dextrins are used as thickening agents in formulated foods. 2.46 Dextrose Synonym far dextro-rotatory 2.47 Diabetes A condition characterized by inability to regulate the use of glucose, ofren because of an insufficiency or ineffectiveness of insulin, a hormone secreted by the pancreas. 2.48 Diet It need All items of the foods actually eaten. not necessarily imply the food used in sick conditions or for reducing body weight. 2.49 Dietary Allowance The quantity of a nutrient, or of food containing it, which is necessary to maintain good health. 2.50 Dietary Supplements Foods which enhance nutrients quate in the diet. that are inador D-glucose.

fS 9216 : 1992 2.51 Dietetic Foods Foods

2.60 Expeller-Pressed be specially imbalances. helpful in A term applied to the vegetable oil and oilcake which result when an oilseed is put through called an expeller in screw press, commonly India. In this machine, a threaded worm rotates in a barrel, generating heat and pressure which cause the oil to be squeezed out. 2.61 Fad Diets Diets which become a craze. They are often based on inadequate or unproven assumptions, and though effective temporarily, for example they are frequently illfor weight reduction, balanced and therfore fraught with danger in the long run. 2.62 Fats and Oils Mixtures of glycerol esters of a number of fatty acids, either saturated or unsaturated; fats and oils are insoluble in and immiscible with water. 2.63 Fat Soluble 2.64 Fatty Acids Derived from hydrolysis of fats forming carboxylic acid with carbon atoms 4 to 26. This may be saturated or unsaturated. 2.65 Feeding Programme Provision of supplementary foods or nutrients to population groups that are deficient in them. 2;66 Feeding Trails Experiments using animals or humans that are designed to test the edect or value of one or more variables in foods by measuring suitable indices. 2.67 Fermentation The degradation of organic substances, particulary starches or sugars, to other products through the agency of micro-organisms. 2.68 Folic Acid
Vitamins

designed to correcting nutritional

2.52 Digestibility The proportion of a food component utilized by the body; it is measured as the difference between the quantity consumed and that excreted, expressed as a percentage of the quantity consumed. 2.53 Edible Oilseed Flour Products which are made from oilseeds by part ial or almost total removal of fat, are rich in protein of a quality suitable for human consumption. 2.54 Egg Albumin The protein found in egg white; of all the natural proteins it has the highest biological value, for man, and is therefore sometimes used as a comparative reference standard. 2.55 Energy The fuel value, usually measured as calories ( see 2.32 ) or joule ( see 2.89 ), available to the body by chemical transformation (burning) of carbohydrates, fats and proteins, and used for mechanical activity, replacement of heat lost and purposes of growth. 2.56 Enrichment
See Fortification

These comprise vitamins

A, D, E and K.

( 2.72 ), and Supplementation

( 2.165 ). 2.57 Enzymes Biological catalysts that are proteinaceous in nature, and enormous in number and functional variety. They are present in all living systems and mediate numerous reactions. 2.58 Essential
Amino Acids

Those amino acids which cannot be synthesized in the body, and must therefore be obtained from food in definite amounts for optimum growth. For the humans, 8 of the 22 amino acids are regarded as essential. 2.59 Essential Fatty Acids These are linoleic and linolenic acid both of which the body needs for proper functioning, and cannot synthesize.

A

water-soluble vitamin of the B-group involved in formation of red blood cells; deficiency is especially prevalent in pregnant women and children and causes anaemias. It is present in meat, liver and green leafy vegetables. 2.69 Food Poisoning Food poisoning refers to an illness caused by a poison or toxin in the food when eaten.

IS 9216 : 1992 2.70 Food-Borne Infection Food-borne infection refers to an illness caused by pathogenic organisms carried by the food and transmitted to man. 2.71 Food Habits Surveys Studies to gather data on the foods consumed by general populations, or specific groups among them, using such methods as weighment of foodstuffs used, recall by the housewife and the like. 2.72 Fortification Addition of one or more nutrients to an article of food or drink to make up any existing deficiency in the diet. 2.73 Germs In cereals and oilseeds, the term is used to describe the distinctive portion which bears the potential seedling, as also the nutrients In groundprovided by nature for its growth. nuts, the germ occurs as a distinct white granule residing at one end in a niche. 2.74 Glucose A sugar used extensively by the body as a source of energy. All the starch and sucrose present in the food is broken down to glucose, and consuming it directly confers no special advantage. 2.75 Gluten A term used for a type of protein or proteins On kneading occurring particularly in wheat. gluten contributes wheat flour with water, elasticity to dough and improves the texture of bread, biscuit, chapatis and t~he like. 2.76 Glycogen The storage form of glucose in the body. 2.77 Haemoglobin A red pigment complex of an iron compound, haem, and protein, globin, which is present in red blood cells and carries oxygen from the lungs to body tissues. 2.78 Hidden Hunger An insul%ciency of vitamins and minerals resulting from lack of protective foods, which particularly affects the tissues. 2.79 Homogenization The blending of immiscible phases to almost colloidal form by pressure dispersion, which sometimes has the effect of prolonging the stability and shelf-life of the food; milk and protein-based beverages exemplify foods that can be homogenized. 2.80 Hormones Chemical substances secreted by various endocrine or ductless glands directly into the blood stream to regulate the functions of other organs. 2.81 Hulls The outer covering of many foodgrains; examples are the horny covering ( as in cottonseeds ), leathery skin ( as in sesame seeds ) or parchment-like coating ( as in soyabeans ). This is removed when edible protein products are to be made from these oilseeds. 2.82 Hydrogenation The process by which hydrogen is added to liquid oils using a catalyst to saturate and harden them. 2.83 Hyperchlorhydria Excessive secretion of hydrochloric acid into the stomach by the gastric cells. An insufficient secretions is termed hypochlorhydria. 2.84 Hypervitaminosis Clinical condition intake of certain and vitamin D. 2.85 Infant Foods Foods designed to meet the nutritional requirements of children from birth to about 12 months of age. 2.86 Intake Quantity of food, that is consumed. 2.87 International cr of any nutrient in it, resulting from excessive vitamins, such as vitamin A

Units

Units for measurement of the biological potency of several vitamins, for example, vitamin A, on an agreed International basis; the present tendency is to avoid such arbitrary units, and use ordinary units of mass (milligram or microgram ).

IS 9216 : 1992

2.88 Iron Mineral needed by the body to make red blood cells and build muscles; ~anaemia results from its deficiency. Formulated foods may be fortified with several iron salts, ferrous sulphate being the commonest. 2.89 Joule Unit of energy ( see 2.55 ); one calorie ( see 2.32 ) = 4.18 joules. 2.90 Keratomalacia Destruction of the cornea of the eye and as a result of severe consequent blindness vltamin A deficiency ( see also 2.181 ). 2.91 Kernels The inner, soft portion of carries the oil and protein; teinl is `meats'. 2.92 Kwashiorkor A condition in children resulting from deficiency of food and perhaps particularly of proteins. It manifests itself in the form of reddish or scanty hair, broken skin, swelling ( oedema ), a `moon' face and apathy. 2.93 Lactic Acid The fermentation product of the lactose of milk, present therefore in curds and buttermilk. It is also an intermediate cf body metabolism, and is produced, for example, following muscular work. 2.94 Lactose The sugar of mik, chemically a combination of glucose and galactose, to which it is broken down in the intestine. 2.95 Laminate A packaging material consisting of two or more films bonded together to achieve better functional protection in such terms as greater air permeability and less strength, lower moisture ingress. 2.96 Leaven To raise or lighten a batter or dough aeration using yeast or baking powder. 2.97 Legumes The edible are usually seeds of leguminous plants which good sources of protein. These by oilseeds which an alternative

include the pulses, and certain oilseeds like the groundnut and soyabean. 2.98 Lipolysis Process of breakdown of fat into fatty acids through enzyme agency, and hence an indicator of quality and wholesomeness. 2.99 Load Test A test to determine the state of vitamin deficiency of a person by administering a specified dose and noting the excretion patiern; in a deficiency state, a lesser proportion will be excreted. 2.100 Lysine One of the essential amino acids, frequently marginal or deficient in cereal-based diets of poor quality. 2.101 Malnutrition Condition of the body usually resulting from deficiency or lack of balance in essential nutrients. especially the major nutrients. Excessive intake of nutrients can also cause malnutrition. 2.102 Malt Partly-germinated and toasted cereal grain, in which the natural food substances present ( like starches ) are modified, certain vitamins enhanced, and diastatic enzymes such as amylase, which is capable of breaking down starch developed. Barley and wheat malts are used to impart taste, vitamins and digestive enzymes to food formulations, and barley malt is employed in breweries and distilleries. 2.103 Malt Extract A sweet, light-brown syrupy liquid which is the concentrated water extract of malt, and is used for its toasted flavour and nutrient content in foods and medicines. 2.104 hllalting The sprouting of water-swollen grains of cereals like barley, wheat, sorghum and RAGI, followed by slow drying during which starch is partly digested. A dried and powdered extract of malt can be added to other foods such as milk powder. 2.105 Maltose A sugar consisting 6 derived from starch, chemically of two linked glucose units.

IS 9216 : 1992 2.106 Marasmus Condition in children that is believed to arise from inadequacy of both calories and protein and characterized by wasted muscle, stunted growth and a wrinkled `old man' appearance. 2.107 Margarine A product which resembles butter in consiscolour and flavour, except that it tency, no butter fat and is made from contains hydrogenated vegetable oils. 2.108 R'lass Feeding See Peeding Programme 2.109 Metabolism Chemical changes by which foods are built up into body tissues ( anabolism ) or broken down into energy or waste products destined for excretion ( catabolism ). 2.110 Methionine One of the essential amino acids containing which is frequently marginal or sulphur, deficient when the proteins are entirely of vegetarian origin. 2.111 Microgram One millionth part of a gram, or onethousandth part of a milligram, designated by the pg. 2.112 very small, quantities of vitamins and for proper of 2.113 The Powder resulting from removal from whole skim milk drying. or essential body. ( see 2.65 ). Dietary Protein quality that protein. growth. 2.118 Net Utilization This proportion of

measure of quality. It is the perratio of nitrogen intake; the nitrogen js the difference in carcass nitrogen ( determined experimentally ) between rats fed a test diet containing the test protein and those fed a diet free of protein. 2.119 Niacin Vitamin of the B-group, essential for proper cell function and growth. Niacin is found in groundnuts, DAL,!?, whole wheat and unmilled rice. Its deficiency causes peIlagra ( see 2.132 ). 2.120 Nitrogen Balance The difference of nitrogen, negative. 2.121 Norm A reference standard of measurement, is used for height or weight. 2.122 Nutrients Ingredients of foods with specific functions in the nourishment of the body. They comprise carbohydrates, proteins and fats as macro ( large ) nutrients, and many vitamins and minerals as micro ( small ) nutrients. 2.123 Nutrition Combination of processes by which the living organism receives and utilizes the food necessary for the maintenance of its functions and for the growth and renewal of its components. Also the study of food and its relationship to the well-bemg of the human or animal body. 2.124 Nutritional Status such as between intake and excretion which may be positive or

powdery almost all roller or

2.114 One-thousandth as mg. Minerals Inorganic substances ing the body, and iodine. Musty Odonr or mouldy 7 as for the iron, of a abbreviated

State of nourishment as measured by various appropriate tests in respect either of total nutrition or specific nutrients. 2.125 Nutritive Food Food, either natutal or processed, besides energy, contributes significantly more nutrients. which, one or

IS 9216 : 1992
2.126 Oilcake

The residue left after oilseeds using expeller solvent-extraction; it is used in animal feeds special edible quality feeding ( see 2.53 ). 2.127 Oilseeds

removal of oil from ( screw ) - pressing or is high in protein, and or fertilizers. Oilcake of can be used for human

phosphates are used to buffer formulated foods against changes in the acid-base balance. 2.135 Precursor A compound which can be used by the body to make another compound or nutrient, such An example is B-carotene, a as a vitamin. precursor of vitamin A; another is ergosterol, present in the skin, which is converted into vitamin D on exposure to sunlight. 2.136 Pre-school Children Group term used to describe children from 12 to 60 months age, who are often nutritionally vulnerable. Younger pre-school children fall in the age group 12-36 months, and older pre-school children in the group 36 to 60 months. 2.137 Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules Act and

Oil-bearing materials used as sources of or industrial oils; the chief oilseeds yield oils that are edible as such or sesame, refining are the groundnut, mustard, cottonseed, coconut, safflower, bean and sunflower. 2.128 Organoleptic
Qualities

edible which after rape/ soya-

Properties perceived by the senses, such colour, texture, fiavour, taste and aroma. 2.129 Osteomalacia

as

Softening of bones through failure to lay down calcium and phosphorus as a result of inadD and calcium, equate supply of vitamin usually observed in women of child-bearing age. 2.130 Osteoporosis Weakening of the bone matrix in old people through depletion of minerals, leading to insufficiency of bone material. 2.131 Pasteurization A process by which a food like milk is held at a high temperature for a short period, immediately followed by chilling, so as to destroy harmful and spoilage organism with minimal changes in composition, flavour and nutritive value. 2.132 Pellagra Skin itchiness, diarrhoea and dementia, resulting essentially from a deficiency of the vitamin niacin. 2.133 Peptization Stabilization of a colloidal system by the addition of peptizing agents; these prevent coalescence by inducing surface charges on the colloidal particles. 2.134 Phosphates Form in which phosphorus is found in foods and in the body. Phosphates play important roles in many biological reactions. Inorganic 8

The Act and Rules define and lay down standards of quality for both natural and formulated foods, transgressions of which are penalized under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act passed in 1954. 2.138 Protective Foods

Foods carrying a high level of vitamins, minerals and proteins, which play a role in safeguarding health. 2.139 Protein Concentrates Edible products with protein levels considerably higher than originally -present, and usually made from oilseeds like the groundnut, etc, from leaves, seasame, soya, cottonseed, or from fish. 2.140 Protein Efficiency Ratio A measure to that of skim milk studies in of the quality of a protein in relation a standard materia1 like casein or It is determined by growth powder. weaning rats. Energy Malnutrition Malnutrition ) ( PEM,

2.141 Protein Protein-Calorie

The condition arising from an insufficiency of energy ( calories ) in the diet, sometimes associated with protein deficiency to varying degrees ( see 2.92 and 2.106 ). 2.142 Protein Isolates Products with protein levels approximating 85 percent, made by separation, mechanical concentration, and/or acid precipitation from solution.

IS 9216 : 1992

2.143 Protein Quality or Score The biological value of any protein, depending in turn on its digestibility and amino acid It is expressed as a figure which balance. represents the percent of the most limiting amino acid in the protein to that of the same amino acid in the reference protein ( see 2.152 ). 2.144 Protein-Rich Food

international agencies. These RDA's' differ according to age, sex, nutritional stresses like pregnancy and lactation, and so on. 2.152 Reference Protein A high-quality protein, like milk or egg protein used as a reference compound. FAO reference protein is a theoretical protein made up of just the right quantities of individual amino acids believed to be required by the human body. 2.153 Ribsfiavin A water-soluble vitamin of the B-group, also termed as vitamin B,, essential for proper cell function and growth, deficiency of which leads to roughness of the eyes, tongue, mouth corners and skin; it is found in DALS, milk green leafy vegetables and liver. 2.154 Rickets Deformation or defective formation of bones, especially in childern, as a result of deficiency of vitamin D or calcium. 2.155 Roughage Undigestible fibres and cularly in cereals, fruits though not nutritious, food down the digestive to easy passage of stools and soft ( see 2.36 ). 2.156 Saccharin An artificial sweetening sweet as sugar and diabetics. 2.157 Salmonella A class of bacteria which cause such infections as typhoid, paratyphoid and gastro-enteritis. 2.158 Scurvy Exudation of blood from the capillaries into the skin, joints and gums brought about by a deficiency of vitamin C. 2.159 Solvent-Extracted A term describing the oil or meal which results from the treatment of oilseed materials with solvents such as hexane so as to dissolve and extract the oil. Use of food-grade solvents is obligatory when edible products are to be made. 2.160 Starch A carbohydrate 9 found in cereals, potatoes, compound 300 times as extensively used by starches found partiand vegetables which, help the movement of tract, and contribute by keeping them bulky

A-food product with a high Ievel of protein or a food carrying an enhanced level of protein compared to the normal product. 2.145 Protein Supplementation Blending two or more protein sources to get a better amino acid balance, thus enhancing the quality of the entire protein. 2.146 Proteins Macro-nutrients present in food, used by the body for building tissues and complex enzymes, and as a source of energy; chemically they consist of amino acids linked in straight head-to-tail chains ( see 2.8 >. 2.147 Proteolytic Enzymes into simpler

Enzymes which split proteins compounds during digestion. 2.148 Pulses

Edible seeds of leguminous plants, which include DALS and grams, and are important in the Indian diet as sources particularly of protein and B-group vitamins. 2.149 Pyridoxine One of the water-soluble B-group of vitamins, sometimes termed Vitamin B, which is essential for body metabolism. Pyridoxine deficiency leads to dermatitis, muscular weakness and, in children, to convulsions. It is present in meat, liver, vegetables and whole cereal grains. 2.150 Rancid Taste Any unpleasant departure from the normal taste of a food, usually brought on by oxidation, hydrolysis, fermentation and the like. The fat component is particularly susceptible to such off-flavours. 2.151 Recommended Daily Allowance ( RDA ) Optimum quantity of various nutrients required to maintain health, as recommended, from national or time to time, by authoritative

IS 9216 : 1992
bananas and other plant materials, and the largest nutrient present in a normal diet. 2.169 Any VANASPATI refined

Chemically, starch consists of units of glucose, into which it is broken down during digestion. 2.161 Sterilization

subjected

edible vegetable o~il or oils to a process of hydrogenation in any

form. 2.170 Vegetable Oils

Heat and/or steam treatment either foods Liquid fats obtained from the kernels of several to destroy micro-organisms which would cause oilseeds ( sesame, rape, mustard ) and certain legumes ( groundnut, soyabean ), or from fruit spoilage, or of containers or implements to coats ( coconut, palm, olive ). destroy infectious organisms. 2.162 Sub-Clinical Deficiency 2.171 Vitamins Essential food nutrients required in very smal1 quantities for the proper functioning of the body; chemically they are of widely diverse types. 2.172 Vitamin A A fat-soluble vitamin, chemically termed retinol, which is especially. essential in the visual process. The vitamm can also reach the body as its precursor B-carotene ( see 2.34 ). It is present in green leafy vegetables, papaya, milk, carrots, etc. 2.173 Vitamin B-Group This group consists of about a dozen watersoluble vitamins, each with a specific function. Among them are thiamine ( B, ), riboflavin ( B, ), pyridoxine ( I$ ), niacin, folic acid, biotin, pantothenic acid and cyano cobalamine ( B,, )* 2.174 Vitamin C in which the A water-soluble vitamin, chemically called ascorbic acid, whose absence of which causes scurvy ( see 2.158 ). It strengthens the bones and teeth, and protects against such infections as the common cold. It~is easily oxidized by air, especially in the presence of heat, light and metals. It is present in citrus fruits, AMLA, tomatoes, guava, grapes and sprouted grains and pulses. 2.175 Vitamin D A fat-soluble vitamin, chemically called calciferoi, important for bone formation, and in ensuring calcium deposition in bones. It can be produced in the skin by exposure to the sun and is present in fish liver oils. 2.176 Vitamin E A fat-soluble vitamin, chemically called tocopherol, which could be important in ensuring normal pregnancy, birth and lactation, and is an important antioxidant in the body.
10

of

State of health in which clinical signs are absent and cannot be detected in a routine medical check-up but can be detected biochemically. 2.163 Sucrose The sugar found in sugarcane, beetroot and many fruits, which in common speech is called table sugar or simply sugar. 2.164 Sugars The simplest form of carbohydrates. The consist of sugars simple monosacchar~ide 5-carbon ( ribose ) or 6-carbon ( glucose, fructose, galactose ) entities, while the disaccharides include such compounds as sucrose or cane sugar ( glucose + fructose ), lactose or milk sugar ( glucose + galactose ) and maltose ( glucose + glucose ). 2.165 Supplementation Addition to food diet is deficient. 2.166 Thiamine A water-soluble vitamin of the B-group, also termed vitamin B,, which is found in whole cereals, DALS, nuts, meat and liver; its d&i_ ciency leads to loss of appetite, muscular weakness and moodiness. 2.167 Toxins Harmful substances which are present natu_ rally or enter foods adventitiously, or are elaborated in them by bacteria or moulds, 2.168 Urease An enzyme which hydrolyses urea to ammonia, carbon dioxide and water. It is present in soyabean, soya proteins, and several D&S and grams, and is destroyed by moist heat treatment. of a nutrient

IS 9216 : 1992 It is present in the germs vegetable oils. 2.177 Vulnerable Groups Segments of the populatron most susceptible These have been generally to malnutrition. children, pregnant identified as weaning women and lactating ( nursing ) mothers especially of low-income groups. 2.178 Water-Soluble Vitamins of cereals and in 2.180 Weaning Food One designed to provide all the nutrients required by a child as it moves over from breast milk to other foods, say from the age of six months. 2.181 Xerophthalmia Dryness, night blindness and finally opacity of the cornea resulting from the deficiency of vitamin A and also reversible by administration of the latter at an early stage ( see 2.90 ). 2.182 Yeast A class of micro-organisms, for example, cerevisiae, containing enzymes which are used as ferments in baking ( baker's yeast ) or brewing ( brewer's yeast ); these yeasts, and food yeast such as Candida utilis, have protein of fair biological quality as we11 as B-group vitamins.
Saccharomyces

These comprise all the vitamins of the B-group, and vitamin C. 2.179 Weaning The gradual transition from breast milk to other liquid and solid foods, which could constitute a danger point in nutritional terms.

11

_'

I

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Siandards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by Details of conditions under BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. which a Iicence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright

No part of these publications may be reproduced of all its publications. in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS.
Revlsioa of lodian Standards

Indian Standards are revlewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in any, are issued from time to time. Comments on this lndlan Standard may be possession of the latest amendments or edition. sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. FADC 21 ( 43 )

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

110002 Telegrams ( Common
: Manaksanstha

to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 I 331 13 75

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western Branches : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 53 38 43,

37 85 61, 37 86 62 53 16-40, 235 04 42, 235 23 15 632 78 58, 632 78 92

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113
: Manakalaya,

235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91,

E9 MIDC, Marol, BOMBAY 400093

Andheri ( East )

: AHMADABAD,

BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORF, FART-DABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed at hintwell Printers. Aligarh. India

