IS 13259 : 1992
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

VTiFFtrl Wan

ym

- WdwfTm vkfT< T+T +wc
Indian Standard

AIRCRAFTTOW

TRACTORS-PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
UDC

629'114'2 : 629'7

@I BIS d92

BUREAU
MANAK March~1992

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group 3

Air Cargo Handling Sectional Committee,

HMD 13

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Air Cargo Handling Sectional Committee had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical ~Engineering Division Council. This Indian Standard identifies and summarizes the various factors that shall be considered evaluated in establishing performance requirements for aircraft tow tractors. It is not within aircraft tractors. the scope of this standard to specify a comprehensive and

set of design criteria for

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IS0 7717-1985 `Aircraft requirements factors for design', issued by the Four-wheel-drive tow tractors - Performance International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ).

IS 13259: 1992

lidian Standard

AIRCRAFTTOW
1 SCOPE

TRACTORS- PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
1) Parallel or nose-in at gates,
2) Spacing from other aircraft,
to other fixed physical 3) Proximity features, 4) Need for remote parking; Paving strength and surfacing of ramps, taxiways, runways and access roads; Road clearance and bridge and overpass limitations; Anticipated towing distances and routes between aircraft maintenancelstorage areas and cargo/passenger terminals; Maximum approach and breakover angles to be negotiated on ramps, taxiways, runways and access roads; and equipment limitations, Other towing physical or regulatory. Particular consideration shall be given to the local applicable government or airport authority regulations.

1.1 This standard provides a summary of design factors that shall be considered in establishing performance requirements as well as various tabulated design data and explanatory examples. d) 2 DESIGN FACTORS The following design factors shall be considered and evaluated in establishing aircraft tow tractor performance requirements. 2.1 Aircraft Characteristics The following account: parameters shall be taken into g) e) f)

4 Dimensions; b) Number of landing gear and wheels; 4 Attach point for towing; 4 Gross weight, empty weight, and weight
distribution Breakaway e>

h)

on the wheels; resistance of the aircraft as a percentage of aircraft weight for initial motion directed:

2.3 Tow Vehicle - General Characteristics The following account: parameters shall be taken into

1) straight ahead, and 2) in a turn; f) Rolling resistance of the aircraft as a percentage of aircraft weight for constant motion On various surfaces on: 1) a horizontal plane, and 2) a grade; 9) Turn radius of the aircraft; h) Angularity limitation of the aircraft tow fitting; j) Strength of the aircraft tow fitting when loads are applied: 1) directly fore and aft, and 2) in the direction of minimum strength; and k) Amount of thrust of engines at idle. 2.2 Airport Environment The following .account: Maximum a> parameters shall be taken into
r

a) Dimensional limitations; b) Visibility requirements; c) Operator's location(s); d) Steering characteristics to accommodate the requirements identified in 2.1 and 2.2 for the possible configuration of: 1) single axle, 2) multiple axle: i) co-ordinated steering, ii) crab steering; the requirements identified in 2.2 and 2.5; d Vehicle power and power train; and service h) Maintenance requirements accessibility; jJ Requirements for integral electrical power equipment to support the aircraft systems during towing and standby operations; to the aircraft k) Method of attachment (for example, type and location of the tow hitch ); m) Requirements for ground control communications ;

4 Braking capability; f) Wheels arid tyres to accommodate

b) Minimum 4

grades to be negotiated; speeds required for crossing active taxiways and runways; Parking requirements: 1

IS 13259 :1992 n) Operational lighting and service compartment lighting; p) _Environmental location; protecting for operator's For this purpose, the weight of the tow vehicle is considered as being equally distributed on the four wheels. The effect of load transfer due to the drawbar height and to acceleration or deceleration is not considered, since it is usually of minor effect. 2.5.2 Traction Traction needs can be changed to match changing friction co-efhcients by specifying the capability to ballast the tow vehicle to higher weights. However, the transmitted engine power shall be suitable to use the extra ballast weight. Single and multiple wheel slippage may also be alleviated by specifying the use of such items as `limited slip' differentials that transmit the available torque to the wheel(s) that are not slipping. 3 DESIGN EXAMPLES 3.1 General The following items, although correct at this time, should only be considered as general guidance. It is highly recommended that the design or specifying engineer reverify any data that he uses for a specific situation. The multiple and inter-related factors affecting the towing forces make it impossible to devise formulae that account for all variables. 3.2 Acceleration This is velocity aircraft standstill constant Resistance ( AR ) DATA EXPLANATION AND

q) Special requirements imposed by aircraft manufacturers and/or regulatory bodies; and r) Special requirements imposed by the tractor owner. 2.4 Tow Vehicle Power Train Requirements to 2.4.3, shall

The parameters given in 2.4.1 be taken into account. 2.4.1 Engine Power

The tow vehicle shall be capable of developing enough power to move both the tow vehicle and the aircraft under the design considerations of weight, direction, speed, surface conditions and resistance to motion. 2.4.2 Rim Pull
It is nccfssary

to consider the engine power and torque, the rature of the drive, which may be a torque converter and transmission, a generator and electric motor, or other type, plus the axle wheel characteristics, and to ensure that adequate torque is developed and transmitted as available rim pull to move the towing and towed vehicles. For the tractor to move itself, its resistance to motion shall be subtracted from `rim -pull'. This is the towing capability usually referred to as `drawbar pull'.
NOTE - `Rim pull' is the effort available at the ground due to the tractor driving mechanism.

the inertial resistance to a change in that shall be overcome to cause an on a level surface to move from to some constant speed, or from one speed to another constant speed.

2.4.3 Applied Force Limits Consideration shall be given to a means of limiting the forces applied to the aircraft tow fittings to prevent damage to them. This may be accomplished through the use of shear devices in the aircraft towbar or through a means cf limiting the drawbar pull of the tow vehicle ( that is, imposing a torque limit on the available rim pull or, removing ballast from the tractor). 2.5 Tow Vehicle 7 2.5.1 Weight The ability of a tow vehicle with sufficient power to start a given load without slipping its wheels is ~dependent upon its weight. When the resistance to motion has been defined for the specific design situation, the weight required to allow the tow vehicle to develop the drawbar pull necessary to accomplish the desired motion on a surface with a given coefficient of friction can be determined. Weight and Traction

The factor normally used to calculate aircraft AR is 0'5 percent of the aircraft weight for each 0'05 m/s2 of acceleration. Thus, if the desired acceleration is 0'15 m/s2 to minimize impact loading, then: AR = 0'5 percent x ig = 1'5 percent X aircraft weight

X aircraft weight

3.3 Rolling Resistance ( RR ) This is a dynamic resistance which is composed of the friction between the tyres and the surface on which they move, the friction of the wheel bearings and the adhesion between the tyres and the surface on which they move. The force required to overcome this resistance can be expressed as a percentage of the weight of the aircraft to be moved. It is the force, in kilonewtons, needed to keep the aircraft rolling at a constant speed over a level surface. Based on empirical tests, various

IS 13259 : 1992 factors of rolling resistance have been developed and are rabulated as follows:
Surface Type Rolling Resistance ( Percentage of Aircraft Weight ) r-----h --_-_

7

Dry Surface Hard asphalt Concrete road Snow and ice Snow ( hard packed ) Snow ( soft > 1'4 1'8 2'0 2'5 3'3

Wet Surface 1'8 2'2 2'5 3.1 4'1

at which motion is impending. Therefore, at the point of impending motion, the combined value of the acceleration and rolling resistances is higher than it is after motion has been initiated. This static breakaway resistance ( BR) is considered to be 4 percent of aircraft weight on a straight pull and nearly 8 percent in a turn. Total breakaway resistance ( BRt ) is: BRt = B-R, -t ~GR + ET As soon as the aircraft begins breakaway requirement falls acceleration and rolling resistances dynamic values. Average BRs = aircraft weight. 3.7 Rim Pull ( RP ) This is the total force, in kilonewtons, which is available at the outer radius of the tractor tyres for transmission to the surface on which the tyres rotate: RP= TXRXeXC r where T = gross engine torque, in kilonewton metres; R = overall gear reduction of the drive train; e = mechanical efficiency of the drive line ; C = correction factor for engine torque to determine net torque available at the flywheel; r = rolling radius of the loaded driving tyres, in metres. 3.8 Tractive %ffort ( TE ) Assuming adequate rim pull is available, TE is the maximum force which can be exerted by the tractor to produce motion without slipping the wheels. It is a function of the tractor weight and the coefficient of traction of the surface: TE = u x tractor weight The coefficient of traction ( u ) is a series of constants for varying road surface conditions. These constants are normally tabulated as follows:
Condition -u

to move, the off and the revertto their 4 percent of

Under normal conditions, RR is usually considered to be about 1 percent to 2 percent of aircraft weight in a straight pull and 2 percent to 4 percent in a turning manoeuvre. An average rolling resistance of 2 percent is considered reasonable and RR == 2 percent of aircraft weight. 3.4 Grade Resistance (:GR ) This is the amount of drawbar pull needed to maintain movement of an aircraft at constant speed on a given grade. GR is considered to be 1 percent of aircraft weight for each 1 percent of grade. Percent of grade is the number of metres vertical rise for every 100 m in the horizontal. Generally, for airports, an average 2 percent is considered reasonable GR = 2 percent of aircraft weight. 3.5 Engine Thrust ( ET ) The thrust produced by idling jet engines is an important consideration in determining tow tractor design criteria. Although the thrust can be positive or negative, depending upon whether the aircraft is being towed forwards or backwards, the primary concern is for the thurst produced during a push out operation. This thrust is additive to the other factors resisting motion of the aircraft and shall be overcome by the tractor. The total force, in kilonewtons, produced by engine thrust will vary depending on the type of engine and the number of engines running. Idle thrust data are available from the engine manufacturer. The number of engines started prior to push out, if any, is a matter of individual airline operating procedure. 3.6 Breakaway Resistance (BR ) This is the sum of the inertial and frictional resistance to initial motion offered by the aircraft which shall be overcome to start the mrcraft moving. The highest value of static resistance to motion occurs at that point grade of and the

Average Glaze ice Wet asphalt _' /I Dry asphalt Wet concrete Dry concrete Hard snow Oily concrete 3

0'45 0'10 0'40 0'80 0'50 0'80 0'20 0'40

IS 13259 : 1992
3.9 Drawbar Pull ( DBP ) 3.9.1 Drawbar Pull Available ( DBPa )

This is the force, in kilonewtons, which the tractor is capable of producing at its tow hitch. It is the tractive effort minus the force required to move the tractor. Assuming, with the exception of engine thrust ( ET ), that the same resistances to motion which apply to the aircraft also apply to the tractor: DBPa ( at breakaway )

DBPr = ~BRt = BRs + GR + ET DBPr = 0'981 [ ( 0'04 X 250 000 ) + + ( 0'02 x 250 000 ) ] + 2 500 = 9 810 + 4 905 + 2 500 DBPr = 17215 daN~z 172 kN k) The tractive effort of the tractor at breakaway, therefore, shall equal the drawbar pull required to move the aircraft ( DBP, ) plus the force required to move the _ tractor, that is: TE = DBPr + BRt ( oftractor > = 172 + (BRs X tractor weight) i- GR = 172 + ( 0'04 + 0'02 ) ( tractor weight ) = 172 + O'S ( tractor weight ) Also .TE = u x tractor weight = 0'45 X tractor weight 172 + 0'06 ( tractor weight = 0'45 ( tractor weight 172 - 0'45 ( tractor weight - 0'06 ( tractor weight 172 = 0'39 ( tractor weight Tractor Tractor weight = -&$mass =

=TE - BRt ( of the tractor ) = ( u X tractor weight ) - ( 4 percent x tractor weight + %R of the tractor ) DBPs ( after breakaway ) =TE-(AR-l-RR+GR)ofthe tractor 3.9.2 Drawback Pull Required ( DBPr ) This is the force required to move the aircraft, that is: DBPr ( at breakaway ) = BRt ( of the aircraft ) DBPr ( to accelerate the aircraft on a slope ) =(AR+RR+GR+ET) DBPr ( to maintain the aircraft at a constant speed on a slope ) =(RR+GR+ET) To make sure that the tractor is sized for the worst condition, it is assumed that the aircraft is being pushed up the slope with engine thrust working against the tractor. 3.10 Example It is desired to specify a tractor to move a 250 000 kg aircraft against 25 kN of engine Design parameters are established as thrust. follows:

) ) ) ) )

M 441'4 kN ==:45 000 kg

opold9~l

TE = 0'45 x 41'4 = 198'63 kN ==:200 kN m) For icy conditions Tractor weight = u = 0'10 and 172 o.lo _ o.06

172 =--433COkN 0'04 Since it would be impratical to ballast the tractor to get this extra weight, an alternative means shall be found to change the coefficient of traction. Consideration should be given to chains, studded tyresi sanding the road surface, etc.

4 Coefficient

of friction = 0'45 ( average ) or 0'10 ( worst ) b) Maximum surface slope = 2 percent 4 Maximum tow speed = 16 km/h d) Coefficient of static breakaway resistance BR2 = 4 percent, Max Coefficient of acceleration resistance 4 AR = 1'5 percent, Max ' f) Coefficient of rolling resistance RR = 2 percent, Mar 8) Coefficient of grade resistance ,' 11 GR = 2 percent, Max h) Assume that resistance constants for the aircraft also apply to the tractor j ) Drawbar pull required ( DBPr ) for breakaway equals the sum of the aircraft resistances or BRt.
4

d The approximate

power, in kilowatts, to overcome breakaway far both tractor and aircraft assuming an increase in spewed ~from 0 up to 1 km/h can be computed as: Required tractive effort ( kN ) 4 50 kW required

Power =

Power -- E"-= 4

The approximate power, in kilowatts, at various speeds can be expressed as: Power=

Required tractive effort X speed ( km/h ) 4

IS 13259 : 1992 Consider the example of accelerating the 250 000 kg aircraft and 45 000 kg tractor from just above breakaway to a speed of a km/h up a 2 percent grade with the engines off, that is: TE x Speed Power = 4 = ( AR + RR + GR ) ( 295 000 X Speed ) 4 5 ( 0'15 + 0'02 + 0'02) ( 295 000 X 0'009 81 x I 4 -4OkW to accelerate to allowances -operation. for unusual or extreme conditions ~of

In many cases, the assumed values of the example will be found to be quite stringent, with normal operation not requiring anywhere near the computed values of the example. The primary requirements of an airplane tow tractor are: a) A configuration, the airplane; b) Adequate c) Enough traction. 3.11 Braking 3.11.1 In practice, an aircraft is usually accelerated slowly from standstill to desired velocity, both to minimize shock and to conserve both fuel and the drive machinery. 3.11.2 When braking of the aircraft is done by the tow tractor, it shall also be done slowly to minimize shock and to conserve the drive machinery. 3.11.3 The design engineer shall remember that the aircraft is being handled by a tractor which has between one-fifth and one-tenth of the aircraft weight. 3.11.4 The tractor is connected to the aircraft by a towbar which swivels at the tractor and is rigidly attached to the aircraft nose wheel. Should the tractor skid during braking, directional control is lost, and the aircraft tends to aggravate the skid due to the towbar angle. For this reason, it is imperative that the tractor maintains directional control; hence, it shall not skid. 3.11.5 Experience indicates that the maximum deceleration that can be expected of a tow tractor is a force of approximately 0'6 times the tractor weight, and this requires ample brakes with good thermal capacity. For normal operation, no more braking shall be used than the acceleration, or at most 4 percent, the same as the breakaway resistance ( BR ). 3.11.6 Braking of an aircraft by a tow tractor could be likened to pulling ten automobiles with just one automobile. Consider the problem of deceleration of the entire eleven using the brakes of the first car. The first car shall not lose directional control. weight that is, compatible with

rim pull to start the load; and to provide adequate

Under the same conditions, 5 km/h would require: 5X40=200 kW
On

a level surface the power required to accelerate to 2 km/h would be: Power = ( AR + RR ) ( 295 000 ) X 2 4 = ( 0.015 + 0'02 ) ( 295 000 x 0'009 81 x 2 ) 4 =50kW To accelerate to 10 km/h would require 250 kW. To keep the aircraft and tractor moving at a constant speed on the grade requires: 0.04 x 295000 X 0.98 1 = 11 576 daN tractive effort or 29 kW per kilometre/hour. A tractor capable of developing a tractive effort of 150 kW could keep this aircraft moving on the grade at 5 km/h. If the 2 percent grade were eliminated, the tractor could then keep the aircraft moving at 10 km/h. The power in this example is expressed as tractive effort. However, a type mechanical drive tow tractor can probably deliver about six-tenths of its engine power as tractive effort. The drive train efficiency, peculiarities of the ratios and other power-sapping factors require about four-tenths of the grosspower.Electricdrive tractors deliver approximately eight-tenths of their engine power as tractive effort. The tractor which develops 150 kW tractive effort, therefore, has an engine of 250 kW for mechanical drive or 188 kW for electric drive. In practice, the design OK specifying engineer should determine, by actual test the correct values for normal operation in the required circumstances, and should make the necessary

5

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of the Indian Standards, Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Brreau of Indian Standards Act, 1956 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are issued from possession of the to BIS giving the are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent following reference :

Dot : No. HMD 13 ( 0947 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern
: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75

37 86 62 53 38 43 235 0216 6 32 92 95

160036 6001~13

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 L_ Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE, BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed

at Swatantra

Bharat Press, Delhi,

India

