URAT ATP IS 4410 (Part 15/Sec 1) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ad acl uhani A Hafa 
Meghacit 


UTT 15 ASW VLA 
SATU 1 BAT Ufeurare 


(TEC JRIH) 


Glossary of Terms Relating to River 
Valley Projects 
Part 15 Canal Structures 


Section 1 General Terms 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2023 


UR AAG SRI 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS HAF, 9 GEG Ve WHR AMI, Ag ZN - 110002 
S = MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2023 Price Group 6 


Canals and Cross Drainage Works Sectional Committee, WRD 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 15/Sec 1) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Canals and Cross Drainage Works Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources 
Division Council. 


This standard includes technical terms, the precise definitions of which are required to avoid ambiguity in their 
interpretation. Part 15 covers the important field of canal structures. However, in view of the wide scope of 
subject; it is covered in different sections. Other sections in the series are: 


Section 2 Transitions 

Section 3 Flumes 

Section 4 Regulating works 
Section 5 Cross drainage works 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the 
standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in 
this country. 


This first revision of the standard has been brought out to bring the standard in the latest style and format of the 
Indian Standards. In the revision of this standard, assistance has been derived in updating the definitions after 
the revision of ICID Multilingual technical dictionary on irrigation and drainage in 2009. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test or analysis, should be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 
: 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4410 (Part 15/Sec 1) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO RIVER VALLEY 


PROJECTS 
PART 15 CANAL STRUCTURES 


Section 1 General Terms 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 15/Sec 1) covers the definitions 
of general terms relating to canal structures. 


2 GENERAL TERMS 
2.1 Access Structure/Communication 


Structures which provide communication across 
irrigation canals or drains and means of access to 
all parts of the distribution system. 


2.2 Air Entrainment 


The phenomenon of entraining appreciable 
percentage of air by the sheet of flow passing with 
high velocities over chutes or spillways. 


2.3 Bottle Neck/Throat 


A contracted section of a channel or structure or 
constricted section of a close conduit with a 
minimum flow section that is always less than the 
normal cross section. 


2.4 Bowing of Bed 


A small concave curvature in the bed of a canal 
section (see Fig. 1). 


NA 


\ — 


FIG. 1 BOWING OF BED 
2.5 Bowing of Flow 


A phenomenon of unstable and non-uniform water 
surface in the cross section of a channel, having a 
flat and non-erodible bed, due to unstable 
streamlines set up by some change in flow (such as 
a transition). The water surface has tendency to 
swing from one side to another due to which it is, 
sometimes, referred to as swinging of flow. 


2.6 Bowing of Jump 


A phenomenon of formation of curved water 
surface of the hydraulic jump in transverse 
direction due to variation in flow intensity on a flat 
bed. 


2.7 Branch Staunch 


A wall off shooting from a wall, usually, at right 
angles to it. 


2.8 Bulking of Flow 


Swelling of flow due to air entrainment resulting in 
increase in downstream water depth in chute at the 
entrance to the stilling pool. 


2.9 Celerity 


Speed of propagation of gravity waves or surges 
over the water surface in an open channel. 


2.10 Cistern/Water Cushion 


A pool of water maintained to take the impact of 
water overflowing a dam, chute, drop, or other 
spillway structures. A cistern provided to maintain 
water seal at the end of lower leg of a siphon is also 
referred to as water cistern. 


2.11 Coefficient of Contraction 


Ratio between the decreased length, area of section, 
or volume and the original length, area of section, 
or volume. 


2.12 Coefficient of Discharge 


A coefficient by which the theoretical discharge of 
water through orifices, weirs or other hydraulic 
structures, must be multiplied to obtain the actual 
discharge. 


2.13 Constriction 


A short length of a closed conduit/open channel 
with a flow section less than the cross section of 
the main conduit open channel, in the form of a 
partition or diaphragm or a throat, with the cross 


IS 4410 (Part 15/Sec 1) : 2023 


section varying along the conduit/open channel 
axis. 


2.14 Constriction Rate of Flow Meter 


A constriction fitted with an instrument indicating 
the instantaneous rate of flow. 


2.15 Constriction Water Meter 


A constriction connected with an instrument that 
integrates the volume of water flowing through the 
constriction. 


2.16 Contraction 


The extent to which the cross-section area of a jet, 
nappe or stream is decreased after passing an 
orifice, weir or notch. 


2.17 Conveyance Structure 


Structures built to help provide general control and 
conveyance of the flow from the intake structures 
to the area to be irrigated. 


2.18 Crest 


The line or area of the spillway, weir or other 
regulation structures in a canal system to which 
water shall rise before passing over the structure. 


2.19 Crest Length 


In case of weirs, spillways, overflow dams across 
rivers and side spillways in rivers and canals, it is 
the linear measurement of the crest at right angles 
to the direction of flow. In case of other irrigation 
and drainage structures, it is the linear 
measurement of the crest in the direction of flow 
over the crest. In case of flumed structure, it is 
equivalent to throat length (see 2.44). 


2.20 Crest Width 


In case of weirs, spillways, overflow dams across 
rivers and side spillways in rivers and canals, it is 
the linear measurement of the crest in the direction 
of flow. In case of other irrigation and I drainage 
structures, it is the linear measurement of the crest 
at right, angles to the direction of flow over the 
crest. In case of flumed structure, it is equivalent to 
throat width (see also 2.83). 


2.21 Curtain Wall 


A cross wall built under the floor of a hydraulic 
structure with the object of dividing the work into 
suitable compartments or to provide cut-offs. A 
wall placed at the top of the inlet and extending 
into the water to ward off ice and drift, usually with 
coarse rack, is also referred to as curtain wall. 


2.22 Cut-Off 


A transverse thin wall, collar or other structure to 
reduce percolation water under surfaces of a 
structure or through porous strata. It is also called 
as Cut-Off wall. 


2.23 Discharge Intensity/Intensity of Flow — 
Discharge per unit width of a waterway. 


2.24 Efficiency of Hydraulic Jump 


The ratio of the specific energy after the jump to 
that of before the jump. 


2.25 Energy Gradient Line 


A line joining the elevation of the energy head of a 
stream. The stream line is above the hydraulic 
gradient line a distance equivalent to the velocity 
head at each section along the stream. 


2.26 Energy Loss in Hydraulic Jump 


The difference in specific energies before and after 
the jump. 


2.27 Entrance Head/Entry Head 


The head required to cause flow into a conduit or 
other structure; it includes both entrance loss and 
velocity head. 


2.28 Entrance Loss 


The energy lost when a stream of water passes into 
a hydraulic structure the loss being caused by 
eddies at the inlet. 


2.29 Flow Constriction 


A constriction inserted between the inlet and outlet 
sections of a closed conduit. 


2.30 Freeboard 


The vertical distance between the maximum flow 
line including afflux and top of bank. The clearance 
between the lowest point of the super structure 
(springing level in case of arched structures) and 
the maximum water level, including afflux, is also 
referred to as freeboard. 


2.31 Friction Slope 


The friction head or loss per unit length of conduit. 
For most conditions of flow, the friction slope 
coincides with the energy gradient, but where a 
distinction is made between energy losses due to 
bends, expansions, impacts, etc., a distinction must 
also be made between the friction slope and the 
energy gradient. Friction slope is equal to the bed 


surface slope only for uniform flow in open 
channels. 


2.32 Gradual, Hydraulic Drop 


A gradual change, not a local phenomenon in the 
water surface from subcritical to supercritical state 
of flow. 


2.33 Height of Hydraulic Jump 


The difference between depth of water downstream 
and upstream of the jump. 


2.34 Hurdling 


The action of water flowing over the top of the 
baffle or baffles with a high velocity, like a horse 
taking a fence. 


2.35 Hydraulic Bore 


A standing wave which advances upstream in an 
open conduit from a point where the flow has 
suddenly been stopped. The flowing water piles up 
in the channel against the obstruction that caused 
the stoppage, and as it teaches a height above the 
normal water surface, approximately its velocity 
head, the increased depth of water moves upstream 
in a wavelike shape. 


2.36 Hydraulic Drop 


A local phenomenon in which a rapid change in the 
state of flow from subcritical to supercritical, 
resulting in a steep depression in the water surface, 
is caused by an abrupt change in the channel slope 
or cross section. 


2.37 Hydraulic Friction 


A force resisting flow which is exerted on contact 
surface between a stream and its containing 
channel. It usually includes the normal eddies and 
cross currents attendant upon turbulent flow 
occasioned by the roughness character of the 
boundary surface, moderate curvature; and normal 
channel variations. 


2.38 Hydraulic Jump 


The sudden and usually turbulent passage of water 
from low level that is below the critical depth to a 
high level that is above critical depth during which 
the velocity passes from supercritical to subcritical 
state. It represents the limiting condition of the 
surface curve wherein it tends to become 
perpendicular to the stream bed. (see also 2.68) 


IS 4410 (Part 15/Sec 1) : 2023 


2.39 Inflow Constriction 


A constriction inserted at the inlet to a closed 
conduit. 


2.40 Invert 


The lowest portion in the internal cross section of 
an artificial channel or pipe or component of a 
hydraulic structure. 


2.41 Kinetic Flow Factor 


A factor defined by twice the ratio of the kinetic 
energy head to the potential energy head. It 
measures the degree of rapidity or tranquility of 
flow and obtains, in general, a standard by means 
of which the state of flow may be qualified 
numerically. 


2.42 Kineticity/Velocity Head Ratio 


Ratio of the kinetic energy head to the potential 
energy head. 


2.43 Length of Hydraulic Jump 


The distance measured from the front face of the 
jump to a point on the surface immediately 
downstream from the roller. 


2.44 Length of Throat 


Length of the throat section measured along the 
axis or center line of the structure or the conduit. 


2.45 Line Throat/Point Throat — Throat 
having no length. (see Fig. 2). 


~N— THROAT 


FIG. 2 POINT THROAT OR LINE THROAT 
2.46 Long Throat 


A throat/having an appreciable linear dimension in 
the direction of flow. 


2.47 Loss of Head 


The energy of a given flow that is lost (converted 
into heat and, therefore, of no use), as a result of 
friction, eddies and impact expressed as a heat, that 
is as the height through which that flow would have 
to fall to produce an equivalent amount of energy. 


IS 4410 (Part 15/Sec 1) : 2023 


2.48 Measuring Constriction 


A constriction inserted into a closed conduit in 
order to produce a pressure drop for measuring the 
rate of flow. 


2.49 Modularity Point 


It is the point on the curve drawn between upstream 
and downstream water depths for a fall, weir, 
overflow dam or like structure at which the linear 
relation between the two depths ends. 


2.50 Navigation Structures 


Structures built in canals or navigable waterways 
where headway and other facilities exist or are 
provided for the direct passage of vessels and 
boats. 


2.51 Neutral Depth/Normal Depth 


The depth of water in an open conduit that 
corresponds to uniform velocity for a given flow. It 
is the hypothetical depth under conditions of steady 
non-uniform flow; the depth for which the surface 
and bed are parallel. 


2.52 Normal Flow 


Uniform flow at normal depth. The flow which 
prevails over the greatest duration of the time; the 
mean flow or the average flow. 


2.53 Oblique Jump 


When a supercritical flow is deflected inward in the 
course of the flow by a vertical boundary, the depth 
of flow will increase abruptly along a wave front 
which extends out from the point of boundary 
discontinuity at a wave angle B that depends in 
magnitude on the angle of deflection 0 of the 
boundary. This phenomenon resembles a normal 
hydraulic jump but with the change in depth 
occurring along an oblique front (see Fig. 3) 


FIG. 3 OBLIQUE JUMP 
2.54 Oscillating Jump 


A type of hydraulic jump in which the oscillating 
jet enters the jump bottom to surface and back 


again with no periodicity. The Froude number of 
the incoming flow in this case is between 2.5 and 
4.5. 


2.55 Outflow Constriction 


A constriction inserted at the outlet of a closed 
conduit or reservoir. 


2.56 Pitching 


A protective covering of properly packed or built in 
materials on the earthen surface slopes (side 
pitching) and beds (bed pitching) of irrigation 
canals, drainage channels, and river banks, etc., to 
protect them from the action of water. 


2.57 Protective Structures 


Structures to protect the canal system from storm 
or drainage water. 


2.58 Recovery of Head 


A phenomenon associated with the flow at outlet 
ends or at expansions by which the water surface 
rises due to reduction in velocity head. 


2.59 Regulating Structures 


Structures built in/across canals to provide specific 
control and measurement of water during 
conveyance to a location of usage or disposal. 


2.60 Relative Height of Hydraulic Jump 


Ratio of the height of hydraulic jump and the 
specific energy of flow upstream of the jump. 


2.61 Relative Initial Depth of Hydraulic Jump 


Ratio of the depth of flow downstream of the jump 
and the specific energy of flow upstream of the 
jump. 


2.62 Relative Sequent Depth of Hydraulic Jump 


Ratio of the depth of flow downstream of the jump 
and the specific energy of flow upstream of the 
jump. 


2.63 Return Wall 


Walls, carried transverse to the center line of the 
stream, starting off either from the abutment 
directly or from any type of wing walls, whether in 
line with the current, splayed, curved, or straight. 


2.64 Ribbed Pitching 


Pitching having a system of regular projections to 
offer greater friction to the flow. 


2.65 Skew Throat 


A throat whose inlet end, or outlet end, or both, are 
skew to the flow. 


2.66 Specific Energy 


The sum of elevation of free surface above the bed 
and the velocity head at that section, expressed in 
units of length. 


2.67 Splitter Wall 


Longitudinal walls provided in open channels or 
basin expansions, for recovery of head and 
equalization of outlet velocity or reduction in 
expansion length. 


2.68 Standing Wave 


a) A wave formed on the surface of a body 
of water when a stream enters such a body 
at a high velocity. The energy of the 
entering stream is dissipated by turbulence 
and by maintaining the water comprising 
the wave at the higher elevation above the 
normal surface of the body of water. 


b) A sudden rise in the water surface, 
generally fixed in position, such as a 
hydraulic jump; a standing wave may 
exist, however, where the hydraulic jump 
is not involved. 


c) A type of wave in which the surface of the 
water oscillates vertically between fixed 
nodes without progressing. The points of 
maximum vertical rise and fall are 
antinodes or loops. It may be the result of 
two equal progressive waves travelling 
through each other, but in opposite 
directions. 


2.69 Staunching Forks 


A pattern of staunching branches emanating from 
the abutment in a fork-like manner. 


2.70 Staunching Wall 


Walls projecting from abutment into the 
embankment to intercept seepage. 


2.71 Steady Jump 


A type of hydraulic jump in which the downstream 
extremity of the surface roller and the point at 
which the high velocity jet tends to leave the flow, 
occurs at practically the same vertical section. The 
action and position of this jump are least sensitive 
to variation in tailwater depth. The jump is well 
balanced and the performance is at its best. The 


IS 4410 (Part 15/Sec 1) : 2023 


Froude number of the incoming flow in this case is 
between 4.5 and 9.0. 


2.72 Strong Jump 


A type of hydraulic jump -in which the high 
velocity jet grabs intermittent slugs of water rolling 
down the front face of the jump generating waves 
downstream, and a rough surface can prevail. The 
Froude number of the incoming flow in this case is 
more than 9.00. 


2.73 Super Contraction 


An excess contraction imposed on the throat of a 
flume more than required. 


2.74 Surge 


A momentary increase in flow or elevation which 
passes longitudinally along the channel as a wave 
resulting from sudden opening or closing of the 
gates controlling the flow in the channel. 


2.75 Theoretical Recovery of Head 


The computed reduction in velocity head at outlets 
or expansions. 


2.76 Toe Wall 


A low wall built of masonry or concrete or stones 
without using mortar, below the bed or floor level 
to provide footing for the sloped pitching or face of 
an embankment. 


2.77 Undular Jump 


A type of hydraulic jump in which the water 
surface shows undulations. The Froude number of 
incoming flow in this case is between 1 and 1.7. 


2.78 Velocity Head 


The distance a body shall fall freely under the force 
of gravity to acquire the velocity it possesses. 


2.79 Velocity of Approach 


The mean velocity in the conduit or stream 
immediately upstream of a weir, dam, Venturi 
throat, orifice or other structures. 


2.80 Velocity of Retreat 


The mean velocity immediately downstream of a 
structure. 


2.81 Warped Pitching 


Pitching on the upstream or downstream sides of 
hydraulic structures having warped surfaces. 


IS 4410 (Part 15/Sec 1) : 2023 


2.82 Weak Jump 


A type of hydraulic jump in which a series of small 
rollers develop on the surface of the jump, but the 
downstream water surface remains smooth. The 
velocity throughout is fairly uniform, and the 
energy loss is low. The Froude number of the 
incoming flow in this case is between 1.7 and 2.5. 


2.83 Width of Throat 


The minimum contracted/constricted width of the 
throat section of a structure or open conduit/closed 
conduit. 


2.84 Wing Walls 


The wall of a dam structure extending from the 
headwall downstream a distance equal to the length 
of the apron, constructed to prevent sloughing of 
banks or channels and to direct and confine 
overfall. Wall(s) joining the abutments of a 
structure to an earth dike or the bank to increase the 
length of percolation path around the end of a 
structure and/or improve flow conditions upstream 
and downstream of the controlling section. 


IS 4410 (Part 15/Sec 1) : 2023 


ANNEX 1 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITON 
Canal and Cross Drainage Works, WRD 13 


Organisation 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Bhakra Beas Management Board, Punjab 


Brahmaputra Board, Guwahati 


Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 


Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Department Of Water Resources, Govt. of Punjab, 
India 


Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, Roorkee 


Irrigation and Water Resources Department, Govt. of 
Haryana 


Irrigation and Water Resources Department, Govt. of 
Uttar Pradesh 


Irrigation Department Govt. of Kerala 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


Narmada and Water Resources, Water Supply and 
Kalpasar Dept, Govt. of Gujarat 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Limited, 
Faridabad 


Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Limited, Gujarat 


WAPCOS Limited, Gurgaon 


Water Resources Department Govt. of Rajasthan 


Water Resources Department, Govt. of Andhra Pradesh 


Representative(s) 


SHRI S. K. SIBAL CHIEF ENGINEER DESIGN (N&W) 
(Chairperson) 


DIRECTOR DESIGNS 
SENIOR DESIGN ENGR- 1 (Alternate) 


SHRI GAYA PRASAD SINGH 
SHRI SHYAMAL KR. DEKA (Alternate) 


DRG. P. PATEL 
SHRI SUNIL SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI N. V. MAHURE 
SHRI SHAHID NOOR (Alternate) 


DR NEENA ISAAC 
SHRI SURESH KUMAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI ARUN KUMAR (Alternate II) 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR MEENA 
DIRECTOR (Alternate) 


SHRI H. S. MENDIRATTA 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER RC CDO (Alternate) 


DR B. R. CHAHAR 


PROF MANOJ KUMAR JAIN 
PROF S. K. SINGAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP TANEJA 
SHRI PARDEEP Y ADAV (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR GUPTA 
SHRI UPENDRA NATH KUNWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ALEX VARGHESE 
SHRI MANJU BALAKRISHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 
SHRI NAVEEN SINGHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI A. M. BARVE 
SHRI B. H. CHAUHDHARY (Alternate I) 
SHRIP. V. VYAS (Alternate II) 


SHRI SHRISH DUBEY 
SHRI PRASHANT JAISWAL (Alternate I) 
SHRI DEEPAK VERMA (Alternate II) 
DIRECTOR (CANALS) 
CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAMBHU AZAD 
SHRI A. K GEHLOT (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (ID&R) 
DIRECTOR (CANALS ID & R) (Alternate) 
SHRI A. SURI BABU 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (CANAL) (Alternate) 


IS 4410 (Part 15/Sec 1) : 2023 


Organisation 


Water Resources Department, Govt. of Maharashtra 


Water Resources Department, Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal 


Water Resources Department, Raipur 


Water Resources Organisation Public, Works 
Department (PWD), Govt. of Tamil Nadu 


In Personal Capacity (204 Raj Mhal Apartment Devi 
Marg, Bori Park Jaipur, 302016) 


In Personal Capacity (242, First Sidharth Enclave, 
Ashrom Chowk, New Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAJENDRA PAWAR 
SHRI M. M. PARATE (Alternate) 


SHRI V. K. WASHIK 
SHRI BHAGWATI PRASAD GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI R. K. NAGARIA 
SHRI U. R. RATHOR (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENG DESIGN WRD 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER CANALS (Alternate) 


SHRI YOGESH CHANDRA AGRAWAL 


PROF S. K. MAZUMDER 


SHRI R. BHANU PRAKASH, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (WATER RESOURCES DEPARTMENT) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI DUSHYANT PRAJAPATI 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(WATER RESOURCES DEPARTMENT), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:WRD 13 (17888). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


