Indian Standard

IS 12880 : 1989 ( Reafl'iiaed 2000) 199s ) (Reaffirmed

GUIDELINES FOR CONTROLLING FOUNDRY REJECTION

( First Reprint AUGUST 1998 ) UDC 621'74'019

0

BIS 1990

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 3 ZAFAR MARC

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI September 1990

Foundry Sectional Committee, MTD 14

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 8 December 1989, after the draft finalized by the Foundry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. There is a large number of foundries in the country, producing iron and steel castings catering to a wide range of customers, automobile and other engineering fields for domestic and overseas market. It has been observed that return in terms of good castings is less in comparison with the inputs in terms of capital investment, manpower, raw material and power utilization. Considering the low return in the foundry industry to be a gross national loss, attempts made to prepare suitable guidelines for reducing foundry rejection. have been

The information given in this standard should serve as good guidelines. However, reasonable knowledge about the technology, constant vigilance and effective pursuance are necessary to keep the rejections under control and to improve upon the condition. In case of increase in rejections, A B C analysis shall be done on the causes of rejection. Then the Economic considerations shall not be lost sight of in priority shall be set to deal with accordingly. an attempt to reduce rejection. At times, it is found that while solving one problem another crops in or in an attempt to solve a minor increase in rejection the steps taken have involved higher cost than the cost of rejection. The nature and the extent of defects shall be decided on the basis of the end use of the product and shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. Doubtful cases shall be subjected to field trials and the standard for rejection shall be updated accordingly. Scrap diagnosis chart for some common defects in iron castings, their causes and remedies in Annex A. is given

It is needless to mention that suitable reclamation techniques, such as, welding, brazing, etc, along with pre- and post-salvaging treatments also contribute towards bringing down the rejection. Micro porosity or micro shrinkage causing leakage under pressure test shall be sealed by impregnation technique wherever permitted. In the preparation of this standard valuable assistance has been provided by TELCO, Jamshedpur.

1s 12880:1989

Indian Standard

GUIDELINES FOR CONTROLLING FOUNDRY REJECTION
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down the guidelines, in general, towards saving rejection in foundry. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following 5.2 Weekly and Monthly Inspection Report

Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts to this standard: IS No. 210 : 1978 Title Grey iron castings Automotive ( third revision) grey iron castings AT

Weekly and monthly rejections shall be reported as percentage of the total rejection as well as the break-ups under individual categories and defects. The report shall have the cumulative status in the week as well asin the month comparing rejectior of the previous week and month. 5.3 Master Chart The master chart shall indicate item-wise rejection of the day, cumulative till date of the month, previous month, cumulative till date of the year, previous year and all time best achieved. 6 METHOD CARD

6331 : 1987

3 ACHIEVABLE REJECTION LEVELS FOUNDRY AND MACHINE SHOP

3.1 Ordinary grey iron castings shall conform to IS 210 : 1978 and high duty castings shall conform to 1s 6331 : 1987 having simple shape with no core or simple cores. The rejections shall be as follows:
Attainable Foundry Rejections 3 percent, Max AttainabZe Machine Shop Rejections

1 percent, Max

3.2 For metal quality same as stated in 3.1 but the castings having complicated outer as well as inner profiles, such as, automobile castings, the rejections shall be as given below: Attainable Foundry Rejections 5 percent, Max Attainable Machine Shop Rejections

6.1 Once a casting drawing is finalized for production, the mould scheme/core setting/core assembly system must be indicated in a card. The card shall have a rough sketch of the casting indicating gating system and core setting arrangement vent positions. lnformation shall also be available regarding the type of moulding machine, boxes to be used, grade of metal, sand pouring temperature, pouring time, composition for mould and cores, wash practice, etc. During early stage of production trials, relevant data regarding rejection, physical properties and chemical composition shall be recorded against each trial. Changes even seemingly insignificant ones at any stage of production shall be recorded and incorporated with the knowledge of all the concerned departments.
6.2 Results obtained

2 percent, Max REPORTING

4 BASIS OF REJECTION

4.1 Castings of repetitive nature in the weight range up to 500 kg shall be accounted for the determination of rejection percentage on number basis, that is, the number of castings inspected and the number of castings rejected. 4.2 Castings of jobbing nature shall be accounted for the rejection percentage on weight basis. 5 REJECTION REPORTING SYSTEM

from the production trrals vis-a-vis practices adopted shall be discussed and the target of rejection, method of manufacture for the particular casting-shall be finally recorded in the method card. 6.3 The Enal method card shall then be released to all the concerned, that is, production, process control, inspection and quality control departments. 7 REJECTION
7.1 Depending MEETING

5.1 Daily Inspection Report The report shall indicate casting-wise nurubers inspected and rejected. The rejection shall be classified into different foundry defects and each casting of these groups shall be identified by the date of cast, serial nmber and shift when it has been produced.
1

on the production rate of the foundry, a shop floor meeting shall be held daily or as required to examine the defective castings.

7.2 The meeting shall be conducted by either the chief of quality control or trouble shooting unit who shall properly identify the defects decided on the unfinal status i.e. rejected castings, good castings and repairable castings. The method of rectification shall also be decided in the meeting.

IS 12880:1989 7.3 The meeting

shall be attended by heads/ supervisors of all the production shops, process control and quality control departments regularly. Moulding shop group leader from the workmens" side should also attend the meeting. 7.4 At least once in a week, the foundry head shall meet his managers and supervisors to discuss the rejection and to decide the lme of action. 8 FEEDBACK SYSTEM 8.1 Copies of rejection report shall be forwarded to the foundry head who in turn shall pass them on with his comments to the concerned department. 8.2 Display board indicating daily rejections on individual items produced and their break-ups shall be kept on a place or places where the workmen and concerned supervisors shall see and discuss among themselves for corrective actions. 8.3 Result achieved on any trial/action shall be recorded in the form of report received from the concerned department initiating the action and copies be circulated among all concerned departmerits. Workmen of the concerned department

shall also be explained in simple language by their supervisor about the result of trial. 8.4 The master chart as in 5.3 shall be made use of for the weekly rejection meeting. 9 TRAINING OF PERSONNEL

9.1 Workmen, supervisors and managers shall be required to undergo suitable technical and managerial courses to keep them up to date on the subject. Such courses shall be either organized within the organization or by different educational/ professional bodies. 10 SUGGESTION

SCHEME

10.1 Problems which are not getting solved

easily shall be made upon for suggestion through proper information system and the suggestion received shall be scrutinized on priority and actions shall be taken accordingly.
11 STATISTICAL QUALITY CONTROL 11.1 For maintaining and analysing technical date, suitable statistical methods, such as, control chart, etc, shall be utilized.

2

ANNEX A [ Foteword ]
SCRAP DIAGNOSIS CHART FOR SOME COMMON DEtiCTS THElR CAUSES AND REMEDIES ( For information only ) Defects Cold ShutlCoId Lap Appearance a) Hole in the thinner section rounding of edges with smooth and shiny appearance b) May appear as a line where two forwarding fronts have not fused. Casting surface closer to the defect may be smooth and shiny Causes a) Low pouring temperature, interrupted pouring b) Low fluidity c) Core shift causing uneven wall thickness d) Very hard mould or low permeability e) High moisture slow or Remedies a) Adjust pouring temperature and use-ladle cover IN IRON CASTINGS,

W Increase phosphorus, if permitted 4 Avoid core shift by proper print 4
or use chaplet wherever possible Avoid excess ramming

4 Increase vents.

W

Adjust moisture as per sand GFN and clay content

Cold Shut Shrinkage and Draw

Gas hole having shiny surface with embedded shot Rough cavities entering casting on heavy sections or at the joint of change of sections

a) Turbulent flow of metal causing iron shots separating out of metal stream, interrupted pouring a) Incorrect feeding b) Weak mould c) Carbon equivalent unsuitable for the casting design d) Excess inoculation e) High pouring temperature

4 Streamline and uninterrupted
flow of metal is desirable

a) Design correct gating and feeding
system b) Improve mould hardness/density c) Select proper composition

d) Adjust inoculation suiting melting practice and casting design e) Reduce temperature wherever possible a) Remove slag from the furnace prior to tapping into the ladle Use coagulant for better removal of slag from the ladle b) Design gating system properly

Shg

Not so rough to smooth cavities generally in the vicinity of gates

a) Unclean metal/ladle

b) Gating system unable to trap the
slag

Defects

Appearance

Causes c) Faulty pouring practice

Remedies c) Keep pouring basin full during

?I cr

d) Very high sulphur or manganese or both
Micro Porosity

pouring the casting d) Use correct type of scrap and select proper composition to avoid Mn-S slag Same of shrinkage and draw further a) Avoid core/mould dilation b) Adjust suitable charge to avoid phosphorus level a) Adjust composition for correct carbon equivalant percentage b) Avoid excess chromium, etc c) Use correct type and quantity of inoculant d) Balance sulphur with manganese I'7 xS-I-0'3=Mn a) Balance clay/sand water proportions in the sand niix. Avoid excess free water b) Increase clay, reduce water Reduce metal velocity, as far as possible c) Samt as (b) and reduce pouring time/temperature as far as practicable Incorporate cellulose in the sand mix d) Use adequate combustible a) Ram evenly and firnily b) Increase weight . on mould/or . ensure proper clampmg

: 0 .. ti g

Machined surface shows localized spongy surface, may leak under fluid pressure

See `shrinkage and draw' a) Core and mould having poor thermal stability b) High phosphorus content a) Incorrect type of metal composition b) Presence of excess carbide stabilizing elements c) Insufficient inoculation d) Sulphur not balanced with manganese

Chilled Edges and Hard Spot

Bright areas oh the edges after machining, fractured surface shows white or mottled surface white shining spots after machining

P

Scab

Rough sand/metal fused layer connected to the casting by a thin strip of metal and on removril, may show a depression on the casting surface

a) Expansion of silica not compensated by clay b) Erosion of the tiould surface in front of the gates and its deposition in adjacent areas c) Condensation of high moisture layer in cope spetially flat surface due to prolonged radiant heat

d) Inadequate combustible in sand mix
Distortion

Casting shows swelling or growth oh surface

a) Too soft a mould to withstand ferrostatic pressure b) Inadequate counterweight on the mould

Warpage Rough Surface

Casting shows warpage on cooling or after machining Casting surface rough

a) High section sensitivity in iron a) Metal penetration

a) Ensure correct inoculation a) Use finer sand or use coating, if permitted b) Use proper quality/quantity of coal dust c) Avoid hard ramming or adjust the sand composition of suit hard ramming condition d) Select proper sand grading

b) Insufficient coal dust to generate
adequate lustrous carbon 4 Very hard mould surface

4 Base sand too coarse or distribution 4
Crocks

too wide producing open grain surface Sand fusion

e) Increase refractoriness in the mix Reduce metal temperature if possibIe a) Adjust ramming and clay content Reduce oil, improve baking or use combustible filler material b) Ensure propel handling c) Avoid stacking of thinwalled castings. Load flat castings standing on the thicker section d) Use proper tool and clamping during machining a) Ensure proper ramming b) Maintain correct compression strength of sand c) Design proper prints d) Adjust liner hight to reduce pressure at the drag/cope mould cavity edges e) Ensure proper pattern condition. f) Avoid manual handling of closed mould g) Adjust moisture and clay content of the sand mix h) Optimize core baking

Hairline crack seen on casting surface and discolouration indicates crack generation at high temperature otherwise it is cold crack

a) High dry strength of the mould or poor collapsibility of the core b) Improper handling c) Incorrect loading during storage or transportation d) Incorrect tool pressure during machining

Dirt

Rough cavities and pits in casting surface and before cleaning, sand grains may be seen visually or under magnification

a) Weak mould surface b) Weak sand c) Core print too tight d) Pattern liner low e) Poor pattern finish or undercut f) Handling of moufds after closing g) Friable sand

t;" a z o .. * z \o

Defects
Blow Holes

Appearance Smooth, nearly round shaped cavity may be on the surface or found after shot blasting or machining. Surface of the cavity may be dull or shiny depending on the nature of the gas causing the defect. In severe cases, section of the casting may be hollow.

Causes a) Insufficient permeability of moulding or core sand b) Hard ramming c) High moisture content of mould d) Rusty or damp chills and chaplets e) Very hard core f) Inadequate venting in the core and mould g) Underbaked core causing high gas content h) Damp pouring ladle, spout and launder j) Too low a pouring temperature

Remedies a) Avoid fines in the sand system b) Avoid excess ramming c) Minimize free water content in the sand mix d) Use coating in the chills and dry them. Ensure chaplets are clean and rust free e) Reduce organic binder content as much as possible f) Vent sufficiently g) Optimize baking/curing of core h) Ensure proper drying before tapping of metal j) Increase pouring temperature if possible a) Cut down source of hydrogen which is normally water, optimize quantity of inoculation. Control aluminium content of FeSi below 1'5 percent b) Optimize use of nitrogen bearing binder and hardener c) Balance sulphur with manganese. Control both to an optimum level

t; CI c;) 8 .. t;: g

Pin Holes

Tiny subsurface round cavity normally having shiny surface. May be isolated or can be found in ciusters. Generally found in the cope portion of the casting

a) High moisture in the sand associated with high aluminium content of the metal

b) High nitrogen content of the core or mould c) High manganese or sulphnr content

