RAT AAF IS 11384 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


dirae vetet aii Фа Я ЕНТ 
Nato — ofa гат 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Composite Construction in 
Structural Steel and 
Concrete — Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ІС5 91.080.13; 91.080.40 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM эъ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH ИТТ, 4% чей — 110002 


Vee МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2022 Price Group 16 


Special Structures Sectional Committee, CED 38 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Special Structures Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Composite construction consists of the use of prefabricated steel structural units like steel beams and steel open 
web joists (trusses) in combination with concrete elements and often with steel reinforcements. The design and 
construction should ensure monolithic action between the structural steel and concrete components so that they 
act as a single structural unit. 


This Indian Standard was first published in 1985. Since composite construction in steel and concrete has come 
a long way after that in India, the revision of this standard has become necessary. Further, both IS 456 ‘Code of 
practice for plain and reinforced concrete’ and IS 800 ‘Code of practice for general construction in structural steel’ 
have been revised extensively since this standard was published in 1985. This is a major revision of the standard 
and includes provisions for the design of most of the members and components of composite construction, based 
on the Limit States Method. This standard is restricted to the design of steel-concrete composite components and 
systems used in buildings. 


In this revision, the following major modifications have been effected: 


a) This standard conforms to limit state design philosophy, and it is in line with IS 456 ‘Code of practice for 
plain and reinforced concrete’ and IS 800 ‘Code of practice for general construction in structural steel’. 


b) Provisions for the design of slab, beam, and columns of composite construction have been added. 


c) Two types of composite column constructions are covered; namely, the concrete encased steel columns 
(both fully encased and partially encased), and the concrete-filled steel columns have been considered. 


d) The following types of composite slabs are presented in this standard: 
1) Profiled sheeting, serving as form work for the reinforced concrete slab, and 
2) The embossed profile sheeting acting as form work and also as a tension reinforcement acting along 
with in-situ concrete with or without shear connectors. 
3) Improved provisions for the design of shear connectors and their testing methods. 
e) Revised limit state of serviceability is also included to check for deflection, vibration and fire performance 
of the steel-concrete composite components. 
f) Additional specifications on the use of light gauge steel and lightweight Concrete (structural) are included 
in this revision. 


Though the common methods of designs have been covered in this code, special systems of design and construction, 
not covered by this code, may be permitted on production of satisfactory evidence regarding their design adequacy 
and safety based on specialist literature or by analysis, test, or both. 


All requirements of IS 456 and IS 800, in so far as they apply, shall be deemed to form a part of this code, except 
where otherwise laid down in this standard. 

Composite construction may be used in beams, columns as well as slabs in structures. Because of the special 
nature of bridge structures, where dynamic loadings are expected, this code is restricted to buildings. 


The sectional committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has taken into consideration the need for 
international coordination among standards prevailing in different countries of the world. These considerations 
have led the sectional committee to derive assistance from the following: 


1) Eurocode 4 (Part 1-1) Design of Composite Steel and Concrete Structures, General Rules and Rules 
for Buildings, European Committee for Standardization. 


2) Eurocode 3 (Part 1-1) Design of Steel Structures, General Rules, and Rules for Buildings, European 
Committee for Standardization. 


3) ANSI/AISC 360 Specification for Structural Steel Buildings. 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


COMPOSITE CONSTRUCTION IN STRUCTURAL STEEL 
AND CONCRETE — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard deals with the design and construction 
of composite structures made up of structural steel and 
cast in-situ/precast concrete, joined together to act 
integrally. 


1.2 This standard is applicable to simply supported as 
well as continuous beams and slabs, and supporting 
column systems. The design provisions in this code are 
based on the limit states method of design. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute the 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of these 
standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 456, IS 800 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Accidental Load — The load is not normally 
expected in design life but has a major impact if it ever 
occurs, such as ramming of vehicles against columns 
or any other member of the frame like bracings, blast 
loading, etc. 


3.2 Accompanying Load — Live (imposed) load 
acting along with leading imposed load but causing 
lower action and/or deflections. 


3.3 Action — The primary cause for stress or 
deformations in a structure, such as dead, live, wind, 
seismic or temperature loads. 


3.4 Built-up Section — A member fabricated by 
inter-connecting more than one element to form a 
compound section acting as a single member. 


3.5 Camber — Intentionally introduced pre-curving 
(generally upwards) in a system, member or any 
portion of a member with respect to its chord. These 
are generally introduced to compensate for deflections 
at a specific level of loads. 


3.6 Composite Action — Integral action of primary 
supporting steel member and supported concrete deck 
with or without limited slip at their interface to ensure 
greater strength and rigidity. In composite columns, it 
is the integral action between steel and its encasement 
or infill concrete. The shear transfer is to be ensured 
through the use of mechanical devices known as, 
shear connectors in composite beams and columns, as 
required (see Fig. 8). 


3.7 Design Load/Factored Load — A load value 
obtained by multiplying the characteristic load with the 
partial safety factor for loads. 


3.8 Design Service Life — The time period during 
which the structure or its components should satisfy the 
design objectives and functions. 


3.9 Detail Category — Designation given to a 
particular detail to indicate the S-N curve to be used in 
fatigue assessment. 


3.10 Differential Shrinkages — It is entirely due to 
shrinkage of concrete from the time composite action 
comes into effect. When the coefficient of thermal 
expansion varies significantly between steel and 
concrete (concrete with limestone or granite aggregate), 
it also includes the difference in thermal strain between 
the steel and concrete. Differential shrinkage may 
lead to increase in stresses and is more pronounced in 
continuous beams. 


3.11 Fatigue — Damage caused by repeated fluctuations 
of stress, leading to progressive cracking of a structural 
element. 


3.12 Fatigue Limit State — The state of failure through 
fatigue damage due to repeated application of loads. 


3.13 Fatigue Strength — Stress range that can be 
endured by a category of detail, depending upon the 
number of cycles. 


3.14 Flexible Shear Connector — It resists shear 
forces by bending, tension or shearing in the root, at the 
connection point of the steel member. It is subjected to 
plastic deformations as it reaches the ultimate strength, 
and the failure mode is ductile. It consists of studs, 
channels etc. (Fig. 8) welded to steel members to 
develop composite action with the concrete. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


3.15 Initial Dead Load — The combination of weight 
of steel structure and the portion of the concrete deck 
that is supported by the steel structure alone before the 
development of full composite action with concrete 
reaching 75 percent of its 28 days strength. 


3.16 Limit State — The load state beyond which the 
structure is incapable of performing its desired function. 


3.17 Loads — Applied forces as per loads indicated 
in relevant standards like IS 875 (Part 1 to 5) for dead, 
live, wind, snow loads, etc; and IS 1893 (Part | to 4) for 
seismic loads that the structure is subjected to during 
its lifetime. 


3.18 Partial Safety Factor For Loads — The factors 
multiplied by the loads or their combinations to obtain 
design loads while checking performance under various 
limit states. 


3.19 m-k Factors — Physically, in a composite slab, 
‘m’ is a broad measure of the mechanical interlock 
between the embossed profiled decking sheet and the 


reinforced cement concrete on top of the deck, and ‘k’ 


represents the frictional resistance between the two 
elements, that is, steel and concrete (see Fig. 38). 


3.20 Rigid Shear Connectors — These are shear hoops 
welded to bars, angles, horseshoes, or tees welded 
to the flange of the fabricated steel units as shown in 
Fig. 8 (b) and (c). They resist shear forces by concrete 
bearing on the vertical face and shearing. They exhibit 
negligible deformation under shear transfer (that is, 
brittle failure). These are not usually recommended for 
ultimate limit state design. 


3.21 Service Limit — The loading state beyond which 
the structure or its components becomes incapable 
of performing its intended function due to excessive 
deformation, or deflection, or vibration. 


3.22 Serviceability Loads — The loads on the structure 
against which the serviceability of the structure needs 
to be checked. 


3.23 Shear Connectors — These are the mechanical 
attachments to steel members to transfer interface 
shear between steel and concrete to develop composite 
action and are composed of flexible shear connectors 
[Fig. 8(a), (c)], rigid shear connectors [Fig. 8(b)], etc. 


3.24 S-N Curve — Curve, defining the relationship 
between the numbers of stress cycles to failure (Nsc) at 
a constant stress range (Sc), during fatigue loading on 
parts of a structure. 


3.25 Strength Factors — The factors by which the 
specified strength is divided to obtain design strength; 
while assessing the safety under limit states of strength. 


3.26 Stress Range — Algebraic difference between 
two extremes of stresses in a cycle of loading at a 
location in a member. 


3.27 Superimposed Dead Load — The dead loads 
added subsequent to concrete hardening of concrete 
that 1s resisted by composite action. 


3.28 Transient Load — The loads that are assumed 
to be varying over a short time interval like live load, 
loads with dynamic effect, temperature effects, wind 
loads on the structure, earthquake loads, accident 
loads, etc. 


3.29 Ultimate Limit State — The state at which the 
structure fails and loses its integrity leading to its 
collapse. 


4SYMBOLS 
The symbols, other than those used for load 
categorization are as follows: 


a Span length of the slab transverse to the steel 
beams. 


A. Area of structural steel cross section. 

A, Areaofstructural steel cross section in tension. 
A. Gross area of concrete. 
А, 


Equivalent area of the cracked composite 
beam section. 


Area of concrete effective in compression. 


Effective cross-sectional area of profile steel 
sheeting. 


А. Area of steel reinforcements. 

А, Area of each flange of steel section. 
A_ Effective cross sectional area. 

А. Area of shear resistance. 


Centre to centre distance between beams and is 
equal to the transverse span of inner beam. 


b. Width of concrete encasement. 


b. Distance between the centres of adjacent ribs 
or one wave length of a profile deck. 


b. Effective width of the flange between pair of 
bolts. 


Effective width of concrete flange. 
b. Width of the structural steel flange. 


D Overall depth of girder/diameter of the steel 
cross section. 

d Depth of the web, Nominal diameter of 
bolts/rivets/studs. 

d, Twice the clear distance from the compression 
flange of angles, plates, or tongue plates to 
the neutral axis. 


sp 


Vertical distance between the centroid of 
concrete slab and centroid of steel beam. 


Overall depth of the concrete slab. 


Nominal diameter of the pipe column or the 
dimensions of the column in the direction of 
depth of the base plate. 


Depth of profiled sheet deck. 


Overall depth of the profiled sheet deck and 
concrete slab. 


Distance between the C.G. axis of the profiled 
steel sheeting and the extreme tension fiber of 
the composite slab. 


Distance between the plastic neutral axis and 
the extreme tension fibre of the composite 
slab. 


Modulus of elasticity of lightweight concrete. 
Modulus of elasticity of structural steel. 
Secant Modulus of elasticity of concrete. 
Modulus of elasticity of steel reinforcements. 
Axial capacity of a single flange. 

Axial capacity of reinforcing steel. 


Compressive force in the concrete above the 
neutral axis. 


Compressive force in the steel section above 
the neutral axis. 


Tensile force in the steel section below the 
neutral axis. 


Design capacity of the web in bearing. 


f Actual normal stress range for the detail 


d 


Y 1, 
Sa 


Лао) 


2 ? ds 
ra 
So 


category. 


Actual axial compressive stress in concrete at 
service load. 


Tensile strength of lightweight concrete. 


Characteristic compressive cube strength of 
concrete at 28 days. 


Characteristic axial tensile strength of concrete 
based on 5percent fractile. 


Mean axial tensile strength of concrete. 


Fatigue stress range corresponding to 5 x 10° 
cycles of loading. 


Design fatigue normal stress range. 
Equivalent constant amplitude stress. 

Highest normal stress range. 

Normal fatigue stress range. 

Proof stress. 

Characteristic yield strength of reinforcement. 
Yield strength of flange and web, respectively. 
Characteristic ultimate tensile stress. 


Characteristic ultimate tensile stress of the 
profiled deck. 


o 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Characteristic yield stress of structural steel. 
Characteristic yield stress of profiled deck. 
Depth of the section/total depth of steel beam. 


Distance between top of concrete and bottom 
of bottom flange of steel beam. 


, Distance between centroids of top and bottom 


flanges/nominal height of stud. 


Distance between shear centre of the two 
flanges of the cross section. 


Moment of inertia of the member about an axis 
perpendicular to the plane of the frame. 


Moment of inertia of concrete (assumed 
uncracked) about the axis of bending for 
column. 


Moment of inertia of the composite section. 


Moment of Inertia of the compression flange 
about the minor axis of the steel beam. 


Moment of Inertia of the tension flange about 
the minor axis of the steel beam. 


Moment of inertia of the steel section about the 
axis of bending for column. 


Moment of inertia of reinforcement about the 
axis of bending for column. 


Moment of inertia about the major axis. 


Second moment of area of steel section about 
the minor and major axis respectively. 


Moment of inertia of the bottom flange about 
the minor axis of the steel section. 


Second moment of the equivalent area of the 
cracked composite beam section for major axis 
bending. 


Flexural stiffness of the steel web per unit 
length along the beam. 


Flexural stiffness of the cracked concrete or 
composite slab transverse to the spanning 
direction of steel beam. 


Effective length of the member. 


Appropriate, effective slenderness ratio of the 
section. 


Effective slenderness ratio of the section about 
the minor axis. 


Effective slenderness ratio of the section about 
the major axis. 


Actual span of composite beams. 


Minimum bearing lengths of steel decking on 
the support. 


Composite slab including the cast in place 
concrete. 


Effective span of the cantilever for overhang. 


Length between points of zero moments 
(inflection) in the span. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


І, Shear span. 


І Distance of the maximum moment cross 
section under consideration to the support. 


Bending moment. 


AR 


Reduced bending moment due to effect of 
shear force. 


E 


8 


Elastic critical moment corresponding to 
lateral torsional buckling. 


Design bending  strength/design bending 
resistance under only bending moment. 


x 


z 


a 


Design bending resistance under combined 
bending and compression. 


E 


т 


Design bending resistance of profiled steel 
sheeting. 


Elastic moment capacity of the section. 


. Design plastic resistance of the flange alone 
for steel section. 


AGAR 


Plastic moment capacity of the section. 


^к 


Factored applied moments about the minor 
axis of the cross section. 


ES 


Factored applied moments about the major 
axis of the cross section. 


m Modular ratio. 
Modular ratio (long term). 
m, Modular ratio (short term). 
М Number of stress cycles. 
P Design axial force. 
Elastic critical buckling load. 


P Plastic resistance of encased steel column 
section or concrete filled rectangular or square 
column section. 


R, Flange stress reduction factor for hybrid 
section. 


r Appropriate radius of gyration. 

ғ. Radius of gyration about the minor axis. 

r, Radius of gyration about the major axis. 

S Spacing. 

Spacing of shear connectors for longitudinal 
shear due to flexural force. 


5 Spacing of shear connectors due to bending 
moment. 


t Thickness of element/angle, time in minutes. 
t. Thickness of flange of steel section. 
Thickness of profiled deck sheet. 

t Thickness of web of steel section. 


м 


~ 
3 


V. V., V, Factored applied shear force. 
V, Design shear resistance. 
һа Vertical shear resistance. 
А Plastic shear resistance under pure shear. 


V., Design vertical shear resistance. 
W Total equivalent load. 


X Distance from the centre line of edge beam to 
the edge of slab. 


x. Depth of elastic neutral axis of the composite 
section from the centroid of steel section. 


x. Depth of neutral axis at limit state of flexure 
from top of the concrete. 


Z. Elastic section modulus. 
2 Plastic section modulus. 


Z ,Z Plastic section modulus of concrete about its 


own centroid and about the neutral axis of the 
composite section, respectively. 


Z Plastic section modulus of reinforcement about 


its own centroid and about the neutral axis of 
the composite section, respectively. 


Z,Z. Plastic section modulus of structural steel 


section about its own centroid and about 
the neutral axis of the composite section, 
respectively. 


% Distance between the point of application of 
the load and shear centre of the cross section. 


a Imperfection factor. 
а Strength coefficient of concrete. 
6 Steel contribution ratio. 


x Stress reduction factor due to buckling under 
compression. 


Xm Stress reduction factor, y, at f... 


X,, Stress reduction factor to account for lateral 
torsional buckling of a beam. 


y Unit weight of steel. 
y, Partial safety factor for material (concrete). 
у; Partial safety factor for load. 


7 о Partial safety factor against yield stress and 
buckling (structural steel). 


y,, Partial safety factor against ultimate stress 
(structural steel). 


7 г Partial safety factor for the strength of bolt. 
Ym Partial safety factor for fatigue load. 

уп Partial safety factor for fatigue strength. 
у, Partial safety factor against shear failure. 


Ym Partial safety factor for the strength of the 
weld. 


у, Partial safety factor Юг ^ material 
(reinforcements). 


= Yield stress ratio, (250/fy)'?. 


À, 2, Non dimensional slenderness ratio = 


f,(KLIry /л?Е = [f1 f, = PP, 


X, Equivalent slenderness ratio. 


ut, Poisson’s ratio of structural steel. 

u, Correction factor. 
1, 1, 
To 1, 


т Actual shear stress range for the detail 
category. 


Strength coefficients. 
Strength coefficients. 


Fatigue shear stress range. 
Design fatigue shear stress range. 
т Highest shear stress range. 


Fatigue shear stress range at №, . cycle for the 
detail category. 


5 MATERIALS AND WORKMANSHIP 


5.1 The main materials for composite construction are 
structural steel, reinforcing steel and concrete. The 
materials and workmanship of structural steel shall 
generally comply with specifications laid down in 
IS 800, and that of reinforced concrete shall comply 
with specifications laid down in IS 456. However, the 
general properties and specifications of materials for 
composite construction are detailed as given in 5.2 to 
5.4. 


5.2 Structural Steel 


All the structural steel used in general construction, 
coming under the purview of this standard shall before 
fabrication conform to IS 2062. 


Structural steel other than those complying with IS 2062 
may also be used provided that the limiting stresses and 
other design provisions are suitably modified and the 
steel is also suitable for the type of fabrication adopted. 


Steel that is not supported by mill test results may be 
used only in unimportant members and details, where 
their properties such as ductility and weldability would 
not affect the performance requirements of the members 
and the structure as a whole. However, such steels may 
be used in the structural system after confirming their 
quality is as per IS 2062, by carrying out appropriate 
tests in accordance with the method specified in 
IS 1608 (Part 1). 


5.2.1 Properties of Structural Steel 


The following physical properties shall be assumed for 
all grades of steel for design purposes: 


= 7850 kg/m 
= 2.0 x 105 MPa 


Unit mass of steel 


Young’s modulus 
(modulus of elasticity) 


= 0.769 x 10° MPa 
= 0.30 
= 0.000012/°C 


Shear modulus 
Poisson’s ratio 


Coefficient of thermal 
expansion 


IS 11384 : 2022 


The mechanical properties of steel like yield stress, 
ultimate stress and, elongation shall be as per values 
indicated in IS 800. 


5.2.2 Specifications of Structural Steel 


Unless otherwise permitted herein, structural steel used 
shall, before fabrication, comply with the requirements 
of the following Indian Standards or their latest 
revisions as appropriate: 


IS 808 Hot rolled steel beam, column, 
channel and angle sections — 
Dimensions and properties 

IS 1161 Steel tubes for structural purposes — 
Specification 

IS 1239 Steel tubes, tubular and other 

(Part 1) wrought steel Fittings Specification: 
Part 1 Steel tubes 
151239 Steel tubes, tubular апа other 
(Part 2) wrought steel Fittings: Part 2 Steel 
pipe fittings 

IS 1730 Dimensions for steel plates, sheets, 
strips and flats for structural and 
general engineering purposes 

IS 1732 Dimension for round and square 
steel bars for structural and general 
engineering purposes 

IS 1852 Rolling and cutting tolerances for 
hot rolled steel products 

IS 2062 Hot rolled medium and high tensile 
structural steel — Specification 

IS 4923 Hollow steel sections for structural 
use — Specification 

IS 11587 Structural weather resistant steel- 
Specification 

IS 12779 Rolling and cutting tolerances for 


hot rolled parallel flange beam and 
column sections 


The use of structural steel not covered by the above 
standards may be permitted with the specific approval 
of the competent authority. 


5.2.3 Other Steels 


Except where permitted with the specific approval of 
the authority, steels for machined parts and for uses 
in features other than structural members or elements 
shall comply with the following or relevant Indian 
Standards, as appropriate. 


IS 1875 Specification for carbon steel billets, 
blooms, slabs and bars for forgings 


IS 6911 Specification for Stainless steel plate, 


sheet, and strip 


IS 11384 : 2022 


5.2.4 Castings and Forgings 


Steel casting and forgings shall comply with the 
requirements of the following Indian Standards as 


appropriate: 


IS 1030 


IS 1875 


IS 2004 


IS 2644 


IS 4367 


5.2.5 Fasteners 


Bolts, nuts, washers and rivets shall comply with the 
following or relevant Indian Standards, as appropriate: 


Specification for carbon steel 
castings for general engineering 
purposes 


Specification for Carbon steel billets, 
blooms, slabs bars for forgings 


Specification for carbon steel 
forgings for general engineering 
purposes 

Specification for high tensile steel 
castings for general engineering and 
structural purposes 


Specification for alloy steel forgings 
for general industrial use 


IS 1148 Steel rivet bars (medium and 
high tensile) for structural 
purposes 

IS 1363 (Part 1 to 3) Hexagon head 

(Part 1 to 3) bolts, screws and nuts of 
product grade “С” (size range 
М5 to M64) — Specifications 
IS 1364 Hexagon head bolts, screws 
(Part 1) and nuts of product grades А & 
B (size range M1.6 to M64) — 
Specifications 
IS 1367 Technical supply conditions for 
(Part 1 to 18) threaded steel fasteners 

IS 1929 Hot forged steel rivets for 
hot closing (12 to 36 mm 
diameter) — Specifications 

IS 2155 Specifications for Cold forged 
solid steel rivets for hot closing 
(6 to 16 mm diameter) 

IS 3640 Specifications for hexagon fit 
bolts 

IS 3757 Specifications for high strength 
structural bolts 

IS 4000 High strength bolts in steel 
structures-code of practice 

IS 5369 General requirements for plain 
washers and lock washers 

IS 5370 Specifications for plain washers 


with outside diameter = 3 x 


inside diameter 


IS 5372 


IS 5374 


IS 5624 


IS 6610 


IS 6623 


IS 6649 


IS 7002 


Specifications for taper washers 
for channels (ISMC) 


Specifications for taper washer 
for I-beams (ISMB) 


Specifications for foundation 
bolts 


Specifications for heavy 
washers for steel structures 


Specifications for high strength 
structural nuts 


Specifications for hardened 
and tempered washers for high 
strength structural bolts and 
nuts 


Prevailing torque type hexagon 
nuts (with non-metallic insert), 
style 1 - Property Class 5, 8 and 
10 


5.2.6 Welding Consumables and Practices 


Welding consumables and practices shall comply with 
the following Indian standards, as appropriate: 


IS 813 
IS 814 


IS 3613 


IS 1395 


IS 6419 


IS 6560 


IS 7280 


IS 812 


IS 816 


Scheme of symbols for welding 


Covered electrodes for manual 
metal arc welding of carbon and 


carbon-manganese steel — 
Specification 

Acceptance tests for  wire-flux 
combinations for submerged-arc 


welding of structural steels 


Low and medium alloy steel covered 
electrodes for manual metal arc 
welding — Specification 


Welding rods and bare electrodes for 
gas shielded arc welding of structural 
steels 


Molybdenum and 
chromium-molybdenum low alloy 
steel welding rods and bare electrodes 
for gas shielded arc welding — 
Specification 


Specifications for bare wire 
electrodes for submerged arc welding 
of structural steel 


Glossary of terms relating to welding 
and cutting of metals 


Code of practice for the use of metal 
arc welding for general construction 
in mild steel 


1$ 822 Code of procedure for inspection of 
welds 
IS 1024 Code of practice for the use of 
welding in bridges апа structures 
subject to dynamic loading 
IS 1182 Recommended practice for 
radiographic examination of fusion 
welded butt joints in steel plates 
IS 4853 Recommended practice for 
radiographic inspection of fusion 
welded butt joints in steel pipes 
IS 5334 Code of practice for magnetic particle 
flaw detection of welds 
IS 7307 Approval tests for welding 
(Part 1) procedures: Part 1 Fusion welding of 
steel 
IS 7310 Approval tests for welders working 
(Part 1) to approved welding procedures: Part 
1 Fusion welding of steel 
IS 7318 Approval tests for welders when 
(Part 1) welding procedure approval is not 
required: Part 1 Fusion welding of 
steel 
IS 9595 Recommendations for metal arc 
welding of carbon and carbon 
manganese steels 
IS 15977 Classification and acceptance tests 


for bare solid wire electrodes and 
wire flux combination for submerged 
arc welding of structural steel — 
Specification 


5.2.7 Wire Ropes and Cables 


These shall conform to the following or relevant Indian 
standards except where use of other types is specifically 
permitted by the authority: 


IS 1785 Specification for plain hard-drawn 
(Part 1) steel wire for pre-stressed concrete: 
Part 1 Cold drawn stress-relieved 
wire 
IS 1785 Specification for plain hard-drawn 
(Part 2) steel wire for pre-stressed concrete: 
Part 2 As drawn wire 
IS 2266 Steel wire ropes for general 
engineering purposes 
IS 2315 Thimbles for wire ropes 


5.3 Concrete 


5.3.1 АП structural reinforced Concrete shall be of 
minimum grade M20 and shall be in accordance with 


IS 11384 : 2022 


material specification and workmanship as stipulated in 
IS 456. The strengths shall be specified in terms of 
the characteristic compressive strengths of cubes, 
Жү measured at 28 days. The design provisions in this 
standard are applicable for concrete strength between 
M20 to M75. Specialist literature shall be adopted 
in composite design, while using concrete strength 
outside this range. 


5.3.2 Concrete grade shall be designated based on 
its characteristic strength. The three main categories 
of concrete strength grade are given below, and the 
recommended design properties of Concrete are 
correlated to 28-day characteristic compressive strength 
unless specified otherwise. The mechanical properties 
of Concrete namely, tensile strength and modulus of 
elasticity, shall be determined as per IS 456. Additional 
data for the same is given in Annex F. 


a) Ordinary Concrete — Concrete grades up to M20 
are included in this type. It could be prepared by 
a nominal mix proportioned by the weight of its 
main ingredients. 


b 


we 


Standard Concrete — This type comprises of 
concrete grades from M25 to M50. It is made 
based on a design mix proportioned by the weight 
of its main ingredients, along with chemical 
admixtures to achieve certain target values. 


c) High strength concrete — Concrete grades from 
M60 to M80 are included in this type. Even 
though usage of high strength concrete is allowed 
in composite construction, capacity equations 
specified in this provision shall not be directly 
used in the design. Specialist literature and 
experimental results are required for using this 
concrete. 


5.3.3 Lightweight Concrete 


Lightweight Concrete may be used in composite 
construction, and the design provisions in this code 
shall be used within a strength range of M20 to M60. 
The mean tensile strength f... , and modulus of elasticity 
Е mı of lightweight Concrete are to be calculated as 
modifications over the provisions in IS 456 as follows: 


Toca = N Som 
E 


The factors n, and n, are determined using the following 
equation: 


cm, [l = 1 gas 


Where, p is the upper limit of the oven dry density of 
the relevant class of lightweight Concrete, as given in 
Table 1. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Table 1 Density Classes and Corresponding Design Densities, p for Lightweight Concrete 
( Clause 5.3.3 ) 


SI Density Class, p 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
1) Density (kg/m?) 801-1000 1001-1200 1201-1400 1401-1600 1601-1800 1801-2000 
( Plain concrete 1050 1250 1450 1650 1850 2050 
ii) Density (kg/m?) 
| Reinforced concrete 1150 1350 1550 1750 1950 2150 


5.3.4 Design of concrete components of a composite 
structure against creep shrinkage and temperature stress 
may be done as indicated in IS 456 or as per specialist 
literature. 

5.4 Reinforcement Steel 

5.4.1 Reinforcement steel shall consist of hot rolled, 
thermo-mechanically treated or heat-treated rods, 
de-coiled rods or cold-worked steel of various grades as 
given in Table 2. The grade designations and strength 
properties are given in Table 3. 


Table 2 Grades of Reinforcing Steel 


( Clause 5.4 ) 
SI Types of Steel Grade/Designation Relevant 
No. Standard 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Mild Steel (MS) Grade - I IS 432 
(Part 1) 
ii) High yield strength Fe 415, Ее 415$, 
deformed (HYSD) — pe 415p 
Fe 500, Fe 5005, IS 1786 


Fe 500D, Fe 550, 
Fe 550D, Fe 600 


5.4.2 The minimum strength of reinforcing steel as 
specified in IS 456 1s either the yield stress in case of 
mild steel or 0.2 percent proof strength in case of high 
yield strength steel and it is notionally taken as the 
characteristic strength of reinforcement f, g 


5.4.3 The steel may be coated or galvanized to improve 
its corrosion resistance. The following corrosion 
resistive steel may be used as reinforcements: 


a) Galvanized Reinforcements — The strength, 
elongation and bond properties are not adversely 
affected by galvanizing. 


b) Epoxy-coated Reinforcements — These are 
reinforcements conforming to IS 1786 coated by 
fusion bonding epoxy conforming to IS 13620. The 
bond of coated reinforcements is lowered by up to 
20 percent compared to un-coated reinforcements. 
The lap length and anchorage length shall be 
increased by 25 percent while using these steel bars. 


c) Stainless Steel Reinforcements — Properties of 
stainless steel reinforcement shall not be inferior 
to carbon steel reinforcement of corresponding 
strength and class. These reinforcements are 
conforming to IS 16651. 


6 STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS 


This section is applicable to composite structures in 
which most of the members are composite. Where the 
structural behaviour is essentially that of reinforced 
or prestressed concrete, with only a few composite 
members, analysis provisions of IS 456 or IS 1343 
respectively shall be used. Similarly, where the 
structural behaviour is essentially that of structural 
steel, with only a few composite members, analysis 
provisions of IS 800 shall be used. 


6.1 Modelling and Basic Assumptions 


6.1.1 Local Buckling of Plate Elements of Steel Section 
and Section Classification 


The types of elements that are encountered in steel 
sections are listed below: 


a) Internal elements are elements attached along 
both longitudinal edges to other elements or 
to longitudinal stiffeners connected at suitable 
intervals to transverse stiffeners, for example, web 
of I-section and flanges and web of box section. 


b) Outside elements or outstands are elements 
attached along only one of the longitudinal edges 
to an adjacent element, the other edge being free to 
displace out of plane for example, flange overhang 
of an I-section, the stem of T-section and legs of 
an angle section. 


c) Tapered elements may be treated as a flat elements 
having an average thickness as defined in IS 808. 


6.1.2 The section strength at the ultimate limit state 
should be considered based on their ability to resist 
local buckling before full plastic strength is developed. 
In this respect, the structural steel sections may be 
classified as given in IS 800. Guidelines for sectional 
classification of composite sections with and without 
concrete encasements are given below: 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Table 3 Strength of Reinforcing Steel 


( Clause 5.4.1) 


$1 №. Туре оҒ ее! Grade/Designation Minimum Yield Minimum Tensile Strength, as Minimum 
Stress/0.2 Percent Proof Stress Percent of the Actual Percent 
0.2 Percent Proof Stress/Yield Elongation 
stress but not less than 
(D (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1) Mild Steel Grade-I Bars up to and including 410 MPa 23.0 
20 mm dia = 250 MPa 
Bar dia > 20 mm and < 50 mm 410 MPa 23.0 
= 240 MPa 
ii) High Fe 415 110 Percent (7 485 MPa) 14.5 
415 MPa 
Yield Fe 415D/S 112 Percent (> 500 MPa) 18.0 
Strength Fe 500 108 Percent (7 545 MPa) 12.0 
500 MPa 
Deformed Fe 500D/S 110 Percent (2 565 MPa) 16.0 
Steel Fe 550 110 Percent (> 585 MPa) 10.0 
550 MPa 
(HYSD) Fe 550 D/S 108 Percent (7 600 MPa) 14.5 
Fe 600 600 MPa 106 Percent (> 600 MPa) 10.0 
NOTES 


1 Elongation on a gauge length of 5.65УА, where А is the cross-sectional area of the test piece, when tested in accordance with 
IS 1608 (Part 1). 


2 For Seismic Zone III, IV and V; HYSD steel bars having a minimum elongation of 14.5 percent and conforming to other requirements 
of IS 1786 shall be used. 
3 For Seismic Zone III, IV and V; Structural steel maximum yield strength shall not exceed specified minimum value by more than 
20 percent and conforming to other requirements of IS 1786 shall be used. 


a) Composite sections 


1) 


2) 


3) 


4) 


5) 


б) 


Steel compression elements (plates) in 
a composite section should be classified 
according to the least favourable class of steel 
elements in compression. 


The class of a composite section depends on 
the direction of the bending moment at that 
section. 


A steel compression element restrained by 
a reinforced concrete element through shear 
connectors may be placed т а more favourable 
class, after ensuring its improved local buckling 
resistance due to the above connection. 


Plastic stress distribution over the cross section 
should be used for section classifications 1 
and 2. In classification 3, the elastic stress 
distribution should be used taking into account 
the sequence of construction and the effects of 
creep and shrinkage. 


For classification, design values of the strength 
of materials should be taken. Concrete in 
tension should be neglected. The stress 
distribution should be established for the gross 
cross-section of the steel web and the effective 
concrete flanges. 


The tension capacity of steel reinforcements 
satisfying the ductility requirements specified 


where 


in 5.4, only can be used in evaluating the 
strength in the hogging moment regions of 
the composite members. The welded wire 
mesh should not be used in the section unless 
it has been shown to have sufficient ductility 
as required. When the design resisting moment 
of the full or partial composite members 15 
evaluated based on either simple rectangular 
stress block or parabolic stress block, the 
minimum area of steel reinforcement, 4,, 
used within the effective width of the concrete 
flange should satisfy the following: 


1 rm 
4,>4,0 =a fk, 


& fy 
e= 4250! f,. 


А, = Effective area of the concrete flange. 


f, — Nominal value of yield strength of 
structural steel, in MPa. 


Í ," Characteristic yield strength of tension 


reinforcement, in MPa. 


Jom = Mean tensile strength of Concrete, in MPa 


(Annex Е). 


1 
са [а+а, /(22,)] 


+0.3 < 1.0. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


a= 1.06 for compact section, 1.17 for plastic 
section. 


d = thickness of concrete slab excluding 
haunch if any. 


2,- vertical distance between the centroid 
of the uncracked concrete slab and the 
centroid of the uncracked effective 
composite section using the modular ratio 
m for short term loading. 


7) The welded mesh should not be included in 
the effective section unless it has sufficient 
ductility before fracture when embedded in 
concrete. 


8) Account should be taken of the class of steel 
section at every stage of construction in the 
global elastic analysis. 


b) Composite sections without concrete encasements 


1) A steel compression flange that is restrained 
from buckling by effective attachment to 
a concrete flange by shear connectors may 
be assumed to be in class 1 if the maximum 
spacing of the connectors is in accordance 
with 11.6.3. 


2) Other steel flanges and webs in compression 
in the composite beams should be classified 
on the basis of width to thickness ratios and 
susceptibility to local buckling of steel only 
unless they are also restrained by concrete 
as in columns. Accordingly, sections are 
categorized into three groups as indicated in 
IS 800. 


3) In beams, cross-sections with webs in Class 3 
and flanges in class 1 or 2 may be treated as 
an effective cross-section in Class 2 with an 
effective web in accordance with Fig. 1. The 
proportion of the web in compression should 
be replaced by a part of 206 t. adjacent to 
the compression flange, with another part of 


20e t. adjacent to the plastic neutral axis of ће 


effective cross-section where € = 1250/ ГА 
and t, is the thickness of ће web. ” 


c) Composite section with concrete encasements 


1) Steel outstand flange shall be classified as per 
Table 4. 

2) In partially concrete-encased I-section 
(Fig. 2), wherein the concrete is effectively 
attached to the web with stud or any 
reinforcement and covers on each side of the 
at least 80 percent of the flange overhang, 
the limiting overhang width of the flange to 
thickness ratio, b/t,, for section classification 
may be taken as given in Table 4, where 


€= |/250//,. 


Table 4 Encased I Section Classification 
[ Clause 6.1.2 (c) ] 


SI Section Flange Overhang to Thickness Ratio 
No. (b/t,) 
—— — 
Class 1 Class 2 Class 3 
Plastic Compact — Semi-compact 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) Rolled Section 9.45 10.5 = 15.76 
ii) | Welded Section 8.45 9.45 13.65 
6.1.3 Joints 


Joints in a composite structure may be modelled as: 


a) Hinged, wherein the connection transfers only 
axial force and shear force, and negligible moment 
may be assumed to be transferred. 


b) Rigid, wherein relative deformation between 
the members being joined is negligible due to 
rigid nature of the joint, and the compatibility of 
deformation of the adjacent members at the joint 
may be assumed in the analysis. 


2 — Tension 
3 — Plastic neutral axis 
1 4 — Neglect 


Fic. 1 EFFECTIVE CLASS 2 WEB IN BENDING 


IS 11384 : 2022 


0.8 < (b/b) < 1.0 


Ес. 2 PARTIALLY ENCASED I SECTION 


c) Semi-rigid, wherein the joint deformation under 
the force transferred across the joint should be 
modelled. 


The effects of the deformation behaviour of the joints 
on the internal force resultants and deformations in the 
members and structure may be generally neglected. 
However, where such effects may be significant (such 
as in semi-rigid connections), they shall be considered 
as discussed in IS 800. 


6.1.4 Foundation Support 


Normally the support from the foundation may be 
assumed as hinged or rigid, depending on the soil 
condition and foundation type. Effects of support 
deformation may be considered, where significant, as 
given in IS 800. 


6.1.5 Deformation of the Structure 


6.1.5.1 If under the external actions, the deformations 
are small, then the analysis can be done by studying 
the equilibrium of the undeformed structure. Such an 
analysis is referred to as first-order analysis or linear 
elastic analysis. 


6.1.5.2 If under the external actions, the deformations 
are large enough to significantly affect or modify 
the structural behaviour, then the analysis should be 
performed considering the equilibrium of the structure 


11 


under deformed configuration. Such an analysis is 
referred to as second-order analysis. 


6.1.5.3 First-order analysis is adequate if the increase 
in the internal forces or moments due to actions on 
the deformation from the first-order analysis is less 
than 10 percent. This may be assumed to be satisfied 
if the ratio of the P /P,is greater than or equal to 10, 
where P. is the load corresponding to elastic instability 
of the member or structure as a whole and P, is the 
factored design compressive load. In evaluating the 
elastic critical load, P. , effect of cracking and creep of 
concrete, deformation of the joint shall be considered. 


6.1.6 Imperfections 


Effects of imperfections in the member (local 
imperfections) and imperfections in the overall 
geometry of the structure should be considered if they 
are significant. The first order analysis does not account 
for these, and hence the design method used should 
consider these effects. The second-order analysis should 
include the imperfections in the modelling, if the ratio 
of the factored design loads to the elastic critical load, 
PAP, « 4.0. Ifthe second-order analysis does not include 
the imperfection effects (when Р/Р, > 4.0), the design 
method used should consider the imperfection effects. 
If the second-order analysis includes imperfection 
modelling, then the design method shall not include the 
effects of imperfections. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


6.1.7 Shear Lag and Effective Width of Flanges 


The effectiveness of steel and concrete flanges is 
reduced due to shear deformation in their plane either 
through rigorous analysis or by using effective width of 
the concrete as given in 8.3.3 and that of steel flanges 
as given in IS 800. 


6.1.8 Creep, Shrinkage and Temperature 


The effect of creep of concrete on the internal forces can 
be accounted by using effective modulus of elasticity of 
concrete, as recommended in IS 456, by considering 
the creep and the age of concrete at the time of loading. 
The shrinkage strain may be taken as recommended in 
IS 456 or as per specialized literature. 


When permanent loads are imposed in several stages, 
one mean value of time may be used for calculating 
creep coefficient. Such a mean value may also be used 
for evaluating prestressing deformations if the age 
of the relevant portion of the concrete at the time of 
prestressing is more than 14 days. 


If a prefabricated and prestressed concrete slab is made 
composite with structural steel subsequently, the creep 
and shrinkage values only after the composite action 
becomes effective are to be taken. 


The effects of creep, shrinkage and differential 
temperature, in terms of internal forces, moments and 
deformation in determinate structure and indeterminate 
structures, where compatibility is not enforced, are 
referred to as ‘primary effects’. In indeterminate 
structures, wherein the compatibility of deformation 
is ensured in the analysis, the additional effects of 
enforcing compatibility are referred to as ‘secondary 
effects’. 


The effects of creep, shrinkage, and temperature are 
normally neglected in analysis for the ultimate limit 
state other than fatigue for composite members, in 
which steel sections used should meet either plastic or 
compact classification. 


The characteristic values of indirect actions due to 
the controlled imposed deformations (e.g. jacking of 
supports) may be calculated using the characteristic 
or nominal values of material properties in prestressed 
indeterminate composite beams and slabs unless a 
more accurate method is followed. 


6.1.9 Cracking of Concrete 


The effect of cracking of concrete in tension zones, 
as obtained from elastic analysis of the uncracked 
concrete model, may be considered by using effective 
stiffness of cracked concrete as give in IS 456. 


6.1.10 Sequence of Construction 


Depending upon the type of construction 
(propped/unpropped, prestressed, precast etc.) the 
model for different stages of loading may differ. For the 
resultant internal forces, stresses and deflection at service 


12 


load considering the effects of the staged construction 
may be obtained by superposing the analysis results 
for different loads obtained from different appropriate 
models for the stage of construction. 


The effect of the sequence of construction may be 
neglected in structures made of plastic and compact 
steel sections and the model corresponding to the final 
stage of construction may be utilized for the ultimate 
limit state, other than fatigue. 


6.2 Methods of Global Analysis 


Different methods of global analysis, as discussed 
in the following sections, are permitted. The design 
and member strength check methods are chosen to 
be consistent with assumptions in analysis and actual 
global/member behaviour. Linear elastic first order 
method is most commonly used, but the second order 
effects and member imperfection effects etc., have to be 
taken care of in the design and member check stages. 


6.2.1 Linear Elastic Analysis 


6.2.1.1 Effect of cracking of concrete in tension, creep, 
shrinkage, temperature, prestressing and sequence of 
construction should be considered in the linear elastic 
analysis, as discussed in 6.1 and 7. Forces and moments 
from the linear elastic analysis may be used even when 
the design is based on the ultimate limit state. In the case 
of continuous structures with hogging moments over 
supports, evaluation of the effective section at supports 
may be necessary, as mentioned in 8.3.3. Appropriate 
load combinations with corresponding load factors are 
to be used to find out the maximum design values of 
moments and shears. 


The stability of a structure as a whole against 
overturning shall be ensured under the limit state as 
per provisions of IS 456. The foundation components 
of the structure shall also be safe against sliding under 
adverse conditions of the applied characteristic loads. 
The following factor of safety shall be ensured: 


a) Overturning — The stability of a structure as a 
whole against overturning shall be ensured so 
that the restoring moment shall not be less than 
the sum of 1.2 times the maximum overturning 
moment due to the characteristic dead load and 
1.4 times the maximum overturning moment due 
to the characteristic imposed loads. In cases where 
dead load provides the restoring moment, only 
0.9 times the characteristic dead load as per 
IS 456 shall be considered. Restoring moments 
due to imposed loads shall be ignored. 

b) Sliding — The structure shall have a factor against 

sliding of not less than 1.4 under the most adverse 

combination of the applied characteristic forces. 

In this case also, only 0.9 times the characteristic 

dead load shall be taken into account if it assists in 

resisting sliding. 


с) Instability — Linear elastic instability analysis 
of member and the global system is possible, 
wherein first order assumptions and the resulting 
eigenvalue problem leads to eigenvalues as the 
instability load. 


6.2.1.2 Redistribution of moments from first order 
analysis 


Bending moments obtained from the linear elastic 
analysis of indeterminate slabs, beams and frames in 
composite structures in buildings may be redistributed 
to a limited extent as given below while ensuring the 
equilibrium is still satisfied: 


a) 


concrete members are subjected primarily to 
flexure in accordance with IS 456; 


b) steel members satisfy Ше section 


requirements of IS 800; 


plastic 


с) 


composite members have partial ог full shear 
connection as given in 11; 


redistributed internal forces and moments should 
satisfy equilibrium; 


d) 


inelastic behaviour of the material, and local and 
lateral-torsional buckling should allow such a 
redistribution; 


at least one end of the beam should be connected by 
rigid or full-strength joint to the adjacent member; 


g) each span is of uniform depth. 


Table 5 gives the maximum percentage reduction in the 
hogging bending moments obtained from linear elastic 
global analysis, in composite beams, unless it is verified 
that the plastic rotation capacity permits a higher value. 


Table 5 Limits to Percentage Redistribution of 
Hogging Bending Moments Obtained from Linear 
Elastic Analysis 


( Clause 6.2.1.2 ) 


Classification of the Plastic Compact Semi- Slender 
cross-section in the compact 
hogging moment 
region 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Рог un-cracked 40 30 20 10 
section analysis 
moment 
For cracked section 25 15 10 0 


analysis moment 


NOTES 


1 For grades of steel having yield strength greater than 
360 MPa, redistribution is applicable to beams with plastic or 
compact cross-sections. In the redistribution, the reduction in 
hogging moment should not exceed the values for compact 
sections given in Table 5, unless it is demonstrated that rotation 
capacity permits a higher value. 


2 The limits in Table 5 for semi-compact and slender sections 
relate to bending moments to be resisted by composite members 
and moment to be resisted by bare steel section should not be 
redistributed. 


13 


IS 11384 : 2022 


6.2.2 Non-Linear Global Analysis 


The non-linear analysis may be performed as specified 
in IS 800. The non-linear behaviour of the shear 
connection shall be taken into account. Effects of 
deformed geometry of the structure, imperfections, 
joint and foundations, creep, shrinkage, temperature, 
stages of loading shall be taken into account as 
discussed in 6.1. 


6.2.3 Rigid Plastic Analysis 


Rigid plastic global analysis may be used in composite 
structures to obtain ultimate limit state design values 
other than fatigue if the conditions given below are 
satisfied. Second-order effects, imperfections, creep, 
shrinkage, temperature effects, etc. need not be 
considered in the rigid plastic analysis. The effect of 
alternating plasticity due to variable loading need not 
be normally considered in buildings. 


a) All the members and joints of the frame are either 
composite or structural steel. 


Material and cross-section should satisfy 
requirements of plastic analysis as given in 
IS 800; 


Joints are able to sustain the plastic resisting 
moments over a large plastic hinge rotation; 


b) 


с) 
а) Critical plastic hinge location shall satisfy the 
following requirements: 


1) Cross-section of the structural steel section 
shall be symmetric about the plane of bending. 
2) restraints are provided to prevent lateral 
torsional buckling. 
3) lateral restraint is provided to the compression 
flange at all critical plastic hinge section under 
any loading. 
4) Therotation capacity of the section, considering 
any axial compression at the section, should be 
adequate to permit the plastic hinge rotation to 
form the plastic collapse mechanism. 
5) When rotation requirements are not calculated 
and ensured, all effective sections at potential 
plastic hinge locations should be of plastic 


classification. 


The plastic hinge rotation capacity in composite 
sections may be assumed to be adequate where: 


1) the yield strength of structural steel does not 
exceed 450 MPa. 


the concrete slab is of normal density concrete, 
having a characteristic strength within the 
range of 25 MPa to 50 MPa. 

contribution of reinforced concrete encasement 
in compression is neglected in calculating 
design moment resistance. 


2) 


3) 


4) all effective steel sections at potential plastic 
hinge rotation should be plastic, and all the 


other sections should be plastic or compact. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


5) all beam connection to adjacent 
beams/columns should have adequate plastic 
rotation capacity or should have a design 
resisting moment of at least 1.2 times the 
design plastic resistance of the adjacent beam. 

6) structural steel compression flange at plastic 

hinge location should be laterally restrained. 

7) adjacent span lengths do not differ by more 

than 50 percent of the shorter span length. 

8) the end span length is not more than 

115 percent of the adjacent span length. 

9) at plastic sections with the concrete slab is 

under compression, not more than 15 percent 

of the total depth of the section shall be under 
compression at the ultimate moment unless the 
plastic hinge at the section 1$ the last to form 


(not requiring much plastic hinge rotation). 


10) Plastic hinges shall not be located in composite 
columns unless plastic rotation capacity can be 


verified. 


11) The lateral support to the compression flange 
shall be located within half the depth of the 


steel section from the plastic hinge section. 


12) Sectionsaway from plastic hinge regions should 


satisfy at least compact section requirements. 
7 LIMIT STATE DESIGN 


7.1 General 


In the limit state design method, the structure shall be 
designed to withstand safely all loads likely to act on 
it throughout its life. The objective of the design 1$ to 
arrive at a structure that will remain fit for use during 
its life with acceptable target reliability. In other words, 
the probability of a limit state being reached during its 
lifetime should be very low. The acceptable limit for 
the safety and serviceability requirements before failure 
occurs is called a limit state. In general, the structure 
shall be designed on the basis of the most critical limit 
state and shall be checked for other limit states. 


For satisfactory functioning of a structure during its 
design life conditions, stipulations and directives laid 
down in IS 800 and IS 456 shall be adequately satisfied 
for all steel-concrete composite structures. 


7.1.1 Effect of Construction Sequence 


The linear elastic method is valid for the analysis of 
the structure after considering load history, sequence 
of concrete casting and development of composite 
strength. In the case of propped construction, most of 
the initial dead load is resisted through the beam -prop 
system and the steel beam remains basically unstressed 
at this stage. In the case of un-propped construction, 
the steel beam alone have to carry the initial dead load 
and construction loads. Consequently, stresses and 
deflections at this stage shall not exceed specified design 
limits. The necessary distinction has to be made in the 


14 


analysis about the stage of loading and the effectiveness 
of the system resisting the load. In the ultimate limit 
state, however, this distinction is not necessary while 
checking for flexural resistance. For the design of steel 
components and concrete deck, stipulations of IS 800 
and IS 456 and this standard shall be applied. 


7.1.2 The sequence of construction should be considered 
as an integral part of the design process, for example, 
when calculating the stresses under serviceability limit 
criteria. The sequence and method of construction 
need to be mentioned in the drawings. Additional 
information such as the position of construction joints, 
if any, may also be included in the drawings. 


Where the composite section is loaded before the 
concrete has attained its 28-days characteristic 
cube strength, the elastic properties and limiting 
compressive strength of the concrete, and the nominal 
strengths of shear connectors should be based upon 
the cube strength of the concrete at the time of 
loading. Where a partially cast slab is assumed to act 
compositely, the shear connection should be designed 
for this condition as well as for the final condition. In 
calculating deflections, consideration should be given 
to the sequence of construction and, where appropriate, 
proper account should be taken of the pre-camber 
of steel section, the deflections of the steel section 
due to loads applied to it prior to the development 
of composite action and of partial composite action 
where deck slabs are cast in stages. In execution, the 
rate and sequence of concreting should be required to 
be such that partly matured concrete is not damaged 
as a result of limited composite action occurring from 
the deformation of the steel beams under subsequent 
concreting operations. 


7.2 Limit States 


A composite structure or part of it is considered unfit 
for use when it exceeds a particular state called the limit 
state, beyond which it infringes on one of the criteria 
governing its performance or use. The limit states can 
be classified into the following categories: 


a) Ultimate Limit State. 
b) Serviceability Limit State. 
c) Fatigue Limit State. 


7.2.1 Ultimate Limit State 


It is the state when under the worst combination of 

factored loads the structure or its components either 
reach design strength or becomes unstable. Both 
stability and strength need to be checked under the 
ultimate limit state. 


In steel-concrete composite structures used in buildings 
or general constructions, the significant ultimate limit 
states to be considered are as follows: 


a) Collapse due to flexural, shear or bearing failure 
of one or more critical sections or components, 


b) Collapse due to horizontal shear failure at the 
interface between the steel beam and the concrete 
slab or composite slab system involving concrete 
slab and embossed profiled sheets, 


c) Collapse due to the vertical separation of the 
concrete/composite slab from the steel beams, and 


d) Collapse due to shear failure between steel and 
concrete components of the composite column 
or due to buckling of both fully/partially concrete 
encased steel columns or Concrete filled hollow 
sections used as columns. 


7.2.2 Serviceability Limit States 


It is the state at which any of the following conditions 
occur during the loads encountered under construction 
and service: 


a) Stress in structural steel has reached the prescribed 
limit. 
b) Stress in concrete has reached the prescribed limit. 


c) Deflection of a structure or its component reaches 
the prescribed limit. 


d) Concrete crack width reaches the prescribed limit. 


e) Slip at the interface between steel and concrete 
exceeds the prescribed limit. 


f) Vibration becomes excessive, especially at 


overhangs. 


g) Excessive corrosion affecting the durability of the 
structure. 


h) Unacceptable effects due to fire. 
7.2.3 Fatigue Limit State 


It is the state at which stress range due to the application 
of live loads reaches the prescribed limit, corresponding 
to the number of load cycles and detail configuration. 


7.3 Design Philosophy 


For ensuring the design objectives, the design should 
be based on the characteristic values for material 
strengths (resistance) and applied loads (actions), 
which take into account the probability of variations in 
the material strengths and in the loads to be supported. 
The characteristic values should be based on statistical 
data, if available. Where such data is not available, they 
should be based on experiments. The design values are 
derived from the characteristic values through the use 
of partial safety factors, both for material strengths and 
for loads. In the absence of special considerations, these 
factors should have the values given in this section 
according to the material, the type of load and the limit 
state, being considered. The reliability of the design is 
achieved by ensuring that: 


Design Action (Load) < Design Strength (Resistance) 


Design action refers to the external actions or load 
which act on the structure and the design resistance 
refers to the maximum resistance the structure and 
its components provides to resist the actions without 


IS 11384 : 2022 


causing failure of the structure and its components 
or causing hindrances to the smooth operation of the 
structure for which it is intended. 


7.4 Design Actions (Loads) 


7.4.1 Actions (loads) are classified into three main 
categories: 


a) Permanent or dead loads — Loads due to 
self-weight of structural and non-structural 
components, fittings, ancillaries, and fixed 


equipment etc. Dead loads shall be calculated on 
the basis of unit weights which shall be established 
taking into consideration the materials specified 
for construction. Alternatively, the dead loads 
may be calculated on the basis of nominal 
dimensions and unit weights of materials given in 
IS 875 (Part 1). 


Variable or live loads — Construction and 
service stage loads such as imposed (live) loads 
(for example, crane loads, impact, etc.), wind 
loads, snow loads and other loads shall be 
assumed in accordance with IS 875 (Parts | to 5) 
and the earthquake forces shall be calculated in 
accordance with IS 1893 (Part 1). 


c) Accidental loads — Accidental loads are actions 
or loads expected due to explosions and the 
impact of vehicles, etc. The characteristic values 
of accidental loads generally correspond to the 
value specified by relevant code, standard or 
client. Design for the accidental load is generally 
not required in every building unless it is required 
by the client or approving authority, in which 
case, general recommendations given in IS 800 or 
specialist literature shall be followed. 


b 


м 


7.4.2 Other than the actions due to the externally applied 
loads as given in 7.4.1, if the effects of shrinkage, creep 
and temperature are liable to affect material safety and 
serviceability of the structure, these shall be accounted 
for in the design calculations [see IS 875 (Part 5)]. 


7.4.3 Load Combination 


The different combinations of loads considered shall 
be as given in IS 875 (Part 5). For each combination, 
different partial safety factors for loads, y, are assigned 
to different loads to account for: 


a) Possibility of unfavourable deviation of the load 
from the characteristic value, 

b) Possibility of inaccurate assessment of the load, 

c) Uncertainty in the assessment of effects of the 
load, and 

d) Uncertainty in the assessment of the limit states 
being considered. 


The loads or load effects shall be multiplied by the 
relevant y, factors, given in Table 6, to calculate the 
design loads or design load effects. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Table 6 Partial Safety Factor for Loads, y, for the Limit States 
( Clause 7.4.3 ) 


Combination Limit State of Strength Limit State of Serviceability 
дд — —_——————_. 
DL LL? WL/EL АШ DL LL? WL/EL 
Leading Accompanying Leading Accompanying 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (60 0) (8) (9) (10) 
DL+LL+CL 1:5 15 1.05 - - 1.0 1.0 1.0 - 
DL+LL+CL+ WL/EL 12 1.2 1.05 0.6 
1.2 1.2 0.53 1.2 — 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.8 
DL+WL/EL 1.5 
(0.9) » — - 1:5 e 1.0 E e 1.0 
DL+ER 1.2 - 
(0.9)? 1.2 - - - - - - 
DL+LL+AL 1.0 0.35 0.35 - 1.0 - - - - 


D This value is to be considered when the dead load contribution to stability against overturning is critical or the dead load causes а 
reduction in stress due to other loads. 


2 When the action of different live loads is simultaneously considered, the leading live load shall be considered to be the one causing 
the higher load effects in the member/section. 


NOTE — The effects of actions (loads) in terms of stresses or stress resultants may be obtained from an appropriate method of 


analysis. 


Abbreviations: DL = Dead Load, LL = Imposed Load (Live Loads), WL = Wind Load, CL = Crane Load (Vertical/horizontal), 
AL = Accidental Load, ER = Erection Load, EL = Earthquake Load. 


Table 7 Partial Safety Factor for Material, ү, 
( Clause 7.5 ) 


SI No. Material Item Partial Safety Factor ym 
Strength Limit State  Serviceability Limit 

State 

(1) 0) (3) (4) (5) 
1) Structural Steel, and steel Resistance against yield stress, у, 1.10 .00 
sheeting Resistance of member to buckling, у, 1.10 .00 
Resistance against ultimate stress, y. 1.25 .00 

For accidental load combinations, у» mı 1.00 .00 

ii) Reinforcement Reinforcement resistance against yield stress, y, 1.15 .00 
iii) Shear connectors Yield stress, Ya 1.25 .00 
iv) Connections Bolts-friction type, у, 1:25 .00 
Bolts-bearing type, у 1:25 00 

Rivets, у, 1.25 .00 

Welds for shop fabrication, у, 1.25 .00 

Welds for site fabrication, y... 1.50 .00 

v) Concrete For basic and seismic load combinations, у. 1.50 1.00 
For accidental load combinations, у. 1.20 .00 


16 


7.5 Material Strength and Partial Safety Factor 


The design strength, 5, of a structural component, 

is obtained as given below from nominal ultimate 

strength, S, and partial safety factors for material 

strength, у. 
5, Е 5,/ Ym 

Where, the partial safety factor for materials, ү, 

(see Table 7), account for: 


a) Possibility of unfavorable deviation of material 
strength from the characteristic value, 


b) Possibility of unfavorable variation of member 
sizes, 


c) Possibility of unfavorable reduction in member 
strength due to fabrication and tolerances, and 


d) Uncertainty in the calculation of the strength of 
the members. 


8 DESIGN FOR ULTIMATE LIMIT STATES 


8.1 Composite Beams 
Composite beams shall be checked for the following: 
a) resistance to flexure; 
b) resistance to lateral-torsional buckling; 
c) resistance to web shear buckling; and 
d) resistance to longitudinal shear (between steel and 
concrete components). 
8.1.1 Assumptions 


Design for the limit state of collapse in flexure shall be 
based on the assumptions given below: 


1) Plane sections normal to the neutral axis 
remain plane and normal after bending; 

2) The maximum strain in concrete at the 

outermost compression fiber at collapse is 


taken as 0.0035 in bending as per IS 456; 


3) The tensile strength of the concrete is ignored; 


4) The stress-strain curve for the reinforcing steel 
shall be assumed to be the same as given in 


IS 456; 


The properties of structural steel shall be taken 
as given in IS 800. 


5) 
6) The stress-strain curve for concrete may 
be taken to be the same as given in IS 456. 
The corresponding parabolic stress block 
may be used to evaluate the design bending 
resistance of composite beams and slab. The 
bending resistance of a composite beam for 
the value of concrete stress using an equivalent 
rectangular stress block, which simplifies the 
design resistance equation, may be used as 


17 


IS 11384 : 2022 


an alternative method. Both methods and 
the design resistance equations are given in 
Annex B. 

NOTE — Critical cross-sections include the following: 
a) sections where the bending moment is maximum; 
b) at the faces of support; 
c) sections adjacent to concentrated force or reactions; 


d) locations where a sudden change of cross-section 
occurs; (ratio of greater to lesser resisting moment 
at adjacent sections exceeds 1.2), (changes due to 
cracking of concrete not to be included). 


8.1.2 Ultimate Bending Resistance 


For determining the position of the plastic neutral axis 
and the ultimate moment of resistance of composite 
beams, the guidelines given in Annex B may be used. 


8.1.2.1 General 


Composite constructions of types: (a) Top flange of 
steel beam supporting the concrete slab (Fig. 3) and 
(b) composite slab resting on structural steel beam 
(Fig. 4) are included in this design philosophy. A 
typical composite beam arrangement is shown in 
Fig. 3, where cast in place or precast RC slab is directly 
resting on the steel beam. Fig. 4 depicts a composite 
slab consisting of RC and profiled deck sheet (with or 
without embossments) and supported on a structural 
steel beam, parallel and perpendicular to the steel beam, 
respectively. The neutral axis may be in the concrete 
slab, in the top flange of the steel section, or in the web 
of the steel section. 


Bending moments and shears due to the application 
of factored loads may be analyzed in indeterminate 
structures by elastic theory assuming the concrete in 
the slab as un-cracked and unreinforced. 


Hogging moments over internal supports as calculated 
above should be checked against section resistance 
assuming steel beam acting integrally with concrete 
(considering un-cracked and unreinforced). If the 
flexural tensile stress in concrete thus calculated 
exceeds the tensile strength of concrete, f. оо; Ш 
Annex F then a new analysis, neglecting concrete but 
including reinforcements over the effective width of 
the slab (see 8.3.3) and over 15 percent of the span on 
each side of the support should be done to calculate the 
required design resistance, provided adjacent spans do 
not differ appreciably. 


The redistribution of elastic analysis moment of 
indeterminate structure, as recommended ш 6.2.1.2, 
15 allowed to arrive at the design moments in the case 
of plastic beams. Design for plastic analysis moments 
(as given in 6.2.3) is permitted in the case of beams 
classified as plastic. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


FA OF STEEL 


CROSS SECTION 


tr 


Fic. 3 TYPICAL COMPOSITE BEAMS WITHOUT PROFILED DECKING SHEET 


PLASTIC NEUTRAL AXIS PLASTIC NEUTRAL AXIS 
OF COMPOSITE GIRDER OF COMPOSITE GIRDER 


Г, О | ва L, es ee | ee D 
С.С. OF STEEL C.G. OF STEEL 


CROSS SECTION CROSS SECTION 


FIG. 4 TYPICAL COMPOSITE BEAMS WITH PROFILED DECKING SHEET (A) RIBS PARALLEL То Beams (В) RIBS 
PERPENDICULAR TO BEAMS 


18 


The bottom flange of the beam in the hogging moment 
zone should be adequately braced against lateral 
buckling. Otherwise, lateral buckling resistance has to 
be evaluated as recommended in B-4. 


8.2 Precast Slab on Steel Beam 


The use of precast slab, both full depth and partial 
depth, is allowed for composite construction as one 
of the components of composite beams. Precast slabs 
shall be erected and connected to the steel section so as 
to ensure composite action along with the steel beam. 


8.2.1 Full Depth Precast Slab 


Full-depth precast concrete deck panels may be used 
for new construction as well as for the replacement of 
deteriorated concrete decks on existing steel beams so 
as to obtain composite action. This shall be ensured by 
proper shear connection during the erection of these 
precast panels. The typical requirements for these types 
of beams are as given below: 


a) Panels shall either span the full width of the 
concreting deck or shall be in lengths that span 
between two or more parallel beams. The 
minimum thickness of the slab shall be 150 mm. 


b 


— 


The panels shall be connected to the beams 
using shear connectors in pockets, which consist 
of mechanical connectors, such as shear studs 
encapsulated in non-shrinking grouted pockets. 
These connections cause the panels to develop 
composite action with the beam. 


с 


ме 


The contact between the precast panels at their 
longitudinal edge should ensure transfer of 
compression between the panels, necessary for 
composite action. 


8.2.2 Partial Depth Precast Slab 


Partial depth precast concrete deck panels are generally 
thin RCC/prestressed concrete panels that span 
between beams and also serve as forms/shuttering for 
the cast-in-place concrete deck. The typical geometrical 
parameters that govern the use of these panels as a 
composite unit for the floor system are as given below: 


a) The minimum thickness of the precast panels shall 
be 75 mm. 


b) As a composite floor system, the cast in-situ 
concrete and the partial-depth panels together 
create the total thickness of the slab, with the 
panel’s reinforcing steel serving as the positive 
moment reinforcement in the bending direction of 
the combined slab. 


с 


ме 


Dimensions of the precast panels shall be chosen 
from consideration of easy handling, ease of lifting 
by cranes and for catering to the construction 
loads, including load of wet cast in-situ concrete. 


d 


wa 


Partial-depth panels must be capable of developing 
sufficient composite action with the cast in-situ 
concrete to be an effective floor system. 


19 


IS 11384 : 2022 


e) To ensure full bond between the cast in-situ 
concrete and precast panels, it is recommended that 
the top surface of the precast panel is intentionally 
roughened while casting it and is cleaned by 
removing the laitance or other contaminants on 
the surface and other measures may be taken, 
before the placement of the cast in-situ concrete 
so as to ensure a good bond between precast and 
cast in place concrete. 


After the precast panels are in place, the top layer 
of the reinforcing steel shall be placed over it, and 
the cast in-situ concrete shall be placed on top of 
the panels. 


8.2.3 General Design Principles 


The design of precast slabs is based on the following 
principles: 


a) The precast slab together with any in-situ concrete 
(for partial depth slab) should be designed as 
continuous in both the longitudinal and the 
transverse direction. 


b) The joints between slabs should be designed to 
transmit membrane forces as well as bending 
moment and shear forces. 


c) The effective width of precast slab in the composite 
beam action shall be calculated as per 8.3.3. 


d) The design principles of composite beam involving 
either full depth or partial depth precast slabs are 
similar to standard composite decks using cast 
in-situ reinforced concrete. 


e) Vertical shear check of the composite beam shall 
be done as per 8.3.6. 


f) For serviceability limit states, guidelines given in 
7.2.2 and 9 shall be followed. 


8.2.4 Joints between Steel Beam and Precast Concrete 
Slab 


a) Where precast slabs are supported on steel beams 
without bedding, the influence of the vertical 
tolerances of the bearing surfaces shall be 
considered. 


b 


— 


The shear transfer between steel flange and precast 
concrete through mechanical shear connector 
shall be designed as per 11 with the following 
precautions: 


1) If shear connectors are welded to the steel 
beam projecting into the recesses within the 
slabs or joints between slabs, which are filled 
with concrete after erection, the detailing and 
the properties of the concrete should be such 
that it can be cast properly. 


2) The minimum  infill around the shear 
connectors should be at least 25 mm. 
3) If shear connectors are arranged in groups, 


sufficient reinforcement should be provided 


IS 11384 : 2022 


near each group to prevent premature local 
failure in either the precast or the in-situ 
concrete. 


4) Special provision for protection against 
corrosion shall be adopted, wherein the steel 
flange under precast slabs without bedding 
should have the same corrosion protection as 
the rest of the steelwork in addition to the top 
coating provided after erection. 


5) Bedding with the purpose of protecting against 
corrosion may be designed to be non-load 
bearing. 


8.2.5 Joints between Precast members 


The critical sections of members close to joints should 
be designed to resist the most adverse combination of 
shear, axial force and bending caused by the ultimate 
vertical and horizontal forces. When the design of 
the precast members is based on the assumption that 
the joint between them is not capable of transmitting 
bending moment (see 8.3.4), suitable precautions 
should be taken to ensure that if any crack developed 
is not excessive, and reduce the shear or axial force 
resistance of the member and should not be aesthetically 
or functionally objectionable. 


Where space is left between two or more precast units, to 
be filled later with in-situ concrete or non-shrink grout, 
the gap should be large enough for easy placement and 
adequate compaction of the filling material to fill the 
gap completely. 


8.2.6 Structural Connection at Joints 


When designing and detailing the connections across 
joints between precast members the overall stability of 
the structure, including its stability during construction, 
shall be considered, a typical joint connection is shown 
in Fig. 5. 


Ж CAST /N-S/TU 


8.3 Design Method 


Connections should, where possible, be designed 
in accordance with the generally accepted methods 
applicable to reinforced concrete or structural steel. 


8.3.1 General Considerations in Design Details 


In addition to ultimate resistance requirements, the 
following should be considered: 


a) Protection — Connections should be designed so 
that the standard of protection against weather and 
corrosion required for the rest of the structure is 
sufficiently maintained. 


b) Appearance — Where connections are to be 
exposed, they should be designed to achieve and 
maintain the quality of appearance required for the 
rest of the structure. 


с) Manufacture, assembly, and erection — Methods 
of manufacture and erection should be considered 
during design. Care should be taken during erection 
and the following precautions are mandatory: 


1) Where projecting bars or sections are required, 
they should be kept to a minimum and made 
as simple as possible. The lengths of such 
projections should be not more than necessary. 


2) Fixing devices should be located in concrete 
sections of adequate strength. 


3) The practicability of both casting and assembly 
should be considered. 


4) Most connections require the introduction of 
suitable jointing material. Sufficient space 
should be allowed in the design for such 
material to ensure that the proper filling of the 
joint is possible. 


Fic. 5 TYPICAL JOINT CONNECTION FOR PARTIAL DEPTH PRECAST SLAB 


20 


8.3.2 Reinforcement Continuity at Joint 


Where continuity of reinforcement is required through 
the connection, the joining method used should be such 
that the assumptions made in analyzing the structure 
and critical sections are realized. The standard methods 
applicable for achieving continuity of reinforcements 
are lapping and butt welding of bars. 


8.3.3 Effective Width of Concrete Slab 


a) For resistance calculation, the width of the slab, 
which is effective as the compression flange of the 
composite beam on each side of the steel beam, 
b œ Shall be as per the equation given below: 


bs =D, (b, bs) o b, + € b, +(b,+5,) 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Reinforcements placed parallel to the steel beam within 
the effective width of the concrete slab should be 
considered for hogging moment resistance calculation 
of the composite beam at the continuous support. 


b) The effective width at an end beam may be 
determined as: 


б = byt Ba ba + Pa Б, 
where 
В. = (0.55 + 0.025 (L/b,,) 
B= (0.55 + 0.025 (L Jb .) 
L,— Equivalent effective end span 


b = 0 for end spans as shown in Fig.6 


8.3.4 Effective Cross Section for Strength Calculation 


In calculating the strength of the cross section of the 


Where composite beam, the following should be considered: 
b, - centre to centre between the outer a) For Sagging Moment — Concrete in the effective 
row of shear connectors. width and structural steel beam to be included but 
bb, = the value of the effective width of not the steel reinforcements in the effective width 
the concrete flange on each side of of concrete. 
the web and taken as L/8 but not b) For Hogging Moment — Concrete to be neglected 
greater than the geometric width but longitudinal steel reinforcement along the 
b, and b,, respectively as shown in beam length within the effective width of the 
Fig. 6. concrete in tension and structural steel beam to be 
= L/8<b апар, (respectively) included 
L, = the effective equivalent span 8.3.5 Design of Structure for Bending Moment 
length of the corresponding | | 
composite beam, usually taken аз 8.3.5.1 The factored design flexural strength, Мьша 
the approximate distance between beam and the external action, М, shall satisfy. 
points of zero bending moment. M<M, 
=  centre-to-centre distance between where 
ihe supports fOr SII Supported М = M '/y „= design flexural resistance calculated 
beam. d n ‘m0 
"T | | as given below. 
= as shown in Fig. 7 in continuously ү „= partial safety factor against flexural failure 
supported beam mo (Table 7) 
M, = Nominal ultimate flexural resistance. 
Бе =0' bo be2 Бе bo be2 bei bo Бе? 


End beam 


Inner beam 


Outer beam Free edge 


Ес. 6 EFFECTIVE WIDTHS FOR CONCRETE FLANGE OF COMPOSITE BEAMS 


21 


IS 11384 : 2022 


15-0.25 (144) 


Ес. 7 EFFECTIVE SPAN OF CONTINUOUS BEAMS 


8.3.5.2 Considering local buckling, sections are to be 
analyzed as plastic, compact or semi-compact with the 
following additional consideration. 


a) Load history and development in composite action 
are to be taken into consideration with appropriate 
values of the modular ratio, m at each stage, and 
stresses and deflections are to be the summation of 
values over successive stages. 


b) Determination of bending resistance for a beam 
before composite action has set in or during the 
construction stage shall be done as per IS 800. 


c) The structural steel reinforcement and concrete 
fully interact with full shear transfer between 
the concrete and structural steel under composite 
action. 


d) The effective width of concrete in composite 
action may be as mentioned in 8.3.3. 


e) For calculating the bending resistance of plastic, 
compact and semi-compact composite beams, the 
procedure presented in Annex B may be followed. 


f) The partial shear connection may be used in plastic 
and compact sections either for attaining economy 
without losing much in the moment capacity of the 
composite section or under conditions where the 
number of shear connectors required for full shear 
interactions cannot be provided. Requirements on 
the method of evaluating the bending resistance of 
partial shear connection are presented in B-1.2. 


The bending moment and shear force distribution in 
continuous beams for secondary, as well as primary 
moment resistant frames/beams have to be determined 
by structural analysis. 


8.3.5.3 Design of structure for effect of lateral buckling 
on moment resistance 


Lateral Buckling may govern the design under the 
following conditions: 


a) At construction stage, in the top flange closer to 
mid-span in both simply supported and continuous 
beams. 


b) Atconstruction and composite stage, in the bottom 
flange closer to support in continuous beams. 


22 


At the construction stage, the effect of lateral buckling 
on the bottom flange in a continuous beam shall be 
taken care of by considering cantilever action up to the 
point of inflection from the support. 


If required, suitable horizontal bracings or members 
may be provided at the bottom flange to reduce the 
effective length of the compression flange near support. 
For beams that are provided with such bracings 
or members giving effective lateral restraint to the 
compression flange at intervals along the span, the 
effective lateral restraint shall be capable of resisting a 
force equal to 2.5 percent of the maximum force in the 
compression flange taken as divided equally between 
the numbers of points at which the restraint in bracing 
members occur. In beams supporting composite slabs, 
wherein the sheeting is welded to the top flange before 
concreting is done, the lateral restraint of the deck sheet 
may be considered. 


The effective laterally unsupported length of 
compression flange of steel sections in sagging and 
hogging moment regions may be taken as given in 
IS 800. In sagging moment segments of composite 
beams, the concrete slab may be assumed to provide 
lateral support, provided an adequate shear connection 
between the slab and the beam is provided. In the 
hogging moment regions of composite beams, the 
effective length considering the rotational restraint 
provided by the slab to the top tension flange may be 
taken into account as given in B-2 of Annex B. 


8.3.5.4 Simplified design of continuous beams т 
buildings without lateral bracings 


Continuous composite beams (or composite beams 
within a frame) with plastic, compact, or semi-compact 
sections may be designed without any additional lateral 
bracings to the compression flange when the following 
conditions are satisfied: 


a) The concrete slab on top should be adequately 
attached with shear connectors to the structural 
steel section and to at least on another parallel 
member top flange to facilitate inverted U-frame 
action that rotationally restrains bottom flange 
lateral buckling at hogging moment sections. 


b) Adjacent span lengths of continuous beams should 
not differ by more than 20 percent of the shorter 
span length. Cantilever span length should not 
exceed 15 percent of the adjacent span length. 


с 


ме 


The loading оп each span should be uniformly 
distributed, with the permanent design loads 
exceeding 40 percent of the total design load. 


d) Ateach support of steel member, the bottom flange 
should be laterally restrained with a web bearing 
stiffener at that location. 


e) The maximum depth of beam sections should not 
exceed the value given in Table 8. 


8.3.6 Design of Structural Steel Web against Vertical 
Shear Force 


8.3.6.1 The factored design shear force, V,, in a 


composite beam due to external action, V, shall satisfy: 


pego 
where 
Г, = design shear resistance calculated as given 
below. 
7. = ras 
Y," partial safety factor against shear failure 
(Table 7). 


и = nominal ultimate shear resistance 


The vertical shear force is assumed to be resisted by 
the web of the steel section only unless the value for 
contribution from the reinforced concrete part of 
the beam has been established. The nominal shear 
resistance, У may be governed by plastic shear 
resistance or strength of the web as governed by shear 
buckling as given below: 


a) Plastic shear resistance 


The nominal plastic shear resistance of composite 
beams under pure shear shall be calculated as 
indicated in IS 800, disregarding the contribution 
of the concrete slab. The shear resistance for 
I-sections, channels both for major axis bending 
and minor axis bending as well as for rectangular 
and circular hollow sections of uniform thickness 
shall be as per IS 800. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


b) Shear buckling resistance 


Resistance to shear buckling shall be verified as 
specified in IS 800. The nominal shear resistance, 
V , of webs with or without intermediate stiffeners 
as governed by buckling may be evaluated as 
detailed in IS 800 either using simple post-critical 
method or tension field method. The contribution 
of encasing concrete to shear resistance may be 
considered and that of shear reinforcement can be 
considered provided they consist of closed loop 
stirrups. The total shear may be shared between 
the structural steel section and encasing concrete 
in the ratio of contribution to the plastic moment 
capacity. 


8.3.6.2 Reduction in bending resistance under high 
shear force 


If V is less than 0.6 „ reduction in the plastic bending 
resistance of the section need not be considered. When 
V > 0.6V, the bending resistance is reduced as the 
contribution of the web to bending gets diminished. 
The reduced bending resistances of the following 
sections are given below: 


a) Plastic or compact section 
М,- M,- B(M,- My) s (1 2 ZS no 


where 
p= QVIV,—1y. 

M, — plastic design moment of the whole section 
disregarding high shear force effect considering 
web buckling effects. 

V — factored applied shear force. 
Г, = design shear resistance as governed by web 
yielding or web buckling. 

M, = Plastic design resistance ofthe area of the cross 


section excluding the shear area, considering 
partial safety factor y... 


b) Semi-compact Section 
My = 27/7. 
where 


Z,= elastic section modulus of the whole section. 


Table 8 Maximum Depth of Steel Beams in Composite Construction (In mm) 


[ Clause 8.4.5.4 (e) ] 
SI Хо. Type of Member Nominal Yield Strength Limit of Structural Steel (MPa) 
Ди 
250 300 350 >400 

Un-cased  Еп-сазеа Un-cased En-cased ^ Un-cased | En-cased ^ Un-cased Еп-саѕей 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 

i) I Section 800 1000 700 900 650 850 500 650 

ii) Parallel Flange 600 800 550 750 400 600 270 430 


IS 11384 : 2022 


8.3.7 Hybrid Sections 


Use of hybrid steel sections consisting of different 
grade steel elements is permitted. The plastic and 
compact section design strength is obtained by using 
the appropriate value of yield stress in the different 
elements of the hybrid section. The design strength of 
the semi-compact section is evaluated with necessary 
adjustment (reduction) in stresses of the flange element 
in the cross-section with higher yield stress by the 
reduction factor, R,. The R, may be determined using 
the procedure as presented in B-3 of Annex B. 


8.3.8 Partially Encased Sections 


This section is applicable for partially encased 
composite plastic or compact beams, provided the web 
depth to thickness ratio, d/t,, is less than or equal to 
117. 


Full shear connection between the structural steel 
section and concrete encasing the web shall be ensured. 
The steel reinforcement in the compression zone and 
concrete in the tension zone may be disregarded. 


Partial shear connection may be used in the partially 
encased composite section, provided the requirements 
of 8.3.5.2 are satisfied. 


9 DESIGN FOR 
STATES 


SERVICEABILITY LIMIT 


9.1 General 


9.1.1 Serviceability limit states are related to the criteria 
governing normal use. Serviceability limit state is the 
limit state beyond which the serviceability criteria 
specified below are no longer met: 


a) Stress and deflection limit, 
b) Vibration limit, 

c) Durability consideration, and 
d) Fire resistance. 


9.1.2 Linear elastic analysis is used for finding out 
design moments and stresses under various load 
combinations and load factors, as mentioned in 
Table 7, for serviceability limit states. Concrete is 
assumed as unreinforced and un-cracked for the 
analysis. 


9.1.3 Method of Construction 


The stress and strain at serviceability limit state depend 
on whether the steel beam is propped or un-propped 
during construction, as given below: 


а) Un-propped construction Іп un-propped 
construction, the steel beam has to carry the 
construction load, including shuttering, wet 
concrete and its own weight until the concrete 
hardens. 


b) Propped construction — In propped construction, 
both the dead and live load are resisted by the 


24 


composite section. When props are used, they 
should be kept in place until the in-situ concrete 
has attained a strength equal to approximately 
twice the stress to which the concrete may be 
subjected to upon removal of props. 
c) Non-composite Construction — In non-composite 
construction, the concrete slab is designed 
according to IS 456 and the steel deck sheet act 
just as a permanent shuttering. 


This difference in the method (a) and (b) of construction 
does not, however, affect the ultimate limit load, 
wherein the total load, including the transient loads, 
shall be resisted by the composite section. 


9.2 Negative Moments 

Negative moments over intermediate supports may be 
adjusted as mentioned in 8.1.2.1. 

9.3 Stresses and Deflections 


For calculating stresses at service load and deflection, 
the value of the modular ratio, m shall be taken as, 


m= a > 7.5 For short-term effect or loading. 
m= `— > 15.0 For permanent or long-term loads. 
where 
К, = Creep factor = 0.5. 
E = Modulus of elasticity for steel = 2.0 x 10° 
N/mm’. 
E „= Modulus of elasticity of cast in-situ concrete 
(1$ 456). 
Лу = characteristic cube compressive strength of 
concrete in N/mm’. 
E.,= Modulus of elasticity of cast in-situ concrete at 


i days (i < 28 days). 
The equivalent area of concrete slab at any stage shall 
be determined by dividing the effective width of the 
concrete slab by the modular ratio as given below: 


Final stresses and deflection are to be worked out 
separately at each stage of load history with relevant 
modular ratios and section modulus as discussed above 
and then added together. 


9.3.1 Limiting Stresses for Serviceability 


Limiting stresses for different stages of construction are 
as indicated below: 


a) Concrete — The limiting compressive stress in 
concrete should not exceed one-third of the 
characteristic strength of concrete. 

b) Reinforcement Steel — The limiting tensile stress 
in steel reinforcement should not exceed f,,/y, 


с) Structural Steel — The limiting stress in steel beam 
considering the different stages of construction 
should not exceed p 


Where bearing stress is combined with tensile or 
compressive stress, bending and shear stresses under 
the most unfavourable conditions of loading, the 
equivalent stress obtained from the following equation 
shall not exceed 0.9f : 


EUR ME ERgGSS 


and 
2 2 2 
Ja fa + tef, ts 
where 
f adf, = equivalent compressive and 
tensile stress in steel section; 
жалау = actual compressive and tensile 
stress in steel section; 
ҮЙ = actual bearing stress in steel 
section; and 
T = actual shear stress in steel 


section. 


The value of bending stresses f; about each axis, to be 
used in the above formula, shall be individually lesser 
than the values of the maximum allowable stresses in 
bending about the corresponding axis. 


9.3.2 Limiting Deflection and Camber 
9.3.2.1 Deflection limit 


The deflection under serviceability loads of a building 
or a building component should not impair the strength 
of the structure or components or cause damage to 
finishing. Deflections are to be checked for the most 
adverse but realistic combination of service loads and 
their arrangements, by elastic analysis using a load 
factor given in Table 7. The deflection of a member 
shall be calculated without considering the impact 
factor or dynamic effect of the loads on deflection. 
IS 800 gives recommended limits of deflections for 
certain structural members and systems. Circumstances 
may arise where greater or lesser values would be more 
appropriate depending upon the nature of the material 
in element to be supported (vulnerable to cracking or 
not) and intended use of the structure, as required by 
the client. 


9.3.2.2 Provision of camber 


Where the deflection due to the combination of 
dead load and live load is likely to be excessive, 
consideration should be given to pre-camber the steel 
beams. The values of desired camber shall be specified 
in the design drawing. Generally, for spans greater than 
25 m, camber approximately equal to the deflection due 
to dead loads plus half the live load may be used. 


25 


IS 11384 : 2022 


9.4 Vibration 


Suitable provisions in the design shall be made for the 
dynamic effects of live loads, impact loads and vibration 
due to machinery operating loads. In severe cases, 
the possibility of resonance, fatigue or unacceptable 
vibrations shall be investigated. Unusually flexible 
structures (generally the height to the effective width of 
lateral load resistance system exceeding 5:1) shall be 
investigated for lateral vibration under dynamic wind 
loads. Structures subjected to a large number of cycles 
of loading shall be designed against fatigue failure in 
accordance with IS 800. The floor vibration effect shall 
be considered using specialist literature. 


9.5 Durability 


9.5.1 Several factors that affect the durability of the 
buildings under conditions relevant to their intended 
life are listed below: 


a) The environment, 

b) The degree of exposure, 

c) The shape of the member and the structural detail, 
d) The protective measure, and 

e) Ease of maintenance. 


The durability of the structural steel component of a 
composite section shall be ensured by recommendations 
as given in IS 800. Specialist literature may be referred 
to for more detailed additional information in design for 
durability. For concrete, the durability shall be ensured 
by following the recommendations as given in IS 456. 


9.5.2 Profiled Steel Sheeting for Composite Slabs 


The durability criteria for profiled steel sheets of 
composite deck slab shall be met by the following 
procedures: 


a) The exposed surfaces of the steel sheeting shall 
be adequately protected to resist particular 
atmospheric conditions. 


b) A zinc coating of a total mass 275 g/m’ (including 
both sides) is sufficient for internal floors in a 
non-aggressive environment, but the specification 
may be varied depending on service conditions 


9.6 Fire Resistance 


Fire resistance of a steel component of a composite 
member is a function of its mass, its geometry, and the 
actions to which it is subjected, its structural support 
conditions, fire protection measures adopted and the 
fire to which it is exposed. Design provisions to the 
resistance of fire for concrete shall be as per guidelines 
given in IS 456. For the design of structural steel 
components for fire resistance, IS 800 shall be referred. 
Specialist literature may be referred to for more 
detailed information on the design for fire resistance of 
steel/composite structures. The aspect of fire resistance 
18 given in 15. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


9.7 Control of Cracking in Concrete and Crack 
Width Calculation 


Minimum reinforcements in terms of diameter and 
spacing required for crack control at the top of concrete 
as per IS 456 is to be provided in composite beams 
at the zone of the negative moment to prevent cracks 
adversely affecting the appearance and durability of the 
structure. Crack width calculation as well as limiting 
crack width as given in IS 456 may be followed, 
subject to the discretion of engineers. The crack width 
in concrete shall be restricted to values as indicated in 
IS 456. 


10 DESIGN FOR FATIGUE LIMIT 


This section applies to the design of structures and 
structural elements subject to loading which could 
lead to fatigue failure. The following effects are not 
considered in the section: 


a) Corrosion fatigue, 

b) Low cycle (high stress) fatigue, 

c) Thermal fatigue, 

d) Stress corrosion cracking, 

e) Effects of high temperature (> 150 °C), and 


f) Effects of low temperature (< below transition 
temperature). 


The fatigue design of various components of composite 
structures like members, welded joints, bolts, shear 
lugs, etc. shall be carried out as per the specifications 
laid down in IS 800. Fatigue provisions in the design of 
shear connectors are discussed in 11.3. 


11 SHEAR CONNECTORS 


The shear connectors shall fulfill the dual purpose of 
transferring shear force between concrete and structural 
steel as well as anchoring the two components relative 
to each other with minimum slip to ensure full or partial 
composite action as per the design requirement. The 
dimensional details of shear shall be as given in Fig. 8. 


11.1 Longitudinal Shear in Beams and Slabs 


Longitudinal shear load on shear connectors in a 
composite section, irrespective of boundary conditions 
of the members, is to be calculated for service and 
fatigue limit states on the basis of elastic theory. 
Appropriate sectional properties based on effective 
widths and modular ratios as per the load history and 
development of composite action shall be considered 
for the design of the section for resistance against 
longitudinal shear between steel and concrete. 


11.2 Design Strength of Shear Connectors 


Shear connectors shall be checked for adequacy 
against failure in both ultimate limit states and fatigue 
limit states. The strength of shear connectors against 
failure under ultimate limit states and fatigue limit 


26 


states shall be considered as per 11.2.1, 11.2.2 and 11.3, 
respectively. 
11.2.1 Design Strength of Shear Connectors 


Design static strengths of flexible shear connectors, 
mainly stud connectors and channel connectors can be 
determined by the following equations: 


a) Stud Connectors 


The design resistance, О, of stud shears connectors 
shall be as given below: 


_ 0.8 f,,.0.d° 14 P 0.26.0. Sfp Evy 
У mv i И 


О, 


where 


a=0.2 h d pse eade L0 for >4 
d d d 


О, = design strength of stud in, Newton (М); 
Уу, Z partial safety factor for stud connector = 1.25; 
— diameter of the shank of the stud, in (mm) 

(16 mm <4<25 mm) 

f," ultimate tensile strength of the stud material 
< 500 N/mm’; 

J „= Characteristic ^ compressive strength of 
concrete of density not less than 1 750 kg/m?; 

h.— nominal height of stud, in mm; and 


— Secant modulus of elasticity of concrete 
(see also Annex F). 
b) Channel Connectors 
Assuming that the web of the channel is placed vertical 
and the shear applied is nominally perpendicular to the 
web, the design resistance of a channel connector shall 
be determined as given below: 


Q, - 45(t, +0.54, LN fx 


04-0,/7,, 
where 
О, = Design strength of channel in Newton (М). 
= Length of the channel in mm. 

1.= Thickness of flange іп mm. 

t, = Thickness of web in mm. 
J „= Characteristic compressive strength of 

concrete. 

У „ = Partial safety factor for channel shear connector 


= 1:25. 


While using the channel shear connectors, the following 
recommendations need to be followed: 


1) The height Л of the channel should not 
exceed 20 times the channel web thickness or 
150 mm, whichever is less. 


2) The width b of the channel should not exceed 
300 mm. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


а eee Т 
мы Кт 
UT QU ur ой И" Т 

CA a^ Ж-ға De ч” oOo ve f > 


ab 


NI 


6 mm FILLET WELD 
MINIMUM 


(b) ANGLE / CHANNEL CONNECTOR - TRANSVERSE SECTION 


MINIMUM 6 mm FILLET WELD FOR FULL WIDTH 
BOTH AT HEEL AND TOE OF CHANNEL/ ANGLE 


(c) ANGLE / CHANNEL CONNECTOR - LONGITUDINAL SECTION 


Fic. 8 DETAILS OF SHEAR CONNECTOR 


NOTES 
1 The diameter of the stud connector welded to the flange plate shall not exceed two and half times the flange plate thickness. 
2 The height of the stud connectors shall not be less than four times their diameter nor 100 mm. 


3 The diameter of the head of the stud shall not be less than one and a half times the diameter of the stud and the depth shall not be less 
than 0.4d. 


4 The size of the fillet weld joining other types of connectors to the flange plate shall not exceed half the thickness of the flange plate. 


5 Channel and angle connectors shall have at least 6 mm fillet welds placed along the heel and toe of the channels/angles. The clear 
distance between the edge of the flange and the edge of the shear connectors shall not be less than 25 mm 


6 The overall height of a connector, including any hoop, which is an integral part of the connector, shall be at least 100 mm with a clear 
cover of 25 mm. 


27 


IS 11384 : 2022 


3) The underside of the top flange of the channel 
should not be less than 30 mm clear above the 
bottom reinforcement. 


4) The size of the fillet weld connecting the 
channel to the flange plate should not exceed 
half the flange plate thickness. 


11.2.2 The design strengths of some standard shear 
connectors are given in Table 9. The following points 
have to be considered while using Table 9: 
a) f,, is the specified characteristic cube strength at 
28 days. 
b) Connector strengths for concrete of intermediate 
grade may be obtained by linear interpolation. 
c) For channels of lengths different from those 


quoted above, the capacities are proportional to 
the lengths greater than 150 mm. 


sections. The number of connectors has to be meet 
both ultimate strength consideration as well as 
fatigue consideration 


h) In order to avoid undesirable slip, the maximum 
interface shear per unit length due to superimposed 
dead load and live load under service conditions at 
any point in the beam should satisfy 11.3.1. 


11.2.3 Design Resistance of Studs Used with Profiled 
Steel Sheeting 


11.2.3.1 Sheeting with ribs parallel to the supporting 
beams 


The studs are located within a region of concrete that 
has the shape of a haunch (Fig. 9). When the sheeting is 
continuous across the beam, the width of the haunch b, 
is equal to the width of the trough, as given in Fig. 10. 
Where the sheeting is not continuous, b, is as given in 


d) For rolled angle and tee shear connectors, the Fig. 9. The depth of the haunch should be taken as а, the 
values given for channel connectors are applicable, overall depth of the sheeting excluding embossments. 
provided the height is at least equal to that of the The design resistance of the shear connector should be 
channel. taken as the resistance in a solid slab, multiplied by the 

е) For stud connectors of overall height greater than reduction factor К, given by the following expression: 
100 mm, the design static strength should be taken 
as the values given in Table 9 for 100 mm high k =0.6 % h у <1.0 
connectors. Р а, d, 

f) The above pIOVISIOHS of stud connectors аге пої Where h is the overall height of the stud, but not greater 
applicable to composite slab using a profiled deck. thang +75 mm. 

The strength of the shear connector in such cases р . . : 
is given in 11.2.3. Where the sheeting is not continuous across the 
Th b f sh i | bod beam as shown in Fig.9, the side of the haunch and 

8) ы ae B К 2 Ь ГЪ be nik dum У "Me its reinforcement should be taken as the depth of the 
quella ud A oc cR DP oq ПК лекле profile d. excluding the embossments. 
between the maximum and the zero moment P 

Table 9 Ultimate Static Design Strengths of Shear Connectors (О, for Different Concrete Strengths) 
( Clause 11.2.2 ) 
SI №. Туре of Connector Material Size Ultimate static strength in kN 
A per connector 
Nominal Nominal For concrete strengths, Ё, 
diameter (mm) height (mm) (MPa) 
SE 
25 30 40 50 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
1) Stud Connectors Material with a characteristic yield 25 100 25 30 40 50 
strength of 385 MPa, minimum 22 100 79 91 113 133 
elongation of 18 percent and a 
characteristic tensile strength of 20 100 65 75 93 110 
are 20 75 в п 88 105 
16 75 42 48 59 70 
ii) Channels 150 mm Аз рег [$ 2062 (E250 A/BR) ISMC 125 244 259 285 307 
long (min) ISMC 100 206 219 241 260 
ISMC 75 166 176 194 209 


28 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Fic. 9 BEAM WITH PROFILED DECKING SHEET RIBS PARALLEL TO THE BEAM 


Fic. 10 BEAM WITH PROFILED DECKING SHEET RIBS TRANSVERSE TO THE BEAM 


11.2.3.2 Sheeting with ribs transverse to the supporting 
beams 


Provided that the conditions given in 11.2.2 are 
satisfied, the design shear resistance should be taken 
as the resistance in a solid slab, calculated as given 
by 11.2.1 (except that f ѕһоша not be taken as greater 
than 450 N/mm?) multiplied by the reduction factor 


К given by: 
e 2 0 


п, 13 the number of stud connectors in one rib at the 
beam intersection, not to exceed two in calculation of 
the reduction factor k, and of the longitudinal shear 
resistance of the connection. 


po & 
t Jn, d, (4 


where 


The factor k, should not be taken greater than the 
appropriate value К „a given in Table 10. The values 
for k are applicable ‘provided that the studs are placed 
in ribs with a height d, not greater than 85 mm and a 
width b, not less than d, and for through deck welding, 


the diameter of the studs is not greater than 20 mm, or 
for holes provided in the sheeting, the diameter of the 
studs is not greater than 22 mm. 


11.3 Fatigue Strength of Shear Connectors 


The fatigue shear stress range (fatigue Strength) of 
the shear connector shall be obtained from IS 800, 
corresponding to the design load life cycle, М. 


The strength shall be determined as given below: 


T= TQ х 105 / Ns. 


— design normal and shear fatigue stress range 
respectively of the detail for 5 x 10 cycles as 
given in IS 800. 


= 67 N/mm’ for stud connector аз per IS 800 


= 59 N/mm?’ for channel connector as per IS 800, 
provided that the thickness of the top flange of 
steel beam is greater than or equal to 12 mm 
and the edge distance from the end of weld to 
the edge of the top flange is 10 mm. 


The nominal fatigue strengths of some standard shear 
connectors are presented in Table 11. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Table 10 Upper Limits K, „ 


ax for the Reduction Factor K, 


( Clause 11.2.3.2 ) 


SL No. Number of stud Thickness t of sheet Studs 20 mm in diameter and welded Profiled sheeting with holes and 
connectors per rib (mm) through profiled steel sheeting studs 19 mm or 22 mm in diameter 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) n=l <1.0 0.85 0.75 
>1.0 1.0 0.75 
il) i= 2 <10 0.70 0.60 
> 1.0 0.8 0.60 
Table 11 Nominal Fatigue Strengths О (in kN) 
( Clause 11.3) 
SI No. Type of Connectors Connector Material N=Nos. of Cycles х 10° 
Гаи vp ee =~ 
0.1 0.5 2 10 100 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
1) Headed studs ф 25 72 52 40 29 18 
E / „= 385 MPa 
ii) Headed studs ф 22 A 56 40 31 22 14 
7 Ж,- 495 MPa 
iii) Headed studs ф 20 Elongation = 18 percent 46 33 25 18 12 
iv) Headed studs ф 16 29 21 16 12 7 
v) Channel 150 long for a IS 2062 
nominal weld of 8 mm 108 79 60 43 27 


NOTE — For intermediate stress cycles the values may be interpolated from log scales (that is, the above equation). Other connectors, 


if used, should have their capacities established through tests. 


11.3.1 Spacing of Shear Connectors 


The design shear action per unit length of the steel 
concrete interface, V, is given by: 


V = Longitudinal shear per unit length. 


V= The factored vertical shear forces due to 
dead load and live load (including impact 
if any) separately at each state of load 
history. 


А„= The transformed compressive area of 
concrete above the neutral axis of the 
composite section with the appropriate 
modular ratio depending on the nature of 
load (short term that is, live load, or long 
term, that is, dead load). 


У= C.G. distance of transformed concrete 
area from the neutral axis. 

[= Moment of Inertia ofthe composite section 
using an appropriate modular ratio. 


DL, LL — Different load history conditions, that is, 
sustained load or composite action dead 


30 


load, transient load, or composite action 
live load. These loads are to be considered 
with appropriate load factors at this stage. 


Maximum spacing of shear connectors, 5, is given as 


-29. 
V, 


L 


S, 


О is the ultimate static strength of one shear connector 
(Table 9) and the summation is over the number of 
shear studs in one section. 


The maximum longitudinal force at the interface due 
to bending moment shall also be calculated over the 
shear span, L, equal to the distance from zero moment 
to maximum moment section and is given by the 
following equations: 


H, m А, г 10° TY ds 


Н, 20.365, A, x10? 
where 


H , H, = Longitudinal interface shear force due to 
bending (kN); 
A = Area of tensile steel (mm?) in the longitudinal 
direction; 


A, = Effective area of concrete: 
b 4, -X, (for neutral axis within the slab); and 
b т. d, (for the neutral axis in the steel section). 


Sufficient connectors should be provided to resist the 
longitudinal force H, the maximum compressive force 
action in the composite beam slab interface, which is 
the smaller of H, and H,. 


The maximum spacing of shear connectors, S 
given as: 


i» 18 


Do 


5,5 ш Н 


11.3.2 Fatigue Strength of Shear Connectors 


l. 


The Shear range in which is the difference 
between the maximum and minimum vertical 
shear envelop due to live load and impact 


ИА. У 


"= | 


is live load with impact. 
Spacing of shear connectors from fatigue consideration 
is given as: 
20, 
V. 


r 


SR 


О is the design fatigue strength of one shear connector, 
which is to be taken from IS 800 Table 10. 


For full shear connection, the lowest spacing of S, , 5, , 
and S, is to be provided as the actual spacing of the 
shear connectors. 


11.4 Partial Shear Connection 


11.4.1 Partial shear connection may be used either for 
attaining economy without losing much in the moment 
capacity of the composite section or where the number 
of shear connectors required for full shear cannot be 
provided without compromising minimum spacing 
provisions. 


Partial shear connections may be used in plastic and 
compact sections. The number of connectors n, shall 
then be determined by a partial shear connection 
theory, taking into account the deformation capacity of 
the shear connector. 


S, degree of shear connection; 


n 
f % 

n,= Number of shear connectors provided for 
partial shear connection; 
Number of shear connectors required for full 
shear connection; 
Required reduced bending resistance of the 
section; 
Design moment of resistance of the entire 
composite section; 


31 


IS 11384 : 2022 


M,,= Plastic moment of resistance of steel section 
alone. 
М, ~ М, 
п„=———п; 
М. n M 
11.4.2 Limitation on the Use of Partial Shear 
Connection in Beams for Buildings 


Headed studs with an overall length after welding not 
less than 4 times its diameter and with shank diameter 
not less than 16 mm and neither greater than 25 mm 
may be considered as ductile with the following limits 
for the degree of shear connection, S : 


a) For steel sections with equal flanges: 

Г, $25: S, 21-142 2? (0.75-0.03L,);S, 2 0.4 
L »25: $,-1.0 

For steel sections having a bottom flange with an 
area of three times the area of top flange: 

Г, x20: S, >1-1.42=? (0.30—0.0157,) ; S, 20.4 
L,> 20: 5, = 1.0 

Where, = = 4250! f, , L, is the distance between 


points of zero bending moment in the sagging 
bending range in metres. For typical continuous 
beams, L, may be assumed as shown in Fig. 6 
and 7. 


For steel sections having a bottom flange with an 
area exceeding the area of the top flange but less 
than three times that area, the limit for 5, may be 
determined from expressions in (a) and (b) above 
by linear interpolation. 


b 


wm 


с 


— 


11.5 Precautions Against Separation of Steel Beam 
from Concrete 


a) Where, a concrete haunch is used, between the 
steel flange and the soffit of the slab, top of stud 
and top flange of channel shear connectors shall 
extend up to at least 40 mm above the transverse 
reinforcements іп the  haunches, provided 
the reinforcements are sufficient to transfer 
longitudinal shear. 

b) Where shear connectors are placed adjacent 

to the longitudinal edge of the slab, transverse 

reinforcement provided in accordance with 11.7 

shall be fully anchored in the concrete between 

the edge of the slab and the adjacent row of 
connectors. 


11.6 Detail of Haunches in Reinforced Concrete 


11.6.1 Figure 11 indicates the dimension of haunches 
as applicable for slabs with haunches resting on steel 
beam. The edge of haunches shall be located outside a 
line drawn at 45 degrees from the outside edge of the 
base of the connector, as shown in Fig. 11. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Fic. 11 DIMENSION OF HAUNCHES 


COVER 50 mm min. 


COVER 50 mm min. 


Fic. 12 CLEAR COVER TO SHEAR CONNECTORS 


11.6.2 Clear Cover to Shear Connectors 


The clear depth of concrete cover over the top of the 
shear connectors shall not be less than 25 mm. The 
horizontal clear concrete cover to any shear connector 
shall not be less than 50 mm as shown in Fig. 12. 


11.6.3 Spacing of Shear Connectors 


Where the compression flange of steel beam, in spite of 
being semi-compact is assumed to be compact or plastic 
based on the restraint provided by shear connectors, 
the centre-to-centre spacing of the shear connectors 
in the direction of the compression should satisfy the 
following: 


a) Where the slab is in contact over the full length 
(for example, solid slab) 
S, «21: t,.£ 
b) Where the slab is not in contact over the full 
length (for example, slab with ribs transverse to 


the beam): 
S, < 14- 1..6 
where 

s= 4/250/ f. 

t,— thickness of the flange; 
ra — nominal yield strength of the flange in N/mm?; 

and 

S, = maximum spacing of the shear connector. 


32 


In addition, the clear distance from the edge of the 
compression flange to the nearest line of shear connectors 
should not be greater than 91, = or 50 mm, whichever is 
less. 


In all cases, a shear connector shall be provided 
throughout the length of the beam and may be uniformly 
spaced between critical cross sections. The maximum 
longitudinal spacing of the shear connectors shall be 
limited to the lesser of 600 mm or 8 times the total 
slab thickness or four times the height of the connector 
(including any hoop which is an integral part of the 
connector), whichever is least. 


Minimum spacing should be such as to allow proper 
concrete flow and compaction around the connectors. In 
stud connectors, the minimum spacing should not be less 
than 75 mm. 


11.7 Transverse Shear Check (Requirement of Bottom 
Steel in Concrete Slab) 


Planes, which are critical for longitudinal shear failure 
in the process of transfer of longitudinal shear from the 
beam to the slab are of four main types as shown in 
Fig. 13. The shear force Q in kN/m of beam is given by: 


N, 0, 


О= 5, 


where 


N.— Number of shear connection at a section. 


Q = Design strength one shear connection. 
S, = Longitudinal of spacing of connector in meter. 
The shear force transferred per metre length from steel 


beam to concrete slab above, V, shall satisfy both the 
following conditions: 


a) V, <0.623L Jf, , or 
b) V, S0232EJ fx +014, P, n 


where 
И = Longitudinal shear force per unit length 
calculated for the ultimate limit state; 


— Characteristic strength of concrete, in MPa; 


— Yield stress of transverse reinforcement, in 
MPa; 


Length (in mm) of possible shear planes 
envelop as indicated in Fig.14; 


Number of times each lower transverse 
reinforcing bar is intersected by a shear 
surface (that is, the number of rows of shear 
the connector at one section of the beam). 
Generally, for T-beam п = 2 and for L-beam 
п = 1; апа 

Sectional areas (іп cm?) of transverse 
reinforcements per meter run of the beam. 


st 


The amount of transverse steel (cm?/m) in the bottom 


2.5 
of the slab shall not be less than 9 | 
yk 
11.8 General Arrangements of Transverse 
Reinforcements 


11.8.1 If the concrete by itself is insufficient to take the 
longitudinal shear, sufficient transverse reinforcements 
shall be provided to transfer longitudinal shear force 


IS 11384 : 2022 


from the beam to the effective width of the slab 
(see Fig. 13). The area of transverse reinforcement per 
unit length of the beam will be the sum total of all the 
reinforcement [4, 4, or 4,, as shown in Fig. 14(а), 
Fig. 14(b) and Fig. 14(c)], which are intersected by the 
shear plane and are fully anchored on both the sides of 
the shear plane considered. 


11.8.2 Total Transverse Reinforcements 


The total transverse reinforcements A „ per unit length 
of the beam in case of shear plane 1- i which crosses 
the whole thickness of the slab, will ‘be the sum of 
(А, + A,) [Fig. 14(a)]. Area of reinforcements A, and A, 
include those provided for flexure. The total transverse 
reinforcements across plane 2-2 [Fig. 14 (a)] is 
A, = 2A, and that across plane 3-3 [Fig. 14(b)] is 
A. 2А, as these planes do not cross the full 
thickness of the slab. In the case of shear plane 4-4 
ІҒір. 14 (c)], the total transverse reinforcement is 
A, = 2(A, + А). The transverse reinforcements shall 
be placed at locations as shown in Fig. 14. The haunch 
bars shall be extended beyond the junction of bottom 
bars by a length equal to the anchorage length. 


12 COMPOSITE SLABS WITH PROFILED 
STEEL SHEETING 


12.1 General 


The provisions in this section deal with composite 
floor slabs spanning only in the direction of ribs of the 
decking. The provisions are applicable in buildings, 
wherein the slabs are subjected to predominantly static 
imposed loads. The application of the provision is 
limited to narrowly spaced web, which is defined by 
the ratio of the width of the sheet rib to the rib spacing 


М <0.6 (see Fig. 15). 


(а) STUD CONNECTORS IN UN-HAUNCHED BEAM 


HAUNCH BAR (A,) 


(с) STUD CONNECTORS IN HAUNCHED BEAM 


(b) CHANNEL CONNECTORS IN UN-HAUNCHED BEAM 


Ac 


40mm (MIN) 


HAUNCH BAR (A,) 


(d) CHANNEL CONNECTORS IN HAUNCHED BEAM 


Fic. 13 ARRANGEMENT OF TRANSVERSE REINFORCEMENTS 


33 


IS 11384 : 2022 


TOP BAR (A,) 


еа 


BOTTOM BAR (А) 


| (АО HAUNCH BAR (А) 


(А) 40 mm / HAUNCH BAR (A, ) 


SECTION As ni 
1-1 AbtAt 
2-2 Ab (c) SMALL HAUNCHED BEAM 
3-3 2An 
4-4 2(A* Ar) 


Fic. 14 TRANSVERSE REINFORCEMENTS ALONG SHEAR PLANES 


34 


Lo ou 
Dp 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Fic. 15 PROFILE DIMENSION FOR COMPOSITE SLABS 


12.2 Prequalifications 
12.2.1 Prequalification of Slab dimension 


The prequalification of composite and non-composite 
slabs are presented below. 
a) Where the slab acts composite with a steel beam 
or used as a diaphragm, 
1) the overall depth of the slab should not be less 
than 90 mm; and 
2) the thickness of concrete above the main top 
flat surface of the sheeting ribs should not be 
less than 50 mm. 
b) Where the slab does not act composite with a steel 
beam or has no other stabilizing function, 
1) the overall depth of the slab should not be less 
than 80 mm; and 
2) the thickness of concrete above the main flat 
top surface of the sheeting ribs should not be 
less than 40 mm. 


35 


12.2.2 Bearing Length 


The recommended minimum bearing lengths of steel 
decking on the support (L,) and the composite slab, 
including the cast in place concrete (L,) shall be as 
given below (see Fig. 16): 


a) For composite slab bearing on steel or concrete: 
Г 75 mm, Ё, = 50 mm 

b) For composite slab bearing on other material: 
L, 100 mm, L, = 70 mm 


12.2.3 Reinforcement for Shrinkage and Temperature 
Stresses 


The effect of temperature stress in composite slabs 
in buildings is normally neglected unless required in 
special conditions. The effect of shrinkage is to be 
considered. The total shrinkage strain for design may 
be taken as 0.003 in the absence of test data. 


12.2.4 Minimum Reinforcement 


The minimum reinforcement in either direction should 
be according to IS 456. The spacing of the reinforcement 
bar should be in accordance with IS 456. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Fic. 16 MINIMUM BEARING LENGTHS 


12.2.5 Size of Aggregates 


In addition to the above, the largest nominal aggregate 
size should be according to IS 456. 


12.3 Analysis for Internal Forces and Moments 


12.3.1 Analysis of Profile Steel Sheeting as Shuttering 


a) 


b 


wm 


с 


— 


d 


М7 


е) 


The elastic analysis shall be used where sheeting 
is considered. The design based on the elastic 
distribution of bending moment is conservative, 
as it does not take into account of redistribution of 
moments that can occur between support and mid 
span sections. 


In the analysis of propped profile steel sheeting, 
the magnitude of bending moments and shear 
forces could be conservatively calculated by using 
the coefficients of bending moment and shear 
force as per IS 456. 


More accurate analysis and design of profile steel 
sheeting as a shuttering should be in accordance 
with IS 801. 


If the deflection at the center of the shuttering due 
to its own weight and the wet weight of concrete is 
less than (1/10) of the depth of the composite slab, 
the effect of ‘ponding’ due to shuttering deflection 
can be disregarded. Otherwise, that effect of 
additional load shall be evaluated by taking the 
additional uniform depth of concrete over the span 
as 0.7 times the central deflection. 


The effect of ponding, especially in longer 
span, can be reduced by propping the shuttering 
during concreting until the concrete hardens. 
Plastic redistribution of moments in the propped 
shuttering is not allowed in evaluating stresses due 
to self-weight and wet concrete weight. 


12.3.2 Analysis of Composite Slab 


a) 


The application of linear methods of analysis is 
suitable for the serviceability limit states as well 
as for the ultimate limit states. Plastic methods 
shall be used only in the ultimate limit state. 


36 


b) The following method of analysis may be used for 
ultimate limit states: 


1) Linear analysis without redistribution 
(serviceability limit state), and with 
redistribution (Ultimate limit state). If the 
effects of cracking of concrete are neglected 
in the analysis for ultimate limit states, the 
hogging bending moments at internal supports 
may be optionally reduced by up to 30 percent 
and corresponding increases are made to the 
sagging bending moments in the adjacent 
spans. 


2 


— 


Rigid-plastic global analysis may be used 
provided it is shown that sections where 
plastic rotations are required have sufficient 
rotation capacity. Plastic analysis without any 
direct check on rotation capacity may be used 
for the ultimate limit state if reinforcing steel 
satisfying the ductility requirement in 6.2.3 is 
used and the span length is not greater than 
3.0 m. (Ultimate limit state). 

Elastic-plastic analysis accounting for the 
non-linear material behavior. (Ultimate limit 
states). 


3 


— 


с) A continuous slab may be designed as a series of 
simply supported spans. Nominal reinforcement 
should be provided in accordance with IS 456, 
over the intermediate supports to manage crack 
size. 


d 


— 


Concentrated loads may be assumed to be 
distributed over an effective width of the slab, 
assuming the load is distributed at an angle of 
45? to the horizontal up to the top surface of the 
decking. 


12.4 Design of Composite Slabs 


Proprietary data backed by analysis and tests may 
be used in the design. Otherwise, the procedure 
given below may be used to evaluate the strength of 
composite slabs. 


12.4.1 Effective Span 


a) When a continuous composite slab is designed as 
a series of simply supported spans, for simplicity, 
the effective span can be taken as the lesser of the 
following: 

1) Distance between centres of the supports, and 
2) The clear span plus the effective depth of the 

slab. 

Where the composite slab is designed as 
continuous, it is permitted to use an equivalent 
isostatic span for the determination of the 
resistance. The span length should be taken as: 


b 


wm 


1) 0.8 L for internal span (effective span L) and 
2) 0.9 L for external span (effective span L). 


12.4.2 Design of Profile Steel Sheeting as Shuttering 
During Construction 


The stress analysis of the profiled steel sheeting should 
be evaluated using the design equations or tests. For 
the ultimate limit state, the resistance of the sheet to 
sagging and hogging bending, together with the effects 
of combined bending and web crushing, are normally 
critical. 


a) Forthe serviceability limit state, the limiting value 
of deflection òa of steel sheeting under its own 
weight plus the weight of wet concrete may be 
considered as L/180 (where L is the effective span 


between supports) as per Table 6 of IS 800. 
b 


ma 


Profiled decking acting alone resists construction, 
dead, and live load until the concrete hardens and 
gains strength. ‘Ponding’ effect, especially in long 
spans due to excessive deflection of decking, has 
to be accounted while evaluating design forces 
and design strength unless sufficient propping is 
provided during the construction stage until the 
concrete hardens. 


с 


— 


The longer spans will require propping to eliminate 
substantial deflection. Otherwise, a significant 
increase in concrete weight due to ponding has to 
be accounted. 


12.4.3 Design of Composite Slab for the Ultimate States 


The bending moment and shear force distribution in 
continuous beams for secondary, as well as primary 
moment resistant frames/beams, have to be determined 
by structural analysis. The design values of load effects 
shall not exceed the design values of resistance for the 
relevant ultimate limit states. 


12.4.3.1 Design flexural resistance 


The design flexural resistance calculation shall take the 
following provisions into consideration: 


a) The design bending resistance, M, of any cross 
section should be in accordance with Annex C, 
where the yield stress of the steel sheeting should 
be taken as f, 


37 


IS 11384 : 2022 


b) The effect of local buckling of compressed parts 
of the sheeting should be considered by using 
effective widths not exceeding twice the limiting 
values of class-1 steel webs as discussed in IS 800. 


с 


— 


For the effective area A. of the steel sheeting, the 

| р . . . 
width of embossments and indentations in the 
sheet should be neglected unless tests infer that a 
larger area is effective. 


d 


— 


The sagging bending resistance of a cross-section 
should be calculated from the equilibrium of stress 
distribution as shown in C-4. 


е 


— 


In hogging bending regions, the contribution of 
steel sheeting shall be taken into account only 
where the sheet is continuous. The redistribution 
of moments that can occur between support and 
mid-span sections shall not be considered. If the 
contribution of the steel sheeting is neglected, 
the hogging bending resistance of a cross-section 
should be calculated as reinforced concrete for the 
stress distribution, as shown in С-4.3. 


In the case of partial shear connection, the sagging 
design bending resistance, M, shall be calculated 
as per C-5. 


12.5 Shear Resistance of Composite Slab 
12.5.1 Punching Shear 


The punching shear resistance of a composite slab 
should be calculated as per IS 456, where the critical 
perimeter is as shown in Fig. 17. 


12.5.2 Resistance to Shear 


The vertical shear resistance И; of composite slab over 
a width equal to the distance between centres of ribs 
and the effective depth, which depends on the effective 
depth of the cross section to the centroid of the tensile 


reinforcement, should be in accordance with IS 456. 


The sheeting may be considered as the tensile 
reinforcement, provided that it is fully anchored beyond 
the section considered. For heavily loaded slabs, 
additional reinforcement may be required at the support 
when the profiled steel sheeting is discontinuous and 
has only limited anchorage. 


Inthe case ofpartial shear connection, the shear capacity 
may be governed by the interface shear strength 
between steel decking and concrete, as presented in 
Annex C. 


12.6 Serviceability Limit State 
12.6.1 Design Against Cracking 


The crack width is calculated at the top surface in 
the hogging moment region using standard methods 
prescribed for reinforced concrete in IS 456. Crack 
width should not exceed 0.3 mm. The provision of 
0.4 percent steel at the top of the slab will normally 
avoid cracking problems in propped construction. The 
provision of 0.2 percent of steel is normally sufficient 
for the same in un-propped construction. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


SECTIONA-A 


Fic. 17 PUNCHING PERIMETER IN A PROFILED COMPOSITE SLAB 


If the environment is corrosive, it is advisable to design 
the slab as continuous at supports and take advantage of 
steel provided for negative bending moment resistance 
and for minimizing cracking during service loads. 


12.6.2 Deflection Limits 


IS 456 gives a stringent deflection limitation of span/350 
or 20 mm whichever is less, which may be unrealistic 
for un-propped construction. The span to depth ratio 
in the range of 25 to 35 for the composite condition 
is recommended for the simply supported slabs and 
the continuous slabs. The deflection of the composite 
slabs is influenced by the slip between sheeting and 
concrete. Testing is the best method to estimate the 
actual deflection for the conditions adopted. 


12.6.3 Fire resistance 


The fire resistance is based on (a) thermal insulation 
criterion concerned with limiting the transmission 
of heat by conduction and (b) integrity criteria 
concerned with preventing the spread of flames and 


38 


CRITICAL PERIMETER, Cp 


LOADED AREA 


hot gases to nearby compartments. These are met by 
specifying the adequate thickness of insulation below 
the metal decking. When the metal decking is used as 
a permanent shuttering, the fire resistance of the slab 
shall be considered as per IS 456. 


13 COMPOSITE COLUMNS 


13.1 General 


13.1.1 This section applies to various forms of 
steel-concrete composite columns, including fully or 
partly encased steel columns and concrete in-filled 
rectangular or circular steel tubes, provided: 


a) The columns or compression members consist of 
structural steel with grade conforming to IS 2062 
and normal weight concrete of strength M20 to 
M60. 

b) Shear transfer between steel-concrete interfaces 
is ensured basically through a bond for which 
calculated shear stress at interface shall be 


in accordance with Table 15, beyond which 

mechanical shear connectors are to be provided. 
c) The columns or compression members are in 
framed structures where the other structural 


members are either composite or steel members. 


The steel contribution ratio 6 (Table 12) should 
fulfill the criteria: 


0.2 <6 x0.9 


d) 


e) Further, 

1) Theinfluence oflocal buckling ofthe structural 
steel section on the resistance of the composite 
section as a whole shall be considered in the 
design. 

2) The effects of local buckling may be neglected 

for a steel section fully encased in accordance 

with 13.2, and for other types of cross-section, 
the maximum width to thickness ratio given in 


IS 800 shall not be exceeded. 


13.1.2 Types of composite columns 
Composite columns can be of two types: 


а) Encased where concrete encases the steel section 
(see Fig. 18); and 


22122 


IS 11384 : 2022 


b) In-filled where concrete fills rectangular or circular 
steel tube (see Fig. 19). 


13.2 Details for Composite Action 


In composite columns with fully encased steel sections, 
concrete cover to structural steel sections shall be at 
least 40 mm or one-sixth of the breadth 5 of the flange, 
over steel section. The concrete shall be adequately 
held by steel reinforcements and stirrups all around. 
The steel section shall be unpainted to ensure bond 
and friction between steel and concrete, but cleaned 
to ensure protection against corrosion and spalling of 
concrete. The cover to steel reinforcement should be in 
accordance with IS 456. 


Shear transfer between steel-concrete interfaces is 
ensured basically through bond for which calculated 
shear stress at interface shall be limited in accordance 
with Table 15, beyond which mechanical shear 
connectors are to be provided. 


13.3 Members Under Axial Compression 


Standard composite sections used as columns are as 
shown at Fig 18 and Fig 19. 


Fic. 19 CONCRETE IN-FILLED COLUMNS 
39 


IS 11384 : 2022 


13.3.1 General Design Philosophy 


To ensure structural stability of a compression member, 
second-order effects like residual stresses, geometrical 
imperfections, local instability, cracking of concrete, 
creep/shrinkage of concrete, yielding of structural 
steel and reinforcement etc. shall be considered. While 
designing the compression members, including design 
for the above effects, the following shall be taken into 
account: 


a) The above effects shall be considered in any 
direction in which failure might occur if they 
affect the structural stability significantly. 


b) Internal forces shall be determined by any of the 
analysis methods discussed in 6. 


c) Full composite action between steel and concrete 
shall be considered up to failure. 


d) Effects of creep and shrinkage shall be considered 
if they are likely to reduce the structural stability 
significantly. For simplification, creep and 
shrinkage effects may be ignored if the increase 
in the first-order bending moments due to creep 
deformations from permanent loads is not greater 
than 10 percent of first-order bending moments 
due to total design loads. 


13.3.2 Design Guidelines 


The simplified design provisions given in the following 
sections is applicable for composite members that 
are doubly symmetrical and uniform in cross-section 
throughout the length of the member. This method is 
not applicable to members consisting of two or more 
unconnected sections. Further, the composite member 
should conform to the following conditions. 


a) The non-dimensional slenderness А should not 
be greater than 2. 


b) For a fully encased steel section (Fig. 18a), the 
maximum thickness of concrete cover that may be 
used in the strength calculation is limited to: 


C (Мах) = 0.4 b 
C, (Max) = 0.3 h 


c) The longitudinal steel reinforcement that may be 
used in the calculation should not exceed 6 percent 
of the concrete area. 


d) The ratio of the cross-section's depth A, to 
width b, (see Fig. 18), should be within limits 
(0.2 x h /b. < 5.0) 


13.4 Local Buckling of Steel Sections 


13.4.1 To prevent premature local buckling of structural 
steel components ш partly encased steel section and 
concrete filled steel sections (see Fig. 18 and Fig. 19), 
the width to thickness ratio of individual elements 
of the steel sections in compression must satisfy the 
following limits: 


40 


for concrete-filled circular tubular 


—«88e 
sections 
h for concrete-filled rectangular 
—<50= : 
tubular sections 
b, + $ 
— <43= for partially encased I sections 


f 


[2 
Where, = = = and f. is the yield strength of the 
steel section, in MPa 


13.4.2 For fully encased steel sections, the above local 
buckling check is not required. However, the concrete 
cover to the flange of a fully encased steel section 
should not be less than 40 mm, nor less than one-sixth 
of the breadth, b, of the flange. 


13.4.3 Design of concrete-filled rectangular tubular 
sections where h/t ratios exceed the local buckling 
limits for semi-compact sections should be verified by 
tests. 


13.4.4 The cover to reinforcement should be in 
accordance with IS 456. 


13.4.5 The steel section shall not be painted to ensure 
friction between steel and concrete but cleaned at the 
abutting surface to ensure protection against corrosion 
and spalling of concrete. 


13.5 Design Compressive Resistance of Short 
Composite Columns 


13.5.1 A column is termed as a ‘short column’ when 
one of the following conditions is satisfied. 
а) Its non-dimensional slenderness ratio, А < 0.2. 


b) If the actual design compressive force on the 
composite column, P, is less than 0.1 P 


where 
P. 
A= |= 
Е, 
Р „= the elastic buckling load of the column = 
Г Ж 
(ЕТ) = effective elastic flexural stiffness of the 
composite column (13.5.2). 
L= the effective length of the column, which may 


be conservatively taken as the overall length 
L for an isolated non-sway composite column. 
The design compressive strength P. of short columns 


of plastic and compact sections may be evaluated using 
the design strength of the material with appropriate 


partial safety factors. Тһе most common column 
sections are bi-symmetric. The design compressive 
strength of short bi-symmetric columns is evaluated 
using equations given in D-2. 
NOTE — While providing spiral ties it must be designed as per 
IS 456, and the ratio of the volume of helical reinforcement to 
the volume of the core is not less than 0.36 (4,/A Mff, 
(Where, 4, = Gross area of section; А, = Area of core of the 
confined core of column measured to the outer diameter of the 


helix). 
13.5.2 Effective Elastic Flexural Stiffness 
a) Short Term Loading — The effective elastic 


flexural stiffness, (E), is obtained by adding up 
the flexural stiffness of the individual components 
of the cross-section: 


(EI), = Е, 1, + 0.6 En I. + E n 
where 
Е апа E,— modulus of elasticity of the structural 
steel section and the reinforcement, 
respectively. 
„= secant modulus of the concrete. 
b) Long Term Loading — Іп slender columns 


(A > 0.2), the effect of long-term loading should 
be considered. 


If the eccentricity ‘e’ of loading is more than twice the 
cross-section dimension 'D' (e > 2D), the effect on the 
moment distribution caused by increased deflections 
due to creep and shrinkage of concrete will be very 
small and may be neglected. The effect of long-term 
loading need not be considered if the non-dimensional 
slenderness (А) of the composite column is less than the 
limiting values given in Table 12. 


Table 12 Limiting Values of à for Long Term 
Loading 


( Clause 13.5.2 ) 


SI No. Cross-Sections Braced Un-braced 
Non-sway and/or Sway 
Systems System 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

1) Concrete encased 
cross-section ER 05 

ii) Concrete filled 08 0.5 
cross-section 15 15 


NOTE — ô is the steel contribution ratio defined as § = Achy 


Р is defined in D-2. 


When X exceeds the limits prescribed above and 
e/D < 2, the effect of creep and shrinkage of concrete 
should be considered by adopting the modulus of 
elasticity of concrete Е, instead of Е, where E, is 
defined as follows: 


E. = 0.75Е,, h-e] 
P 


41 


IS 11384 : 2022 


where 
P= the applied factored axial load; and 
P = the part of the factored load permanently 
acting on the column. 
The effect of long-term loading may be ignored for 


concrete filled tubular sections with A < 2.0 provided 
that 6 > 0.6 for braced (non-sway) columns and 
6 > 0.75 for unbraced (sway) columns. 


13.6 Long Members Subjected to Axial Compression 


The non-sway composite columns need not be checked 
for buckling if any one of the following conditions 1s 
satisfied: 

a) P < 0.1Р., where, Р is the axial force in the 
column, and P, is the elastic buckling load of the 
column, defined in 13.5.1. 

b) Non-dimensional slenderness А < 0.2. 


For columns not satisfying the above conditions, safety 
against buckling strength shall be checked about the 
corresponding axis. The following equation needs to be 
satisfied for buckling load: 


Psy, 
where 


Р = the applied factored axial load; 


P,— is the design plastic resistance to compression 
(D-2). 
" 1 
= —— == -js the stability reduction factor 
ф g: 9: -22 y 


$ =0.5[1+a(A-0.2) +A? | 


Non-dimensional slenderness ratio. 


A value that represents initial imperfections 
and residual stresses which is based on the 
buckling curve to be adopted, which is further 
dependent on the type of section and the axis 
of bending as given below (see Table 13): 


Curve a— for concrete-filled tubular sections with 
reinforcement percentage less ап 
3 percent of gross cross section area and 
buckling about both axes. 


Curve b - for fully or partially concrete-encased 
I-sections buckling about the strong axis 
(z-z axis) of the steel sections and for 
concrete-filled tubular sections with steel 
reinforcement percentage more than 
3 percent of gross cross section area and 
buckling about both axes or concrete 
filled tubular section with the addition of 
I section at the core and buckling about 
both axes. 


Curve c — for fully and partially concrete-encased 
I-sections buckling about the weak axis 


(у-у axis) of the steel sections. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Table 13 Imperfection Factor a for the Buckling 
Curves 


( Clause 13.6 ) 
Buckling Curve a b c 


(1) (2) (3) (4) 
0.21 0.34 0.49 


Imperfection Factor 


13.7 Members Subjected to Combined Compression 
and Bending 


When the bending moment in the section is zero 
(that is, M = 0), the design compressive strength is 
as given in 13.5. Similarly, the plastic moment of 
resistance of a column at zero compression load is as 
given D-3. The equations for evaluating the design 
bending resistance of symmetric column sections are 
given in Ю-4. 


13.7.1 Bending Resistance Under High Shear 


While determining the plastic resistance when the 
simultaneous shear force is high at the section as given 
below, the bending resistance shall be reduced as given 
below: 


If the shear force V on the steel section exceeds 
60 percent of the design shear resistance V, of the steel 
(8.3.6.1), the influence of the transverse shear on the 
resistance in combined bending and compression shall 
be taken into account by a reduced design steel strength 
(1-f) is /Y „a in the shear area A, (В is determined as рег 
8.3.6.2). 

Unless a more accurate analysis is used, the design 
shear action, Г, may be distributed into (V, acting on 
the structural steel) and (V,, acting on the reinforced 
concrete section) as: 


M 


Г = V a 
d 
V.- V- Y, 
where 
М = design moment of resistance of steel section 
alone; 
¿= design moment of resistance of the entire 
composite section; and 
Г, = may be assumed to be resisted by steel sections 


alone as a simplifying approximation. 


13.7.2 Second Order Effects on Bending Moment 


If neither of the two conditions (a) and (b) for short 
compression members in 13.5.1 is satisfied, then the 
second-order effects on first-order analysis moment 
shall be considered by modifying the maximum 
first-order bending moment (moment obtained linear 
elastic analysis), M a» with an amplification factor К, 
which is defined as: 


42 


C, 


К- >1.0 


foe 
Pa 


= the applied factored axial load, 


elastic critical load for the relevant axis and 
corresponding to a modified effective flexural 
stiffness given by (ЕГ) as given in 13.5.2 and 
the effective length of the column is taken as 
per IS 800. 


equivalent moment factor given in Table 14 
to account for non-uniform bending moment 
over the length of the member. 


C = 


m 


the ratio of moments at the ends of the laterally 
unsupported members 


y= 


13.8 Members Subjected to Axial Force and 
Uni-axial Bending 


13.8.1 While checking a section for combined axial 
force and bending moment, first, it should be ensured 
that the section is safe against an axial force acting 
alone, considering buckling along each principal axis. 
The resistance of the section shall then be checked 
for combined axial compression and uniaxial bending 
moment, as described below: 


The design against combined bending and axial 
compression are adequate when the following condition 
is satisfied: 


м" = a, H4 M, 
where 
a „= reduction coefficient based on steel yield 
strength; 
= 0.9 for 250 < f, < 400 MPa 
= 0.8 for f. > 400 MPa 
М” у= design bending moment, which is to be 
amplified to account for the second-order 
effects as discussed in 13.7.2, when the column 
is not short. 
M,= Design bending resistance of the section about 


the bending axis evaluated as in D-3. 


The moment resistance reduction ratio p, for a long 
composite column under combined compression and 
uniaxial bending shall be evaluated as follows: 


ntu? "n 
xx 
and 
1— 
"S 1) Xe when xy, < x. 
(1—7.)Х 


IS 11384 : 2022 


where Р.= Axial compressive strength of concrete 
X," Axial resistance ratio to the concrete Р/Р, а. 
i . . . . Йй = А Қ 1] ` 2 Е fa 
X," Design axial resistance ratio to the concrete 2 
PIP, р 53 
: : — see D-2. 
х= Reduction factor due to column buckling as ч 
рег [$ 800. 
Table 14 Equivalent Uniform Moment Factor 
( Clause 13.7.2 ) 
Bending Moment Diagram Range C o Сыз Curr 
Uniform Loading Concentrated Load 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
M l<y<l 0.6 - 0.4 w=0.4 
yM <yws ; A y 0. 
0<a <l -l<y<l 0.2 + 0.8 a 20.4 0.2 + 0.8 a, 20.4 
0<у<1 0.1— 0.8 а, > 0.4 -0.8 a >0.4 
-l <a <0 
: -l<y<0 0.1 (1-у/) - 0.8 а > 0.4 0.2 (~y) — 0.8 a, > 0.4 
05а 51 -l<y<l 0.95 — 0.05 a, 0.90 + 0.10 a, 
М „М, 0<у<І 0.95 + 0.05 о, 0.90 + 0.10 a, 
һ 
-1<0,5<0 
-l<y<0 0.95 + 0.05 о, (1+2 y) 0.90 + 0.10, (1-2 v) 
М; On =M, / М, 


For members with sway buckling mode, the equivalent uniform moment factor Cay =C_=0.9. 


C C. C 


my “mz? ~mLT 


shall be obtained according to the bending moment diagram between the relevant braced points 


Moment factor Bending axis Points braced in direction 


С у-у 7-7 
Cu 252 yy 
C 7-7. 7-7. 
mLT M; 
for Cu LT 


43 


IS 11384 : 2022 


13.8.2 Members Subjected to Axial Force and Bi-axial 
Bending 

Members subjected to combined axial compression and 
biaxial bending shall satisfy the following interaction 
relationships equations: 


M 


2 


ИМ, 


Ha, M dy 


where 


и, and ц a = moment resistance reduction factors іп 2 
and y directions, respectively (see 13. 8) 


нм, =, (see 13.8) 


mx 


13.9 Mechanical Shear Connection and Load 
Introduction 


Proper sharing of loads between the steel section and 
concrete of composite columns should be ensured at 
points of load introduction due to load and moment 
reactions coming from members connected to the ends 
of the column and also for axial loads applied anywhere 
within the length of the column, considering the shear 
resistance at the interface between steel and concrete. 


Where composite columns and compression members 
are subjected to significant transverse shear, for 
example, by local transverse loads and by end moments, 
the provision shall be made for the transfer of the 
corresponding local longitudinal shear stress at the 
interface between steel and concrete. For axially loaded 
columns and compression members, longitudinal shear 
outside the region of load introduction need not be 
considered. 


13.9.1 Load Introduction 


Shear connectors should be provided at regions of load 
introduction and at regions with change in cross section, 
Ш the design shear resistance at the concrete-steel 
interface, т, (Table 15) is exceeded. The shear forces 
should be determined from the change of sectional 
forces of the steel or reinforced concrete section within 
the introduction length. If the loads are introduced into 
the concrete cross section only, the values resulting 
froman elastic analysis considering creep and shrinkage 
should be taken into account. Otherwise, the forces at 
the interface should be determined by elastic theory 
or plastic theory to determine the more severe case. In 
the absence of any accurate method, the introduction 
length should not exceed 24 or L/3, where d is the 
minimum transverse dimension of the column and L is 
the column length. 


44 


Table 15 Design shear strength (т) 
( Clause 13.9.1) 


SI Type of Cross-section T 
No. (N/mm?) 
(1) Q) (3) 

1) Completely concrete-encased steel sections 0.30 
ii) Concrete filled circular hollow sections 0.55 
iii) ^ Concrete filled rectangular hollow sections 0.40 
iv) Flanges of partially encased sections 0.20 
v) Webs of partially encased columns 0.00 


Due to the action of creep and shrinkage, no shear 
connection is required for composite columns ог 
compression members if the load application is by 
endplate, where the full interface between steel and 
concrete is permanently under compression. Otherwise, 
the load application/introduction should be verified as 
given below: 


a) If the cross-section is partially loaded, as shown 
in Fig. 20(a), the loads may be distributed with a 
ratio of 1:2.5 over the thickness f, of the endplate. 
The concrete stresses should then be limited in the 
area of effective load introduction. 


For concrete-filled circular hollow section or 
square hollow section, under partial loading 
as shown in Fig. 20(b), for example, by gusset 
plates or by stiffeners, the local design strength of 
concrete o, under the gusset or stiffener resulting 
from the sectional forces of the concrete section 
shall be determined as: 
where 

AJA, < 20 


ae 0.8 fy, TA th 
Y, а 0.8 fy 
t= is the wall thickness of the steel tube; 
d= diameter of the tube or width of the square 


b) 


А. ORA Ль. „ Л 


A A Ye © Уто 


section; 

А, = is the cross sectional area of the concrete 
section of the column; 

A,= is the loaded area under the gusset plate 
(see Fig. 20); and 

n, = 4-9 for circular steel tubes and 3.5 for square 


sections. 


с) For concrete-filled circular hollow sections, 
longitudinal reinforcements may be taken into 
account while determining the resistance of the 
composite column, even if the reinforcement 15 
not directly connected to the endplate, provided 
that the gap [Fig. 20(a)] between the end of 
reinforcement and the surface of the endplate does 
not exceed 30 mm. 


А-А Section 


(а) END PLATE LOADING 


IS 11384 : 2022 


B-B Section 


(b) END GUSSET LOADING 


Ес. 20 PARTIALLY LOADED CIRCULAR CONCRETE FILLED HOLLOW SECTION 


13.9.2 Shear connection 


When a mechanical connection is introduced in 
the form of stud connectors to the web of a fully or 
partially concrete-encased steel I-section, an account 
may be taken of the frictional forces that develop due 
to the restraint in lateral expansion of the concrete by 
the adjacent steel flanges. This resistance is assumed to 
be equal to и.О /2 on each flange and each horizontal 
row of studs, as shown in Fig. 21 and may be added 
to the calculated resistance of the shear connectors. 
и 15 the relevant coefficient of friction and be taken as 
0.5. Q is the resistance of a single stud as per 11.2. 


The clear distance between the flanges should not 
exceed the values given in Fig. 21 to ensure the 


45 


development of the frictional forces between concrete 
and steel flanges. 


13.9.3 Longitudinal Shear Outside Area of Load 
Introduction 


a) Outside the area of load introduction, longitudinal 
shear at the interface between concrete and steel 
should be verified where it is caused by transverse 
loadsand/or end moments. Shear connectors should 
be provided based on the distribution ofthe design 
value of longitudinal shear, where this exceeds the 
design shear resistance т. In the absence of a more 
accurate method, elastic analysis, considering 
long-term effects and cracking of the concrete, 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Fic. 21 ADDITIONAL FRICTIONAL FORCES IN COMPOSITE COLUMNS BY USE OF HEADED STUDS 


may be used to determine the longitudinal shear at 
the interface. Provided that the surface of the steel 
section, in contact with the concrete, is unpainted 
and free from oil, grease, and loose scale or rust, 
the values given in Table 15 may be assumed for т. 
The value of z given in Table 15 for fully concrete- 
encased steel sections applies to sections with a 
minimum concrete cover of 40 mm. For greater 
concrete cover and adequate reinforcement, higher 
values оЁ т may be used. Unless verified by tests, 
for completely encased sections, the increased 
value В. т may be used, with В, given by: 


БЕ 


is the wall thickness of the steel tube; and 


= diameter of the tube or width of the square 
section. 


z,min 


В, = а 


2 


where 
С, 


С 


z,min 


b) Unless otherwise verified, for partially encased 
I-sections with transverse shear due to bending 
about the weak axis caused by lateral loading or 
end moments, shear connectors should always 
be provided. If the resistance of the structural 
steel section alone against transverse shear is 
not sufficient to take care of the total transverse 
shear on the composite section, then the required 
transverse reinforcement for the shear force V. 
according to 12.5.2, should be welded to the web 
of the steel section or should pass through the web 
of the steel section. 


13.10 Shear Check 


The factored shear force in the compression members 
should be less than the design shear strength of the 
member, which is the sum total of the shear resistance 
given by the concrete section along with steel 
reinforcements as per IS 456 and the shear resistance 


46 


given by the steel section as per 8.3.6. The shear force 
shall be distributed between the steel section and the 
concrete section in accordance with 13.9. 


14 CONSTRUCTION AND ERECTION 


14.1 Fabrication and Inspection Procedure for 
Structural Steel 


Fabrication and erection of steel sections and 
components, as and where situated in a composite 
structure would include fabrication procedures, both 
shop and site fabrications, along with fabrication 
tolerances, inspection, testing, handling, transportation, 
site storage, erection along with erection tolerances, 
etc. 


Fabrication and erection specifications of all steel 
components of a composite structure shall refer to 
stipulations laid down in IS 800. 


15 FIRE RESISTANCE AND FIRE DESIGN 


15.1 In closed structures, an accidental fire may lead 
to a rise in temperature under which failure of the 
material may take place unless a proper design and 
construction against fire is carried out. Open structures 
such as bridges are not generally vulnerable to failure 
under fire since the temperature does not go up to the 
level which may cause material damage. Also, in an 
open structure, the fire can be extinguished easily and 
quickly. Fire tests on open structures such as elevated 
parking lots and bridges have shown that the structure 
does not undergo any material damage due to reasons 
indicated above. However, all structures, including 
both closed and open ones, shall be protected from all 
possible accidental fires caused by different kinds of 
hazards. 


Fire-resistant designs for open and closed structures 
at specialized locations, such as those in proximity 
to oil installations or pipelines carrying inflammable 


materials, etc., as in the case of industrial buildings and 
structures, shall be done based on recommendations 
given іп specialized literature. Also, adequate 
provisions may be made for firefighting equipment to 
access all parts of the structure. After the occurrence 
of fire in a structure, it should be mandatory for the 
concerned authorities to have the structure inspected by 
competent experts in order to ascertain the condition of 
the structure before it can be declared safe for re-use. 


In addition to the above, locations in any structural 
system that may be prone to accidental occurrence 
of fire, shall be adequately provided with basic 
fire protection methods as per specialist literature. 
These will include both active as well as passive fire 
protection. 


15.2 Response to Fire 


Steel is a good conductor of heat that experiences an 
almost uniform temperature increase over its entire 
volume. Concrete is a poor conductor of heat has a 
large temperature gradient within its volume. Due 
to this, the entire steel member gains the heat faster, 
whereas the surfaces of concrete exposed directly to 
heat experience high temperature, with the temperature 
dropping off drastically in the interior of the concrete 
mass. 


Both steel and concrete exhibit a drastic reduction 
in strength with an increase in temperature above 
400 °C. Due to this, the resistance of steel members 
tends to decrease drastically above 400 °C, whereas 
concrete at the surfaces exposed to high temperature 
tends to spall off due to high temperature gradient. The 
steel structure, if it does not fail under fire, regains its 
strength after the fire, the damage at the surface of the 
concrete is permanent due to chemical changes. The 
steel reinforcement in concrete is protected from loss of 
strength due to an increase in temperature by providing 
adequate concrete cover as per IS 456. Composite 
floor system deck sheeting is to be provided with fire 
protection. 


However, literature shows that the minimum necessary 
fire resistance can be achieved by using the composite 
floor systems and the composite columns, without 
applying fire protection. Interaction of the steel beam 
and the concrete slab in the composite flooring leads to 
a higher critical temperature and higher fire resistance. 


The requirements for fire resistance shall apply to 
steel elements of steel-concrete composite structure 
designed to exhibit a required fire resistant level as per 
the relevant specifications. 


47 


IS 11384 : 2022 


15.2.1 Design Fire 


The design of a structure against fire load is dependent 
on the required fire resistant level (FRL), which is 
dependent on the function of the structure itself and 
the period of structural adequacy (PSA). These shall be 
calculated based on the stipulation laid down in IS 800. 


The response of steel elements of a composite structure 
against fire as laid down in IS 800 shall be binding on 
all steel elements of the composite structures which are 
susceptible to rise in temperature during its design life. 
For all general buildings, an adequate fire protection 
methodology shall be adopted. 


15.2.2 Fire Protection Methodology 


Apart from the direct design of steel components 
against fire as required in IS 800 (protected as well 
as unprotected section), other protective measures, 
(both active and passive), may also be adopted as 
recommended in literature as fire-resistant procedures. 


For active fire resistance, provisions of fire locating 
and fighting measures like the smoke detectors, fire 
extinguishers inside a building along with accessory 
fire water supply, sprinkler system, etc shall be made 
available at vantage points. The planning ofthe structure 
shall be made in such a way that it is accessible from all 
sides to fire extinguishing vehicles. 


For passive fire resistance, protective paints and 
materials like intumescent paints, vermiculite boards 
etc, may be used on exposed steel surfaces, and their 
provision shall be made as per the required fire-resistant 
level and as per their properties and specification 
provided by the manufacturers. The design of protected 
sections shall be done as per the stipulations laid down 
in the relevant section of IS 800. Detailed design against 
the fire may be based on provisions of other composite 
codes and specialized literature. 


15.2.3 Fire Resistance of Composite Slabs 


The fire resistance 1$ assumed based on the following 
two criteria: 

a) Thermal insulation. criterion, concerned. with 
limiting the transmission of heat by conduction; 
and 

b) Integrity criterion 1s concerned with preventing the 
flames and hot gases from nearby compartments. 
It is met by specifying an adequate thickness of 
insulation. 


16 TESTING METHODS 


For testing methods, Annex E may be referred. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


15 Number 


432 


(Part 1): 1982 


456 


800 


808 


812: 


814: 


816: 


822: 


875 


Part 1: 


Part 2: 


: 2000 


: 2007 


: 2021 


1957 


2004 


1969 


1970 


1987 


1987 


Part 3 : 2015 
Part 4 : 2021 


Part 5: 


1987 


1024 : 1999 


1030 : 1998 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Specification for mild steel and 
medium tensile steel bars and 
hard-drawn steel wire for concrete 
reinforcement: Part 1 Mild steel 
and medium tensile steel bars 
(third revision) 


Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 


General construction in steel — 
Code of practice (third revision) 


Hot rolled steel beam, column, 
channel and angle sections — 
Dimensions and properties 
(fourth revision) 


Glossary of terms relating to 
welding and cutting of metals 


Covered electrodes for manual 
metal arc welding of carbon 
and carbon manganese steel — 
Specification (sixth revision) 


Code of practice for use of 
metal arc welding for general 
construction in mild steel 
(first revision) 

Code of procedure for inspection 
of welds 

Code of practice for design 
loads (other than earthquake) for 
buildings and structures 

Dead loads — Unit weights of 
building materials and stored 
materials (second revision) 
Imposed loads (second revision) 
Wind loads (third revision) 

Snow loads (third revision) 


Special loads and combinations 
(second revision) 


Use of welding in bridges and 
structures subject to dynamic 
loading — Code of practice 
(second revision) 


Carbon steel castings for 


general engineering purposes — 
Specification (fifth revision) 


48 


IS Number 


1148 : 2009 


1161 : 2014 


1182 : 1983 


1239 
Part 1 
Part 2 

1363 
Part 1 
Part 2 
Part 3 


1364 
(Part 1) 


1367 


Part 1 


Part 2 


Part 3 


: 2004 
: 2011 


: 2019 


: 2018 


: 2018 


: 2018 


: 2014 


: 2002 


: 2017 


Title 


Steel rivet bars (medium and high 
tensile) for structural purposes 
(fourth revision) 


Steel tubes for structural 
purposes — Specification 
(fifth revision) 

Recommended practice for 
radiographic examination of 


fusion welded butt joints in steel 
plates (second revision) 

Steel tubes, tubulars and 
other wrought steel fittings — 
Specification 

Part 1 Steel tubes (sixth revision) 
Part 2 Steel pipe 
(fifth revision) 

Hexagon head bolts, screws and 
nuts of product grade C: 


fittings 


Part 1 Hexagon head bolts (size 
range M 5 to M 64) (fifth revision) 


Hexagon head screws (size range 
M 5 to M 64 ) (fifth revision) 


(Style 1) Hexagon nuts (size range 
M 5 to M 64) (fifth revision) 


Hexagon head bolts, screw and 
nuts products grade A and B: 
Part 1 Hexagon head bolts 
(size range M 1.6 to M 64) 
(fifth revision) 


Technical supply conditions for 
threaded steel fasteners: 


Part 1 General requirements for 
bolts, screws, studs and nuts 
(fourth revision) 


Part 2 Tolerances for fasteners — 
Bolts, screws, studs and nuts — 
Product grades a, b and c 
(third revision) 

Part 3 Mechanical properties of 
fasteners made of carbon steel 
and bolts, screws and studs 
(fifth revision) 


18 Number 


Part 5 : 2018 


Part 6 : 2018 


Part 7 : 1980 


Part 8 : 2020 


Part 9/Sec 1 : 
1993 


Part 9/Sec 2 : 
1993 


Part 10 : 2002 


Part 11 : 2020 


Part 12 : 1981 


Part 13 : 2020 


Part 14/Sec 1: 
2018 


Part 14/Sec 2 : 
2018 


Part 16 : 2002 


Part 17 : 2005 


Title 


Part 5 Mechanical properties of 
fasteners made of carbon steel 
and alloy steel — Set screws and 
similar threaded fasteners with 
specified hardness classes 
Coarse thread and fine pitch thread 
(fourth revision) 


Part 6 Mechanical properties of 
fasteners made of carbon steel and 
alloy steel — Nuts with specified 
property classes Coarse 
thread and fine pitch thread 
(fourth revision) 


Ра” 7 Mechanical properties 
and test methods for nuts 
without specified proof loads 
(second revision) 


Part 8 Prevailing torque type steel 
nuts — Functional properties 
(fifth revision) 


Part 9 Surface discontinuities, 
Section 1 bolts, screws and 
studs for general applications 
(third revision) 


Part 9 Surface discontinuities, 
Section 2 bolts, screws and 
studs for special applications 
(third revision) 

Part 10 Surface discontinuities — 
Nuts (third revision) 

Part 11 Electroplated coatings 
systems (fourth revision) 
Part 12 Phosphate 
on threaded 
(second revision) 

Part 13 Hot — Dip galvanized 
coatings on threaded fasteners 
(third revision) 


coatings 
fasteners 


Part 14 Mechanical properties of 
corrosion — Resistant stainless — 
Steel fasteners, Section 1 Bolts, 
screws and studs (fourth revision) 


Part 14 Mechanical properties 
of corrosion-resistant stainless 
steel fasteners, Section 2 Nuts 
(fourth revision) 

Part 16 Designation system for 
fasteners (third revision) 


Part 17 Inspections, 
and acceptance 
(fourth revision) 


sampling 
procedure 


49 


IS Number 


Part 18 : 1996 
Part 19 : 1997 


Part 20 : 1996 


1395 : 1982 


1608 (Part 1): 
2018 


1730 : 1989 


1732 : 1989 


1785 


Part 1 : 1983 


Part 2 : 1983 
1786 : 2008 


1852 : 1985 


1875 : 1992 


1893 
Part 1 : 2016 
Part 2 : 2014 


Part 3 : 2014 
Part 4 : 2015 


1929 : 1982 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Title 


Packaging (third revision) 


Axial load fatigue testing of bolts, 
screws and studs 


Torsional — Test and minimum 
torques for bolts and screws 
with nominal diameters 1 mm to 
10mm 


Specification for low and medium 
alloy steel covered electrodes 
for manual metal arc welding 
(third revision) 


Metallic materials tensile testing: 
Part 1 Method of test at room 
temperature (fourth revision) 


Dimensions for steel plates, 
sheets, strips and flats Юг 
general engineering purposes 
(second revision) 


Dimensions for steel bars, round 
and square for structural and 


general engineering purposes 
(second revision) 

Specification for plain 
hard-drawn steel wire Юг 


pre-stressed concrete: 

Cold drawn stress relieved wire 
(second revision) 

As-drawn wire (first revision) 
High strength deformed steel 
bars and wires for concrete 
reinforcement Specification 
(fourth revision) 


Specification for rolling апа 
cutting tolerances for hot rolled 
steel products (fourth revision) 


Carbon steel billets, blooms, 
slabs and bars for forgings — 
Specification (fifth revision) 
Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures, 


General provisions and buildings 
(sixth revision) 


Liquid retaining tanks 
(fifth revision) 

Bridges and retaining walls 
Industrial structures | including 


stack like structures (first revision) 


Specification for hot forged steel 
rivets for hot closing (12 to 36 mm 
diameter) (first revision) 


IS 11384 : 2022 


15 Number 


2004 


2062 


2155 


2266 


2315 


2644 


3640 


3757 


4000 


4367 


4853 


4923 


5334 


5369 


5370 


5372 


5374 


5624 


: 1991 


: 2011 


: 1982 


: 2019 


: 1978 


: 1994 


: 1982 


: 1985 


: 1992 


: 1991 


: 1982 


: 2017 


: 2014 


: 1975 


: 1969 


: 1975 


: 1975 


: 2021 


Title 


Carbon steel forgings Юг 
general engineering purposes — 
Specification (third revision) 

Hot rolled medium and high tensile 
structural steel — Specification 
(seventh revision) 


Specification for cold forged solid 
steel rivets for hot closing (6 to 
16 mm diameter) (first revision) 
Steel wire ropes for general 
engineering purposes — 
Specification (fifth revision) 
Specification for thimbles for wire 
ropes (first revision) 


High strength steel castings 
for general engineering and 
structural purposes — 


Specification (fourth revision) 


Specification for hexagon fit bolts 
(first revision) 


Specification for high strength 
structural bolts (second revision) 


High strength bolts in steel 
structures — Code of practice 
(first revision) 


Alloy steel forgings for general 
industrial use — Specification 
(first revision) 


Recommended practice for 
radiographic inspection of fusion 
welded butt joints in steel pipes 
(first revision) 


Hollow steel sections for 
structural use — Specification 
(third revision) 

Magnetic particle flaw detection 
of welds — Code of practice 
(third revision) 

General requirements for plain 
washers and lock washers 
(first revision) 

Specification for plain washers 
with outside diameter 3 x inside 
diameter 

Specification for taper washers for 
channels (ISMC) (first revision) 


Specification for taper washer for 
I-beams (1SMB) (first revision) 


Foundation bolts — Specification 
(second revision) 


50 


15 Number 


6419: 1996 


6560 : 2017 


6610: 1972 


6623 : 2004 


6649: 1985 


6911 : 2017 


7002 : 2018 


7307 (Part 1) : 


1974 


7310 (Part 1) : 


2019 


7318 (Part 1) : 


1974 


9595 : 1996 


11587 : 1986 


13620 : 1993 


15977 : 2013 


Title 


Welding rods and bare electrodes 
for gas shielded arc welding of 
structural steel — Specification 
(first revision) 

Welding consumables — Wire 
electrodes, wires rods and 
deposits for gas shielded arc 
welding of creep resisting steel — 
Classification (second revision) 


Specification for heavy washers 
for steel structures 

High strength 
(second revision) 


structural nuts 


Specification for hardened and 
tempered washers Юг high 
strength structural bolts and nuts 
(first revision) 


Stainless steel 
and strip — 
(second revision) 


plate, sheet 
Specification 


Prevailing torque type hexagon 
nuts (with non-metallic insert), 
style — Property classes 5, 8 and 
10 (third revision) 


Approval tests for welding 
procedures: Part 1 Fusion welding 
of steel 


Approval tests for welders 
procedures: Part 1 Fusion welding 
of steel (first revision) 


Approval tests for welders when 
welding procedure approval is not 
required: Part | Fusion welding of 
steel 


Metal — Arc welding of carbon 
and carbon manganese steels — 
Recommendations (first revision) 


Specification for structural 


weather resistant steels 


Fusion bonded epoxy coated 
reinforcing bars — Specification 


Classification and acceptance 
tests for bare solid wire electrodes 
and wire flux combination 
for submerged arc welding of 
structural steel — Specification 


IS 11384 : 2022 


ANNEX В 
( Clauses 8.1.1 and 8.1.2.1) 
BENDING RESISTANCE OF COMPOSITE BEAMS 


Тһе stress distribution and the methods of evaluation 
of the sagging and hogging bending resistances under 
full and partial shear interaction of composite beams are 
discussed in this Annex. 


B-1 SAGGING MOMENT RESISTANCE OF 
COMPOSITE SECTION WITH PLASTIC OR 
COMPACT STRUCTURAL STEEL BEAMS 


B-1.1 Sagging Bending Resistance with Full Shear 
Interaction 


The equations for calculating the bending resistance 
of composite beams are presented in this section. It is 
assumed that sufficient shear connectors are provided 
between the structural steel and concrete to develop full 
shear with no-slip during the service load. 


Initially, evaluating the resistance based on parabolic stress 
block over the entire depth of concrete in compression 
is presented. This is theoretically slightly more accurate 
than the rectangular stress block (maximum of 2-3 
percent difference), but computationally more tedious, 
particularly when it comes to sections subjected to 
combined bending and compression. 


Subsequently, equations based on rectangular stress 
block for concrete in compression is presented. This 
is assumed so that the calculations are simplified. This 
method is easier to use, particularly when the neutral axis 
is in or closer to compression flange of the steel section. 


In both the above methods, the stress in the reinforcing 
steel in the concrete slab under compression is 
disregarded. 


B-1.1.1 Based on Parabolic Stress Block Satisfying 
Stress Strain Relationship 


Calculation of bending resistance is based on parabolic 
stress block, which is compatible with strain diagram. 
The design bending resistance depends on the location 
of the plastic neutral axis. Table 16 gives the various 
cause of design bending moments of a composite section 
depending upon the location of the plastic neutral axis 
as shown in Fig. 22, 23 and 24. For hybrid sections, 
appropriate yield strength in flanges and web shall be 
considered for calculation of the plastic moments. 


B-1.1.2 Based on Rectangular Stress Block 


The design plastic bending resistance depends on the 
location of the neutral axis, as shown in Figs. 25, 26 
and 27. Table 17 gives the equations for evaluating the 
bending resistance of a composite section, depending 
upon the location of the neutral axis. For hybrid sections 
appropriate yield strength in flanges and web shall be 
considered for calculation of the plastic moments. 


Figs. 26b and 27b show the actual stress distribution 
and Figs. 26c and 27c show the equivalent stress 
distribution to simplify the equations. 


0. бт! Үс 


С.С. OF STEEL 


ы NEUTRAL 
AXIS OF COMPOSITE 


SECTION 


53 
22222224 


f Үто 


Ес. 22 STRESS DISTRIBUTION IN A COMPOSITE BEAM WITH PLASTIC NEUTRAL 
AXIS WITHIN THE CONCRETE SLAB AT ULTIMATE MOMENT 


51 


IS 11384 : 2022 


0.67 к/с 0.67 к/с 


22222222 


б Ф -К== — 2-Е — 
5 VA = “ЕЕ 
N E T == — 
А Е Е 
\ COMPOSITE SECTION Е — 
\ == == 
: NU 2-2. CGOFSTEEL E | E 
А == CET == 
_ = ' = 
N = = 


fy/ 'Ymo 
(b) 


жы. ELI 
o 3 
w © 


(а) 


Ес.23 STRESS DISTRIBUTION IN А COMPOSITE BEAM WITH PLASTIC NEUTRAL AXIS WITHIN 
THE FLANGE OF STEEL BEAM AT ULTIMATE MOMENT 


Asfy/ Ymo 


ғ” бет EE 0.671 0.67 y/o 


PLASTIC NEUTRAL N 


AXIS OF COMPOSITE SECTION 


__С.6. OF STEEL 


А 


—— 


ШЇ 


fy/fmo fy/fmo 
(a) (b) (c) 


Fic. 24 STRESS DISTRIBUTION IN COMPOSITE BEAM WITH PLASTIC NEUTRAL AXIS WITHIN 
THE WEB OF STEEL BEAM AT ULTIMATE MOMENT 


52 


_ Asfy/ymo 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Table 16 Sagging Moment Resistance of Composite Section with full Shear 
Interaction (Parabolic Stress Block) 


( Clause B-1.1.1 ) 


Case Position of Plastic Location of NA Design Moment Capacity, 
Neutral Axis х; M, 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1 Within slab (Fig. 22) x, 7 aA. / ba M,= A, (Е) (а. + 0.5d, — 0.42 x ) 
byd > аА, : 
2 in steel flange (Fig. 23) (aA ра ) M= A/o) КА, (4.+0.08 d,) — 46, (c, — d.) 
ae bod x, =d, ++ | (x,+0.16d,)}] —— | 
NIA aA < ( HE ,*2a.A,) u s 2ba u s 
3 In web (Fig. 24) х=а+1+ M, = FA no) КА, (а, + 0.08d )} — {2А (0.51, + 0.58d,)} 
аА > (bgd %2а4) {а (4 -2 А) — b ,d,/Qat,) —{2 (x, — d, — t) (0.5х + 0.084 + 0.58} ] 
EH 
Where a=—™ 
0.36 f... 


( Осс/ус ). foy 


М NEUTRAL 


AXIS OF COMPOSITE 
SECTION 


4 
E 


C.G. OF STEEL 


Asfy/ Ymo 


5 


f Үто 


Ею. 25 STRESS DISTRIBUTION IN A COMPOSITE BEAM WITH PLASTIC NEUTRAL AXIS WITHIN 
CONCRETE SLAB AT ULTIMATE MOMENT 


53 


IS 11384 : 2022 


( Gicc/c ).-Fox ( cele ).n. fa 


02222222 
Ж 


| ee NEUTRAL 


AXIS OF 
COMPOSITE SECTION 


C.G. OF STEEL 


Asfy/ Ymo 


“тт 4 
72222222222222222222222222 


NN 
7 


И!!! 


1/Үто fy/Ymo 
(a) (b) (c) 


Ес. 26 STRESS DISTRIBUTION IN A COMPOSITE BEAM WITH PLASTIC NEUTRAL AXIS WITHIN 
THE FLANGE OF THE STEEL BEAM AT ULTIMATE MOMENT 


Dor = (Осе/Үс әп. қ (Осе/Үс ). Пк 
| 0.59; —e 


0.54 2F sc 

N 

L -N - = n - E - 

E 
NN 
N 
N PLASTIC NEUTRAL AXIS OF 
ү COMPOSITE SECTION 
N 

EM REN E 
N C.G. OF STEEL BEAM Ауто 
NN 
N 


NN 
7 


то то 


(а) (b) (c) 


Fic. 27 STRESS DISTRIBUTION IN A COMPOSITE BEAM WITH PLASTIC NEUTRAL AXIS WITHIN 
THE WEB OF THE STEEL BEAM AT ULTIMATE MOMENT 


54 


15 11384 : 2022 


Table 17 Sagging Moment Resistance of Composite Section with full Shear Interaction 


(Rectangular Stress Block) 
( Clause B-1.1.2 ) 


Case Position of Plastic Neutral Axis Location of NA Design Moment Capacity, 
х, М, 

1 Within slab (Fig. 25) b p4, > а.А, x, = aA к MALY on (d, 0.54 — 4. х /2) 

2 Plastic neutral axis in steel flange (aA —bud ) Mi= fhao [4, {d,+0.5d (1 - 2)) —b, (x, — d.) 
(Fig. 26) x, =d, p as ix, + ü - 2d, }] 

a s 

b d <a.A<(b „d +2а A) i 

3 Plastic Neutral axis in web (Fig. 27) a( -2A,)-b d M, =f, Уно (A, (d, + 0.5 d.(1 — 2)) — 2A, {0.5t, + 
52d tied cod, x cd ei e Ал Ты a7 32) 43 - 1,9, -d,- 1) (0-2 4, * 1] 


EA 
Y mo 
о. 


те fa) 


с 


= average thickness of the top flange of the steel section. 


t = thickness of the web of the steel section. 


M,= design bending resistance. 

а, = 0.67. 

у. = material safety factor for concrete 
= 1.50 (for basic and seismic combinations) 
= 1.20 (for accidental combinations) 

Үш = material safety factor for structural steel = 1.10 
ү, = material safety factor for reinforcing steel = 1.15 
n= 1.0 [for f, < 60 MPa] 

= 1.0-(f,-60) / 250 [for 60 <f < 110 MPa] 
= 0.8 [for f, < 60 MPa] 


= 0.8 - (f,-60) / 500 [for 60 < f, < 110 MPa] 


A,= area of the top flange of steel beam of a composite section. 


NOTE — Notations used in the determination of plastic bending resistance are given below: 


A = cross sectional area of structural steel beam of a composite section. 
Б = effective width of concrete slab. 

b,= width of top flange of steel section. 

d = overall depth of concrete slab. 

а = 


= vertical distance between centroids of concrete slabs and steel beam іп a composite section. 


depth of neutral axis at ultimate limit state of flexure from top of concrete 


В-1.2 Bending Moment with Partial 
Interaction 


Shear 


B-1.2.1 Partial shear connection is applicable only in 
the case of plastic resistance of plastic and compact 
classifications. Provisions for partial shear connection is 
applicable either for attaining economy without losing 
much in moment capacity of the composite section or 
in conditions where the number of shear connectors 
required for full shear interactions cannot be provided 
due to lack of space resulting in the increased spacing 
of shear connectors due to provision of lesser numbers 
of shear connectors than that needed for full composite 
action. 


Degree of shear connection S, is given as 


55 


g -fo М-М, 
° n Fe М.-М, 


Number of shear connectors provided for partial 
shear connection, 


= Number of shear connectors required for full 


shear connection, 


Capacity of shear connectors in partial shear 
connection with п, numbers of connectors, 


Capacity of shear connectors in full shear 
connection with n, numbers of connectors, 


Required bending resistance of the section, 


Design bending resistance of the composite 
section 


Design bending resistance of steel section alone. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


B-1.2.1 To obtain required bending resistance M, the where 
number of shear connectors required (assuming all 


2. у, = partial safety factor for reinforcement = 1.15. 
connectors have equal capacity) is given as: 


JL ‚= Characteristic yield strength of the reinforcing 


n, x (М- M (M,- мо nc steel. 
B-1.3 Sagging Bending Resistance of Composite A = the effective area of longitudinal reinforcement 
Section with Non-Compact Structural Steel Beams within the effective width bẹ of the beam. 


Since the compression flange of semi-compact steel Тһе plastic moment of resistance for plastic and 
sections buckle locally under compression on reaching Compact structural steel section is given as: 


yield stress /, the design resistance of the composite Z,Í, 
section consisting of semi-compact sections is Mac-— 
evaluated using equations of compact sections as per Ymo 


B-1, wherein the effective width of elements of section where 
like the compression flange is restricted to limiting 


| Z is the plastic section modulus of the structural steel 
value of that of the compact section. : 


section and y. , is the material safety factor to be taken 
as 1.10. In the absence of any tensile reinforcements, 
the bending resistance of the section would be that of 
the structural steel section as given by M, above. To 
allow for reinforcements, it is assumed that the stress 
Figure 28 shows stress distribution across a composite іп a depth У changes from tension to compression 
beam section subjected to hogging bending moment. 
Since the steel bottom flange is in compression 
section classification shall be done as per IS 800. For 
classification of the web, the distance, (У), of the 
plastic neutral axis above the centroid of the area of the 


B-2 MOMENT ОЕ RESISTANCE ОЕ 
COMPOSITE SECTION (NEGATIVE 
MOMENT) (CONTINUOUS BEAMS) 


for Plastic and compact section. The corresponding 
depth for a non-compact section is х. For plastic 
and compact sections, stress distribution may be 
determined from 


steel section shall first be found. yt, 2hy =F, 

B-2.1 Hogging Bending Resistance for Plastic and d 

Compact Structural Steel Sections The locations of the neutral axis and the bending 
The design tensile force in reinforcement is given as: resistance for the plastic and compact section are given 

_ in Table 18. 
Е. =f A 
Xe 
fy/Ymo fy/Ymo 
(a) Plastic and compact section (b) Semi-compact section 


Fic. 28 STRESS DIAGRAM FOR HOGGING MOMENT REGION AT ULTIMATE MOMENT 


56 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Table 18 Hogging Bending Resistance of plastic and compact Composite Section 
( Clause B-2.1 ) 


а- Effective depth of the slab 
t,= Average thickness of the top flange of the steel section 


t, = Thickness of the web of the steel section 


Case Position of Plastic Value of у Moment Capacity М., 
Neutral Axis y 
a) 2 (3) (4) 
1 In Web — р Ma =M, EZ 
у<—-—-1 f 
2 
2 In Flange 2 
D.-.D (А-5) t 
a eye М, 9 FF, 4 be rum) 24 
2 2 dh b 5 Е, 4 
where 
= P des 
2 2 
_ А B E = у* 
‚= Axial capacity of a single flange = "m 
Е,- Axial capacity of steel section = ы 
m0 
. . “ % m Ay 
Е,= Axial capacity of reinforcing steel = Y 
A = area of structural steel cross section * 
A,= area of top flange of structural steel cross section 
A „= area of reinforcing steel within the effective width of concrete flange 
d_= overall depth of the concrete slab 


NOTE — The web shall be classified as being in compression throughout. 


B-2.2 Hogging Bending Resistance for Non-Compact 
Section 


Where elastic analysis is used, creep is considered in 
the choice of modular ratio m (—E,/E. ). Here, at the 
section considered, the loading causes bending moment 
(Ме) in the steel member alone and (Mẹ) in the 
composite member. 


The location of the elastic neutral axis of the composite 
semi-compact section (see Fig. 28(b)) is given as: 


X (4*4)- 424.) 


and the second moment of area of the composite section 
15 given as: 


D 2 
I,, =1,+ Ах на [2+4 -қ| 


Where, 7. is the second moment of area of the steel 
section alone. 


The yield moment is mostly governed by the total stress 
in the steel bottom flange. The locations of the neutral 
axis and the moment of resistance for non-compact 
section 15 given in Table 19. 


The bending moment (М) causes no stress in the slab 
reinforcements. Іп propped construction, the tensile 


stress in the reinforcement may govern the design. It is 
given in the following equation: 


tja) 
(2 А 2 | ` < 


B-3 FLANGE STRESS REDUCTION FACTOR 
(К) FOR HYBRID SECTIONS 


Flange stress reduction factor is applicable for hybrid 
sections using higher-grade steel flanges where the 
section is non-compact, or in other words, where the 
section reaches the plastic moment capacity. In such 
cases, design limiting stress for both compression and 
tension shall be modified by the reduction factor ‘R, 
and shall be taken as: 


i n К, Ы ЖИН 
where, 


R,7 (ру) AGF, < 1.0 
Лођ = the yield strength of the flange and web 
respectively 
D, d — the distance of the extreme compression/tension 
flange and the corresponding extreme fiber of 
the web from the neutral axis of the composite 
section respectively. 


57 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Table 19 Hogging Bending Resistance of Non-compact Composite Section 
( Clause B-2.2 ) 


Location of Neutral Axis Moment capacity of Steel section Moment Capacity М. 
alone [f ] у 
(1) (2) (3) 
D D 
P (4*A4)- [5+4 -м,, 2 (4-5), 
5 s 1 S = m0 

My.) M, + D 
—tx, 
2 


NOTE: — The web shall be classified as being in compression throughout. 


Where, 


— Overall depth of the slab 

— effective depth of the slab 

— Hogging moment in the steel section alone 

= Compressive stress in steel flange due to moment Me(s) 
— moment of inertia of the steel beam alone 


moment of inertia of the composite section 
D 
-IQSLeAO [274 -x] 


t= average thickness of the top flange of the steel section 


t = Thickness of the web of steel section 


— Cross sectional area of steel beam of a composite section 


Cross sectional area of reinforcements within the effective width of the concrete flange 


For homogeneous grade steel sections, R, shall be 
1.0. The reduction factor shall not apply to compact 
or plastic sections because the effect of lower strength 
material in the web is accounted for in calculating the 
plastic moment as specified in B-1.1. 


B-4 MOMENT OF RESISTANCE AGAINST 
LATERAL-TORSIONAL BUCKLING 
(CONSTRUCTION STAGE) 


At the construction stage, before the concrete hardens, 
the structural steel beam strength may be dictated by 
the lateral buckling strength. This may be evaluated as 
per IS 800. 


Effect of lateral-torsional buckling on flexural strength 
need not be considered if À, < 0.4. 

В-4.1 Sagging Lateral Buckling Resistance of 
Structural Steel Beams 


The design buckling resistance moment of a laterally 
unrestrained beam under un-propped condition during 
the construction stage shall be taken as: 


М. = B,Zp Ен 3 


m0 


58 


where, 


: <1.0 


1 


Ат = 1 
fou + (o; -À 2 


Фа = 0.5[ 1+ 04,7 (4-02) Anz” | 
+ = As per Table 13 
The non-dimensional slenderness ratio, д 


12 IS given by: 


hy = ae 2E 


M, М. 

Л 
Алт ЖЕ 

pA 

where 
В, = 1.0 for Plastic and Compact sections. 
= ZIZ, for semi-compact sections. 
M „= the elastic critical moment corresponding to 


lateral torsional buckling. 


In the case of simply supported prismatic members with 
symmetric cross-section, the elastic critical moment, 


М , сап be determined as: 
x^ El, 


< GI, L [> = By Loto 
(Lir) 


М. | 2 
(Lir) 
bending compressive 


The maximum stress 
corresponding to lateral buckling, f „of non-slender 
rolled I-sections may be approximately calculated 


using the following equation: 
2 0.5 
11л2Е | | | 


~| 1+ 
at f) 


The following simplified conservative equation may be 
used in the case of prismatic members made of standard 
rolled I-sections and welded doubly symmetric 
I-sections for calculating the elastic critical lateral 
buckling moment. 


1 
20 


Li! r, 
hy | te 


Л = 


0.5 


EL, L 1 [= lr, j T 
E m. 20\ %/1, open 
where 
fẹ = lateral torsional buckling stress, 
I = warping constant, 
1 = torsional constant = Ур, [2/3 for open sections, 
L — moment of inertia about the weak axis, 
E radius of gyration of the section about the 
weak axis], 
L,,= effective length for lateral torsional buckling, 
h,— Center to center distance between flanges, and 
t, = thickness of the flange. 


М, for different beam sections, considering loading, 
support condition, and non-symmetric cross-section, 
shall be more accurately calculated using the method 
given in IS 800. 


В-4.2 Hogging Lateral Buckling Resistance of 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Composite Beams 


The effective unsupported length, L,,, in case of bare 
steel section may be taken as recommended in IS 800. 
When a slab connects in the hogging moment region 
the top flange of two or more beams running parallel, 
then the effect of U-Frame action in restraining the 
lateral buckling of bottom flange under compression 
(Fig. 29) may be considered as given as below: 


B-4.2.1 The rotational spring restraint stiffness of the 
concrete slab, k, per unit length of steel beam is given 
by 


К — k, k/(k, + k) 


Flexural stiffness of the cracked concrete or 
composite slab transverse to the spanning 
direction of steel beam = a (EI) /a, 


2 for an edge beam, 
3 for inner beam and 


4 for inner beam with four or more such beams 
running parallel and supporting the continuous 
slab; 


span length of the slab transverse to the steel 
beams 


cracked flexural stiffness of the concrete or 
composite slab per unit width parallel to the 
steel beam, taken as the lower of the sagging 
bending slab stiffness of the slab in between 
the steel beams and hogging bending stiffness 
of the slab at the supporting steel section; 


flexural stiffness of the steel web per unit 
length along the beam, 

Е t ?/[4(1-0,7)A.)] in un-encased steel section 
E t b?/ [16 h (1* 4 m ¢,/b,)] in encased steel 


Sw С 


section as per 8.3.8 
modulus of elasticity of structural steel; 


Poisson's ratio of structural steel; 


Ес.29 INVERTED U-FRAME ACTION TO RESTRAIN LATERAL BUCKLING OF BOTTOM FLANGE 


59 


IS 11384 : 2022 


thickness of the steel section web; 


Ь = width of concrete encasement (Fig. 27); 

h = distance between centroids of top and bottom 
flanges 

m= long term modular ratio of encasing concrete 


as per IS 456 


B-4.2.2 The torsional rigidity of the steel section may 
be taken as С. 1, where G, is the shear modulus of 
steel, I „ is the St. Venant’s torsion constant of the steel 
section. The torsional rigidity stiffness contribution 
of encasing concrete may be taken as being equal to 
GJ,,/10, where С’, may be taken as equal to 0.3 Es/m 
and Г is the St. Venant's torsion constant of encasing 
concrete of rectangular shape and m is the modular 
ratio for long term effects. 


B-4.2.3 The elastic hogging critical buckling moment 
of the composite beam at an internal support of a 
continuous beam is given by the following equation: 


e = Aol, JA, Z, (А -А,)] 


h = Distance between the centers of the flanges of 
the steel section 


Io 1 = Second moment of area of steel section about 
the minor and major axis, respectively 


2, = distance between the centroid of steel section 
and the mid depth of concrete slab. 


С = 


„= constant depending upon the bending stress 


distribution over the span length as given in 
Tables 20 and 21. 


B-5 MOMENT OF RESISTANCE FOR FILLER 
BEAM DECKS 


Filler Beam decks most likely to be designed for 
structures with wide column-free zones having higher 
live loads. The stress distribution diagram for a standard 
filler beam decks is as shown in Fig. 30. 


For equilibrium, F, =F. + F. 


M, = (k C/D (G + k, Pine) E, 1, Р where 
wise F = Tensile force in the steel section below the 
neutral axis. 
ы” 2... anoni F „= Compressive force in the steel section above 
i d b ad ГЕ” the neutral axis. 
= second moment of the equivalent area, 4 , о : : 
ar on composite i secon for tma jär F „= Compressive force іп the concrete above the 
axis bending neutral axis. 
К = composite beam section property = The depth of the neutral axis is given as, 
(h, LIT ӘЛ, /4+(1,+1„)/А )/е+ h] x, = Hx, 
Table 20 Linear BMD Over the Span 
( Clause B-4.2.3 ) 
BMD С, 
w=-l 0.75 0.5 0.25 0.0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.0 


yM 
18.1 16.3 14.6 12.8 11.1 9.5 8.2 7.1 6.2 
Table 21 Non-Linear BMD over the span 
( Clause B-4.2.3 ) 
BMD B C, 

и=0.5 | 0.75 1.0 1.25 1.5 1.75 2.0 2.25 2.5 
0.00 41.5 30.2 24.5 21.1 19.0 17.5 16.5 15.7 15.2 
0.50 33.9 22.7 17.3 14.1 13.0 12.0 114 10.9 10.6 
0.75 28.2 18.0 13.7 117 10.6 10.0 9.5 9.1 8.9 
1.00 21.9 13:9 11.0 9.6 8.8 8.3 8.0 7.8 7.6 
0.00 28.4 21.8 18.6 16.7 15.6 14.8 14.2 13.8 135 
1.00 12.7 9.8 8.6 8.0 77 7.4 7.2 7.1 7.0 


60 


IS 11384 : 2022 


( Occ/Yc ).n.fa 


Fsc 
2 > " - = - i SoS ee 
PLASTIC NEUTRAL AXIS H 
OF COMPOSITE h 
SECTION 
Xg 
tr 
B fy/ymo fy/ymo 
FIG. 30 STRESS DIAGRAM FOR FILLER BEAM 
where „= Thickness of the web of steel section. 
a f. = Distance between top of concrete and bottom 
ы nS [В.Н а” )] Ses m of bottom flange of steel beam. 
i, = = 7 = h = Total depth of steel girder. 
E mn.f4 (B = ) а x= Distance of neutral axis from bottom of bottom 
E Ymo flange of steel beam. 
Bending resistance is given as, A = Cross sectional area of reinforcements within 
M CUR UELUT P t. the effective width of the concrete flange. 
where A = Cross sectional area of steel beam of а 
X » X,, and X, are respectively the distance between the Composte secon: 
neutral axis of the composite beam and the individual а,- Overall depth of the slab. 
centre of gravities of the corresponding forces]. d,= effective depth of the slab. 
B= center-to-center distance between two filler М = Ultimate bending moment. 


beams. 
b," Effective width of concrete for one filler beam. 
b= width of the top flange of steel section. 


61 


IS 11384 : 2022 


ANNEX C 
( Clauses 12.4.3.1 and 12.5.2 ) 
COMPOSITE SLABS 


C-1 GENERAL 


Composite slabs consist of metal decking spanning 
between the supports and acting integrally with the 
concrete after the concrete hardens (Fig. 31). The steel 
decking performs several roles as given below: 


a) It supports loads during construction and acts as a 
working platform. 


b) It develops adequate composite action with 
concrete to resist the imposed loading. 


c) It transfers in-plane loading by diaphragm action 
to vertical bracing or shear walls. 


d) It may stabilize the compression flanges of the 
beams against lateral buckling until the concrete 
hardens. 


e) It reduces the volume of concrete in the tension 
zone of the slab. 


f) It distributes shrinkage strains, thus preventing 
serious cracking of concrete. 


C-2 STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS 


C-2.1 Composite floors with profiled decking consist 
of the following structural elements along with in-situ 
concrete and steel beams: 


a) Profiled Decking. 
b) Shear Connectors. 


c) Reinforcement for shrinkage and temperature 
stresses. 


Connections between the structural steel beam and 
decking elements are generally designed as ‘simple’, 
that is, not moment-resisting. Stud shear connectors are 
welded through the sheeting onto the top flange of the 
beam to facilitate the shear transfer between concrete 
and steel decking, serving as end anchorage, as well as 
the shear transfer between the slab and steel beam for 
mobilising composite action along the beam span. 


C-2.2 Profile Decking 


The steel deck is normally rolled into the desired profile 
from 0.9 mm to 1.5 mm galvanized coil sheets. It is 
profiled such that the profile heights are usually in the 
range of 38-75 mm, and the pitch of corrugations is 
between 150 mm and 350 mm. Generally, composite 
slab spans of the order of 2.5 m to 3.5 m between 
the beams are chosen, and the beams are designed to 
span between 6 m to 12 m. There are two well-known 
generic types of profiles as given below (Fig.32). 


62 


C-2.3 Shear Connectors 


To enable composite action to be assumed between the 
profiled steel sheet and the concrete, the longitudinal 
shear force be transferred by the sheet by the above 
following form of connection (Fig.33): 

a) Mechanical interlock through the provision of 
indentations or embossments rolled into the 
profile. 

b) Frictional interlock of re-entrant profile. 

c) Through-deck welded stud connectors or any 
other local connection between the steel and the 
concrete. 


d) Deformation of the ends of the ribs at the ends of 
the sheeting. 


C-2.4 Reinforcement for Shrinkage and 
Temperature Stresses 
In buildings, the temperature difference ш the 


slabs is negligible; thus, there is no need to provide 
reinforcement to account for temperature stresses. The 
effect of shrinkage is to be considered, and the total 
shrinkage strain for design may be taken as 0.003 in the 
absence of test data. 


C-3 PONDING OF PROFILED DECKING 


Fig. 34 shows ponding of the profiled deck. In 
unpropped construction, the profiled decking acting as 
a formwork to support wet concrete and construction 
live load. Due to this, the deck sheeting may deflect 
and cause an increase in the thickness of concrete at 
or closer to mid-span. This is referred to as ‘Ponding.’ 
Ponding increases the volume of concrete consumed as 
well as dead load. These effects should be accounted 
for, particularly in long spans. 


C-4 BENDING RESISTANCE OF COMPOSITE 
SLAB WITH FULL SHEAR CONNECTION 


NOTE — In C-4, instead of the usual Е, the concrete 
compressive force is denoted as F to represent the concrete 
compressive force with a full shear connection. 


C-4.1 Sagging Bending Resistance [Neutral axis is 
above the steel decking (Fig. 35)] 


The design stress distribution is shown in Fig. 35. This 
is valid when x, < d, that is, when the neutral axis lies 
above steel decking. Centroid of concrete force lies at 
0.42 x, from top concrete surface. The equations for the 
design resistance are given in Table 22. 


С-4.2 Sagging Bending Resistance [Neutral axis is 
within the steel decking (Fig. 36)] 


The design stress distribution is shown in Fig. 36. This 
is valid when x, > 4, that is, when the plastic neutral 
axis lies in the steel decking. The depth of the parabolic 
compressive stress block in concrete is between the top 
of the concrete slab to the top fibre of the deck sheet 
as shown іп Fig. 36. Also, е, is the distance between 
the plastic neutral axis of the composite slab to the 


SHEAR STUD —7 
CONNECTOR 


IS 11384 : 2022 


extreme fibre of the deck sheet in tension and e is the 
distance between the centroidal axis of the profiled 
steel sheeting to the extreme fibre of the deck sheet 
in tension. The centroid of concrete force F lies at 
0.42 а from top of the concrete surface. The equations 
forthe design resistance are given in Table 22. The value 
M Bs used in Table 22 is plastic moment capacity of the 
deck sheet which may be provided by the manufacturer 
or calculated independently. 


CAST IN SITU 
CONCRETE 


WELDED WIRE 
REINFORCING MESH 


ROLLED 
EMBOSSMENTS 


BEAM 


STEEL PROFILED 
DECKING 


Ес. 31 COMPOSITE SLAB 


a) Trapezoidal profile with web indentations 
b) Dovetail profile with flange indentations 


Ес. 32 COMPOSITE SLAB DECKING PROFILE 


63 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Fic. 33 TYPICAL FORMS OF SHEAR CONNECTORS IN COMPOSITE SLAB 


Ponding deformation 


Fic. 34 PONDING IN PROFILE DECKING DUE TO WEIGHT OF CONCRETE SLAB 


0.67 Ле 
= — 


ур/Үто 
Fic. 35 STRESS DISTRIBUTION UNDER SAGGING BENDING MOMENT (X, « D.) 


64 


0. б7Е / Ус 


IS 11384 : 2022 


0.67Ғ/Үс 


Ты Үто 


Fic. 36 STRESS DISTRIBUTION UNDER SAGGING BENDING MOMENT (X, > D.) 


Table 22 Design Moment Capacity, М, of Composite Slabs with Full Shear Connection 


( Clauses C-4.1, C-4.2 and C-4.3 ) 


Case | Position of Plastic Neutral Axis Value of x, Design Moment Capacity, М. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1 Sagging moment, NA above А и А 
sheeting material (Fig. 35) 7 M,, = АЉ (а -0.42х,) 
х= LL m «d ` mo i 
" 036,0” 
2 Sagging moment NA within the x, d. Мұ-Е,Х2%М, 
steel decking (Fig. 36) A simplified stress block is shown in 
Fig.36. Using which M, is calculated Ех 
without the need for x, М,-125М,1- Af 7 F7 « Ma, 
р> yp/ 
И То 
z-d, —0.42d, —e, + 2 - (е, e) 
sp 
F = 036 f, b, d, 
Е = АЛ 
Ж Ya 
3 Hogging moment (Fig. 37) А А 
А m, (а, солы) 
EE Ук 
“ 0.36/,Ь, 
Notations: 
А, = area of the reinforcing bar within one wave length 5, of decking sheet. 
d= distance between the C.G axis of the profiled steel sheeting and the extreme fibre of the composite slab in compression (d. — e). 
е = distance between the С.С axis of the profiled steel sheeting and the extreme fibre of the composite slab in tension. 
е,- distance between the plastic neutral axis and the extreme tension fibre of the composite slab. 
b, = distance between the centres of adjacent ribs or one wave length of a profile deck. 
4,7 effective cross-sectional area of profile decking sheeting. 
M, — design bending resistance of profile decking sheeting. 
M. — Plastic moment of resistance of the profile decking sheeting. 
Лу = characteristic compressive strength of concrete. 
f, = yield strength of profile decking sheeting. 
а, = total depth of the composite slab (а= d + d,). 


65 


IS 11384 : 2022 


C-4.3 Hogging bending resistance of composite Deck 


The contribution of steel decking is neglected. The 
design stress distribution is shown in Fig. 37. This is 
valid when x, is in the range of (d, « x, < d_), that is, 
when the neutral axis lies in the steel decking. The 
centroid of concrete force lies at 0.42 x, from the 
bottom concrete surface b, the concrete width at 
the neutral axis is to be evaluated by trial and error. 
The equations for the design resistance are given in 
Table 22. 


C-5 BENDING RESISTANCE OF COMPOSITE 
SLAB WITH PARTIALSHEAR CONNECTION 


NOTE — In С-5, instead of the usual АР, the concrete 
compressive force is denoted as Е „р tO represent the concrete 


compressive force with a partial shear connection. 


C-5.1 The stress distribution in slabs with partial 
shear connection is similar to Fig. 37. However, the 
compressive force in the concrete above the neutral axis 
(ЕЕ) is controlled by the interface shear resistance 
due to the partial shear connection. The interface shear 
resistance is obtained from tests. The details of tests to 
obtain the shear strength between the interface of decking 


and concrete is given in С-5.2. 


C-5.2 Shear Resistance of Composite Slab 


The longitudinal shear behaviour may be considered 
as ductile if the failure load exceeds the load causing a 


recorded end slip of 0.1 mm by more than 10 percent. If 
the maximum load is reached at a mid-span deflection 
exceeding L/50, the failure load shall be taken as the 
load at the mid-span deflection of 7/50. Otherwise, the 
behaviour is classified as brittle. 


The shear resistance due to the chemical bond shall not 
be considered. This clause 18 applicable to the composite 
slabs with the mechanical or frictional interlock. Literature 
gives two main methods for determining the shear transfer 
for partial shear connection from test results. They are 
(1) the m-k method and (11) the partial shear connection 
method. The m-k method is valid for both ductile and 
brittle failure cases but disregards the effect of overhang 
beyond the support, whereas the partial shear connection 
method is valid only for ductile behaviour, but accounts 
for the effect of the support reaction and the overhang 
beyond the support. 


С-5.2.1 m-k Method for Composite Slabs without End 
Anchorage 


The m-k method is based on establishing the gradient 
and intercept of an assumed linear relationship between 
two parameters of the slab, obtained from two groups 
of composite slab tests. The evaluation of m-k values is 
illustrated in Fig. 38. 


For cases when the longitudinal shear behaviour may be 
considered ductile,is taken as the value of the support 
reaction at the failure load. However, if the behavior 


Рос 
0.67f yc 


Fic. 38 Test SETUP TO EVALUATE M-K VALUES 


66 


is brittle, the value should be reduced using a factor 
0.8. By plotting the results from the composite slab 
tests in terms of the vertical shear parameter [V/(b D )] 
against the shear bond parameter [A /(b ЕЛ for two 
groups of data corresponding to the long specimens 
(Group-A) and the short specimens (Group-B). The 
relationship between vertical shear and shear bond 
capacity is approximated by constructing a straight line 
through the two groups of data (Fig. 38). The effect 
of any overhang in the test specimen is neglected in 
the m-k method, unlike in the partial shear connection 
approach. 


From all the values of V, 5percent fractile of the 
characteristic shear strength linear regression line 
should be calculated to define the characteristic m and 
k values (Fig. 38). The minimum value of each group is 
further reduced by 10 percent for design consideration 
If two groups of three tests are used and the deviation 
of any individual test result in a group does not differ 
by more than 10 percent from the mean. 


If the m-k method is used, it should be shown that 
the maximum design vertical shear V for a width of 
slab ‘b’ does not exceed the design shear resistance 
V, , specified in Table 23. 


M 
Ma 1.0 Е и 
Mrest > | 
Гоби ж | 
а 5 Еср 
Ест 


ccf 


ep 


IS 11384 : 2022 


C-5.2.2 Partial Interaction Method 


The degree of shear connection 1s defined as, 


n- s 
Кы 
where 
Е „= Compressive force in the concrete аз governed 


с 


by partial shear transfer, as obtained from а 
standard test 


Е 


с 


„= Compressive force in the concrete for full 
shear connection as given in С-4. 


The variation in bending resistance with the degree 
of shear connection is shown in Fig. 39. In case 
1] = 0, composite action between the steel sheet and 
the concrete does not exist, and it is assumed that 
the bending resistance is provided by the bending 
resistance, M,, of profiled steel sheet alone. For 
the case 1 = 1, in the full shear connection, the full 
tensile resistance of the sheet is developed, or the full 
compressive resistance of concrete above the ribs of 
the sheet is attained. For intermediate cases such that 
0 <n <1, the partial shear connection exists. Typical 
behaviour of open trough profile steel sheeting with 
partial shear connection is illustrated in Fig. 39. 


Fic. 39 TEST TO DETERMINATION OF THE DEGREE OF THE PARTIAL SHEAR CONNECTION 


67 


IS 11384 : 2022 


For a given bending resistance, the degree of shear 
connection provided in the test тү may be assessed 
from the points on the partial shear interaction curve in 
Fig.37. By neglecting the effect of the support reaction, 
the longitudinal shear strength t, can be obtained from 
the following equation: 


= 1 test m 


^T BL) 
where, 


Е „= Compressive normal force in the concrete flange 


ccf 


with full shear connection 

b = width of the slab. 

1, = Shear span. 

L = Length of the overhang (Fig. 39). 


If the additional longitudinal shear, the additional 
resistance caused by the friction due to the support 
reaction is taken into account, т, may be obtained from 
the following equation: 


т = Ц Кы = ЦИ 
"  b(L+L,) 
where 
u= frictional coefficient taken as 0.5. 
V= support reaction under the test load. 


The characteristic shear strength t,, should be 
calculated from the test values as the minimum value of 
stress below which not more than a specified percentage 
(usually 5 percent) of the corresponding stresses of 
samples tested are expected to occur. This is divided by 
the partial safety factor governed by the ultimate state 
to obtain the design value, т. 


The determination of the design moment resistance of 
the composite slab with the partial shear connection 
is similar to the case (Fig. 39). The design bending 
resistance of the partial shear connection slab is 
evaluated using equations given in Table 23. 


Table 23 Design Moment Capacity, M ар? of Composite Slabs with Partial Shear Connection 


( Clauses C-5.2.1 апа C-5.2.2 ) 


Case Position of Plastic Neutral Axis Methods/ Value of x, Design Moment Capacity, М ia 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Sagging moment (Fig. 38) m-k method М,-У,х1, 


ii) 


Sagging moment, NA above profile 
decking sheet (Fig. 39) 


Partial shear connection method 


F. 


сср 


x, == & 
À" 0.36 fx b, ` 


М, - АЛ (4 942x.) 


dp — 


mo 


in Fig. 39. Using which М, 18 
calculated with 


Е, 


сср 


Х,------- 
0.36 fx b, 


Hs Та DLS Fa 

iii) Sagging moment, NA within the | Partial shear connection method M "x F х2+ М, 
profile decking sheet (Fig. 39) A simplified stress block is shown Е =1.bL<F 

cep ud ^p ^x — 4 ecf 


2-а,-0.42х,-е, 


ут 6-5) 


Е 
М, =1.25 М. 1- 57,7 <М, 
PY yp 
us 


Where L. is the distance of the cross-section being considered to the nearest support. 


68 


ANNEX D 


( Clause 13.8.1) 
PLASTIC DESIGN RESISTANCE OF SYMMETRIC COMPOSITE COLUMNS 


D-1 GENERAL 


This section deals with the calculation of the design 
resistance of the doubly symmetric composite 
columns. The resistance equations are derived based 
on the rectangular stress block in concrete. The general 
dimensional view of the fully or partially concrete- 
encased single I-section is as given in Fig. 40a. The 
general dimensional view of the concrete infilled 
tubular composite column section is given in Fig. 40b. 


The following are the notations used in this section, in 
addition to the dimensions shown in Fig. 40. 


A= 


с 


cross sectional area of concrete. 


А, = cross sectional area of structural steel. 
А, = cross sectional area of total steel reinforcement. 
А „= cross sectional area of steel reinforcement in 
the compression zone. 
Лу = characteristic compressive cube strength of 


concrete. 


Л 


2hn 


h-hc 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Minimum Guaranteed yield 
structural steel section. 


strength of 


Minimum Guaranteed yield strength of steel 
reinforcement. 

Design bending resistance under only bending 
moment. 


Ultimate bending resistance under only 
bending moment. 
Design | compressive resistance under 
compression only. 
Ultimate compressive resistance under 


compression only. 


Design bending resistance under combined 
bending and compression. 

Ultimate bending resistance under combined 
bending and compression. 

Design | compressive resistance under 
combined bending and compression. 


== 


Do 


b) Concrete infilled tubular columns 


Fic. 40 TYPICAL COMPOSITE COLUMN DETAILS 


IS 11384 : 2022 


P' = Ultimate compressive resistance under 
combined bending and compression. 
r= Inner radius of the rounded corners in RHS. 
у, = partial safety factor for the compressive 
strength of concrete = 1.5. 
7 о = partial safety factor for the yield strength of 


structural steel = 1.1. 


y = partial safety factor for the yield strength of 
steel reinforcement = 1.15. 


D-2 DESIGN COMPRESSIVE RESISTANCE 
OF SHORT COMPOSITE COLUMN 


Тһе stresses on different components of the composite 
columns at the ultimate stage under only axial force are 
as shown in Fig. 41. The ultimate design compressive 
resistance, P , of the plastic, compact апа semi-compact 
sections are given by: 


Р, = ASF, + Ат 0.8 А, afa 
where 
а, — 0.85, for partially ог fully encased column 
а, = 1.0, for infilled columns 


The axial design resistances of different types of the 
composite column are given in Table 24. 


To account for minimum eccentricity and grade of 
reinforcing steel, the design axial capacity can be 
estimated using the following expression, 


P, ал fn 


|, == + 048a, A, Sos 


Y mo k Ve 


Where о, values can be taken as 


Grade of Reinforcing Steel Value of a, 
Fe250 0.9 
Fe415 0.82 
Fe500 0.77 


D-3 DESIGN BENDING RESISTANCE OF 
COMPOSITE COLUMN 


The stresses on the different components of the 
composite columns at the ultimate stage under only 
the bending moment about the z-z axis are as shown in 
Fig. 42. 


The design bending resistance is given by: 


M, = (2, E а Ymo + (2, = 2,) Íx т, + 0.4 
(2. E Z a) а fa hr. 


where 


Zo бы апа Z. = Plastic section moduli of the steel 
section, reinforcement and concrete about their own 
centroidal axis, respectively (the concrete in tension 
region is assumed to be uncracked for this calculation). 


Z. ,Z and Z_ = Plastic section moduli of the steel 
ps pm ^ реп iaa 

section, reinforcement and concrete, all within the depth 

h оп both sides of the neutral axis of the gross section, 

about the neutral axis of gross cross section, respectively. 


(Table 25 may be referred for evaluating the value of Л) 


a = the strength coefficient of concrete, 


— 0.85 for fully and partially encased composite 
sections, 

= 1.0 for concrete filled hollow sections and 

— 0.89 for fully or partially encased concrete 
columns with spiral ties 


Table 24 Design Compressive Resistance of Short Composite Compression Members 
( Clause D-2 ) 


Type of section 


Design compressive resistance 


(0) 


Partially or fully encased composite section 


Concrete filled rectangular tubular section 


Concrete filled circular tubular section 


В = Ал, 


(2) 
Р=А h + A, Uu + 0.684, Ја 
Ymo Yk Ve 
Р=А hy +A, fa +0.84, Ía 
m0 Үк с 
ГА f, 


Y +A, 0.84, Ja [ Fn, th | 
то Vx Y. d 0.8 f, 


1,749 — 18.5% + 172 2 0.0 
ты, = 0.25(3 +21) <1.0 


70 


к 
Ў 


SS 
1 
ла ССС аласа лың 


CSO 


{ 
и 
f 
и 
f 


АА 


P 


CC 
ea 


E] 
| 


S 


DP 


IS 11384 : 2022 


———— (——— ÀÀ — Bending only 


fy/ Imo 


Fic. 42 STRESS DISTRIBUTION AT ULTIMATE STAGE UNDER ONLY BENDING MOMENT 


Qcefok/Yc 


fyhimo 


Fic. 43 SHoRT COLUMN COMPRESSION AND BENDING INTERACTION 


D-4 DESIGN RESISTANCE OF COMPOSITE 
SHORT COLUMN UNDER COMBINED 
BENDING AND COMPRESSION 


The stresses on the different components of the 
composite columns at the ultimate stage under only 
the bending moment about the z-z axis are as shown in 
Fig. 43. 


If the concrete section is in compression below the neutral 
axis of the gross section, h , is assumed. The integration 
of the stresses over the cross section gives the ultimate 
nominal compressive resistance, P' , for the cross section. 
The integration of the moment of the stresses over the 
cross section about the neutral axis of the gross section 
give the corresponding ultimate bending resistance, М". 
For various values of 7, the corresponding simultaneous 
compressive and bending resistance of the cross section 
can be calculated to obtain an interaction curve as shown 
in Fig. 44. 


71 


It is seen that the resistance under only compression 
(Table 23) 15 a point, (А), on the curve. The resistance 
under only bending is also a point, (B), on the curve. 
Further, from the case of pure bending, as the axial load 
is increased from 0 value, the bending resistance also 
increases until point D. Similarly, the point C corresponds 
to the case, where spite of the axial compression, the 
ultimate plastic bending resistance, М, is reached. 


It is tedious and time-consuming to develop the full 
interaction curve for every section designed. In order to 
simplify, the values corresponding to the points A, B, C and 
D are computed and in between a straight-line variation is 
assumed in the design. The simplified procedure and the 
equations are discussed in the following sections. 


The values of P, and M, corresponding to plastic section 
under pure compression (point A, Fig. 41) and pure 
bending (Point B, Fig. 42) are obtained as in D-2 and D-3. 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Table 25 Location of Neutral axis in Composite Column at Ultimate moment 


( Clause D-3 ) 


Section Case 


Depth, h, 


a) (2) 


(3) 


а) Major axis Bending 


Concrete 
encased sections 


h < [h/2- t] 


2 
А.0.8 a, /һ | fs 0.8 а, А.) 


Үс Үк Үс 
2b, 0.8 a, Ja PIC f, 0.8 a, ЈА | 
Ye Y mo Ye 


0.8a, А, fa [= 0.8a, 4 (b-1,)(h “Дай 0.80, ^ 


[h/2-t,] <h, <h/2 e Үк Ye 7 Ymo Ys 
1.60, fa eaa *.—0.8 А.) 
Ye Ymo Ye 
0.8 A, fa Ang з fn 0.8 ^ afz h 0.8 А) 
1/2 <h, <А /2 s k 7 Ymo Ye 
1.6 p, — 
Ye 
Concrete filled 
sections 0.8 A, Ла А, Ё Л» 0.8 Ла | 
RHS Ye Ye 
1.6 b, fa +41, [2 У_ —0.8 fs) 
Ye Ymo Ye 
CHS substitute D and t for b, and ¢,, respectively as an approximation. 


b) Minor axis Bending 


Concrete 


encased sections 0.8 A, Ía Ам [ Л» 0.8 Ía | 
h, E n Үс * Те 
ШЕН е z вв 
Ye Ymo Ye 
0.84, Ла EN [2 Ía 5—0.8 Ls) +t, (21, ZE fy 0.8 fs) 
1/2 <h, ba Ye Үк Ye 7 Ymo Ye 
1.6h, /һ ЕЕ У--0.8 fs) 
Ye Ymo Ye 
0.84 Ses A, [2 fa 0.8 fs) А, E Л 0.8 fs) 
b/2 <h <bJ2 Ус Үк Үс Ymo Ye 
1.6h, fa 
Ye 
Concrete filled | Recatangular f. f y 
sections Hollow Section 0.84, — А, Е ж — 0.8 2% | 
(RHS) Ye Үк Ys 
1.65. /һ + 442 hy 0.8 А) 
Ye Ymo Ye 


Circular Hollow 
Section (CHS) 


Substitute D and ¢ for h and t , respectively as an approximation. 
c w 


72 


IS 11384 : 2022 


М! 1.0 
м, 
п 


Fic. 44 SHoRT COLUMN COMPRESSION AND BENDING INTERACTION 


YU) 


—— 
_ 


f Ymo 


FIG. 45 STRESS DISTRIBUTIONS FOR THE POINT C OF THE [INTERACTION CURVE FOR CONCRETE FILLED 
RECTANGULAR TUBULAR SECTIONS 


Fic. 47 STRESS DISTRIBUTION AT POINT D AT ULTIMATE STAGE UNDER COMBINED COMPRESSION AND BENDING 


73 


IS 11384 : 2022 


D-4.1 The Design Resistance at Point C (Fig. 45) 


The design bending resistance corresponding to point C 
is the same as pure bending resistance. 
Msc E M, 

The design compressive resistance corresponding 
to point C on the interaction diagram 1s obtained as 
given below. The typical position of the neutral axis 
for points B is shown in fig. 43 and at the point C in 
the beam-column interaction curve in fig. 44. The 
location of the neutral axis from ће CG of section, A 
can be determined from table 21. The integration of the 
stresses shown in fig. 46 is equal to at point C. The axial 
force corresponding to point C in the interaction curve 
is given by the equation in Table 26. 


D-4.2 Design Resistance at Point D (Fig. 44) 


The stress diagram on the section corresponding to 
point D on the interaction curve is shown in fig. 47. 


Pup 0.5 P'e 
Mic mE hy tZ, fx +0.4a,Z,. Ја 
Y mo Yk Ус 


Knowing the values of the compressive and bending 
design resistances at the points A, B, C and D the values 
of the resistance at any other point may be obtained 
approximately by linear interpolation, as shown by 
dashed lines in Fig. 44, assuming a linear variation. 


Table 26 Design Compressive resistance at point C 
( Clause D-4.1 ) 


Section Case Depth, л, 
(1) (2) (3) 

a) Major axis Bending 

Concrete encased f 

column h, [h/2-t, P. = 1.6h,b.a, Ла , anaf Y 0.8 fs) 

Г с Ymo Ye 
[02-1] <h, <h/2 Р =1.6h,b.a, Ја + 4(0.54, (A-h, )b, || Л 0.80, ^. 
" | с Ymo Ye 


М2 <h Sh] 


P ева «e| Л оза, fa 
Ve Ymo Үс 


Concrete filled 


sections RHS Ре =1.6h,b, Ја + 8h,t, | hy 0.8 Ја | 
Ye Ym Ye 
CHS substitute D for b, and t for t. 
b) Minor axis Bending 
Concrete encased 
column h zt P.o =1.6h,h, Ía sanal fy 0.8 А) 
i | Ye Ymo Ye 


t/2<h,<b/2 


Р, =1.6h,h, ЕРТ) +ty o-z) 2-084) 


Үс Ymo Ye 


b/2<h <b/2 Ре =1.6h,h, Ja zl h 0.8 | 
NE Ye Ymo Y. 
Concrete filled 
RHS Ре =1.6/,h, Ja | h 0.8 fs) 
Ye Ymo Ye 


74 


IS 11384 : 2022 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 16) 
TESTING 


E-1 TESTING OF MATERIALS 


Testing of materials shall be done as per standard laid 
down norms given in E-1.1 to E-1.3. 


E-1.1 Concrete 


For testing of concrete, reference shall be made to 
IS 456. 


E-1.2 Steel Sections 


АП the structural steel and accessories like rivets, 
bolts, nuts, washers, welding consumables, steel 
forging, casting, etc., shall be tested for mechanical and 
chemical properties as applicable and shall conform to 
requirements of appropriate Indian standards referred 
to in IS 800. Steel shall conform to the requirements of 
IS 2062 and IS 11587. Bolts and bolted connection 
joints with high strength bolts shall be inspected 
according to IS 4000. 


For testing ofthe strength, flexibility, and other relevant 
properties of the shear connectors, the test procedures 
as indicated in E-1.3 shall be adopted. 


E-1.3 Testing of Shear Studs for steel-concrete 
interface shear. 


The nominal static strength of a shear connector may 
be determined by push-out tests. The conditions and 


75 


procedures which shall be followed while performing 
the tests are as indicated below: 


a) The dimensions of the standard test are as shown 
in Fig. 48. 

b) The bond at the steel-concrete interface shall be 
prevented by greasing the flanges or by any other 
suitable method. 


с) The rate of application of load should be uniform 
and such that the failure load is reached in not less 
than 10 minutes. 


d 


— 


The strength of the concrete f, at the time of 
testing, should not differ from the specified 
cube strength f. of the concrete by more than 
+ 20 percent. 


Not less than three tests shall be done, and the 
nominal static strength P, shall be taken as the 
lowest value of f; .P/f. for any of the tests, where 
P is the failure loads of the connectors at concrete 
strength / and f, is the characteristic cube strength 
of the concrete. 

The load-deformation curve, the ultimate 
resistance of the shear per shear connector, relative 
slip at ultimate load shall be recorded. 


е 


wm 


IS 11384 : 2022 


BEDED IN MORTAR 
OR GYPSUM 


REINFORCEMENT RIBBED BARS OR 10 mm DIA 


STEEL SECTION HE 260 B OR 


Fic. 48 STANDARD Розн OUT TEST FOR SHEAR STUDS 


76 


АММЕХ Е 
( Clauses 5.3.2, 6.1.2, 8.1.2.1 and 11.21) 


STRENGTH DETAILS AND ELASTIC MODULUS OF NORMAL CONCRETE 


LL 


SINo. . Symbol Grade of Concrete M20 M25 M30 M35 M40 M45 M50 M55 M60 M65 M70 М75 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) () (0 (1) (2 (3) (М4) (5) 
i) Л, (MPa) Characteristic cube compressive 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 

strength 
i) Л, (MPa) Mean concrete compressive strength 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 
ii) f, (MPa) Mean tensile strength of concrete 1.91 2.21 2.50 277 3.03 3.28 3.52 3.75 3.97 4.42 4.54 4.66 
iv) f,, (0.05) Characteristic tensile strength at 1.34 1.55 1.75 1.94 2.12 229 246 2.62 2.78 3.09 3.18 3.26 
(MPa) 5 % fractile of concrete 
v) £E „(МРа) Elastic modulus 28608 29962 31187 32308 33346 34313 35220 36076 36887 37659 38395 39100 


CCOT : УЗЕТТ SI 


IS 11384 : 2022 


ANNEX G 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Special Structures Sectional Committee, CED 38 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, New Delhi 
C R Narayana Rao Architects, Chennai 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 

Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi 


Consulting Engineers Association of India, Delhi 


Department of Space, Bangaluru 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Food Corporation of India, New Delhi 
Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 

Housing and Urban Development Corporation 


Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, 
New Delhi 


Indian Concrete Institute, Nagpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Representative(s) 


Dr DevpaAs MENON (Chairman) 
SHRI ANAND NARAYAN 
Dr C. N. SRINIVASAN 


SHRI A. К. GARG 
SHRI RAJESH KHARE (Alternate) 


Dr ACHAL K. MITTAL 
SHRI S. К. SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr RAJEEV KUMAR GARG 
Dr LAKSHMY PARAMESWARAN (Alternate) 


Dr K. RAMANJANEYULU 
Dr J. RAJASANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. К. SHARMA 
SHRI R. S. RAPERIA (A/ternate) 


SHRI S. C. MEHROTRA 
Suri V. P. AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI М. NARAYANA MURTHY 


ӛнкі К. B. BHUTDA 
SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


SHRI А. К. GROVER 
Suri К. D. Оммат (Alternate) 


SHRI VENKATARAMANA М. HEGGADE 
SHRI ANAND Desa! (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI TARANJOT KAUR 
Suri T. T. Dines (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI М. P. RAJAMANE 
REPRESENTATIVE 
Ок D. В. SAHOO 
DR А. К. JAIN (Alternate) 
Dr DURGESH C. RAI 
DR Samit Ray CHAUDHURI (Alternate) 
DR SRIMAN KR BHATTACHARYA 
Dr Мік?нак DHANG (Alternate) 


Dr A. MEHAR PRASAD 
Ок С. У. В. Murty (Alternate Г) 
DR AMLAN Kumar SENGUPTA (Alternate П) 
Dr S. ARUL JAYACHANDRAN (Alternate Ш) 


DR А. К. JAIN 
DR PRADEEP BHARGAVA (Alternate) 


78 


Organization 


Indian Society for Structural Engineers, Mumbai 
Institute for Steel Development & Growth, Kolkata 


Invictus Consultancy Services, Mumbai 
Larsen & Toubro, ECC Division, Chennai 


M N Dastur Company Limited, Kolkata 
MECON Limited, Ranchi 


National Disaster Management Authority, Delhi 


NBCC (India) Ltd, New Delhi 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 
Paharpur Cooling Tower Ltd, Kolkata 


SAIL (India) Ltd, Ranchi 
STUP Consultants Limited, Mumbai 


Tandon Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 
VMS Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 


Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, 
Nagpur 

In personal capacity, (Block 2, Flat 24, Rani 
Meyyammai Towers, MRC Nagar, RA Puram, 
Chennai) 

In personal capacity, (80, SRP Colony, Peruvallur 
Chennai) 

In personal capacity, (36 old Sneh Nagar, Wardha 
Road Nagpur) 


BIS Directorate General 


National Institute of Technology Karnataka, Surathkal 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI ARIJIT GUHA 
Suri P. L. Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI A. S. OUNDHAKAR 


SHRI S. KANAPPAN 
SHRI S. VEERAMANI (Alternate) 


SHRI TAPAN KUMAR BHAUMIK 
SHRI MRINAL KANTI Сноѕн (Alternate) 


Suni T. K. GHOSH 
SHRI S. KUMAR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Dr В. R. JAYALEKSHMI 


SHRI S. С. JAIN 
SHRI PRADEEP CHAWLA (Alternate) 


ӛнкі H. K. RAMKUMAR 
DR PRAVEEN KHANDELWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
SHRI G. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI R. N. RAI 
SHRI M. RAMAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI G. S. BHARGAVA 
SHRI S. N. PATWARDHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
SHRI VINAY GUPTA (Alternate) 


Ms ALPA SHETH 
SHRI HITENDRA J. SHAH (Alternate) 


Dr О. R. JAISWAL 
Dr RATNESH Kumar (Alternate) 


DR V. KALYANARAMAN 


DR N. LAKSHMANAN 


DR L. К. JAIN 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST “С? (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


79 


IS 11384 : 2022 


Composites Subcommittee, CED 38 :2 


Organization Representative(s) 

Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai DR ARUL JAYACHANDRAN S. (Convener) 
C R Narayana Rao Architects, Chennai SHRI C. N. SRINIVASAN 
CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, DR PRABHA 

Chennai 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI ANURAG SINHA 
Gammon India Ltd, Mumbai, Mumbai SHRI R. K. MEHTA 
Indian Concrete Institute, Nagpur Dr N. P. RAJAMANE 


Institute for Steel Development & Growth, Kolkata SHRI ARJIT GUHA 
Suri P. L. Rao (Alternate) 
Larsen & Toubro, ECC Division, Chennai SHRI R. BALASUBRAMANIAN 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai SHRI A. K. LAHARIA 
SHRI Y. T. PRAVEENCHANDRA (Alternate) 


SRM University, Chennai DR UMAMAHESHWARI 
Stup Consultants Pvt Ltd, Mumbai SHRI A. T. SAMUEL 
Thiagarajar College of Engineering, Madurai PROF ARUL MARY 
In Personal Capacity, (Block 2, Flat 2А, Rani DR V. KALYANARAMAN 
Meyyammai Tower, MRC Nagar, RA Puram, 
Chennai) 


80 


(Continued from second cover) 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the in the formulation of this standard is given in Annex G. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( second revision )’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded-off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 38 (13455). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6^ Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western У Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. РАМТРАТ. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


