( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS:1408- 1968

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR INSPECTION OF COPPER-BASE ALLOY SAND CASTINGS (

First Revision)
Alloys Sectional Committee, Representing
Ministry of Railways Devideyal Metal Industries, Bombay
National

Copper and Copper
Choirrnan
SHRI K. C. CEOTJDEURI

SMDC

11

Members
A~Q~RWAL SHW S. N. DIKSHIT ( Altermte SHRI N. C. BAWBI SHEI KAILASH BOHRA &EXIST AND MEITALLURQIST,

SEEI DEV KUMA~

)

Test House,

CalcUtt.8

Alcobex M&81 Corporation, Jodhpur ?&nistry of R8ilw8y8

CHEMIST AXD METALLUROIST. SIXTH EASTEBX RAILWAY, KHA~AOPUR ( Alternate II ) Alllndis Efandicrsfts Board, New Delhi SHRI S. N. DANDONA DIRECTOR OF S c I E N T I F I C Naval Headquarters RESEARCH ( NAVY ) Xational Pipes & Tubes Co Ltd. Calcutta SHRI S. B. FIRBE Heavy Electric& ( India ) Ltd, Bhopal SHRI S. GOVINDRAJ SRRI F. A. JASDA~AUA Indian Standard Metal Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI C. CHATTE~JEE ( Alternafe ) India Government Mint, Bombay SHRI V. J. JOSHI SHRI S. B. BANERJEE ( Alternate )

CAITTARANJAN LOCOUOTIVE WORKS, CHITTABAXJAX ENOINEEB, PRODUCTIONS EASTERN RA~WAY, JAMALPUR ( AIternote 1 )

SHRI R. L. KHANNA SHRI K. P. K. h'lE:NON
SHBI D. Y. bf013HE

Indian Copper Corporation Ltd, Ghatsils Ministry of De~~;~nc~lDGI ) Directorate , Ordnance Factories,
Calcutta

SHRI Y. C. STJBBAHJ~ANYA ( SHFII B. R. NA~AB

Alternute

Directorate General Inspection Wing, Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi

)

of

SHRI K. C. DATTAQUPTA

(

Alternate

) ( Continued on puge 2)

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,
NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
MARG
110002

9 ~BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR

IS :

1408- 1968
Representing
Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta Ministry of Defence ( R & D )

( Continued from page 1 ) Members

SHRI A. T. PAL SHRI K. L. CHATTEBJEE ( Alternate ) Kamani Metals and Alloys Ltd. Bombay SHBI H. S. PAEWiI, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras DR E. G. RAXACHANDRA~ Indian Telephone Industries Ltd. Bangalore SSRBI B. RAMAKRISRNA Non-Ferrous Metals Manufacturer's SHRI M. K. RAO Indian Association, Calcutta SHEI R-

SERI H. NAXDY

SEBI G. Ch~yn&Alternate

.

All Ix&-N&+Ferrous ation. Bombay B.

)

Metal Industries Associ-

Sasr BIIA~AZ KIWOBE GVPT~ (Alternate ) Snsx CR~AXANI SHAIZXA SHRI B. P. SINIIA

Du L. R. V~Y&WATH SHRX R. 6. CoBi-rELKrst A~ternatti ) Bhandary Metallurgical Corporation Pvt Smtr 8. S. VAIDYANATEAN . Bombay DA A. Kc. CHATTEBJEE, Director General, IS1 ( E.x-o@cio Member ) Director ( Strut & Met ) ( Secretary)

National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ). Jamshedpur Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi Indian Copper Information Centre, Calcutta Ltd,

2

IS : 1408 ? 1968

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR INSPECTION OF COPPER-BASE ALLOY SAND CASTINGS

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adapted by the Indian Standards Institution on 23 February 1968, after the draft finalized by the Copper and Copper Alloys Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first issued dimensions have been metricized and been given. in 1959. reference While to latest revising standards all has

0.3 A number of India-n Standards on copper-base alloy ingots and castings have been published and a few more are under preparation. With a view to facilitating industrial inspection of these castings, the Sectional Committee felt that suitable, requirements should be Accordingly, these recommendations have formulated for this purpose. been formulated and it is expected thet if these procedures are adopted, maximum possible information on the properties of sand castings with minimum expenditure of materials and efforts can be obtained. Further the recommended procedures are expected to assist both the deThe signer and the founder in improving the quality of castings. recommendations are not intended to be rigidly adhered to in all cases, but would indicate the significance and value of the various steps in the inspection procedures and also give guidance to inspecting authorities on the most useful lines of inspection for various classes of castings. These recommendations shall be used in conjunction with the relevant Indian specifications which lay down acceptance tests for chemical For some more general informaanalysis and mechanical properties. designers and founders, reference may be tion for purchasers, suppliers, made to Appendix A. 0.4 This standard contains two clauses, namely, 4.2 and 5.2 which for agreement between the supplier and the purchaser. 3 call

IS : 1408 -

1968

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded~off in-accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS : 2-1960*. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard recommends suitable procedures for industrial inspection of copper-base alloy sand castings to ensure that they comply with the relevant specifications. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose
aPP'YThe 2.1 Supplier - The party offering the castings for inspection. supplier may or may not-be the actual manufacturer of the material. party purchasing the material. The term 2.2 Purchaser -The ` purchaser' shall also cover inspection expressly authorized in writing by the purchaser. 3. CLASSIFICATION of this standard, the following definitions shall

OF CASTINGS

3.1 In view of the variety in the service required of castings, a similar variety is necessary in the methods and degrees of inspection applied. Hence it is necessary to classify castings according to the service they have to perform and the following classes have been adopted for the purpose of this standard: Class 1 -Castings
the failure of which would cause serious breakdown of the mechanism of assembly, or would give rise to danger. which do not fall within Class 1 but which Class 2 -Castings are required to withstand special service conditions. Class 3 - Castings not included within Class 1 or Class 2.

4. INSPECTION

OF MATERIALS

4.1 The first essential step in the procedure for inspection of any casting

is to ensure that the properties, such as the physical and corrosion-resisting properties according to the service they have to perform ( for *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised).

4

IS:1408-1968
which material is selected by the designer ), are castings when cast substantially free from defects. methods are generally employed for this purpose: a) Analysis b) Mechanical for chemical composition, and tests on standard testibars. attainable in the The following two

4.1.1 For castings, such as those intended for bearings or those required to resist corrosion or to possess high conductivity, the method of analysis for chemical composition assumes more importance whereas in castings required to resist stresses only, the method of mechanical tests on standard test bars, which gives a measure of the strength of castings, becomes important though in some cases the composition of alloys may also be significant. 4.1.2 So far the evaluation of chemical and mechanical properties of castings are concerned it is desirable to consider the values of a few tests depending on the size of the heat. For this purpose more than one test bars may be cast simultaneously with castings at suitable intervals and tested for giving an overall idea about the quality of metal from start to finish of the heat. 4.1.3 Weightage should be given on machining test. Castings, picked up at random in the course of mass production, when machined, Apart from will show dimensional accuracy and internal soundness. the purpose of inspecting the castings, such a procedure also aids in keeping a close watch on day to day control of melting and founding practice. 4.1.4 Proper examination of raw materials for a particular alloy is no less important than the inspection of the final alloy ( chemically ) after casting. This preliminary step, if carried out judiciously, shall enable the inspector eventually to omit, in several instances, the chemical examination of the furnace output, provided it has been established that the melting practice followed is metallurgically sound. 4.2 Analysis for Chemical Composition - The inspecting authority should conduct chemical analysis on the sample castings or test bars to make sure that the raw material is free from harmful impurities which may be introduced during storage melting, casting, etc. For methods of chemical analysis reference may be made to IS : 440-1964*, IS : 3685 19661_ and IS : 4027-1967f. The manufacturer shall, when required supply free of charge, a copy of his works analysis of the material carried out by the manufacturer in order to control the quality of the
*Methods of chemical analysis of copper ( revised). tMethods of chemical analysis of brasses. $Methods for chemical analysis of bronzes.

5

IS:1408- 1968
material. The chemical composition limits of each alloy are wellcovered by the Indian Standard specifications and close adherence However, melts are occasionally found not to these limits is expected. exactly conforming to the composition limits specified. If the deviation is slight and the physical properties of tensile specimens from the heat conform to requirements, the castings may be acceptable, unless the application is such that no variation in composition can be tolerated because of exposure or other conditions. Disposition of such deviations should be by agreement between the supplier and the purchaser. 4.3 Mechanical Tests on Standard Test Bars - It should be noted that neither separately cast rror cast on test bars may have the same features as the castings they represent and that, therefore, for purposes of inspection, the properties off test bars may be considered to give only a rough idea of the extent of the mechanical properties which may be expected of the represented cast metal and also and an estimate of the control that could be effected in the foundry. Mechanical tests should be regarded as supplementary to chemical analysis, being a.means of ensuring that the metal actually cast in the foundry is capable of giving the spe-cified mechanical properties. Where the type of production permits, mechanical test results over a period may be of value to the inspector in enabling him to form an opinion of the degree of technical control in force, and from this to determine the extent of inspection where this is partly left to his discretion and, therefore, such data should be obtained. 4.3.1 As the cast-on test bar has several disadvantages, such as that its presence may cause local porosity in the casting, that it may affect the free contraction of the casting, that it may cause change in the correct pouring temperature for the casting, etc, this type of test bars attached to parts is not recommended for general practice, unless specifically required by the specifications or by the purchaser for any special reasons. 4.3.1.1 Reconunended forms of test bars and test pieces - It is recommended that standard forms of separately-cast test bars be adopted. When test bars are cast separately, the manufacturer shall give prior notice to the purchaser and he shall be present at the time of casting. These shall not be given any heat-treatment unless specified. The forms recommended for copper-base sand casting alloys are described in ;Ippendix B.

4.3.1.2 SeparateI>:-cast test bars when adopted shall be cast simultaneously :vith the castmgs in moulds prepared out of the same material as that of moulds LO*. the crrstings. In case of composite mould materia!, t!rr :e$ pi..:{ is shall be cast in orclinary sand moulds.
6

IS :

1408 - 1968

in determining the quality of castings and it is strongly believed that adoption of these tests 1s useful in improving the foundry techniques, particularly on new undertakings. 5.1

5. INSPECTION METHODS OF CASTINGS 5.0 The value of the tests enumerated in 5.2 to 5.4 is very important

two methods
castings. 5.1.1

Common

Inspection Methads of inspection are

for All Castings -The following recommended for all categories of

inspection may be supplemented by methods, such as fluorescent or dye-penetrant or immersion in oil, followed by drying and dusting with chalk. Visual inspection would normally be applied to every ca-sting, aided by special methods for particularly important castings.
h_OTE -

Cracks,

Exarninatioll for Surface Finish and Defects, and External Evidence of Unsoundness - Visual

Freedom

from

Immersion

in oil is unsatisfactory

and insensitive.

lot of castings to determine dimensions.

5.1.2

Exnrnirzation for

made from the patterns whether it is possible

Dimensional

Accuracy - The first casting

of a shall be laid out for the inspector to machine it to the finished

5.1.2.1 All castings subsequently made from the patterns may be similarly laid out, or any or all of their dimensions may be checked. In all cases the layout or checking of the dimensions shall show that it is possible to machine the castings to the required dimensions. 5.1.2.2 Where castings are of such form and dimensions as to make calipering of their walls impracticable and the inspector so requests, one casting of the lot shall be sectioned., 5.1.2.3 In case of mass scale production of castings? it is recommended that careful evaluation be made of the quality of initial castings from a ~pattern. For this, all available inspection ~methods, such The required as fracture test or radiography, be used in this analysis. changes in pattern equipment or foundry practice may then be made before any large number of castings is made. 5.2 Inspection of Stressed Castings -The methods referred in 5.2.1 Unless and 5.2.2 are recommended for inspection of stressed castings. otherwise required by the specification, there should be prior agreement between the supplier and the purchaser with regard to applying one or more destructive tests. 5.2.1 of interior soundness test - For evaluation and proper condition of metal, micro-examination or macro-examination may be resorted to, if suspected defective.

Destructive Tests 5.2.1.1 Nickedfracture

7

IS:1408r 1968 5.2.1.2 Machining test - This shall production of parts without possibility would affect operation of the cast parts.
be carried of defects out for ensuring in locations that

5.2.1.3 Full-scale proof-loading test - Xt is recommended that the In tests be used wherever possible. method of full-scale proof-loading it may be necessary to load sample the initial stages of production, castings to destruction, but when satisfactory production technique is established it should suffice to proof-load an agreed proportion of the castings, in a-ccordance with Table 1 and to confirm by strain gauges that the load does not produce more than a specified permanent deformation.

TABLE

1 NUMBER

OF DESTRUCTIVE CASTINGS ( Clause 5.2.1.3

TESTS

ON PRODUCTION

and 5.5.1)
BEYOND 1000 Up to 5 percent of each batch Up to 1 percent each batch None of

CLASS

OF

CASTINQS 1 2 3

Up TO AND INCLWDING 1000 up to 5 percent each batch Up to 3 percent each batch None of of

5.2.1.4 Test for mechanical properties - Reference may be made to the mechanical properties of specimens cut from the casting itself. While it will be for the designer to indicate the position and orientation of such test pieces, the properties to be specified for them can only be decided by consultation between the designer and the manufacturer, and this may involve experimental investigation.
5.2.1.5 When only one determination is to be done on a lot for mechanical properties, the lot shall be considered as conforming to the mechanical properties of that specification if the result so obtained satisfies the specified requirements. If the sample fails in any of the mechanical properties then two additional determinations from the same lot shall be done in order to confirm that the test has been done properly. If both of these test results satisfy the relevant requirements, the lot shall be considered as conforming to the particular mechanical property under consideration otherwise not, 5.2.1.6 Once a standard of quality has been established by mechanical tests on pieces cut from castings, by full-scale proof-loading tests or by other suitable tests, the maintenance of this standard 8

Is : 1408 - 1968 in production may -be confirmed by mechanical tests, sectioning, or nondestructive testing, such as radiological fracture tests, examination.

5.2.1.7 It would be impracticable in many cases to reproduce service conditions in inspection tests; castings subject, for example, to alternating stresses would normally be examined to determine whether they had the static strength expected of them, and their suitability for service would be judyed from the results of these tests and from existing knowledge of the general properties of the material. 5.2.2 Nondestructive Tests 5.2.2.1 Liquid penetrant test - To aid inspection of surface cracks, cold shuts, and similar surface discontinuities, the casting may be subjected to fluorescent and dye-penetration tests in accordance with IS : 3658-1966*. 5.2.2.2 Radiographic test - For evaluation of internal soundness, this type of inspection is nondestructive in nature and therefore may be applied to all or part af castings poured. 5.2.2.3 Pressure test - Castings which are required to be pressuretight should be pressure-tested, hydraulically or otherwise, after machining. by specifications, 5.2.2.4 Hardness tests - If required tests may be conducted in accordance with IS : 2866-1965t. hardness

5.2.2.5 Ultrasonic test-Where necessary, the castings may be subjected to ultrasonic testing to screen them before radiographic examination. Ultrasonic testing would be benefjcial for such castings and based on results of such testings, further radiographic examination of any part suspected to be defective could be made. Ultrasonic testing, while suitable for comparatively simple cast shapes, is unrealiable for complex castings and particularly those having a high lead content. 5.3 Inspection of Castings to Withstand Pressure - Castings which are subjected to high stresses resultin, u from the applied pressure should be subjected to the inspection tests outlined in 5.2 for stressed castings. Where the stress is imposed by the pressure only, the proof-loading ( or load-to-destruction) test may conveniently be done by applying pressure with the appropriate medium ( according to service conditions ) and -using strain gauges to measure deformation. 5.4 Inspection of Castings for Other Purposes on which no stress of significant magnitude There are many castings is imposed in service,

j

*Code of praotice for liquid penetrant flaw detection. tMethod for Viokers hardness test for copper and copper alloys.

9

IS:1408 -1968
be performing important duties, for example, In such cases, mechanical as bearings or corrosion-resistant parts. tests are irrelevant so far as the user is concerned, although it may be agreed that they are of incidental value to the founder for the -evidence they may afford regarding the consistency of the metal he is using. It is logical, however, from all points of view, to appb tests The manufacturer and the appropriate to the service requirements. inspector will look for explicit instructions on drawings and relevant documents regarding the nature of the tests which are desired. For example, in a casting intended for use as a bearing, the important requirements may be that the metal at the rubbing surfaces, and immediately below, shall be sound and free from nonmetallic inclusions. The acceptance test in this application may be an inspection of the bearing after machining in the area concerned, or after machining off to a depth equivalent to the permissible wear down of the bearing surface, or an examination of cross-sections of a proportion of the castings, prepared by fracturing or machining. As in other methods of inspection, extent of the testing would be related to the classification of the casting. 5.5 Sampling tests on production Table 1. 5.5.1.1

although they may

5.5.1 Sampling for

castings

Destructive

is recommended

Tests -

The

number of destructive to be in accordance with

The provisions of 5.2.1.3 relate to castings in reasonably production, as agreed between the purchaser and the manufacturer. The sizes of the batches into which the castings aredivided for the purpose of testing and the procedure in the event of failure of-a proportion of the tested castings are to be the subject of agreement between the purcaser and the supplier.

continuous

5.5.2 Sampling for Nondestructive Tests - Where nondestructive testing is applicable, the extent of the inspection, that is, the proportion of castings tested or the amount of testing on each casting, may vary according to the type of duty and the nature of the test. For example, in the case of important hydrulic components, it may be appropriate to call for a pressure test on each casting supplied; on the other hand, in a stressed member operating with an ample factor of safety, radiological examination of 10 percent of the castings may give adequate assurance as to the maintenance of a satisfactory standard of quality. It will, therefore, be necessary for the proportion of castings submitted to nondestructive tests to be subject of agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. The proportions of nondestructive and destructive testing should be considered together, since the information obtained from the one method of testing is complementary to that derived from the other. 10

IS : 1408? 1968

APPENDIX ( Clause 0.3 )
GENERAL A-l. AGREEMENT BETWEEN

A

INFORMATION' PURCHASER AND SUPPLIER

A-l.1 The supplier and the purchaser should discuss all requireemnts and reach a definite agreement before entering into a contract for the supply of castings conforming to the requirements of any particular The usage of the casting should be well understandard specification. stood and where necessary, special conditions should be made a part of the purchase contract. A-i.2 To help increase the supply of satisfactofy castings as well as reduce the number of rejections caused by literal interpretation of specifications, careful considerations should be given to suitability of castings as related to service demand, and discreet interpretation of the specification requirements should be made. A-1.3 On the other hand, the quality of standards of the critically-stressed sections of castings should be the highest and these conditions should be clearly understood to help the foundry in producing the desired quality castings. A-2. -CO-OPERATION BETWEEN DESIGNER AND FOUNDER

A-2.1 Consultation with the founder at an early stage in,design helps so avoid the inclusion of features which are not essential to the design, and seriously increase the difficulty of producing a sound casting. Such consultation also enables the founder to make suggestions for modifications which will simplify, and, therefore, expedite and reduce the cost of production and inspection. Therefore, it is recommended that the designer should collaborate with the founder at the earliest possible stage.

APPENDIX B ( Clause 4.3.1.1 )
RECOMMENDED STANDARD FORMS OF TEST BAR FOR COPPER-BASE ALLOYS B-l. The function of a test bar is to provide an indication ~of the quality of the metal from which it is cast. For example, it should be

11

IS: 1408-1968
sensitive to the effect of dissolved gas, which is not always evident on some types of test bars at present in use. Furthermore, from the economic point of view, the form of test bar adopted by a standard should entail minimum wastage of metal and machining time, yet provide adequate means of obtaining a sound bar. B-2. Having these facts in mind, it is recommended that the design illustrated in Fig. 1 should be tentatively adopted as a standard form of test bar for copper-base alloy castings. In certain long freezing range alloys, such as gun-metals and phosphor bronzes, some difficulty may be the requirements of existing specifications, experienced in meeting when using this form of test bar, and it is suggested that the design of test bar illustrated in Fig. 2 might be allowed in such cases.

All

dimensions in millimetres.

FIG. 1

TEST BAR (TYPE l )

B-3. All test bars should be moulded in the same material as the castings and treated generally in the same way as the castings they represent. Normally, pouring directly into the feeding head is satisfactory, but for aluminium bronze and high tensile brass, the test bars may, if desired, be run from the bottom by means of a small ingate attached to one end of the bar.

12

10

1.54'30

All dhen8ioM

in millimetrett.

FIG. 2

TEST BAR CAST TO SI-LWE ( TYPE 2 )

13

