**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8712-4 (1977) : Guidelines for co-ordination of 
dimensions shipbuilding, Part 4 Controlling dimensions [TED 
17: Shipbuilding] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS t 8712 < Part IV)- 1977 
ft' f^ j J J ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR 

CO-ORDINATION OF DIMENSIONS 

IN SHIPBUILDING 

PART IV CONTROLLING DIMENSIONS 



UDC 629 11^:389 63 




© Copyright 1978 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK SHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DEUII tlLMMli 

? rtI tRs 5™ May J 978 



IS t 8712 ( Part IV ) - 1977 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR 

CO-ORDINATION OF DIMENSIONS 

IN SHIPBUILDING 

PART IV CONTROLLING DIMENSIONS 

Shipbuilding Sectional Committee, MCPD 1 

Chairman Representing 

Shri S. Parmanandhan Ministry of Defence ( NHQ, ) 

Members 
Chief Mechanical Engineer Indian Ports Association, New Delhi 
Calcutta Port Trust 

Chief Mechanical Engi- 
neer, Bombay Port Trust ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. G. Damle AFCO Ltd, Bombay; and Institute of Marine 

Technologist, Bombay 
Shri R. D. Paralkiar AFCO Ltd, Bombay 

( Alternate ) 
Shri A. T. Joseph ( Alternate ) "} 

Shri I. N, Pradhan (Alternate ) J- Institute of Marine Technologists, Bombay 
Shri R. S. Sachdev ( Alternate ) J 
Dr M. K. Ghosh Roy Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd, 

Calcutta 
Shri S. K. Bosk ( Alternate ) 
Director of Naval Construc- Ministry of Defence ( NHQ) 

TION 

Shri V. P. Goyal Mukand Iron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Sundakshan Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. B, Irani Directorate General of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri J. S. Bhatti ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. K. Kuriyan Central Institute of Fisheries Technology, Gochin 

Joint Fisheries Scientist ( Alternate ) 
Cdr N. A. Mullerworth Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Lt Cdr Mehr Sinqh ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. N. Pradhan Indian National Shipowners' 1 Association, Bombay 

President Institute of Marine Engineers, Bombay 

Shri P. C. Kumar ( Alternate ) 

Shri H. K. Kaul ( Alternate ) 

Shri K. S, Mani ( Alternate ) 

Shri R. K. Mehrotra ( Alternate ) 

Caft P. Mukund_an ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1978 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS 1 8712 ( Part IV) -1977 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri T. S. Rajan Ericson & Richards, Bombay 

ShriH. S. Rao Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri R. Ratra Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri D, Maphok ( Alternate ) 
Capt D. S. Rupa Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. Sundaram ( Alternate ) 
Shri R t Sarangarajan Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri B. R. Sawarrar Cochin Shipyard Ltd, Cochin 

Shri P. R. Govil ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. G. Schaeffer American Bureau of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri K, Shabma ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Sheth Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam 

Shri M. G. Rutty ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Sinha SF India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri H. Svensson ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. N. Sujan Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A, S. Thaktjr Ministry of Shipping & Transport 

Shri S. Raghavan ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Das, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( MCPD ) ( Secretary ) 



IS : 8712 ( Part IV ) - 1977 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR 

CO-ORDINATION OF DIMENSIONS 

IN SHIPBUILDING 

PART IV CONTROLLING DIMENSIONS 

0, POREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part IV) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 30 December 1977, after the draft finalized by 
the Shipbuilding Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, 
Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 The rationalization of traditional shipbuilding methods and the 
increased use of prefabricated assemblies necessitate the utilization of 
standardized components wherever possible. It is essential to co-ordinate 
the dimensions of these components and of the assemblies incorporating 
them. 

0.3 It is intended to introduce the system of dimensional co-ordination 
which gives module sizes, controlling dimensions and recommendations 
for co-ordinating spaces, etc, for use in dimensional co-ordination. 

0.4 This standard on dimensional co-ordination in shipbuilding is being 
issued in parts. Other parts are: 

Part I Principles of dimensional co-ordination, 

Part II Glossary of terms, and 

Part III Co-ordinating sizes. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part IV ) establishes a framework of controlling 
dimensions for use in the design of ships' deckhouses and accommodation 
and for assistance in the derivation of co-ordinating sizes of components. 

1.1.1 Recommendations are given for the deck to ceiling height, 
horizontal spacing between bulkheads, controlling zones for bulkhead 
and lining spaces, and heights for doors and window box heads and 

sills. 



IS : 8712 ( Part IV )- 1977 



2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 8712 
( Part II )-1978* shall apply. 

3. VERTICAL CONTROLLING DIMENSIONS 

3.1 In order to make full use of dimensionally co-ordinated components, 
flat decks are necessary and wherever possible, camber and sheer of the 
decks should be eliminated. 

3.2 The recommendations are based on flat decks as shown in Fig. 1 and 
where camber and/or sheer is present, consideration should be given to 
their effect on ceiling heights, in order to give the maximum degree of 
modular co-ordination. 

3.3 The preferred size for deck to ceiling height A is 2 100 mm. Other 
Tieights in multiples of 100 mm (preferred ) or 50 mm may be selected. 

Note — The deck to ceiling height is the clear height from top of finished deck to 
underside of ceiling. 

3.4 When selecting the modular deck to ceiling height, allowance shall 
be made within the tween-deck height (B) for finished floor, structure, 
services and suspended ceilings. 




Fig. 1 Vertical Controlling Dimensions 



♦Guidelines for co-ordination of dimensions in shipbuilding: Part II Glossary of 
terms. 



IS : 8712 ( Part IV) -1977 

4. HORIZONTAL CONTROLLING DIMENSIONS 

4.1 Horizontal controlling dimensions are for the width and spacing of 
controlling zones for the structural bulkheads and linings, and for the 
spacing of neutral zones. 

4.2 The method of locating controlling lines in relation to and on the 
boundaries of the zones shall be as shown in Fig. 2. 



• v. ..-.v.- v/.y/;/.\v.v.j»y.v.;A\v.w 



A 





V 



o o 




o o 



biG. 2 Location of Controlling Lines on the Boundaries 

of Zones 



4.3 In order to make full use of dimensionally co-ordinated components, 
a box structure is necessary and wherever possible raked or cambered 
house fronts, shaped house sides and sloping side shell should be avoided 
or obviated internally. 

4.4 The recommendations are based on rectilinear structures and where 
shaping is present consideration should be given to its effect in order to 
obtain the maximum degree of modular co-ordination. 

4.5 Controlling Dimensions for Widths of Zones — The sizes of 
controlling zones should be in multiples of 50 mm although some devia- 
tion may be necessary where required by structural arrangements. 
These sizes refer to the dimensions within the boundaries of zones, for 
example, casing, lining and insulation house-side lining, and insulation 
and stirTeners. 

4.6 The sizes of neutral zones shall be determined from the actual .sizes 
for bulkheads and their supports, etc. 

5 



IS : 8712 ( Part IV ) - 1977 

4.7 Controlling Dimensions for Spacing of Zones — Selection of 
sizes should be made from the table. The sizes refer to the horizontal 
distances between controlling lines. 

First Preference Second Preference 

Multiples of 300 mm Multiples of 100 mm 

From 300 From 300 

5. INTERMEDIATE CONTROLLING DIMENSIONS 

5.1 Intermediate controlling lines indicate where joints are most likely 
to occur between components or assemblies. The sizes given are the 
vertical distance from the controlling line bounding the top of the 
floor zone. 

5.2 Window Box Sill Height — The first preference height of the 
controlling line for a window/sidelight box sill should be 1 000 mm. 

5.3 Window Box Head Height — The first preference height of the 
controlling line for a window/sidelight box head should be 2 000 mm. 

5.4 Door-Set Height — The first preference for the height of the 
controlling line for a door-set head should be 2 000 mm. 

5.5 Alternative Heights — Alternative choices of heights for 5.2, 5.3 
and 5.4 should be limited to 100 mm multiples of the standard modules 
given in IS : 8712 ( Part III )-1978*. 



♦Guidelines for co-ordination of dimensions in shipbuilding: Part III Co-ordinating 
sizes. 

* 6 



