**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 12448-2-4 (1988) : Basic testing procedures and measuring 
methods for electromechanical components for electronic 
equipment. Part 2: General examination, electrical 
continuity and contact resistance tests, insulation tests, 
voltage stress tests. Section 4: Voltage stress tests [LITD 
3: Electromechanical Components and Mechnical Structures 



^£yjiji3a^sb.%fe=aTs:^^^iiy;^?5^ 



i5?&i I U |T'5K;^^e%>>^»»l 



K^>i:^\X<^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




^'^^^r 



k 



Rhartrhari — Nitisatakam ^-^ — -^^ 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621 '38-038-871 : 621 31 7*32 IS : 12448 ( Part 2/Sec 4 ) - 1988 



Indian standard ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

BASIC TESTING PROCEDURES AND MEASURING 

METHODS FOR ELECTROMECHANICAL COMPONENTS 

FOR ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT 

PART 2 GENERAL EXAMINATION, ELECTRICAL CONTINUITY AND CONTACT 
RESISTANCE TESTS, INSULATION TESTS AND VOLTAGE STRESS TESTS 

Section 4 Voltage Stress Tests 



1. Scope — This standard ( Part 2/Sec 4 ) covers voltage withstand test for electromechanical 
components. 

2. Test 4a: Voltage Proof 

2.1 Oj&/ecf — The object of this test is to determine the ability of a component to withstand 
specified test voltage applied in a specified manner. 

2.2 Mounting of Specimen — The specimen shall be mounted in accordance with the detail 
specification. 

2.3 Test Metfiods — A dc or ac peak test voltage shall be applied for 60 ± 5 s using method 
A, B or C, as specified in the detail specification. 

If an ac test voltage is used, it shall have a frequency of 45 to 60 Hz and shall be approxi- 
mately sinusoidal in waveform. The rate of application of test voltage shall not exceed 500 V/s. 

2.3.1 Metiiod A — The specimen shall be subjected to the test voltage as specified in the detail 
specification, between each termination in turn and the housing and/or the mounting plate, all 
other terminations being connected together and to the housing and/or the mounting plate. 

2.3.2 IVIethod 5 — Alternate terminations shall be connected together. Where practical, no 
one group shall contain adjacent contacts. 

Note — In the case of terminations arranged in two or more rows, it will be necessary to form a second 
arrangement of two groups in order to measure the withstand voltage of each pair of adjacent terminations. 

The specimen shall be subjected to the test voltage as specified in turn, between the follow- 
ing: 

a) The first group of terminations and the second group connected to the housing and/or the 
mounting plate, and 

b) The second group of terminations and the first group connected to the housing and/or the 
mounting plate. 

2.3.3 Method C — The specimen shall be subjected to the test voltage between adjacent 
terminations, as specified by the detail specification. 

2.4 Test Requirements — There shall be no breakdown or flashover and maximum permissible 
leakage current shall not be exceeded when the voltage specified by the detail specification is 
applied. 

2.5 Details to be Specified — When this test is required by the detail specification, the following 
details shall be specified: 

a) Method to be used; 

b) Value and nature of the test voltage; 

c) Maximum permissible leakage current, where applicable; 

d) Contacts to be tested; 

e) Environmental conditions; 



Adopted 23 September 1988 



©March 1989. BIS I Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH 2AFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 12448 ( Part 2/Sec 4 ) - 1988 

f) Operated conditions in the case of switches; and 

g) Any deviation from the standard test method and/or conditions. 

Note — Reduced voltage values should apply for altitude, low air pressure and temperature conditions based on 
the tables of derating factors stated in the relevant general requirement specification. 

3. Test 4b: Partial Discharge 

3.1 Object — The object of this test is to detail a standard method to assess the ability of an 
electromechanical component to be used under specified voltage conditions without showing 
partial discharges. 

Mote — This test is basically the same as the one given in IS : 6209-1 982*. The measuring circuit, however, 
is dimensioned such as to meet the specific requirements of electromechanical components having relatively 
small inductances and capacitances. 

3.2 Test Method 

3.2.1 Test egw/p/nem — The partial discharge extinction voltage shall be measured with the 
basic circuit shown in Fig. 1 . 



SPECIMEN UNDER TEST 



TEST 
VOLTAOE 






FIG. 1 BASIC CIRCUIT FOR PARTIAL DISCHARGE EXTINCTION VOLTAGE 

The values of the equipment shown in Fig. 1 shall be as follows: 

a) Frequency band of the oscilloscope; 500 kHz 

b) Sensitivity of the oscilloscope: 2 to 10 mm/mV 

c) Time base scale: 2 ms/Division 

d) Inductance L: 20 to 40 mH 

e) Capacitance C ( including the capacitance of the oscilloscope, wiring and coil: 80 to 120 
pF 

f) Frequency of test voltage: 40 to 60 Hz, 

If required, a current-limiting resistor ( /?v ) may be used. To minimize the influence of the 
measuring set-up, low-impedance coupling and, if necessary, an amplifier may be used. 

Care must be taken to ensure that the cable/wire used is capable of meeting a higher require- 
ment than the specimen under test. 

3,2.2 Test procedure — The test voltage shall be applied and steadily increased up to a value 
where partial discharges are observed on the oscilloscope. In order to determine the partial 
discharge extinction voltage, the test value of the voltage shall then be noted. 

The test voltage shall in no case exceed the proof voltage as specified for the application of 
Test 4a. 

3.3 Requiremer)ts — The partial discharge extinction voltage shall be not less than that specified 
in the detail specification. 

If no discharge occurs below the proof voltage, the specimen shall also have passed the test. 

3.4 Details to be Specified — When this test is required by the detail specification, the following 
details shall be specified: 

a) Preparation of the specimen, including cable/wire to be used; 

b) Operated conditions; 



♦Methods for partial discharge measurements ( first revision ). 



IS : 12448 ( Part 2/Sec 4 ) - 1988 

c) Minimum extinction voltage; 

d) Proof voltage; and 

e) Any deviation from the standard test method. 

4. Test 4c: Voltage Proof of Pre-lnsulated Crimp Barrels 

4.1 Object — The ob\ecX of this test is to detail a standard method to determine the ability of 
pre-lnsulated crimp barrels to withstand the crimp operation without damage to the insulation. 

4.2 Preparation of the Specimen — The specimen shall consist of a crimp contact or a terminal, 
and having a pre-insulated crimp barrel and the appropriate cable/wire, and shall be prepared in 
accordance with the detail specification. 

The cable/wire, stripped as specified, shall be fitted to the crimp barrel and then crimped in 
the normal manner. The conductive area of the contact/terminal end and the end of the conduc- 
tor to which it is attached shall be sealed, for example, by beeswax or other suitable sealing 
compound, ensuring that the sealing used does not cover the area of contact deformed by the 
crimping tool. 

4.3 Test Method — The end oi the specimen with the contact/terminal end shall be immersed in 
a 5 percent aqueous sodium chloride solution to a depth such as to cover the crimp indentations 
but not immerse the open end. 

A voltage shall be applied between the specimen and an immersed electrode placed at a 
distance not more than 50 mm from the specimen. The voltage shall be steadily increased at a 
rate not exceeding 500 V/s up to the proof voltage specified in the detail specification and kept 
at the value for 60 ± 5 s. 

4.4 Requirement — There shall be no breakdown. 

4.5 Details to be Specified — When this test is required by the detail specification, the following 
details shall be specified: 

a) Preparation of the specimen, 

b) Cable/wire to be used, 

c) Type and die setting of crimping tool, 

d) Proof voltage, and 

e) Any deviation from this standard test method. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard ( Part 2/Sec 4 ) is based, without any technical change, on lEC Publication 
512-2 ( 1985 ). 'Electromechanical components for electronic equipment; Basic testing proced- 
ures and measuring metods: Part 2 General examination, electrical continuity and contact resistance 
tests, insulation tests and voltage stress tests', issued by the International Electrotechnical 
Commission ( lEC ). 



Printed at Printograph, New Delhi, India 



