INAT UTTE IS 16008 (Part 1) : 2016 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2020) 


giaa — pà sik mari 
Wasnt cn few Brat A — 
fafsrfie 


aw 1 ca a4 a faf oat wm 
(TEN JTI ) 


Agro Textiles — Shade Nets for 
Agriculture and Horticulture 
Purposes — Specification 
Part 1 Shade Nets Made from Tape Yarns 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 59.080.70; 65.020.20 


© BIS 2016 


mA AH emu 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM Wa, 9 aage wt Art, we feeei-110002 
Lm MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2016 Price Group 5 


Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee, TXD 35 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division 
Council. 


This standard was first published in 2012 and is being revised to include the following major changes: 


a) Amendment No. | has been incorporated. 

b) Test method for determining shading percentage has been modified. 
c) Requirement for shading percentage has been modified. 

d) Sampling and criteria for conformity has been modified. 


Shade nets are being manufactured by tape yarn technology, mono filament technology or a combination of both 
the technologies. Shade nets manufactured by mono filament technology has an added advantage of higher breaking 
and bursting strength. Based on the manufacturing technology, this standard is published in two parts. The other 
Part in the series is: 


Part 2 Shade nets made from mono filament yarns 


The shade nets are mostly used for agriculture and horticulture applications particularly in countries like India 
where the scorching heat of the sun plays a major role in damaging the crops by sun burning and thus causing 
severe financial losses. The varying climatic conditions throughout the year, together with the slow but constant 
rising temperature in the summer months prove the need for shade nets to maximize growth and crop yields. The 
shade nets helps in controlling the temperature by accumulating the day heat to withstand the low temperatures of 
night thus help in off season ripening of fruits and vegetables. It also acts as a wind shield and prevents damage to 
young plants from damage. 


The guidelines for installation of shade nets is given in Annex D for information only. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16008 (Part 1) : 2016 


Indian Standard 


AGRO TEXTILES — SHADE NETS FOR AGRICULTURE 
AND HORTICULTURE PURPOSES — SPECIFICATION 
PART 1 SHADE NETS MADE FROM TAPE YARNS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) prescribes constructional and 
other performance requirements for synthetic agro 
shade nets manufactured from tape yarns for agriculture 
and horticulture purposes in protecting/increasing crop 
yield by providing partially controlled climatic 
conditions for the intended crops. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute provision 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given 
in IS 16366 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Shading Factor — It is the percentage of normally 
incident UV visible radiation in the range of 290 to 
770 nanometer not transmitted by the shade nets. 


3.2 Cover Factor — It is the area of shade nets 
covered by the yarn and fibre of the structure. 


3.3 Photosynthetically Active Radiation (PAR) — 
It designates the spectral range (wave band) of solar 
radiation from 400 to 700 nanometer that 
photosynthetic organisms are able to use in the process 
of photosynthesis. PAR watts directly indicate how 
much light energy is available for plants to use in 
photosynthesis. 


4 MATERIALS 


4.1 HDPE Tapes 


Tapes shall be manufactured from HDPE granules 
(see IS 6192), which shall be UV stabilized by adding 
suitable UV stabilizer. The width of the tape used in 
the fabric shall be 1.70 + 0.1 mm and linear density of 
the tape shall be 40 Tex (360 denier). As agreed to 
between the buyer and the seller, coloured tapes shall 


be manufactured using colour master batch. The denier 
of HDPE tape used in the manufacture of shade nets 
shall be subjected to the following tolerances: 


a) 10 percent on individual value; and 
b) 5 percent on average. 


4.1.1 The heat shrinkage of the tape at 60°C shall not 
exceed 5 percent when subjected to the specified 
temperature for a period of 10 min in an air circulating 
oven. The heat shrinkage of the tape at 95°C shall not 
exceed 8 percent when subjected to the specified 
temperature for a period of 10 min in hot water bath. 


4.2 Fabric 


The fabric used in the manufacture of shade nets shall 
be knitted on the warp knitting machines and shall have 
a width as per the agreement between the buyer and 
the seller. A tape of 1.70 + 0.1 mm width having the 
name of the manufacture and applicable shading 
percentage shall be provided at one end of the fabric 
which shall run through the complete length of the roll 
for identification of manufacture. 


4.3 Colour 


The colour or a mixture of colour of the shade nets 
fabric shall be as per the agreement between the buyer 
and the seller. The colour/shade shall be as specified 
in the contract or order. In case a sample has been 
agreed upon and sealed, the supply shall be made in 
conformity with the sample in such respects. 


5 TYPES 


Based on the shading percentage, the agro shade nets 
are classified as follows: 


a) Type I — having shading percentage of 
50 percent; 


b) Type II — having shading percentage of 
75 percent; and 


c) Type III — having shading percentage of 
90 percent. 


6 REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Dimensions and Mass 
The shade nets shall be made to the shade and 


IS 16008 (Part 1) : 2016 


dimensions as specified in the contract or order. The 
dimensions shall be determined by the method 
prescribed in IS 1954. The following tolerance shall 
be permissible for length, width and mass (g/m°): 


Dimension Tolerance, percent 
Length +] 
-0 
Width +] 
-0 
Mass, g/m? +6 
-0 


6.2 The shade nets fabric made from tape yarns shall 
confirm to the requirements specified in Table 1. 


7 PACKING AND MARKING 


7.1 Packing 


The tape yarn shade nets shall be packed in roll form 
in length of 50 m or in bundle form or as agreed to 
between the buyer and the seller. 


7.2 Marking 


7.2.1 Each fabric roll/bundle shall be marked legibly 
by affixing a label with the following information: 


a) Indication of the source of manufacture; 

b) Type of shade nets and shading percentage; 

c) Declared length and width of the shade nets; 
d) Mass per square meter of the shade nets; 

e) Batch No. and date of manufacture; and 

f) Any other information desired by the buyer. 


7.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The shade nets may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


7.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
The details of the conditions under which a license for 
the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


8 SAMPLING 


8.1 Lot 


All tape yarns shade nets rolls/bundles of same 
construction and type dispatched to a buyer against one 
dispatch note shall constitute a lot. 


8.2 Unless otherwise agreed to between the buyer and 
the seller, the number of tape yarn shade nets rolls/ 
bundles to be selected at random from a lot shall be as 
given in col 3 of Table 2. 


Table 2 Scale of Sampling 
(Clause 8.2) 


Table 1 Requirements of Shade Nets Made from Tape Yarns 
(Clause 6.2) 


SI No. Characteristic(s) 


(1) (2) 


i) Mass, g/m?, Min 

ii) Average breaking strength of shade nets fabric 
(Strip method, 325 mm x 50 mm test piece with 
gauge length of 200 mm), N, Min; 


a) Warpway 
b) Weftway 

iii) Retention of breaking strength after UV exposure, 
N, Min 

iv) Color fastness to artificial light” 

v) Bursting pressure, kgf/cm’, Min 


vi) Shading percentage 


D Applicable for coloured shade nets only. 


«—— 85 percent of original actual value (fabric) — 


SI No. of Sample Sub- Permissible 
No.  Rolls/Bundles Size sample No. of 
in Lot Size Defective 
Rolls/Bundles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Up to 50 3 2 0 
ii 51to 150 5 2 0 
iii) 151 to 300 8 3 1 
iv) 301 to 500 13 3 2 
v) 501 and above 20 5 3 
Requirement(s) Method of Test, 
Ref to 
Type I Type II Type III 
(3) (4) (5) (6) 
100 120 140 IS 1964 
IS 1969 (Part 1) 
200 250 290 
200 250 290 


Annex B and 
IS 1969 (Part 1) 


4 or better 4 or better 4 or better IS 2454 
5 6 9 IS 1966 (Part 1) or 
IS 1966 (Part 2) 
45 to 55 70 to 80 85 to 95 Annex C 


9 NUMBER OF TEST SPECIMENS AND 
CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 


Number of test specimens and criteria for conformity 


IS 16008 (Part 1) : 2016 


shall be as given in Table 3. 


Table 3 Number of Test Specimens and Criteria for Conformity 


(Clause 9) 
SI No. Characteristic No. of Rolls/Bundles Criteria for Conformity 
a) 2) (3) (4) 
i) Material and manufacture, According to col 3 of Table 2 The defective rolls do not exceed the corresponding 
dimensions and mass number given in col 5 of Table 2 
ii) All other requirements According to col 4 of Table 2 All the test specimens shall pass the tests 
ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
IS No. Title IS No. Title 
1954 : 1990 Determination of length and width of — 1969 (Part 1): Textiles — Tensile properties of 
woven fabrics — Methods (second 2009 fabrics — Determination of 
revision) maximum force and elongation at 
1964 : 2001 Methods for determination of mass maximum force: Part 1 Strip method 
per unit length and mass per unit area (third revision) 
of fabrics (second revision) 2454: 1985 Method for determination of colour 
1966 Textiles — Bursting properties of fastness of textile materials to artificial 
fabrics — Determination of bursting light (Xenon lamp) (first revision) 
strength and bursting distension: 6192: 1994 Textiles — Monoaxially oriented 
(Part 1): 2009 Hydraulic method (second revision) high density polyethylene tapes — 
(Part 2): 2009 Pneumatic method (second revision) Specification (second revision) 
16366: 2015 Glossary of terms used in agrotextile 
ANNEX B 
[Table 1, SI No. (iii) ] 
UV RESISTANCE TEST 


B-1 TEST SPECIMENS 

The test specimens for breaking strength shall be cut 
from the sample as specified in IS 1969 (Part 1). 

B-2 TEST CONDITIONS 


B-2.1 The test shall be carried out with fluorescent 
UV-B lamp (313 nanometer or its equivalent). 

B-2.2 The duration of the test shall be 144 h (that is 
6 days). 

B-2.3 The test cycle shall be 8 h at 60 x 3?C with UV 
radiation alternating after 4 h at 50 + 3?C with 
condensation. 

B-2.4 Irradiation level throughout the test shall be 


maintained at 0.63 100 W/m?. 


B-3 TEST PROCEDURE 


B-3.1 Determine the original average breaking strength 
of shade nets specimens separately as per the test 
specified in IS 1969 (Part 1). 


B-3.2 Expose the specimens alternately to ultraviolet 
light alone and to condensation in one respective 
cycle. 


B-3.2.1 The type of fluorescent UV lamp, the timing 
of the UV exposure and the temperature of 
condensation shall be as specified in B-2. 


B-3.3 Determine the average breaking strength of the 
specimens separately after UV exposure as mentioned 
above. 


IS 16008 (Part 1) : 2016 
B-3.4 Determine the percent retention of original 
strength as follows: 


Percent retention of original — b 100 
breaking strength B "ua 


where 


a  — average breaking strength before UV 
exposure as obtained in B-3.1; and 


b = average breaking strength after UV exposure 
as obtained in B-3.3. 
NOTES 


1 The UV source is an array of fluorescent lamps (with lamp 
emission concentrated in the UV range). 


2 Condensation is produced by exposing the test surface to a 
heated, saturated mixture of air and water vapour, while the 
reverse side of the test specimen is exposed to the cooling 
influence of ambient room air. 


ANNEX C 
[Table 1, SI No. (v1)] 
TEST METHOD FOR DETERMINING SHADING PERCENTAGE OF SHADE NETS 


C-1 PRINCIPLE 


A sample ofthe shade nets is mounted in shade-O-meter 
tester and the amount of light transmitted or passed 
through the sample is measured with the help of PAR 
sensor, in W/m?. The relative measurement of light 
transmission with and without sample is considered for 
calculating the shading percentage of shade nets. 


C-2 SAMPLING 
C-2.1 Laboratory Sample 


For the laboratory sample take a swatch extending the 
full width of the product, of sufficient length along the 
selvage from each sample roll/bundle so that the 
requirements of C-2.2 can be met. 


C-2.2 Test Specimens 


From the laboratory sample, cut at least 10 samples 
each having dimensions of 180 mm x 180 mm. Space 


LIGHT SOURCE 


the specimens along a diagonal on the unit of the 
laboratory sample. Take no specimens nearer the 
selvage or edge of the shade nets. The selected test 
specimens shall not have any creases or folds. 


C-3 CONDITIONING 


Bring the specimens to moisture equilibrium in the 
atmosphere for testing shade nets (65 + 5 percent 
relative humidity and 27 + 2°C temperature). 
Equilibrium is considered to have been reached when 
the increase in the mass of the specimen, in successive 
weightings made at intervals of not less than 2 h, does 
not exceed 0.1 percent of the mass of the specimen. 


C-4 APPARATUS 


The instrument used for measurement shall meet the 
geometric and spectral requirements. The schematic 
diagram of the apparatus is given in Fig. 1. 


SPECIMEN 


SENSOR 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


NOTE — The shade-O-meter has been designed and developed by The Synthetic & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai. 


Fic. 1 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF SHADE-O-METER 


C-4.1 The shade-O-meter tester shall have a flat base 
with total approximate dimensions as given below: 


Length x Diameter x Height = 970 mm x 350 mm x 
325 mm 


C-4.2 Apparatus shall consist of a chamber in which 
arrangement for placement of light source, filters, 
sample holder and sensor shall be provided. The inside 
surface of chamber shall be painted with black paint 
and shall be highly reflecting throughout the visible 
spectrum. The light transmitted through the shade nets 
sample shall be measured by light sensors. 


C-4.3 The apparatus shall consist of the following 
elements: 


a) Light source — Tungsten lamp which is an 
incandescent light bulb that has a tungsten 
filament shall be used in the apparatus to cater 
to visible light spectrum range. The light bulb 
of 60 W shall be used in the equipment. 

b) Filter — Neutral density filters (ND) which 
exhibit nearly constant transmission, 
especially in the visible range shall be used in 
the apparatus. The filter shall be of 165 x 165 

+2 mm size. The thickness of filters shall be 

1 mm. The transmission of the filter shall be 

in the range of 400 to 700 nanometer 

wavelength. 


c) Specimen holder — The specimen holder shall 

be 180 mm x 180 mm size with a tolerance of 
+2 mm with sample clamping holder on both 
the sides. Specimen holders shall be made of 
aluminium or stainless steel. The profile of 
sample holder shall be such that after 
mounting the specimen, exposed area of 
specimen shall be of diameter 150 mm with a 
tolerance of + 2 mm. 


d) Measuring sensor — Pyarnometer type light 


IS 16008 (Part 1) : 2016 


sensors which provide accurate, continuous 
measurement of PAR in the visible spectrum 
range of 400 to 700 nanometer wavelength 
shall be used in the apparatus. The amount of 
light transmitted through the sample is 
measured with these sensors. 

NOTE — The PAR quantum sensors from M/s Kipp and Zonen 

(mention of the name of specific instrument is not intended to 


promote or give preference to the use of that instrument over 
others not mentioned) may be used in this kind of measurement. 


C-5 TEST PROCEDURE 


C-5.1 Instrument shall be switched on and the reading 
for PAR without sample shall be taken on the sensor. 
This shall be recorded as 7|. 


C-5.2 Shade nets sample (see C-2.2) shall be mounted 
in the slot of specimen holder. The reading of PAR 
measurement with sample shall be taken from the 
sensor. This shall be recorded as 7;. 

NOTE — Test specimen shall be properly mounted in the 


specimen holder so that it shall not be very tight or very lose in 
the specimen holder. 


C-6 CALCULATION 


C-6.1 Shading percentage shall be calculated from the 
following formula: 


T-T, 100 


Shading percentage = 
1 


T, = reading of transmitted light, in W/m? 
(without sample); and 
T, = reading of transmitted light, in W/m? (with 
sample). 
C-6.2 Calculate the arithmetic mean of the measured 
values of shading percentage for ten samples. 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 
INSTALLATION GUIDELINES FOR SHADE NETS 


D-1 PREAMBLE 


D-1.1 The primary function of agricultural shade nets 
is to provide favourable micro-climate to the plants by 
partially controlling the atmosphere and environment 
by reducing both light intensity and effective heat hence, 
round the year seasonal and off season cultivation is 
possible. This enables lengthening of the growing 
season and as well as flexibility of off season cultivation 


depending upon the conditions and the type of crop 
under shadenets house. 


D-1.2 These shade nets are typically cladded on an 
inflated frame structure made out of materials such as 
G.I. pipes, steel, angle iron, wood or bamboo and is 
known as shadenets house in which crops are grown 
successfully. The success of shadenets house depends 
particularly on appropriate design, orientation, design 


IS 16008 (Part 1) : 2016 


loads, proper installation and the quality of materials 
used for its construction. 


D-1.3 Shadenets house have proved to be highly useful, 
economical and effective in controlled environment 
agriculture and in meeting our requirements. It gives 
manifold production of good quality produce from the 
same piece of land as compared to the open cultivation. 


D-1.4 The service life of shade nets over the structure 
depends purely on proper anchoring of shade nets with 
appropriate mechanism. It is very much essential to 
avoid joints/stitches of shade nets in between the frame 
structure. To achieve this proper onsite laying, joining 
and fixing of shade nets is imperative. 


D-2 LOGISTICS 


Shade nets are packed and transported by appropriate 
means so as to protect them from any type of 
damage. Rolls/bundles of shade nets are loaded 
manually or with a crane and tie beam and can be 
unloaded in a similar manner at the destination. Use of 
hooks shall be avoided for loading and unloading of 
the shade nets bundles/rolls at site. 


D-3 STORAGE AT SITE 


D-3.1 The shade nets shall be stored on levelled surface 
so as to protect them from any damage, dirt, grease, 
water, moisture, mud, mechanical abrasions or 
excessive heat and to be stacked not more than three 
rolls/bundles. 


D-3.2 The owner of the site where the shade nets is to 
be installed shall provide storage space in a location 
sufficiently near the shade nets structure to minimize 
any additional handling. 


D-3.3 The storage area shall be protected from theft, 
vandalism, vehicular traffic and any other source which 
could create potential damage to the shade nets. 


D-4 PLANNING FOR A SHADENETS HOUSE 


D-4.1 Before starting a shadenets house project, 
grower shall carefully study the climate and its 
influences on the growth of the crops intended to be 
grown. The following parameter need to be taken into 
consideration for its success: 


a) Climate, soil and water, topography, 
accessibility of the area and the opportunities 
for transport and marketing, protection against 
fluctuating temperatures, solar radiation, 
heavy rain, hail and strong wind. 

b) Type of soil, soil profile and the location. If 
possible, choose soil with a good structure in 
a flat area for the shadenets house project. 

c) Adequate drainage of water to a lower area 
shall be ensured. It is very important to have 


enough and good irrigation water to irrigate 
and leach the soil. 

d) A good infrastructure for transporting 
materials and products is also of importance, 
just like the availability of electricity. 


D-4.2 Planning of Production 


Planning of production to include what to plant, when 
to plant, how much to plant, how much it will cost, 
what quantities are required, where to sell, when to sell, 
who to sell, what price to sell at and how much it will 
cost. Market accessibility for selling the produce 
intended to be grown, if necessary, to switch to other 
crops is also an important factor. 


D-4.3 After consideration of the above factors, size of 
the shadenets house need to be selected based upon the 
availability of the land, market access and experience of 
shadenets house cultivation. It is suggested that growers’ 
to start with small sizes shadenets house as it would 
require less initial capital investment alongwith 
operational expenditure however, provision shall be 
made for future expansion also. Alongwith the above, 
experienced farmers/entrepreneurs can decide on size 
of shadenets house depending upon their scale of 
operation and project costs. The cost may vary depending 
upon the types of shadenets house and number of 
suppliers’ present in the region. 


D-5 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 


D-5.1 Site Selection 


While selecting the site for construction of a shadenets 
house, the following points shall be considered for 
optimum growth and development of plant: 


a) A shadenets house shall be located in such a 
way that it is well connected with market for 
input supplies and sale of its produce. 


b) Structure shall be constructed away from 
buildings, trees, industrial and vehicular 
pollutants; means location shall be fairly 
shadow free. 

c) Construction site shall be at higher elevation 
than surrounding land with adequate drainage 
facility. 

d) Availability of good quality irrigation water 
and electricity for running of irrigation system. 

e) pH of the soil should be in the range of 5.5 
to 6.5 and electrical conductivity (EC) of 0.5 
to 0.7 ms/cm, whereas pH of the irrigation 
water should be in the range of 5.5 to 7.0 and 
EC between 0.1 to 0.3 ms/cm. 

f) For wind zone area, if possible, wind breakers 
may be located 30 m away from the shadenets 
structure. 


D-5.2 Orientation 


There are mainly two criteria for shadenets house 
orientation. They are: the uniformity of light intensity in 
the shadenets house and wind direction. Single span 
structure may be oriented either in east-west or north- 
south direction but multi span structure shall be oriented 
in north-south direction to ensure uniform light intensity. 


D-5.3 Selection of Shade Nets Type 


D-5.3.1 Nets transmits light evenly throughout the 
visible part of the light spectrum, thus acting as neutral 
density filters. Every plant has its own individual 
requirements for sunlight and shade under which it 
flourishes at its best. To create optimum climatic 
conditions, selection of the correct percentage of shade 
nets plays an important role under which the plant’s 
productivity and quality produce is maximized. 


D-5.3.2 There are no hard and fast rules for selecting 
shade nets type; it varies regionally, and according to 
prevailing climatic conditions in each region. Advice 
can be taken from the researchers, agricultural research 
bodies or from other successful growers in the region. 
In general, the geographical location of the site as well 
as the local climatic conditions can also play a role in 
determining the ideal shade nets requirements. 


D-6 STRUCTURAL MATERIALS 


D-6.1 A shadenets house consists of two basic 
components that is frame and cladding material. The 
frame (made of either G.I. pipes, steel, angle iron, wood 
or bamboo materials) provides support for cladding 
materials. The selection of frame materials must possess 
adequate strength to withstand the design loads. When 
deciding, for construction of shadenets house designers 
need to consider various design parameters particularly 
design loads such as wind load, crop load, live load 
and snow load for the selected design. Shadenets house 
can be of variable height and width. 


D-6.2 Design Load 


a) Dead load — Weight of all permanent 
construction, cladding, heating and cooling 
equipment, water pipes and all fixed service 
equipments to the frame. 

b) Live load — Weights superimposed by use 
(include hanging baskets, shelves and persons 
working on roof). The shadenets house shall 
be designed for a maximum of 15 kg/m? live 
load. Each member of roof shall be capable 
of supporting 45 kg of concentrated load when 
applied at its centre. 

c) Wind load — The structure shall be able to 
withstand winds of 120 km/h and at least 
50 kg/m? of wind pressure. 


IS 16008 (Part 1) : 2016 


d) Snow load — These are to be taken as per the 
average snowfall of the location. The 
shadenets house shall be able to take dead load 
plus live load or dead load plus wind load plus 
half the live load. 


D-6.3 Depending on the costs involved in the 
construction, there are following three types of 
shadenets house: 


a) Low cost — The low cost shadenets house is 
made of a supporting structure of bamboo/ 
wood/local available materials. It does not 
have any climate control system but shall be 
equipped with micro-irrigation system. 

b) Medium cost — The medium cost shadenets 
house is made of a supporting structure of G.I. 
pipes, profile springs and wires and equipped 
with micro irrigation system. 

c) High cost— The high cost shade house is made 
of supporting structure of steel tubes and has 
many facilities like auto control mechanism, 
heating, cooling and humidification system, 
micro irrigation system etc. 


D-7 COMMENCEMENT OF SHADENETS 
HOUSE INSTALLATION WORK 


D-7.1 Before starting the shadenets house installation, 
the contractor shall issue a certificate of stability of 
erected shadenets structure, to enable to commence 
shade nets installation work. 


D-7.2 Chain linked fencing shall be put around the 
shade house to prevent stray entry of men and animals 
to protect any damage to the shade nets. 


D-8 SHADE NETS LAYING OPERATION 


D-8.1 While laying the shade nets, precaution shall 
be taken to avoid any damage to it. 


D-8.2 The shade house area shall be declared as a ‘NO 
SMOKING ZONE’. 


D-9 SHADE NETS INSTALLATION OPERATION 


D-9.1 Measure out about 25 percent more shade nets 
fabric than needed to cover the entire structure. Total 
requirements of shade nets depend entirely on the 
surface area of the shadenets house; as the area 
increases the requirement will decrease proportionally. 
It varies from approximately 2.5 times to 1.8 times of 
total surface area. Unroll the shade nets fabric across 
the structure, leaving at least one foot of nets fabric 
overhanging on all sides. Pull the nets fabric into 
position, straightening as needed. 


D-9.2 Start with the longest side one will be covering 
and affix the shade nets fabric with appropriate 
measures like aluminium profile with zig-zag spring, 


IS 16008 (Part 1) : 2016 


etc. Keep the fabric tight and the lines on the knitting 
straight while working across the length of the structure. 
Same procedure need to be followed for shorter side 
by keeping the shade nets fabric evenly lined up while 
heading in the direction away from the home. Always 
continue in the same clockwise or counter clockwise 
direction one began with. When attaching the nets 
fabric, after finishing the last edge, try to avoid any 
overlap in the fabric. 


D-9.3 Points Need to be Considered Before 
Installation 


a) Before installation, carefully check the shade 
nets for any faults. Do not install shade nets 
with holes or any damaged area. Check actual 
length and width before starting the 
installation over the framed structure. 

b) Twisting or shortage of the shade nets fabric 
on frame, structure or wall of the shadenets 
house shall be eliminated. 


c) Metal parts shall not touch the nets. In the 
summer, heat accumulated in metal parts might 
damage the shade nets. Therefore, it is 
important to cover metal parts with white paint 
or white tape to protect the nets. Unprotected 
metal cables or metal parts are harmful to the 
nets and can cut it in matter of hours. 

d) Friction between the shade nets and sharp 
edges of structures/ hard surfaces in the 
construction shall be avoided. 

e) Chlorine based products shall not touch the 
shade nets directly or indirectly. Chlorine and 
sulphur deteriorates the nets by chemical 
reaction. 


D-10 POST INSTALLATION PRECAUTIONS 


D-10.1 Shadenets house equipped with micro- 


irrigation and fertigation system increases production 
per unit area manifold and requires proper 
maintenance regularly. The frequency of services/ 
examinations shall be in accordance to the extent of 
exposition of the shade house to hazardous 
conditions. 


D-10.2 During the first two months of cladding of 
shade nets, it is very important to tighten them, 
whenever they become loose and to maintain a tight 
stretch of the nets. After the first two months, the 
natural spread of the nets is significantly reduced and 
stretching is required only once a year, or after harsh 
storms. This measure keeps the nets tight at a high 
level. This helps to prevent damage to the nets and 
extends its life span. 


D-10.3 Ifno unusual events take place during the first 
year following completion of construction, it is 
necessary to conduct an examination of shadenets 
structure once a year. This examination shall be 
conducted prior to the season of strong winds and rain, 
as follows: 


a) Verify the exposure of the columns from 
ground soil, if any. Conduct a random 
examination of the foundations; verify that 
they are intact. If there are cracks or damages, 
pour new foundations. 

b) Verify that there are no tears or holes in the 
shade nets covering. Repair and fasten, if 
required. 

c) Verify that there is no threat of flooding of 
the shadenets house as a result of any new 
groundwork conducted in the surrounding area 
adjacent to the structure. 

d) Clean the shadenets house area from any 
debris that is likely to blow away and damage 
the structure of the shade nets covering. 


IS 16008 (Part 1) : 2016 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee, TXD 35 


Organization 
The Synthetic & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


Business Co-ordination House Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Central Agricultural University, Imphal 


Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, Mumbai 
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology (CIPET), 


Chennai 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology (CIPET), 
Bhopal 


Chandra Shekhar Azad University of Agriculture and 
Technology, Kanpur 
CTM Technical Textiles Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Department of Jute & Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies & Disposal, New Delhi 
Garware Wall Ropes Limited, Satara 


Gujarat Green Revolution Company Limited, Vadodara 


Horticulture Training Centre, Pune 


Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 


Lamifab & Paper (P) Ltd, Aurangabad 


Maharashtra State Horticulture & Medicinal Plant Board, Pune 


MAHA Seedsmen Association, Jalna 


National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, Mumbai 


National Committee on Plasticulture Applications in Agriculture 


& Horticulture, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari 


Neo Corp International Limited, Pithampur 


Representative(s) 
Dr U. K. GaucorApuvav (Chairman) 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
Surimati Ritika Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI MAMONI PROBHA BORAH 


Dr S. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Dr R. Guruprasab (Alternate) 


Dr ABDUL KADER 
Suri Rajiv KUMAR LILHARE (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. SAHOO 
Dr Asay Kumar NEEMA (Alternate) 


Dr Asuok KUMAR 
Dr JireNDRA Yapav (Alternate) 


SHRI Amit AGARWAL 
Surimati Jyoti AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Dn SwAPAN KUMAR GHOSH 
Pnor S. C. Ray (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DiRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 


Suri SANJAY RAUT 
Suri S. G. PALUSKAR (Alternate) 


Dr Y. P. SINGH 
Suri P. D. Kotak (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVINDRA DESHMUKH 
Suri Sampat Yapav (Alternate) 


Dn T. V. S. RAJPUT 
Dr NEELAM ParteL (Alternate) 


Dr SANJAY CHATTOPADHYA 
Dr TANWEER ALAM (Alternate) 


Dr Manuya GHosH 
Suri D. K. Biswas (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SHASHI SINGH 
Ms PrIvANKA Prasarartı (Alternate) 


SHRI KAMLEISH DHOOT 
Suri Kishor! LaL Duoor (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Proyect MANAGER (PC & FP) (Alternate) 


SHRI SATYANARAYAN B. RATHI 
Suri UDDHAV MANIKRAO SuirsaTH (Alternate) 


SHRI R. ANAND 
Suri B. K. Sincuat (Alternate) 


Suri KRISH S [YENGAR 
Suri K. K. Kausuar (Alternate) 


SHRI TAPOBRATA SANYAL 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Kuastaair (Alternate) 


Dr B. G. SALANKI 
Dr V. P. Uspapia (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KUMAR TRIVEDI 
Suri AsHoK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


IS 16008 (Part 1) : 2016 


Organization Representative(s) 
Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai Suri AJAY PANDIT 
Suri M. BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 
Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi Suri M. S. VERMA 


SHRI SHRICHAND SANTANI (Alternate) 


Shri Ambica Polymer Pvt. Ltd, Ahmedabad SHRIMATI JYOTIKA NAGRI 
Suri PARTH NAGRI (Alternate) 


Texel Industries Limited, Kalol SHRI SHAILESH R MEHTA 
SHRI SusHIL PAcursiA (Alternate) 


Textiles Committee, Mumbai Suri K. V. Rao 
Suri R. CHANDRAN (Alternate) 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai Suri V. K. PATIL 
Suri RAVIKANT (Alternate) 


The Synthetic & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai DR ManisHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI AsHWINI SuDAM (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI PRABHAKAR Ral, Scientist *E' and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. K. Gupta 
Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 35 (1301). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central |: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


