ARAÑA ATTE IS 17912 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


ua A am aer — RRA 


Supply Chain of Onions — 
Guidelines 


ICS 67.080.20 


O BIS 2022 


ARA AMA et 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM Aaa, 9 ETRE WH AMT, Ag fra -110002 
Wa Ra Y MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2022 Price Group 7 


Supply Chain Management Sectional Committee, SSD 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Supply Chain Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Service Sector Division 
Council. 


Onion is an important horticultural commodity which is grown worldwide for culinary purposes and its 
medicinal values. India is the second largest producer of onion in the world and a traditional exporter 
of fresh onion. An increase in production has little value unless there is a good marketing system and 
therefore a uniform approach towards supply chain of onion is necessary. This standard has therefore 
been formulated with a view to facilitate a uniform supply of onions in the domestic market. The 
standard would also be helpful to the stakeholders in regulating the supply of onions and minimizing 
the abnormal increase in price in different seasons. 


This standard provides guidance to the stakeholders involved in the supply chain of onions to reduce the 
losses during post-harvest operations including curing, sorting, grading, packaging, procurement, 
handling, storage, transportation, and distribution of onions. This standard would help to ensure efficient 
and effective system of onion supply throughout the country. 


While formulating this standard, assistance has been drawn from the documents published by National 
Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Limited (NAFED) and the Agmark standard 
related to quality of onion, published by Department of Marketing and Inspection, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare. 


The composition of the committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex 
B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2: 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number 
of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 


IS 17912 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
SUPPLY CHAIN OF ONIONS — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian standard specifies the guidelines for 
supply chain of detopped onion bulb (Allium 
Cepa L) covering post harvesting operations 
including curing, sorting, grading, packaging, 
procurement, handling, storage, transportation, 
and distribution of onions. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standard contains provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the edition indicated was valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 9311: 2021 Guide to storage of onions 
IS 3790: 1991 Textiles — Hessian bags — 


Specification 
3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 
3.1 Customer — Person or organization that 


could or does receive a product or a service that 
is intended for or required by the person or 
organization. 


Example: Customer, client, end user, retailer, 
receiver of product or service from the internal 
process; a beneficiary; or a purchaser. A 
customer can be internal or external to the 
organization. 


3.2 Conformity — Fulfillment of a requirement. 


3.3 External Provider — External supplier or 
provider that is not part of the organization. 


3.4 Infrastructure — System of facilities, 
equipment and services needed for the operation 
and management of supply chain of onions. 


3.5 Monitoring — Observing and checking a 
system, a process, a product, a service or an 
activity over a period of time. 


3.6 Nonconformity — Non-fulfillment of a 
requirement. 


3.7 Onion — The de-topped cured onions. 


3.8 Pack House — Combination of buildings and 
other installations such as machinery, gear, 
workers, and techniques which support the 
process of converting harvested farm-fresh 
onions into market-ready packages. 


3.9 Practically Free — Without pests (or a 
specific pest) in numbers or quantities in excess 
of those that can be expected to result from, and 
be consistent with, good cultural and handling 
practices employed in the production and 
marketing of the onions. 


3.10 Requirement — Need or expectation that is 
stated, or implied. 


3.11 Service — Output of a group or society or 
an organization with at least one activity 
necessarily performed between the supplier and 
the customer. 


3.12 Supply Chain — The physical, financial 
and information networks that involve the 
movement of onions, funds and related 
information through the full logistics process, 
from the acquisition of onions to delivery to the 
end user. 


NOTE — The supply chain includes all 
vendors, service providers, customers and 
intermediaries. 


3.13 Wholesaler — A person or whole set of a 
body or an organization that has processes, 
activities, means and resources necessary to 
provide services for procurement, handling, 
storage, transportation, distribution of onions in 
large quantity and resells. 


IS 17912 : 2022 


4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 


The onion producer/supplier/wholesaler should 
establish, implement, operate and maintain 
supply chain of onion and should ensure the 
following: 


a) The quality of onions at 
source/procurement centre to be 
monitored; 


b) Safe disposal of residues, adopting 
appropriate methods and/or processes; 

c) Compliance of IS 9311 for handling and 
storage of onions; 

d) Determine the resources needed for these 
processes and ensure their availability; 
and 

e) Assign the responsibilities to the 
concerned for the important processes 
appropriately. 


5 LEGAL, STATUTORY AND OTHER 
REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 


The onion producer/supplier/wholesaler should 
ensure to implement all the legal requirements 
and other applicable requirements issued by the 
government from time to time. It should be 
ensured to communicate relevant information on 
legal and other applicable requirements to its 
employees and other relevant third parties 
including contractors. 


6 COMMUNICATION 


The onion producer/supplier/wholesaler should 
determine and ensure that an adequate internal 
and external communication system relevant to 
the onion supply chain is in place. It should also 
be ensured that the communication with 
farmers/local traders is done effectively as per 
8.1.4. 


7 RESOURCES 
7.1 Infrastructure 


The onion producer/supplier/wholesaler should 
determine, provide and maintain the 
infrastructure necessary for the operation of its 
processes and ensure that: 


a) onion establishment be located away from 
environmental pollution, industrial 
activities and other such activities, 


i) that produce disagreeable or 
obnoxious odour, fumes, excessive 
soot, dust, smoke, chemical or 
biological emissions and pollutants, 

ii) that pose a threat of contaminating 
onions, 

111) that are prone to infestations of pests, 
and 

1v) where wastes, either solid or liquid, 
cannot be removed effectively; 


b) construction, design and layout of storage 
premises should be in the manner that 
neither permits the entry of pests nor 
provide harbourage for pests; and 


c) equipment, premises and containers are 
kept in good condition as to minimize any 
risk of contamination. 


NOTE — Infrastructure may include, 

a) warehouses; 

b) equipment, including hardware and software; 

c) transportation resources; and 

d)information and communication technology 
(ICT) tools and systems. 


7.2 Persons/Workforce 


The onion producer/supplier/wholesaler should 
determine and provide the persons necessary for 
the effective implementation of its supply chain 
of onion and for the operations and control of 
processes. 


7.3 Competence 
The onion producer/supplier/wholesaler should: 


a) determine the necessary competence of 
person(s) doing work under its control 
that affects the performance and 
effectiveness of the supply chain of 
onions; 

b) ensure that these persons are competent 
on the basis of appropriate education, 
training and experience; 

c) take actions to acquire the necessary 
competence, wherever applicable; and 

d) retain appropriate documented 
information as evidence of competence. 


NOTE — Applicable actions can include, for 
example, the provision of training to, the 
mentoring of, or the reassignment of currently 
employed persons; or the hiring or contracting of 
competent persons. 


7.4 Environment for the Operation 


The onion producer/supplier/wholesaler should 
determine, provide and maintain the environment 
as well as hygienic conditions necessary for the 
operation of its processes and to ensure 
conformity of onions as per the acceptable limits. 
For guidance, refer Annex A for the quality 
requirements of onions. 


The onion supplier/wholesaler should ensure the 
safety of its workforce and should periodically 
assess the safety measures including availability 
of first aid kits, arrangement for fire safety at the 
site of procurement. First aid kit should contain 
at least cotton, band-aid, sterilized cotton 
bandages, antiseptic liquid, ORS and other items 
as deem fit. 


NOTE — A suitable environment can be a 

combination of human and physical factors, 

such as: 

a) social (non-discriminatory, calm, non- 
confrontational); 

b) psychological (stress-reducing, burnout 
prevention, emotionally protective); and 

c) physical (temperature, heat, humidity, 
lighting, ventilation, hygiene, noise 
control). 


7.5 Monitoring and Measuring Resources 
7.5.1 General 


The onion producer/supplier/wholesaler should 
determine and provide the resources needed to 
ensure valid and reliable results when monitoring 
or measuring is used to verify the conformity of 
requirement of services given in the standard. 
Adequate measures for surveillance of onions 
quality during storage and distribution system 
should be instituted. 


The onion producer/supplier/wholesaler should 
retain appropriate documented information as of 
fitness for purpose, of the monitoring and 
measurement resources. 


7.5.2 Measurement Traceability 


In order to provide confidence in the validity of 
measurement results, onion producer/supplier/ 
wholesaler should arrange calibration of 
measuring equipment at specified intervals 
against measurement standards traceable to 
international or national measurement. The 
measuring equipment should be calibrated and a 


IS 17912 : 2022 


list of such equipment along with their records of 
calibration should be maintained as documented 
information. 


8 OPERATION 


8.1 Identification of Mandi/Procurement 
Centre for Procurement of Onions 


8.1.1 The farmers may use the electronic 
platform of national agriculture market (eNAM) 
or any mobile application approved by the 
government. 


NOTE — For example, kisan rath which is an 
online trading platform for agricultural 
commodities in India and helping the farmers 
and traders for better price and providing better 
services and facilities for smooth marketing of 
their produce. 


8.1.2 The onion supplier/wholesaler should 
identify Mandi/procurement centre. The 
purchaser should specify and communicate to the 
farmers about the tentative quantity to be 
procured through each procurement centre 
based on their requirements and infrastructure. 
Agencies may also be appointed by onion 
supplier/wholesaler for procurement of onions 
at Mandi/procurement centre. The onion 
supplier/wholesaler should verify the 
infrastructure and related support for 
procurement of onions available with such 
agencies. The legal document in the form of 
agreement should be signed by the onion 
supplier/wholesaler with the appointed agency 
to ensure that all activities are performed to 
meet all the requirements of this standard. 


8.1.3 Infrastructure at the Procurement Centre 


8.1.3.1 The onion supplier/wholesaler or 
appointed agency engaged in procurement of 
onions should organize all the required 
infrastructure at the procurement centre, which 
may include adequate working space having 
sufficient sheds, weighing scales, stationery and 
computers for keeping records of the 
procurement and temporary storage, if required, 
or any other equipment required. 


8.1.3.2 If loose onions are being received, the 
onion supplier/wholesaler/appointed agency 
should organize for gunny bags, Sutli, etc in 
adequate quantity for packing of onions. 


IS 17912 : 2022 


8.1.3.3 Infrastructure at the procurement centre 
should be created as per the rules and regulations 
defined under respective state APMC Act. 


8.1.3.4 The onion procurement centre should 
have modern amenities and facilities. Refer Fig. 
1 for the preferable system for modernization of 
onion procurement centre. 


8.1.4 Communication with Farmers/Local 
Traders 


The onion supplier/wholesaler or appointed 
agency should inform the farmers/traders about 
nearby area of procurement centre and share the 
procurement process in advance including the 
period of procurement and quantity to be 
procured by the centre. The farmers/traders 
should be communicated through Gram 
Panchayat/posters or announcements regarding 
the location and in-charge of procurement centre. 


Pack House/Fresh onions from 


Farm 


Mechanical 
Pre-Storage 
Sorting and 
Grading 
(Clause 9.2) 


Drying yard equipped with 
mechanical heating for drying 
(Clause 9.1) 


Onion Storage 
(Clause 9.5.2) 


Wholesale auction Sorting 


/e-NAM center 


and 
Packaging 
(Clause 9.4) 


FIG. 1 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM DEPICTING TYPICAL PROCESS FLOWCHART IN A 
MODERN PROCUREMENT CENTRE 


8.1.5 Determination of Requirements for Onions 
and Related Services 


The onion supplier/wholesaler or appointed 
agency should ensure that relevant documented 
information regarding requirements for 
procurement, handling, transportation, storage 
and distribution are determined including any 
applicable statutory and regulatory requirements 
and communicated to all concerned. The relevant 
persons should be made aware of the changed 
requirements, if any. 


8.2 Control of Externally Provided Processes 
and Services 


8.2.1 General 


The onion supplier/wholesaler should determine 


and apply criteria for the evaluation, selection, 
monitoring of performance, and re-evaluation of 
external providers including agency appointed 
for procurement of onions, based on their ability 
to effectively handle the onions, processes 
involved and services in accordance with the 
requirements of this standard. The onion 
supplier/wholesaler should retain documented 
information of these activities including list of 
selected external providers and any necessary 
actions arising from the evaluation. 


8.2.2 Type and Extent of Control 


The onion supplier/wholesaler should ensure that 
due to externally provided processes, supply 
chain related services do not adversely affect the 
onion supplier/wholesaler’s ability to 
consistently deliver services for supply of onions 


to its customers. 
The onion supplier/wholesaler should: 


a) take into consideration, 

i) the potential impact of the externally 
provided processes related services 
and their ability to consistently meet 
customer and applicable legal 
requirements; and 

11) the effectiveness of the controls 
applied by the external provider. 


b) ensure that externally provided processes 
remain within the control of the supply 
chain services; and 


c) determine the criteria for evaluation of 
activities necessary and verification at 
regular interval to ensure that the 
externally provided processes, and 
related services meet the requirements of 
this standard. 


8.2.3 Information to External Providers 


The onion supplier/wholesaler should 
communicate to external providers about its 
requirements for: 


a) the processes, onion quantity and quality, 
and related services to be provided; 


b) the approval of, 
1) onion quality and associated 
services, 
ii) methods, processes and equipment, 
and 
111) the procurement of onions and 
related services; 


c) competence, including any required 
qualification of persons involved in the 
processes; 


d) interactions with the farmers/traders; 


e) method and criteria for evaluation of 
performance of external provider; and 


f) verification or validation activities that 
the onion supplier/wholesaler, or its 
customer, intends to perform at the 
external providers” premises. 


IS 17912 : 2022 
9 ONION AND RELATED SERVICES 
9.1 Curing and Drying 


9.1.1 In order to achieve long storage, it should 
be ensured that the onion bulbs are cured 
appropriately. The process of curing should 
ensure that the necks and outer scale leaves of the 
bulb are dried off adequately to prevent the loss 
of moisture and the attack by decay during 
storage. 


9.1.2 The curing should be in appropriate heat 
and good ventilation and preferably with low 
humidity. Onions should be considered cured 
when neck is tight and the outer scales are dried 
until they rustle. This condition is generally 
considered as reached when bulbs have lost about 
5 percent of their weight. In case bulbs cannot be 
dried in the field, the bulbs should be collected in 
trays and then stacked in a warm, covered area 
with good ventilation. 


9.1.3 In cool, damp climates, onions in bulk- 
ventilated stores should be dried with artificial 
heat blown through the bulk at a duct temperature 
of 30°C. Onions may also be cured by tying the 
tops of the bulbs in bunches and hanging them on 
a horizontal pole in well-ventilated shades as 
curing in shade improves bulb colour and reduces 
losses significantly during storage. 


9.2 Sorting and Grading 


Before transportation for marketing or storage, 
manual or automatic grading and sorting of 
onions should be done to reduce losses during 
storage as injured and decayed bulbs may harm 
the healthy onions of the lot. Based on the 
demand of customer/local market, onions should 
be graded based on their size, colour, etc and it is 
ensured that the bulb is: 


a) reasonably uniform in shape, size colour 
and pungency of the variety/type; 

b) mature, solid in feel, reasonably firm 
with tough clinging skins; 

c) throughout cured and dried; 

d) free from dust and other foreign material; 

e) free from defective, diseased, decayed 
and damaged bulbs; 

f) free from dry sun scald burn, sprouting, 
mechanical or other injuries and staining; 
and 

g) free from moulds, soft rot and insect 
attack. 


IS 17912 : 2022 


NOTE — The sorting and grading of onions 
should be done based on requirements of variety, 
size, colour given in the guidelines issued by the 
supplier/wholesaler. 


9.3 Onion Procurement 


Farmers/traders may bring stock in loose/packed 
form in tractor trolley/other vehicle at the 
procurement centre. Alternatively, the onion 
supplier/wholesaler may also procure onion from 
the field of the farmers. 


The onion supplier/wholesaler or appointed 
agency should verify the quality of onions as per 
the guidelines set for procurement and accept the 
material after weighment. 


The quality requirements for onions may be 
decided by the Onion supplier/wholesaler and 
should be communicated to the farmer/local 
trader in advance. For guidance, refer Annex A 
for the quality requirements of onions. 


9.3.1 Procurement Centre 
The procurement centre should ensure that: 


a) constant monitoring mechanism of 
procured onion should be put in place as 
to minimize the by-product losses; 

b) weighing arrangements along with 
certified standard weights are available 
and receipts are issued to the 


farmer/trader; 
c) system is in place for daily reporting to 
management of onion 


supplier/wholesaler indicating quantity 
purchased and financial details relevant 
to procurement; 

d) control room is set up which should 
remain functional throughout the 
operation of procurement for monitoring 
and supervision as well as for receiving 
complaints/grievances and their 
redressal with proper recording of receipt 
of such complaints; 

e) name and contact number of centre in- 
charge, is prominently displayed at 
procurement centre; 

f) by-product obtained during 
sorting/grading of onions are disposed as 
per 9.3.3; and 

g) prior to storage, bulbs are cleaned and 
graded, and all damaged or diseased 
bulbs are removed. 


9.3.2 Cleaning 


The impurities, soil or other foreign materials, 
which may materially alter the appearance or 
quality of bulbs should be removed and badly 
affected produce should be discarded. Cleaning 
may be carried out using air or by manually 
removing unwanted materials on the bulb 
surface. Care should be taken to avoid physical 
harm to the bulb during these operations. 


9.3.3 Disposal of By-product Obtained During 
Sorting/Grading of Onions 


The onion supplier/wholesaler should arrange 
disposal of by-product through open auction at 
spot of sorting/grading itself and in case of 
waste/damaged products, the same should be 
disposed by adopting standard procedures 
stipulated for sustainable organic waste disposal. 


9.4 Packaging 


9.4.1 The packing should be small for easy 
handling during transit, however may vary 
according to market demand and customer 
requirements. Onions should be packed in such a 
way as to protect the produce properly and are 
free from all foreign matter. The bags used for 
packaging of onions should be cleaned 
adequately from inside and should be of a quality 
such as to avoid causing any external or internal 
damage to the onions. 


9.4.2 The packing of procured onion should 
generally be made in environment friendly wide 
meshed hessian cloth new bag conforming to IS 
3790 and preferably 45 kg of the capacity or as 
decided by the onion supplier/wholesaler. Being 
helpful to reduce storage losses, polypropylene 
net woven bags (leno bags), suitable for packing 
weights from 5 kg to 50 kg may also be used for 
packaging of onions. The bags used for packing 
of onions should meet the following criteria: 


a) The bag should be strong enough to 
retain the required weight of onions 
during transport and storage; and 

b) The bags should allow sufficient 
ventilation for the air around the bulbs to 
maintain temperature and relative 
humidity in the required range. 


The standard specifications of wide meshed jute 
(hessian) bags used for packing of onion may be 
as under: 


a) Type of jute bag: New jute hessian bag; 

b) Capacity: 45 kg; 

c) Dimensions: 0.6 x 1 m; 

d) Weight: 220 g; 

e) Stitching: Herakle, sewn by jute 
twine/jute yarn; and 

f) Packing: Iron bound bale 500/1 000 bags 
in a bale. 


9.4.3 The onion supplier/wholesaler should 


IS 17912 : 2022 


incorporate suitable IT tools and should devise a 
suitable coding system to be marked on 
packaging for identification/traceability of 
onions preferably containing the location of 
farmer/Mandi/procurement centre, date of 
procurement, quality (grade, size, colour), 
weight, logo of procurement agency, etc. A low- 
cost real-time system as given in Fig. 2 may be 
preferred. 


Add QR code with Information: 
Type, Place, Sender, Date, Google 


Map Location of Destination, URL to = 
upload the details after delivery. Google 


Truck driver 
to scan the 
QR & Set 


Location 


At warehouse 
/Retail QR 
Scanned 


At destination QR Code scanned and 
URL uploaded and updated 

Auto update of QR information 

+ Additional Details (if applicable) 


Truck fitted 
with GPS 
tracker moves 


FIG. 2 TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION OF USE OF TECHNOLOGY TO TRACK AND TRACE 
ONIONS IN STORE AND TRANSIT 


9.5 Weighment and Storage 
9.5.1 Weighment of the Onions 


The warehouse person should adopt the practices 
to ensure that the negotiable warehouse receipts 
preferably in electronic form are issued 
accurately stating the quantity and quality of the 
deposited onions. 


The following procedure should be adopted: 


a) The entire lot of the onions to be stored 
should be weighed before being stored 
inside a registered warehouse; 

b) The warehouse person should ensure that 
the record of the weighment of the goods 
to be stored cannot be tampered with or 
altered; 

c) In case where the warehouse does not 
have its own lorry weighbridge, it should 
have platform scales of requisite capacity 
and in sufficient numbers; 

d) If the warehouse does not have its own 
lorry weighbridge, and the weighment is 


taken at an external weighbridge, the 
warehouse person or authorized official 
should supervise the weighment of the 
onions at such external locations as well 
as during transportation to the 
warehouse; 

e) The recorded weight of the onions during 
storage should be communicated to and 
got authenticated by the depositor or its 
authorized representative; and 

f) The standard weights, weighing scales or 
weighbridge used for weighment of 
goods should be available in the 
warehouse. In case weighing facilities 
are not available in the warehouse or out 
of order, the facilities available 
externally should be used. These 
standard weights, weighing scales or 
weighbridge should be periodically 
verified and stamped by Department of 
Weights and Measures. Same mode of 
weighment should be resorted both 
during deposit and delivery of goods in a 
warehouse. 


IS 17912 : 2022 


9.5.2 Storage of Onions 


The storage of onions should be in accordance 
with IS 9311 and operated in such a manner to 
minimize losses from physical, physiological, 
and pathological agents. In addition to the 
guidelines mentioned in IS 9311, the following 
precautions should be taken during storage of 
onions: 


a) Turning of onion is required at 3 month 
interval in ventilated storage structures. 
In case storage structure starts emitting 
foul smell, turning of onion should be 
carried out earlier to remove rotten, 
damaged and sprouting bulbs; 

b) During rains, structures may be protected 
with plastic sheet to prevent splashing; 

c) Avoid spraying or dusting of hazardous 
pesticide on the stored onions; 

d) General maintenance of storage premises 
should be done before storage and no 
structural maintenance should be 
allowed during the storage of onions; 

e) Trash and onion waste disposal system 
should be in place; 

f) The warehouse person should check the 
godowns regularly for any leakage in the 
roof, gaps in the walls/window/ventilator 
pans allowing entry of rain water or entry 
of birds; 

g) Vegetative growth in the warehouse’s 
premises should be removed at 
periodical intervals and the premises 
kept free from reptiles, bird nests, rat 
burrows, etc; 

h) Adequate arrangements should be 
available to deal with any emergency 
situation including outbreak of fire in the 
premises of storage; 

j) The adequate lighting arrangements 
should be available in warehouse 
premises; and 

k) Before storage of onion, storage structure 
should be cleaned and disinfected. It is 
recommended to disinfect with spray of 
2 percent carbendazim or fumigation of 
sulphur. 


NOTE — The storage reservoirs may be 
located at key points to take advantage of 
natural physical topography, or for reasons of 
balancing supply and demand or for emergency 
situations. 


9.6 Transportation 


9.6.1 As the onions are generally transported by 


means of ship, road and rail, the conveyances 
and/or containers used for transporting should be 
kept ventilated, clean and maintained in good 
condition to protect from contamination and 
should be designed and constructed such as to 
permit adequate cleaning and/or disinfection. Not 
more than 12 bags should be stowed on top of one 
another, as too great a stack height leads to 
bruising and excessive heating which may lead to 
more losses than usual limits. It should also be 
ensured that the bags stacking should fill not 
more than three-fourth of the volume of the 
vehicle. 


9.6.2 Non-Refrigerated Transportation 


9.6.2.1 In case where transportation time is less 
than five days, the onions should be transported 
by road/rail at ambient temperature and humidity, 
however, the vehicle should be covered suitably 
to protect the consignment from 
rain/thunderstorm/contaminations, etc during 
transportation; and 


9.6.2.2 In case of transportation time is more than 
five days, adequate ventilation (60 to 90 
circulations per hour, and at least one complete 
air change per 12 h) at ambient temperature is 
essential to prevent a buildup of excessive 
humidity in the load, which may lead to initiation 
of rooting. It should be ensured that there is at 
least 150 mm of clear space between the top of 
the load and the roof of the container, to allow air 
movement. 


9.6.3 Refrigerated Transportation 


In case, transportation time of the consignment is 
more than 10 days, onions should be transported 
at low temperatures in conventional vessels, or in 
containers. Optimum conditions during such 
transportation should be a temperature of (0 to 
2)°C and relative humidity of 65 to 70 percent, 
with a high air circulation rate of 60 to 90 
complete circulations per hour, and one complete 
air change per 12 h. Modern integral reefer 
containers with in-built dehumidifying capacity 
may also be used to maintain a relative humidity 
of 65 percent to 70 percent. 


9.7 Distribution 


The following steps should be taken for efficient 
distribution of onions: 


a) The onion stock stored in ventilated 
stores and controlled atmosphere stores 


should be labeled as per date of storage, 
date of harvesting, farmers details and 
other traceability features. The suitable 
coding system as per 9.4.3 may also be 
adopted. 

b) Retrieval of stock for distribution should 
be on first in first out (FIFO) basis. 

c) Mapping should be done in advance for 
deficient markets and consumption 
centers. 

d) The onion producer/supplier/wholesaler 
should maintain proper action plan for 
distribution of onions and ensure 
efficient transport distribution channel of 
onions. 

e) Requirement of each consumption 
centers from April till December should 
be worked out in the action plan. 

f) Action plan should indicate the dates on 
which supply is to be made and quantity 
to be supplied to each center. 

g) Advance booking of transport should be 
done for each date and destination. 

h) The duration of transportation time to the 
destination should be factored in the 
distribution. 

3) The action plan should also factor the 
holidays and festivals on which mandis 
are not working at the destination 

k) Before transportation, grading of stock 
should be done to remove diseased and 
sprouted bulbs. 

m) Reheating of onion should be done in 
case of controlled atmosphere storage 
before dispatch to market/consumption 
centre. 


n) 


p) 


q) 


r) 


IS 17912 : 2022 


Transportation should be done in well 
ventilated trucks for long distance 
beyond 500 km. 

The Good Receipt Note (GRN) should be 
filled in prescribed format with 
appropriate verification at the time of 
dispatch. 

At the time of dispatch, Quality 
Inspection Report (QIR) should be 
prepared and dispatched along with the 
consignment. 

In case of pre-dispatch inspection of the 
stock by the representative of buyer, state 
government/any other agency, their 
signature certifying the quality of stock 
may be obtained on the QIR. 


9.8 Documentation 


To 


the extent necessary, the onion 


producer/supplier/wholesaler should: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


maintain documented information to 
support the operation of its processes; 
retain documented information to have 
confidence that the processes are being 
carried out as per planned scheduled; 
maintain the records of the workforce 
employed and needed, as per schedule; 
maintain records to establish traceability 
of onions causing major/minor non- 
conformity; and 

maintain documented information of 
quantity of onions purchased along with 
their source of origin for inspection and 
traceability. 


IS 17912 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 9.3) 
(For guidance) 


GUIDELINES FOR CLASSIFICATION AND QUALITY CHECK OF ONIONS AT THE 
PROCUREMENT CENTRE 


A-1 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 
Onion should be: 


a) intact; 

b) sound, produce affected by rotting or 
deterioration such as to make it unfit for 
consumption is excluded; 

c) clean, free from any visible foreign 
matter; 

d) free from damage caused by frost; 

e) sufficiently dry for the intended use (in 
the case of storage of onions, at least the 
two first outer skins and the stem should 
be fully dried); 

f) without hollow or tough stems; 

g) practically free from pests; 

h) practically free from damage caused by 
pests; 

j) free of all abnormal external moisture; 
and 

k) free of any foreign smell and/or taste. 


A-2 CLASSIFICATION 


The onions are classified in two classes, based on 
the quality as given below: 
a) Class I 


1) Onions in this class should be of 
good quality and the bulbs should be: 
1) firm and compact; and 
ii) practically free of root tufts; 
however, for onions harvested 
before complete maturity, root 
tufts are allowed. 


2) Defects — The following slight 
defects, however, may be allowed, 
provided these do not affect the 
general appearance of the produce, 
and the quality: 

1) a slight defect in shape; 

ii) slight defects in colouring; 

111) light staining covering not more 
than one fifth of the bulb’s 
surface; 

iv) superficial cracks in and partial 
absence of the outer skins, 
provided the flesh is protected; 


and 
v) slight glassiness not exceeding 
the outer fleshy ring. 


b) Class IT 


1) This class includes onions that do 
not qualify for inclusion in Class I 
but satisfy the minimum 
requirements specified in A-1. The 
bulbs should be reasonably firm. 


2) Defects — The following defects 
may be allowed, provided the 
onions retain their essential 
characteristics as regards the 
quality, the keeping quality and 
presentation: 

1) defects in shape; 

ii) defects in colouring; 

111) staining covering not more 
than one half of the bulb”s 
surface; 

iv) cracks in the outer skins and 
partial absence of the skins on 
a maximum of one third of the 
bulb’s surface, provided the 
flesh is not damaged; 

v) slight marking caused by 
parasites or disease; 

vi) slight bruising; 

vii) root tufts; and 

viii) glassiness not exceeding the 
two outer fleshy rings. 


A-3 QUALITY CHECK 


The quality of onions at source/procurement 
centre should be monitored by the onion 
producer/supplier/wholesaler for the long-term 
storage and to minimize losses from physical, 
physiological and pathological agents. 


In addition to A—1, the quality of the stock of 
onion should also meet the following 
specifications: 


a) The bulbs should be reasonably uniform 
in shape, size colour and pungency of the 
variety/type; 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


8) 


h) 


The bulb should be mature, solid in feel, 
reasonably firm with tough clinging 
skins, be free from dust and other foreign 
material; 

Bulb should be free from defective, 
diseased, decayed and damaged bulbs 
caused by seed stems, tops, roots, 
moisture, dry sun scald burn, sprouting, 
mechanical or other injuries, staining and 
be free from moulds, soft rot and insect 
attack; 

Bulbs selected for storage should be 
firmed and the neck dry and thin. The 
bulbs should be intact (flesh not 
exposed); 

Thick- necked bulbs should be discarded 
because they are most likely to have high 
moisture content than optimum for 
storage, and therefore would have short 
storage life; 

Skin colour should be typical of the 
cultivar; 

The stem should be twisted and clean-cut 
and should not be more than 40 mm long 
(except for twisted); and 

Size code of onions should be as follows: 


Size Code 


Jaw» 


Diameter 
mm 


Difference 
Between the 
Diameter of the 
Smallest and the 
Largest Onion in 
the Same Package 
mm 


10 to 20 5 
21 to 40 15 
41 to 70 20 
More than 30 
70 


IS 17912 : 2022 


A-4 RELAXATION 


At all marketing stages, tolerances in respect of 
quality and size should be allowed in each lot for 
produce not satisfying the requirements of the 
class indicated, as follows: 


a) Quality Tolerances 


b) 


1) Class I 


A total tolerance of 10 percent, by 
number or weight, of onions not 
satisfying the requirements of the class 
but meeting those of Class II should be 
allowed. Within this tolerance not more 
than 1 percent in total may consist of 
produce satisfying neither the 
requirements of Class II quality nor the 
minimum requirements, or of produce 
affected by decay. Within the 1 percent 
tolerance, the externally visible shoot 
growth may not exceed 10 mm in 
length. 


2) Class II 


A total tolerance of 10 percent, by 
number or weight, of onions satisfying 
neither the requirements of the class nor 
the minimum requirements are allowed. 
Within this tolerance not more than 2 
percent in total may consist of soft 
onions or produce affected by decay. In 
addition, a tolerance of 10 percent by 
number or weight of firm onions with 
externally visible shoot growth is 
allowed. 


Size Tolerance for All Classes 

A total tolerance of 10 percent, by number 
or weight, of onions not satisfying the 
requirements as regards sizing may be 
allowed. 


IS 17912 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Supply Chain Management Sectional Committee, SSD 18 


Organization 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi 


Amazon India, Bengaluru 


Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
of India, New Delhi 

Association of State Road Transport 
Undertakings, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Shipping, Mumbai 


Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, 
Faridabad 
Domestic Air Cargo Agents Association, Navi 
Mumbai 


Dredging Corporation of India Ltd, Vizag 
DTDC Express Ltd, Bengaluru 


Federation of Freight Forwarders' Associations in 
India, Mumbai 

Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry, New Delhi 

ICAR-Directorate of Onion and Garlic Research, 
Pune 

ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, 
Bengaluru 

Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad, 
Ahmedabad 

Indian Institute of Management Bangalore, 

Bengaluru 

Indian Institute of Materials Management, Navi 
Mumbai 

Indian Ports Association, New Delhi 

Infrastructure Industry and Logistics Federation 
of India, New Delhi 

Institute of Logistics and Aviation Management, 
New Delhi 

Logistics Sector Skill Council, Chennai 


Mahindra Logistics Ltd, Mumbai 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, New 
Delhi 
Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship, New Delhi 
National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing 
Federation of India Ltd, New Delhi 
National Center for Cold Chain Development, 
New Delhi 
National Horticultural Research and 
Development Foundation, New Delhi 
National Institute of Agricultural Extension 
Management, Hyderabad 


Representative(s) 
DR SURENDRA KUMAR AHIRWAR (Chairman) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI VIKRANT RAI 
CAPT P. C. MEENA (Alternate) 
SHRIB. K. PRUSTY 


SHRI DINESH KUMAR 
SHRI AMIT BAJAJ (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI SHANKAR SHINDE 


SHRI ABHIK SAHA 
DR RAJIV KALE 


DR T. M. GAJANANA 

DR R. RAGHU (Alternate) 
PROF NITIN SETH 

PROF DEEPANKAR SINHA (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


DR ADITYA GUPTA 
REPRESENTATIVE 
DRR. D. TRIPATHI 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


CAPT T. S. RAMANUJAM 
SHRI RAMESH VENKAT (Alternate I) 
SHRI R. SIVAKUMAR (Alternate IT) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRI S. K. KAUL 

SHRI BRAJENDRA SINGH 

SHRI ANGSHUMAN SIDDHANTA (Alternate) 


DR P. K. GUPTA 


DR SHALENDRA 
DR K. C. GUMMAGOLMATH (Alternate) 


Organization 


National Institute of Industrial Engineering, 
Mumbai 


Packaging Industry Association of India, Mumbai 


Pricewaterhouse Coopers Private Ltd, Gurugram 
Research Designs and Standards Organization 
(RDSO), Lucknow 
Rhenus Logistics India Private Ltd, 
Mumbai 
Services Export Promotion Council, New Delhi 
The Chartered Institute of Logistics and 
Transport India, New Delhi 
TRAX - Road Safety NGO of India, New Delhi 
TVS Supply Chain Solutions Ltd, Chennai 


Warehousing Development and Regulatory 
Authority, New Delhi 

XLRI - Xavier School of Management, 

Jamshedpur 

In personal capacity (#172, 23rd Main Road 
Srinivasanagar Nandini Layout, Bangalore 
360096) 

BIS Directorate General 


IS 17912 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


DR VIVEK KHANZODE 
PROF RAVINDRA GOKHALE (Alternate I) 
PROF RAKESH RAUT (Alternate II) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI VIVEK ARYA 


MS TARVINDER KAUR 
SHRI RAJIV KUMAR KOCHHAR 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI NAGENDRA PRASAD V. 

SHRI S. RAMCHANDRAN (Alternate) 
DR RACHANA SHALINI 


DRT. A. S. VIJAYA RAGHVAN 
DR ABHISHEK CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 
SHRI VARUN RAMU 


SHRI S. K. KANOGIA, SCIENTIST E AND HEAD (SSD-II) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SHIVAM SONI 
SCIENTIST B (SERVICE SECTOR DEPARTMENT-U), BIS 


Panel for drafting standard on Supply Chain of Onions — Guidelines - SSD 18/P01 


Organization 


Logistics Sector Skill Council, Chennai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAMESH VENKAT (Convener) 
SHRI R. SIVAKUMAR (Alternate I) 
CAPT T. S. RAMANUJAM (Alternate II) 


Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Faridabad 
Domestic Air Cargo Agents Association, Navi Mumbai 


ICAR-Directorate of Onion and Garlic Research, Pune 
ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, Bengaluru 


Indian Ports Association, New Delhi 

National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India 
Limited, New Delhi 

National Center for Cold Chain Development, New Delhi 


National Horticultural Research and Development Foundation, 
New Delhi 

National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management, 
Hyderabad 

Research Designs and Standards Organization (RDSO), Lucknow 


Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority, New Delhi 


SHRI B. K. PRUSTY 
SHRI DINESH KUMAR 

SHRI AMIT BAJAJ (Alternate) 
DR RAJIV KALE 


DR T. M. GAJANANA 

DR R. RAGHU (Alternate) 
DR R. D. TRIPATHI 
SHRI S. K. KAUL 


SHRI BRAJENDRA SINGH 


SHRI ANGSHUMAN SIDDHANTA (Alternate) 


DRP. K. GUPTA 
DR SHALENDRA 

DR K. C. GUMMAGOLMATH (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


DR RACHANA SHALINI 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication 8 Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: SSD-II 18 (17397). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


