, IS 13358 ( Part 5 ) : 1993

( Reaffirmed 2000 )

Indian Standard

CODEOFPRACTICEFORCULTIVA?IONOF AROMATICPLANTS
FART 5 MENTHA PIPERITA ( PEPPERMINT ) AND MENTHA SPICATA ( SPEARMINT )

UDC

665'526'22

@ BTS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MAKG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

August

1993

Price Group 1

Natural & Synthetic

Perfumery

Materials Sectional Committee,

PCD 18

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Natural & Synthetic Perfumery Materials Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Proclucts Division Council. Natural perfumery materials like essential oils, are known to vary in olfactory and other physicoWorking on this premise, chemical characteristics depending on different agro-climatic conditions. the Committee had quite some time back published IS 6774 : 1972 Classification ofessential oil This standard covers information relating to botanical identity, habitat, bearing aromatic plants'. economic stage of growth, harvesting season and part of the plant used for essential oil production. These factors have long been recognized to govern the quality of the natural essential oils. Realizing the importance of endemic variations of these factors including fertilizer, irrigation, modern technology and appropriate agronomic practices developed through B process of evaluation trials at recognized cultivation centres for aromatic plants in the country, the Committee decided to amplify these efforts directionally and prepare specific codes for good This series cultivation practice for individual aromatic plants used for esscr tial oil production. of Jndian Standards for specific aromatic plants is expected to provide guidance to prospective cultivators, producers and users of the essential oils to obtain the optimum yield of the essential oil of an acceptable quality for the perfumery industry. In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from R & D' work of ICAR and CUR laboratories besides State Directorates and Institutions for Medicinal Plants.

IS 13358 ( Part

5 ) : 1993

Indian Standard

CODEOFPRACTICEFORCTJLTIVATIONOF AROMATICPLANTS
PART 5 MENTHA 1 SCOPE This standard prescribes a code of practice aromatic plants for cultivation of the for production of oil of peppermint, botanically known as Mentha piperita Linn. and spearmint botanically known as Mentha spicata Linn., introduced mainly from Europe and USA where these are extensively cultivated. The oil of peppermint is cooling, sweet in taste and possess 45 to 50 percent menthol, whereas the spearmint emitting oil has 59 to 62 percent I-carvone, These crops grow in warm, fruity spicy aroma. U.P. and parts of Punjab and their respective oil is now being exported to Europe/USA. 2 VARIETIES Mentha piperita vulgaris Black Mitchen ( var. Linn. ) a hardy introduced culture is generally grown in India. It contains higher oil content. Another culture called white mint ( var. o#icinalis Linn. ) has low oil content, is less hardy but is reported A number to yield superior odour value of oil. of clonal material and selections of black Mitchen occur into cultivation in India. Mentha spicata Similarly common spearmint culture with thick broad foliage and pink stems continue to be some Lately, popular in the cultivation. selections have also been broughtout and introduced into cultivation. 3 SOIL AND CLIMATE AND CULTIVARS PIPERITA ( PEPPERMINT ) AND MENTHA SPICATA ( SPEARMINT ) 5 MANURES AND FERTILIZERS

Generally nitrogeneous, phosphatic and potash fertilizer in 100:40:20 kg/ha ratio is given. About l/6 of total nitrogen, along with entire quantity of phosphatic and potash fertilizers is applied at planting whereas the remaining nitrogen is divided into two equal splits and given as top dressing in moist soil in April and July months when the plants are 8 to 12 cm high. The fertilizers optimize growth and increase yield significantly showing it has influence on oil content or oil quality produced. 6 WEEDING AND INTER-CULTURE

These mints maintain rows before the first harvest is taken and allow wheel hoe, tractortillers, bullock drawn intercultur-e and hand hoes, used in rows in early growth stage. Usually two weeding cum hoeings are given before the first crop is harvested in mid-June. The crop sprouts in a fortnight and spread all over the field during rainy season, forming thick growth. Incessant rains ( because of high soil moisture & thick growth ) limit mechanized interculture. Only two or three hand wcedings are possible. Pre-emergent use of chemical weedicidts like Sinbar ( Terbacil ) at 1'5 kg in 805 litrcs of water/ha is recommended to control weed growth. 7 IRRIGATION The crops needs copious irrigation three to four times c:ich month in summer months of April to June before the first harvest is taken. Since monsoon continue in m>st part of July August and September the fields needs a suitable network of drainage system. The crop is given irrigatron if rains are erratic to mainlain soil moisture till second harvest is taken. 8 HARVESTING AND YIELD

These species favour cooler temperatur-e, climate of foot-hills and longer days ( more sun light ) for higFer growth and yield, though organic well drained soils with pH ranging 6 to 8 is remaining same as other conditions ideal, described. 4 PROPAGATION AND PLANTING

Live juicy stolons of Mitchenmint and spearmint are planted in February ( foot-hills 62 plains ) to March and April ( hills ) in well prepared fields ( or terraced lands ) in rows. These stolons 5 to 8 cm in size arc planted in furrows at 2 cm depth at 40 to 45 cm spacing in rows either end to end or 10 cm distance in the row and given a It sprouts in 10 to 21 days and light irrigation. grow into erect healthy shoots.

The 011 content in these two mint cr'ops is low ( 0 3 to 0'35 per-cent on fresh weight basis ). The stage of h:rrvcst in mint plays a crucial role in its quality and odour vnluc. Imrnatu re pcppcrmint product oil with less swxt aroma, The optimum harvesting time is determined by crushing foliage between Iwo fingers when it emits charl-:cteristic minty odour and confirmed, by test distillatio:l. Falling of lower leaves in an 0therwi::e well grown branched stem full 01' foliage gives Indication of approackin~ maturity

IS 13358 ( Part 5 ) : 1993

of the crops where flowering is scattered in spearmint but is shy or absent in piperita species. The first cutting is taken in second to fourth week of May and the second in July/August. Total harvests yield varies from 4 to 6 tons producing 60 to 80 kg of oil per hectare of peppermint and spearmint depending upon soil fertility, crop strand, growth and management. The oil of peppermint has 35-40 percent menthol, 25-30 percent methone ( calculated as menthol ) and 3-4 percent menthyl acetate.
9 DISTILLATION

10 DISEASES

AND PESTS

Stolen rot caused by Mucrophomina phascoli ( Maubl ) Hobby sometimes occur in both of these species causing loss of crop strand in early stages. The infected stems show brown lesions, turning black and later results into soft decay. This causes yellowing of leaves, stunted growth and wilting. The stems be treated with 0'1 percent solution of suitable pesticide before planting. Once disease occur, the infected plants be segregated, pulled and burnt. Spearmint is susceptible to blight in Himachal Pradesh. Leaf blight is caused by Alternaria spp. which is another disease known for sizeabte losses for some years in India. It forms oval brown spots which coalesce and become bigger. Spraying of copper fungicides like cuprous oxide and copper oxychloride in early stages of infection, control the disease.

Usual steam or water steam ( hydro ) distillation is used and the crop is distilled in 90 minutes. The peppermint oil is yellow, mobile liquid. cooling to senses and sweet in taste with 40 to 50 percent of menthol. Presence of moisture in stored mint be avoided as it oxidizes or resinify the oil and spoil it. The mint oils are slightly acidic in nature and galvanized steel drums are used for storage.

Standard Mark by the provisions of the Bureau ofIndian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a icence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. The use of the Standard Mark is governed
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

Bureao of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following Monthly Additions'. reference : Dot : No. PCD 18 ( 1155 ) Amendments Issued Since Poblicatioa Amend No. Date of Issue ~__ Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

c 331 01 31 331 13 75 378499, 37 86 26, t 53 38 43, 53 23 84 235 02 16, 235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91 378561 37 86 62 53 16 40

Eastern : l/l4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1, P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Southern

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

235 04 42 235 23 1.5 632 78 58
632 78 92

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol. Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATJ. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THJRUVANANTHAPURAM.

