UDC

658.512.2

( 026 )

( Second

Reprint

NOVEMBER

199-E )

IS : 8976 - 1978 ( Reaffirmed 2001 ) ( Reaffirmed 1090 )

Indian Standard GUIDE FOR PREPARATION SETS OF DRAWINGS AND AND ARRANGEMENT PARTS LISTS OF

1. Scope 1.1 This standard serves as a guide for the preparation of sets of drawings and parts lists which properly meets the requirements of production practice and efficient plant operation and which may be applied equally by manufacturer and user for the purposes of production, maintenance, overhaul and spares acquisition. 1.2 It does not cover other design data which are needed apart from the lists, for example, stress calculations, test reports, standard and design not cover proposal drawing or project layout. 1.3 Simplified like; however, drawing sets, 2. Terminology The 2.1 Set of Drawings and Parts Lists manufacture and assembly of a product. 2.2 Component Scheme - A graphical is a useful document for job preparation aggregate of all the drawings and parts lists needed for sets of drawings such simplification are permitted for one-off should not run counter set of drawings and It also data sheets. parts does

manufacture, preproduction runs to the fundamental arrangement

and the of the

representation purposes. scheme

of details

of a product

( see

Appendix

A ).

It

2.3 Assembly Tree - Identical to component is different (see Appendix B ). 2.4 Part 2.4.1 An individual parts item which

in content.

Only

the

method

of presentation

is not divisible. occur in different assemblies/products. or more parts and/or groups etc, are also covered under of it.

Repeated

are parts

which

2.5 Groupslower order. Like repeated

Generally complete in themselves and consists of two Groups of loose parts such as name plates, accessories, parts, there may be repeated groups. or groups or smooth

2.5.1 Functional groupsWhen the component parts ordinated prior to the assemblies for adequate clearance may be grouped as functional groups.

are required functioning

to be matchedcoon assembly, these

groups

Drawings for functional Although in most cases such groups form part of the set of drawings. are generally referred as technical data (see 1 ) and not as manufacturing drawing as defined in IS : 8930-1978 ` Nomenclature of general engineering drawings `. machines, equipment) and or parts representing which the are end

of functioning (for example, 2.6 Producf - An item capable of a number of groups complete in themselves and consist products of a manufacturing sequence. 3. Function 3.1 A drawing of Drawings and Parts Lists

is a production

document. a!,oat the items called for in the drawing, item cal!ed for in the drawing. integral on the drawing or separate. regardless of whether the each other -~_. the list provides the full

3.2 Parts lists provide information designation and quantity of each 3.2.1 The parts lists (nay however, are complementary separate. be to

Parts

lists

and

drawIncl,

parts

lists

are

Integr.;l

or

Adopted

20 October

1978

{$ I
BUREAU
MANAK

February

1979, BIS I

Gr

4

OF
9

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN.

NEW

IS : 8978 - 1978
4. Preparation of Drawings and Parts Lists 4.1 Drawings and parts lists shall be so prepared that they may be reused ( rationalization other applications ( for example, other models, other order, repairs, spares deliveries ). This to the following requirements.
) for leads

4.1.1 Drawings should not bear any order-tied particulars, except general arrangement drawings for equipment of one-off character. In addition, drawings of groups and parts should not contain special layout representations tylng them to a specific place of use; Instead, these specific layouts should be included In the higher-order assembly or attachment drawing. Particulars regarding use may be entered in the appropriate panel of the preprinted drawing sheet or recorded on an Index card.

4.1.2 The quantity details given In the quantity columns of the deslgn parts lists are to be related to unit item represented, and not to the quantity needed per product or per order. This is necessary to allow flexibility in the use of the drawing for other requirements (for example, different products, ordering of spares ) in which the quantity required may differ from that Indicated for first use. The number of times a piece is required in the particular Instance is found from the higher-order parts list in the case of new production, and from the order In the case of spares acquisition.
4.2 Redundant detailing, that Is, repetition of the same particulars (for example, materials, weights, dimension figures) at different points should be avoided because when changes are made there is a risk that one of the redundant details will be overlooked and the necessary correction of all redundant particulars involves much effort and leads to confusion. From this it leads to the following requirements. 4.2.1 Materials and weights of component parts are to be indicated only on the production drawings of these parts and the total weights of groups only on the assembly drawings of such groups, and not repeated on the higher-order drawings. 4.2.2 When there Is a need for repetition on an assembly or attachment drawing of dimensions are not yielded for the Rrst time by the process of as for guidance purposes (for example -which assembly), but instead have already been laid down in a lower-order drawing (for example, in connection with the machining of a part) and therefore only constitute a repetition for the purpose of providing a clearer picture, then, such dimensions are to be placed alongwith the prefix REF in brackets. 4.3 All parts and groups belonging to the item represented, and including bolts, nuts, etc, are to be itemized, that is, are to be given serial numbers ( item No. ) even when, according to 5.4.2 they are not drawn separately. They are drawn in thick lines; the serial numbers should clearly define the item represented in its full extent. All parts and groups not belonging explanatory character ( for example, layouts 4.4 Drawings specifications the drawings to the item represented, and which > are to be drawn in thin lines. production, reference are rather of an

shall not reproduce specifications ( for example, ). Instead, these should be prepared separately; where required. are to

inspection and delivery to them may be given in

4.5 Identical parts in a drawing or parts list there are special reasons for not doing this.

be combined

in a single

item number

unless

4.5 Special particulars affecting a whole drawing and going to be entered above or alongside the drawing title block.

beyond the content

of the title

block are

4.7 The combining of the representation of two or more items in a single drawing is a question of expediency. This is usually done for the purpose of simplifying drawing work, indicating existing variants ( for example, different sizes, right-hand and left-hand versions ), and hence rationalization. The usefulness of the drawings for the purpose of job preparation, manufacture, spares supply, etc, Other aspects of combining are as follows. should not be impaired by such combining. 4.7.1 Combining of different stages of manufacture to give a simplified set of drawings ( 5.4.1 ) ( for example, machining and assembly or assembly and attachment ), should preferably be recognizable from the sub-title of the name, for example, ' .*.***...*.. assembly and attachment `. 2

IS : 8976 - 1978
47.2 The combining to only a minor extent dimensions ). of several varieties or sizes of a part or a group (for example, right-hand and left-hand versions differing from or in a small each other number of

4.7.3 Set-wise combining of parts or groups which do not justify individual stocking and which are not useable singly, but instead are used in sets ( for holders for fixing an attachment, or plates from the same production sequence single welded assembly ). 4.7.4 The following purposes: shall not ba combined, as combinations of this kind

accounting example, forming

and/or a set of part of a

are unsuitable

for shop

a) Varieties differing in type ( for example, single-armed and double-armed parts or groups differing fundamentally in character ( for example, chains, and the like in a single drawing ). b) Parts and groups resulting sequences ( for example, 4.8 The subdividing of a drawing the following conditions: a) from turned different manufacturing parts and stampings methods ). and

levers ), sets of gaskets, castings

different

production

into

several

sheets

( continuation

sheets ) may

be desirable

in

If the sheet size is too large and is, therefore, unwieldy in practical use, for example, filling purposes or in the workshop ( for example, subdivision of a side member front end, centre section, rear end, or details and sections as well ); and up an excessively dense representation and thereby rnake it clearer for frame assembly, attachment of buffer beam or head ). to follow

for into

b) To open example,

( for

With any such associated sheets so is convenient for this separate parts list is is used.

subdivision, the first of the various related drawings shall bear a list of the as to provide a survey of the total content ( for example, views, sections ). it list to be indicated above or alongside the title block of the first sheet when a parts list used, or to be placed at the start of the parts lists when an integral

The sheets resulting from the subdividing of a drawing are all given fhe same name and the be made identifiable and distinguishable by a same drawing number. They shall, however, supplementary mark behind the drawing number ( Sheet 1, Sheet 2, Sheet 3, etc, or A, B, C, etc ). Even when integral parts lists are used, the parts lists of these sheets form a single, coherent parts list. 4.9 Subdividing of the representation in supplementary drawings serves to allow a repeatedly recurring production process to be represented once only and this representation to be reused in a repeat application; this may be desirable ( standard can form for different camshafts, or fitting of a standard window if, apart from the window, its method of installation-position of holes, washers, screws and nuts used, etc, is also standardized ). The subdivision of a drawing for the splitting up of large groups. indicated in 5.1. 5. Arrangement 5.1 The flow. of Sets and representation described in 4.8 and 4.9 should not be used This should be carried out only in accordance with the rules

of Drawings sets of

and

Parts

Lists parts lists shall correspond with the assembly

arrangement

of the

drawings

and

This means that the set of drawings and parts lists shall be broken down into productron For example, a part which t)elongs groups which often will not match the functional groups. functionally to the ` brake' group (functional group ), but is welded to the frame, will need to he allocated to the ` frame ' group ( production group ) for drawing and parts I ists purposes. The foregoing principle regarding to the sequence of entries within the sequence corresponding a group parts lists. 3 the assembly tlow does not

relate

IS : 89769 1978
Note 1 -A product is made in the production workshop in various assembly stages starting with the combining of single parts to relatively small groups which in turn are combined to form larger groups until from the latter the complete product is finally assembled, possibly with the addition of fastening elements, such as bolts, nuts, etc. This assembly flow gives rise to a tree-like configuration of the set of drawings and parts lists which may be represented graphically, for example, as an assembly tree (see Appendix 6.1, or as a component scheme (see Appendix A ).
assembly tree and the component Note 2 -The shown in the Appendices, the assembly tree provides whereas the component scheme gives their sequence scheme are identical in content. The form in which they are an overall view of the total aggregate of all the components of manufacture and also serves as a planning document.

Note 3-The assembly tree and component scheme show that, with regard to the subdivision into individual groups, a certain hierarchy emerges in respect of the incorporation of these groups into the complete product; that is to say, it appears that any particular group occupies either a higher or a lower position compared with another For these reasons it is desirable not to adopt any such evaluative designation, but rather to refer only to group. 4groups ' which may be differentiated, where necessary, as groups of the lst, 2nd, 3rd........... nth order. If in such cases it were to become the practice to refer to sub-groups, then, to be logical, Note 4`-group and in this way there would be created as many stage would have to be designated a `sub-sub Such ranking of a group may change between one application and another. designations as there are ranks. products on a large scale are concerned the ranking may also cover many levels. the next different When

If the arrangement of the set of drawings and parts lists corresponds with the subdivision described in Note 5so far as it covers the range from component parts to complete product and contains the group drawings and group parts lists corresponding to the various assembly stages, then such an arrangement may be said to promote orderly job preparation, execution and accounting, as well as proper spares holding. 5.2

lists

An essential precondition is unambiguous naming

for a proper and clearcut subdivision of fhe contents of the drawing.

of the set of drawings

and parts

designer should be cleat about the purpose of every group drawing. If the groups concerned are Note 1 -The purely assembly groups, he should name them according to their content, for example, `gear unit ' or `magnet At the same time it is necessary that assembly into a system ' or ' cab ' (of a crane, locomotive or the like). complete group and the attachment of such a group of the product should be shown separately in the drawings if such attachment takes place in a part of the plant quite different from that where assembly into a group is carried or indeed, as may sometimes happen, outside the plant when outdoor erection is involved, or when the out, A group drawing of this assembled group is to be fitted on or in one or more products at different points thereon. kind, which contains a self-contained group as individual items plus their attaching parts individually listed, is then named accordingly, for example, ' gear unit with attaching parts `, ' cab with attaching parts ' or ` gear unit, attachattachment `. ment `, `cab, Note P-The parts should, as far as possible, their function if in future applications also, `compression spring `, not spring' but instead bearing ' but instead `axle bearing `, not ' triangle be named according to their nature and/or form and only accordtheir use is tied to a specific purpose, for example, not `contact `pivot pin ' but instead `grooved pin `, on the other hand not ' but instead ` brake triangle'. the parts represented same part. as that as repetition of a later parts part in

ing to

l

This

method

of naming

simplifies part name

use

of

in another product.
the parts list, the word

If

`complete '

the name of an assembled shall be appended to the

(group) is the of the assembled or

Additional particulars, Note 3on the direction of viewing.

such as ' right '

' left `, etc, should

be

used

with

caution,

since

they

depend

5.3 The arrangement of the set of drawings and parts lists ment drawing and for every assembly drawing a parts list exactly with content of the drawing, regardless of whether ` separate `.

For every shall agree. shall be prepared which the parts list concerned

general arrangeshall correspond is ' integral ' or

The parts list is a complete enumeration and itemization of the parts, groups, etc, represented in the drawing, and it includes standard parts and auxiliary materials as well as groups and parts not drawn separately. Only the parts, etc, serving the specific purpose of the drawing ( for example, assembly, attachment ) shall be itemized. 5.3.1 The parts list also gives the drawing/code,`catalogue number against serial numbers.

Every assembly drawing has a parts list which agrees are arranged according to the sequence of their numbering. the parts list, if made separately.

Drawings with the content of drawing. The same arrangement is followed for

5.3.2 Through its serial numbers ( items) the parts list of the complete product indicates what The groups and single parts, including fastening elements are needed for assembling the product. parts lists of the groups indicate what subordinate groups, parts, fastening elements and auxiliary materials are needed for assembly or attachment. The same applies to the parts lists for subordinate groups. 4

5.4 To simplify the set of drawings in specific instances, for example, in the case of one-off producIt is a basic principle that the aim should tion or preliminary runs, certain variations are permitted. be to subdivide the set of drawings and parts lists in all branches of the assembly tree down to If in individual cases, however, consistent subdivision down to individual individual part drawings. it is permissible for variations to be made from the ,part drawings is not economically justifiable, provisions of 5.1 and 5.2 provided that such variations do not run counter to the basic arrangement of These departures are defined in 5.4.1 and 5.4.2 and it is not the set of drawings and parts lists. permissible for them to be extended arbitrarily. Exceptions for these departures are repeated parts and spare parts which are always to be shown separately from each other on drawings of their own so that they may be used freely and replacements for them ordered according to the (same) drawings. This practice is also recommended for drawings of bought-out parts. 5.4.1 Assembly component drawings, that is the combining of several stages of manufacture, for ,exampIe, the representing of parts with all their dimensions for production purposes and the assembling of these parts in a assembly component drawing, are only permissible as a means of reducing the amount of work in the drawing ofice provided it does not involve extra work on the production side. Assembly component drawings may be split up into sections for the assembly drawing of the product or the group (at right bottom by the title block, with integral parts list where appropriate) and for the production drawings of the associated parts. For the purposes of manufacture, purchase etc, the prints of the same may be cut into their individual sections and used. Such drawings are not suitable for the products in that manufacturing range. Therefore, drawings of this type should be used only to limited extent. 5.4.2 example, finished ,in so far diagrams (numbers All 40 which Parts which are not drawn are clearly designated by brief particulars in the parts list, for parts obtained simply by cutting half-finished products, standard parts obtained in the condition in so far as they are used unaltered, commercially obtainable parts or products as they are clearly defined, for example, in catalogues - and do not require any dimension for the purpose of installing or inspection. Catalogue numbers or any other document should be quoted. groups or parts not separately drawn should they belong and should be fully designated be itemized in the in the parts list, drawing and the parts list

1s : 8976 - 1978
APPENDIX ( Clause 2.2 )
COMPONENT 1STORDER I LrlHE-OEL*Y
GROUPS BASEPLATE COMPL. MAGNET YOKE 2NO OROER GROUPS 3RO

A

SCHEME
ORDER SINGLE PARTS RAW MATERIAL/ PAR BOUGHT-OUT

GROUPS

I _
-MAGNE -1

.

MAGNET I

SHEET BRACKET HOLDER

)--1

,,,AT

I

MAGNET

,-w,

INrERMEOIArE RIVErto

SHEET PIN

STRANOEO -`CONTACT

CONDUCTOR HOLOER ,L,

t+ +.--r(

MAT

3

1

BRACKET

]

BRACKET

--

BOUGHT-O,,!

1

ROLLER

-

6

APPENDIX ( Clause 2.3)
ASSEMBLY
PRODUCT

B

TREE
RELAY

[ TINE-DE;AY

1
8
COMPONEN SPRING CONTACT COUPL. CONTACT BRACKET PARTS RE TAlNER TO DRAWING STANDARD ITEMS

I
151 *ND FOR ORDER PARTS FINAL BASEPLATE COHPL. MAGNET YOKE GROUPS

I

ASSEMBLY

r
2hD ORDER SPRING CONTACT LEFT SPRING CONTACT RIGHT GROUPS ANC ) ( PARTS FOR ASSEMBLY OF 151 WRDtR GROUPS c

I I 1 3 :OMPONEN PARTS TO

COMPONENT PART 10

DRAWING STANDARD ITEM

ORAWING STANOARO ITEMS

3RO `PARTS :ND

OROER AND FOR OF OfiOtE SPRING CONTACT

_L
3 COMPONENl PARTS TO DRAWING STANDARD IlLUS I 3 COUPONEN PARTS TO DRAWING STANOARO ITEMS 3 COMPONENI PARTS TO DRAWING STANDARD ITEHS

GROUPS ASSEl*fiLY GROUPS

IS:18976 - 1978 EXPLANATORY NOTE

`Code of practice for general engineering drawings ' contains general IS : 696-1972 IS : 8930-1978 ` Nomenclature for general recommendations for preparation of engineering drawings. enoineering drawings ' provides the names of various engineering drawings and their short explanations. This standard contains further explanations to classify the role played by those drawings. in a modern drawing set. concepts, such as group, repeated part, etc, and' This standard first explains som e important then considers drawings and parts from the functional aspect and presents principles and rules to be applied in the arrangement of a set of drawings and parts lists as an aid to production. The appendices to the standard give examples of an assembly flow. All the explanations regarding parts lists are not oriented towards a specific preprinted form. The same applies to the remarks regar-ding of engino?ring drawings because this depends drawings. No reference is made to the .:un,l,erincj The CI:CL;~~ diagrams have also been not dealt with in largely on the works organization concerned. this standard. This standard is based on DIN 6789-1965 ` Systematic and parts lists as production aids, definitions, direction lnstitut fur Normung ( DIN 1. arrangement of drawings, set of drawings. for arrangement' issued by Deutsches

