NAT Aa IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


TRAT AA 
ATT 1 Tia oherat 


Municipal Governance 


Part 1 Reference Architecture 


ICS 33.020, 35.020 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM aa 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SEERNE TH Ari, ag faset — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2021 Price Group 10 


Smart Infrastructure Sectional Committee LITD 28 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Smart 
Infrastructure Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Electronics and Information Technology Division 
Council. 


The Composition of the panel, LITD 28/P8 and the sectional committee, LITD 28 responsible for the formulation 
of this standard is given at Annex C. 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


Contents 

Pages 
0 INTRODUCTION w vii 
I SCOPE ya 1 
2 REFERENCE ao 1 
3 TERMINOLOGY AND DEFINITIONS 1 
3.1 Terms and Definitions 1 
3.1.1  Desludging Operator 1 
3.12  Aadhaar 1 
3.1.3 Goods and Service Tax Network (GSTN) 1 
3.14 Goods and Service Tax (GST) 1 
3.1.5 Unified Payments Interface (UPI) 1 
3.1.6 Bharat Bill Payment System (BBPS) 1 
3.1.7 BharatOR 1 
3.1.8 Core Services 1 
3.19 Core Data Infrastructure 1 
3.2 Abbreviations 1 
4 ARCHITECTURE PRINCIPLES FOR MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE SYSTEM 2 
5 HIGH LEVEL ARCHITECTURE FOR MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE SYSTEM 2 
5.1 Collaboration Layer 4 
5.1.1 Channels 4 
5.1.2 Voice of Citizen (VoC) Platform 4 
5.2 Business Layer 4 
5.2.1 Municipal ERP 4 
5.2.2 Citizen Services 4 
5.3 Technology Layer 4 
5.3.1 Core Service Infrastructure 4 
5.3.2 Core Data Infrastructure 4 

6 MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE: COLLABORATION LAYER 
BUSINESS ARCHITECTURE 4 
6.1 Channels 4 
6.2 Voice of Citizen (VoC) platform 5 
7 MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE: MUNICIPAL ERP BUSINESS ARCHITECTURE 5 
7.1 Account, Budget, Investments & Planning 5 
7.1.1 Budgeting Creation and Maintenance 6 
712 Budget Execution 6 
7.1.3 Budget Closing and Financial Reporting 6 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


7.2 


7.3 


7.4 


7.5 


7.14 
7.1.5 
7.1.6 
7.1.7 
7.1.8 
7.19 
7.1.10 
7.1.11 
7.1.12 
7.1.13 
7.1.14 
7.1.15 
7.1.16 


Grants Management 

Financial Accounting 

Asset Accounting 

Inventory accounting 

Joint Venture Accounting 
Compliance Reporting 

Payments and Bank Communications 
Cash and Liguidity Management 
Debt and Investment Management 
Financial Planning and Analysis 
Overhead Cost Accounting 
Service Cost Management 
Profitability and Cost Analysis 


Asset, Land and Real Estate management 


7.2.1 
7.2.2 
123 
724 
7.2.5 
7.2.6 
7.2.7 
7.2.8 


Maintenance Master Data 
Maintenance Planning and Scheduling 
Maintenance Execution 

Work Clearance Management 

Linear Asset Management 
Geographical Enablement Framework 
Resource Management 

Real Estate Management 


Project or Works Management (Engineering) 


7.3.l 
7.3.2 
133 
734 
7.3.5 


Portfolio Management 
Project Financial Control 
Project Logistics Control 
Project Management 
Resource Management 


Procurement and Inventory Management 


7.4.1 
7.4.2 
7.4.3 
7.44 
7.4.5 
7.4.6 
7.4.7 
7.4.8 
7.49 
7.4.10 
7.4.ll 
7.4.12 


Human Resource, Payroll and Employee Self Service 


7.5.l 
13.2 


Goods Movement 

Physical Inventory 

Stock Room management 
Inventory Analytics and control 
Purchase contract management 
Central Sourcing 

Self-service Requisitioning 
Purchase order processing 
Service Purchasing 

Invoice processing 

Supplier Management 
Purchase analytics 


HR Administration 
Payroll 


Pages 


Kolo O O O O œ œ œo o o RBI—II—SI—ID——— I I QI NAN 


8 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


Pages 

7.5.3 Organization Management 12 

7.5.4 Manager Self-service 12 

7.5.5 Employee Self-service 12 

7.5.6 Benefits Enrolment and Administration 12 

7.5.7 Time Capture 12 

7.5.8 Time Calculation 12 

7.5.9 Absence Management 13 

7.5.10 Goal and Performance management 13 

7.5.11 Skill Assessment 13 

7.512 Skill Management 13 
MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE: CITIZEN SERVICES BUSINESS ARCHITECTURE ... 13 
8.1 Property Tax management 13 
8.1.1 Property Assessment 13 

8.1.2 Property modification 13 

8.1.3 Demand Notice Generation 13 

8.1.4 Payment collection and Receipts 13 

8.1.5 Reports and Dashboards 14 

8.2 Building Plan approval 14 
8.2.1 Real Time Scrutiny of Drawing/Plan 14 

8.2.2 Submission and processing of Application 14 

8.3 License and Registration 14 
8.3.1 Registration, Login and creation of user profile 14 

8.3.2 License Application 14 

8.3.3 License Issue 14 

8.3.4 License Modification 14 

8.3.5 License Renewal 14 

8.4 Connections & Billing 14 
8.4.1 Application for new connection 14 

8.4.2 Modifications to a Connection 15 

8.4.3 Meter Reading 15 

8.4.4 Generate Demand 15 

8.4.5 Payments collection and Receipts 15 

8.4.6 Closure of Water Connection 15 

8.5 No-Objection Certificates 15 
8.6 Sewerage Management 15 
8.7 Public Grievance management 16 
8.7.1 Registration, Login and Creation of User Profile 16 

8.7.2 Lodging a Complaint 16 

8.7.3 Assigning a Complaint 16 

8.7.4 Resolving a Complaint 16 

8.8 Solid waste management 16 
8.8.1 Biometric Attendance System 16 


8.8.2 Door to Door Collection 


iii 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


8.8.3 Transit Management System 
8.8.4 Route Mapping and Optimization 
8.8.5 Billing and Collection Module 


9 MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE: TECHNOLOGICAL ARCHITECTURE 


9.1 Core Service Infrastructure 
9.1.1 Authorization management 
9.1.2 Identity Management 
9.1.3 Single Sign-on 
9.1.4 Digital signature and encryption 
9.1.5 Document Builder 
9.1.6 Workflow engine 
9.1.7 Document management 
9.1.8 Notification 
9.1.9 Localisation 
9.1.10 Enterprise Search 
9.1.11 Registries 
9.1.12 Location 
9.1.13 Payment Gateway 
9.1.14 Entity Management 

9.2 Core Data Infrastructure 
92.1 Data warehouse 
9.2.2 Data Quality Management 
9.2.3 Master Data Management 
9.24 Analytics engine 
9.2.5  Reporting/Dashboards 


10 MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE: DATA ARCHITECTURE 


ANNEX A Example of Data Modeling for Asset management system 
ANNEX B Example of a process flow for Asset management syStem 
ANNEX C Committee composition 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


LIST OF FIGURES 


Fig. | Interdependency of IS 18006 (Part 1) with other standards 
Fig. 2 High Level Architecture of Municipal Governance System 
Fig.3 Voice of Citizen Platform 

Fig. 4 Finance Management 

Fig. 5 Asset, Land and Real Estate Management 


24 


27 


Fig. 6 
Fig. 7 
Fig. 8 
Fig. 9 
Fig. 10 
Fig. 11 
Fig. 12 
Fig. 13 
Fig. 14 


LIST OF TABLES 


Table 1 
Table 2 


Project or Works Management (Engineering) 

Procurement & Inventory Management 

Human Resource, Payroll and Employee Self Service 

An Overview of SWM in a city 

Core Service Infrastructure 

Core Data Infrastructure 

Data Abstract Model 

Example of Data Modeling for Asset Management System 
Example of Process Flow for Asset Management System 


Principles for municipal governance system 
eGovernance Data Standards 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


Pages 


21 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


0 INTRODUCTION 


A smart city is the one that can effectively leverage 
technology, infrastructure, public policy, government 
and citizen engagement to create an environment 


that fosters economic growth and productivity, 
innovation, social mobility, inclusiveness, and 
sustainability. 


Cities are complex entities having: 


a) Diverse Stakeholders: Citizens, visitors, City 
administration, state government, central 
government, vendors, system integrators, 
business, academia, other organizations. 

b) Diverse Geographical Entities: Parking lots, 

streets, buildings, waste bins, etc. 


Diverse Services and Business Processes: With 
diverse functionality and consumers need to be 
developed. 


c) 


d) Diverse ICT Technologies: Data systems, 
sensor technologies, software systems, 


networking systems etc. 


While it is almost impossible to engineer a smart 
city from scratch, it is possible to adopt the right 
architectural framework along with appropriate 
practices and policies to nudge the evolution towards 
smart city. 


The three key principles for facilitating such an 
emergence or evolution towards a smart city ecosystem 
are: 


a) Interoperability — Refers to the ability of 
diverse systems and components to work 
together, even as parts from diverse set of 
suppliers are substituted and integrated; 

b) Composability — Refers to the ability to 

combine discrete components into a complete 

system to achieve a set of goals and objectives; 
and 


vii 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


c) Harmonization Refers to achieving 
compatibility between technologies and 
systems, even when they at first appear 
incompatible. 


This standard provides a reference architecture (RA) 
for achieving such a unified digital infrastructure for 
municipal governance and can serve as a template 
for both the City Administrators, who are the consumers 
of such ICT based solutions, as well as the ICT solution 
providers who develop and deploy such solutions. 


The reference architecture heavily relies on some of 
the other standards developed as well as aligns itself 
to the parent standard, IS 18000 : 2020. The Municipal 
Governance RA is supported by IS 18004 (Part 1) and 
IS 18008 (Part 1) to achieve a lot of its functionality. 
For example, one of the core service infrastructure, 
“Location”, in the reference architecture is enabled by 
GIS reference architecture and this service supports 
functionalities such as GIS tracking of Project progress, 
GIS mapping of Asset and real estates and many 
others. 


Further, this reference architecture also implements 
components from IS 18002 (Part 1) to ensure 
availability of quality data for effective decision 
making by city administrators. The interdependence of 
the aforementioned Standards are illustrated in Fig. 1. 


This reference architecture described in this standard 
addresses stakeholders expectations for efficient 
municipal operations as well as to enable equitable 
service delivery to citizens. The cities or municipal 
corporations can also use this standard as a guide to 
compare their current initiatives and functionalities. 
Cities or Municipal corporation shall aim to, at the 
minimum, create a common Core Data Infrastructure 
and Core Service infrastructure layer. Cities can go 
with a phased approach to adopt the functionalities 
described in business layer , over a period of time. 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


IS 18000 
ICTRA 


aligns 


IS 18006 (Part 1) 


MGRA 
FT al N 
| IS 18004 (Part 1) 8 IS 18008 (Part 1) 
| IoTRA E GISRA 
| | 
OE NAIDA a KEN RS 
£ 
 IS18002(Part1) | 
| UDIDLRA 


FIG. I INTERDEPENDENCY OF IS 18006 (PART 1) WITH OTHER STANDARDS 


vili 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


Indian Standard 
MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE 


PART 1 REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian standard defines the reference architecture 
and models for Municipal Governance in Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs). The reference architecture includes 
functional reference models, technology reference 
models and information reference models. 


The implementation details are excluded from the 
scope of this standard. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following documents are referred to in the text in 
such a way that some or all of their content constitutes 
reguirements of this document. For dated references, 
only the edition cited applies. For undated references, 
the latest edition of the referenced document (including 
any amendments) applies. 


IS No. Title 
IS 18000 Unified Digital Infrastructure — ICT 
Reference Architecture 
IS 18002 Unified Digital Infrastructure — Data 
(Part 1) Layer Part I Reference Architecture 


3 TERMINOLOGY AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 18000 shall apply, in addition to the following: 


3.1 Terms and Definitions 


3.1.1 Desludging Operator 


Desludging Operator, also known as Sludge Emptier 
is an individual, who is responsible for emptying, 
transport and disposal of faecal sludge from the septic 
tank/pits to desludging site / FSTP / Co-treatment plant 


3.1.2 Aadhaar 


Aadhaar is a verifiable 12-digit identification number 
issued by Unique Identification Authority of India 
(UIDAI) to the resident of India. 


3.1.3 Goods and Service Tax Network (GSTN) 


The Goods and Service Tax Network (or GSTN) is 
a non-profit, non-government organization. It will 
manage the entire IT system of the GST portal, which 
is the mother database for everything GST. This 


portal will be used by the government to track every 
financial transaction, and will provide taxpayers with 
all services — from registration to filing taxes and 
maintaining all tax details. 


3.1.4 Goods and Service Tax (GST) 


Goods and Services Tax (GST) is an indirect tax (or 
consumption tax) used in India on the supply of goods 
and service 


3.1.5 Unified Payments Interface (UPI) 


Unified Payments Interface is an instant real-time 
payment system developed by National Payments 
Corporation of India (NPCI) facilitating inter-bank 
transactions. The interface is regulated by the Reserve 
Bank of India and works by instantly transferring funds 
between two bank accounts on a mobile platform. 


3.1.6 Bharat Bill Payment System (BBPS) 


Bharat Bill Payment System is an integrated bill 
payment system in India offering interoperable and 
accessible bill payment service to customers through 
a network of agents of registered member as Agent 
Institutions, enabling multiple payment modes, and 
providing instant confirmation of payment. 


3.1.7 BharatOR 


BharatOR, developed by NPCI, Mastercard, and Visa, 
is an integrated payment system in India. The system, 
which was launched in September 2016, founded in 
2018 facilitates users to transfer their money from one 
source to another. 


3.1.8 Core Services 


The Key Building Blocks in the Urban domain that can 
be used in Multiple urban application context. 


3.1.9 Core Data Infrastructure 


Key building blocks which help define, create, store, 
access, modify and exchange data and metadata 


3.2 Abbreviations 


AP Accounts Payable 
API Application Programming Interface 
AR Accounts Receivable 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


BBPS Bharat Bill Payment System SMS Short Messaging Service 
BPM Business Process Management SSF Secure Store and Forward 
CAD Computer Aided Design UDI Unified Digital Infrastructure 
DSO Desludging Operator ULB Urban Local Body 
EIM Enterprise Information management UPI Unified Payments Interface 
ERP Enterprise Resource Planning 
. . 4 ARCHITECTURE PRINCIPLES FOR 
MG pie MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE SYSTEM 
FSTP Faecal Sludge Treatment Plant 
The Municipal Governance system should be built 
SL Me Lenge on the principles listed in Table 1. The principles are 
GST Goods and Service Tax derived from with the properties of the Unified Digital 
GSTN Gada Service Tax Network Infrastructure (UDI) defined in Table 2 of IS 18000. 
Municipal Governance system should also comply to 
HR Human Resource Data Principles as defined in IS 18002 (Part 1). 
ICT Information and Communications 
Technology 5 HIGH LEVEL ARCHITECTURE FOR 
KPI Key Performance Index MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE SYSTEM 
LIFO Last In First Out Municipal Governance system comprises of two 
NOC No Objection Certificate broad building blocks; ‘Citizen service platform’ and 
; : “Municipal ERP” (see Fig. 2). Each of these building 
REC National Payment Corporation of India blocks serve a unique purpose and play an important 
NPV Net Present Value role in the transformation of city’s governance. These 
j fe Ka building blocks are supported by horizontal layers 
NE Makena WAA performing distinct functions that are essential for the 
OTP One Time Password successful implementation ofthe functionality provided 
PC Personal Computers by each block. The role of each layer is described in 5.1 
to 5.3. 
PPP Public Private Partnerships 


Architecture Principle 


Table 1 Principles for municipal governance system 


Description 


Modularity 


Extensibility 


Interoperable 


Standardized 


Inclusive 


Ability to attach, re-associate or remove functional application modules based on business process 
reguirements truly enhances portability, eliminates rigorous and reiterative testing and configuration and 
increases the flexibility in the light of a dynamic business environment. 


The design of system will be modular, with clear separation of data storage, software services and APIs. 
Components will be minimalistic, independently replaceable and extensible. This will allow different 
components to be loosely coupled when building applications, thereby enabling application diversity. 
Different instances of the stack will be able to customize and create contextual solutions to serve their 
specific purpose. 


The Reference Architecture shall enable interoperability of systems by adopting open, standards-based 
interfaces, protocols, common data models and communication methods at key interaction points between 


constituent systems. 


Process/Application/Technology should be standardized across a common integrated platform. Fine-grained 
auditing across processes, modules and technologies enhances the software governance, risk management 
and controls. Application functionality should remain congruent over time to provide a consistent views of 
vital business data. 


The design is aimed at ensuring that all segments of citizens can benefit from the Reference Architecture 
(RA). Different instances of the RA should be able to configure, extend or customize applications to cater 
to their specific needs. In addition, it can be leveraged across multiple channels — both digital and physical 
to engage and serve citizens effectively. The system should provide multilingual functionality or at least 
bilingual for ease of operation to end users and city administrator. 


Architecture Principle 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


Table 1 ( Concluded ) 


Description 


Minimalistic 


Scalablity 


Data Protection 


Multi-Channel Access 


Non-Repudiable 


Federated 


Infrastructure Agnostic 


The goal of the stack is to enable relevant solutions; hence it is important that the stack remains minimal 
and allows innovative solutions to emerge rather than forcing a particular type of solution. It may provide 
reference implementations to seed the imagination of the ecosystem, but should remain minimalistic to allow 
actors to respond to context and complexity. 


Municipal Governance Reference architecture shall be scalable. Scalability is the characteristic of a system 
to continue to work effectivelyas the size of the system, its complexity or the volume of work performed by 
the system is increased. 


Managing security and privacy of data is crucial to building and maintaining trust between ecosystem 
participants and thus will be a critical design principle. All data access must be through API calls to ensure 
appropriate security controls. 


With the rapid growth of net connectivity and the variety of electronic devices available in the market, it 
is important that the end user’s access points and access interfaces are kept in mind while enabling access 
channels — Citizen Service Centres, PCs, Tablets, Smartphones, local kiosks and doorstep delivery — and 
ensuring an engaging user experience on all of these channels to enable rapid adoption and ease of operation 
by the end users. This will enable cities to effectively respond to the needs of all citizens including digitally 
excluded sections of the society. 


The system should enable a means of ensuring accountability. For collaboration and interaction within 
the ecosystem to thrive on the platform, building trust by ensuring accountability is very important. This 
accountability will take the form of non-repudiability of any access or changes to data, ensured through the 
platform’s own design and audit mechanisms. 


The system should be able to provide highest possible autonomy in order to reduce the complexity, which at 
the same time increase the agility. The expected result is a high degree of flexibility. 


The system should be able to work on cloud as well as on premise environment with similar output 
capability. 


Collaboration 


Channels m 
es dem 


Layer Web Portal Social Media 


Business Layer Procurement & Material Human Resources, Payroll 
Management and Employee Self Services 
Accounts, Budget, Investments and Planning 


Municipal ERP Citizen services 


ilding PI 
Property Tax Bullding ju License & registration 
R Asset, Land 8 Real Estate approva 
Project Management 


Management 


Connections & billing Solid waste 
management 
ii kri) 


Core Service Infrastructure 


Authorization Identity ; m Digital Signature Document f Document 
Single Sign-on 4 F Workflow Engine 
Management Management & Encryption Builder Management 


Technology 
FURE MAA Entity it h | Payment 
Layer Notification Registries Kanaan Localisation Searc Location Gateway 


Core Data Infrastructure 


Data Ouality Master Data Reporting/ A A 
W: Analytics Engine 
PERANG tes Management Management Dashboards ya 3 


Fic. 2 HIGH LEVEL ARCHITECTURE OF MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE SYSTEM 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


5.1 Collaboration Layer 
5.1.1 Channels 


These are points of interaction for the citizens with 
the various government agencies operating in a city. 
Citizens can use any method listed here to submit 
their reguests, complaints or applications. The solution 
should be designed in a manner so that citizens have 
a similar user experience across these channels, 
and they can easily move from one to other without 
causing any disruption in their engagement with the 
government. The User interface and user experience 
for these channels shall be designed in such a way that 
each of the constituent systems should be user friendly, 
efficient, effective, and easy to navigate for everyone 
including persons with disabilities. Navigation through 
the component should flow smoothly and it should be 
intuitive and adaptive to use. Further, these channels 
shall be seamlessly integrated into the backend 
applications to provide a consolidated view to the 
government bodies. 


5.1.2 Voice of Citizen (VoC) Platform 


A voice of citizen platform enables cities to implement 
a closed loop feedback process between its citizens and 
administration. This platform ensures citizen feedback 
is collected at each touchpoint in the citizen’s interaction 
with ULB or city administration. The platform can 
help city track various indices such as ease of living, 
quality of life, happiness index, mental and physical 
well being, etc. It can also enable feedback on service 
delivery by the ULB, on the quality of grievance 
redressel and programs and policies run by the city 
administration. 


5.2 Business Layer 
5.2.1 Municipal ERP 


This is a vertical block in the architecture comprising 
of five functionalities that are key to the financial 
sustainability of city governments. These functionalities 
are Human resource & Payroll Management, Asset, 
Land and real estate Management, Project or Works 
Management, Procurement and Materials Management, 
and Financial Management. The key feature of this 
block is that all five functions are truly integrated and 
form the backbone of the expense management for a 
city. 


5.2.2 Citizen Services 


This vertical block is a set of services that the city 
offers to its citizens. These services can be offered to 
individuals, business or other groups operating out of 
the city. Each of these services can either be delivered 
through a single application or a combination of 


different applications. However, the guiding principles 
for individual applications will remain the same and 
they all need to be integrated with the overall Municipal 
Governance Framework. 


5.3 Technology Layer 
5.3.1 Core Service Infrastructure 


These are set of common services made available 
through technology solutions for building or enabling 
municipal applications described above. Each service 
identified in this layer is essential to smooth operations 
of the functional layer. An example of core service ina 
Municipal Governance system is the ‘file management’. 
This is a service that enables the recording of all the 
essential documentation into a digital format that can 
be easily tracked and recovered when required. It also 
enables the movement of e-files and e-notings up and 
down the hierarchy of decision making. 


5.3.2 Core Data Infrastructure 


Data and its management is the basic building of a 
robust Municipal Governance system. The development 
of any system to run the city shall start with defining 
registries and data specifications. This layer contains 
tools that perform Enterprise Information management 
(EIM) function to keep control on the sharing and 
usage of data. EIM defines how data will be optimized, 
processed and stored and manages data through its 
entire lifecycle, making it available. 


6 MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE: 
COLLABORATION LAYER BUSINESS 
ARCHITECTURE 


6.1 Channels 


The reference architecture suggests a multi-channel 
interface for the delivery of all municipal services. 
Each channel serves a unique purpose by addressing 
the needs of a unique segment. 


a) Portal — A website with an overview of the 
overall functioning of the municipal body with 
essential information regarding the municipal 
body and its members and municipal bodies 
can provide regular updates of the day to day 
activities through this platform 


b) Mobile — A native app that lets citizen access 
municipal services from their mobile phones 
as well as access any information related to 
the city or alerts issued by city administration 
directly on their mobiles. 

Social Media — Citizens shall be able to 
interact directly with city administrators as 
well as share grievances through social media 
platforms such as Twitter, Facebook, etc. 


C 


— 


d) Contact Center — Cities should setup 
dedicated helpline numbers that are manned 
by personnels to respond to any guery or an 
emergency of a citizen. 


e) Branches and service counters — City 
administration shall create facilities where 
citizens can walk in to avail various municipal 
services 


6.2 Voice of Citizen (VoC) platform 


A Voice of citizen (VoC) platform (shown in Fig. 3) 
shall enable ULBs to capture citizen perception and take 
appropriate actions to improve their overall satisfaction 
with city's performance. This platform can help cities 
to build a brand for themselves, improve their rankings 
in various indices (cleanliness, Ease of living, ease of 
doing business, etc) and formulate policies and plans 
with inputs from citizens to enable a truly participative 
governance. 


The platform shall provide the following functionalities: 


a) Real-time feedback on any channel: Engage 
citizens in a branch, online, through email, 
SMS, social media and many more channels 
to get real-time feedback on the things that 
matter to the corporation. The platform shall 
enable a customizable survey design with 
multi-lingual support and a strong survey 
distribution capability to support mutlti- 
channel distribution along with participant 
management to control over-surveying as well 
as followups with non-responders. 


b) Detailed analytics through minimal effort: 
Spot patterns in data automatically with 
detailed statistical and text analysis that always 


Collect 


Solicited 
Feedback 


Online surveys 
Website intercepts 
Mobile and SMS 
Offline / In-person 


VR surveys 


Unsolicited 
Feedback 


Social media 


Kiosk Reporting 
& Role-based 


Dashboards 


OR code 
Website link 


Analyze 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


runs in the background to surface the key 
insights that cities need, These analysis shall 
be available in real time and should be able 
to use data streams integrated from different 
sources. The platform shall be capable of doing 
various statistical and predictive analysis on 
data including key driver analysis, sentiment 
analysis, regression & correlations, etc. 


c) Prompt action to resolve issues: Improve 
satisfaction rates for citizens by taking prompt 
action on the basis of the feedback received 
from the citizens. The platform shall have the 
ability to close the loop on customer comments 
and complaints through a dynamic cases 
management functionality where tickets are 
triggered on both guantitative and gualitative 
(verbatim) data collected in the survey, with 
additional follow up automatically triggered if 
necessary 


7 MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE: 
ERP BUSINESS ARCHITECTURE 


MUNICIPAL 


A municipal governance system provides the 
functionalities described in 7.1 to 7.5 to re-engineer, 
integrate and transform the business functions of 
the city departments along with the field offices and 
functionaries spread across the state/ nation. 


7.1 Account, Budget, Investments & Planning 


Finance management (shown in Fig. 4) is a key reform 
area in the public sector, especially in local bodies. 
A comprehensive, end to end financial management 
system would go a long way in transforming local 
bodies and making them sustainable. The functional 
architecture for the Financial management system 


Act 


Dynamic Case 
Management 
Automated alerts 
Close the loop 
Drive improvement 
Launch new studies 


Create new initiatives 


ASSIGN ACTIONS TO 
ndīviduals 
Groups 
Analyze trends across channels Departments 
Zoom into indīvidual customers, LOLA 
zoom out for big picture 

Integrate with existing systems 

Text analytics 

Key driver analysis 

Turn data into insights 


Fic. 3 VOICE OF CITIZEN PLATFORM 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


1s built on the following four pillars that are tightly 
integrated to the other: 


a) Budgeting, 
b) Financial accounting, 
c) Investments and Treasury, and 


d) Management accounting or Planning. . 
7.1.1 Budgeting Creation and Maintenance 


This module helps with the creation, maintenance, 
management, and monitoring of public funds. User 
may transfer approved budgets to other projects and 
departments and monitor and track changes throughout 
the budget cycle. Key features of this module include 
the creation of budget structure, update and approve 
budgets, allow budget increases from revenue, Budget 
release and reporting. 


7.1.2 Budget Execution 


This module integrates operational and accounting 
processes with a maintained budget. It enables real- 
time and parallel budget controls that can operate on 
multiple levels, helping to monitor and control funds 
while reducing procurement and operating costs. 
User can monitor and compare budget values with 
commitment and actual budget values, set a threshold 
for the available budget and define what will happen 
should budget consumption reach or surpass this 
threshold. 


7.1.3 Budget Closing and Financial Reporting 


This module covers the planning, standardizing, 
scheduling, and monitoring of financial and budget 
close activities. It helps manage open remaining 
commitments and budget committed as well as any 


Budgeting Budget Maintenance 


Financial Accounting 


Financial Accounting (GL, AP, AR) 


Contract Accounting 


Payments & Bank 


Investments & Treasury Commünitation 


Management 
Accounting/planning 


Financial planning & 
Analysis 


Budget Execution 


Asset Accounting 


Financial Close 


Cash & Liquidity 
Management 


Overhead cost 
Accounting 


residual budget at the end of the fiscal year. User 
can further reconcile budgetary accounting data with 
financial and managerial accounting. 


7.1.4 Grants Management 


Help users manage grant information and provide 
status indicators of the grant process according to 
the administrative requirements of their sponsors. 
Coordinate funding throughout the grant lifecycle, 
restrict specific grant posting objects, and control 
transactions based on grant status. Users can maintain 
master data components for managing, controlling, 
and reporting based on the sponsor’s administration 
requirements. 


7.1.5 Financial Accounting 


An accrual based double entry accounting system 
covering functionalities like General ledger, Accounts 
Receivable and Accounts Payable. This module is used 
to record all financial transactions that occur on a day 
to day basis. Accounts Receivable allows user to record 
and manage accounts receivable data of all customers. 
All postings to accounts receivable are triggered in 
response to operative transactions 


7.1.6 Asset Accounting 


Asset Accounting module is used to manage and 
monitor transactions related to tangible fixed assets. 
User can run an integrated acquire-to-retire cycle 
for all assets including functions like depreciation, 
capitalization and post capitalization. 


7.1.7 Inventory accounting 


Inventory Accounting is used to value and monitor 
material and work-in-process inventories according 


Budget reporting and 


Closing Grants Management 


Joint venture 


Inventory Accounting Accounting 


Compliance Reporting 


Debt & Investment 
Management 


Product/Service Cost 
Management 


Profitability & Cost 
Analysis 


Fic. 4 FINANCE MANAGEMENT 


to legal regulations and management accounting 
reguirements. All goods movements are valued in the 
Material Ledger which supports parallel, real-time 
valuation ofinventories. material inventories are valued 
at standard cost or moving average automatically. 
Periodic valuation of material inventories can be 
carried out according to statutory reguirements (such 
as Lowest Value, LIFO, or FIFO). 


7.1.8 Joint Venture Accounting 


This could be applicable in the scenarios where smart 
cities are entering into PPP agreements with service 
providers on a revenue share basis. The primary 
processes of Joint Venture accounting are Material 
and asset transfers between ventures, Allocations and 
settlement with ventures, cash calls, partner netting, 
partner billing and joint venture reporting and audit. 


7.1.9 Compliance Reporting 


This module gives an optimized overview of user's 
compliance reporting tasks, and to generate and send 
the compliance reports on time. User can monitor the 
compliance status, due dates and generate the supported 
compliance reports. User can also generate and submit 
ad hoc or non-periodic reports. 


7.1.10 Payments and Bank Communications 


Payments and Bank Communications streamlines, 
controls, and gives better transparency into 
communications with user's banks. Automated 
payment workflows streamline routing and approval 
processes and ensure compliance by using rules-based 
approval workflows that guarantee proper payment 
approvals and documentation. 


7.1.11 Cash and Liquidity Management 


Cash and Liguidity management helps user monitor 
cash positions, make bank transfers, approve payments, 
create cash pools, liguidity planning and perform cash 
flow analysis and forecasting. The key feature of this 
module is to forecast the future liguidity trend and track 
the status and trace the liguidity planning cycle to get 
an early warning indicator of liguidity shortages or to 
be used as a steering tool for medium- and long-term 
investment or borrowing. 


7.1.12 Debt and Investment Management 


Using this module, user can portray the process for 
managing user's liabilities and capital investments. The 
following functional areas are covered in this module: 


transactions 
market, 


a) Manage Financial 
securities, money 
securities lending, etc.), 


(such as 
derivatives, 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


b) Manage financial position, 
c) Calculate NPVs, 


d) Determine market 
transactions, and so on. 


risks of financial 


In addition, integrated posting and payment processes 
and integrated position reporting allow a user to achieve 
compliance with legal reguirements and regulatory 
standards. 


7.1.13 Financial Planning and Analysis 


A central, integrated place for all financial planning 
data. It also provides real-time access to master data and 
actual data to compare with the plan data to determine 
the success of the financial units. 


7.1.14 Overhead Cost Accounting 


This application area covers the journal entries for 
Overhead Cost Accounting. It captures costs by cost 
center and defines the output of the cost center in terms 
of activity types. It allows user to enter statistical key 
figures as a basis for user's allocations at period close. 
User can allocate costs between cost centers, enter 
activity prices for any combination of cost center and 
activity type and control the budgets in user's cost 
centers. 


7.1.15 Service Cost Management 


This module allows user to determine the costs 
incurred by user's products and/or services in order 
to successfully manage user's portfolio. These costs 
can be broken down into each step of the value 
chain mapping the guantity flow with the values of 
Finance. 


7.1.16 Profitability and Cost Analysis 


This application area enables user to analyze 
the profitability of various cost objects. It shows 
contribution margins in real time and offers detailed 
views for further analysis. 


7.2 Asset, Land and Real Estate management 


Asset, Land and Real estate management (shown 
in Fig. 5) is an often-neglected area in cities. Cities 
hold assets such as Lands, roads, bridges, plants & 
eguipment, worth several crores. Poor visibility & 
management of these assets lead to losses as well as 
inefficient spending. An efficient Asset Management 
System for a city will help it achieve sustainable 
development without putting pressure on revenue 
budgets. Further, it will help minimize cost, facilitate 
long term planning and help respond better to disaster 
or pandemic situations. 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


Maintenance Maintenance Master 


Maintenance Planning 


Maintenance Work Clearance 


Operations Data 8. Scheduling Execution Management 
Linear Asset Geographical Enablement Framework for 
Management Asset Management 
R 
Gde ha Utilization Tracking Resource Scheduling Resource Forecasting 
Management 
Real Estate Real Estate Portfolio Land Management ed - re Space Planning 
Management anagsmen 
Environment RS VAA WASI Environment Health & Safety 
Health & Safety 8 Management Management 


Fic. 5 Asset, LAND AND REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT 


7.2.1 Maintenance Master Data 


Asset management process starts with mapping the 
operational structures to technical objects. This can 
efficiently manage and evaluate the technical assets 
and maintenance objects, monitor the costs involved 
and allow for a faster evaluation of the maintenance 
data. Creating maintenance master data reguires the 
following set of activities; 


a) Create the hierarchical and horizontal structure 
for the technical objects, 


b) Create master records for functional locations 
and pieces of eguipment, 


c) Create Maintenance Bills of Material (BOM), 
d) Reading measuring points £ counters and 
e) creating measurement documents. 


7.2.2 Maintenance Planning and Scheduling 


Maintenance Planning and Scheduling helps user 
optimize the scope of work and effort reguired for 
inspection, maintenance, and planned repairs. Based 
on legal requirements, manufacturer recommendations, 
and cost analyses, user determine which preventive 
maintenance tasks are required, which work centers are 
needed, and how frequently preventive maintenance 
tasks have to be processed to avoid breakdown time. 
The system shall be preferably integrated to the ICCC, 
where possible, to ensure real time alerts. 


7.2.3 Maintenance Execution 


Maintenance Execution allows user to perform planned 
and unplanned maintenance tasks. Maintenance 
planners can carry out preliminary costing, work 
scheduling, material provisioning, and resource 
planning. They provide maintenance workers with job 


lists so that they have easy access to all maintenance- 
related information 


7.2.4 Work Clearance Management 


Work Clearance Management allows user to make 
sure safety measures are implemented for carrying out 
certain maintenance tasks. The module allows issuance 
of work permits for a maintenance order, define the 
validity of the work permit, define risk parameters, 
define safety aspects and issue safety certificates. 


7.2.5 Linear Asset Management 


Linear Asset Management enables the management 
of the entire lifecycle of linear assets like roads, 
rails, pipelines, or electricity transmission lines. The 
process helps to optimize the reliability, availability, 
maintainability, and safety of the networks and 
infrastructure. It is a comprehensive, integrated process 
that facilitates and connects linear asset management 
activities with enterprise processes and data. In addition, 
the process helps to improve asset management 
effectiveness, efficiency, and strategy, thereby boosting 
asset reliability and return on investment. 


7.2.6 Geographical Enablement Framework 


Geographical enablement framework allows the 
user to see assets or technical objects (pieces of 
equipment, functional locations, maintenance orders, 
and maintenance notifications) on a map that allows 
the user to analyze user’s data in a geographical 
context. It lets the user select a single technical object 
or a maintenance document on the map and the system 
processes it further. In addition, user can initiate 
the asset management processes from the map by 
selecting multiple maintenance orders or maintenance 
notifications. 


7.2.7 Resource Management 


Resource management provides insights into user's 
maintenance workload and available capacities for 
current and upcoming maintenance activities. This 
module allows user to check current and forecasted 
work center utilization, build one or more schedules for 
a specific target week, and level work center utilization 
before dispatching the scheduled work. User can get 
an overview of KPIs related to maintenance planning, 
track utilization of work centers, create one or more 
schedule simulations for a target week and check the 
forecasted utilization at weekly and daily level. 


7.2.8 Real Estate Management 


Real Estate Management is a comprehensive software 
solution with the ability to boost revenues by managing 
user's real estate portfolio. The module allows user 
to create a property portfolio and integrate with CAD 
drawings to create a 3D visualization of the property. 
The module allows management of vendor contracts 
and leases, service charge settlement, property 
revaluation and any other third-party integration. 
Another important aspect of Real estate management is 
Land Management. This feature integrates the internal 
view with the public and legal view of the land. User 
can depict land registers, parcels and other public 
registers, link them to other master data objects, set up 
contracts, and run reports. 


7.3 Project or Works Management (Engineering) 


City infrastructure development is one of the key 
deliverables for any city government and there's an 
increased focus on monitoring capital expenditures 
of the city. Cities are not only expected to increase 
their capital spend but also ensure efficiency in that 
spends to get maximum value out of the money spent. 
Capital project Management plays (shown in Fig. 6) an 
important role in the day to day life of city engineers as 
it helps them keep track of the progress of each project, 
assess and manage the associated risk, and keep a tab 
on the actual vs planned expenditures. 


7.3.1 Portfolio Management 


Portfolio Management provides a comprehensive 
and up-to-date view of the entire portfolio of ULB 
projects to present the full extent of project risks and 


Portfolio Management 


Enterprise Portfolio and 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


opportunities. It allows user to overcome delays that 
can occur, as information is collected from disparate 
sources. Portfolio Management gathers diverse data 
into dashboards which act as a starting point for 
portfolio analysis. Portfolio Management integrates 
information from existing project management, human 
resources, and financial systems to provide an overview 
of the project portfolio and resource availability, and it 
provides an easy drill down to details. 


Portfolio management lets user carry out financial and 
capacity planning for user's capital projects. User can 
further evaluate projects based on a set of guestionnaire 
and scoring models to assess the impact of each project 
as well the risk assessment associated with it. User can 
perform What-if analysis by running simulations for 
budget assignment or capacity assignment. 


7.3.2 Project Financial Control 


This capability enables the user to define work 
breakdown structures as a basis for hierarchical project 
accounting. User can plan costs and budgets and 
track actual costs that are tightly integrated with core 
business processes. This provides the user with better 
insight into the project progress and user's project 
financial performance and enables the user to avoid 
cost overruns in time. User can monitor purchase 
reguisitions, purchase orders, and account assigned to 
work breakdown structures as well as monitor planned 
and actual project progress values 


7.3.3 Project Logistics Control 


This capability enables the user to define project 
structures consisting of work breakdown structures and 
network structure, plan and schedule project activities, 
control all procurement processes integrated with the 
core business process, and provide an insight into all 
logistic related execution aspects of a project. User 
can create and maintain operative networks assigned 
to WBS and determine the chronological seguence of 
activities in a network or a standard network. User can 
schedule activities within a network by determining the 
earliest and latest start and finish dates for each activity. 
In a complex project, the dependencies in a project can 
make the activities in one network dependent on the 
completion of activities in another network. User can 
use the function for the overall network scheduling 


Project Financial 
Control 


Project Logistics 
Control 


Project Management 


Project Management | | Resource Management 


Fic. 6 PROJECT OR Works MANAGEMENT (ENGINEERING) 


9 


Supplier Management 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


where the networks are linked through certain 
relationships. 


7.3.4 Project Management 


This module helps user standardize and improve project 
execution and reduce associated administrative and 
system costs, by providing reliable project management 
functions that can be deployed independently or 
integrated into user's, for example, Human Resources 
or Financials back-end system. It supports structuring, 
scheduling, visualization, operative planning, and 
execution of a project. The system can be integrated 
with the GIS system to identify the project location and 
tracking of progress 


7.3.5 Resource Management 


Resource Management provides planning tools to 
support user in planning and optimizing user's human 
resource deployment within a project as well as across 
different projects. User can use a planning tool to 
optimize user's human resource deployment in a 
project. It focuses on using user's employees efficiently 
and assigning them to projects based on demand, 
qualifications, and availability. It offers a role based 
resource management, and a project or line manager 
can staff resources on the project 


7.4 Procurement and Inventory Management 


Transparent and efficient procurement system (shown 
in Fig. 7) goes a long way in improving the financial 
health of the city. With the right checks & balances, 
correct supplier information and up to date procurement 
records, cities can utilize this platform to save cost by 
procuring the right quantity and quality. Similarly, 
real time visibility of inventory and its movement can 
help reduce leakages. A strong inventory management 


Inventory 


Goods Movement 
Management 


Physical Inventory 


system can have an indirect impact on user’s balance 
sheet and financial standing that can go a long way in 
improving a city’s credit worthiness. 


7.4.1 Goods Movement 


An inventory management system works on the 
accepted accounting principle of no posting without 
a document. According to the document principle, a 
document must be generated and stored in the system 
for every transaction/event that causes a change in stock. 
This module provides two broad functionalities; Goods 
issue features enable user to post goods movements 
that lead to a reduction in warehouse stock and Goods 
receipt features enable user to post goods movements 
that lead to an increase in warehouse stock. 


7.4.2 Physical Inventory 


Physical Inventory covers the following inventory 
management tasks to support the recording of actual 
stock levels (quantities) of materials: 


a) Performance of 
(stocktaking) and 


b) stock adjustments both for own stock and for 
special stocks on periodical basis. 


physical inventory 


This module allows user to perform the periodic process 
of making necessary adjustments to stock on hand 
after a physical count thereby providing a transparent 
view on the stocks currently available and efficient 
processing of inventory adjustments 


7.4.3 Stock Room management 


Stock Room Management provides capabilities such as 
material management on levels like storage bin, unit, 
batch, stock status, etc., inbound processing, outbound 
processing and internal warehouse movement. 


Stock Room 
management 


Inventory Analytics 
and control 


Sourcing & Contract Purchase Contract å : 
8 Central sourcing Purchase Analytics 
Management Management 
Operational Frist Furene ode Service Purchasing 
Procurement q 8 R 8 


Classification 8. 
Segmentation 


Supplier Evaluation 


Invoice processing 


Fic. 7 PROCUREMENT & INVENTORY MANAGEMENT 


10 


7.4.4 Inventory Analytics and control 


Inventory analytics function helps to evaluate and 
display reports on stock position and inventory 
documents. In addition, user can monitor KPIs 
effectively to ensure forecast and inventory accuracy in 
a timely manner and visualize this in a meaningful way. 
User can identify critical KPIs to monitor the inventory 
flow or investigate potential problems. 


7.4.5 Purchase contract management 


Purchase contracts are long-term agreements between 
organizations and suppliers regarding the supply of 
materials or the performance of services within a 
certain period as per predefined terms and conditions. 
This module lets user create, change and display 
purchase contracts by type value contracts, guantity 
contracts and so on. The user can further use workflow 
based approval for automatic, one-step or multi-step 
approval. 


7.4.6 Central Sourcing 


The Central Sourcing scenario enables central 
purchasers to get an overview of all purchasing 
needs across various departments and locations that 
optimizes the procurement process and increases user's 
savings. 


7.4.7 Self-service Requisitioning 


Self-service requisitioning allows user to create, 
manage, and track user’s orders efficiently. User can 
create items from external catalogues and free-text 
items. After ordering the products user require, an item 
or header-based approval process is triggered. Once 
the user’s purchase requisition has been approved, a 
purchase order is created. 


7.4.8 Purchase order processing 


A purchase order is a request or instruction to an 
external supplier to deliver a specific quantity of 
material at a certain point in time or to perform services 
within a specific period. In this module, user can create 
purchase orders from existing requisitions, previous 
purchase orders or from scratch. 


7.4.9 Service Purchasing 


User can use service purchasing for a wide range of 
services, such as planned and unplanned maintenance 
and construction or consulting services. When user 
request services from the user’s suppliers, the user can 
specify all the services that may be procured in detail or 
the user can just set a limit in the purchase order. User 
can track service performance through service entry 
sheets that can keep track of precise values and record 
the actual performance of the service. 


11 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


7.4.10 Invoice processing 


The invoice processing follows the processes of the 
purchase order and goods receipt. User can create the 
supplier invoice with reference to a purchase order or 
without any reference. User can select the reference 
purchase order using the corresponding delivery 
note or service entry sheet, for example. The invoice 
verification checks the supplier invoice for correctness. 
Before posting the document, the user can simulate the 
supplier invoice to display the account movements. 


7.4.11 Supplier Management 


This module gives the user the ability to segment 
and classify suppliers based on their capability and 
operational area. User can create master data of all 
suppliers capturing details like tax registration, name, 
address, bank details etc. 


7.4.12 Purchase analytics 


Purchasing Analytics provides users with centralized 
analyses and the necessary capabilities to better 
understand the procurement areas — both on a holistic 
level and on a more fine-granular level relating to 
connected systems. The module enables users to 
analyse purchase contracts for consumption, analyse 
overall spend and analyse reguisitions all by supplier, 
item or department. 


7.5 Human Resource, Payroll and Employee Self 
Service 


Human capital management (HCM) (shown in Fig. 8) 
is an upcoming subject in the public sector, but its 
importance can't be overstated. Something as simple 
as timely and correct processing of payroll can help 
improve employee morale and at the same time save 
hours of effort in accounting. Another area where 
HCM will play an important role is the area of Skill 
management. The changing paradigm around us 
reguires public sector employees to have many roles 
and an integrated skill assessment and management 
solution would help recognize individual skills and 
training reguirements. 


7.5.1 HR Administration 


This module is where the user maintains the master data 
for all user's employees. User can capture all personnel 
details like demographic, benefits, compensation, date 
of joining, and so on. 


7.5.2 Payroll 


Payroll allows user to process and ensure accurate, 
on-time payrolls for all employees. User can use this 
solution to process payrolls, third-party payments, 
tax reporting, and accounting data. With its integrated 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


HR Administration 


Core HR & Payroll 


Manager Self-service 


Time & Attendance 
Management 


Time Capture 


Skill Management 


Payroll 


Employee Self-service 


Time Calculation 


Goal and Performance management 


Organization 
Management 


Compensation 
Management 


Benefits Enrolment 


and Administration 


Absence Management 


Skill Assessment Skill Management 


Fic. 8 HUMAN RESOURCE, PAYROLL AND EMPLOYEE SELF SERVICE 


functions, the solution manages differentiated value that 
supports net payroll calculation and legal reporting. As 
an addition to regular payroll, which carries out payroll 
at fixed regular intervals, the solution also enables the 
user to carry out specific off-cycle payroll activities for 
individual employees on any day. 


7.5.3 Organization Management 


This module lets user create and manage the 
organization structure, create, display or assign jobs, 
tasks, or staff assignments, manage funds and budget, 
and carry out personnel cost planning and analysis 


7.5.4 Manager Self-service 


Manager Self-Service enables the user to increase 
productivity and reduce operational burdens for HR 
staff. A role-based user interface that helps managers 
make decisions on executing human capital, financial, 
and operational management strategies. This solution 
supports planning, analysis, budgeting, recruitment, 
compensation, employee development, and cost 
management processes on any device. Access to 
automated processes, data, and workflow reguests can 
reduce cycle times and transactional costs. It integrates 
self- services with business intelligence capabilities and 
aggregates data from all sources. Managers can use this 
integrated data to make informed decisions regarding 
corporate strategies and resource management 


7.5.5 Employee Self-service 


Employee Self-Service enables the user to improve 
productivity by automating processes and reducing 
administrative costs, cycle time, and error rates. 
By giving employees more control over their own 
data, organizations can realize a guicker return on 
investment. Self-services gives employees personalized 


access to their own HR data, processes, and services. 
Employees take more responsibility for their jobs and 
career development. Employees can enter, display, and 
update personal information such as bank information 
and emergency contacts. HR staff members freed from 
routine inguiries and data entry can focus on strategic 
initiatives that contribute to business goals 


7.5.6 Benefits Enrolment and Administration 


User can perform the following main activities using 
this component: Enroll employees in benefits plans and 
terminate enrollments, Monitor continuing eligibility 
for plans, Monitor provision of evidence of insurability, 
View information about current benefit enrollments, 
Print enrollment and confirmation forms, Transfer data 
electronically to plan providers, Administer retirement 
plans. Further, user can also manage the pension fund 
in this module including calculation of employee 
contribution and calculation of total benefits. 


7.5.7 Time Capture 


Time Capture enables the userto record and manage time 
data effectively and efficiently. It provides the user with 
a comprehensive and effective business concept and 
related processes for manual and automatic recording 
of personnel times. Time recording allows user to enter 
employee time data for working time, leave, business 
trips, and substitutions using different methods. This 
data can be entered as clock times or in hours and can 
contain account assignment specifications 


7.5.8 Time Calculation 


Time Calculation enables the user to define and manage 
time elements for payroll schedules, and shifts. Use a 
time-evaluation component to generate a variety of 
payroll-related time codes to determine employee pay. 


Decision makers can use time management analytics 
to get other targeted workforce information. Managers 
can define work schedules, plan shifts, as well as define 
incentive wages. 


7.5.9 Absence Management 


Absence Management enables the user to define and 
manage working calendars and vacation allowances for 
the user's organization. Employees can enter absences, 
attendance, and breaks. Managers can approve 
attendances and absences. 


7.5.10 Goal and Performance management 


Goal and Performance Management enables the user 
to motivate the user’s workforce by aligning them with 
organization goals. Managers can cascade goals, review 
employee performance, and identify each employee’s 
development needs with standardized, consistent 
appraisal and performanceprocesses. Using thissolution, 
managers can develop employees, calibrate their overall 
performance, and review potential ratings in a visual 
grid. 

7.5.11 Skill Assessment 


Skill Assessment enables the user to consolidate 
employee skill profiles for full assessments in a 
structured and objective approach. With greater ease 
and speed, HR professionals and organizational leaders 
can prepare, conduct, and follow up on skill review 
meetings with a cross-organizational view of up-to- 
date skill data. This module lets user create a pool of 
all the skills available within the organization and helps 
plan skill development activities appropriately. 


7.5.12 Skill Management 


Skill Management enables the user to maximize 
employees’ utility within the user's organization. User 
can plan and implement specific personnel and training 
measures to promote the professional development 
of user’s employees. User can also ensure that staff 
qualification requirements are met and planned. By 
considering employees’ preferences and suitability, user 
can increase job satisfaction. Personnel development 
sets out to ensure that all the employees in all the 
functional areas in the user’s company are qualified to 
the required standards and will remain so in the future. 


8 MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE: CITIZEN 
SERVICES BUSINESS ARCHITECTURE 


8.1 Property Tax management 


The Property Tax management module shall provide 
a digital interface to make property assessments, pay 
property tax, generate payment receipts and monitor 
tax collection. It shall be used by the citizens, ULB 


13 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


counter and field employees, and ULB Administrators 
to accomplish their specific tasks. 


8.1.1 Property Assessment 


This module enables a citizen and employee to perform 
a self-assessment of a new property for a financial year. 
This feature helps in registering the property in the 
system. The details of the property can be entered online 
and can be assessed for the calculation of the taxes. The 
module shall be designed in a user-friendly manner to 
reduce the chances of error. The system shall calculate 
the tax automatically and create the demand. If a user 
wants to reassess his property due to any reason (for eg, 
incorrect data, change in property etc), it can be done by 
editing details of the last assessment. An employee can 
edit the details of the last assessment, on behalf of the 
citizen based on owner’s input. The citizen can track 
down the status of his incomplete assessment. Any 
incomplete assessment can be searched and completed. 


8.1.2 Property modification 


The system shall have the ability to capture mutation 
and transfer of ownership. The system shall provide 
the ability for alteration of assessment after verification 
and inspection. The system shall have the capability to 
handle changes like structural changes like addition/ 
extension/reduction of existing built-up area or 
construction type or utility changes like usage or 
occupancy, which have an impact on the increase or 
decrease in a property tax demand. The system shall 
provide the ability for bifurcation or amalgamation of 
property. The property bifurcation or amalgamation 
undergoes an approval process. The parent property 
needs to be modified accordingly, which should be 
done in the system. 


8.1.3 Demand Notice Generation 


The system shall have the capability to automatically 
generate demand notice for a financial year based on 
set triggers like time-based roll over on completion of a 
financial year. The system notifies the citizens about the 
demand through SMS or Email. The generated Bills can 
also be grouped and printed for physical distribution 
by the ULB employees. The system shall provide the 
capability to Employees to merge and download bills 
based on given parameters to plan their distribution 
drives. 


8.1.4 Payment collection and Receipts 


The citizen or employee shall be able to view the 
payment status of previous assessments. The system 
shall have the provision for making payment for 
any assessment with a full or partially paid amount. 
Receipts for assessment should be downloaded in 
the assessment history section after searching for the 
property details. 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


8.1.5 Reports and Dashboards 


The system shall have the facility to access receipt 
register, cancelled receipt register, account receipt 
register, ULB wise property tax collection report, DCB 
Register. State-level administrator can monitor property 
tax collections, assessments and other information at a 
state level through dashboards. 


8.2 Building Plan approval 


The system shall enable Architects, Engineers, 
Supervisors, Town Planners etc. to register, submit 
drawings and plans, applications for approval, and 
make necessary payments against the same. The module 
should also allow issuing of approval certificates on a 
workflow-based approval process. 


8.2.1 Real Time Scrutiny of Drawing/Plan 


The system shall enable the Architect/Engineer to 
submit the Drawing in Drawing Interchange Format 
(DXF) format from any Open Source CAD tools of 
their choice. The Module should enable the Architect/ 
Engineer to submit the Application for various services 
along with reguired supporting documents. 


8.2.2 Submission and processing of Application 


The Online Building plan system handles the plan 
scrutiny in online real time mode. The entire process 
from the time of submission of drawing to scrutiny 
completion should be automatic without any human 
intervention and instantaneous. From the Plan 
submitted by the architect the system shall generate all 
the relevant plan in PDF format automatically. These 
are the set of Plans which will be issued to the end 
user with certification on successful completion of the 
application process. The application shall capture all 
relevant details for all internal and external agencies, 
relevant data needs to be forwarded to corresponding 
agencies for issuing NOCs. 


8.3 License and Registration 


This module is a digital interface for citizens to apply 
for various licenses & registration certificates and make 
subsequent payments using online channels. 


8.3.1 Registration, Login and creation of user profile 


a) OTP Based Login for Citizen via Web or 
Mobile App 

b) OTP Based Login for Employee via Web or 
Mobile App 

c) Provision for language selection during 
first time registration for both employee and 
citizens 

d) Provision of creating a personalized Profile for 
Citizens and employees on Web App 


14 


e) Login Credentials for the various hierarchies 
of employees 


f) Role-based access for performing different 
actions relating to various License modules 


8.3.2 License Application 


User can apply for a new license from the system by 
selecting the type of license to apply. The user enters 
trade details, owner details and documents after 
which the application can be reviewed and submitted. 
Similarly, a counter employee can also apply for a 
license on behalf of the citizen. The system has a 
workflow integration that enables stage-wise approval 
before issuing the License. 


8.3.3 License Issue 


The system shall have the facility to assign the 
application to the respective Inspector for survey and 
verification. After the application is submitted, it goes 
to the document verifier. The next step after document 
verification is field inspection. After the field inspector’s 
approval, the license is approved by the approver. 


8.3.4 License Modification 


The system shall have the facility to edit/update the 
Application based on the Inspection report against the 
application. The system shall also allow the business 
owner to apply for Business Name or Business category 
changes to the department for approval. 


8.3.5 License Renewal 


The system shall have the facility to provide a hassle- 
free renewal process for citizen and employee ease, 
leading to increased revenues, by reducing unlicensed 
trades. The system should allow sending of SMS and 
Email notifications and reminders based on the renewal 
cycle. 


8.4 Connections & Billing 


The Connections & Billing module provides a 
digital interface to apply for water and sewerage 
connections and, pay the water and sewerage charges 
for connection/s. It can be used by the citizens, Urban 
Local Body (ULB) counter employees and field 
employees, and ULB Administrators to accomplish 
their specific tasks. It is available as a mobile and web- 
based application. 


8.4.1 Application for new connection 


The system allows the Citizen or ULB user (with an 
appropriate role in the system) to apply for a New 
Water or Sewerage connection. The application goes 
through an approval workflow before it is available 
for various transactions in the system. The workflow 


to be followed for new water or sewerage connection 
is configurable. In the workflow, the ULB official will 
generate the estimation notice. Once the payment is 
made, the work order will be generated. Every time 
there is a change in the status of an application, the 
citizen will be intimated through in-app notifications, 
SMS, and email. 


8.4.2 Modifications to a Connection 


The system facilitates the title transfer of water tap 
connection from one person to the other person. Title 
transfer of water tap connection directly depends up on 
Property tax. If title transfer is done in the property tax 
module then at the time of final approval, the changes 
will reflect in the module automatically. After the title 
transfer has been completed successfully, subseguent 
bills will be generated with the details of the new 
owner/s. 


Water tap change in usage happens when property type 
is changed from residential to Non-residential or from 
Non-residential to residential. Change in usage directly 
depends on the property tax module. If the property 
type is changed in the Property tax system, then it will 
automatically reflect in this module. When there is 
a change in the usage type, the subseguent bills will 
reflect the rates as per the updated usage category. When 
there is a change in the usage category in the middle of 
the billing cycle, pro-rata charges will be applied in the 
next billing period. The change in connection category 
from non-metered to metered and vice-versa is also 
possible in this module with the appropriate workflow 
configured to intimate all stakeholders of the change 
and collect any charges (if applicable) from the citizen. 


8.4.3 Meter Reading 


The module enables ULB employees to automatically 
read the meter values. Based on this information the 
employee can generate the bills for connections 


8.4.4 Generate Demand 


The system has the capability to configure the demand 
generation as an automatic or a manual process. In 
automatic process the demand generation for non- 
metered connections is automatically done periodically. 
For metered connection as soon as the employee enters 
the meter reading and clicks on ‘SAVE’, the demand is 
generated 


8.4.5 Payments collection and Receipts 


The citizen can pay for dues by searching his/her 
connection. In search results, the citizen can click on 
pay, which redirects to the summary page of the dues. 
After this, the citizen can pay for dues online. The 
employee can also collect the payment on the citizen's 


15 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


behalf. After searching for the desired connection, 
clicking on pay will redirect the employee to the 
common payment page. The employee can print the 
receipt after the payment is successfully collected. The 
citizen is also notified and gets a download receipt link 
in the notification. 


8.4.6 Closure of Water Connection 


If the water tap owner has got his own water source, 
then the water tap owner can initiate for Water tap 
connection closure permanently. So, that tap will 
be closed permanently, and demand would not be 
generated for the connection. Application for closing 
of water tap connection is accepted only with the latest 
water charges receipt and clearing of old dues. 


8.5 No-Objection Certificates 


No objection certificates (NOC) are certifications 
or permissions acguired from various bodies like 
Airport authority, monument authority, etc before any 
construction activities actually take place. To acguire 
a building permit, an applicant needs to acguire NOC 
from the concerned authorities. The system shall allow 
the NOC department user to login and upload the 
reguired NOC and approve or reject the application. 


8.6 Sewerage Management 


Sewerage Management is a system that enables a citizen 
to raise a reguest for septic tank cleaning with their 
ULB’s directly or by reaching out to the ULB counter. 
The Citizen can track the application, make a payment 
for the charges and rate the service. The system shall 
also enable ULB employee to create and search Vendor 
i.e Desludging Operator (DSO) and create billing slab 
with different combination of Property Type , Slum , 
etc. There must be a facility to generates the demand 
after calculating the charges for the given application 
using the billing slab already configured. 


It shall provide the following additional capabilities: 


a) A Citizen can file, track and rate the application 
for cleaning septic tank 

b) ULB Employee can file an application for 

cleaning septic tank on behalf of Citizen 


C 


— 


ULB Employee can assign DSO to the given 
application with a possible service date 


d) DSO can accept or reject the application 


— 


DSO or ULB Employee can complete the 
application after cleaning the septic tank 
Admin in ULB can cancel the application at 
any stage before completing the application 


wa 


ULB Employee or Admin can view the audit 
log of the given application 


8 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


8.7 Public Grievance management 


The public Grievance management module shall enable 
citizens to lodge complaints and track them, whereas 
employees can track, and address grievance incidents 
raised by the citizens. The platform shall be available 
for use in both mediums, as web and mobile app. The 
functions of this module can be broadly classified as 
the following: 


8.7.1 Registration, Login and Creation of User Profile 


This module provides enables OTP Based Login for 
Citizen and employees via Web/Mobile App. Users 
shall be able to select the language of their choice during 
registration and even create personalized profiles for 
themselves. The module allows role-based access to 
various functionalities provided as part of this solution. 


8.7.2 Lodging a Complaint 


The Citizen or Citizen Service Representative (CSR) 
on behalf of citizens can lodge, any municipal services 
related complaints in the PGR system. Users can 
also upload associated or relevant pictures with the 
complaint. For identifying the location of the complaint, 
the user can provide city, mohalla, house no. and other 
details or even select the location using maps. After 
filing the complaint a complaint number is generated. 


8.7.3 Assigning a Complaint 


The assigning officer shall have a dashboard with 
unassigned complaints. Any complaint can be selected 
to view details and expected closure timelines. The 
assigning officer can select and assign complaints to 
appropriate employee from a department-wise list. 
A complaint can also be re-assigned, if it is assigned 
incorrectly or for any other reason. 


8.7.4 Resolving a Complaint 


The Employee can view the complaints assigned to 
him on a dashboard with a functionality to mark them 
for closure. An employee can view details and closure 
timelines of the complaints from a list. After resolving 
the complaint, the Employee can upload pictures as 
evidence and enter comments. With the help of the share 
feature, complaints details can be shared via Whatsapp, 
SMS, email etc. to contractors. If the citizen finds the 
resolution to be unsatisfactory, the complaint can be 
reopened. Citizens can also provide feedback and rate 
the resolution. Citizen also have the option to reopen 
request if they are not satisfied with the resolution. 
Request for re-assign can be raised if the complaint 
cannot be resolved by the employee for reasons that 
could include employee leave or partial resolution 
requiring attention by an additional department, among 
other reasons. 


16 


8.8 Solid waste management 


Solid Waste Management (SWM) is one of the 
Significant focus areas for ULBs and is also one of 
the challenging areas for the cities to demonstrate 
outcomes to the stakeholder in line with the Sustainable 
Development Goals. Demonstrating control for 
the entire SWM process involving management of 
collection, handling, disposal, and processing the 
waste in an environment friendly manner is very 
important. An overview of the SWM system is shown 
in Fig. 9. 


A SWM system shall have functionalities such as 
door to door waste collection, real time monitoring 
of vehicles and manpower, monitoring operations of 
waste processing facilities, route planning, scheduling, 
and provision of alerts to citizens. Some of the KPI that 
shall be tracked through the solution are: 


a) Vehicles Coverage: Deployment of vehicles 
(ward-wise), route deviations, start & end 


timing 

b) Manpower: Attendance for deployment of 
manpower 

c) Non collection instances:  geo-tagged 
complaints from generators 

d) Quantum Details: load (fill/unfilled status) on 


secondary transportation vehicles and quantum 
received at weighbridge system placed at 
processing facilities and landfill sites 


8.8.1 Biometric Attendance System 


An integrated attendance system with the use of 
biometric would bring transparency in the operation 
of collecting waste. Details of the employee with 
their punch in and punch out time will be captured 
for monitoring attendance. All such attendance details 
shall be maintained on a real time basis and appropriate 
reports can be viewed on the application. 


8.8.2 Door to Door Collection 


Door to Door bins plays a vital role in fulfilling the 
goals of municipal SWM. Door to door waste provides 
a base for municipal solid waste and needs to be 
collected daily by municipal staff. Each household will 
be equipped with a proper bin and QR code mounted 
on the bin. Tracking of this data will make it easier for 
the city to track the waste collection. QR code will be 
mounted in each household to monitor the collection 
of wet waste and dry waste. At the time of collection 
of waste from home, Auto Tipper Drivers/Helpers shall 
scan the QR codes with the QR Code scanner assigned 
to the route to keep track of waste collected from home 
or society. Missed households will get notified in 
reports along with its area, zone, or ward details. 


Residence 
with OR Code 


Tipper Auto with 
GPS Tracker 


\ 


Start Trip 


a. & Scan QR Code 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


Residence 
with QR Code 
Pre-defined 
Ward-wise Route 


Residence 
with QR Code 


Q Tipper Auto with 


» | GPS Tracker 


Collect Garbage 


Residence 
with QR Code 


Residence 


ÆR Oo 
Start App, Select : 
Route Code d 
Collect Garbage : 
& Scan QR Code 3 j 
GSM/LAN „aa ( ) 
Network ””” A 
1 
Stop Trip F 
Bg m| 
RI Q R - Nr: 
Stop App, Select R) 
Next Route Code Residence 
with OR Code 


with OR Code 


Fic. 9 AN Overview OF SWM IN A CITY 


8.8.3 Transit Management System 


Both primary and secondary waste collection vehicles 
shall be eguipped with a vehicle tracking unit as well 
as passive RFID Tag. Vehicle tracking unit will be a 
GPS device mounted on a vehicle for sending location 
details of the vehicle at any time. Fleet status along 
with its routes, schedules and assigned driver details 
can be traced on real time basis on GIS map through the 
Transit Management System 


a) The primary vehicles transfer the waste 
to secondary vehicles at specific transfer 
points. The Compactor should be connected 
with a RFID reader. Every time an auto tips 
into the compactor the RFID tag of the auto 
tipper should be read by the scanner on the 
Compactor. 

b) The load sensors at the compactors will record 

the load of the Compactors. 


C 


— 


Entry/exit points of all Dry Waste Collection 
Centers (DWCC), Wet Waste Processing 
facilities, Landfill, Transfer Stations and Bio 
methanation Plants shall be installed with 
RFID Readers, Barrier Gate and Weight 
Sensors to be integrated with a local controller 
and workstation. 

d) Waste carrying vehicles shall be fixed with 
RFID Tags to enable their reading at the entry/ 
exit points of the processing facilities. 


17 


8.8.4 Route Mapping and Optimization 


The Route Mapping and Optimization Module shall 
enable defining of route and waste collection points 
on the map. It should define a schedule for each route 
and waste collection points there in, with respect to its 
collection in terms of the start time, end time and grace 
period if any. The module can further assign specific 
or multiple routes to a particular contractor, vehicle, or 
driver and monitor the route attendance by designated 
vehicle in terms of in time, out time and duration. 


8.8.5 Billing and Collection Module 


a) Module shall facilitate the generation of 
demand note for billing. 

b) The application shall facilitate integration with 

payment gateway for online payment of the fees, 


fines and other kinds of financial transaction. 
The module shall also have the facilities to 
accept offline payment by capturing details of 
Demand Draft or bank challan. 

The application shall enable integration with 
handheld POS devices to enable the update of 
onsite payment. 


c) 


d) 


e 


— 


The billing and collection mechanism as well 
as the assessment of the penalty should be 
developed in line with the provision of the 
existing collection and transportation contracts 
to avoid any conflict in future. 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


9 MUNICIPAL GOVERNANCE: 
TECHNOLOGICAL ARCHITECTURE 


Technological Architecture derives the benefits of 
the latest technologies and standards and enhances 
efficiency through customer-centric behaviour. 
Municipal governance functionalities and applications 
are built on two key layers: Core Service Infrastructure 
and Core Data Infrastructure that are described in 9.1 
and 9.2 and shown in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 respectively. 


9.1 Core Service Infrastructure 
9.1.1 Authorization management 


Authorization Management enables administrators to 
make sure that users only have access to functions for 
which they are authorized. This service lets you manage 
user authorizations by defining standard application 
roles, aggregate them into role collections and groups, 
and assign them to users. 


9.1.2 Identity Management 


Identity Management deals with identifying individuals 
in a system landscape and controlling their access by 
associating user rights and restrictions. An Identity is a 
combination of all user accounts of a person in a system 
landscape. It contains the settings required for system 
access and the associated user rights and restrictions. 


9.1.3 Single Sign-on 


Single Sign-On (SSO) eases user interaction with 
the many component systems available to users in a 
municipal governance system environment. Once users 
are authenticated on the portal, they can use the portal 
to access any applications. With SSO in the portal, users 
can access different systems and applications without 
having to repeatedly enter their user information for 
authentication. 


9.1.4 Digital signature and encryption 


Digital signatures help implement the Secure store and 
forward (SSF) mechanisms that provide the user with 
the means to secure data and documents. The digital 
signature uniquely identifies the signer, is not forgeable, 
and protects the integrity of the data. Any changes in 
the data after being signed result in an invalid digital 
signature for the altered data. The digital envelope 
makes sure that the contents of the data are only visible 
to the intended recipients. 


9.1.5 Document Builder 


Document Builder component lets you author simple to 
complex documents quickly and easily, using customer 
defined formats, templates, and clause content. The 
service adds value to any scenario that has a need to 
generate documentation. The content of the document 
may be simply formatted correspondence with fill- 
in values, such as recipient name, or it may be a very 
rigidly formatted contract with hundreds of clauses 
selected by rule-based logic. 


9.1.6 Workflow engine 


The Workflow or BPM Engine is a lightweight 
framework that provides capabilities to define business 
process targeted at internal users, developers, and 
system admins. It allows to define various steps in the 
process and their execution flow. For example, a typical 
origination process involves an eligibility check of a 
customer, application form submission, and approvals. 


9.1.7 Document management 


Document Management service enables the user to 
create a new document in the system or store a scanned 
copy of one, automatically route documents to concerned 
employees, store metadata for each document, create 
an index to track documents and retrieve the status 


Authorization Identity ; : Digital signature Document Workflow Document 
Single Sign-on 5 p = 
management Management & encryption Builder engine management 
Notification Registries Entity Localisation Search Location Permen 
Management Gateway 
Fic. 10 CORE SERVICE INFRASTRUCTURE 
Data Quality Master Data Reporting/ | | 7 m 
Data warehouse Analytics engine mens 
Management | Management Dashboards | | yt 8 
Fig. 11 CORE DATA INFRASTRUCTURE 


18 


of the documents based on various search parameters 
and share auto updates to various stakeholders. It shall 
enable integration with a workflow engine to enable a 
multitude of departmental services. 


9.1.8 Notification 


Notification service enables notification of the user 
through SMS and email for taking actions on specific 
activities or to inform the user when a task gets 
completed. 


9.1.9 Localisation 


This service enables a solution to adapt to the needs 
and preferences of the citizens and users in different 
regions. Every service needs to communicate with the 
user in a language that is understandable by the user. 
Localization service will provide the capabilities to 
serve multilingual content to the users and citizens. 


9.1.10 Enterprise Search 


Enterprise Search is a search solution that provides 
unified, comprehensive, and secure real-time access 
to enterprise data which enables users to search for 
structured data (business objects) and allows direct 
access to the associated applications and actions. 


9.1.11 Registries 


Registries enable decision makers across organizations 
to have access to common sets of data that are logically 
organized and act as a shared source of truth, to improve 
collaboration and decision-making in the ecosystem. In 
addition, for citizens, Registries can ensure that their 
data is secured and encrypted with trusted parties and 
1s shared only with their explicit consent. The registries 
will be backed with a common data ontology that will 
enable sharing of data across functions and creation of 
dashboards and analytics at various levels. 


9.1.12 Location 


This service enables capturing of the location of 
various assets either being created or owned by ULBs. 
The location can then be displayed on a map for a GIS 
based tracking of the assets. 


9.1.13 Payment Gateway 


This is a unified payment service to enable receipt of 
payment from citizens against service delivery. 


9.1.14 Entity Management 


This service manages the primary data of entities 
amongst different programs in conjunction with 
corresponding registries (e.g., user, device and so on). 
It will help ecosystem actors in resource management. 
It can also provide various user administration and 
security functions, including creating new users, 


19 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


managing user passwords, editing the profile, enabling 
or disabling certain users. 


9.2 Core Data Infrastructure 


9.2.1 Data warehouse 


An Enterprise data warehouse shall be governed, 
scalable, high-performance platform for storing 
integrated data as well as processing large, complex 
queries and advanced analytics to provide the insights 
for data-based decision making. The platform shall act 
as the single source for self- service BI and analytics 
and will provide long-term trends, patterns as well as 
predictive insights for more effective planning and 
optimization of city operations. 


The data warehouse platform shall deliver fast query 
performance and storage efficiency for structured data 
through a native columnar architecture providing speed 
and agility with a low total cost of ownership. Column 
based storage makes it easy to execute operations in 
parallel using multiple processor cores thus providing 
massive parallelization in Query Execution. In addition 
to the above, it shall provide extremely strong support 
for complex predictive analytic methods through in- 
database analytics, handling massive data sets for better 
modeling accuracy, and ability to work with leading 
analytics and visualization tools. 


9.2.2 Data Quality Management 


In a smart city, the function of data quality becomes 
very important as similar information about citizens 
(Address, phone number, etc.) is collected across 
multiple applications and most times it is entered 
manually. Also, when application forms are filled by 
citizens or operators there’s always the possibility of 
missing data in some fields. A data quality solution will 
ensure these errors or omissions are either corrected 
through linkages to other sources of similar data or 
highlighted for correction. 


9.2.3 Master Data Management 


Master data governance is the process of creating a 
centralized database of data entities used by multiple 
application across a city. Examples of master data in 
a city could be addresses (property, buildings, road 
names, locality names, etc.), Assets (Fixed asset like 
real estate, plant & machinery or a movable asset like 
vehicles), Citizens (or customers), and many more. 
This practice helps meet the data quality requirement 
as these central databases act as the single source of 
truth for all applications. 


9.2.4 Analytics engine 


This is a combination of tools such as AI & ML 
workbenches that help cities use data collected across 
various modules of the municipal governance system to 
drive decision making. 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


9.2.5 Reporting/Dashboards 


Reporting and dashboards are enabled through the 
Business Intelligence (BI) platform that simplifies the 
process of data manipulation, allowing users to access, 
navigate, analyze, format, and shares information 
across different environments. It allows a wide range 
of processes, from search and navigation to advanced 
analytics, enterprise guery, reporting and analysis, 
dashboards and visualization, self-service access to 
relevant information and information infrastructure 
management. 


10 MUNICIPAL 
ARCHITECTURE 


GOVERNANCE: DATA 


Data Architecture ensures the adoption of which ensures 
establishing data as a “Single Source of Truth” that is 
shared by all. India has a unigue challenge pertaining 
to Data Architecture for Municipal Governance due to 
federated governance and policies as well as the market 
for municipal governance systems. 


Data Description Abstract Models like Taxonomy, 
Data Models and APIs can hence focus on providing 
an unambiguous understanding of the data in terms of 
structure (syntax) and meaning (semantics). Correct 
and uniform description of data will thus enable the 
following capabilities in government: 


a) Data Discovery — It enables a department 
to guickly and accurately identify the data 
reguired to fulfil its governance objectives 
(through functions and services). The data may 
be owned by the department itself or by another 
department in any level of Government. Data 
discovery is further strengthened by the 
categorization, search and guery capabilities 
provided by other areas. 


b) Data Sharing and Reuse — The ability to 
discover data (who is generating/managing 
what data) and a clear understanding of its 
meaning ensure that the data can be easily 
shared and reused in many activities both 
within and outside the department. 


c) Data Harmonization — A uniform way 
of describing the data through a well- 
defined model enables different departments 
to compare the data assets and helps in 
harmonizing the syntax and semantics of the 
data assets, a useful outcome of this would be 
the creation of common entities which can be 
used across departments. 


20 


Two aspects of data description that are needed to be 
captured are: 


a) The metadata (data about data) and 
b) The mechanism for storing the metadata. 


The metadata should accordingly be captured along 
these two dimensions: 


a) As logical data models for describing structured 
data and 


b) As Digital Data Resource metadata for describing 
semi-structured and un-structured data (using 
standards such as Dublin Core Meta Data 
Standard) 


The structured data would invariably be implemented 
in the Data Architecture as Entity — Relationship 
diagram. The Digital Data Resource would be captured 
as metadata records. Data Context Abstract Model Data 
context is any information that provides additional 
meaning to the data in terms of nature of data (category), 
the organization which is responsible for creating and 
managing the data, which business process created the 
data etc. 


The data context along with the data description makes 
it possible for a potential consumer of data to discover 
the data (if such a data discovery service is available) 
and understand the context in which the data was 
created so that a decision can be taken on whether the 
data is relevant for his/her purposes. 


Table 2 provides the list of various publications related 
to Policies and Standards on Data and the location from 
where the related published documentation can be 
accessed. 


Some of the standards which have been notified in 
http://egovstandards.gov.in are listed below: 
a) Metadata and Data Standards — Demographic 
b) Digital Preservation Metadata and Schema 


c) Localization and Language Technology 
Standards 

d) Technical Standards for IFEG 

e) Standards and Specifications for 


e-Authentication 
f) Data Security Standards 


Annex A provides an example of data model 
(Fig. 13) and Annex B provides an illustrative process 
and information flow between different components of 
the Municipal Governance architecture (Fig. 14). 


Structured Data 


Resource 32 
RE 
xe” 
vē NY 
Publication 


Manages 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


Provides Management Context for 


PA 


Digital data 
Data Steward - — — — — — — — Data Asset 8 
på Resource 
på 
4 Categorizes 
Categorizes 5 d 
|| på 
M på 
Contains g ¢ Categorizes 9 
Taxonomy Topic k------- > Query Point 
N 
N 
I `“. 
Participates in Relates Categorizes 
1 N 
E V 
: 5 Exchange 
Relationship ` 5 
Package 


Indicates a concept that is part of another 
standardization area 


Indicates an operational relationship 


Fic. 12 DATA ABSTRACT MODEL 


Table 2 eGovernance Data Standards 


Purpose of the Publication 


Published By 


eGov Standards 


Local Government Directory 


National Data Sharing and Accessibility 
Policy (NDSAP) — 2012 


Open Data Element Framework 


(O-DEF), Version 1.0 


Provide a platform for sharing of ideas, 
knowledge and draft document among the 
members of various committees involved 
in Standards formulation Process 


To make available Standard location codes 
with a mechanism for dynamic update of 
create /split /merger of villages/ blocks / 
districts/ states and local governments 
(Panchayats and municipalities) 


To make data available to public for 
access, for enabling rational debate, better 
decision-making and use in meeting civil 
society needs 


To define Object-oriented classification of 
data elements 


21 


Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
Government of India http://egovstandards.gov.in 


Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Government of 
India under e-Panchayat Mission Mode Project 
(e-Panchayat MMP) 


http://igdirectory.gov.in 


Ministry of Science & Technology (Department of 
Science & Technology), Government of India 


https://data/gov.in 
http://dst.gov.in 
The Open Group 


www.opengroup.org/bookstore 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 10 ) 


EXAMPLE OF DATA MODELING FOR ASSET MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


Data modelling based on Geographical, Functional, and Technical Criteria 


Company Code ABC 
smart city 


Cost Center 
4600 ABC Smart City 
Ward 1 


Maintenance 
PlanningPlant 
4600 — Gurgaon Plant 


Maintenance Plant 
4600—ABC Smart 
City Ward 1 


Planner Group 
002— Planner group 


Maintenance Work 
Center 
MS MW- Mechanical 
Work center 


Function Location 


ABC Smart City 


Y Y v v 
Water Supply Community center Garden Bus Depot 


Y M v Y v v 
Road Stretch Road Stretch 2 Road Stretch 3 Road Stretch 4 Road Stretch 5 Road Stretch 6 
1 


Storage Location 
MS01- Storage 
Location 01 


PurchasingGroup- 
002; 
Purchasing Org - 
1015 


v v v M M 
Street Light1 Street Light2 Street Light3 Street Light3 High Mast 


v Y i 
HPSV light Electric Switch 


Supply Sub Eguipment + Spares 


Fic. 13 EXAMPLE OF DATA MODELING FOR ASSET MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


22 


Inventory 
Management 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 10 ) 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


EXAMPLE OFA PROCESS FLOW FOR ASSET MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


Material Master 
for Eguipment 


è Spare parts, 
i Assembly. Bill 
| of Material 


ii Asset Warranty GSE Document 
EAM Controlling Accounting Management Classification Management 
JE > 
' 
! Catalog Profile ' 
1 1 
1 . | | | EE 4 PNG pa ` sad & 
| Equipment |! ' 1 Í 1 1 i 1 Asset | 1 OEM 
—» Asset Master ! 
rt Master i | Cost gener | | | Warranty for 1 Classification Manuals, SLD, 
FTE seran lensi , Ba . Equipment __/ kr 2 | Test Results 
4 | | | et a , 
CAD 2D, 3D `^ 
=o i Drawings,. 
TN one 
! Pemmit ; 1 
S 4 i Complex 
E bakt N assets g 
(Measurement $ O aa 
h Points/ | 
\___ Counters __ |} 
Li Maintenance | 
| WorkCenter |! 
WI AA I Standardization of Routine Maintenance penne en 
a Task List | i Spare parts i 
be be | warranty ! 


Fic. 14 EXAMPLE OF PROCESS FLOW FoR ASSET MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


23 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 


Standardization Testing and Quality Certification 
(STQC) 


Shrama Technologies Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 
Treasure Data 


Amravati Smart City Development Corporation 
Limited, Mumbai 


Centre for Development of Telematics, New Delhi 
Criterion Network Labs, Bengaluru 


CyanConnode Private Limited, Bengaluru 


ERNET India, New Delhi 
Ericsson India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Esri India Technologies Private Limited, Noida 


Hawlett Packard Enterprise, 


IEEE India, Bengaluru 


India Smart Grid Forum, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 


Intel India Technology Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, New Delhi 


Narnix Technolabs Private Limited, New Delhi 
National Institute of Urban Affairs, New Delhi 


National Smart Grid Mission, Ministry of Power, 
Gurugram 


PHYTEC Embedded Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Qualcomm India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


24 


Representative(s) 


PROF BHARADWAJ AMRUTUR (Chairman) 


Ms Lirika KAUSHIK 


MR AMARJEET KUMAR 
MR KUMAAR GUHAN 


MR SIDDHARTH GANESH 


MR AURINDAM BHATTACHARYA 
Ms ANUPAMA CHOPRA (Alternate) 


MR JAYAPRAKASH KUMAR 
MR Krishna Kumar LOHATI (Alternate) 


MR MANISH WIDHANI 
MR Deepak NIMARE (Alternate) 


MR PAVENTHAN ARUMUGAM 
MR SENDIL KUMAR DEVAR 


Ms Serma JosHI 
VIJAY KUMAR (Alternate) 


MR DEVARAJAN R. 
MANUKUMAR NAR (Alternate) 


Mr SRIKANTH CHANDRASEKARAN 
Mr Munir MonammeD (Alternate) 


MR Rest Kumar PILLAI 
Ms PARUL SHRIBATHAM (Alternate) 


Mr VASANTH RAJARAMAN 


MR C. SUBRAMANIAN 
MR ANANTHA NARAYANAN (Alternate 1) 
MR SIDHARTHA MOHANTY (Alternate II) 


KUNAL KUMAR 
MR Panam Vijay (Alternate) 


MR N. KISHOR NARANG 
Ms LAVANYA NUPUR 


MR Arun MISRA 
Smt Kumup WADHVA (Alternate I) 
MR Gyan PRAKASH (Alternate I) 


B. VALLAB Rao 


Dr VINOSH BABU JAMES 
Dr Punit RATHoD (Alternate) 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 
Renesas Electronics, Bengaluru RAVINDRA CHATURVEDI 
SAURABH Goswami (Alternate) 
Schneider Electric's industrial software business - MR Gourav Kumar Haba 
AVEVA, Mumbai 
SESEI, New Delhi MR DINESH CHAND SHARMA 
Secure Meters Limited, Gurugram MR ŪTTAM KOTDIYA 


MR KAusTUBH PATIL (Alternate I) 
MR PUNEET KHURANA (Alternate II) 
MR Anıl Menta (Alternate IID 


Senra Tech Private Limited, New Delhi DHIRAJ KUMAR 
ANKUSH KOCHHAR (Alternate) 


Siemens Limited, Mumbai Mr Manos BELGAONKAR 

MR Ravi MADIPADGA (Alternate I) 
MR PrabeeP Kapoor (Alternate II) 
MR VIKRAM GANDOTRA (Alternate IID 


System Level Solutions (India) Private Limited, Anand Mr DIPEN PARMAR 
MR Foram Moni (Alternate) 


Tata Consultancy Services Limited, Mumbai MR RAMESH BALAJI 

MR Desasuis MITRA (Alternate) 
Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi Mumbai MR JAGDISH SHIVRAJ SHIGE 

Mr Manos Kumar (Alternate) 
Tejas Networks Limited, Bengaluru Dr Kanwar Jit SINGH 
Telecommunication Engineering Center, New Delhi MR RAJEEV KUMAR TYAGI 


MR Susuit Kumar (Alternate I) 
MR ŪTTAM CHAND (Alternate II) 


eGovernments Foundation, Bengaluru MR KRISHNAKUMAR THIAGARAJAN 

In personal capacity MR Anisa P. K. 

In personal capacity PROF ŠUPTENDRANATH SARBADHIKARI 

BIS Director General Ms REENA GARG, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (ELECTRONICS AND IT) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI MANIKANDAN K. 
Scientist ‘D’ (ELECTRONICS AND IT), BIS 


25 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


Panel involved in the Finalization — LITD 28/P8 E-Governance Framework 


Organization 


E-Goverments Foundation, Bengaluru 
SAP India Pvt Ltd 

National Institute of Urban A ffairs 
DWI Consulting Pvt Ltd 

CEPT University 

KPMG 

KPMG 

KMPG 

KPMG 

Tech Mahindra 

IBM 


Hexagon India 


26 


Representative(s) 


MR KRISHNAKUMAR THIAGARAJAN (Co-convener) 
MR SUJIT PATHEJA (Co-convener) 

Ms LAVANYA NUPUR 

MR SHOBHIT VERMNA 

MR RAVIKANT JOSHI 

Ms MONIKA MALIK 

Ms NEETIKA CHHABRA 

MR RAKESH LAKHENA 

Mr Anoop ARVIND 

MR PANKAJ MITTAL 


MR PANKAJ JAIN 


MR VINAYBABU ADIMULAM 


IS 18006 (Part 1) : 2021 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


a) IS 18004 (Part 1) : 2021 IoT System Part 1 Reference Architecture 

b) IS 18008 (Part 1): 2021 Smart Cities GIS Part 1 Reference Architecture 
c) National Data Sharing and Accessibility Policy (NDSAP) — 2012 

d) MeitY India Enterpise Architecture (IndEA) — 2019 

e) E-Gov standards — http://egovstandards.gov.in 


27 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enguiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendmerts are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendmerts or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions”. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 28 (17283). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headguarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131,2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


