IS 5249 : 1 9 9 2

Indian Standard
DE TE RMINATION OF DYNAMIC P ROP E RTIE S OF SOIL - ME TH OD OF TE ST ( Second Revision )

UDC 624'131'5

0 BIS 1992

BURE AU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAH ADUR

STANDARDS
SH AH 110002 Price Gr ou p 5 ZAF AR MARG

BH AVAN,

NE W DE LH I

November 1992

Foundation

Engineering

Sectionat

anti

&I,!`I'. ( K.X 4;

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted bv the Bureau draft finalized by the Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee Civil Engineering Division Council. of Indian Standard+ had been approved ac.*r " e by tl.:

Several Indian Standards have been published for the design and construction of foundation for machines of various types, These involves the use of dynamic properties of soil. The need for a standard procedure for the determination of such properties therefore arose. The standard is meant to fulfil this need. The designer should choose the method appropriate to the codditions at a given site. In-sit u dynamic test by the forced vibration method may be found useful in most of the cases even though In layered soils, the wove propogation test has the it has the limitations of the plate load test. advantage that the dynamic properties of the layer of interest can be determined by suitably The results obtained by a free vibration test should adjusting the distance between the geophones. be used with caution. This standard was first published in 1969 and subsequently revised in 1977 which included the block vibration tests both under free and forced vibration conditions, shear modulus tests, wave propagation tests and cyclic plate load tests. Guidelines are provided for choosing the design parameters consistent with the conditions of confinement and strains which are likely to occur in an actual problem. This revision has been taken up to incorporate further improvements found necessary in light of determination of dynamic properties of soil, since its last publication. In the formulation of this standard among the standards and practices in the field in this country. due weightage has been given prevailing in different in addition to international co-ordination to relating it to the practices

In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, or calculated is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance rounding off numerical values ( rev ised )`.

if the final value, observed with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for

IS 5249 : 1992

Indian St andard

DETERMINATIONOFDYNAMICPROPERTIESOF SOIL-METHODOFTEST
( Second Revision )
1 SCOPE This standard covers methods of conducting block vibration test, cyclic plate load test and wave propagation test for evaluation of in situ dynamic and damping properties of soils. Guidelines for choosing parameters for design and analysis are also provided. 2 REFERENCES 4 APPARATUS The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the relevant definitionsin IS 2810 : 1979 and the following shall apply. The notations given in Annex B shall also apply* 3.1 Natural Frequency 4.0 One of the apparatus utilized in conducting these test are listed in 4.1 to 4.15. Other suitable apparatus or mesuring devices may be utilized for conducting the test. 4.1 Mechanical Oscillator 3.7 Damping Coeft'icient @ The ~ ;ltioof damping of system to the critical damping. 3.8 Coefficient of Attenuation

Coefficient which has dimensions of l/distnace used in the expression for determining the amplitu+ at any distance from the vibration source. The coefficient is a characteristic of soil (m-l).

Number of cycles per unit time with which the system oscillates under the influence of forces inherent in the system. 3.2 Undamped Natural Frequency

The mechanical oscillator should be capable of producing a sinusoidally varying force and have a frequency range commensurate with the size of the block to be tested and type of the soil. It should have the provision for altering dynamic force level by simple adjustment of eccentric masses. 4.2 d.c. Motor

Number of cycles per unit time with which the system oscillates under the influence of forces inherent in the system without considering damping effect. 3.3 Damped Natural Frequency system considering its

Motor of suitable power rating so as to run the above oscillator in the required frequency range at full load. This should be of type that its own vibrations are negligible. 4.3 Speed Control Unit

Natural frequency damping. 3.4 Coeflicient (C")

of the

of Elastic

Uniform

Compression

Capacity commensurate with d.c., motor being used, capable of operation at 220 V a.c. input supply and giving variable d.c. voltage output. The maximum drop in voltage at full load should not exceed 2 percent. 4.4 Acceleration Pick-up

It is the compressive stress causing unit elastic uniform compression for a given area under dynamic loading conditions. 3.5 Coefficient of Compression (C$) Elastic Non-Uniform

It is the ratio of compressive stress and elastic nonuniform compressive deformation for a given area under dynamic loading conditions (kg/cm). 3.6 Coeffkient of Elastic Uniform Shear (CT)

Three in number, of same response characteristics, maximum range should be commensurate with equipment used in 3.1, useful frequency range d.c. 100 Hz or more. Natural frequency should be 220 Hz undamped and 140 Hz damped. The response should be linear, deviation from linearity being 1 percent or less with amplitude changes. 4.5 Velocity Pick-up

It is the ratio of shear stress to elastic uniform shear displacement for a given area under dynamic loading condition. 1

Two in number, of suitable type, sensitive enough to record even feeble ground vibrations. Natural frequency<10 Hz and dampling less than 1 percent of the critical damping.

IS 5249 : 1992 4.6 Displacement pick-up block should be made. For block size as in 5.2, the size of the pit may be 3 m x 6 m at the bottom and a depth preferably equal to proposed depth of foundations. The test should be conducted above the ground water table. In case of rock, the test may be performed on the surface of rock bed itself. The bottom of the pit should be level and horizontal and the size of the pit should be at stable slope and may be kept vertical where possible. 5.2 Test Block A plain cement concrete block of M-15 concrete should be constructed in the test pit as shown in Fig. 1. The size of the block should be selected depending upon the sub-soil conditions. In ordinary soils it may be 1 m x 1 m x 1.5 m and in dense soils it may be 0.75 m x 0.75 m x 1 m. In boulder deposits the height may be increased suitably. The block size should be so adjusted that the mass ratio m xp3 I-0

Amplitudes may be directly measured using displacement pick-ups. These should be of appropriate capacity and should have flat frequency response in the range 0 to 100 Hz or more and should be of high sensitivity; accuracy should be not less than 2 percent. 4.7 Geophones Similar characteristics (see 4.5). 4.8 Universal Amplifier Osciilograph as of velocity pick-up

4.9 Ink Writing

Frequency response above 100 Hz, number of elements 3 (preferable); natural frequency above 140 Hz; maximum amplitude + 20 mm: paper speed 5, 25, 125 mm/s: capable of operation of 220 V a.c. 50 Hz supply, optimum damping with external resistance. 4.10 High Gain d.c. Amplifier To match velocity pick-up or geophone as the case may be. 4.11 Steel Plate for Fixing Oscillator
Motor and d.c.

the concrete block should be cured for at least days before testing. Foundation bolts should embedded into the concrete block at the time testing for fixing the oscillator assembly. Details the test block are shown in Fig.1. 5.3 Test Set-up

)I

is always more than unity 15 be of of

Thickness 20 mm, length and width depending upon size of oscillator unit. 4.12 Measuring
Tape

Steel or metallic tape of 30 m length. 4.13 Hammer A sledge hammer or a drop hammer weighing 10 kg or any other device to impart blow to the block for exciting under conditions of free vibrations or for generating waves in the ground. 4.14 Plate Load Testing Equipment Conforming to IS 1888 : 1982. Arrangement for loading may be of mechanical or hydraulic type with facility to apply of remove the loads quickly for conducting cyclic plate load tests. 4.15 Apparatus Soil at Site for Measuring Field Density of

Vibration exciter should be fixed on the coilcrete block and suitable connection between power supply, speed control unit, should be made as shown in Fig. 2. Any suitable electronic instrumentation may be used to measure the frequency and amplitude of vibrations. 5.4 Forced Vibration
5.4.1 Vertical Vibration

Test
Test

The vibration pick-ups should be fixed at the top

In accordance with IS 2720 (Part 28) : 1973 or IS 2720 (Part 29) : 1975.
NOTES 1 Equipment given Alternative equipment in 4.1 to 4.14 are found suitable. may be used where available.

2 In addition to above equipment, optical or mechanical equipment for analysing records of wave propagation tests shall be required. 5

of the block as shown in Fig.1, such that it senses vertical motion of the block. The vibration exciter should be mounted on the block such that it generates purely vertical sinusoidal vibrations and line of action of vibrating force passes through the centre of gravity of the block. The exciter is operated at a constant frequency. The signal of the vibration pick-ups are fed into suitable electronic circulatory to measure frequency and amplitude of vibration. The frequency of the exciter is increased in steps of small values, (l-4 cycles/set) up to maximum frequency of the exciter and the signals measured. The same procedure should be repeated if necessary for different excitation levels. The dynamic force should never exceed 20 percent of the total mass of the block and exciter assembly. Amplitude versus frequency curve shall be plotted for each excitation level to obtain the natural frequency of the soil and the foundation block tested. A typical plot is shown in Fig. 3. 2

BLOCK

VIBRATION

TEST

5.1 Test Pit

A test pit of suitable size depending upon size of

IS 5249 : 1992

5.4.2 Determination of Coefficient of Elastic Uniform Compressti bf Soil The coefficient of elastic uniform compression of soil is given by the following equation: c
where
"

(CJ

=

4x2 f& M A

test. The pick-up fitted on the block is removed and installed at a certain distance di (approximately 30 cm) from the block. The second pick-up is fixed in line with this pick-up and the centre of the block at a distance of d, The amplitude of vibration at these two locations are measured for different frequencies. The coefficient of attenuation is calculated from the following expression:

f
Z

= Natural

A

frequency; = Mass of the block, exciter and motor; and = Contact area of the block with the soil.

= A,
A2

1d
d2

. e-+`e'J

where

From the value of CU obtained for the test block of contact area A the value of CU, for the foundation having contact area A, may be obtained from the equation: C", = CU d

A,

= Amplitude

at distance at distance

d,, d,, and
of a a, m-l 0.1 0.04 clay TEST 0.04-O. l:! silt

A, = Amplitude a = Coefficient
Table Soil type Saturated Saturated Saturated 6 CYCLIC

of attenuation values

for typical

N OTE - This relation is valid for small variations in base area of the foundations and may be used for area up to 10m2. For actual foundation areas larger than 10 m2, the value of C', obtained for 10 mz may be used.

sand or sandy silty sand sandy silty

54.3 Determination of Damping Coefficient of Soil
In case of vertical vibration test, the value of damping coefficient E of soil is given by the following equation:

PLATE

LOAD

6.1 Equipment Suitable arrangement for providing reaction of adequate magnitude depending upon size of plate employed should be used. The load mechanism shoulo have facility to apply and remove the loads quickly1 A hydraulic jack or any other suitable equipment may be used. 6.2 Test Procedure be assembled 1888 : 1982. equal to the: pit excavated1

E =
where

f2

-

fi

2fm f,, f, = Two frequencies
is equal at which the amplitude

to X,

x, f nr

= Maximum
(resonant Fig. 4.

amplitude; frequency).

and This is shown in

= Frequency at which amplitude is maximum

6.2.1 The equipment for the test shall according to the details given in IS The plate shall be located at a depth depth of the proposed foundation in a as given in IS 1888 : 1982.

5.5 Free Vibration

Tests

The block shall be excited into free vertical vibrations by the impact of sledge hammer or any suitable device, as near to the centre of the top face of the block as possible. The vibrations shall be recorded on a pen recorder or suitable device to measure the frequency and amplitude of vibration. The test may be repeated three or four times. In case of free vertical vibrations tests, the value of CU shall be obtained from the natural frequency of free vertical vibration using equation given at 5.4.2. The damping coefficient may be obtained from free vibration tests using the following equation:
E =

$

log,

X -f
mtl

For X,,, and Xm+, are as explained 5.6 Evaluation of Coeffuzient

6.2.2 After the set-up has been arranged the initial readings of the dial gauges should be noted an the first increment of static load should be applie $ to the plate. This load shall be maintained constant throughout for a period till no further settlement occurs or the rate of settlement becomes negligible. The final readings of the dial gauges should then be recorded. The entire load is then removed quickly but gradually and the plate allowed to rebound. When no further rebound occurs or the rate of rebound becomes negligible, the readings of the dial gauges should be again noted. The load shall then be increased gradually till its magnitude acquires a value equal to the proposed next higher stage of loading, which shall be maintained constant and the final dial gauge readings should be noted as mentioned earlier. The entire, load should then be reduced to zero and final dial gauge readings recorded when the rate of rebound becomes negligible. 6.2.3 The cycles of loading, unloading and reloading are continued till the estimated ultimate load has been reached, the final values of dial gauge readings being noted each time. 3

in Fig. 5.

of Attenuation

The test set up is same as that for the block resonance

IS 5 2 4 9 : 1 9 9 2

F IG. 1

S ET-u pF ORB ~o c r< VIB RATION TES T

nOtORAND
OSCILLATOR rSPEE0 CONTROL UNIT

' I

POWER WJPPLV I I I

\ \I

PICK UP/ tRANSDUCER

I

.

AMPLIFIER b

OSClLLOmAPn

F IG. 2

B LOCKD IAGRAM OF %S TLN GEQU IP MEN FT ORB LOCKVIB RATION TES T

6.0

_

PEAK

AMPLITUDE

x
c, i
1.0 3

z .

)(rn

3t
f2
0.
0 I 15 I 20 fn I 25 CPS I 30 I 35

fnz 4
CPS

FREOUENC<

FREQUENCY,

F IG. 3

TYP ICAL AMP LITU D VERS E US F REQU EN CY CLJ RVE ( VERTICAL VIB RATION TEST)

F IG. 4

D ETERMIN ATION OF D AMP IN G F ROM F ORCED VIB RATION TFST

4

IS 5249 : 1992 6.2.4 The magnitude of the load increment should be such that the ultimate load is reached in five to six increments. The initial loading and unloading cycles up to the safe bearing capacity of the soil should be with smaller increments in load. The duration of each loading and unloading cycle upon the type of soil under investigation. 6.2.5 Coefficient of Elastic Uniform Compression from Cyclic Plate Load Test From the data obtained during cyclic plate load test, the elastic rebound of the plate corresponding to each intensity of loading shall be obtained as shown in Fig. 6. The load intensity versus elastic rebound shall be plotted as shown in Fig. 7. The value of C, shall be calculated given below: C" = 5 e where kgf/cm3 from the equation Velocity of shear waves

VB is given 3-f

by:

vs =
where

f=

Frequency of vibration at which the wave length has been measured.

When the test is conducted using a phase meter, the phase angle corresponding to different distances between the geophones should be recorded and a curve plotted between the phase angle and the distance. From the curve, the distance S between the geophones for a phase difference of 90 should be determined. The remaining computations should be done as in 7.1.1 7.2 Hammer Tests

7.2.1 Equipment A hammer to imart impact to the ground, a geophone or velocity pick-up or time marking device to record the time of impact, an acceleration pick-up (or a geophone) to monitor the time of arrival of waves, universal amplifier, ink-writting oscilloscope or a timer capable of measuring time interval up to a precision of 10 seconds, and a steel measuring tape. 7.2.2 Procedure

P
5,

= Corresponding
= Elastic rebound

load intensity corresponding

kg/cm2, and to P in cm.

7 WAVE PROPAGATION TESTS FOR DETERMINATION OF SHEAR MODULUS 7.1 The wave propagation tests for determination of shear modulus may be conducted by making seismic waves to pass through the ground by impact of a hammer and determining the time of travel of these waves between two points at a known distance apart or by measuring the phase difference between vibration at two pointer under steady vibrations. 7.1.1

Steady State Vibration Test
up to infinite depth, vibrations is given

In case of uniform soil extending the wavelength of propagating by: Ids u4 = Jr + 2 (A,h)

the geophones where characteristics, that is h, = $ N4 = s where A s = = Wavelength Measured
CDL,

have

the

same

A suitable location in the area where this test is to be conducted is selected and radial lines are ranged out from this point for a distance of 30 m to 40 m. Points are marked on these lines at 2 m intervals. A velocity pick-up or a geophone is fixed at the origin of the radial lines and waves are generated near this point by impact of a 10 kg hammer falling through a height of 2 m on a steel plate of 150 mm x 150 mm resting on a the surface of ground. An acceleration pick-up is placed at a known distance along one of the radial lines, the pick-ups is amplified through universal amplifier and fed to two channels of the same pen recorder. The time taken by the waves to travel the distance between the two pickups can be obtained from these records. The test is repeated for different known distance between the pick-ups along all the marked lines one by one. 7.2.2.1 The test may be repeated at different locations to obtain a representative value of wave velocities in the area under investigation. 7.2.2.2 Alternatively, the time taken by the waves to travel a known distance may be obtained directly by feeding the output of the pick-ups to a timer. 7.2.2.3 Density of soil

in cm, distance between geophones in

h,

=

phase shift of geophones with respect to wave nearer to concrete block at the frequency of the propagating vibrations in radians, and Phase shift of the other geophone at the frequency of the propagating vibrations in radians.

The in situ density of the soil should be determined by the method specified in IS 2720 (Part 28) : 1973 or IS 2720 (Part 29) : 1975.
7.2.3 Hammer Test

h,=

The values of travel time of compression
the corresponding distance

waves and along each selected line

IS 5249 : 1992

(m*l)

L2.._L--2.-J
b-W= DAMPED NATURAL FREQUENCY FIG. 5 OF SYSTEM DETERMINATIONOF DAMPING FROM FREE VIBRATION TEST LOAD -

.
0.15 -

Al ,A2 ....AS ARE ELASTIC REBOUND AT LOAD Pl, P2.....P5 RESPECTIVELY FIG.

6 LOAD S ETlUMENT CURVE FOR &XlC
h AD %3 T

h .4 l-E 0 20 DISTANCE, m AVERAGE VELOCITY Vc *+mls FIG. 8 DETERMINA~ON OF AVERAGE WAVE VELOC~~ OF STRESS WAVE PROPAGATION IN S OIL MEDIUM (HAMMERTES T) 60

I

ELASTIC

REBOUNO-

Cu =&
7 1 ~. 7 &~XHOD FOR C~TAINING VALUEOF CYCLIC hm ILMD `~IZS TDATA

C, FROM

6

IS 5249 : 1992 at a location are plotted as shown in Fig. 8. A straight line is fitted through these points. The value of average velocity is obtained as: vc = sit where cl) cq = = 3.46 Ct 1.5 cz

NOTE - The relation between C,, CT, C(I and CU, depends upon elastic properties of medium, the soil, the size and shape of contact area and flexibility of rigidity of the foundation.

Vc = velocity
s t = distance

of compression in m; and

waves,

in m/s;

= corresponding sec.

time of travel of waves in Modulus and Shear by equation:

7.3 Determination Modulus of Soil 7.3.1

of Elastic

Elastic modulus

E is determined

8.2 In case of very stiff soils the value of C,, may be so high that the natural frequency of the foundation soil system may not be reached because of limitations of the vibration exciting equipment. The frequency response curves in such cases may be extrapolated to obtain the resonant frequency of foundation soil system following the procedure suggested in Annex C. 9 GUIDANCE PARAMETFRES FOR CHOOSING DESIGN FROM IN-SITU TESTS

where P = E =
NOTE -

Mass

density

of soil

Poision's
The following

ratio of soil
values for Poission's ratio may be

T yp e of soi l

E

Clay Sand Rock

0.5 0.30 to 0.35 0.15 to 0.25

7.3.2 Depending upon the nature of medium involved, and if the distance between pick-ups is sufficiently large, both the arrival of compression and shear waves may be distinguishable from the records. In such a case both E and G can be determined independently.

9.1 The value of the dynamic shear modulus G is affected by a number of parameters out of which confining pressure, shear strain amplitude and relative density are most important. It is observed that changes in density from medium to dense state have relatively insignificant effect compared to effect of confining pressure and shear strain amplitude. Since the order of strain level and confining pressure associated with different in-situ tests are different, tests may be expected to show a large variation, as the strain associated with, say hammer test is very small and that with cyclic plate load test is very large. A rational apprroach is therefore, needed to arrive at a suitable design value. 9.2 In the range of strains associated with properly design machine foundations, the effect of variation in strain on shear modulus is small and the values of G for design purposes may be determined from the in-situ test values using the relation given below: G, -_= G

E
G where P Y E

= 2 G (1 t E)
= v;p

= Mass

density

of soil in kg set r/m", in m/s, and

where G, and G = Dynamic shear prototype and respectively; modulus for the from field test

= Velocity = Poission's

of shear waves, ratio of soil.

7.3.3 The values of from the values of C, D. Alternatively the from E and G values tests. 8 TEE UNIFORM UNIFORM

E and G can also be obtained
obtained as indicated in Annex values of C, can be obtained obtained in wave propagation

Mean effective confining pressure, associated with prototype foundation and the in-situ test respectively and

m
OF ELASTIC ELASTIC NON-

= Constant depending

COEFFICIENT SHEAR AND SHEAR

upon the type of soil, shape of grains, etc. Its value has been found to vary from 0.3 to 0.7 and may on the average be taken as 0.5.

8.1 Compression C,, the coefficient of elastic uniform shear, Ct, the .coeffrcient of elastic non-uniform compression C9 and the coefficient of elastic nonuniform shear CI# are related to each other by the lrelations given below:

9.3 In situations where high strain levels are associated as in the case of analysis for earthquake conditions, the effect of strain level shall be considered along with that of confining pressure. In such a case, the values of G from different field tests may first be reduced to same confining pressure ( expected below the footing ) and their variation 7

C" =

1sto2cz

IS 5249 : 1992 with strain levels may be studied to arrive at an appropriate values corresponding to the expected strain level. 9.4 The value of damping in soils is also a function of strain level to which the soil is subjected. Damping is less at low strain levels and becomes large at high strain levels. significantly

9.5 The value of C may similarly be expected to vary as Cu and G are related to each other ( see Annex D ).

ANNEX

A

( Clause 2 )
LIST OF REFERRED IS N o. 1888 : 1982 2720 (Part 12 ) : 1981 Title Method of load test on soils ( second revis ion )Methods of test for soil : Part 12 Determination of the shear strength parameters of soil from consolidated undrained triaxial compression test with measurement of pore water pressure (first revis ion ) Methods of test for soil : Part 28 Determination for dry 2720 ( Part 29 ) : 1975 INDIAN STANDARDS IS No.
Title

density of soils in-place, by the sand replace-ment method (firs t
revis ion )

Method of test for soil : Part 29 Determination of dry density of soils in-place, by the core cutter method (firs t
revis ion )

2810 : 1979

2720 ( Pati 28 ) : 1974

Glossary of terms relating to soil dynamics (firs t revis ion )

ANNEX B ( Clause 3.0 )
NOTATIONS UNIT Contact area of block with soil Contact area of actual foundation with soil Vertical amplitude of vibration Vertical acceleration vibration Coefficient of elastic uniform compression of soil for area A and A, respectively Coefficient of elastic non-uniform compression of soil for area A and A, respectively Coefficient of elastic uniform shear of soil for area A and A, respectively Coefficient of elastic non-uniform shear of soil Young's modulus Peak dynamic force Frequency of propagating waves Frequencies at which amplitude is X,ld2 Horizontal resonant frequency of block and soil system Dynamic shear modulus of soil Acceleration due to gravity Moment of inertia of foundation contact area about a horizontal axis passing through centre of gravity of the area and perpendicular to direction of vibration Mass of block Mass moment of inertia of the block about a horizontal axis passing through the centre of gravity of the block and perpendicular to direction of vibration Mass moment of intertia of the block about the horizontal axis passing through the centre of gravity of contact area of block and soil and perpendicular to the direction of vibration Distance between geophones or pick-ups Elastic rebound Compression wave velocity 8 Cm2 Cm2 mm mm/s2 kgf/cm3 kgf/cm3

kgf/cm3 kgf/cm2 kg Hz Hz Hz kgf/cm2 mm/s2 cm4

kg s21cm kgf/cm/s2

kgflcnl/s2

cm
Cl11

cm/s

IS 5249 : 1992
SYMBOL

DEKRIP~ON Shear wave velocity Maximum amplitude of vibration in forced vibration tests Successive amplitudes of vibration in free vibrations at 2 from each other respectively Time of travel of waves Mass density of soil Poision's ratio of soil Damping coefficient of soil Wavelength of propagating waves Phase shift of geophone near to radian centre of gravity of block at frequency (f) of propagating vibrations Phase shift of geophone far away from centre of gravity of block at frequency u> propagating vibration Ratio Mm/Mm0

UNIT cm/s mm mm
S

kg s2/cm4 cm radian radian -

ANNEX

C

( Clause 3.2 )
EXTRAPOLATION OF FREQUENCY RESPONSE CURVE FOR OBTAINING NATURAL FREQUENCY OF TIIE SYSTEM Cl In case of stiff soils where the resonant frequency is higher than the limit to which the block can be excited by the vibration equipment, extrapolation of the response curve may be resorted to as indicated below to evaluate the resonant frequency of the system. This holds for a single degree of freedom system as in case of vertical vibrations. However, workable values of f. may also be obtained for horizontal vibrations. From the theory of mechanical vibrations the relation between the amplitude of vibrations (AZ) and the frequency (w) for the forced vibrations is given by: AZ m 0 = Eccentric mass, e = Eccentricity, = Frequency of excitation k" = Spring constant, and C = Coefficient of damping. By substituting = 2lrf in above equation

A" A1
and2A,

= M/( mo.e )' = ( c2-2kM )/{ ( mo.e )" ( 2x )`}
= A,f4 + k2/{( mO.e )' ( 2n )4},

A2f2 + A, = ( f4/`Az 2)

=

Fo
( k-mo2)2tc2W2

where

F,

= m0ew2 = Dynamic

force,

C-2 The above equation can be solved if a minimum of three points are known on the rising portion of the curve. Average values of A,, A,, A, may be obtained if more than three points are available by solving the equation for set of three points taken at a time. Knowing the value of A,, A, and A, the amplitudes at different frequencies can be worked out and the frequency corresponding to maximum amplitude, that is, the resonant frequency determined.

ANNEX

D

( Clause 7.3.3 and 9.5 )
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SHEAR MODULUS, YOUNG'S MODULUS, COEFFICIENT OF ELASTIC UNIFORM COMPRESSION, ETC Values below: of shear modulus G and Young's modulus to each other by the relation given Cy can be obtained from E by the equation

E are related

G, = ~
where

E
where

cu = (I-

1.13 E

E2) VT

2( 1 t E ) ratio,
9

A = area of contact
e = Poision's
NOTE - This relation between Cu and E is based upon the assumption that E remains constant with depth.

Standard Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of i't- RII~~,OU of- lndlm The St~+rldar,~ M;*rk on Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they 1!;1\,e JWW r)r,,dllced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well definr.1 -vs'clv lf iri\p:xt~nq, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by Blq ;Irldl 11) `r Ire f b y the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously check4 !-w `!lS f *I c~~nft~rlnlry Details of conditions unde. `1 ic.11 a Ilf.ence for tI)e to that standard as a further safeguard. use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 7 o I IW'S w IV he ~~b ra irlrd from the Bureau of Indian Standards,
Standards

Bureau of Indian Standards

I

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization. marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No. part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. This does not preclude the free use, in the any form without the prior permission in writing of BlS. course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ). BIS. Revision of Indian Standards if any, are Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the the latest amendments or edition. following reference : Dot : No. CED 43 ( 4242) Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31. 331 13 75 '

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg, New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices )

Regional

Offices:

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern

Shah Zafar Marg

I
Maniktola t 37 86 84 26, 99, 160036 600113 i 235 02 15 16, 19,

Telephone 331 01 13 75 31

: l/l4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, : C. I. T. Campus, Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol,

37 86 85 62 61,

Northern Southern Western

MADRAS

235 04 23 42, 15 632 632 78 92 58,

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

Andheri

( East )

{ 632 92 78 95, 91.

Branches

: AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM

COIMBATORE, JAIPUR, KANPUR,

Printed at Printrade,

New Delhi, India

