•••*****•*•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 10528 (1983) : Method of sampling empty paper sacks for 
testing [CHD 15: Paper and its products] 



<bVJJIi^j>^^^Vfl/ll^^^ag^Ts^^lITFS3egS 



[SS^ V I l>5ft>!>5^>«SV: 



^^\\X^L 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<a^EL 




!**> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS i 10&2& - 1983 

( Reaffirmed 1999) 



Indian Standard 

METHOD OF SAMPLING 
EMPTY PAPER SACKS FOR TESTING 



udc farm i5i:676*82i:68ni3 




& Copyright 19! 

IJNDSA* STANDARD INSTITUTION 

MAN^K &HAVAN. ^ BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 30002 

Gr* 2 



IS : 10528 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF SAMPLING 
EMPTY PAPER SACKS FOR TESTING 

Paper and Flexible Packaging Sectional Committee, MCPD 14 

Chairman Representing 

SHRl K. Viswanathan Metal Box India Ltd, Calcutta 

Members 

Shri K. B. NARASlMHAN ( Alternate to 
Shri K. Viswanathan ) 
Dr S. R, Agarwal Glaxo ( Laboratories ) India Ltd Bombay 

Shri S. M. Khan ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. B. Ajmbra Card Board Box Manufacturing Co, Calcutta 

Shri C. B. Ajmera ( Alternate ) 
Shri Vidya Charan Bhargava Directorate of Plant Protection ( Ministry of 

Agriculture ), Faridabad 

Shri S. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Wg Cdr V. B. Bhatia Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), Kanpur 

Shri J. K. Sinha ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Chakraborti Hindustan Lever Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. Dhawan ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. D. Chatterjee Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, 

Vadodara 

Shri P. R: Seshan ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. Jayaram Federation of Biscuit Manufacturers' of India, 

Delhi 
Joint Director, Traffic Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ), New 

Commercial Rates Delhi 

Shri N. P. Kapadia Larsen & Toubro Limited, Bombay 

Shri R. P. Soochak ( Alternate ) 
Shri Satish Kapur Federation of Corrugated Box Manufacturers' of 

India, Bombay 

Shri S. S. Kejriwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Keshava ITC Limited, Calcutta 

Shri Y. C. DeveShwAr ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. L. Muthiah India Packaging Products Private Limited, 

Bangalore 

Shri A. L. AnnamALAI { Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

© Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10528 - 1983 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri P. V. Narayanan Indian Institution of Packaging, Bombay 

Shri A. K. Sengupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Madha van Nair Kssoran Rayons, Calcutta 

Dr A. N. Nayer Scan Packaging Consultancy Service, New Delhi 

Shri Sanjay K. Nayer ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. Y. Pandit Bayer ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

Dr P. V. Raikar ( Alternate ) 
Shri M, K. Ramasami Jayant Packaging Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Shri R. Muthjah ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. V. N. Rao Office of the Development Commissioner, Small 

Scale Industries ( Ministry of Industry ), 
New Delhi 
Shri G. V. Rao Directorate of Standardization, Ministry of 

Defence (R&D), New Delhi 
Shri O. P. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shr L, N. Shetty Solid Containers Limited, Bombay 

Shri N. V. Sheth ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Sunder India Foils Limited, Calcutta 

Shri S. P. ChaTTERjEE ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Tandon Forest Research Institute and Colleges, 

Debra Dun 
Shri P. S. Das, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( MCPD ) 

Secretary 

Shri A. R. Gulati 

Deputy Director ( MCPD ), ISI 



IS : 10528 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF SAMPLING 
EMPTY PAPER SACKS FOR TESTING 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 28 February 1983, after the draft finalized by the Paper and Flexible 
Packaging Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo 
Movement and Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 Method of sampling laid down in this standard is based on the 
sampling procedures given in IS : 2500 (Part II)- 1965*. 

0.3 This standard does not specify the details of tests and the number of 
paper sacks to be subjected to a particular test as the specification on the 
paper sacks is under preparation and will take some time for printing. 
Such details along with the sequence of testing shall be covered in the 
specification. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the method of obtaining a representative sample 
of empty paper sacks for testing to assess the average quality of a consign- 
ment of empty sacks. 

2. DEFINITIONS 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Lot — The aggregate of sacks of a single kind with specified charac- 
teristics, about which it is desired to make a judgement (usually as to 
compliance with specification) and which are available for sampling. 

Notb 1 — The number of sacks comprising a lot may be indicated by the invoice 
or as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 

Note 2 — When the supplied lot size is less than the lot size indicated on the 
invoice, the actual lot size supplied may be taken into account for the purpo se of 
sampling. 



♦Sampling inspection tables : Part II Inspection by variables for percent defective. 

3 



IS : 10528 - 1983 

2.2 Unit — A lot comprises one or more nominally identical units. The 
unit may be in the form of a bundle, bale, pallet load, container load, 
etc. 

2.3 Element — A unit comprises one or more nominally identical elements. 
The element may be in the form of a bundle, bale, pallet, load, etc. It 
cannot be a single sack. 

2.4 Sample — A specified number of sacks selected according to a prescribed 
procedure to represent the lot. 

2.5 Selected at Random — Taken in such a way that each part of the whole 
has an equal chance of being selected. In order to ensure the randomness 
of selection, a random number table ( see IS : 4905 - 1968* ) as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the supplier shall be used. In case such a table 
is not available the following procedure is recommended for use : 

Starting from any unit, element or sack in the lot, count them in 

one order as 1, 2, 3, etc, up to r and so on where r is the integral 

part of Njn (N being the lot size and n being the sample size). Every 
rth unit, element or sack thus counted, shall be selected to constitute 
a sample. 

3. PRINCIPLE 

3.1 Select at random a prescribed number of sacks from the lot following 
a two-stage procedure: 

First select a prescribed number of units from the lot (4.1). 

Secondly use one of the following two procedures: 

a) Where the unit is not subdivided into elements, select a 'prescri- 
bed number of sacks from each of these units (4.2.1). 

b) Where the unit is subdivided into elements, select a prescribed 
number of elements from each of these . units, then select a 
prescribed number of sacks from these elements (4.2.2). 

4. PROCEDURE 

4.1 Selection of Units — Determine and select the number of units to be 
sampled using Table 1. 

4.1.1 The units selected shall be intact and in good external condition. 



•Methods for random sampling. 



IS : 10528-1983 



TABLE 1 SAMPLING OF UNITS FROM A LOT 

( Clause 4.1 ) 



Number Of Units («) in 


Number of Units 


Method of 


the Lot 


Selected 


Selection 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


1 to 5 


All 


_ 


6 to 99 


5 


At Random 


100 to 399 


n* 
20 


At Random 


400 or more 


20 


At Random 



, * In deciding the number of units to be selected, any remainder of less than 20 
units shall be ignored. 



4.2 Selection of Sacks 

follows: 



For each unit selected from the lot, proceed as 



4.2.1 When the Unit is not Subdivided into Elements — Take at random 
an approximately equal number of sacks from each unit so that the total 
number taken from the lot is not less than the number of sacks required 
for testing and conforms to the requirements of Table 2. 



TABLE 2 SAMPLING OF SACKS 



Number of Sacks 




in the Lot 




Not more 


than 


280 


281 


to 


500 


501 


to 


1200 


1 201 


to 


3 200 


3 201 


to 


10 000 


10 001 


to 


35 000 


More 


than 


35 000 



Minimum Number of Sacks to be 
Taken from the Lot 

3 

4 

5 

7 • 
10 
15 
20 



4.2.2 When the Unit is Subdivided into Elements — If there are more than 
20 elements in one unit, all the sampled units are to be assembled and ele- 
ments are to be drawn according to Table 1. Select the elements in the 
same way that the units were selected. It shall be further ensured that at 
least one element from each selected unit according to Table 1 is taken 
for sampling. 



IS : 10528 - 1983 

5. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Precaution — The sacks selected shall be preserved and handled in such 
a way that their properties will not permanently change before testing. 

5.2 Marking — Each sack that has been selected shall be provided with 
identification marks sufficient to ensure that its provenance is known. 

5.3 Resampling 

5.3.1 If, as a result of an accident during sampling or testing resampling 
is necessary, a new sample shall be taken following the above procedure. 
Selection may, however, be made from the same units as before unless 
agreed otherwise. 

5.3.2 If resampling is needed for any other reason, the procedure adop- 
ted should follow this specification as closely as possible. 

6. REPORTING 

6.1 The report shall indicate the following particulars: 

a) Reference to this standard; 

b) Names and addresses of the purchaser and vendor; 

c) Date and place of sampling; 

d) Description of the lot; 

e) Number of units in the lot; 

f ) Number of units selected; 

g) Number of elements, if any, in a unit; 
h) Number of elements selected; 

j ) Number of sacks in the lot; 
k) Number of sacks selected; 

m) All the circumstances which might influence results of future 
tests; 

n) Reference corresponding to the identification marks on the 
sacks; 

p) Signature of the person carrying out the sampling; and 

q) Any deviation from this standard. 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 OCTOBER 1985 
TO 

IS: 10528-1983 METHOD OF SAMPLING EMPTY PAPER 
SACKS FOR TESTING 



(Page 3, clause 0.2) - Delete. 

[Page 5 y clause 4.1, Table 1, col 2) - Substitute 
20 20 



(MCH) lU) 

Reprography Unit , ISI, New Delhi, India 



