.
UDC 625.57 : 001.4

IS : 7649 - 1975
Indian Standard
( Reaffirmed 1998 )

GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED -IN CONNECTION WITH AERIAL ROPEWAYS AND CAB-LEWAYS
I. Scope - Lays down the definitions 3nd cableways. 2. Terminology 2.1 -Aerial Ropeways 2.1.1 Types of aerial ropeway A system of ropes for the conveyance of loads, rcarried above ground level of the terms commonly used in connection ~with aerial ropeways

2.1 .I .I Aerial ropeway on supports.

2.1 .I .2 Bi-cable ropeway - A ropeway system consisting basically of two carrying track ropes with coupled to, or connecting rails and one endless hauling rope. A number of carriages are automatically uncoupled from, the hauling rope at the stations.

/ HAULING
TENSION

ROPE WEIGHT

2.1 .I .3 Mono-cab/e ropeway (detachable clip type) - A ropeway system consisting basically of an endless rope which acts as both carrying and hauling rope, to which a number of carriages (boxheads) are attached at regular intervals. The carriages are automatically transferred to, or transferred from, the rope on to rails at the stations.

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
%HAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH 110001 ZAFAR MARG

IS : 7649 - 1975
2.1.I .4 Mono-cable ropeway (fixed clip type) - A ropeway system consisting basically of an endless rope which acts as both carrying and hauling rope. A number of carriers are clamped to the rope at regular intervals and pass round the terminal sheaves without stopping.
ORlVlNG GEAR

2.1.I .5 Single to-and-fro (jigback) ropeway - A ropeway system consisting basically of a single track rope with a reversing endless hauling rope. A single carriage with bucket is attached to the hauling rope and travels to-and-fro between the driving and return station.

SION

WEIGHT

TENSION

WEIGHT

2.1.I .6 Double to-and-fro (jigback) ropeway - A ropeway system consisting basically of track ropes and a reversing endless hauling rope to which carriages with buckets are attached, each carriage being supported on a separatetrack rope and so arranged that when one carriage is moving away from the starting station, the other is travelling towards it.
TRACK ROPES

NSION

WEIGHT

WEIGHTS

IS : 7649 - 1975
2.1 .I .7 Single to-and-fro (jigback) mono-cable ropeway - A ropeway system consisting basically of a single reversing endless rope which acts as both carrying and hauling rope. A single carriage with bucket is attached to the rope, and travels to-and-fro between the driving and return stations.

CARRIAGE CARRYING AND HAULING ROPE

2.1 .1.8 Double to-and-fro (jigback) mono-cable ropeway - A ropeway system consisting basically of a single reversing endless rope which acts as both carrying and hauling rope. Two carriages with buckets are attached to the rope, and so arranged that when one carriage is moving away from the starting station the other is travelling towards it.

HAULING

.ROPE

2.1.2

Aerial ropeway components

2.1.2.1 Track rope - The stationary rope which provides the track and supports the weight of the load(s) conveyed. It is usually of locked coil construction, or, for lighter capacity ropeways, of spiral construction.

. 2.1.2.2 Hauling rope - The moving rope which applies the tractive-effort Sometimes also acts as carrying rope. right-hand Lang's lay construction. to the load(s). Usually of

WIRES if4 STRAND

3

IS : 7649 - 1975
2.1.2.3 Under-type bi-cable carriage - A carriage for supporting the ropeway bucket or load and hanger on a bi-cable track rope. It is provided with a clamp positioned below the track rope for attaching to the hauling rope. This clamp is automatically unlocked at the stations to allow the carriage to be disconnected from the rope.

2.1.2.4 Over-type bi-cable carriage -A carriage for supporting the ropeway bucket or load and hanger on a bi-cable track rope. It is provided with a clamp positioned above the track rope for attaching to the hauling rope. This clamp is automatically unlocked at the stations to allow the carriage to be disconnected from the rope.

2.1.2.5 Mono-cable carriage (boxhead) - A carriage for attaching a ropeway bucket and hanger to a mono-cable rope. The carriage is not clamped to the rope but equipped with clips which straddle the rope. It is provided with wheels to enable it to transfer between rope and rails at the stations.

2.1.2.6 Mono-cab/e fixed clip - A clamp for attaching a load-carrying The clamp does not detach from the rope during the ropeway operation.

hanger to the hauling rope.

IS : 7649 -1975
2.1.2.7 Bi-cable load carrier - The carriage and the hanger which tipping bucket and hanger are illustrated. support a load. A typical rotating

2.1.2.8 Mono-cab/e to lighter loads.

load carrier -

A carrier similar to the bi-cable

load carrier, but usually

restricted

5

IS : 7649 - 1975
2.1.3 Aerial ropewa y supports a mono-cable ropeway between the ropeway 2.1.3.1Mono-cable trestle - A structure supporting stations. It ts equipped with mounts to support the rope.
CATHEAO

2.1.3.2 Bi-cable,trestle - A structure supporting a bi-cable ropeway between the ropeway stations. It is equipped with saddles to support the track ropes. Flying stay rollers are provided to prevent excessive sag of the hauling rope when the carriers are removed.

6

IS : 7649 - 1975
2.1.3.3 Pressure frame A structure for distributing the severe loading at crests in a ropeway.

2.1.3.4 Protection bridge - The structure positioned beneath a ropeway where protection is required from possible falling materials. It can be of rigid girder construction or flexible netting supported from wire ropes.

2.1.4 Aerial ropeway

systems

2.1.4.1 Loading station - A structure for supporting ropeway rolling stock whilst being loaded. It is usually at ground level, but may be elevated and can be arranged for any combination of driving, tensioning or anchoring of the ropes.

I

-LOAD

CARRIER

DRIVING

GEAR

7

IS : 7649 - 1975
2.1.4.2 Unl!ading station - A structure for supporting the ropeway rolling stock whilst Usually elevated but may be at ground level and can be arranged for any combination loaded. tensioning or anchoring of ropes.

being unof driving,

HAULING

ROPE

LOAD ~XFRIER

/ / II II

II II II
83

_

ROPE TENSlOt WEIGHT

kc RACK ROPE z%`t?TN

:ii-

2.1.4.3 Track rope divide station - A structure for supporting ropeway rolling stock whilst transferring from the end~of one track rope to the beginning of another track rope. Each of the two track ropes is either anchored or tensioned at the station.

2.1.4.4

Angle station -

A structure at which the lateral direction

of the path of the ropeway changes.

8

IS : 7549 - 1975
2.1.4.5 Tipping gantry - A structure situated between ropeway stations to enable buckets to tip and form 3ntermediate stockpiles of materials. It is used on mono-cable ropeways only.

2.1.4.6 Tipping carriers to discharge.

frame -

A movable

device

positioned

on a bi-cable

ropeway:that

causes loaded

TRIP LEVER

2.2 Cableways
2.2.1 Types of cableway Cableway -+ A single-span rope between two fixed or mobile supports, with provision for raising and lowering the load.

2.2.1 .I

over which

a load

may be conveyed,

9

IS : 7649 - 1975
2.2.1.2 Single-motor cableway (blondin) -A cableway system consisting basically of a load car running on a single span of track~rope and with the hoist and traverse ropes driven by a single motor. This system cannot hoist and travel the load simultaneously and thus gives a rectangular path. The hoist rope is reeved through blocks and is anchored on the carriage.

FLEETlNG

SHEAVE

2.2.1.3 Two-motor cableway (blondin) - A cableway system consisting basically of a load car running on a single track rope, and with the hoist and traverse ropes driven by separate motors. This system can hoist orlower the load whilst travelling the load in either direction and give a diagonal or curved path. The hoist rope is reeved through blocks and is anchored at the end cable support from the operating winch.

T ROPE -DRIVE

IS : 7649 - 1975
2.2.1.4 Cable crane - A crane consisting of two fixed or movable masts with a tensioned track rope between, on which a trolley complete with hoisting gear travels to-and-fro. The travelling and hoisting motions are by means of wire-ropes from a suitable winch controlled from one of the masts.

2.2.2 Cabteway
2.2.2.1

components

Track rope -

The rope which providesthe

track and supports the weight of the load conveyed.

2.2.2.2 Traverse rope of a cableway.

The rope which applies the tractive effort to cause the~load to traverse the span

2.2.2.3 Hoist rope - The rope which of an appropriate purchase.

raises and lowers the load conveyed

by a cableway,

by means

2.2.2.4 Button rope - A rope used to locate fall rope carriers at predetermined track rope span, by means of graded stops or buttons.

positions

across the

2.2.2.6 Fallrope carrier -- A device by which the hoist rope is supported from the track rope to-prevent excessive sag on long spans*. 2.2.2.6 Sing/e-motor cablewayload car - A carriage for supporting a load on a single-motor The hoist rope is reeved through fall blocks and is anchored to the carriage. cableway.

*By this definition the term might be expected to be `hoist rope carrier' but the term given is generally used.

11

IS : 7549-1975
2i2.2.7 Two-motor cableway load car - A carriage for supporting a load on a two-motor cableway The hoist rope is reeved through fall blocks and is anchored at the cable end support remote from the operating winch.

2.2.3

Cableway supports

2.2.3.1 Cableway travelling tower -a A structure anchoring one end of the track rope of a cableway. It can be arranged to run on a radial track whereby a segmental area would be served by the cableway, or can be utilized on a parallel track with a similar travelling tower at the other end whereby a rectangular area would be served.

IS : 7649 - 1975
2.2.3.2 Cableway needle mast - A fixed guyed structure anchoring one end -of a cableway track rope. It can be arranged with a travelling tower at the other end, whereby a segmental area would be served, or can be arranged with a similar fixed mast, whereby a narrow rectangular area would be served.

2.2.3.3 Cableway luffing mast - A structure, one of a pair, anchoring the ends of a cableway rope. They are arranged to luff with auxiliary winches, thereby serving a rectangular area.

track

2.3 Driving and Control Gear 2.3.1 Driving gear The mechanical The electrical unit for driving equipment which the haulage rope of a ropeway system. is provided to control the driving ~motors of the

2.3.2 Control gear ropeway driving gears.

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

While preparing this standard assistance has been derived from BS 3810: Part 7 :I 973 `Glossary of terms used in materials handling: Part 7 Terms used in connection with aerial ropeways and cableways', issued by the British Standards Institution. 13
Printed at SW Saraswaty Press Limited, Calcutta, India

