IS 10400 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


Ada UFAA 
qd frau — uden ed 
(FAT JRI) 


Indian Standard 


INVENTORY MANAGEMENT — 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 658.787.3 : 0014 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


August 2013 Price Group 4 


Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 4 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Management and Productivity Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1983 and revised in 1992. This standard is now again revised to modify/ 
incorporate the terms and definitions in line with the latest development and changes in this field. The scope of 
this standard has also been widened to make it more broad-based by including the aspects of inventory management. 


Organizations in developing economies generally tend to have excessive inventories at all stages, namely, finished 
goods, goods in transit, in-process inventories, pre-use inventories, and inventories awaiting disposal being surplus/ 
obsolete. Inventory management is a function of materials management which helps in optimizing stocks consistent 
with requirements. 


This standard is intended to minimize confusion by rationalizing existing terms and their meanings. 


The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 10400 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


INVENTORY MANAGEMENT — 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 


( Second Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This standard gives definitions of terms relating to 
inventory management. 


2 BASIC TERMS 
2.1 Inventory — Assets at a give point of time, 


a) inthe form of materials or supplies (including 
in transit) to be consumed in the production 
process or in the rendering of services; 


b) inthe work-in-progress; or 
c) held for sale in the ordinary course of 
business. 


NOTE — It is generally measured in terms of days of 
consumption. It is also measured in absolute terms of money 
value. 


2.2 Inventory Management — The aspect of the 
overall management function with the purpose of 
getting the right inventory in the right place at the right 
time in the right quantity in the right form at the right 
cost. 


2.3 Inventory Planning — To pre-determine the 
required inventory to meet the object/activity. 


NOTE — The effective inventory planning is instrumental in 
reducing costs and increasing productivity while coordinating 
inventory with production or sales needs. 


2.4 Inventory Control — A functional activity the 
objective of which is to minimize the total costs of 
maintaining inventories and of acquiring these in order 
to render the stipulated level of service. 


2.5 Inventory Policy — A definitive statement 
enumerating when to procure and how much to 
procure, usually to ensure optimal cost in tune with 
organizational objectives and to meet desired customer 
service levels. 


3 INVENTORY CLASSIFICATION/INVENTORY 
CATEGORY/INVENTORY TYPES 


3.1 Raw Materials — Materials for processing/ 
conversion into finished goods. 


3.2 Bought-Out Components — Items not 
manufactured/fabricated by the organization but used 


with or without further processing and/or packing in 
the finished product. 


3.3 Finished Goods — The complete units and the 
assemblies carried in stock ready for delivery to 
customers or for transfer to other plants or for own 
use. 


3.4 Inventory in Transit — Inventory that has left the 
premises of the supplier and till it reaches the buyer. 


3.5 Negative Inventory — An inventory system 
condition whereby the on-hand inventory balance is 
listed as a quantity less than zero. 


3.6 Quantity Allocated — It is the quantity that is on 
current open sales orders or production orders (as 
components), and may be relative to specific time 
period. 


3.7 Quantity Available — It is the result of a 
calculation that takes quantity on hand and reduces it 
by allocations. 


3.8 Pool Inventory — An inventory managed on behalf 
of more than one organization. Any constituent of these 
organizations can have access to this inventory at given 
point of time. 


3.9 Stores and Spares 


3.9.1 Consumables — Materials which are consumed 
in the process of manufacturing/operations/ 
maintenance, and lose their identity in the process and 
as such do not form distinct part of finished goods. 


NOTE — Example, coolants, oil, greases, lubricants, solders/ 
fluxes, etc. In case of equipment, consumables are those 
materials used in the equipment which need regular 
replacement due to material losing either its identity or life, 
for example, washers, filters, toners, developers, etc. 


3.9.2 Expense Items — Frequently used items of small 
unit value and also small aggregate consumption value. 


NOTE — Generally very limited control is called for issue of 
such items, for example, hand gloves, dusters, etc. 


3.9.3 Insurance Spares — Spares of items of 
prohibitive high stock-out costs but likely to be rarely 
required during the normal working life of the machine, 
equipment, assembly or any other thing of which the 
spare forms a part. 


IS 10400 : 2013 


3.9.4 Spares — An item or a sub-assembly or 
component thereof, kept or carried in reserve of an 
item to meet scheduled or unscheduled maintenance, 
repair and overall needs, for example, crank shaft, 
stepany, etc. 


3.10 Vendor Managed Inventory/Consignment 
Stock — Inventory where a supplier responsible for 
ensuring that stock is maintained at appropriate levels 
in the supplier/purchaser facility and for replenishing 
items when these levels drop. 


3.11 Work-in-Progress — Materials, components or 
products at various stages in the manufacturing process, 
including items issued for processing and manufactured 
items awaiting final inspection and acceptance such 
as finished products. 


4 INVENTORY ANALYSIS 


4.1 A B C Analysis — The technique used to classify 
items into three classes namely, A, B and C based on 
annual usage value. Class A normally covers about 
10 percent of the items with highest annual usage value 
which in aggregate generally account for over 
70 percent of the total annual usage value of all items. 
Class C covers about 70 percent of the items which 
account for up to 10 percent with lowest annual usage 
value. The remaining about 20 percent items are 
classified as Class B. 


4.2 F S N Analysis — The technique used to classify 
items into three classes in the descending order of their 
frequency of issue from stores in terms of the number 
of transactions made per unit time. Here, F stands for 
fast moving, S for slow moving, and N for non-moving 
items. 


NOTES 


1 Non-moving items — Those items which have not moved at 
all during a specified period, depending upon the type of 
industry. 


2 Slow moving items — Those items whose inventory holding 
is more than the expected consumption during the same 
specified period, depending upon the type of industry. 

3 Fast moving — Items other than those explained above are 
termed fast moving. 


4.3 HM L Analysis — The technique used to classify 
items into three classes in the descending order of their 
unit cost. Here, H stands for high, M for medium, and 
L for low unit cost items. 


4.4 S D E Analysis — The technique used to classify 
items into three classes in the descending order of ‘ease 
of availability’ with which supplies can be obtained. 
Here, S stands for scarce, D stands far difficult, and E 
stands for easily available items. 


4.5 V E D Analysis — The technique used to classify 
items into three classes in the descending order of their 


criticality for the organizations, performance as a whole. 
The criticality may be either technical or environmental. 
Here, V stands for vital items in the absence of which 
the stock out costs would be very high, E for essential, 
and D for desirable items. 


4.6 X Y Z Analysis — The technique similar to ABC 
analysis, but the basis is actual stock position at the 
time of analysis. If the stock values are very high, they 
are classified as X-class (over 70 percent of stock value) 
and need special efforts to reduce the inventory level. 
Y-class and Z-class items have medium stock and low 
stock values respectively. 


5 INVENTORY PLANNING 


5.1 Bill of Material — Lists of materials (components 
or ingredients) required to produce an item. 


5.2 Blanket Order — A type of purchase order that 
commits to purchase a specific quantity over a specific 
period of time, but does not necessarily provide specific 
dates for shipments. 


5.3 Lead Time (LT) — The actual or expected time 
between initiation and fulfillment of an indent. The 
LT consists of several sub-LTs, such as suppliers/ 
manufacturing LT, transportation LT, administrative LT. 
Some of the sub-LTs constitute the external LTs and 
some constitute the internal LT. 


5.4 Maximum Stock Potential/Maximum Level — 
The maximum stock which can be held for a particular 
period based on monthly consumption, interval period 
between two reviews of indents and the time taken 
between initiation and fulfillment of an indent. It may 
be calculated as per formula given below: 


(Time period between two reviews - lead time) 
x consumption in unit time 


NOTE — Above time period and lead time are to be in the 
same unit as that of consumption. 


5.5 Minimum Level/Safety Stock/Buffer Stock — 
The inventory kept to provide protection against the 
fluctuations in demand and in lead time or fulfilling 
cycle time. Buffer stock is a synonym for safety stock. 
Sometimes it is also called minimum level. In case the 
demand remains almost steady the safety stock may 
be calculated as: 


Safety stock = R(L- 1) 


where 
R = rate of consumption, 
L - maximum lead time, and 


l = normal lead time. 


NOTE — There are other statistical formulae which may be 
used, if wide uncertainty both in demand and lead time is 
predicted. 


5.6 Re-ordering Level — The sum of the safety stock 
and the consumption during normal lead time. It 
represents the stock level at which action is initiated to 
re-order the item. 


5.7 Re-ordering Level System — In this case, an order 
is placed for the quantity equal to the economic order 
quantity as soon as the stock level reaches re-ordering 
level. This is also sometimes called fixed order system. 


6 REPLENISHMENT SYSTEMS 


6.1 Annual Usage — Number of units of an item 
consumed during the accounting year. This term is also 
used to denote the value of such usage. 


6.2 Average Inventory — Average inventory is 
calculated on a periodic basis by adding beginning 
inventory to ending inventory and dividing by two. 


6.3 Backorder — A specific quantity of a specific item 
that could not be filled on the requested date. 


6.4 Consumption Rate — Actual consumption of an 
item per unit of time. 


6.5 Cannibalization — The process of breaking down 
a higher assembly into its sub-assemblies/parts. 


NOTE — This is resorted to when the sub-assemblies/parts 
are reguired freguently and the higher assembly is either surplus 
or slow moving or non-moving or obsolete. 


6.6 Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) — The 
quantity of a product which should be ordered at one 
time so as to minimize the sum of ordering costs and 
inventory carrying costs. The EOQ may be calculated 
from the following equation: 


ST CI 
where 
A = annual consumption in units, 
S = ordering cost in rupees per order, 
I = inventory carrying cost as a fraction of the 
average inventory, and 
C - unitcost. 


6.7 Inventory Carrying Cost — The cost of holding 
inventories. This is usually represented as a percentage. 


NOTE — The major constituents are the costs of capital locked 
up in form of inventories, preservation, deterioration, 
obsolescence, space, personnel, insurance, security and other 
related costs. 


6.8 Ordering Cost — The administrative cost incurred 
in placement of a purchase order from the time demand 
is received in the purchase department to the time the 
items are ordered. It is expressed as rupees per order. 
This also includes all follow-up costs till the material 
is received in stores. 


IS 10400 : 2013 


6.9 Periodic Review System — Under this system, 
certain number of items is reviewed for ordering at 
fixed intervals called review period. This is also called 
*P' system. It is calculated as: 


Optimum review period = months 


288 S 
ACI 
6.9.1 Periodic Review System with Variable Order 
Quantity — Under this system, an order of quantity 


equal to the difference between the maximum level 
and the quantity at hand is placed at the time of review. 


6.9.2 Periodic Review System with Fixed Order 
Quantity — Under this system, an order equal to a fixed 
quantity, that is, EOQ is placed at the time of review if 
the quantity at hand is below the reordering limit. If 
the quantity at hand is above the reordering limit, no 
order is placed. 


Reordering limit = Safety stock + Consumption 
during lead time + Consumption during half 
review period 


6.10 Stock Out — Non-availability of materials or 
products at a point of time when it is required. 


6.11 Stock Out Cost — The total costs due to non- 
availability of a particular material or product when 
needed. 


NOTE — In the case of finished goods, this includes customers, 
goodwill and/or the net profit lost. Stock-outs of in-process 
and the pre-use materials may result in stock-outs of the 
finished goods besides the costs of under-utilized capacity. 


6.12 Two-Bin System — A type of reorder level system 
in which inventory is carried in two bins, one is called 
service bin and the other one is called working bin. A 
replenishment quantity is ordered when the working 
bin is empty. When the supply is received the service 
bin is refilled first and the excess is put into the working 
bin. This term is also sometimes used to describe any 
fixed order system even when physical ‘bins’ do not 
exist. This method is usually adopted for low annual 
usage value ( AUV ) items. 


NOTE — This is also referred as Min-Max system. 


6.13 Standard Pack Quantity (SPQ) — It is a packing 
which is not further split for the purpose of supply by 
the vendor. 


6.14 Minimum Order Quantity (MOQ) — Vendors 
also specify certain minimum quantity below which 
the order is not accepted. 


NOTE — This is more relevant in case of low cost items. 


6.15 Minimum Order Value (MOV) — It is the 
minimum amount of the order below which the vendor 
does not accept the order. 


IS 10400 : 2013 


6.16 Minimum Line Value (MLV) — It is the value 
of the individual items below which the order is not 
accepted. 


7 STORES PRICING SYSTEMS 


7.1 Automated Storage and Retrieval Systems 
(ASRS) — A system of rows of rack, each row having 
a dedicated retrieval unit that moves vertically and 
horizontally along the rack picking and putting away 
loads. 


7.2 FIFO (First-In First-Out) — In this method, the 
costs of material are transferred to the item in 
chronological order of receipt. 


7.3 LIFO (Last-In First-Out) — In this method, the 
costs of material are transferred to the item in reverse 
chronological order of receipt. 


7.4 Standard Pricing System — A method of 
valuation by which items are priced at a pre-determined 
standard rate for a pre-determined period. 


7.5 Weighted Average Method — This method 
consists of re-calculating an average price each time a 
new consignment is received at a new price. 


8 OTHER TERMS 


8.1 Bin Card — Itis perpetual inventory record card 
which reflects a continuous account of the incoming 
material, outgoing material and the balance on hand. 


8.2 Bonded Warehouse — A facility or a dedicated 
portion of a facility where imported goods are stored 
prior to custom duties and taxes being paid. 


NOTE — This can be particularly useful when products are 
received well in advance of sale or when a portion of the product 
received may eventually be returned or scrapped (thus 
preventing paying import fees on items not sold). 


8.3 Catalogue — A systematic list of items providing 
part number, description, price, and code number, etc. 


8.4 Codification — A form of identification assign to 
the items by a alpha and/or numeric code for their 
complete identification and providing similarity with 
other products. 


8.5 Goods Received and Acceptance Note (GRAN) — 
A document acknowledging receipt and acceptance 
thereof. 


8.6 Indent — A prescribed form describing the 
indentors requirements for procurement (see also 8.18). 


8.7 Indentor — The person, department or 
organization that raises the indent. 


8.8 Inventory Turn-Over Ratio — The cost of sales/ 
consumption turn-over divided by the average 
inventory. 


NOTE — It could also be expressed in terms of month, year, 
days, etc, as the case may be. 


8.9 Just-in-Time (JIT) — JIT is an integrated system 
of managing the flow of material in such a manner 
that these reach the user at the time of use. 


8.10 Kanban — It is the used as part of a just-in-time 
production operation where components and sub- 
assemblies are produced based upon notification of 
demand from a subsequent operation. 
NOTE — Typically, kanban has been a physical notification 
such as, a card (kanban cards) or even an empty hopper sent 
up the line to the previous operation. Kanban is actually a 
simplistic means of both signalling the need for invention as 


well as controlling the inventory levels (by limiting kanban 
cards or containers). 


8.11 Material Requirement Planning — It is a 
technique which uses the bill of material to develop a 
plan for components or materials needed to support 
the master schedule for products/services. 


8.12 Obsolete Inventory — The inventory which has 
lost its usefulness or worth to the current possessor as 
a result of changing over to different and/or more 
economical products, or change in technology. 


8.13 Radio Frequency Identification Device (RFID) 
— Ít refers to devices attached to an object that transmit 
data to an RFID receiver. 


NOTE — RFID has advantages over barcodes such as, the 
ability to hold more data, the ability to change the stored data 
as processing occurs, does not require line-of-site to transfer 
data and is very effective in harsh environments where barcode 
labels won't work. 


8.14 Seasonal Demand — Demand in season at a time. 


8.15 Shelf Life — The expected period of time during 
which an item when stored in the specified manner 
will retain its quality/performance. 


8.16 Stock Taking — A process of physically verifying 
inventory in order to check whether the actual 
quantities tally with the documented figures. This is 
also called stock verification. 


8.16.1 Perpetual Stock Verification — The stock 
verification wherein inventory is checked at the time 
of transaction. 


NOTE — Normally, it may be done when an item reaches its 
reorder level, new stock is received or issued. 


8.16.2 Periodic Stock Verification — The stock 
verification wherein inventory is checked periodically. 
The periodicity is determined on the class/nature of 
the item. 


8.16.3 Annual Stock Taking — The stock verification 
wherein inventory is checked once in a year. Normally 
it is taken at the end of the financial year. 


8.17 Stock Verification Report (SVR) — A report 
filled in by the stock verifiers at the time of stock taking. 
It indicates variations, if any, between the physical 
stock and the ledger record. 


8.18 Stores Reguisition — Authorization usually in a 
prescribed form to the stores for issue of material. 


8.19 Stores — A place designated for safe storage of 
inventories. 


8.19.1 Raw Material Store — A place designated for 
safe storage of raw material inventory. 


IS 10400 : 2013 


8.19.2 Work-in-Progress Store — A place designated 
for safe storage of in-process goods inventory. 


8.19.3 Finished Goods Store — A place designated 
for safe storage of finished goods inventory. 


8.19.4 Ouarantine Stores — A place designated for 
safe storage of inventories of disputed items. 


8.20 Surplus Inventory — When the guantity of an 
item in stock is more than the updated pre-determined 
maximum level, the excess holding is surplus inventory. 


IS 10400 : 2013 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 4 


Organization 
Interglobe General Aviation, New Delhi 
All India Manufacturers’ Organization, Mumbai 
ASSOCHAM, New Delhi 
Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL), New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 
Confederation of Indian Industry, Bangalore 
DDG Management Studies, New Delhi 


Defence Research & Development Organization, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service & Labour Institutes, 
Ministry of Labour & Employment, Mumbai 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Finance, Delhi 


Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata 


Institute of Secretariat Training & Management, New Delhi 
Jaipuria Institute of Management, Lucknow 


Larsen & Toubro Limited, Gurgaon 


Management Development Institute, Gurgaon 


Maruti Suzuki India Limited, Gurgaon 


Naval Headquarters, New Delhi 


ONGC Ltd, New Delhi 
Ordnance Factory Board, Kolkata 


Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati 


Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL), New Delhi 


Tata Consultancy Services Ltd, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Suri V. K. Jain (Chairman) 
SHRI BABULAL TODI 
PROF AMAN AGARWAL 
SHRI BALARAJ SETH 


Suri K. K. SETH 
SHRI JAGDISH PRASHAD (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY SINGH 
Suri S. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


DR SARITA NAGPAL 
Suri C. V. Rao (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI RAJWANT B. SINGH 
Suri S. S. Kirar (Alternate) 


Dr M. RAJARAM 
Suri R. N. MEENA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH MURGAI 
Suri S. V. NARASIMHAM (Alternate) 


Suni M. K. BHARDWAJ 


PROF SAURABH AGARWAL 


PROF (SHRIMATI) MANJU AGARWAL (Alternafe) 


Dn (SHRIMATI) VIJAY KATTI 
Dr Biswant NAG (Alternate) 


PROF AJIT VERMA 
Pror A. SRIVIDYA (Alternate) 


Pror D. K. BANWET 
Dr Ravi SHANKAR (Alternate) 


ProF S. S. HANDA 
Ms RINA CHAKRAVORTY (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. KASANA 
PROF S. CHAKRABORTY 


SHRI K. RAVINDRANATH 
Suri MOHAMMED HABIBULLA (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY AGGARWAL 
Dr B. A. METRI (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. TOMER 
Suri S. Bose (Alternate) 


CAPTAIN D. K. SINGH 
Lr-Cpr S. SREEKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI S. RAMACHANDRAN 


SHRI V. GANDHI 
Suri T. K. BANDOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


Pror P. RAJASEKHARA REDDY 
Pror P. Tirupati Rao (Alternate) 


Suni V. K. GULHATI 
Suni Rany KHANNA (Alternate) 


DR SANJEEVAN BAJAJ 
SHRI MRITUNJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


Organization 


IS 10400 : 2013 


Representative(s) 


The Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India, New Delhi Suni J. P. SINGH 


Wipro Technologies, Bangalore 


Ms VIDYA SRIDHAR 


In personal capacity (D-27 Panchsheel Enclave, New Delhi 110017) Pnor R. K. SACHDEVA 


BIS Directorate General 


Suri N. K Pat, Scientist ‘F’ & Head (MSD), BIS 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRIMATI RENU GUPTA 
Scientist ‘ʻE’ (MSD), BIS 


Panel on Inventory Management, MSD 4/P-19 


Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi Suri M. K. BHARDWAJ (Convener) 


Indian Airlines, New Delhi 


Suri M. L. KrisHNAMURTY 


Indian Institute of Management, Indore DR VIJAY GUPTA 


ONGC Ltd, New Delhi 


SHRI S. RAMACHANDRAN 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 4 (330). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 

NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Published by BIS, New Delhi 


