( Reaffirmed 2006 )

lS:686

-1985

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF TEXTILE MATERIALS TO DAYLIGHT

( First Revision 1
Chemical
Chairman DR ( KUM~I) M. D. BEAVSAR Silk & Art Bombay

Methods of Test Sectional Committee,
Raprcscnting Silk Mills'

TDC 5
Association,

Research

Members Tata Mills Limited, Bombay JAMSBED D. ADRIANVALA National Peroxide Limited, Bombay DR V. G. AQNIHOTRI Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI A. K. B~DOPADHYAY KUMARI L. C. PATEL ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies & SHRI P. K. BASU ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi SARI A. K. SAIQAL ( Alteraatc ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SERI M. L. BEHRANI SHRI N. KASTURIA ( Ahnate ) SHRI C. BHATTAOHA~YA Indi~ad~;;fpchemicals Corporation
SHRI

Disposals

Limited,

SHRJ D. K. CHATTOPADHYAY ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta DR D. K. DAS SHRI N. C. CHATPERJEE (Alternate) Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay SHRI K. S. DESIEAN SHRI PAUL Lr~ono~ ( Altmata) SERVIOE Deve$;m;e;;i Commissioner for Handlooms, DIRECTOR, W~~vnna' CENTRE, BOMBAY Bomb& Textile Research Association, Bombay SRRI M. D. DIXIT SHRX D. K. SINHA ( Altcraate ) Cotton Technological Research DR V. G. KHANDEPARKAR Laboratory ( EAR ), Bombay Intexa India, Bombay DR B. R. MANJUNATHA Silk 8s Art Silk Mills' Association, Bombay SHRI Snxrr. S. MEHTA ( Continued on bage 2 ) Q Cojyright STANDARDS 1986 INSTITUTION

INDIAN

Thii publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

I[s r686 -1985
( ConfinuedfYom page1 ) Members DR A. K. MUKHERJEE Rcpnscnting

Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, Bombay DR (SHRIMATI ) U. NANDURKAR Wool Research Association, Bombay DR S. N. PANDEY Cotton Technological Research Laboratory ( ICAR ), Bombay KUMARI I. G. BHATT ( Alternate ) DR ( SERI~ATI ) G. R. PHALOUMANI Textiles Committee, Bombay Central Excise & Customs ( Ministry of SHRI P. R. V. RAMANAN Finance ), New Delhi SHRI P. K. KEERE ( Alternate ) SERI M. S. RATHODE National Textile Corporation, New Delhi SHRI P. P. CHECKER ( Alternate ) REPRESENTATIVE Crescent Dyes & Chemicals Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. R. ANANTHAKRISHNA SETTY Binny Limited, Madras DR M. G. MODAK ( Altcrnatc) Bombay Millowners' Association, Bombay SHRI J. J. SHAH Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmadabad SHRI JAMNADAS K. SHAIX Ahmedabad Manufacturing & Calico Printing Co SHRI K. G. SEAH Ltd, Ahmadabad DR J. I. SETALWAD (Alternate) Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research AssociaSHRI S. S. TRIVEDI tion, Ahmadabad Punjab State Hosiery & Knitwear Development SHRI J. N. VOHRA Corporation Limited, Chandigarh SHRI P. T. BANERJEE ( Alternufc) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-uflcio Mrmbrr) SHRI R. I. MIDHA, Director ( Tex ) Secretary SHR~ M. S. VERMA Assistant Director (Tex), ISI

Colour Fastness Subcommittee,
Conucner
SHRI S. S. TRIVEDI

TDC 5 : 3
Research

Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Association, Ahmadabad

Manbrrs Atul Products Limited, Bombay SHRI M. R. BHATT SERI K. B. SHAH ( Altsrnats ) National Test House, Calcutta DR D. K. DAS Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay Sass K. S. DESIKAN SHRI PAUL LINQDOH ( Alternate ) Indian Dvcstuffs Industries Ltd. Bombav .%a: V. R. KARMABXAR Arvind Mills Ltd, Ahmadabad ' ' SH~I I. M. PATEL Wool Research Association, Bombay DR (SHRIMATI)S.PATWARD~AN Textiles Committee, Bombay DR(%RIYATI) G. R. PHALCJUMANI ( Cwhwd en page 12 )

2

IS :686-1985

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF TEXTILE MATERIALS TO DAYLIGHT

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 November 1985, after the draft finalized by the Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. was first published in 1957 and has been revised to include changes carried out in other similar colour fastness standards regarding sampling, specimen size, apparatus and procedures as well as to align it with IS0 105-BOI-1981 Textiles - Tests for colour fastness to light: Daylight, issued by International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ). 0.3 Colour fastness of textile materials to daylight is of considerable Though a quicker method of determining importance to the consumer. colour fastness to light by xenon arc ( see IS : 2454- 1985* ) exists, yet in cases of dispute, the methods prescribed in this standard should be preferred. Two methods of mounting and testing of specimens for colour Method 1 is fastness to daylight have been prescribed in this standard. considered preferable and should be used in cases of dispute but it requires one set of standard patterns for each test specimen and is, therefore, impracticable when a large number of test specimens have to Method 2 enables a number of test specimens of be tested concurrently. differing light fastness ratings to be rated against a single set of standard patterns. This method is used when a large number of test specimens have to be tested concurrently. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in
*Method light ( xenon for determination of colour lamp ) (first revision ). fastness of textile materials to artificial

0.2This standard

3

IS : 686 - 1985 The number of significant places retained accordance with IS : 2-1960*. in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes two methods for determining colour fastness of textile materials of all kinds and in all forms to the action of daylight. 2. PRINClPLE 2.1 A specimen of the textile material is exposed to daylight under prescribed conditions, including protection from rain, alongwith eight blue dyed wool standard patterns. The fastness is assessed by comparing the change in colour of the specimen with that of the standard patterns. 3. SAMPLING quantity of same kind and form of textile material 3.1 Lot -The or printed essentially under similar conditions shall constitute a lot. dyed

3.2 Sample shall be drawn from the lot so as to be representative of the lot. Sample drawn in accordance with the material specification for the coloured textile material or as agreed to between the buyer and the seller shall be held to be representative of the lot. 4. PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS

4.1 An area of the textile product not less than 1 cm x 6 cm should be used for Method 1 ( see 7.1.1 ) or 1 cm X 10 cm for Method 2 ( see 7.1.2 ) so that each exposed portion is not less than 1 cm x 2 cm. The specimen may be a strip of cloth, yarns wound close together on a card or laid parallel and fastened on a card, or a mat of fibres combed and compressed to give a uniform surface and fastened on a card. Draw one such specimen from each piece in the test sample. 4.2 To facilitate handling, the specimen or specimens to be tested and the similar strips of the standard patterns may be mounted on a card in an arrangement as indicated in Fig. 1 or Fig. 2 ( see 7.1.1 or 7.1.2 ). 4.3 The specimens to be tested and the blue strips of the standard patterns should be of equal size and shape in order to avoid errors in assessment due to over-rating the visual contrast between exposed and unexposed parts on the larger specimens as against the narrower standard patterns.
--*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( ruuisrd).

4

IS : 686 - 1985

TEST SPLFR SPLFR SPLFR SPLFR SPLFR SPLFR SPLFR

SPECIMEN
rJO.l

NO.2 NO3 NO.4 NO5 NO.6 NO.7 NO.8

SPL F R

I---0
FIG. 1

t
MOUNTING OF TEST SPECIMEN AND STANDARD PATTERNS FOR METHOD I

19 : 686

l

1985

tEST

SPECIMEN

SPLFR SPLFR SPLFR SPLFR SPLFR SPLFR SPLF R SPLFR
w--w

NO.1 NO.2 NO.3 NO.1 NO5 NO-6 NO.7 NO.8

Y

0

F

FIG. 2

MOUNTING OF TEST SPECIMENSAND STANDARD PATTERNSFOR METHOD 2

4.4 While testing carpets the standard patterns shall be arranged in such a way that they are in the same plane as the surface of the carpet This can be achieved by underlayed cardboard. specimens. 5. STANDARD PATTERNS

5.1 Standard patterns of blue wool cloth ranging in light fastness from rating No. 1 (very low light fastness ) to rating No. 8 ( very high light fastness) and dyed with the dyes listed in Table 1 shall be used ( see Note ).
NOTE - Sets of standard patterns of light fastness rating No. 1 to 8 may be obtained from Indian Standards Institution or British Standards Institution. They are specially dyed to match a master set of standard patterna in colour and in fading behaviour. It has been found that, when repeated dyeings for of dye required to match a the dyed standard patterns are made, the amount previous lot is often different from that originally used. The dyeing strengths would, therefore, be misleading and they are intentionally omitted from this list.

6

IS: 686-m&5

TABLE 1 DYES FOR STANDARD ( Clause 5.1 )
FAWJT?IcSS

PATTERNS

DYE-Co~ova
C, I. &id

INDEX-DESIQNATION* blue

RATINQ No. 1

104 109 83 121 47 23 w 8t

2 3 4 5 6 7 8
*The Colour Index Colourits, P. 0. Box 244, Yorks, United Kingdom.

C. I. C. I. C. I. C. I. C. I. C. I. C. I.

Acid blue Acid blpe Acid blue Acid blue Acid blue Selubiliped v@t blue Solubiliaed vat blue

( third edition) published by the Society of Dyers and Perkina House, 83 Cratton Road, Bradford BDl 2JB, West

tThe patterns dyed with these dyes should be decatized after dyeing.

6. APPARATUS 6.1 Exposure Rack - Facing south in the Northern hemisphere, north in the Southern hemisphere and slopping at an angle from the horizontal approximately equal to the latitude of the place where the exposure is made. The rack shall be sited preferably in a non-residential, non-industrial area free from dust and automobile exhaust fumes. 6.1.1 The rack shall be placed so that shadows of surrounding objects, including any framing, will not fall on the exposed specimen and constructed so that the latter are firmly held. There shall be adaquate ventilation behind the mounted specimens and the rack shall be covered with window glass to protect the specimens from rain and other elements of the weather. The transparency of the glass used shall be at least 90 percent between 380 and 700 nm, falling to 0 percent between 310 and 320 nm. 6.1.2 The minimum permissible distance between the glass and the specimens is 5 cm. In order to minimize shadows due to the varying angle of the sun, the usable exposure area under the glass is limited to that of the glass cover reduced on each side by twice the distance from the glass cover to the,specimen. 7

IS : 686 - 1985 6.2 Opaque Cardboard - or other thin opaque material, for example, thin sheet aluminium, or cardboard covered with aluminium foil, or in the case of pile fabrics; a cover that avoids surface compression. 6.3 Grey 1982*). Scale for Evaluating Change in Colour -(See IS : 768-

7. PROCEDURE FOR MOUNTING, EXPOSURE AND PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT OF LIGHT FASTNESS 7.1 Exposure of Specimens - Expose the specimen ( or group of specimens) and the standard patterns simultaneously to daylight every day from sunrise to sunset under conditions described in 6.1, in such a manner and for such duration as is necessary to evaluate fully the light fastness of each specimen relative to that of the standard patterns, by successively covering the specimens and exposed standard patterns throughout the duration of the test. Two suggested methods of procedure follow. 7.1.1 Method 1

7.1.1.1 Arrange the specimen to be tested and the standard patterns as shown in Fig. 1 with an opaque cover AB across the middle third of the specimen and standard patterns. Expose to daylight under the conditions described in 6.1. Follow the effect of light by removing the cover AB and inspecting the specimen frequently. When a change in colour of the exposed portion of the specimen can just be perceived, equal to grey scale grade 4-5, note the number of the standard pattern showing a similar change. (Th is is preliminary assessment of light fastness of the specimens). 7.1.1.2 Continue to expose the specimen and the standard patterns until the contrast betwen the exposed and the unexposed portions of the specimen or the standard pattern 7 is equal to grey scale grade 4. 7.1.1.3 If the standard pattern 7 fades to a contrast equal to grey scale grade 4 before the specimen does, terminate the exposure at this stage. If the specimen fades to a contrast equal to grey scale grade 4 before the standard pattern 7 does, replace the cover AB exactly in the previous position, cover the left hand one-third of the specimen and the standard patterns with another opaque cover (CD in Fig. 1) and continue to expose until the contrast between the fully exposed and unexposed portions of the specimen is equal to grey scale grade 3. At this stage, terminate the exposure.
*Method for evaluating change in colour (first m&ion).

8

IS : 686 - 1985
a specimen has a light fastness rating equal to or greater than NOTE -When 7, it would require unduly long exposure to produce a contrast equal to grey scale grade 3; moreover, this contrast would be impossible to obtain when the light fastness rating is 8. Assessment in the region of 7 to 8 are made, therefore, when the contrast produced on Standard pattern 7 is equal to grey scale grade 4, the time required to produce this contrast being long enough to eliminate any error which might result from inadequate exposure.

7.1.1.4 Assess the light fastness of the specimen as given in 8. 7.1.2 Method 2

7.1.2.1 Arrange the specimens to be tested and the standard patterns as shown in Fig. 2, with an opaque cover AB, covering one-quarter of the total length of each specimen and standard pattern. Expose to daylight under the conditions described in 6.1. Follow the effect of of light by lifting cover AB periodically and inspecting the standard patterns. When a change in colour of the exposed portion of the standard pattern 3 can just be perceived, equal to grey scale grade 4-5, inspect the specimens and rate their light fastness by comparing any change that has occurred with the changes that have occurred in standard patterns 1, 2 and 3. (This is a preliminary assessment of light fastness.) and the 4-5; Fig. 7.1.2.2 Replace the lifted cover AB in exactly the same position continue to expose until a change in colour of the exposed portion of Standard pattern 4 can just be perceived, equal to grey scale grade at this stage fix an additional cover CD in the position shown in 2, overlapping the cover AB.

7.1.2.3 Continue to expose until a change in colour of the exposed portion of the Standard pattern 6 can just be perceived, equal to grey scale grade 4-5; then fix the final cover EF in the position shown in Fig. 2, the other three covers remaining in position. Expose until either a) a contrast is produced on Standard pattern contrast illustrated by grey scale grade 4, or 7 equal to the

b) a contrast equal to grey scale grade 3 on the grey scale has been produced on the most resistant specimen, whichever occurs first. 7.1.2.4 Compare the changes in the colour of the specimens and those of the standard patterns and assess the light fastness of each specimen as given in 8. 7.2 Other Permissible Exposure - Where the test is to be used to check conformity with a performance specification, it is permissible to expose the specimens with two standard patterns only; that specified as 9

IS I 686 - 1985 minimum and the one below it. Continue exposure until grey scale grade 4 and grey scale grade 3 contrasts have been produced on separate areas of the minimum standard pattern. 8. ASSESSMENT OF LIGHT FASTNESS

8.1 The final assessment in numerical ratings is based on contrasts equal to grey scale grade 4 and/or grade 3 between exposed and unexposed portions of the specimen (s). 8.2 Compare the change in colour of the specimen with that of the standard patterns under suitable illumination. The light fastness of the specimen is the number of the standard pattern which shows similar changes in colour (visual contrast between exposed and unexposed parts of the specimen). If the specimen shows changes in colour which are nearer to the .-imaginary standard pattern midway between any two consecutive standard patterns the intermediate rating, for example, 3-4, shall be given.
NOTE I- In case of doubt in the colour fastness rating as assessed by an observer, the assessment may be made by three observers and the overall rating may be reported accordingly. NOTE 2 -The term change in colour includes not only true, fading, that is destruction of dyes but also changes in hue., depth, brightness, or any combination of these characteristics of colour. If the difference in colour is a change of hue or brightness, this may be indicated by adding abbreviations as follows to the numerical fastness, ratings: Bl R = = bluer, redder, Y = G = yellower, greener, D = Br = duller, Brighter this may also be indicated as and

If the change in hue is accompanied follows :

by change in depth,

W = weaker, and Sfr = Stronger NOTE 3- In order to avoid a misrating of the light fastness of the specimen due to photochromism, the phototropic specimens shall be allowed to condition in the dark at room temperature for 24 h before the light fastness is assessed.

8.3 If different assessments are obtained at the different degrees of contrast, the light fastness of the specimen is the arithmetic mean of these expressed to the nearest whole or half grade. When three areas are being rated, take the mean of the contrasts closest to grades 4 and 3. Assessments, however, shall be confined to whole or midway ratings only. When the arithmetic mean gives a quarter or three quarter rating, the assessment is defined as the next higher half or whole grade. 10

IS : 686 - 1985 8.4 If the colour of the specimen pattern 1, the rating shall be 1. is more fugitive than that of Standard

8.5 Comparison of the changes in the specimen with changes in the standard patterns may be facilitated by surrounding the specimen with a mask of neutral grey colour (approximately the shade of the lightest chip of the grey scale for assessing change in colour), and the standard patterns in turn with a similar mask of equal aperture. 8.6 If the light fastness is equal to or higher than 4, any preliminary assessment based on the contrast equal to grey scale 4-5 ( see 7.1.1.1 and 7.1.2.1) becomes significant; if this preliminary assessment is 3, it shall be included in the rating in brackets. For example, rating of 6 (3) indicates that the specimen changes very slightly in the test when Standard pattern 3 just begins to fade, but that on continuing the exposure, the resistance to light is equal to that of Standard pattern 6. 8.7 If specimens larger than the standard patterns were exposed because of certain other requirements, mask of a neutral grey colour midway between the grade 1 and grade 2 of the grey scale (approximately Munsell N 5) should be used in assessment which covers the surplus area of the specimens leaving an area equal to that of the standard patterns open for comparative evaluation. 9. REPORT 9.1 Report specimens. individually, the numerical light fastness rating of

9.2 If the rating is equal to 4 or higher and the preliminary is equal to 3 or lower, report the latter figure in brackets.

assessment

11

fS : 686 - 1985 ( Continued from page 2 )
MCmbCrS Representing Swadeshi Polytex Ltd, Ghaziabad SHEI c. N. PuABEU Colour-Chem Limited, Bombay SHRI S. R. RAJABOPALAN SERI R. V. GUPTE ( Alternate ) Crescent Dyes & Chemicals Limited, Calcutta REPRESENTATIVE Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) REPRESENTATIVE Sandoz ( India ) Limited, Bombay SHRI K. S. RINDANI SHRI V. S. ANoADI ( Alternate ) Binny Ltd, Madras SHRI S. R. A. SETTY SHRI A. J. KADAVAN ( Altcrnatr \ j Bombay Millowners' Association, Bombay SHRI J. J. SIIAR SImI S. A. SHAH Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, Bombay SERI S. B. IYER ( Alternate ) SIIRI A. K. SINaa Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI A. C. PERTI ( Ahnate) ' SHRI A. SOYASUNDARAM Arun Knitters, Tirupur SHRI D. R. TENDULKAR Amar Dye-Chem Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. VARADARAJAN Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay

12

