(Reaffirmed 1999)

IS : 11429 - 1985

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR CALIBRATION OF SPRAYERS

Crop

Protection

Equipment

Sectional Committee,
&pr6senting

AFDC 43
New

Chaiwnun
SHRI R. K. GUPTA Stat;yb;ms e .

Corporation

of India Limited,

SHRI BHUPENDRA SHRI B. B. NAYYAR Ds M. S. DEATT DIREOTOR

National Agricultural Co-operative Marketing Federation of India Limited, Delhi

(Altrrnatr )

National Malaria Eradication Programme, Delhi Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi Central Farm Machinery Institute, Budni
)

SHRI H. S. BISEE~ ( Akmatc 1 ! DE S. A. A. ALVI (Altrrmt6 II, DIRECTOR SENIOR TEST ENQINEEB ( DIRECTOR
A~trrnatr

Training

& Testing

Northern Region Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institute, Hissar SENIOR TEST ENQINEER ( Ahrrndr) Defence Materials & Stores -Research & SERI C. D. D~IVEDL Development Establishment, Kanpur SERI M.-G. CHATTERJEE ( Altmatr ) Mechanical Engineering Research & DevelopSHRI C. L. GA~Q ment Organization ( CSIR ), Ludhiana SERI R. NI~AM ( dtrrnatr ) Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies, Department DaK. KRISHNAMUWUSY of Food, New Delhi DR G. K. GIRISH ( Ak6nu~6 ) The Sigma Steel Industries ( Regd ), Ludhiana SHRI KRISHAN KUMAR MANQAL SHRI JAQDISH CHANDER ( Alternat ) Skoda ( India ) Private Limited, Arkonam SHBI M. D. MANQALAKARAN Shaw Wallace & Company Limited, Madras SHRI O.S. NATLRAJAN Navalakha Agro Equipments, Pune SERI M. P. NAVALAKHA SERI D. P. NAVALAKEA ( .&mat6 )

( Continued on pUg6

2 )

Q Captight 1986 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the In&n Ce@right Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in-part by any means except Hiith written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:11429-1985
(Continued from pogc 1) h4embcrs SHRI C. B. PAD~ILWAR SHRI L. M. PATEL
SHRI S.

Reprasrnting Padgilwar Agro Industries, Nagpur American Spring & Pressing Works Bombay Limited,

L. PATEL ( Alternate )

S-I P. L. SAFAYA SHRI 0. D. SANQAR SHRI V. C. S. SHASTRI SHRI S. M. PATHAK (Alternate)

DR 0. P. SINQHAL SHRI B. P. SO~ANNA REDDY
SHRI NARESH TREHAN

Metalcrtift, Jammu Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi Central Plant Protection Training Institute, Hvderabad Direct&ate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage, Faridabad Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ) , New Delhi ASPEE Agro Equipment Private Limited, Bilimora

Hymstic Industries, New Delhi SERI RAJESH TREHAN (Alternate ) Central Warehousing Corporation, SHRI P. R. VISHWAMBHARAM SERI AJAY KHERA ( Alternate )
DR D. S. WADIIWA SHRI NIRMAL SING-HSANDHAR ( Alternate ) Punjab Agricultural University,

SHRI J. H. SHAH ( Alternatc )

New Delhi
Ludhiana

SRRI T. PURNANANDAM, Director ( Agri & Food )

Director

General, IS1 (Ex-oficio

~Membsr )

Assistant Director

SHRI K. ANBAEASU

Sacrctary

( Agri & Food ), IS1

2

IS:11429 -1985

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR CALIBRATION OF SPRAYERS
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted. by the Indian Standards Institution on 20 November 1985, after the draft finalized by the Crop Protection Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council.
0.2 Sprayers

play an important role in the successful application of pesticides. But with the continuous use of sprayers the pump and the spray nozzle may get worn out. Further strainers and the nozzles may get chocked. All these defects would cause the rate of discharge of spray fluid to be different from what is originally declared by the manufacturer. Therefore, to check the output of a sprayer, calibration of sprayers, is necessary. This standard deals with the establishment of a calibration procedure for sprayers. 0.3 In preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from ASAE EP 367.1 Guide for preparing field sprayer calibration procedures, issued by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in The number of significant places retained accordance with IS : 2-1960". in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies boomless type sprayers. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this IS : 8480-1977t shall apply. standard, the definitions given in the methods for calibration of boom and

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( r&sad ). tGlosaary of terma relating to crop protection equipment.

3

IS:11429 3. TEST

-1985 EQUIPMENT Tapes of 25, 50 or 100 m length

3.1 Measuring

of f5

mm.
or Flags -

with an accuracy

3.2 Stakes

for marking the test plot. and and five litres capacity

3.3 Measuring Cylinders - of one litre graduated in 10 millimetres increments. 3.4 Pressure Gauge - of proper range of fl percent at the rated pressure. 4. TEST LIQUID

size with

an accuracy

4.1 Fresh water shall be used unless the flow rate of actual spray mixture varies by more than 5 percent from the flow rate of water when calibrated with actual spray mixture. 5. SAFETY REQUIREMENTS IS : 9632-1980* shall be

5.1 The safety precautions given in 7 of complied with while calibrating the sprayers. 6. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

6.1 When developing a specific calibration procedure determine the nozzle flow rate, ground speed of the-sprayer and the spray width per nozzle to compute the spray volume for a given area. 6.1.1 .Nozzle Flow Rate - Check the nozzle flow rate with nozzle capacity, nature of spray fluid and fluid pressure. Check the nozzle output by collecting the spray in a measuring cylinder over a fixed period of time with a stop watch and at a constant pressure. The output of nozzles at several positions shall be checked to determine the effect of any pressure drop along the boom. 6.1.2 Nozzle Capacity - Select the nozzle that would best fit the desired application volume, pressure and ground speed. 6.1.3 -Nature of Spray Fluid - If the spray mixture would be altered by the addition of adjuvants compare the flow rate of the spray mixture to If the flow rate difference is 5 percent or more, then use that of water. the actual spray mixture in the calibration. equipment.
`Code of

practice for operation and preventive maintenance of crop protection 4

IS : 11429 - 1985

should be maintained

6.1.4 Fluid Pressure -

A constant pressure with f5 to achieve uniform application.

percent

variation

6.1.4.1 In case of lever operated sprayers, a fitted as close to the nozzle as possible and the evenly with a full stroke to maintain a uniform shall practise before achieving an even pumping

pressure gauge shall be lever shall be operated pressure. The operator rate. valve

6.1.4.2 In case of compression sprayers a pressure regulating shall be fitted to regulate the pressure.

6.1.5 Ground S@eed of .Spayer - Adjust the ground speed to suit the Ground speed shall be kept constant for uniform application rate. application.
NOTE This does not apply to sprayers fitted with ground driven pumps.

6.1.6 Spray Width per .Nozzle - Calibration methods given in 8.1.1 and 8.1.2 shall be used to determine the volume ( litres ) of liquid applied For per unit area ( hectare ) actually treated with agricultural chemical. band application, the area treated is the area in the band and not the If the pesticide recommendation is based on the area area of crop land. of crop land rather than the area actually sprayed, then the spray width shall be crop row spacing and not the band width,

7. CALIBRATION
7.1 Nozzle

PROCEDURE

Tip Selection

7.1.1 Considering the manufacturer's recommendation and condition select a suitable spray volume and the operating speed.

field

7.1.2 Select a nozzle tip that would give the required operated within the recommended pressure range.

output when

7.1.3 Considering the spray width, speed and spray volume calculate the nozzle output from the formula given in 8.1.1.1.
Pre-calibration Check - Ensure that all sprayer parts are free of foreign material, if any and shall be functioning properly. Nozzle tips shall be inspected for proper size and type, wear and defects, if any. Check the flow rate of each nozzle using water at rated pressure for uniform output, equal spray angle and uniform appearance of spray pattern. Replace those nozzle tips having flow rates varying from other nozzles checked by f5 percent and those having obviously different spray angle or pattern. 7.2

5

IS t 11429 - 1985 7.3 Adjustments to Obtain -Desired Spray Volume

7.3.1 Adjust the operating speed to get the desired spray volume if the spray volume change is below 25 percent. 7.3.2 Operating pressure may also be adjusted to adjust the spray volume if the spray volume change is below 25 percent when operating The operating pressur.e shall within the recommended pressure range. be adjusted without affecting the drop size and spray pattern excessively. 7.3.3 Select few nozzle tips to obtain than 25 percent. spray volume change more

7.4 Layout of Test Plot - Lay out a measured course length to the The course length shall be selected nearest 0'1 m in the test plot. The depending upon the travel speed, spray width and spray volume. course length shall be long enough that an accurate measure can be made of time ( at least 15 seconds ) or of spray volume ( at least 10 percent of tank volume ) whichever method is used. 8. CALIBRATION METHODS the spray

8.1 Any of the following methods shall be used for determining volume.

8.1.1 Select representative nozzle(s) and direct the spray at desired operating pressure. Measure the liquid sprayed from the nozzle(s) while operating under the following conditions: a) Over the measured course length; to the travel time over the

b) Over the period of time equivalent measured course length, and; c) Over a fixed period of 5 minutes. 8.1.1.1 The spray volume from the following formulae: a) V= Quantity of spray Area treated 600 x 4,
sw

and the nozzle output shall be computed

b) V=
c)

Q=,,,

vsw

6

IS r11429 -1985
where V = spray volume, l/ha; Q = output per nozzle, l/min; S = speed, km/h;

We= spray

width, m;

Quantity of = volume of liquid in litres sprayed by the nozzle or boom on a measured course length spray or in the equivalent time. Area treated
NOTE -

= area actually treated, ha.

Spray width for different types of spraying shall be as follows: Nozile spacing for boom spraying; Spray swath width for boomless spraying;

4 b)

Cl Band width for band spraying; 4 For row crop spraying, the spray width per nozzle is equal to the row spacing ( or band width) divided by the number of nozzles per row
(or band).

under

8.X.2 The quantity of spray required to refill the tank after operating the conditions given in 8.1.1 shall be measured. An accurate liquid level mark shall be used or fill the tank to overflowing before the calibration run and then measure the quantity required to refill the tank to overflowing after the run. The boom and the distribution lines shall For accurate measurement the be full before and after operation. sprayer shall be in a level surface while taking measurements. -8.1.2.1 The given in 8.1.1.1. spray volume shall be computed from the formulae

8.2 The sprayer shall be recalibrated periodically to find out any changes in the variables listed in 6 due to nozzle wear, pump wear, strainer and nozzle chocking, etc.

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units
QUANTITY

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS)

UNIT

SYMBOL

Lengtb Mass Time Electric eurreut Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Smpplemenbry QVANTITY Plaue angle Solid augle Derived Unite QUANTITY Force Energy Power FbIX Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress Unitm

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin caudela mole UNIT radian steradiae UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

m

kg
S
A K cd mol SYYBOL rad sr SYMIIOL J" W Wb T HZ S V Pa DE~INIYION 1N

IW -lJ/s 1 Wb1V.s 1 T - 1 Wb/m* 1 Hz - 1 c/s (r-i) 1 S - 1 A/V 1 V - 1 W/A 1 Pa - 1 N/m'

1J

= 1 N.m

-

1 kg.m/sa

