NAT HIAF IS 17547 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Areia An OT ah AAT AR 
ash chi AN — aa AATE vet 
uano faterat 


Specification for Vaccine Freezer 
or Combined Vaccine Freezer and 
Water-Pack Freezer Compression 
Cycle — General Requirements and 
Testing Methods 


ICS 11.040.20 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2021 Price Group 7 


Hospital Equipment and Surgical Disposable Sectional Committee, MHD 12 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Hospital Equipment 
and Surgical Disposable Sectional Committee and approval of the Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning 
Division Council. 


This Indian Standard specifies the general requirements and test methods for vaccine freezer used for vaccine and 
water—packs storage. 


The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the following 
International Standards/Other Publications and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with 
this standard: 


International Standard Title 
ISO 20282-1 : 2006 Ease of operation of everyday products — Part 1: Context of use and 
user characteristics 
IEC 60335-2-24 : 2007 Household and similar electrical appliances — Safety — Part 2-24: 


Particular requirements for refrigerating appliances. 
IEC 62552 : 2007 Household refrigerating appliances characteristics and test methods 


In preparation of this standard, assistance has been drawn from specifications received from Technical Specifications 
Development Group (TSDG) for Cold Chain Equipment, National Cold Chain and Vaccine Management Resource 
Centre (NCCVMRC), Department of Health and Family Welfare. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex H. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 17547 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


SPECIFICATION FOR VACCINE FREEZER OR 
COMBINED VACCINE FREEZER AND WATER-PACK 
FREEZER: COMPRESSION CYCLE — GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS AND TESTING METHODS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Indian Standard describes general requirements 
and test methods for deep freezers for vaccine and water 
pack storage. Vaccine freezers maintain temperatures 
of —15 °C to —25 °C, to store vaccine and prepare ice 
packs required for passive cooling in vaccines carriers 
and cold boxes. 


1.2 This standard defines the requirements 
and procedure for verifying the performance 
of | compression-cycle vaccine freezers or 


compression-cycle combined vaccine and water-pack 
freezers. Three temperature zone designations are 
described: moderate zone, temperate zone and hot zone. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS. No/Other Title 
Publication 
IS 302 (Part 1): Safety of household and 
2008 similar electrical appliances: 


Part 1 General requirements 
(sixth revision) 


IS 10461 (Part 1) Resistance to inter — Granular 


: 1994 corrosion of austenitic 
stainless steels — Method 
for determination: Part 1 


Corrosion test in nitric acid 
medium by measurement 
of loss in mass (Huey test) 
(first revision) 


IS. No/Other Title 
Publication 
IS 10461 (Part2) Resistance to intergranular 
: 1994 corrosion of austenitic 
stainless steels — Method 
for determination: Part 2 


Corrosion test in a sulphuric 
acid/copper sulphate medium in 
the presence of copper turnings 
(Monypenny Strauss test) in 
the presence of copper turnings 


(Monypenny Strauss test) 
(first revision) 
IS/ISO/IEC 17025 General requirements for 
: 2017 the competence of testing 
and calibration laboratories 


(second revision) 


IS/IEC 60529 : 
2001 


Degrees of protection provided 
by enclosures (IP code) 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions apply. 


3.1 Vaccine Freezer — These are compression-cycle 
vaccine freezer or combined vaccine and water packs 
freezer, powered by mains electricity and are used 
primarily in areas with a reliable electricity supply 
(that is, 20 or more hours of continuous electricity per 
typical day). Freezers maintain temperatures — 15 °C to 
—25 °C, to store vaccine and prepare ice packs required 
for passive cooling in vaccines carriers and cold boxes. 


3.2 Holdover Time — The time in hours during 
which all points in the vaccine or water-pack freezing 
compartment of the freezer remains below —5 °C after 
the power supply has been disconnected. 


3.3 Hot Zone — Hot zone appliances shall operate 
at a steady +43 °C ambient temperature and over a 
+43 °C/+ 25 °C day/night cycling temperature range. 


3.4 Moderate Zone — Moderate zone appliances shall 
operate at a steady +27 °C ambient temperature and 


IS 17547 : 2021 


over a +27 °C/+10 °C day/night cycling temperature 
range. 


3.5 Temperate Zone — Temperate zone appliances 
must operate at a steady +32 °C ambient temperature 
and over a +32 °C/+15 °C day/night cycling 
temperature range. 


3.6 Vaccine Storage Capacity — The net capacity in 
an appliance available for the storage of vaccines. It is 
measured in liters in the following manner: 


3.6.1 Freezers — Load the vaccine storage compartment 
up to the manufacturer’s loading markings with 
boxes or blocks measuring 100 x 100 x 100 mm or 
100 x 100 x 50 mm, packed so that there is minimal 
air space between each, column of packets or between 
the packets and any adjoining wall. The total volume 
of the dummy load, in liters, represents the net volume 
available for the storage of vaccines. 


3.6.2 Refrigerators — Load the vaccine 
storage compartment up to the manufacturer’s 
loading markings with boxes or blocks measuring 
100 x 100 x 100 mm or 100 x 100 x 50 mm, packed so 
that there is a minimal air space between each column 
of packets or between the packets and any adjoining 
wall. If baskets are provided, load the boxes or blocks 
into the baskets in the same manner. The total volume 
of the dummy load, in litres, represents the net volume 
available for the storage of vaccines. 


3.7 Water-pack — Flat plastic container filled with 
water. 


3.8 Water—pack Freezing Capacity — The maximum 
weight of water-packs which can be frozen, in one 
batch, during a 24 h freezing cycle. During this period 
the temperature of the vaccine storage compartment 
shall not exceed —15 °C, except during the actual 
freezing process after unfrozen water-packs have been 
loaded when a rise to a maximum of —5 °C is permitted. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 General (Physical Characteristics) 


Compression-cycle vaccine freezers or combined 
vaccine and water-pack freezers, powered by mains 
electricity, are used primarily in areas with a reliable 
electricity supply (that is, 20 or more hours of continuous 
electricity per typical day). Manufacturers may offer 
products suitable for one or more temperature zones. 


4.2 Overall Dimensions 


To allow for manoeuvring through corners, corridors 
and doorways, the minimum dimension of the product 
(either length, width or height) should not exceed 
710 mm; exceptionally a minimum dimension up to 


830 mm can be accepted, but this will restrict 
the number of sites where the appliance can be 
installed. The maximum dimension shall not exceed 
1700 mm and the maximum diagonal (corner to corner) 
dimension shall not exceed 1850 mm. 


4.3 Weight 


Mechanical lifting equipment will typically not be 
available at the installation sites. It is recommended 
that the refrigerator and any associated components 
should be designed for lifting in such a way that no 
single worker is required to carry more than 25 kg 
whilst working on their own, or in a group. 


4.5 Electrical Safety Rating 


Manufacturer to 
IS 302 (Part 1) : 2008. 


certify compliance with 


4.6 Performance 


4.6.1 Operating Temperature Range 


Three temperature zone designations are described: 
moderate zone, temperate zone and hot zone. However, 
all appliances are tested at +43 °C at minimum. In 
addition, appliances are tested to establish a minimum 
rated ambient temperature designation. As indicated 
on the temperature zone rating sticker attached to the 
product as specified in Annex E. 


4.6.2 Refrigeration Cycle 


Compression-cycle unit 
current electricity. 


operating on alternating 


4.6.3 Voltage and Frequency 


Direct supply of mains electricity. Options for 
220-240 volt 50/60 Hz and 100-127 volt 50/60 Hz 
are to be offered. Performance is to be identical for 
all options, regardless of the nominal voltage and 
frequency rating of the appliance. 


4.6.4 Water-pack Freezing 

In combined freezers, not less than 7.2 kg of 
water-packs must be frozen per 24 h whilst maintaining 
the temperature control specified in 4.6.7. 

4.6.5 Areas not Suitable for Vaccine Storage 

Areas of an otherwise acceptable appliance which are 
too warm must be excluded from use by design. 

4.6.6 Vaccine Storage Advice 


All units must carry a factory-fitted non-removable 
label, designed to last the lifetime of the appliance, 
carrying the following information: 


4.6.6.1 Vaccine freezers 


Vaccine storage instructions and the appropriate 
temperature zone symbol as per Annex E. 


4.6.6.2 Combined freezers 


Vaccine storage instructions, water-pack freezing 
instructions and the appropriate temperature zone 
symbol as per Annex E. 


4.6.6.3 The instructions should be fixed to the lid of 
chest freezers and near the top of the door on upright 
freezers. Instructions may be specified in one of 
the languages as agreed by the purchaser and the 
manufacturer. 


4.6.7 Temperature Control 
4.6.7.1 Vaccine compartment 


4.6.7.1.1 All freezers 


The vaccine load must remain below —15 °C during 
any continuous ambient temperature test(s) or 
day/night cycling temperature test(s). Combined units 
must achieve this performance with no water packs in 
the water-pack compartment. 


4.6.7.1.2 Combined freezers only 


While freezing a quantity of water-packs equal to its 
water-pack freezing capacity, the temperature of the 
full load of vaccines must remain below —5 °C and 
return to below —15 °C within the 24 h freezing cycle 
under the maximum continuous ambient temperature 
test conditions of its rated temperature zone. 


4.6.8 Thermostat 


4.6.8.1 The temperature control shall be effective 
throughout the ambient operating temperature range 
(down to the minimum rated ambient temperature). The 
temperature controller must meet some requirements. 
Most notably, because of ambient temperature 
variation and operation uncertainties, the controller 
must be capable maintaining the temperature range 
recommended. 


4.6.8.2 Alternatively, in case of programmable 
thermostat, the temperature controller must be a 
precision device capable of maintaining control well 
inside 0.1 °C over time and temperature variations. 


4.6.8.3 Finally, the controller must have digital display 
to show set/controlled temperature values, alarm 
signals and facility of viewing/editing (with password 
protection) necessary operational parameters. 
Additionally, it must be equipped with buzzer element 
for sounding an alarm in the event of temperature 
breaches. 


4.6.9 Thermometer 


4.6.9.1 The following are the thermometers that could 
be used: 


a) Option A — Externally readable cabinet-mounted 
gas or vapor pressure dial thermometer. 


IS 17547 : 2021 


b) Option B — Externally readable cabinet-mounted 
electronic thermometer. 
4.6.10 Holdover Time 
No standard set. 


4.6.11 Compressor Starting Voltage 

Compressor starting at 172 volts at 22 percent below 
manufacturers stated voltage, 10 out of 10 cold starts 
and 10 out of 10 hot starts must all be successful. 
4.6.12 Power Consumption 


No standard set however, results will be reported. 


4.6.13 Evaporator Configuration 

If the evaporator is mounted in shelves, the minimum 
clearance between shelves must be 130 mm. 

4.6.14 Lock 


4.6.14.1 The door or lid must be fitted with a lock. Two 
keys are to be supplied with every unit. 


4.6.14.2 Hinges and handles shall be strong and 
resistant to corrosion. 


4.6.14.3 When the door is closed, there shall be no 
abnormal ingress of air into the interior. 


4.6.14.4 The strip of paper shall not slide freely when 
the door or lid seal is subjected to the air tightness test. 
4.6.15 Corrosion Resistance 


The internal and external cabinet, lid and frame shall 
be tested for corrosion resistance as specified in 
IS 10461 (Part 1) and IS 10461 (Part 2). 


5 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Ambient Temperature Range During Transport 
and Storage 


—30 °C to +55 °C when the product is inactivated. 
5.2 Ambient Humidity Range During Transport, 
Storage and Use 


5 percent to 95 percent RH, non-condensing. 
6 INTERFACE REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Voltage Stabilizer Compatibility 


All electrical components shall be compatible with 
voltage stabilizers that use tap-changing technology. A 
warning shall be affixed to the unit stating the type(s) 
of voltage stabilizer that may be used and the user’s 
manual and spare parts list shall clearly record this 
warning. 


6.2 Power Lead 


The product is to be supplied with a power lead with a 
sealed-on plug compatible with the electricity socket 


IS 17547 : 2021 


standard in the country where the equipment is to be 
installed. The power lead shall be at least 1.5 meters 
and not more than 2.0 meters in length. 


7 HUMAN FACTORS 


7.1 Thermal Insulation and Air Tightness 


The thermal insulation shall be efficient and 
permanently maintained. In particular, the insulating 
material shall not be subject to shrinkage and shall not 
allow under normal working conditions an excessive 
accumulation of moisture. 


7.2 General 


The equipment shall have appropriate mechanism 
(that is, rotating screw) at its base to balance the weight 
on uneven floor. The product must be useable by the 
widest practicable range of active health workers, 
regardless of age, gender, size or minor disability, 
including colorblind users and long-sighted people 
without glasses, in accordance with the general 
principles laid out in ISO 20282-1 : 2006. 


7.3 Control Panel and Thermometer 


Controls, thermometer and other visual displays may 
be positioned on the front of the unit; preferably as 
close to eye level as possible. Alternatively, they may 
be mounted on top of the unit at a height not exceeding 
1.3 meters. If a low level position is essential, the 
display should be aligned so that it can easily be read 
without the user having to squat or kneel down. The 
on-off and/or defrost switch, if present, should be 
recessed or otherwise protected so that it is not possible 
inadvertently to activate it. 


8 MATERIALS 


8.1 General 


Equipment shall be constructed in such a manner as 
to ensure adequate performance and durability in use. 
Their performance in use is checked by applying a 
series of relevant tests and this clause defines some 
characteristics which are not tested but to which the 
attention of manufacturers is drawn. 


8.2 Materials and Finishes 


All materials used inside the equipment shall not 
transmit odours. All materials used inside freezers 
shall not contaminate vaccines stored nor transmit 
poisonous substances. They shall be resistant to the 
action of moisture. All surface finishes shall, for the 
purpose intended be resistant to impact, sufficiently 
hard, colour-fast, smooth, easily washable and resistant 
to damage by moisture and by acids. 


8.3 Refrigerant 


8.3.1 Appliances are preferring to use HC refrigerants 
such as R600a or other gases with GWP < 11 and 
zero ozone depletion potential (ODP) HFC (hydro 
fluorocarbon) or HC (hydrocarbon) refrigerant. 
Refrigerants which are ozone depleting as identified 
under Montreal Protocol shall not be used in the 
manufacture and operation of these refrigerators. The 
suitability of alternative refrigerant gases will continue 
to be assessed and preference will be given to products 
that use gases with low global warming potential 
(GWP). 


8.3.2 Refrigerants which are ozone depleting as 
identified under Montreal protocol shall not be used in 
the manufacture and operation of these freezers. 


8.3.3 The Refrigerant symbols to be specified as in 
Annex F. 


8.4 Thermal Insulation Foaming Agents 


Any gas complying with the limitations and deadlines 
on the elimination of ozone-depleting chemicals. 


8.5 Other Restricted Materials 


The product and its constituent components, including 
batteries, must not contain lead, mercury, cadmium, 
hexavalent chromium, poly-brominated biphenyls 
(PBB) or poly-brominated biphenyl ethers (PBDE). 
Manufacturing process of the product shall not use or 
produce hazardous chemicals gases. 


9 ACCESSORIES 


9.1 Vaccine storage basket/tray allowing free circulation 
of air, having the size to be able to accommodate 
4 to 6 of them in the unit and suitable to match the net 
volume requirement. 


9.2 Baskets and similar components shall have adequate 
mechanical strength. Those used for storing. 


9.3 Baskets which are intended shall allow free 
circulation of air/easily removable and match the net 
volume requirement. 


9.4 Stem alcohol thermometer for 
monitoring (Annex G). 


temperature 


10 APPLICABILITY 


Type-testing as per test method mentioned in Annex A. 
11 MARKING AND INFORMATION 


11.1 Each vaccine freezer or combined vaccine freezer 
and water-pack freezer shall have the following 


information marked in a permanent and eligible manner 
on one or several locations where it is readily visible 
either when the ice lined refrigerator is away from a 
wall or after the removal, without the help of the tools, 
of the small door or ventilating grating. 


a) The manufacturer’s name or trade-mark, 


b) The model (or commercial designation) of the ice 
lining refrigerator and serial number, 


c) The rated gross volume in litres, 


d) The name of the refrigerant used in system and its 
quantity, 


e) Voltage range, 

f) Supply characteristics, 

g) Wiring diagrams, 

h) Rated energy consumption, 

j) Water packs freezing time, 

k) Overall dimensions, and 

m) Rated storage volume. 
11.2 Each vaccine freezer or combined vaccine freezer 
and water-pack freezer shall be accompanied on 
delivery by instructions for its use and maintenance 


printed on strong paper, cardboard, or similar material. 
These instructions shall at least contain information on: 


a) Installation requirements (in particular levelling 
of equipment); 


b) Conditions of operation (starting, stopping); 


c) Use of various control devices (temperature 
Controller, etc.); 


d) Maintenance and cleaning; and 
e) A paper copy of user/operator manuals to be 
supplied in English. 
12 PACKING, LABELLING AND MARKING 


12.1 Packing and Labelling 


12.1.1 Materials used for packaging the finished 
product are to be free of ozone depleting compounds as 
defined in the montreal protocol. 


IS 17547 : 2021 


12.1.2 A vertical arrow shall be marked at the all sides 
of packages to ensure transportation of equipment in 
vertical position. TOP and BOTTOM shall also be 
written. 


12.1.3 To put label and signage’s for HANDLE WITH 
CARE ON ALL SIDES OF THE CRATES as per 
packing and shipment norms. 


12.1.4 The refrigerant symbol to be specified as per 
Annex F. 


12.2 Marking 


12.2.1 Compressors shall be marked with the blue 
identifying symbol shown in Annex G. In addition, 
the cabinet shall be permanently marked, near the 
compressor position, with the chemical name of the 
refrigerant, or with the refrigerant number, formula 
or proportion (for blended refrigerants). Appliances 
operating on R600a shall be marked with the warning 
symbols shown in Annex G. 


12.2.2 The name of the manufacturer or supplier, model 
number and date of manufacture/serial number. 


12.2.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


13 DISPOSAL AND RECYCLING 


The legal manufacturer is to provide information to the 
buyer on the hazardous materials contained within the 
system and suggestions for resource recovery/recycling 
and/or environmentally safe disposal. 


IS 17547 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 10 ) 
TEST METHODS 


A-1 TEST TEMPERATURES 


A-1.0 The specific tests listed below apply equally to 
moderate zone, temperate zone and hot zone appliances. 
Relevant test chamber temperatures are given in the 
following format M:<XX°C> for moderate zone; 
T:<XX°C> for temperate zone and H:<XX°C> for 
hot zone. 


A-1.1 Test 1 
A-1.1.1 Cool-down 
a) Set the test chamber temperature to M: +27 °C, 
T: +32 °C, H: +43 °C and leave for 48 h with 


the appliance empty, the lid or door open and the 
power supply switched off. 


b 


wm 


Close the lid or door of the freezer, switch the 
appliance on and leave it to stabilize with the 
thermostat/fast freeze switch on its maximum 
setting. 

c 


wa 


After stabilization, record temperatures every 
minute for 24 h. During this period measure the 
energy consumption and determine the compressor 
duty cycle. Measure the duty cycle by timing from 
the end of one cycle to the end of a corresponding 
cycle approximately 24 hlater. 


d 


wa 


Calculate the percentage ‘on’ time over this 
period. Measure electricity consumption over the 
24-hour period in kWh/day. 


A-1.1.2 Acceptance Criterion 


Stabilized internal temperatures maintained at or below 
-15 °C. 


A-1.1.3 Rejection Criterion 


Failure to stabilize at or below —15 °C. 
A-1.2 Test 2 


A-1.2.1 Stable Running and Power Consumption Test 


a) When the internal temperature is stabilized at the 
end of Test 1, load the appliance with simulated, 
pre-conditioned vaccine as described in Annex B. 
Ensure that the water-pack freezing compartment 
(if present) is empty. 

b) Close the lid or door of the freezer and leave it 

to stabilize below — 15 °C with the thermostat/fast 

freeze switch on its maximum setting. 


wn 


c 


<~ 


After temperature stabilization has been achieved, 
record temperatures every minute for 24 h. During 
this period measure the energy consumption and 
determine the compressor duty cycle. Measure the 
duty cycle by timing from the end of one cycle 


to the end of a corresponding cycle approximately 
24 h later. Calculate the percentage ‘on’ time over 
this period. Measure electricity consumption over 
the 24 h period in kWh/day. 


If the internal temperatures are not correct, adjust 
the thermostat, if it is possible to do so, and repeat 
step 3. If successful, the newly established setting 
is referred to as the revised optimum. Record all 
thermostat settings and the outcomes for each 
setting. Once the revised optimum is established 
DO NOT adjust the thermostat during subsequent 
tests. 


d 


wa 


A-1.2.2 Acceptance Criteria 


Stabilized internal temperatures at or below 
—15 °C. Power consumption at the revised optimum to 
be reported. 


A-1.2.3 Rejection Criteria 


Failure to stabilize at or below —1 5 °C within the test 
period. 


A-1.3 Test 3 


A-1.3.1 Water-pack Freezing Capacity (Combination 
Units Only) 


a) Continue the Test 2 conditions. 


b) Stabilize 12 no. 0.6 kg water-packs at M: +27 °C, 
T: +32 °C, H: +43 °C. 

c) Load the water-packs into the freezer 
compartment, if possible in a row and with the 
edges perpendicular to the evaporator surface. 
Install the freezer thermocouples (minimum 
8 no.), centered as uniformly as possible between 
the loaded water-packs. The minimum distance 
between a thermocouple and the lid/door, wall or 
evaporator should be 30 mm. 


d) Turn on the fast-freeze switch (if present). DO 
NOT adjust the thermostat. 


e) Record water-pack and vaccine load temperatures 
every minute for the following 24 h. 


f) As soon as the water-packs are frozen (to —3 °C 
or below) AND the vaccine load has returned to 
-15 °C or below, they can be removed. 
Check that the vaccine load has stayed below 
—5 °C throughout the test period. Check that the 
water-packs have been fully frozen within the 
24 h test period. 


Repeat steps 2 to 6 introducing additional 
water-packs up to the point when one or more of 
the following conditions occurs: 


an 


8 


1) One or more of the water-packs do not fully 
freeze within the 24 h period; 


2) The temperature of the vaccine load exceeds 
—5 °C during the freezing process; and 


3) The temperature of the vaccine load does not 
return to —15 °C or below by the end of the 
24 h test period. 


h) Establish and record the maximum weight of 


water—packs that can be frozen whilst still meeting 
the requirements of specification 4.2.4. 


A-1.3.2 Acceptance Criteria 


A minimum of 7.2 kg of water-packs must be frozen 
within 24 h. The vaccine storage temperature must 
return to —15 °C or below by the end of the 24 h cycle 
and the vaccine storage temperature must not exceed 
—5 °C on one or more sensors at any time during the 
test period. 


A-1.3.3 Rejection Criterion 


Failure to meet one or more of the acceptance criteria. 
A-1.4 Test 4 
A-1.4.1 Holdover Time 


a) For units without water-pack freezing, continue 
the Test 3 conditions. For combined units, 
continue the Test 3 conditions but with the 
water-pack freezing compartment empty. 


b 


wm 


Stabilize the vaccine load temperature below 
—15 °C on all sensors. Once the temperature has 
stabilized, record temperatures every minute. 


c 


wa 


Switch off the power supply at the start of a 
compressor ON phase. Record the length of the 
preceding compressor OFF period (t). 


d 


wn 


Monitor the temperature of the vaccine load at 
one minute intervals. At the moment when the 
warmest point in the load exceeds —5 °C, record 
the elapsed time since power supply switch off 
and add this to the value ‘t’ recorded in Step 3. 
Record the position of the warmest point. 


A-1.4.2 Acceptance Criterion 


No standard set. Performance data will be published in 
the data sheet. 


A-1.5 Test 5 


A-1.5.1 Day/Night Test 


a) Stabilize the test chamber at M: +27 °C, 
T: +32 °C, H: +43 °C. Load the appliance with 
simulated, pre-conditioned vaccine as described 
in test 2. Ensure that the water-pack compartment 
(if present) is empty. 

b) Switch the appliance on and allow the temperature 
of the vaccine load to stabilize below —15 °C on 
all sensors. Allow to run for a further 24 h. 


IS 17547 : 2021 


c) Over a 3 h period reduces the temperature of 
the test chamber to M: +10 °C, T: +15 °C, 
H: +25 °C. Hold this temperature for 9 h. Raise 
the temperature to M: +27 °C, T: +32 °C, 
H: +43 °C over a 3 h period. Hold at M: +27 °C, 
T: +32 °C, H: +43 °C for a further 9 h. Reduce 
again to M: + 10 °C, T: +15 °C, H: +25 °C again 
over a further 3 h period. Repeat this simulated 
day/night cycle five times. Record the vaccine 
load temperature every minute. 


Review the data and establish the highest and 
lowest temperatures recorded during the test. 


d 


wn 


A-1.5.2 Acceptance Criterion 


Vaccine load temperatures must remain at or 


below — 15 °C throughout the test. 


A-1.5.3 Rejection Criterion 


Vaccine load temperature exceeds — 15 °C. 
A-1.6 Test 6 


A-1.6.1 Maximum water-pack Freezing Load 


a) Set the test chamber temperature to M: +27 °C, 
T: + 32°C, H: +43 °C and with the appliance empty, 
the power supply switched on and the freezer 
temperature between — 15 °C and—25 °C. Stabilize 
the water-packs to be used for the test at M: + 27 °C, 
T: + 32 °C, H: + 43 °C. 

Load the freezing compartment, including the 
fast-freeze zone, with water-packs at M: + 27 °C, 
T: + 32 °C, H: + 43 °C with a combined volume 
of one third of the manufacturer’s stated gross 
volume. Instrument the water pack load in 
accordance with Fig. 1 and 2 for E003/FZ—O1 
under points7 to 10 and 5 as in Annex C. 


b 


wm 


c 


Sa” 


Turn on the fast-freeze switch (if present). DO 
NOT adjust the thermostat. 


Monitor internal and water-pack temperatures 
every minute for 24 h. The load is assumed to 
be completely frozen when the temperature of 
the warmest water-pack reaches — 3 °C. Next 
introduce additional water packs up to the point 
when one of the water-packs does not fully freeze 
within the 24 h period; 


Record the weight of water-acks frozen within the 
24 h test period. 


d 


WwW 


e 


<~ 


A-1.6.2 Acceptance Criterion 

No standard set. Performance data will be published on 
the data sheet. 

A-1.7 Test 7 


A-1.7.1 Compressor Starting Test 
a) Empty the freezer. 
b) Switch on the appliance using a starting voltage 


IS 17547 : 2021 


20 percent lower than the nominal voltage of the 
compressor. 


c) Repeat step 2 ten times from cold with the 
compressor at M: + 27 °C, T: + 32 °C, H: + 43 °C. 

d) Repeat step 2 ten times with the compressor at its 
normal stable running temperature. 

e) Reduce the voltage to — 22 percent of the nominal 
voltage, repeating steps 2 to 4 for each voltage. 

f) If there is a test failure at or before the — 22 


percent voltage test, establish the likely cause of 


the problem and include the diagnosis in the test 
report. 
A-1.7.2 Acceptance Criterion 
Ten out of ten starts must be successful in both cold 
start and hot start tests at a minimum of 22 percent 
below the manufacturer’s nominal voltage. 
A-1.7.3 Rejection Criterion 


One or more start failures. 
A-1.8 Test Criteria for Qualification 


A-1.8.1 A final report must be issued after all testing 
is complete. The report of the tests must contain the 
following data and analyses. 


A-1.8.1.1 Summary 


Conclusions and recommendations, including 
confirmation of the temperature zone(s) for which the 
product is suitable: 


a) Comments on samples received, tabulated 
data on the type examination test and relevant 
photographs. 

b) Results of cool-down test, including temperature 
graphs. 

c) Results of stable running and consumption test, 
including temperature graphs. 

d) Results of water-pack freezing capacity test 
(if relevant), including temperature graphs. 

e) Results of holdover 
temperature graphs. 


time test, including 


f) Results of day/night test, including temperature 
graphs. 

g) Results of maximum water-pack freezing load 
test, including temperature graphs. 


h) Results of compressor starting test. 


A-1.8.2 Annexes 


Description of the test apparatus. Test chamber 
temperature records. Copy of reference thermometer 
calibration certificate(s). Diagrams showing the 
location and identification codes for temperature 
sensors, clearly distinguishing between sensors 
measuring vaccine, water-pack freezer and evaporator 
temperatures. Additional supporting documentation 
requested and received from the Legal Manufacturer or 
Reseller during the course of the type-testing. 


A-1.9 Quality Control Standard 


All testing and reporting must be 
out in accordance with the 
IS/IEC/ISO 17025 : 2017. 


carried 
requirement of 


ANNEX B 
( Annex A-1.2 ) 


B-1 GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS 


B-1.0 The following conditions are applicable to all 
refrigerator and freezer tests. 


B-1.1 Test Conditions 


a) Carry out tests in a test chamber in which 
temperatures can be controlled to + 1°C and 
humidity within the range of 45 percent to 
75 percent unless otherwise stated below. Measure 
test chamber temperatures in accordance with 
IEC 62552, 8.2. 


b) Maximum test chamber temperatures of 
M: + 27 °C, T: +32 °C and H: + 43 °C are required 
for the tests. 


c) Minimum test chamber temperatures down to 
—15 °C may be required for the minimum ambient 
temperature rating test. The actual minimum 
required for a specific appliance should be 
discussed with the product manufacturer before 
the test commences. 


d 


wm 


Temperatures within the appliance must be 
continuously monitored to an accuracy of 
+ 0.5°C without the presence of the sensors 
influencing the test in any way. Thermocouples 
that are sealed within the appliance are most 
commonly used. Up to 15 simultaneous 
temperature measurements may be required for 
a single appliance. The suggested temperature 
sensor locations are shown in Annex C and 
Annex D for temperature sensor specifications. 


e) Position the test appliance in the test chamber with 
its back face 50 mm clear of one of the chamber 
walls. Ensure that it is accurately levelled. 


B-2 STABILIZATION TIMES 


B-2.1 Before measuring the performance of a 
refrigerator or freezer under normal running conditions, 
temperature conditions inside the appliance must be 
stable. 


B-2.2 This is normally assumed to have occurred when 
either: 
a) The thermostat has been cycling for 24 h, or 
b) The temperature at each of corresponding points 
during successive operating cycles varies by less 


than + 1°C and there is no marked trend away 
from the mean temperature at that point over 24 h. 


B-3 VACCINE STORAGE CAPACITY 
MEASUREMENT 
a) Measure vaccine storage capacity using 


cardboard boxes, plastic foam or wooden blocks, 
100 x 100 x 100 mm and 100 x 100 x 50 mm. 


b) Fill the appliance up to the maximum loading line 
recommended by the manufacturer. 


c) Where baskets and shelves are supplied, these 
should be used to hold the dummy load. Do not 
place any boxes outside the zone designated by 
the manufacturer for vaccine storage. 


d) Do not place the dummy load in the fast freeze 
compartments of vaccine freezers. 


B-4 RECORDING TEMPERATURES 


a) Test appliances, either loaded or empty, as 
described above in the verification protocol. 


b) Take temperature readings once per minute. 


B-5 SENSOR PLACEMENT 


a) Place sensors at the centre of the vaccine load 
compartment and at other positions which are 
likely to experience extremes of temperature. 
Such positions might be near door seals, or where 
air circulation is restricted by the appliance design 
as in Annex C sensor position diagrams and note. 


b) Fix the sensors in position so that they cannot be 
displaced during the course of the tests. Sensors 
may be fixed in position using thin rigid wire, 
tape or similar materials which do not affect the 
thermal performance of the appliance. 


c) After initial setup, do not alter the position of 
sensors during subsequent tests. 

d) Where sensors are located in the vaccine storage 
compartment place them within the volume 


IS 17547 : 2021 


designated by the manufacturer for vaccine 
storage. 

e) Where vaccine storage baskets are supplied with 
the appliance, fix sensors within the volume(s) 
defined by the internal faces of the basket(s). 

f) Monitor all sensors so that an overall picture of the 
temperature distribution can be obtained. 

g) Where applicable, the following points should 
also be monitored: 

1) Surface temperature of evaporator plates; 
2) Flue temperature; and 
3) Condenser fins or outer skin temperatures. 


B-6 DUMMY VACCINE LOAD 


a) Make up a dummy vaccine load using partially 
filled water-packs. 


b) Measure the chosen water-packs to establish 
their nominal unit volume in liters 
(length x width x thickness in cm/1 000). 


c) Select the number of empty water-packs required 
to build a dummy load whose nominal volume is 
equal to the measured vaccine storage capacity in 
liters divided by five, + 5 percent. 


d 


wa 


Partially fill the water-packs with equal volumes 
of water so that the mass of the load is equal to the 
nominal load volume x 0.4 kg (0.4 kg per liter). 


e 


ma 


Pre-condition the dummy load at+8°C and 
place in the appliance as follows so that it does 
not interfere with the sensor positions already 
established. 

B-6.1 Front-opening Appliances 

Stack the partially filled water-packs evenly on the 
shelves designated for vaccine storage. 

B-6.2 Top-opening Refrigerators 


a) Stack the partially filled water-packs evenly on the 
bottom of baskets supplied for vaccine storage. 


b) If baskets are not required to keep vaccine away 
from the base and walls of the appliance, stack the 
partially filled water-packs evenly on the base of 
the appliance. 

B-6.3 Top-opening Freezers 

Stack the partially filled water-packs evenly on the base 
of the appliance. 

B- 6.4 Water-packs 

Tests which require water-packs must use 0.3, 0.4 or 
0.6-liter water-packs. 

B-6.5 Dual Compressor Units 


Both compressors should be switched on during all 
tests. 


IS 17547 : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Annex A-1.6, Annex B-1.1, Annex B-5.0 ) 
TEMPERATURE SENSOR POSITIONS 


Approximate sensor positions are indicated by the freezing compartment or vaccine storage compartment. 
figures. Except for sensors placed centrally in a If baskets are used for vaccine storage, the sensors 
compartment, the center of sensors should be placed should be located inside the basket(s) but not touching 
50 + 10 mm away from the lining of the water-pack the basket material. 


Plan view 


Figure 2: Chest freezers 


Front view 


X4 


6X 3,11 X 


Figure 3: Water-pack fast freezers 


Front view Side view 


8.9.10 X 


Fic. 1 POSITON OF TEMPERATURE SENSORS 


10 


IS 17547 : 2021 


ANNEX D 
( Annex B-1.1 ) 
TEMPERATURE SENSOR SPECIFICATION 


Probe, accurate to + 0.5 °C, inserted into brass or minimum external area (diameter = height = about 
tin-covered copper mass of 25 g + 5 percent and of 15.2 mm). 


ANNEX E 
(Clauses 4.6.1, 4.6.6.1 and 4.6.6.2 ) 
TEMPERATURE ZONE SYMBOL FOR FREEZERS 


Hot Temperate Moderate 
zone zone zone 


Maximum rated 


7, v wilt ambient temperature 


All semi-circles are to be 100mm diameter. Font: Arial bold 


Fic. 2 SYMBOLS OF TEMPERATURE ZONES 


ANNEX F 
( Clauses 8.3.3 and 12.1.4 ) 
REFRIGERANT SYMBOLS 


Refrigerant label 


i Black font on pale blue background or 
white font on dark blue background 


Font: Arial bold - 18 point minimum 


Fic. 3 REFRIGERANT LABEL 


R600a warning symbol 


—=-———_ Black font on yellow background 


Font: Arial bold - 18 point minimum 


Fic. 4 REFRIGERANT WARNING SYMBOL 


11 


IS 17547 : 2021 


ANNEX G 
( Clauses 9, Clause 12.2.1 ) 


G-1 ALCOHOL STEM THERMOMETER 


G-1.0 Portable alcohol thermometer suitable for 
monitoring storage temperature in vaccine refrigerators 
and freezers. 


G-1.1 Power Source 


Sensor: Coloured alcohol in glass column. 
G-1.2 Physical Characteristics 
G-1.2.1 Overall Dimensions: Maximum 200 x 25 x 25 mm. 


G-1.2.3 Weight: Not critical, provided the product is 
fully portable. 


G-1.3 Temperature Ranges and Accuracy 

Upper limit: + 50 °C; Lower limit: —30 °C; Accuracy: 
+1°C 

G-1.4 Scale Markings (Temperature Display) 


a) Easily readable centigrade scale with a minimum 
space of 1 mm between each line; 


b) Long lines (with numbers) for each 10 degrees; 
c) Short lines for even numbered degrees; 
d) Shorter lines for odd numbered degrees; 


e) Safe zones for ranges of + 2 °C to + 8 °C and 
—15 °C to —25 °C to be marked with a green bar; 


f) Numeral size: 2 mm high minimum; 

g) Font: high-legibility font; 

h) Below zero temperature range indicated with a 
minus sign; 

j) Above zero temperature range indicated with a 
plus sign; 

k) Unit of measurement: Temperatures must be 
displayed in degrees centigrade only; 


m) Reading angle: between 80 and 100° to the plane 
of the support plate; and 

n) Colour of markings: dark blue or black on a white 
background. 


12 


G-1.5 Environmental Requirements 


G-1.5.1 Ambient Temperature Range During Transport: 
=50 °C to + 55 °C. 


G-1.5.2 Ambient Humidity Range During Transport 
and Use: 0 to 95 percent RH. 


G-1.5.3 Maximum Relative Humidity: 90 percent. 


G-1.5.4 Resolution: Resolution: + 0.5 °C or better 
within the range —30 °C to + 20 °C. 


G-1.5.5 Casing Specification: Non-corrodible, sealed 
mechanism. 


G-1.5.6 Vibration Test: Product should stand 30 min 


on a programmable vibrating table without physical 
damage or calibration. 


G-1.6 Impact Resistance 


Product to withstand 5 drops from 1 metre onto a 
concrete floor without physical damage or loss of 
calibration. 


G-1.6.1 Construction 


The glass column must be protected against break age 
and strongly supported so, that the column cannot be 
displaced more than 0.5 mm vertically with respect to 
the scale. 


G-1.6.2 Mounting Specification 


a) Hook to suspend (hanging hook with minimum 
8.0 mm throat to hook over the rim of a 
refrigerator/freezer basket). 


b) Rubber sucker. The position of the mounting 
device must not prevent the temperature scale 
from being clearly visible in a suitable reading 
plane. 

c) WHO specification reference: E06/THO03.1. 


d) Applies to procedures: E06/TH03.VP.1. 
G-1.6.3 IP Rating 


Protection of the 
IS/IEC 60529 : 2001. 


product not less than 


IS 17547 : 2021 


ANNEX H 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Hospital Equipment and Surgical Disposable Sectional Committee, MHD 12 


Organization 


Directorate General of Armed Forces of Medical 
Services, New Delhi 


3 M India Limited, Bengaluru 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 


Association of Indian Medical Device Industry, 
New Delhi 


Asia Pacific Medical Technology Association 
(APACMED), Singapore 


Becton Dickinson India Pvt Ltd, Haryana 
Boston Scientific India Pvt Ltd 


Central Drugs Standards Control Organization, 
New Delhi 


Dental Council of India, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Armed Forces of Medical 
Services, New Delhi 


Dr Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital and PGIMER, 
New Delhi 


EI Dupont India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Employees State Insurances Corporation Ltd, 
New Delhi 


ESIC Dental College & Hospital, New Delhi 


Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital, New Delhi 


Haffkine Institute for Training, Research & 
Testing, Mumbai 


Hindustan Syringes and Medical Devices Ltd, 
Ballabhgarh 
IIT Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Medical Association, New Delhi 


Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, Ghaziabad 


Representative(s) 


Mas GEN (Dr) SUNIL KANT, VSM (Chairman) 


SHRI KULVEEN SINGH BALI 
SHRIMATI MADHULIKA SINGH/DR ANMOL (Alternate) 


PROF ANITA DHAR 

DR MANJUNATH MARUTHGI POL (Alternate) 
SHRI Rasrv NATH 

SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ APPUKUTTAN 


SHRI KALYAN BHOWAL REWARI 
SHRI NEERAJ SHARMA (Alternate) 


Ms KIRTI ARORA 

Ms PREETY SHARMA (Alternate) 
Dr V. G. SOMANI 

Dr RAVIKANT SHARMA (Alternate) 
Dr SANJAY TEWARI 

Dr R. K. Trwart (Alternate) 
COL SAMEER KUMAR 

CoL GAURAV Kumar (Alternate) 
Dr A. K. GOLA 

DR YASHVANT SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI VISHNU SHANKAR VYAS 

SHRI SRINIVAS S. CHERUKUPALLI (Alternate) 
Dr S. K. JatN/DR KAYAM SINGH 

Dr A. K. AGARWAL/R. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 
DR DHIRENDRA SRIVASTAVA 

DR JITIN KHARBANDA (Alternate) 
Dr Buarat B. SAGAR 
DR SHASHIKANT PRABHAKAR VAIDYA 

Dr SANOESHA PASHTE (Alternate) 
SHRI PRADEEP SAREEN 

SHRI DINESH BHARADWAJ (Alternate) 
DR SANDEEP K. JHA 

Dr DEEPAK Josut (Alternate) 
Dr R. N. TANDON 

Dr V. K. MonGa (Alternate) 


DR ANIL KUMAR TEOTIA 
DR MANOJ KUMAR PANDEY 


13 


IS 17547 : 2021 


Organization 


Iscon Surgicals Ltd, Jodhpur 


Johnson & Johnson Limited, Mumbai 


Kalam Institute of Health Technology (KIHT), 
Visakhapatnam 


KOB Medical Textiles Pvt Ltd, Coimbatore 
Lady Irwin College, New Delhi 

Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi 
MIDMARK (India) Private Ltd, Mumbai 


(Formerly Janak Health Care, Mumbai) 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), New Delhi 


Nat Steel Equipment Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Office of Development Commissioner, (MSME), 
New Delhi 


Paramount Surgimed Limited, New Delhi 


Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education & 
Research, Chandigarh 


Precision Electronics Instruments & Component, 
Mumbai 


Safdarjang Hospital, New Delhi 
Sir Ganga Ram City Hospital, New Delhi 


Sri Rama Chandra Medical College & Research 
Institute, Chennai 


Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New Delhi 


Sri Rama Chandra Medical College & Research 
Institute, Chennai 


Stryker India, Gurugram 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI NARENDRA KUMAR JAIN 
SHRI DEEPAK SINGHAVI (Alternate) 


Ms AISWARYA NAIR 


Dr JITENDAR SHARMA 
SHRI DILIP KUMAR CHEKURI (Alternate) 


SHRI A. SHANMUGAVASAN 
SHRI S. KUMAR SUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


Dr BHAWANA CHANANA 
DR SHEETAL CHOPRA (Alternate) 


DR DEEPAK GHULIANI 
DR ANURAG MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHISH M. DEOKAR 
Mrs SARANNYA JAYAKUMAR (Alternate) 


DR A. PRAKASH 
Dr C. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYANT J. PAHAPALE 
SHRI DEEPAK CHALKE (Alternate) 


SHRI KANWALINDER SINGH SODHI 
Suri G. S. BHATIA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILY GROVER 
SHRI ABHAY KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR NAVNEET DHALIWAL 
DR SWAETA TIVARI (Alternate) 


SHRI SITAL D. SHAH 


DR VIMAL BHANDARI 
Dr R. K. Sont (Alternate) 


Dr VIVEK SHARMA 
Ms SARAMMA Parral (Alternate) 


Bric Dr B. S. RANA 
CDR JANAK S. GULERIA (Alternate) 


DR JyoTI RANDHAWA 
DR TARUN MITTAL (Alternate) 


Dr N. JAMBU 
Dr B. MOHAN CHOUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIVKUMAR HURDALE 


SHRI PRAKASH BACHANI SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (MHD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI SUMIT KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (MHD), BIS 


14 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MHD 12 (14450). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


