**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9462 (1980) : Humidifier, Nebulizing, Ventury Type [MHD 
13: Veterinary Hospital Planning and Surgical Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 615-471 : 615 835 3032-23 



IS: 9462 -1980 



£ 
cr 

LU 



U 

_j 

CO 

■D 

c 

G3 

>^ 
Q. 
13 







/nd/on Standard 



( Reaffirmed 1998) 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
HUMIDIFIER, NEBULIZING, VENTURY TYPE 



to in 

I- 
°.5 

| cj 

«! 

c Q 
< ^ 

2 a 

o ~ 
a 7. 

&8 
*S 

S3 0. 
gO 

E © 
o © 

o £ 

1 1 

O o 

^ o 

© 3 
CO CO 



£ 
a. 

UJ 



1- Scope — Specifies the general and performance requirements for nebulizing humidifier used for 
oxygen/inhalation therapy purposes. 

2. Terminology — For the purpose of this standard, the following definition shall apply. 

2.1 Nebulizing Humidifier — A device designed to add water to inspired gas in the form of aerosol 
with particle size less than 15 microns. 

3. Shape — Typical diagrams showing nebulizing humidifier, ball type and plate type with 
nomenclature of its different components is given in Fig. 1 and 2. 



PRESSURE JET 



CO 

c 
o 



© 



CO 



t 



DOME 



TUBE 



'nusm 




^ 



* i «■ " 



MIST 



fl^zggzg 



**>>>>>{ 



^J 




BALL 



ROUND 

SHAPED 

BOTTLE 




OETAILS OF BALL 
ATTACHMENT 



FIG. 1 HUMIDIFIER NEBULIZING, VENTURY, BALL TYPE 



.' 1 



Adopted 12 March 1980 



© July 1980, ISI 






Gs 



a 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS; 9462 -1980 



PRESSURE JET 



MIST 



DOME 




FIG. 2 HUMIDIFIER NEBULIZING, VENTURY, PLATE TYPE 

4- Materials -The different components of the humidifier shall be made of materials as given 
below, 

4.1 Container— It shall be made from suitable transparent, sturdy and non-breakable plastics, 
permitting visibility of the liquid level. The plastics material shall withstand the chemical steriliza- 
tion when kept in the following chemicals for 24 hours: 

Glutar Aldehyde, or 

Pure Hexadrine, or 

Cetrimide 

or shall withstand ethylene oxide gas sterilization. 

4.2 Dome and Crown -These shall be made from suitable non-breakable and sturdy plastics 
material, or from suitable non-corrosive metals. 

4.3 Plastics Components-The plastics should be non-reactive, non-toxic, free from discoloration 
and suitable for medical purposes. The plastics material shall withstand the chemical sterilization 
as given in 4.1. 



15:9462-1980 

4.4 Dip and Jet Tubing —It shall be a sturdy tubing with a uniform bore made from plastics or other 
non-corrosive material. 

4.4.1 Stilette — It shall be a wire of stainless steel or brass corresponding to inner calibre of the 
jet and having 10 mm length more than the jet length for cleaning the clogged jet. 

4.5 Metallic Components — These shall be made from stainless steel conforming to IS : 5522-1969 
'Specification for stainless steel sheets, coils and circles for utensils and hospitalware ' or brass 
chromium plated. 

4.6 Breathing Tube — It shall be made from suitable rubber or plastics and shall be corrugated and 
non-kinkable. It shall have a minimum 25 mm inside diameter and 1 m length. 

4.6.1 Patient-end of the tubing shall conform to IS : 5413-1969 ' Specification for conical fittings 
for to-and-fro carbon dioxide absorber ( water type) for use with anaesthetic apparatus ' and shall 
fit to a face mask or polymask or any other type of attachment which may be in use at that time. 

4.6.2 The bottle end of the breathing tube shall be fitted with a water trap having a tap to let the 
water out. 

5. DESCRIPTION OF THE APPARATUS 

5.1 The apparatus shall consist of a round shape container with nominal capacity of 400 ml and 
screwed-cap head having vertical jet capillary system with * baffle collar' for arresting large size 
aerosol delivery. 

Note-The basic principle used to obtain fine micron size particles in this device is a jet capillary system and 
a bail obstruction, the liquid in the container being drawn up by capillary action as created by the use of high 
pressure jet source of gas ( air or oxygen ) which finally hits the ball/plate to break into fine, micron size particles. 
This creates a large volume of mist. 

5.2 The humidifier shall be provided with suitable arrangements for mounting on the wall or bedside 
rail or on a table top. 

5.3 The humidifier shall have a flow-meter to measure the rate of flow of gas in litres per minute 
and shall be of rating as 2-15 litres per minute. 

5.4 An additional inlet may be provided in the crown, so as to add any other medication in the 
aerosol. 

6. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

6.1 All the components shall be easily detachable and capable of withstanding chemical steriliza- 
tion. They shall form leak-proof joints on re-assembly. 

6.2 The dimensions for various components shall be suitable for portability and uniform nebuliza- 
tion of maximum 15 micron size particles for long durations with easily refilling arrangement. The 
capacity of the apparatus shall be 44 mg per litre, at a relative humidity of 50-55 percent. 

6.3 The humidifier shall be capable of working on oxygen or air at a pressure of 403 kPa (1 Pascal 
« 1 N/m 2 ). 

6.4 All the components shall have a smooth finish and shall be free from any burrs, sharp edges 
or other imperfections affecting the handling or performance of the equipment. 

7. Test — The performance of nebulizer shall be checked by throwing the aerosol against a smooth 
transparent glass surface in a turbulent air free room at a maximum designed flow rate ( 1-15 l/min), 
held at a distance of 150 mm from the aerosol outlet. There shall be no deposit or condensation 
on the surface. 

8. Instructions for use-An instruction manual shall be provided with each humidifier indicating 
the directions for use along with the details of its applications and other information which the 
manufacturer may consider to be helpful to the user. 



IS ".9462-1980 

9. Marking — Each humidifier shall be legibly and permanently marked with the following: 

a) Name or registered trade-mark of the manufacturer; 

b) Capacity of the bottle in ml; and 

c) The words * Disposable ' on those components which are of disposable type. 

9.1 ISI Certification Marking — Details available with the Indian Standards Institution. 

10. Packing -The packing shall be done as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, or 
in accordance with the best prevailing trade practices. 



printed at New India Printtno Press. Khuria, India 



