( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 11182 ( Part 3/&c

1) - 1986

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR THE EVALUATION OF INSULATION SYSTEMS OF ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
PART 3 Section 1 ELECTRICAL ENDURANCE TEST PROCEDURES Procedures

General Considerations Based on Normal

and Evaluation Distributions

Electrical Insulation Systems Sectional Committee,
Chairman DR 0. P. CHHABRA Members
SHRI B. SUDARSHAN

ETDC 65

Representing Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad

SHRI N, V SATYANARAYANA ) ( Alternates to Dr 0. P. Chhabra ) NGEF Ltd. Bangalore SHRI K. S. MAHADEVARAO ( Alternate ) SHRI S. B. BAPAT Dr Beck & Co ( India ) Ltd, Pune SHRI R. S. LAAD ( Alternate ) SHRI A. BASU Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara SHRTB. G. SHARMA( Alternate ) SHRI S. G. DESHMUKH Bharat Bijlee Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. V. BHALERAO ( AIternate ) DIRECTOR( HTD VIII ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi DIRECTOR( TED ) ( Alternate ) SHRI B. N. JAYARAM Kirloskar Electric Co Ltd, Bangalore SHRI G. UL~ESH ( Alternate ) JOINT DIRECTOPS ~ANDARDS Rese;ccknoesigns & Standards Organization, ELECTRICAL -3 ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR ELECTRICAL B - 1 ( Alternate ) LT-COL S. KEWAL RAMANI Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI S. K. BATRA ( Alternate )
SHRI ASWATHA~~RAYAN~

( Continued on page 2 ) Copyright 1987 NDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Acf ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 11182( Part 3pec 1) - 1986 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members
SHRI

Representing

Senapathy Whiteley Ltd, Bangalore A. S. LAKSHMANAN SHRI Y. S. VBNKATESWARAN ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore PROP R. S. NEMA PROP V. PRABHASHANRER ( Alternate ) IndiTomUe;trical Manufacturers' Association, DR G. M. PHADKB SHRI K. S. KAP~OR ( Afternate ) Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore SHRI M. C. RATRA SI-IRIK. S. ARUNACHALASASTRY( Alternate ) Permali Wallace Ltd, Bhopal SHRI C. C. SAKARDA DR L. C. ANAND ( Alternate ) Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Vadodara DR P. SATYANARAYANA DR M. S. PADBIDRI( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member ) SHRI S. P. SACHDEV, Director ( Elec tech )

Secretary
SHRI K. GANESH Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), IS1

2

IS : 11182( Part 3/Set 1) - 1986

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR THE EVALUATION OF INSULATION SYSTEMS OF ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
PART 3 Section 1 ELECTRICAL ENDURANCE TEST PROCEDURES Procedures

General Considerations Based on Normal

and Evaluation Distributions

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 3/Set 1 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 19 May 1986, after the draft finalized by the Electrical InsulationSystems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council.

0.2 This standard is one in the series of standard dealing with guidelines for These guidethe evaluation of insulation systems of electrical equipment. lines include method of identification and general principles of functional evaluation of insulation systems together with test procedures to evaluate the behaviour of systems under different factors of influence. 0.3 This standard which deals with electrical endurance test procedures land is intended to deal with study of systems under electrical stress, is intended to be brought out in various sections. This section ( Section 1 ) covers general details and evaluation procedures based on the promise that data is normally distributed. Additional sections are intended to cover other statistical distributions of electrical endurance data. 0.4 The purpose of this standard is to guide the development of system test procedures by equipment technical committees with a view to study insulation systems in their specific equipment under electrical stress. 0.5 In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from IEC Pub 727-l ( 1982 ) `Evaluation of electrical endurance of electrical insulation systems : Part 1 General considerations and evaluation procedures based on normal distributions', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission.
3

IS : 11182( Part 3/Set 1) - 1986 1. SCOPE

of system test procedures and suggest points to be considered by the equipment technical committees in the preparation of specific instructions for the evaluation of electrical endurance of insulation systems for electrical equipment. 1.2 This standard presents background information on the electrical endurance of insulation systems and test procedures are suggested for the case where the electrical factor of influence is a dominating ageing factor. Techniques for statistical treatment of normally distributed electrical endurance data are also suggested.
SECTION 2. AGEING IA GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

1.1 This standard ( Part 3/Set 1 ) covers guidelines for the development

Electrical stresses applied to an insulation system may have ageing effects which can be present either alone or in combination, the main ones being: a) Effects of partial discharges when the iocal field strength exceeds the breakdown strength in liquid or gaseous dielectrics adjacent to or included in the system, b) Effects of tracking, c) Effects of treeing, d) Effects of electrolysis, e) Effects, related to those above, on the adjacent surfaces of two insulating materials where tangential fields of relatively high values may occur, for example, materials having different permitivities. 2.2 Effect of the Environment - Humidity may affect electrical ageing in various ways. It may alter the level or uniformity of the surface and volume conductivities, the electrical field -distribution, the rate of insulation degradation due to discharges, surface tracking tendencies and leakage currents. 2.2.1 Chemicals produced by discharges under humid conditions can combine with electrodes, insulation and humidity. The result can be a change of discharges which occurs subsequently. 2.2.2 Temperature effects on lity of chemicals, the erosion humidity can all change with voids within insulation changes discharges are equally complex. The stabieffects of discharges and interaction with temperature. Also spatial distribution of with thermal expansion. 4

2.1 Effects of Electrical Stress -

IS : 11182 ( Part 3/Set 1)

- 1986

2.2.3 The environmental conditions include many other factors beyond humidity and temperature, for example, atmospheric pressure, dirt, dust, chemical fumes, etc. These are all important factors in electrical ageing. It is important to evaluate electrical ageing in the presence of these factors if they are part of the environmental conditions in service. 3. EVALUATION FACTOR Ok ELECTRICAL STRESS AS AN AGEING

3.1 Test Variables and Aspects 3.1.1 As stated in Part 1 of this standard ageing tests under voltage should be performed whenever electrical stresses are deemed to act as an ageing factor. Presently, it is not possible to give complete and definite rules for every case. Equipment Technical Committees should determine, when preparing test procedures for equipment under their responsibility, which aspects of electrical ageing tests are important for those specific cases. 3.1.2 It is important to recognize that damaging effects of electrical ageing are very much dependent on the nature of the insulation systems. Variables and aspects which are ( frequently ) of importance include electrode size, insulation thickness, stress concentration, absolute voltage level and frequency, probable failure rate and changes in failure rate. 3.1.3 Electrical stress is usually considered as an ageing factor if partial dischages, internal or external, are present or expected to develop at operating voltage. Presence of discharge extinction level may be required in considering electrical stress as an ageing factor. Technical consideration, based on Paschen's law, the geometry of the insulation system, the permitivity of the insulating materials and the density of the gas in voids, or at electrically stressed surfaces, may give an approach for the predetermination of possible existence of partial discharges. 3.1.4 Another approach consists in measuring these discharges by suitable methods such as those described in IS : 6209-1982". When such measurements show no partial discharges over the appropriate voltage range, and when -it can be shown that no damage or significant electrochemical reactions will be associated with partial discharges below the threshold of detection for the instrumentation used, ageing tests under electrical stresses may not be required.
*Methods of partial dischare measurement.

5

IS : 11182 ( Part 3/Set

1 ) - 1986

In some cases. electrical ageing has been recognized during tests where no partial discharges appeared. Ageing effects resulting from other aspects of electrical stresses, such as treeing, tracking or electrolytic effects cannot generally be determined by simple non-destructive measurements on an insulation system. In these cases, experience on similar systems may be a guide for the consideration of these stresses as ageing factors. Preliminary tests before ageing may give valuable information on such effects. 3.2 Presence of Other Factors
3.2.1 It is possible that electrical stresses will become an ageing factor only in the presence of another factor, or after the action of the latter ( for instance, temperature, moisture, mechanical stress ), these other factors modifying the system characteristics in a reversible or irreversible way.

In this case, electrical stresses should be taken into consideration even if they do not create any ageing outside the action, simultaneous or not, of those other factors. 3.2.2 The test method may then take these combined influences into Test methods involving combined influences are in an early account. state of development. The results do not always lend themselves to general interpretations. In this case also, experience on similar equipment will allow a judgement to be made on the need for retaining the electrical factor as a significant ageing factor for a given equipment. 4. AGEING ACCELERATION 4.0 lt is often necessary to accelerate the ageing in a functional testing. Two methods of accelerating electrical ageing are recognized. They are stress level increase and frequency increase. These methods may be applied separately or simultaneously. The ageing effect of stresses occurring only in special circumstances ( over-voltages ) does not generally need to be accelerated by the stress level. Transient over-voltages may be applied at intervals, as ageing factors on the test specimens. 4.1 Acceleration by Stress Level Increase
4.1.0 Wide experience has shown that, for a given insulation system and a given test procedure, it is possible to establish an empirical relationship within the test range, between the applied voltage and the time-to-failure.

4.1.1 Mathematical Formulae - Several mathematical formulae have been proposed for representing this relationship. As it is probable that the phenomena leading to electrical breakdown are dependent on the 6

IS : 11182 ( Part 3/Set 1)

- 1986

duration of exposure, mathematical formulae are often considered as a statistical expression of the results. Some are given in Appendix A with application to an accelerated method of step-by-step increasing voltage. The validity of such empirical formulae shall be assessed by test results obtained at different voltages which provide the constants to be used in the formulae. 41.2 Disperation of Results -Jt must be recognized that the dispersicm of the measurement results on a certain number of test specimens, manufacture in the same way and tested in the same conditions, is very important. For example, the calculated standard deviation of the voltage stress for a fixed time-to-failure, derived from the empirical relationship assumed in 4.1.1 above may range from a few percent to 10 percent or more, and the ratio of the maximum to the minimum time-to-failure for the same applied voltage on similar specimens may be of one order of magnitude or more. 41.3 Choice of Test Voltages - To obtain a valid representation of the results on a graph, it is desirable to obtain at least three and preferably four points. The voltages selected may be such that the ratio of highest to lowest mean time to failure is about 1 000 to 1. The minimum level of testing voltage to be applied may be chosen in such a way that the mean value ( or median value ) of the actual test times should be a significant part of the intended performance. In many cases, a value of 5 percent is considered as being typical. In special cases, lower figures than this may be acceptable. Indications concerning the verification of an unchanged deterioration mechanism are given in 5. When this cannot be accomplished, the method of acceleration by frequency may be used ( see 4.2 ). 4.1.4 Test Methods - Since it is not possible to establish in advance a breakdown voltage for a given time, it is necessary to determine voltages V,, V?, V, and V, for instance, should four voltages be used, in order that the failure times at these voltages can be planned. The ratios V,/V,, V,/V, and VI/V, may be fixed by experience or preliminary tests on similar models containing the specific type of insulation to be tested. For instance, a quotient V,/V, = V,/V, = V,/V3 = 1.2 may be chosen. Similarly, the ratio of the lowest test voltage VI to the operating voltage V= can be a selected by experience or preliminary tests. 4.1.5 Time-to-Breakdown - The distributiou of the time-to-breakdown of the individual specimens at a given voltage V1 may often be represented by a normal (~Gaussian ) distribution. Sometimes it 1s better represented by a logarithmic normal distribution. 7

IS : 11182 ( Part 3/Set 1 ) - 1986

Other statistical distribution have also been found to be valuable. Currently Weibull distribution is extensively used by many researches and appears in some cases to be a better alternative than the logarithmic normal distribution. In the first case ( normal distribution ), the mean value of the distribution is usually taken as a representative characteristic of the population. An estimate of this parameter may be calculated from:
j=n fj=

j=l

cn
c

fij

where tij are the individual times-to-breakdown at voltage Vi and n is the number of specimens tested at voltage Yi( j = 1, 2, . . . . ..n ). In the second case (logarithmic normal distribution), it is preferred to use the logarithmic mean value, an estimate of which is obtained from:
j=n

Log ti =

log

fij

n

j=l

This value is less influenced by a single extremely high value. In both representative breakdown ). cases, the sample median may be taken as an estimate of the characteristic ( arithmetic or logarithmic mean time-toThis value is equal to time number 2
n+l

if n is odd, and F+l if n is

equal to the average of time number ?2 even.

and time number

The latter procedure yields a less precise estimate of the distribution parameters than the first two mentioned ( that is, with a higher standard error ), but has the advantage that the test may be stopped at the time when about half the specimens have failed. In one experiment comprising tests at several voltage levels, only one method for determining the estimate of the population parameters should be used. 4.2 Acceleration by Frequency Increase - It is generally agreed that, for ageing resulting from partial discharges, the life at a given voltage is inversely proportional to the frequency, as long as the number of discharges per cycle is constant and the discharge energy per cycle is also constant.
8

IS : 11182 ( Part 3/&c

1) - 1986

This hypothesis is valid only up to frequency levels, which depend on the test arrangement, test conditions and the nature of the insulation system. It cannot be generally stated. Ageing caused by other than partial discharges may not be accelerated according to the same law. The dielectric losses, which are increased by the frequency, should not be permitted to affect significantly the temperature of the specimen. It is important to control and record this temperature. As in the case of acceleration by voltage, any acceleration by frequency should b,- permitted only after careful study to demonstrate validity. Experience has shown that certain insulation systems cannot be validly exposed to frequencies higher than a few hundred hertz whereas others appear to provide very valid data when exposed to frequencies of several thousand hertz. 4.2.1 Choice of Frequerlcies - In the present state of knowledge, and for an operating frequency of 50 Hz or 60 Hz, it seems advisable not to exceed a frequency of about 1 000 Hz without careful study. In some cases, it is recommended that this test be performed in addition to the increased voltage level test at power frequency, as described in 4.1. 4.2.2 Calculation of Results - Since these tests are performed at constant voltages, the result may be calculated as in 4.1.5. The comparison of two tests at the same voltage and different frequencies performed as indicated may verify the hypothesis given in 4.2. In this case, the result of an increased frequency test may be transformed into an equivalent power frequency life.
5. AGEING MECHANISMS 5.0 Part 1 of this standard describes mechanisms of ageing and methods of verification. The following paragraphs recall some aspects of ageing mechanisms during electrical ageing and some methods of verification.

5.1 Since the action of partial discharges is one of the important ageing factors, it is generally useful to measure partial discharge values ( level, discharge energy dissipated per cycle, quadratic rate of apparent charges, etc ) in operating conditions of voltage and frequency and in the testing conditions thus evaluating the degree of ageing obtained during the tests. It is often considered that normal acceleration conditions are obtained by frequency acceleration, if the conditions of 4.2 are met. No general rule can be given for the acceleration by voltage stress level ( see4.1 ), but careful attention is necessasy if a large variation of partial discharge characteristics appears between testing and operating conditions. 9

IS : 11182 ( Part 3/Set 1) - 1986

5.2 When applicable, analysis of evolved gas may give information on a change in the ageing mechanism. It is known that the products of degradation by partial discharges are generally composed of light hydrocarbons and-carbon oxides, the nature and proportion of which are dependent on the energy dissipated at the molecular level. Furthermore, the appearance of an aged sample after electrical breakdown may be compared to that of components removed from equipment in service. The analysis of solid degradation products could provide additional information. These techniques may also be used to choose other conditions or to select levels of other factors of influence. of test,

5.3 Experience shows, for instance, that conditions of partial discharges are strongly modified by temperature, as well as other characteristics, such as permeability to gas produced by ageing. A preliminary test should be made to choose the temperature during testing or to specify two or more temperatures or variations of temperature during the test in order to reproduce as far as possible conditions anticipated in service.
SECTION 6. GENERAL IB TEST PROCEDURES

GUIDANCE

ON TEST PROCEDURES

6.1 Test procedures

for the evaluation of electrical endurance of insulation systems for electrical equipment should include descriptive remarks providing a clear understanding of the objectives of the particular tests with respect to the industry and the special requirements that exist. technical committees should ensure that each test

6.2 The equipment procedure:

a) gives statistically consistent engineering grounds;

results based on sound scientific and

b) provides data free from bias of the tester; c) results in information which correlates generally acceptable manner. 7. TEST OBJECTS 7.1 Wherever practicable, the equipment itself should be used for the evaluation of insulation systems. However, when size and convenience require their use, insulation systems may be evaluated by models~rather than by full size equipment.
10

with field experience in a

IS : 11182 -( Part 3/Set 1) - 1986

Test procedures shall include descriptions of the models, if models are used; a model may include more than one insulation system or test specimen. 7.2 Models should be made to embody the essential elements of the equipment they represent, and particularly those concerning electrical stresses. However, voltage grading devices may sometimes need to be adapted to stresses used during testing. 7.3 Test procedures shall specify the minimum number of models and test specimens that are to be tested under each particular ageing condition in order to obtain reasonable statistical accuracy. The wider the spread in failure times among the specimens exposed at each electrical stress level, the larger the number of test specimens required to achieve an acceptable degree of confidence. 7.4 The number of test objects used at each stress level should, therefore, be determined by a statistical analysis of the scatter of time-to-failure and by the degree of accuracy desired in determining average specimen life. Sometimes, the median value is used as an estimate of this characteristic. 4.1.5 gives examples of computation of time-to-breakdown. Preliminary tests may be included to ensure that test objects are typical of the system being tested. 8. INFLUENCE
8.1 It

OF ENVIRONMENT

AND TEMPERATURE

should be noted that electrical endurance results under different environmental conditions are not directly comparable. 8.2 The influence of temperature on electrical endurance is recognized as being particularly important, but the direction of this influence depends upon the test conditions and the insulation system. Special attention should be paid to this when specifying the test procedure. To cover the range of operating temperatures, tests at two or more temperatures may be specified. When the equipment operates under special atmospheric conditions, for example, chemical, dust or in a liquid, the test conditions may simulate the service-conditions. Thus, in these special cases, environmental conditioning may be included in the test procedure. 9. INFLUENCE OF ASSOCIATED OF DEGRADATION
9.1 Test procedures

MATERIALS

AND

PRODUCTS

shall take cognizance of the possible degrading effect of associated materials on insulation systems. Such materials may be part of 11

IS : 11182 ( Part 3/Set 1) - 1986

the insulation system or adjacent parts in the physical support, in the equipment itself or in the cooling medium. The ventilation used during the ageing of test objects should not significantly effect the ageing mechanisms normally experienced in service. Consideration should be given to removal or retention of degradation products.
10. AGEING

PROCEDURES

10.0 The primary objective of test procedures is the determination of changes in the essential characteristics of insulation systems under various degrees of electrical stress exposure, either continuous or cyclic. This is accomplished by continuous or periodic exposure of models ( or equipment itself ) to controlled electrical stress conditions. Diagnostic factors may be applied simultaneously or periodically to the test object to evaluate any change in essential characteristics. The end-point criterion can be: a) breakdown at test voltage, b) breakdown at an over-voltage which may be applied and c) reaching a defined level of a diagnostic factor. Evaluation often involves accelerated electrical endurance testing in the specified environmental conditions. ( See Section IA for further discussion of acceleration by stress level and by frequency. )
-10.1 Acceleration by Stress Level -

periodically,

To obtain useful results, it is suggested that any system being evaluated should have not less than three electrical stress levels under study.

Depending on the electrical equipment involved, the test procedures may specify the ratio between the lowest test stress level and the stress level The ratios between the test stress to which the results will be extrapolated. levels may also be specified. 10.2 Acceleration by Frequency - For some insulation systems it has been found that, for ageing due to partial discharges, the electrical endurance at a given voltage is approximately inversely proportional to frequency. The limits of frequency acceleration should be specified in the Excessive dielectric heating should be avoided. test procedures. It is suggested that the frequency accelerated tests be performed in combination with tests at the increased stress levels at operating frequency. The highest voltage level at theincreased frequency is often selected to be equal to the lowest voltage level of the operating frequency test, with 12

IS : 11182 ( Part 3/Set 1) - 1986 additional tests at the increased frequency performed at still lower voltage levels. Test procedures can set the conditions in which one can accept the equivalence of a high frequency result with an operating frequency test, the times being multiplied by the frequency ratio. When the ageing mechanisms are well known, the test procedures can fix the conditions in which a test at accelerated frequency can be considered sufficient, without requiring a comparison with a test at operating frequency. 10.3 Tolerances on Parameters - Specifications of electrical stress levels, frequency and other test conditions should include tolerances on the specified values. The number and duration of voltage interruptions should be considered. In many cases, the voltage has been maintained within & 2 percent of the specified value with short period variation ( less than 5 percent of the time ) of f 5 percent. 11. VERIFICATION OF AGEING MECHANISMS 11.1 When evaluating insulation systems by accelerated functional tests, one important source of erroneous conclusions is the difficulty of detecting possible changes in ageing mechanisms when test conditions differ from those in service. The risk increases with increasing acceleration of the test. Because of this, it is necessary that the assumptions of the same ageing mechanisms in test and in service be verified. 11.2 Among measurements and observations this purpose are the following: a) Dielectric losses, b) Amplitude and time distribution of partial discharges, c) Changes in slope of the relationship between stress level and timeto-failure, d) Changes in statistical failure, and distribution governing individual times-towhich could be useful for

e) Changes in location of failures and their appearance. Other methods may be proposed by equipment technical committees. All techniques used for monitoring of ageing mechanisms should have a negligible ageing effect compared with the ageing in test. 12. DIAGNOSTIC METHODS AND END-POINT CRITERIA 12.1 Diagnostic methods and end-point criteria other than dielectric breakdown during ageing may be useful. 13

IS : 11182 ( Part 3/Set 1) - 1986 12.2 Diagnostic techniques are described in Part 1 of this standard. Equipment technical committees may choose from among these techniques. Test procedures should specify diagnostic methods chosen. Many diagnostic measurements can be made without interrupting the endurance test. Other diagnostic techniques may be used at intervals, after removing specimens from the voltage source; for example, over-voltage proof tests to simulate over-voltages in operation. All diagnostic measurements should have a negligible compared with the ageing in the test. 13. ALTERNATIVE TEST PROCEDURES 13.1 Continuous Fixed Stress Levels -The test procedures may specify that all test objects be tested at fixed electrical stress levels until failure. From such testcharacteristic times-to-failure at each stress level may be obtained and interpreted. ( See 4.1.5 ). 13.2 Increasing Stress Level - In special cases, it may be possible to perform electrical endurance tests with increasing stress levels for each test object. A number of such methods have been described in the technical literature. In such a test procedure, it is necessary to specify, in addition to all other test conditions already mentioned, a definite mathematical relationship between stress level and time-to-failure and a method of reducing all test results to a common time or a common stress level value. Verification of unchanged ageing mechanisms in this method of electriAppendix A describes an cal endurance testing is particularly important. example of such a procedure. 13.3 Cyclic Tests - Either fixed or increasing stress levels may be used in cyclic tests. Each test cycle shall include an electrical stress exposure period. The duration of each cycle shall be specified. If over-voltages are considered was ageing factors in service of the insulation system, over-voltage application may be specified at intervals. The test procedure should specify the number, duration and level of these applications. 14. REPORT EVALUATION OF RESULTS ageing effect

14.1 The results of the test may be reported on a graph on which mean times or median times to failure are entered. One may use log-log or semi-log-coordinate paper. It is preferable to use the graph giving better linearity of the plot. 14

IS : 11182 ( Part 3/Set 1) - 1986
14.2 If acceleration by level and by frequency have both been used, graphs for each frequency should be drawn. In this case, if the results at the same voltage level and two frequencies given a time ratio essentially equal to the reciprocal of the frequency ratio, the interpretation of the results is improved.

15. INTERPRETATION

OF ELECTRICAL

ENDURANCE

DATA

15.1 The equipment technical committees should recognize that, based on the present state of the art of electrical insulation technology, only comparative evaluations may be made. As recognized in Part 1 of this standard, it is desirable ultimately to be able to make evaluations in absolute terms. However, that is not possible at this time. The equipment technical committees, when assessing the relationship between electrical stress level and time-to-failure, should clearly note that the co-ordinates of these relationships will use actual values of time ( for example, hours ) either within the test range or extrapolated. 15.2 However, extrapolations will not necessarily of the equipment in absolute terms. reflect the operating life

15.3 When insulation systems are tested according to the test procedures, it is important for uniformity that the test procedures specify the following:

a) The electrical

stress range over which the endurance values of insulation systems may be extrapolated or the value to which the extrapolation should be limited; confidence limits;

`4 The mathematical treatment of the data including an expression of 4 The additional limitations regarding extrapolation and the spread of
data, if the relationship between electrical stress and time-to-failure is not linear in the co-ordinate system used; and ing the performance of the insulation systems being compared.

4 The values of the electrical stress of the time to be used for estimatThe above considerations may be different for various types of equipment and insulation systems. The appropriate statistical distributions and scale of transformations to be used may differ from case to case. Special limitations should be specified for the case in which the relationship between electrical stress and time-to-failure for the insulation systems being compared are quite dissimilar or are not reasonably parallel. 15

IS : 11182 ( Part 3/Set 1) - 1986

APPENDIX
TEST AT STEP-BY-STEP

A
VOLTAGE

( Clauses 4.1.1 and 13.2 )
INCREASING

A-l. GENERALITIES The individual time-to-breakdown of a group of identical specimens tested at the same voltage may vary in a~ratio of one to ten, or even more, and the quotient of the longest time to the median or mean time-to-failure may be 3 to 1 or more. Therefore, the time-to-breakdown of the last specimens is much longer than the mean or median times which are useful values for the tests. A-l.2 It is then possible to shorten the time of a complete whole sample by a test at stepwise increasing voltage. test of the
A-l.1

It is also possible to use a combined procedure, by the application of a constant voltage up to the median time-to-failure followed by the application of a stepwise increasing voltage. A-2. PRINCIPLE A-2.1 In the case of a test at step-by-step increasing voltage, it is necessary to choose a mathematical law to calculate the results. A-2.2 Various mathematical (V--V@ v= formulae have been proposed: . ..(l) . ..(la) 0 . ..(2) VkT = A T = A Nlog +

v, -

in which V and T are respectively the applied voltages and the application times, VO and TO a couple of particular values, A, k and N are constants peculiar to the tested system. Various theoretical studies have been published to justify these mathematical formulae. Some authors retain two functions of type (1) with different coefficients k and k', on either side of a certain time limit. This report relates to mathematical expression (1) which may be written as: k log V + log T = log A the graphic ordinates. representation of which is a straight 16 line on log-log co-

IS : 11182 ( Part 3/Set 1) - 1986

This procedure is applicable when k, the slope of tl;e electrical endurance curve on a log-log plot, has been approximately established by earlier test, or by a steady-state electrical endurance test obtained up to about the median time-to-failure. End-points for longer lasting specimens, or for another untested group of similar specimens, can be determined by this procedure of step-by-step increasing voltage with a significant saving of time. A-2.3 In cases when k is unknown, other strategies, which are not dependent on this knowledge, may be employed. While available in the literature, they are beyond the scope of this guide. A-3. TEST PROCEDURE AND CALCULATION

A-3.1 Under the assumptions defined above, the application of a voltage V' = aV for a time T' consumes a portion of the total life equivalent to the application of voltage V for the time T, if:
T=-&T

By choosing a = kz/T particularly, the application of a voltage Vi for a time Ti is equivalent to the application of a voltage UVi for a time Ti/2. By using n specimens, the voltage is applied by steps in geometrical progression V,, aVO, . . . . , aVo for times T,,, Tl,. . . ., T, on all specimens. If a test specimen is punctured valent time to this voltage T, is:
Ta =

at the voltage uVO, the total equi-

3
P

+ +
P-l

+ . . . . f +-

+ Tp

. ..(3)

The life of the considered specimen at voltage aPV,, is then Ta, and according to eqn (1) it may be assumed that at any voltage V, its life would be T, if: VT = (aV,)k T, . ..(4) If n specimens have been used, a couple of values correspond one :
(SVo)i, Tai with i = 1 to n A-3.2 To establish a distribution

to each

of the values relating to these n specimens, it is easy to bring the values found as indicated in the preceding paragraph for each specimens back to the values corresponding to the median value of times ( Tai ) z as this time is taken as the one corresponding 17 to the

IS : 11182( Part S/Set 1) - 1986

puncture

of specimen

n+1 2

if n is odd, or the average of the times + 1, if n is even.

corresponding

to the specimens G and +

Supposing Tm is this time. For each specimen, the voltage corresponding to this life duration by eqn (4) will be calculated, ~which will thus give n voltages Vmi, corresponding to the useful life Tm. From these n voltage values, the average voltage will be calculated for the group of specimens:

and the elements relating to the scattering standard deviation will also be calculated

such as the corresponding

S=

II

i=n

2 (
i=l

Vmi -

vm>'

n-1

A-4. PLOTTING OF THE CURVE A-4.1 If four groups of specimens have been used, the mean values V, corresponding~to times Tm as well as the standard deviations s have been determined for each group. On a log-log paper, the life duration curve may also be plotted. A-4.2 If the assumptions given in A-l are accurate, the four points are aligned, or more exactly, a straight line can be drawn inside the limits of confidence at 95 percent of the average voltage values, and the slope of this straight line with logarithmic co-ordinates corresponds to the coefficient k of formula (1). No extrapolation with. A-5. COMBINED TEST PROCEDURE INCREASING VOLTAGE CONSTANT VOLTAGE is possible, if both these conditions are not complied

A-5.1 If the characteristics of the tested insulation system are sufficiently well known in order that the chosen initial voltage `v, may be such that half the specimens are punctured for the foreseen test duration, the obtained gain of time is maximum. 18

IS : 11182 ( Part 3/Set 1) - 1986

For this procedure, the application duration To of the first step of voltage V, is not fixed in advance. It corresponds to the time-to-breakdown of specimens number F + + 1 ( II being even ). ( n being odd ), or specimens number times T,, T,..., r, of the

The application

following voltage steps V, = aV,, Vz = a2V0, etc, will be able to equal about To/l?; in these conditions, we may expect the last specimens to be punctured m a total time equal to or lower than I.4 To. Besides, the median value of the puncture voltage of each group of specimens is determine without previous assumption of the ageing law. The test procedure can be recommended particularly tests have indicated the initial level of voltage V,, to be applied.

19

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units
QUANIT=

SYSTEM

OF UNITS ( SI UNITS )

UNIT metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

SYhmoL m kg S A K cd mol

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary Units

QUANTITY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QUANITIY Force Energy ~Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

UNIT radian steradian

SYMBOL rad sr

UNlT

SYMBOL

DEF~N~~ON 1 N - 1 kg.m/s* 1 J i= 1 N.m 1 W=lJ/s 1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 T = 1 Wb/mP 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-l) 1 S = 1 A,V 1 V = 1 W/A 1 Pa = 1 N/m*

joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

N J W Wb T HZ S V Pa

