**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8434 (1977) : Airconditioning requirements on boardships 
[TED 17: Shipbuilding] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS :8434- f977 
( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 



AIR-CONDITIONING REQUIREMENTS ON 

BOARD SHIPS 



L DC 62B84: 629- 12-005 




® frfrrigti 1977 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK lHAVAN 9 liAHADUR SHAH 7 AFAR MARC 

NL-.VV DELHI J 10009 

Priei Hi 5-00 Attg(ut 19?7 



IS: 8434- 1977 

Indian Standard 

AIR-CONDITIONING REQUIREMENTS ON 
BOARD SHIPS 

Shipbuilding Sectional Committee, MGPD 1 

Chairman Representing 

Shri S. Parmanandhan Ministry of Defence ( NHQ) 

Members 
Chief Mechanical Engineer, Ports Consultative Organization, New Delhi 
Calcutta Port Trust 

Chief Mechanical 
Engineer, Bombay Port 
Trust ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. G. Damle AFCO Ltd, Bombay; and Institute of Marine 

Technologists, Bombay 
Shri R. D. Paralkar AFCO Ltd, Bombay 

( Alternate ) 

Shri A. T. Joseph ~\ 

( Alternate ) \ 

Shri I. N. Pkadhan I Institute of Marine Technologists, Bombay 

( Alternate ) \ 

Shri R. S. Sachdev | 

( Alternate ) J 

Director of Naval Ministry of Defence ( NHQ,) 

Constr uction 
Shri V. P. Goyal Mukand Iron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Sudarshan Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. B. Irani Directorate General of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri G. K. Kuriyan Central Institute of Fisheries Technology, Cochin 

Cdr N. A. Mcllerworth Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Lt Cdr Mehr Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. N. Pradhan Indian National Shipowners* Association, Bombay 

President Institute of Marine Engineers, Bombay 

Shri P. C . Kumar ( Alternate ) 

Shri H. K. Kaul ( Alternate ) 

Shri K. S. Mani ( Alternate ) 

Shri R. K. Mehrotra ( Alternate ) 

Capt N. P. Mukundan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Raghavan Ministry of Shipping and Transport 

Shri T. S, Rajan Ericson & Richards, Bombay 

Shri H. S. Rao Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Capt D. S. Rufa Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay 



Shri S. Sundaram ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1977 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



ISi 8434- 1977 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri R. Sarangarajan Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri B. R. Sawarkar Cochin Shipyard Ltd, Cochin 

Shri P. R. Govil ( Alternate ) 
Shri W. R. D. Saxton Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri D. Madhok ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. G. Schaeffer American Bureau of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri K. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Sen Garden Reach Workshops Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri D. S. Sheth Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam 

Shri M. G. Kutty ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Sinha SF India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri H. Svensson ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. N. Sujak Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. S. Das, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( MCPD ) ( Secretary ) 



IS : 8434 - 1977 

Indian Standard 

AIR-CONDITIONING REQUIREMENTS ON 
BOARD SHIPS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 7 April 1977, after the draft finalized by the Shipbuilding Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and 
Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 Most of the ships that are built today are required to have an efficient 
air-conditioning system to meet the crew comfort and to maintain a high 
standard of efficiency as well as alertness in operational compartments 
such as bridge, machinery control room, etc. In addition they are also 
to meet certain stringent requirements for installation and operation of 
electronic equipment as well as machinery such as gyro, radar, etc. 
Taking these factors into consideration, this standard has been 
formulated. 

0.2.1 In view of the above and in order to ensure adequate capacity of 
air-conditioning plant, it was felt necessary to formulate a standard 
first on the air-conditioning requirements on board ships. 

0.3 As a systematic approach, it is intended to formulate a series of 
Indian Standards on marine air-conditioning. This standard is the first 
one of series, and is based on practices prevalent in the shipbuilding 
industry of the country as well as overseas. Other standards in the series 
covering the following sub-groups will be formulated later. 

a) Heat load calculations and design procedure for the air-condi- 
tioning system; 

b) Code of practice for selection and installation of air-conditioning 
system; 

c) Code of practice for insulation; and 

d) Tests, trials and certification of shipboard air-conditioning system. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements for air-conditioning of 
accommodation spaces, offices, operation spaces and other specialized 
compartments. 



IS : 8434 - 1977 

2. CONDITIONS 

2.1 Susnsner 

2.1.1 Primary— The inside temperature of 28°C with 50 percent 
relative humidity ( RH ) shall be obtained to an outside ambient 
temperature of 35°C with 70 percent RH. 

2.1.2 Secondary — The air-conditioning system shall be able to maintain 
an inside temperature of 24°C and 50 percent RH for an outside condi- 
tion of 28°C and 80 percent RH. 

2.2 Winter — For an outside temperature of — 20°C the inside 
temperature of +20°C and 50 percent RH shall be attained. 

2.3 Fresh Air 

2.3.1 The quantity of fresh air supply shall not be less than 25*5 m 3 per 
person per hour. 

2.3.2 The number of changes of conditioned air shall be not less than 
4 per hour in living rooms and 6 per hour in public rooms. 

2.3.3 The content of fresh air in the circulated air shall not be less 
than 45 percent by volume. 

2.3.4 In all cases whichever quantity of fresh air is the highest shall be 
applicable. 

2.4 The difference in temperature between the cabin air and air supplied 
from the duct should not be more than 10°C. 

2.5 Recirculation air to be collected from at least one point on each deck 
and shall not be taken from pantry, hospital and sanitary spaces. 
Recirculation air shall be taken through louvres in door, alleyway through 
recirculation grills and ducting to the air handling units. The inlet and 
distribution grills should be so designed that it will meet full fan capacity 
to supply fresh air with no recirculation. 

2.6 Branches to hospital and sanitary spaces shall be provided with non- 
return flaps. Self-closing isolation doors or other suitable arrangements 
shall be provided with lobbies for all accesses to open decks and galleys 
and hot compartments, such as engine room casing, etc. 

2.7 The plan^ shall be positively balanced so as to allow the supply of 
fresh air to be more than the quantity exhausted. 

3. PLANT CAPACITY 

3.1 For ships of more than 3 000 GRT, more than one compressor plant 
shall be necessary and in such a case when any one plant goes out of 
order, a minimum of 65 percent of the heat load should be capable 
of being absorbed. This is for the compressor and associated units and 
not for the fans and air treatment units. 



