**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 6049 (1971) : Code of practice for application of 
temporary corrosion preventives [PCD 3: Petroleum^ 
Lubricants and their Related Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS t «049 • 1*71 

Indian Standard RE'^^f '"^ed 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

APPLICATION OF TEMPORARY CORROSION 

PREVENTIVES 

' Second Repri&i APRIL 1985 ) 



UDC 6? I 798 15 620 197-2 




® Cop\ right 1971 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DCl HI 110002 

Or 6 September 1971 



ISt6M».1971 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

APPLICATION OF TEMPORARY CORROSION 

PREVENTIVES 

Lubricants and Related Products Sectional Committee, CEDC 1 

Qiakman Rtpresniing 

Da M. G. KanHNA Indian Institute of Petroleum ( CSIR )» Dehn Dun 

Mimbirs 

SBaiP.K.GoBL (il/lfmolf to 
DrM.G. Krishna) 
Shbi D. V. Arora Madras Refineries Ltd, Madras 

Snai M. P. Srinivasam ( AlUrnaU ) 
Saai O. M. Banbrjeb Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Snai S. K. MorraA ( AlUrnatt) 
Da A. S. Bkaduri National Test House, Calcutta 

Snai K. M. GaATTBajxB ( Altemau ) 
Sou J, P. Dalal Lubrizol India Ltd« Bombay 

&aa R. A. Rao ( AlUnuU$ ) 
Douunoa or Marinb ENOiNSBaiNO, Naval Headquarters, New Deliu 

Naval HsADquAaTBRs 
Sflai G. C. GoswAM Assam Oil Co Ltd, Digboi 

SHai B. N. Baruab ( AlUnaU ) 
SRaiJ. M. Guha Ministry of Petroleum^ Ghcmioals, Mines ft MeCab 

Sini M. KuaiBM ( Aliirma$ ) 
Snat G. G. Jain Hindustan Steel Ltd* Ranchi 

Snai M. N. L. Sastri ( AtUmaU ) 
Joan DiRicrrOR ( M & C ), RDSO, Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 
GnrTARAirjAN 

DtPUTY DiRBGTOR RbSBARCH 

( CHaM ), RDSO» LucKNOw ( Altemati ) 
Sou ¥• R. Makajan Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Siiai U. San ( AUtrmU ) 
Snai D. N. NAOwaaAa ESSO Standard Eastern Inc, Bombay 

Snai N. G. KAaKAL ( il/tenua# ) 
Snai A. N. Nandy Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

SaaiP.D. Puai Burmah-Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Go of 

India Ltd, Bombay 

Smu F. G. FaaiCANDBZ ( Altemati) 
SHai T. R. RAMAKaiSHNA Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Siiai Ram Dbv Lube India Ltd» Bombay 

Snai F. V. B. FaaNANDss ( AlUrnatt ) 

{CoHtiimkl&Hfaii%) 

INDFAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 



l8t€IM9.1971 

{CiuHmmifimmtaitl) 

RsPIUflMTATlVS 

Shri G. H. Sani 
Shm B. K. Sarxar 

Shki R. Mukhexji {AUiffi^) 
Sma K. SimARAMA Rao 

Snu A. Majumoak {Atknuas) 
Shri G. V. Tkbkar 

Shri V. B. Bhadra ( AlknutU ) 
Shri R. R. Vbrma 

Shri D. P. Gupta ( AlkmaU ) 
Shri D. Dai Gupta, 
Difcctor ( Chcm ) 



National Phyrical Laboratory ( GSIR )» New Ddhi 
Galtex ( India ) Ltd, Bomk>ay 
Indian Oil Blending Ltd, Bombay 

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (Marketing Diviiioa)» 
Bombay 

Tata Engineering & Locomotive Go Ltd, Jamhedpur 

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd ( Refineriet DiviaioD ), 
New Delhi 

Director General, ISI ( S»^gkh Mmktr ) 



Sicrtimy 

Shri V. K. Govil 

AttiBtant Director (Cbem), ISI 



Anticorrotives Subcommittee, CEDC 1 : 8 



CMwnuf 
, K. Sanyal 



Mimbers 
Shri K. M . Chattbrjbr 

GhPHHT & NfSTALXUROltT 

RDSO, LucaLNOW 
Shri P. K. Chreda 
Shri F. G. Fernandbz 



n. 



Shri B. B. Kaua 

Shri A. K. Parikh ( AlUmaU ) 
Shri D. R. Koppixar 
ShriK. Kruhan 
RRpRimrrATivE 
Shri B. K. Sarkar 

Shri M.J. Shah ( AtUmaU ) 
SaumfiG Advhbr to thr Gihev 

or THR Naval Stapp 
Shri K. Sftharama Rao 

Shri A. Majuhdar ( AUtnmU ) 
Shri S. T. Taikar 



Miniitry of Defence (R&D) 



National Tett House, Calcutta 
Railvray Board ( Miniitry of Railwayi ) 

Aihok Industry, Bombay 

Burmah-Shell Oil Storage A Diitributing Go of 

India Ltd, Bombay 
Plattipeel Chemical Corporation, Bombay 

Peelcote Enterprifet, Calcutta 
ESSO SUndard Eastern Inc, Bombay 
National Physical Uboratory (GSIR ), New Ddhi 
Indian Oil Blending Ltd, Bombay 

Naval Headquarters, New Delhi 

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (Marketing DivliiQii)» 
Bombay 

Shetty Chemicals & Engineering Woilai Private Ltd, 
Bombay 



IS s 6049- 1971 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

APPLICATION OF TEMPORARY CORROSION 

PREVENTIVES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 1 February 1971, after the draft finalized by the Lubricants and 
Related Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Chemical Division Council and the Mechanical Engineering Division 
Council. 

0.2 Metal articles are often required to be protected for short criods 
against corrosion during transport and storage. This code deals wiii the 
methods of preserving such articles for periods ranging from 3 months to 
4 years. 

03 For protecting the metal articles against corrosion for short periods, 
temporary corrosion preventives are used. These may be removed from 
the metal surface easily when required ( see 0.4 ). The preliminary steps of 
preservation are cleaning, removal of rust, scale and miscellaneous 
residues, washing and drying. It should be emphasized that the effective- 
ness of a particular temporary corrosion preventive will be reduced or 
even nullified if these steps are skipped. A sequence of these steps 
involved is given below: 

First Step: Degreasing by 

1) grinding, wire brushing, etc 

2) using rust removers 

3) cleaning by using petroleum solvents 

4) alkali cleaning 

5) trichloroethylene cleam'ng 

6) ultrasonic cleaning 

7) emulsion cleaning 

8) liquid blasting 

9) steam cleaning 
10) flame cleaning 



1971 

Se€9ndSup: Demsting and disecUng 

a) by fMchamcd methods, such as 

1) scratch brushing 

2) shot or sand blasting 
3} barrelling 

b) by chemical methods^ such as 

1) acid pickling 

2) electrolytic derusting 

3) tannin derusting 

Third Step: Removal of miscellaneous residues 

Fourth Step: Washing and drying 

a) Washing, using 

1) water 

2) washing soda solution 

b) Removing moisture by 

1) wiping the surface with cloth 

2) blowing air 

3) heating 

4) using dewatering agents 

«) Drying by 

1) heating 

2) centrifuging 

3) using hot solvent 

4) using water displacing fluids 

Fifih Step: Applying corrosion preventives by 

1) dipping 

2) spraying 

3) manual application ( brushing, smearing, etc ) 

4) roller coating 

5) flow coating 

6) flushing 

7) circulating 
8} barrelling 

NoTB -- If at any lUge it it felt that the lubiequent step if not requiitd, the 
tame may be ikipped. 



ISt6049.l971 

0«S«1 In this code, these steps are dealt with in different sections. 

0.4 Temporary corrosion preventives have to be removed from the metal 
surface after they have served their purpose except when the protective is 
compatible with the environment to which the protected components is 
ezpcKted. However, they should not be removed until the components are 
ready for painting or otherwise safeguarded against corrosion. The choice 
of a particular method to be adopted for removing the corrosion preventive 
depends on the thickness and nature of the protective film and the 
equipment and facilities available. 

0*4*1 Any suitable method using petroleum hydrocarbon solvents 
( see 3.3.3 ) may be used for continuous removal of the temporary corrosion 
preventives. Often there is a need for treatment of a single article or a 
few articles at a time; for this immersion in a solvent in a suitable dish 
assisted by brushing may be employed. ' Wiping with fabric soaked in 
solvent may also be useful for local cleaning specially in the case of oily 
and greasy films. 

0.5 It should be ensured that the various treatment chemicals employed in 
preparing the metal surfaces shall not have any deleterious effect on other 
parts of the metal component such as made of plastic, rubber and leather. 



1. SCOPE 

!•! This standard lays down a code of practice for application of temporary 
corrosion preventives to metal articles for prevention of corrosion during 
transport and storage. 

SECTION I DECREASING 

2. NECESSITY 

2.1 Before a corrosion preventive is applied on a metal surface it is 
important that the surface is oil, grease- and moisture-free and is clean; 
otherwise the protective may not adhere to the surface and come off, in 
some cases it may even get emulsified. So a prerequisite for any surface 
to take a protective is that it shall be degreased, derusted and freed from 
dirt. 

2*2 Finished machinery that has been handled with reasonable care may 
not require much cleaning. But the metal stock and partially finished 
work pieces on the other hand require thorough cleaning against the 
commonlv found impurities, such as oil, grease, water, perspiration and 
residues derived from it, dust, chemical deposits from the atmosphere and 

Kxlucts of corrosion that have been formed on the meul surface, 
rticles of solid matter such as swarf or scale may prevent the access and 



I8tC049.1971 

adherence of the protective to the metal. surface thus leaving the con* 
cemed areas susceptible to corrosive attack. Sometimes contaminants 
remaining from manufacturing operations are themselves capable of 
greatly increasing the rate at which corrosion attack may occur. 

3. DECREASING METAL SURFACE 

3.0 There is no single method by which all metal surfaces may be 
prepared for the application of protective coatings. The individual 
methods that shall be used depend upon the type of contamination to be 
removed, nature of the surface to be cleaned and type of impurities. If 
no further treatment of the metal surface is desired^ inmiediat^ly after 
degreasing) the temporary corrosion preventive shall be applied without 
any delay; otherwise rusting may take place. 

3.1 Grinding, Wire-Brasliing, Sand Blaadng and Pickling 

3.2 Using Suitable Rnst Removen 

3.3 Cleaning by Ualng Petroleum Hydrocarbon Solvents 

3*3*0 Petroleum hydrocarbon solvents may be applied in situ on large units 
by brush or metallic components may be dipped in the petroleum solvents 
for degrcasing them. General methods followed for processing are 
described in 3.3.3 to 3*3.5; the choice of appropriate process to be 
selected depends upon the type and degree of contamination and the size of 
metal components to be degreased. Temporary corrosion preventive may 
immediately be applied on the metal surface after cleaning, if derusting is 
not desired. In any case, after cleaning the parts with the petroleiun 
solvents, these require drying in order to remove the residual solvent. 
Drying may be accomplished by using compressed air blasts or by placing 
the articles in appropriate ovens if their size permits. In case of assemblies 
containing fabric, rubber or other non-metallic components where the 
petroleum solvents attack these things, petroleum solvent cleaning shall 
not be adopted. 

3.3.1 General Precautions While Cleaning by Petroleum Solvents — Articles 
shall be placed on hooks or racks or in suitable containers that permit 
adequate draining. After cleaning they shall not be handled with bare 
hands. Oil resisting synthetic-rubber gloves or other protective measures 
shall be used while handling the articles in order to protect them from 
sweat residues and the skin from the effect of these solvents. The place 
where cleaning operation is done shall be airy. Care shall be taken to 
avoid breathing the petroleum vapours. Petroleum solvents shall be used 
at room temperature and suitable fire extinguisher shall be provided to 
meet any eventuality that may arise because of fire hazard of these solvents. 

33 Jt Qjiolitj of Petroleum Solvent Used — The petroleum solvent used shall 
be a neutral petroleum fraction having a mimmum flash point of S5*C 



I8t6M§-lf71 

(JM IS: 1745-1966*). A lower flash point solvent may alio be med 
provided adequate fire precautions are taken. 

3«3«3 Imnufsion CUanbig — This method may be used for unit parts 
or assemblies when the degree of contamination is light and mild cleaning 
is required. The articles shall be immersed in the solvent, taken in a tank 
( cleaning tank } provided with tight-fitting metal coven, long enough to 
allow removal of contaminants. Brushing or scrubbing and agitation aid 
speed the cleaning operation. In case of use of automatic conveyors for 
placing the articles, means shall also be provided to agitate the solvent in 
the tank. Articles with cavities that may hold the solvent shall be so 
immersed that the holes are filled with the solvent. For removing the 
contamination from the holes, the articles shall be removed from the 
solvent tank at such an angle that these holes are emptied. Repeated 
dipping and agitation may be necessary to flush out solid material such as 
swarf. The articles shall then be immersed in a second tank of dean 
solvent (rinsing tank), the solvent being agitated in it, if possible. The 
articles shall be kept dipping in this solvent for at least one minute to 
remove the film of contaminated solvent from the cleaning tank. Care 
shall be taken to carry over as little solvent as possible from the first to the 
second tank. 

The solvent shall be checked periodically for dirt and contaminad<m 
and replaced when contamination causes unsatisfactory cleaning or reaches 
2. percent of the solvent. The dirt content may be determined by 
evaporating a measured volume of the solvent until the oily and solid 
residues remain, and then weighing these residues. Pure solvent from the 
contaminated solution may be reclaimed by distillation. When solvent 
tanks are not in use, they shall be kept tightly covered in order to minimize 
contamination by atmospheric dirt, moisture and loss by evaporation. 

After cleaning excess solvent shall be drained off from the article. 

NoTB — Th^ solvent from the rinsing tank may be transferred to the cleaning tank 
whenever the solvent of the latter becomes too contaminated to be used. The nmbig 
tank shall then be refilled with fresh solvent. 

3J3A Cleaning hy Brushing cr Wiping — This method is intended for local 
application to bare metal areas on assemblies containing painted surfaces or 
non-metallic inserts that may be damaged by a general application of 
solvent. Oil, grease and light dirt contamination may be removed by this 
method. It may also be used for the in situ cleaning of articles too large 
ibr immersion tanks or spray cleaning system. 

Petroleum solvent shall be applied to the contaminated areas with a 
clean brush or a cloth soaked in the solvent; the application of clean 



^Spcdfication for petfpleum hydrocarbon lolvcBts ( jErit iwif mn ) . 

7 



Hit C0I9. 1971 

solvent, with scrubbing or wiping, shall be repeated until all contamina- 
tion has been remov^. Care shall be taken to apply the solvent to the 
contaminated metal areas only. 

S3Ji Sprof Cleaning — This method may be used to remove oil» grease 
and light dirt or swarf contamination from unit parts or very simple 
assemblies, provided that all surfaces may be reached by the sprayed 
solvent and none tends to trap the solvent. 

The parts shall be suspended in or passed through the spraying zone, 
the spraying arrangements and the cleaning time being suitably suijusted to 
obtain thorough cleaning. The pressure used for spraying the solvent shall 
be strong enough and the spray nozzles shall be so placed and directed 
tfiat all surfaces of the article are reached. A solvent recirculating system 
equipped with screen or filters shall also be provided. The equipment shall 
be inspected frequently to see that the spray nozzles are not clogged. The 
screen or filters in the solvent recirculating system shall also be periodically 
cleaned. 

S.4 AlkmU Gleaning 

3.4.0 A mild or strong alkaline solution may be used for cleaning 
depending upon the contaminants. Trisodium phosphate and sodium 
meta silicate solutions containing wetting agents are often used as mild 
alkalis. Strong alkaline solutions include sodium hydroxide. The con- 
centration of alkali solution shall not exceed 6 percent. Special care is tp 
be taken while using alkalis as they attack non-ferrous metals and paints; 
highly polished surface is also damaged by these. Alkali cleaning shall 
not be used for articles containing porous components. Alkali cleaning 
shall also not be used in case the components having some zinc, tin, 
and aluminium parts which are attacked by the alkali. The methods 
followed are described in 3*4.2 to 3.4.4. After cleaning, the components 
shall be thoroughly washed with water to completely remove the alkali. 

3.4.1 Genital Precautions While Alkali Cleaning — Strong alkalis injure the 
eyes and skin. Operators handling the articles during and after cleaning 
shall wear gloves. Goggles and protective clothing shall also be worn 
when alkaline solutions are handled or if there i{ any danger of their 
splashing. 

• 

3.4.2 Immersion Cleaning — The articles to be cleaned shall be immersed 
singly or in batches on racks or trays in a steam heated tank containing the 
alkaline solution. The temperature of the solution shall be maintain^ at 
80 to 95^0 and the articles immersed for one to ten minutes. Cleaning 
may be assisted by agitation of the solution or of the articte. After alkali 
cleaning the components shall be thoroughly washed in running water to « 
remove the alkali completely. 

8 



IS: 6049 -1971 

3 A3 Stray Cleaning — Jets of alkali solution may be directed on the 
surface of metal to be cleaned. 

3.4.4 Electrocleaning — Alkaline solutions arc u«^ed in elertroclcaning 
which is suitable for cleaning of small parts made of ferrous metals or known 
metals unharmed by alkalis. The cleaning tank contains alkaline solution 
as the electrolyte, and the articles to be cleaned form one of the electrodes. 
It is advised that the article should be made anode. An electi ir current 
of 0025 to 0050 A/cm2 of the area of the metal to be clrancd at 4 to 8 
volts shall be passed through the solution, causing electrolysis accompanied 
by evolution of gas on the electrode surface. This has the effect of 
producing a powerful scrubbing action assisting removal of the 
contaminants. 

3.5 TricUoroethylene Cleaning 

3.5.0 Trichloroethylene cleaning may be used to remove oil and grease 
from the surface of metal. The various methods that may be used in case 
of trichloroethylene cleaning are described in 3.5.1 to 3.5.3. The choice of 
a method depends upon the size of the component to be cleaned and degree 
of contamination. 

3*5*1 Vapour Cleaning — The principle involved in trichloroethylene vapour 
cleaning is vaporising trichloroethylene by heat and condensing the i^apours 
on components desired to bcdcgrcascd, so that, condensed trtchlorocthyleTtc 
dissolves oils and greases on the component and pass on to the main bulk of 
the solvent in the bath. The method is efficient since pure trichloroethylene 
vapours uncontaminated with oil and grease always come in contact »vith 
the components. 

The apparatus used shall consist essentially of a bath containing 
trichloroethylene at the bottom. The bath shall be fitted with electric 
heater to volatilize the solvent The upper part of the bath shall be cooled 
by a jacket of water with inlet and exit for it. The temperature of 
the upper part of the bath shall be maintained as near the room tempera- 
ture as possible, by passing tap water through the jacket. Hooks shall be 
provided to cover the bath so that components in singles or wuc ba^ikcts 
containing a number of components may be hung from thebe. 

The components shall be hung from the hooks provided on the under- 
side of the cover plate. The apparatus shall be run, so that there is 
copious condensation of tlie solvent on the components. After about 15 
to 30 minutes, the components may be taken out and degreasing may be 
ensured by water break test ( see 3,11 ). 

3.5,2 Spray Cleaning — Jets of boiling trichloroethylene may be directed 
on the surface of metal to be cleaned. 



IS 1 6049* 1971 

3»5Ji Immersion Cleaning -^ Soiled components may be immersed in 
trichloroethylene contained in tanks and loose deposits of dirt, oil, grease 
and residues of polishing components left on the metal surface removed. 

3.6 Ultrasonic Cleaning — This is a modern method in which super* 
sonic waves arc hammered on metal surface to free it from deposited 
contaminations. Ultrasonic vibrations assist grease removed by solvents or 
aqueous solution containing alkalis or organic detergents. 

3.7 Emulsion Cleaning 

3.7.0 The principle involved is loosening the grease or oil on metal 
surface by a concentrated cmulsifier/solvent mixture which, during washing, 
readily forms an emulsion. With more water, the emulsion so formed is 
washed down mechanically, carrying away the loosened oil or grease. 
Inferior kerosine ( see IS : 1459-1968*) and white spirit ( see IS : 1745-1966t ) 
emulsion in water containing some emulsifier or some other suitable 
emulsion may be used. The method is suitable for moderate cleaning 
work specially where trichloroethylene or alkali cleaning is not suitable and 
where in situ cleaning is required. The methods that may be followed are 
described in 3.7.1 to 3.7.3. 

3.7.1 Immersion Cleaning — The component shall be immersed in the 
emulsion for a period extending up to 10 minutes with brushing it, if 
necessary. The component, after withdrawing from the bath, shall be 
hung over it to allow the excess emulsion to drain out into the bath. It 
shall then be washed with a jet of water or steam till no more milky 
emulsion is produced on the surface of the component. 

3.7.2 Spray Cleaning — A jet of weak emulsion at a suitable temperature 
above the room temperature shall be directed on the component to reach 
the surfaces to be cleaned. The component shall then be washed in spray 
of cold water. It may also be dipped in hot water before drying. 

3.7.3 In Situ Cleaning — Large components, handling of which is 
difficult, may be cleaned by brushing the emulsion on the component in 
situ. After the liquid is in contact with the. component surface for 
sufficient time, it shall be washed away with a jet of water or steam. 

3.8 Degreasing by Liquid Blasting — This process consists of blasting 
the component to be degreased with a liquid, usually water. Liquid 
blasting is preferred to sand blasting as it avoids the possibility of causing 
silicosis to the operators when using sand for this purpose. 



^Specification for kerosines (Jirtt revision ). 

tSpccification for petroleum hydrocarbon solvents (first reMon). 

10 



18:6049-1971 

3.9 Steam Caeaaing 

3.10 Flame Cleaalng — This method is recommended ( where others arc 
not considered suitable ) for metallic plates and sections of more than 6 mm 
in thickness. Non-uniform heating of the surface during flame cleaning 
should be avoided as far as practicable to ensure freedom from buckling. 

3.11 Teat for Ensariag Proper Degreasing^— In case of small articles 
which may be dipped in ^v,Uf■I^ the surface of the metal component shall 
be taken to be degreased if on immersion in water and subsequent with- 
drawal of the component, the surface is completely wetted without any 
water breaks. 

SECTION II DERUSTING AND DESCALING 

4. NECESSITY 

4.1 It is often found that a metal surface is not only oily, greasy and moist 
but also rusty. As pointed out earlier, full advantage of corrosion 
preventives is not obtained if they are not in intimate contact widi the 
metal surface. In a number of cases scales on metal surface are formed 
during the course of various treatments in the manufacture of the compo* 
nent, such as hot rollings heat treatment and welding. It is important to 
remove rust and scale and swarf from the metal surface. 

4.1 SI A rusted article, when required to be preserved with a oorroiion 
preventive, shall first be degreased as detailed in Section I and then 
denisted. 

5. DERUSTING AND DESCALING METAL SURFACE 

5.0 Processes that are used for derusting a metal surface may be divided 
into two main heads mechanical processes and the chemical processes. The 
size, shape, type of finish of the component as well as the process that was 
used for its^construction, the tenacity and thickness of the rust coating 
determine the individual method that may be adopted for derusting. 

5.1 Mechanieal Piroeeaaea* 

5.1.1 Scratch Brushing — may be used for removing non-adherent 
rust and scale using wire or other suitable brushes ( sec IS : 3015«1964t and 
IS:4301.1%7J). 

5.1.2 Shot or Sand Blasting — may be used for all surfaces except the 
machine finished. 



^For more details, at IS; 6005 -1970 Gode of practice for phosphating of iron 
and steel. 

t%)ecification for brush, scrobbing. 
tSpeeificatioo for brushes, feuadry, flat. 

11 



ISt6049.1971 

CAUTION — Blasting with silica sand is extremely dangerous to 
health because on impact with surface, the sand is partially pulverized 
causing a mist of finely divided silica which may be breathed not only 
by the operator but by others also in the vicinity. Wet sand blasting, 
in which the sand is carried on a jet of water, has a similar though less 
marked effect. Therefore, if the operator has to work within the blast 
cleaning enclosure, he shall be provided with suitable protective 
clothing including a hood with an external air supply. The blasting 
enclosure should have an exhaust ventilation system equipped for dust 
extraction and the blazing nozzle should be fitted with a dead man 
trigger or remote control. Particular care should be given to the 
cleaning of floor, walls, fixtures and fittings within the chamber to 
avoid dangeroas accumulation of aluminium and zinc dust which may 
be flammable if raised in dense clouds. Strong lighting should also be 
provided as the dust obscures the work specially when expandable 
abrasives are used. 

5.1.3 Barrelling Using Suitable Abrasives 

5 J( Cihemical Process 

5«2.0 The chemical methods which may result in hydrogen embrittle* 
ment shall not be employed in case of high tensile strength steel. 

S.2.1 Acid Pickling Process 

5.2.1.0 The strength of the acid used in acid pickling processes 
depends upon the extent of rusting or scaling to be removed. The articles 
of complicated shapes or having crevices and blind holes shall not be acid 
pickled. Riveted or Sjpot welded articles shall not be acid pickled. CSast 
iron components shall also not be acid pickled due to the possibility of 
occlusion of the acid. After acid pickling, the component or their con- 
cerning parts shall be washed with water followed by a solution of 1 to 5 
percent washing soda. 

5.2.1.1 Phosphoric acid pickling — Phosphoric acid pickling not only 
removes rust and scale from the surface of metal but also forms on the 
metal surface a line coating of iron phosphate which acts as a preservative. 
Thus, though this method is costlier among the various acid pickling 
processes, yet it is preferred. * 

At least 60 percent solution of phosphoric acid (j^^IS: 798-1968*) 
in water with or without butanol ( i^^ IS : 361-1962t ) and denatured spirit 
(ie# 18:324-1959$) shall be used. This acid solution shall also contain 
suitable wetting agent and corrosion inhibitor. The chlorides ( as NaCl ) 



^Spedficatton for ortho phosphoric ackl (first revision ). 
tSpecification for normal butyl alcohol, technical ( revised), 
tSpecification for ordinary denatured spirit ( revised), 

12 



ISt60i9.1971 

and sulphates ( as NajSOi ) in it shall not exceed by 0*1 and 0*2 percent 
and arsenic ( as Asj^O, } and antimony ( as Sb^Os ) each by 8 parts per 
million respectively. A degreased and clean black plate ( see IS : 597- 
1962*) when immersed for a period of 6 hours in a 1 : 1 solution of 
pickling acid solution and water at a temperature of 40 ± 1**C shall not 
show a loss of metal by more than 1 g/dm^ of the area of the black plate. 

The article shall be pickled in the I : 1 pickling acid taken in a 
suitable tank kept at a temperature of 60°C depending upon the degree of 
rusting and scaling of the article. Occasional brushing with steel wool 
may also be done for quick removal of the contamination. After derust« 
ing, the article shall immediately be washed first with cold and then with 
hot water before drying. 

Nore — Light rust may also be removed by brushing the acid solution on the article 
followed by washing. 

5.2.1 .2 Sulphuric acid pickling — In lead tanks 5 to 20 percent sulphuric 
acid solution containing suitable inhibitors! shall be taken. The acid 
solution shall be maintained at a temperature of 60 to 85^C and the 
article shall be immersed in it. Occasional agitation of the solution and 
scratch brushing of the article may be resorted to speed up derusting. 

CAUTION — For preparing the acid solution, always add add to 
the cold water and never the water to the acid. 

5.2.1 .3 Hydrochloric acid pickling — Hydrochloric acid soludon 1 to 50 
percent contaming suitable inhibitor^ taken in acid resistant tanks made of 
glass, glazed earthenware or rubber lined tanks at room temperature may 
also be used for removing rust and scales from the metal. 

5.2.1.4 Sulphuric — phosphoric acid pickling — The article shall be first 
dipped in a tank containmg 5 to 10 percent {vfv) suitably inhibited 
sulphuric aeid solution {see Note) kept at a temperature of 60 to 65^C. 
After draining off the acid, the article shall be dipped in a warm water 
tank maintained at 60 to 65^C wherein a water flow is maintained in order 
that the concentration of the acid does not exceed 0*1 percent. The 
component shall now be pickled for 3 to 5 minutes in another tank con- 
taimng 2 percent phosphoric acid soludon ( see Note ) maintained at a 
temperature of about 85^C. In order to avoid derusting of the metal, the 
metal component shall be taken out, dried quickly and the temporary 
corrosion preventive applied over the metal suiface after this treatment. 



^Specification for black plate for tinning and tinplate ( pack rolled ) ( miisirf). 
tOne percent of Rodine 82 calculated on the weight of the acid may be added to it as 
inhibitor. 

tOne percent Rodine 213 has been found useful as an inhibitor. 

13 



I8t6049-1971 

Nan*- The addi b the unkf ihall be wholly or partially changed when the 
denifting rate reduces remarkably or the iron content riies beyond the following 
limits: 

a) For sulphuric acid 80 g/1 

b) For hydrochloric acid 120 g/1 

c) For sulphuric acid — phosphoric acid First bath — 70 g/1 

Second bath — 5 g/1 

5JIJ2 Electrolytic Dcrusting 

5.2.2.1 Cathodic cleaning — The component shall be made the cathode 
with an auxiliary anode usmg an acid or alkali as the electrolytic solution 
and a suitable current shall be passed. Quick removal of rust and scale 
may be achieved by this process. There is less danger of hydrogen 
embrittlement {su 5.2.0) in case of use of alkali electrolyte than in case 
of use of acid electrolyte though the former method is slower than the latter. 

5.2.2.2 Anodic cleaning — In this case there is no danger of hydrogen 
embrittlement. For electrolytes both acid as well as alkali may be used. 

5.2.3 Tannin Derusting — After degreasing and mechanical derusting to 
remove the loose rust, derusting may be effected by applying with a hand 
brush, an aqueous solution containing KHARDE or mangrove extract, 
myrobalan extract, formalin, a suitable wetting agents molasses or glycerine 
and phosphoric acid. After the coating is dry, it shall be worked with a 
brush to remove the friable black iron tannate. Depending upon the 
thickness of the rust, this operation may be repeated till the surface is 
completely derusted. 

SECTION ill REMOVAL OF MISCELLANEOUS RESIDUES 

6. REMOVAL OF MISCELLANEOUS RESIDUES 

6.0 This section deals with the removal of miscellaneous residues like heat 
treatment salts, fluxes and sweat residues. 

6.1 Removal oCHeat Treatment Ssdta 

6.1.0 Heat treatment salts may contain water soluble cyanides, 
carbonates, chlorides or fluorides of sodium or potas^um with or without 
less readily soluble barium chloride. 

6.1.1 The heat treatment salts shall be removed by washing in clean hot 
water for 5 minutes for articles of simple shape and up to 1 hour for articles 
having crevices or that are coated with salts containing barium chloride. 
Afler removing the soluble salts, the article shall be rinsed in a second tank 
in order to remove the adherent residue. 

6.1.2 If the heat treatment salts contain barium, the articles shall be 
soaked in hot water, transferred for a few minutes while in hot condition to 

14 



I8t6049.I971 

a bath containing the cold solution made from the water, 10 to 30 percent 
hydrochloric acid and an inhibitor, swilled in cold running water and 
finally rinse in clean hot water. Thb treatment shall, however, not to be 
used for the heat treatment salts comprising of cyanides. 

6.1.3 After cleaning, the articles shall be dried (sa 9} and the 
temporary corrosion preventive shall be applied immediately, 

6.2, Removal of Fluxea 

6.2.0 The fluxes used in soldering, brazing or welding invariably contain 
hygroscopic chlorides or fluorides or both. ^ These are required to be 
removed in order to prevent the metal corrosion. 

6J2.1 Fluxes may be removed by washing the articles in water 
thoroughly. If necessary a little amount of dilute sulphuric acid may also 
be added to the rinsing water. Scrubbing with brush may be used to 
remove incrustations. 

6.2«2 The fluxes from articles which have been brazed with a borate flux 
may be removed by first cleaning the article in dilute sulphuric acid and 
then washing and scrubbing in water. 

6.2.3 Fluxes of organic nature shall be removed by the methods 
prescribed under degreasing ( see Section I }. 

63 Removal of Sweat Residnea 

6.3.1 Sweat residues shall be removed by alkali cleaning processes 
{s€i3A). 

6.3.2 In certain cases suitable oil-in-water emulsions may also b^ used. 

6.33 Methanol containing 5 percent water is also found suitable for the 
removal of sweat residues. 

^SECTION IV WASHING AND DRYING 

7. WASHING 

7.0 After degreasing ( except solvent degreasing ) or derusting ( except 
phosphoric acid, suipnuric acid derusting) or after applying both the 
treatments, it is important that the metal shall be washed in order to 
completely remove the contaminations. Washing may be accomplished by 
using the following substances. 

7.1 Water — A jet of hot or cold water depending upon the need shall be 
directed on the component. Washing may be facilitated by the use of 
suitable brushes ( see IS : 270M964« ). 

^Spcdficatioa for brush, carriage washing ( without handle ). 

15 



I8t6IM9-1971 

7.2 Washing Soda Solutioa — In case of acid pickling, after washing 
with water, the articles shall also be washed with 1 to 5 percent washing 
soda solution in order to neutralize the acid that may be adhering to metal. 
After removal from the washing soda solution, metal parts should be 
thoroughly swirled in hot water and dried. 

8. REMOVAL OF MOISTURE 

8.1 Wiping the Surface with Qean and Dry Cloth 

8.2 Blowing Clean, Dry and Oil-Free Air Over the Metal Sorface 

8.3 Heating the Metal Component in Drying Ovens 

8.4 Using Dewatering Agents lo Displace Water 

9. DRYING 

9.0 After washing the metal component, it shall be immediately dried and 
corrosion preventives applied on it; otherwise rusting may occur. For 
drying the following metnods may be used. 

9.1 Drying by Heating 

9.1.1 Hot Air-Oven — Heating in an air-oven at a temperature of 120 
to 170^0 is most suitable to articles washed by water after cleaning. 
Lower temperature may be used in drying components having low 
melting point non-metallic parts, or in cases when heat effects the proper- 
ties of the material. The air may be circulated by using suitable fans and 
the used air which is moist shall be discarded. . 

9.1.2 Infrd'Tid Radiation — may be effected by conveying the articles 
through a tunnel fitted with infra-red element. Very large articles may be 
dried Dy a build-up of element around them. 

9.13 Warm Air Blast — may be accomplished by means of a fan 
forcing clean, dry air across a heating zone. 

9.1.4 Hot Water — Washing the article may be accomplished by hot 
water itself in which case drying is easier. Drying may be accomplished 
by using air blasts. 

9.2 Drying by Centrifiiging — It may be used in case of small articles. 

93 Drying with Hot Solvent — Water may be quickly removed from 
any free surface by immersing the article in a boiling chlorinated solvent 
containing a suiuble additive. This may later be dipped for a minute or 
less in boiling solvent and when taken out the solvent is allowed to 
evaporate from its surface. 

9.4 Using Water Displaeing Flvids — In case of removing water by 
dipping ue article in a tank containing the water displacing fluids, water 

16 



dtf|da€iiig fluid ihould be discarded when the water ditplaoemeiit 
propertiei of the metal have lignificantly deteriorated. 

Nom — In case the metal part ii to be protected from corrotion by oting hot dippinf 
tfpe temporary corroiion preventivet, the Utter should be applied alter the solvent 
from the surface of the metal has completdy evaporated. 

9«5 Bkiwlng with Comprcaaed Air — The compressed air used shall be 
clean and dry and used at suitable pressure. Moisture traps and air 
filten should be provided in the air delivery system and shall be rq^arly 
inspected and cleaned. 

9,6 Drying by Wiping — This method may be used when the other 
methods are not fotmd suitable. The cloth or waste that is used for 
wiping shall be clean and dry and shall not leave lint on the dried surface. 
The process may be completed in two operations, the first being drying the 
metal to a reasonable extent and the second completing the operation. 

SECTION V APPLICATION OF TEMPORARY CORROSION 

PREVENTIVES 

19. PREVENTION OF ATMOSPHERIC CORROSION 

1S«1 Under ordinary atmospheric conditions, corrosion occurs if both 
moisture and air have access to the metal surface specially when the sur&ce 
is clam. The various methods of prevention of metal corrosion are» 
Ih^refiire, designed to cbtck the reaction of moist air with metaL The best 
means is to cover the metal surface by impervious coating. Chances of 
corrosion may also be minimized during transport and storage, if due 
care is given to cleanliness and control of environment of stores for low 
humidity and exclusion of volatile contaminants. For complete prevention 
of corrosioni temporary corrosion preventives are used which protect the 
V metal for a period ( ist 0i2 ) as long as necessary and when they have served 
the purpose, they are resdily removed without causing any damage to the 

3uipment jq|i which they were used. Application of impervious coating 
tbcse temporary corrosion preventives is by far the most flexible aim 
widdy used method of protection against corrosion. 

10,2 The various temporary corrosion preventives that are used on metal 
surface are classified accoiding to the type of film that they produce on 
metal surfibce, namely, hard, soft and oily and their method of application. 

103 Users should choose the correct preservative, depending upon the 
article to be preserved, the period for which preservation is reqmred, the 
environment of the stores where the preserved components would be 
exposed and the supplementary packaging available for use. Given bdow 
b a Hst of commonly avaiUble temporary corrosion protectives. Hie 
p sie v c n t lvc selected should be such that it shall not have any ddeterions 

17 



I8t«IH9.1971 

effect on the parts of the component that are made from materials like 
plastic^ rubber and leather: 

a) Strippable, hot dip coating type ( sa IS : 6050-1971* ); 

b) Soft film, smearing type ( si$ IS : 958-1 958t ); 

c) Soft film, hot-dipping type ( sa IS : 6048-1970^ ); 

d) VCI powder ( sa IS : 5730-1970§ ) ; 

e) VCI treated papers {sal&x 6263-. 1972 1) ; 

f) Soft film, solvent deposited type Isie IS : 1674-1960f and 
IS:1154.1957«*); 

g) Hard film, solvent deposited ( sti IS : 1 153-1957tt ) ; and 
h) Oil type. 

10.3.1 In case of ball bearing, battery terminals, bearing inserts, 
bicycle chains, brake cables, milhng cutters, dies, dip heads, gauges, oil 
seals, piston assembUes^ road springs, roller bearings, adjustable spanners; 
spring leaves, taps, etc, soft film hot dipping temporary corrosion 
preventives may be found suitable specially for long term protection. 

10*3.2 Gun bores, electrical machines, machine flange faces, gean, 
bearings, hinges, joumab of electrical machines, pulleys, screws ( throuled 
parts ), diread end of painted tubes, etc, may be preserved with soft film, 
smearing type temporary corrosion preventives. 

10J.3 Hard film, solvent deposited type of temporary corrosion preven* 
tives may be used in case of conjugation with mild steel bars, nuts and 
bolts, circular saws, crank shafts, cylinder liners, large size gears, gudgeon 
pins, hand tools, lay shafts, lathe beds, ploughs, plug rings, mild steel rods, 
U^ht steel sections, shackle pins, spiral sprmgs, waohefni, spades, shoivels, 
pick axes, etc. 

10.3.4 Soft film, solvent deposited type of temporary corrosion preven- 
tives may serve the purpose in case of differential units, engine cylinders, 
ferrous and light alloy sneets, suxgical instruments, etc. 

10«3,5 Precision instruments, such as microscopes, binoculars, gauges, 
and small arms, may be preserved by volatile 'corrosion inhibiton. 



^pecificati<m for tempormiy oorronoQ preventivei ttrippftble hM-dipping type. 
tSpedficstipn for temporary corroiioii preventive, greaie, soft film, cold sf^pUcstioa. 
tSpedficatioa for temporary corrosion preventive loft film^ hol-dti^Mnf type. 
Ppecification Ibr volatile corrodon lahfintor poivder. 
gSpeeification for volatile corroiion Inhibitor treated paper. 
^Ppeeifieatioa for tenq>orary cocroiion preventive, fluid, soft film, lolvipt dcpoaML 
ition for temporary oorrodon preventive^ fluid, loft filai, solvent 



tf Specification for temporary corroMD preventivef fliiici, haid film, solveai dspesiiedt 

18 



ISf6049.1971 

10*3.6 Small precision components, gauges, etc, which are not in 
frequent use may be protected by strippable hot-dipping type of 
preservative. 

10.3.7 Mineral oils containing suitable corrosion inhibitors may be used 
as a protective for metal surfaces such as ICE cylinders and other compo* 
nents for short periods. 

10.4 As pointed out earlier ( see 0.3 ) before the corrosion preventives are 
applied, the surface on which they are to be applied shall be prepared by 
degreasing, derusting, washing and drying. These corrosion preventives 
shall be applied immediately after the surface is prepared as the freshly 
cleaned metal surfaces are extremely vulnerable to corrosion attack, 

11. METHODS OF APPUCATION 

11*0 Choice of a particular method that may be adopted for applying the 
temporary corrosion preventives to the metal surface is governed by the 
nature of the protective, the size and shape of the article, the equipment 
and facilities available and whether the application is to the internal parts 
or external parts of the component. 

11.1 Thickness of Film — The effectiveness of a corrosion preventive 
varies with its constitution and also with the thickness of the film. A reason* 
ably thick film of the protective shaU be applied over the metaL If a 
single application is not enough, the required thickness may be built up by 
repeated application. Before a repeat application, sufficient time shall be 
alu>wed for the first fihn to dry. Care shall be taken to ensuie Chat 
existing films are not disturbed when subsequent films are applied. In case 
of dipping, reimmersion shall be very quick. With spraymg, a limited 
quantity^ shall be applied^ specially on vertical surfaces. Manual 
application shall not be too vigorous. 

1X2 (Senoval Precautions — Most of temporary corrosion preventives 
are flammable and precautions against fire shall be taken. As die volatile 
solvents may be toxic, the process of the application of ttiese shall be 
carried out in well-ventilated place. 

11,3 Dipping 

11.3,0 Dipping is the Quickest of all the methods and produces an even 
and continuous thin film. It may be unsuitable with non*metallic 
components or for units that are too large or of too much irregular diape. 
Aj the protectives may be required to be removed after sometime, the 
holes, cavities and crevices in the component mav be sealed or plugged 
after covering their inside surface with oily or soft corrosion pitventives 
^t may not require to be removed. 

19 



Ph>tective oils and fluids may be applied by dipping at room 
temperature. In some cases, where the protectives are required to be 
melted ( for example in the case of soft film, hot^dipping type or strippable 
hot-dipping type ). They shall be kept at a temperature 10 to 20''C higher 
than their melting point and components dipped in them. However^ 
heating shall not be violent. 

1U.1 Thi Dipping Tank 

11.3«1,1 Dipping tanks enclosed by a jacket and heated with steam or 
oil if required shall be used. These shall be fitted with a cover to prevent 
die ingress of foreign matter and to restrict the evaporation of the solvent 
when not in use. While using, only appropriate opening of the door 
provided for this purpose shall be made. The tanks shall be fitted with 
drain cocks to facilitate draining of the protective fluid, the bottom of tank 
being sloped towards the drain cocks. In case of use of water displacing 
type of tem[X>rary corrosion protectives, another drain cock shall also be 
provided which shall be operated to drain ofl* the displaced water. A screen 
shall be fitted in the tank near its bottom to prevent rcfdispersal of 
substances sent to the drain when the fluid in the tank is agitated. 

11,S.1«2 To compensate for the evaporation of the fluid which may 
occur during use, an appropriate solvent may be added in the fluid if 
recommended by the manufacturers. 

llJ3Jt Th$ Dipping Operaiion 

11,3«2.1 The articles to be coated shall be completely submerged in 
the protective and turned to allow entrapped air to escape. The fluid shall 
abo be agitated from time to time. Duration of immersion shall be 
sufficient to allow complete wetting of the surface. Time of immersion may 
be prolonged to ensure complete displacement of water in case of fluid 
havmg dewatering fluids used for treating wet metal surfaces and attain- 
ment of tank temperature by the metal. 

11«3.2.2 After removal of the articles from the dipping tank, these shall 
be allowed to drain and surplus protective shall be removed fromf these 
which may be used again. The articles in some cases may require 
drying before they sure stacked. 

11.4 SpmyisiK — Suitable for treatment of bulky articles that may not be 
easily dipped. Any syrings or positive-displacement sprayer, or an air- 
operated sprayer using clean and dry air may be used. Care snail be taken to 
ensure that the coatiiu; is even and sufficient and an adequate amount has 
been applied; when the protective just begins to flow, spnyin^ may be 
stopped A coarse noszle shall be used for the coating to be applied within 
a reasonable time, so that premature evaporation of the solvent and conse* 
quent uneven or discontinuous distribution of the fihn does not occur. 

20 



ISt6049.1971 

11.5 Mmnoml AppUcadon — When dipping is impracticable and equip- 
ment for spraying not available, protective substances may be applied with 
a brush. Smearing may also be done in case of greasy type protectives. 
The progress may be slow and uneconomical where a large number of 
articles have to be treated. The use of a soft quality brush is recommended 
{see 18:384-1964* and IS : 487-1966t ) as coarse fibres tend to leave 
channels in the film. When large areas have to be covered, a swab may 
be used instead of a brush while using thinner protectives. Care shall be 
taken to ensure that sufficient protective is applied and that the protective 
film is even and continuous even at the sharp edges where a brusn tends to 
displace a protective already deposited. 

11 .6 Rolkr Coating — Applicable to metallic sheets. The temporary 
protective is applied to the metal as it passes between the two soft rollers* 
The protective is fed on to the top roller by means of drip taps^ the 
bottom roller rides in a trough containing liquid protectives. 

11.7 Flow Coating — The protective in the liquid form is poured on the 
article which is rocked or tilted to ensure complejte coverage. 

11«8 Fliishing — For tanks and other containers with relatively small 
orifices, oil type protectives may be applied by flushing. 

11.9 Gircnlation — Particularly useful for preserving hydraulic systems 
using oil type protectives. Application may be effected by gravity flow or 
pumping throughout an enclosed system. 

11.10 Barrelling — Applicable in the case of solvent deposited corrosion 
preventives may be aflTected in the following ways. 

11.10.1 Predetermined quantities of corrosion preventives shall be 
charged in a suitable barrel containing the articles to be preserved and the 
barrel sealed and rotated for 5 to 10 minutes. The evolved solvent 
vapours may be extracted and the articles discharged. 

11.10.2 Articles shall be placed in perforated barrel or open mesh 
basket so tluit } to f of its volume is occupied by the article and dipped 
into the corrosion preventive for 5 to 30 seconds and rotated. Afterwtfds 
the barrel is withdrawn and rotated again over the surface of the corrosion 
preventive for sometime and the article is withdrawn. 

11.11 Use of VCI Powders — These inhibitors may be applied over the 
metal surface as such ( in their powdery form } or in solution form. In 
certain cases the metallic components are kept in a closed box which 
contains the vapours of the material. 



^Specification for bnuhei, paints and varaiihes, flat ( iMmidf nrisian ). 
tSpedfication for bniihes, paint and varaishes, (i) oval, ferrule bound* and (V) fomwV 
copper wire bound ( f#oiiitf ). 

21 



18:6049*1971 

12. CaiOICE OF WRAPPING 

12*1 The preservation of a metallic surface depends on the protection 
afforded to it after the corrosion inhibitor has been applied. The articles 
shall not be touched till the corrosion preventive has set^ also some 
protection shall be provided so that the film of the corrosion preventives 
does not come off by rubbing with other objects while storing or transport- 
ing them. Thus the use of a primary wrap is a dire necessity specially for 
soft film protectives. This wrap may be used to carry a supply of 
inhibitive material in addidon to serving as a vapour barrier material 
against excessive rate of loss of volatile corrosion inhibitor as well as a 
water resisting barrier. In view of the close proximity to the metallic 
surface, the wraps shall not only be oil, grease- and moisture-resistant 
but also be such that they do not contain harmful amounts of corrosive 
materials »uch.as chlorides and sulphates. 

12.2 For economic reasons, the choice of wrapping or packaging the 
preserved component is governed by the protective used. Thus a less 
efficient protective available at a cheaper rate supplemented with good 
packaging may prove more beneficial than an efficient and costly protective 
used on a component and the component is not given adequate packaging. 
Among different materials for packaging, one may choose kraflt paper 
(jsif IS: 1397-1967*), plain and waxed paper, greased paper, waterproof 
paper {seg IS: 1398-I968t), some special type of paper such as, volatile 
corrosion inhibitor treated paper (see IS : 6263-1972 t)> cartons with 
lim'ng of polythene sheet or wax paper, polythene sheets, etc, with or 
without drying agent such as silica gel and alumina. Cartons used may 
also be dipped m wax compositions for effective barrier against water 
vapour and moisture. 



^Specificadon for kraft paper (fast nvisitm ). 

fSpedficatioii for packing paper, vraterproof, bitumen-lamliiated (first feolskn )• 

ISpcclfication for volatile corroiton inhibitor treated pi^wr. 

22 



ygri INDIA'N STANDARDS INSTITUTION 



H0a(fqvart»rsi 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahddur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELH1 110002 

T«lephone8 : 26 60 21, 27 01 31 Teiegrams : ManaKsanstha 

( Common to all ofRcea ) 

Regional Officer: Telephont 

^Western t Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andhari ( East ), 6 32 92 95 
BOMBAY 400093 

tEastern 1 1 /14 C i. T. Scheme Vlt M, V. I. P. Road, 36 24 99 

Manlktola. CALCUTTA 700054 

Southern i C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 41 24 42 

Northern t B69 Phase VII, Industrial Focal Point, 8 73 26 

S. A. S. NAGAR 160051 ( Punjab ) 

Branch Offlcaa : 

'Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, (2 63 48 

AHMADABAD 380001 (2 63 49 

'P Block, Unity Bidg, Naraslmharaja Square, 22 48 08 

BANGALORE 560002 

Gangotrl Conyylex, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 6 27 16 

BHOPAL 462003 

22E Kalpana Area. BHUBANESHWAR 751014 5 36 27 

8-8-56C L N. Gupta Marg, HYDERABAD 500001 22 1 83 

R14 Yudhlster Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 6 98 32 

1 17A418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 4 72 92 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 6 23 05 

Hantex - BIdg ( 2nd Floor ), RIy Station Road, 32 27 

TRIVANDRUM 695001 

Inspection Offlea ( With Sale Point ) i 

institution of Engineers ( India ) Building. 1332 ShlvaJI Nagar, 5 24 35 
PUNE 411005 



•Saraa OfRc* in Bombay i« «t Nowlty diamlmrt. OrsAt Road. M 9S SI 
Bombay 400007 

fSalea Ofllea In Calcutta la at 9 Chowrlnohaa Approach, P. 0* Prineap >7 08 00 
Btraot. Calcutta 700079 



Printad at Oftset Printing Centre. New Oaihl, India 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 APRIL 1976 

TO 

15:6049-1971 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
APPLICATION OF TEMPORARY CORROSION 
PREVENTIVES 

Alterations 

(Page 3j elauBs 0.3) - Delete SI Ho. 
I9 2, 8 and 10 and re-number the remaining 
serial numbers accordingly* 

(Page 8, alaueea 3.1 and 3.2) « 
Delete and re«»number the remaining clauses 
accordingly* 

(Pages 10 and 11^ atauees 3.8 and 
3.10) • Delete and re«number clauses *3*9 
and 3*11* as •3.8 and 3*9'# 



(CEDC 1) 



Printed at Offset Printing Centre. New Del 



AMENDMENT NO* 1 APRIL 1976 

TO 

15:6049-1971 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
APPLICATION OF TEMPORARY CORROSION 
PREVENTIVES 

Alterations 

(Page 3^ alauBe 0^3) • Delete SI No. 
1» 2, 8 and 10 and re«-number the remaining 
serial numbers accordingly* 

(Page 6, clausea 3.1 and 3.2) - 
Delete and re«-nuaber the remaining clauses 
accordingly. 

(Pagea 10 and 11 ^ alauaes 3.8 and 
3.10) « Delete and re->number clauses *3*9 
and 3.11* as •3.8 and 3.9*. 



(CEDC 1) 



Printed at Offset Printing Centre, New Delhi« 



