IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080( 1991 )

W?mmm

Id \ Iaa@l-aa

Indian Standard GUIDE TO THE MEASUREMENT OF EQUIVALENT ELECTRICAL PARAMETERS OF QUARTZ CRYSTAL UNITS

Ics

31.140

@ BIS 2004

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
9 NEW

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002

BHAVAN,

December

2004

Price Group 14

Piezoelectric Quartz Committee, LTD 12

and

Ceramic

Devices

for

Frequency

Control

and

Selection

Sectional

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with IEC 61080 ( 1991 ) `Guide to the measurement of equivalent electrical parameters of quartz crystal units' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Piezoelectric Quartz and Ceramic Devices for Frequency Control and Selection Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunications Division Council. The text of the IEC Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be

b)

Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker.

the current practice

CROSS REFERENCE In this adopted standard, reference appears to the following International Stahdard for which Indian Standard also exists. The corresponding Indian Standard which is to be substituted in its place is given below along with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated:

International Standard
IEC 302 ( 1969 ) Standard definitions and methods of measurement for piezoelectric vibrators operating over the frequency range up to 30 MHz

Corresponding Indian Standard
IS 7962 : 1975 Methods of measurement for piezoelectric vibrations operating over the frequency range up to 30 MHz

Degree of Equivalence
Technically equivalent

The Technical Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standards and has decided that these are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: IEC 283( 1968) Methods for the measurement resonances of filter crystal units IEC 444 Measurement of frequency and equivalent resistance of unwanted

of quartz crystal unit parameters

by zero phase technique

in a z-network and

IEC 444-1 ( 1986 ) -- Part 1 : Basic method for the measurement of resonance frequency resonance resistance of quartz crystal units by zero phase technique in a n-network

IEC 444-3 ( 1986) -- Part 3: Basic method for the measurement of two-terminal parameters of quartz crystal units up to 200 MHz by phase technique in a n-network with compensation of the parallel capacitance CO IEC 444-4 ( 1988 ) -- Part 4: Method for the measurement of the load resonance frequency fL, load resonance resistance Fl~and the calculation of other derived values of quartz crystal units, UP to 30 MHz

Indian Standard

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)

GUIDE TO THE MEASUREMENT OF EQUIVALENT ELECTRICAL PARAMETERS OF QUARTZ CRYSTAL UNITS
1

Scope

This Standard constitutes a guide to the measurement of equivalent electrical parameters of quartz crystal units. 2 Equivalent network

Consisting of a mechanically resonant piezoelectrically excited quattz element together with some means of mechanical mounting within a protective enclosure, a crystal unit can be exactly represented by an equivalent two-pori network as shown in figure 1. In this network, CP1 and CP2 represent the electrical capacitance between each connecting pin and the surrounding ground planes (the enclosure itself, if made from a conducting material). CPP represents the capacitance directly between the contacting pins. RPt and R are the equivalent resistances of the mounting structures which support the quartz el%nent, while L and LP2 are the equivalent inductances of these structures. Ce represents the electri%l capacitance between the two electrodes, while Cel and Ce2 are the capacitances between each electrode and the surrounding ground planes. R* represents conductivity between the electrodes of the resonator, due to a leakage path. In the case of quartz resonators at moderate frequencies, R~ can usually be neglected (except if there are defects in the plating masks), but it may be significant for high frequency, high overtone quartz crystal units.

The series resonant branches represent the equivalent electrical parameters associated with each mechanical resonance of the quartz plate. Since quartz plates are of finite dimensions, there will be a large number of resonant modes, many of which can be excited piezoelectrically, and others which can be excited by mechanical coupling to_other modes. One of these resonances will correspond to the "design mode" of vibration; the others will be "spurious" or "unwanted" modes for that application, and will correspond to other overtone modes of thickness shear, width shear, extensional and flexure vibrations as well as the enharmonic modes of thickness shear and thickness twist.

While this model of a crystal unit is quite complete, and capable of describing its electrical response over a very wide frequency range, it is fortunate that this degree of sophistication is rarely, if ever, needed. In the remainder of this standard, we will consider three degrees of simplification from this very general equivalent circuit, and discuss some of the applications for which each is suitable. 3 Simplified equivalent networks

In most cases, the response of the crystal unit to applied electrical signals needs be considered over only limited frequency ranges, which will include the "design mode" frequency and may include one or more of the other "unwanted" mocks. The frequency range of interest may extend above and below the desired mode frequency by only a fraction of a percent, or in the case of a filter application, a range of several percent may be required. If the application is a filter circuit, or a voltage-controlled or temperature-compensated

1

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) oscillator circuit, more exact modelling of the crystal response over the frequency band of interest may be needed. For these applications, the equivalent network of figure 2a is usually suitable. Here, the shunt capacitances between pin and ground and between electrode and ground are not distinguished.

The residual inductance and resistance of the mounting structure are not separately detailed, but are included in the equivalent motional parameters of the crystal unit. Since the frequency band of interest is relatively narrow, this will introduce little error. However, it is well for the circuit designer to be aware of the more complex network topology, as occasional spurious circuit behaviour can sometimes be explained by consideration of the entire equivalent circuit of figure 1. (For example, very high frequency oscillation can occur due to LPI and L ~ together with the shunt capacitances to ground resulting in some kind of failure of the #esign mode resonance!) While filter applications in particular may require specification of one or more of the "unwanted" modes, it is usually sufficient to ascertain that their resonance frequency lies outside a particular narrow band and/or their equivalent series resistance is greater than some specified value. It will in general be necessary to evaluate the capacitance between pins and ground (C13 and C2J as well as the total capacitance between pins (Co). Motional resistance (Rl) and motional inductance (Ll) are of prime importance as they determine the band-shape characteristics of the filter, or the frequency tuning characteristics and gain margins of the circuit.

At high frequencies (above about 100 MHz) the effect of the inductance of mounting leads in combination with the capacitances from pins to case and electrode structure to case transforms the actual motional parameters of the quartz element, so that the equivalent parameters ,measured at the reference plane (2 mm below the seating plane of the enclosure) are somewhat different. The addition of a shunt conductance between pins in the equivalent circuit is usually sufficient to model the effect, as the applications circuit will only be aware of the effective parameters at the reference plane, and the fact that the motional equivalent parameters seen at this point differ somewhat from those of the quartz element alone is not significant. For those cases which require good modelling"of the crystal unit in a filter circuit or in a tunable oscillator application, then the parameters which are needed are:

-

series resonance frequency, f~; motional resistance, /?l; motional equivalent inductance, ~1 (or capacitance c1 ); shunt conductance, Go; shunt capacitance, Co; pin-to-case capacitances, C13 and C23.

-

In some instances, it will also be required to determine the frequencies and the effective resistance of one or more unwanted modes which are located near the design mode frequency.

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) For somewhat less exacting applications, such as in simple narrow-band filters where only the pass-band shape is critical, or in oscillators which will operate at fixed frequency, the equivalent circuit can be further simplified. As shown in figure 2b a two-terminal equivalent which neglects the pin-to-case capacitances may suffice. In this case, however, it is well to specify whether or not the enclosure will be connected to the same point as one of the crystal leads, as the value of Co will depend upon how the connections are made. [f the unit is measured with the enclosure ungrounded, the CO value will include the two pin-tocase capacitances in series; if both the enclosure and one crystal unit lead are to be connected to the same point in use, the effective Co value will be different.

The parameters needed for the equivalent circuit of figure 2b which will allow reasonable modelling of the crystal response over a frequency range of a few percent near f~ are:

-

series resonance frequency, f~; motional resistance, RI;

-

motional inductance, L, (or capacitance, Cl); effective shunt capacitance, CO.

However, in many oscillator applications, it is sufficient to determine th$ resonance frequency (at which the transfer phase is zero) together with the insertion resistance at this frequency; or, if-the oscillator uses a fixed value of load capacitance, the load resonance frequency and load resonance resistance at the specified load capacitance are all that are required. The equivalent circuit for these cases may be represented as in figure 2c. The effective motional parameters for the case of resonance operation are essentially the same as those of the series branch in figure 2b; however, for the case of operation with a load capacitor, resistance and inductance as well as frequency are different. As will be discussed later, measurement of the load parameters poses some special problems.

When figure 2C represents the series resonance condition, it will be found adequate to predict behaviour at frequencies very near resonance, where the impedance of the series resonance branch is small compared to the impedance of the shunt capacitance co, @ the figure of merit of the crystal unit is greater than about 10:
1
M= --

>>10

0, Co RI

where O* is the angular series resonance frequency = 2X f~ COis the shunt capacitance R, is the motional resistance.

This condition will usually be met by most quartz crystal resonators operating on fundamental, third or fifth mechanical overtones at frequencies below about 150 MHz.

3

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) 4 Impedance/admittance characteristics

A very compiete discussion of the impedance function and characteristic frequencies of the crystai unit equivalent network can be found, for exampie, in references [1]* and [2]*. Consequently, we wiii not repeat the detaiied derivations here; rather, we wiii iook oniy briefiy at those characteristics which are important when evacuating measurement techniques. Examination of the network of figure 2a shows first, that the probiems of measurement wiii be manifest mainiy in the determination of the transadmittance, as the shunt capacitances (Co, C13, C2J can be readily determined with a guarded capacitance bridge at a frequency weii removed from any resonance phenomena. The rnotionai arm, however, cannot be measured independentiy - it is aiways associated physically with the static eiements.

The admittance of the motionai arm can be written as:

Y,*=L
z', *

.

1

(1) --%
0)

/?1+j(03L1-

c1

whiie the admittance of the shunt capacitance Co and conductance GOare:
y,,
12

=GO+]OCO

where GO represents any shunt conductance which might be present across the resonator terminais due to traces of metaliization or due to the effects of the mounting structure, and 6) = 2zt. Combining these, the totai transadmittance is (2)

"2= G0+(@R:u2)+'fcO ~2)
1

where U = o f, simplified:

-- . Making use of the narrow band approximation, this can be 0 c1

1

(o f,-

-- (0 c1

=2

AUL1

where A@ = o - o~, the anguiar frequency offset from series resonance frequency.

q

The figures in square brackets refer to clause 16: Bibliography.

4

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) Substitution in equation (2) gives: RI

2Aril L, +j

Y,z = Go+
~+(2A0L1)2

6)~co [ ~+(2A0L1)2

1

(3)

which is the parametric equation of a circle in the Y-plane, of radius l/2R1, centred at G = GO + l/2R1, B = m~COas shown in figure 3. The five characteristic frequencies often discussed are also shown' in figure 3, and their location on the admittance circle is also indicated. The offset of the circle from the real axis has been exaggerated to demonstrate the differences. The five characteristic frequencies are:
� � -

fm : frequency of minimum impedance; f~ : series resonance frequency; fr : frequency of zero insertion phase at resonance (resonance frequency); fa : frequency of zero reactance at anti-resonance (anti-resonance frequency); f" : frequency of maximum impedance.

Clearly, one may determine the magnitude of Y12 at these characteristic frequencies directly from the transadmittance circle in the Y-plane. However, the motional inductance L, (capacitance Cl) requires knowledge of the frequency as well. Over the frequency range from f~to fa, the susceptance is negative; this portion of the curve transforms to a positive reactance in the Z-plane and is the only frequency range over which the crystal unit can exhibit a positive (inductive) reactance.

It should also be noted that of the five frequencies defined, only f~ is invariant with changes in stray static capacitance. The others all depend on the value of Co, and will generally be different when the crystal unit is connected to a different fixture or circuit.

The relationships among these frequencies, in terms of the series resonance frequency, are given below:

f~- fm --= f,

v

l+4a *-1 4r `z

a2
(4)

fr-f~ --= f~

1-

v

l-4a2

a2
(s),

4r

= Tr

fa - f~
--=

1+ P 1-4a

" -a*) "T

f~

4r

(6)

5

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)

--=

f" - f~ f~

1+

r

l+4a

4r

("a') = 2r

(7)

where Co RI a. m~L,C, `T r ad r.

co
--

c1

We see that the frequency of minimum impedance is slightly less than f~, and the resonance frequency of zero phase is greater than f~, the differences being a function of the quality factor Q and the ratio of capacitances (Co/C1). To illustrate the magnitudes, assume first a fundamental crystal unit of good quality, with r = 200, Q = 400 000. The separation between fm and f~, and between fr and f~ will be less than 1 x 10-9. However, for an overtone crystal with r = 5 000 and Q = 30 000 the separation will be about 28 x 10-6 Whether or not these frequency definitions may be used interchangeably will ciearly depend upon the tolerances required, and the parameters of the crystal unit. (The high impedance frequencies fa and fn are rarely specified, as they depend strongly on the shunt capacitance, and therefore will usually be much different when connected into a user circuit than when placed in a test fixture.)

Figure 4 is a symbolic plot of the magnitudes of the real and imaginary components of crystal transimpedance, Z ,2, again indicating the characteristic frequency points defined above. Information about the value of the motional inductance/capacitance is contained in the relationships of figure 4. While the locus of the admittance-plane circle depends only on the magnitude of /?l and the ratio of CO to Cl, the separation between the characteristic frequencies and the slope and magnitude of the reactance/impedance functions depend on the value of f, as well. We have already seen (equations (4), (5) and (6)) that:

f~-fm
~=

fr-f~ f~ -z

a'
and

fa-f~
--.--

l-a' 2r

f~

It can also be shown ([1] and [2]) that the crystal unit connected in series with a load capacitance CL will have a composite resonance frequency fL such that

--=

fL- f~ f~

c1 2(C0 + CL)
(8)

provided any stray capacitances are either neglected or included in Co.

The equivalent circuits of figures 2a and 2b have exactly the same transadmittance characteristics; they differ only in the definition of values for the "stray" static capacitance values. 6

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) The circuit of figure 2c, however, does not take into account the presence of any shunt capacitance, and therefore will only serve to approximate the impedance of the device over a small frequency range near series resonance. Over this range

1

z12=R1+j((o L1- --)=/?1+j(2Aa)~1) cl) c,
which is exactly the same result one obtains if it is assumed that
1

(9)

2A QLl <<-- (i)~ co
in equation (3) above. in this case, the crystal reactance is:

xc=2Aa dXC 7=

L1 =4n

L1(f-f~).

Differentiating,

4 n L, (Q/Hz), or

L1=--.

1

4X

dXC -- df

(10)

and L, may be directly determined from the slope of the reactance versus frequency function evaluated in the neighbourhood of f~.

5

Parameters to be measured

Characterization of a crystal unit, therefore, requires determination of series resonance frequency, f~; the motional resistance, R,; the motional inductance, L1 (or capacitance Cl); and the three static capacitances, C13, C23 and Co. Other characteristics which are often specified are the derived characteristics: fL: load resonance frequency; the frequency at which the series connected combination of crystal unit and a specified value of load capacitance will exhibit a resonant, zero phase condition; FfL-load resonance resistance; the real component of crystal unit equivalent impedance at frequency fL;

-

S-pulling sensitivity; the rate of change of fL with changing load capacitance at a load capacitance CL;

- AfL1,Lz pulling range; the difference between two load resonance frequencies corresponding to two specified values of load capacitance. These characteristics are termed "derived" because they may all be calculated from the values of the shunt and motional parameters and the value of f~. With suitable

7

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) instrumentation they may also be measured with or without the introduction of physical capacitors into the measuring fixtures, as will be described below.

It is common practice to specify the resonance frequency fr (frequency of zero phase) instead of series resonance frequency f~. Generally, the difference between the two is negligible for fundamental mode units; however, when dealing with fifth and seventh overtone units, fr - f~ can be as great as several parts per million, and differentiation is necessary. f~ is the preferred parameter, as it is independent of stray capacitance effects. It is also necessary to be very specific about the definition of the "zero phase" condition: fr is precisely defined as that frequency for which the transadmittance vector Yt2 is purely conductive. This is not identical to the frequency at which the transmission in a test fixture exhibits zero phase shift, as the transmission phase shift depends upon the physical length of path between the test pins, and on the nature of the terminating impedances of the test pins. Again, the difference is small at lower frequencies, but can become signia matched line ficant for frequencies of 100 MHz or greater. At 100 MHz, for example, length of one centimetre results in a phase delay, A@ Of about 0,02 radians; a resonator having Q = 10000 would exhibit a frequency error of

--s

Af
f.

A@ --= 2Q

lX IO-6

if the terminations are truly resistive. Consequently, great care is required in establishing the reference conditions when calibrating and adjusting real test fixtures and instruments.

6

Attributes

of measurement

systems

While a number of techniques have been described, and may be used, to obtain some or all of the network parameters described above, it seems appropriate to discuss first the general requirements for determination of the equivalent network parameters.

As noted above, one must determine both magnitude and phase of the admittance (or impedance) of the device at various frequencies in order to solve for the network parameters. Consequently, the measurement equipment shall permit calibration in terms of recognized standards of impedance and phase, and shall be equipped with means for frequency measurement. Today, many calibrated frequencies are broadcast, and it is a relatively simple matter to maintain a laboratory frequency source within 1 x 10-9 or better agreement with national standards.

Standards of phase and impedance, however, especially at frequencies above 100 MHz, are not easy to achieve, and generally can only be obtained in coaxial form, at impedances of 50 Q or 75 Q. Such standard impedances with traceable calibration to an and matched air lines with accurately known characteristic accuracy of better than 1 impedance and effective length (phase standards) calibrated to better than *1 mm can be readily obtained. Short-circuit and open-circuit conditions can be established from first principles.
9'0,

8

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) Reference impedance standards for use in fixtures based on other than 50 f2 or 75 Q are not readily obtained, and require considerable effort to produce and calibrate.

Similarly, considerable ingenuity is always required to connect known impedances into test fixtures designed. to accept the wire leads of crystal units without at the same time introducing additional stray reactance and extra line length.

With these general precautions in mind, we will examine some of the possible techniques for crystal measurement.

7

Active methods (oscillator or other closed-loop

methods)

In principle, it is possible to construct a broad-band (or tuneable) active circuit which will sustain oscillations when a feedback loop is closed by inserting a crystal unit. The conditions for oscillation are well known: the net loop phase shift shall be 2mc, n = O, 1, 2 ... and at equilibrium, net loop gain is unity. Such a circuit is shown in figure 5a, where a crystal unit or other impedance element completes the positive feedback loop by connecting between points 1 and 2. If the voltages at these pins, e, and ez, have precisely the same phase, then a crystal unit connected in the circuit will control the frequency of oscillation at its resonance frequency, fr. The oscillator sustaining circuit may be replaced by a tunable source and a phase detector as shown in figure 6 (where an automatic tracking arrangement is shown, but manual tuning may also be used) with the same result, i.e., the zerophase frequency is determined. If the impedances presented by the test circuit at terminals 1 and 2 are accurately known, we can calculate the resonance resistance /?r of the device from knowledge of the amplitudes of et and e2, for example, using a vector voltmeter as in figure 5b. In this circuit, the frequency would be adjusted to give exactly zero phase between e, and ez, and the resonance resistance found from the ratio of the magnitudes:

% --.
f32

Rr + RT RT ; ()

Rr = ---1
:2

%

RT

(11)

where RT is the effective terminating resistance from test points to ground, while the value of fr could be determined by measurement of the source frequency when the zero phase condition is satisfied. If, however, there is any stray reactance appearing in shunt with the terminating impedances at points 1 and 2, both the frequency and the resistance determined above will be in error. The accuracy of this type of measurement depends upon the accuracy of the meter and the precision with which the circuit impedances can be realized. Repeatability of such a system will in general be quite good, so long as the same instruments and test fixtures are used, but the accuracy achieved (due to unavoidable stray reactance) will depenq also on the motional parameters of the crystal unit being measured.

At this point, it should be noted that very little data are available to allow comparison of measurements between different measuring methods. Most "round robin" experiments have been restricted to comparison of results using equipments of the same kind at different locations. 9

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) Measurement of motional inductance/capacitance using the oscillator or transmission methods described above can in principle be accomplished in either of two ways. One method calls for the introduction of "known" values of capacitance in series with the crystal unit, and determining the change in frequency which results, as indicated by the. connection of figure 5c, using equation (12) below. Adjusting frequency to the zero-phase point gives the load resonance frequency, fL, and the load resonance resistance, RL, directly. With this connection, it is very important that any stray capacitance to ground from the interconnection point between crystal unit and load capacitor be accurately known, and included in the effective value Of CL.

Because of the difficulty of determining these strays accurately, it is often easier to use two different values of CL, using test-capacitor fixtures as nearly identical as possible so that all strays are essentially the same with each fixture. Then, the motional inductance is determined from equation (13) below:

The calculation of L, (or Cl) using a single load capacitance CL is: 1 2 (f - f~) (co+
f~

=C1=

CL) (12)

Q):L,
Using two load capacitances CL, and CL2,

1

=C1=

2 (f~l - f~) (f~z - `~) ( CL2 - CL1) (13) `~ (fLl - `L2)

#

L,

In the case of two load capacitances (equation (13)), the value of Co is not required and only the difference between the load capacitance values is needed. Strays introduced by the test capacitor fixtures do not influence the result, so long as they are the same for the two fixtures. The second method for determining motional parameters requires that, after the values of fr = f~ and R - RI have been determined using the circuit configuration of figure 5b, the phase adjusfer setting is changed to produce two phase conditions between e, and e2 voitages of opposite sign and equal magnitude, *AO and the frequencies required for each phase condition are measured (f, and f2). Knowing the test circuit impedances RT, the motional resistance of the crystal unit RI and the series resonance frequency f~, the motional capacitance Cl (or inductance L,) is calculated:

c1 = --=

1

(f.2 - Q --
f:

cot (A 4)

(14) 2 (2%+ RI)

m: L,

10

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) This technique has the advantage that no additional stray reactance are introduced in making the measurement. However, especially when operated manually, the accuracy of the value determined depends directly on the accuracy with which RT and R, are known and the accuracy of the phase shift value introduced. The motional parameters cannot be determined with any better accuracy than the network and crystal resistances known. Also, some additional error will be introduced due to the effects of the shunt capacitance Co, which has been neglected in obtaining equation (14). Probable accuracies obtainable with the above oscillator/transmission methods are consifor L, and Cl, if reasonable care dered to be about *1 x 10"6 for fr, *5 % for Rr and *8 in calibration of the vector detector and in the fabrication of the test fixtures is exercised. At higher frequencies (above about 100 MHz), accuracy is degraded as unavoidable stray reactance become more significant. When measuring high order overtone crystals (seventh, ninth, etc.) it is not unusual to find that no zero-phase condition is possible.
Y.

All of the above oscillator and transmission methods can be operated without phase detection, but at reduced accuracy. When the oscillator method is used, an inherent phase condition is established, but unless a vector detector is used, the actual value of loop phase shall be suspect and the accuracy of the measurement is not well established. However, oscillator measurements can be very repeatable when the same equipment is used, making them very useful for use in manufacturing situations, as long as better means are used to assure the required accuracy and correlation with respect to standard methods of measurement.

Externally excited transmission circuits, when used without phase detection, determine the frequency of minimum impedance, fm, rather than the resonance frequency, fr. Since fm lies below f~ by about the same amount that fr lies above it, the accuracy is nearly the same; and in either case, it is well to keep in mind just what is being measured. However, when operated manually, it is more difficult to estimate the point of maximum transmission than to set the point of zero phase - this is not a consideration when computer-automated equipment is used, as curve fitting to measured points will allow very accurate interpolation to the precise frequency of the maximum.

Transmission test fixtures may be of the n-network type as described in IEC Publication 444, or of the T-network type as described in [12] and [13], as well as of other designs. In any case, the design and fabrication of the test fixtures are of critical importance, and correlation of results requires that all fixtures used shall be exactly alike.

8

Bridge methods

R.F. impedance and admittance bridges have been used for the measurement of crystal unit equivalent parameters in the vicinity of resonance [4]. Such bridges depend upon the calibration of the internal elements used in setting balance conditions, and are not easily standardized to available coaxial impedance standards especially at higher frequencies. Moreover, their use generally requires considerable care in adjustment, so that they are not well-suited for production measurements. Because of the limited reactance range of most commercially available bridges, load frequency and resistance measurements usually require the use of physical test capacitors placed in series with the device under test.
11

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) An automated microcircuit realization of a Scheering bridge [5] has been developed as an automatic crystal parameter measurement system. The details of this automatic system are beyond the scope of this guide. In general terms, it is based on a miniaturized bridge whose tuneable elements are varactor diodes, enabling electronic balancing of the bridge under control of a computer system. The details of this development have been published [7] and reported accuracies are very good.

An automatic measurement method based on a commercially available reflection coefficient bridge (impedance meter) has also been developed and reported [6]. This equipment has a coaxial measurement port, and is calibrated using standard 7 mm coaxial impedance elements, which can be readily obtained and easily certified by most national standards laboratories. Adaptors must be provided to permit connection of the wire leads of crystal units to the coaxial port, and their characteristics shall be accounted for when converting measured reflection coefficients to equivalent crystal parameters. Reported accuracy obtainable by this method is very good [6], [8]. Load resonance frequency and resistance can be determined by the phase offset method as described by Smythe [6], so that physical capacitor fixtures are not required - a significant advantage.

Since the reflection coefficient bridge is a single port system, one terminal of the crystal unit under test must be grounded, and it is not therefore possible to determine Co, Cl ~ and C23 separately with this system. They may be found from measurements made away from resonance with the enclosure grounded and ungrounded and lead connections reversed, if necessary.

For frequencies below the range of the reflection coefficient bridge (impedance meter), low frequency network analyzers are commercially available, having frequency capability from about 50 Hz to slightly above 10 MHz. These instruments measure the transmission characteristics of devices as two-port networks and calculate the equivalent series or parallel form of the trans-immittance parameters. They also permit determination of crystal load parameters by the phase offset method.

9

Automated network analyzer methods

Automatic two-port network analyzers have been developed for the general characterization of active and passive networks. These analyzers provide for the determination of the two-port scattering parameters of the network under test, and provide for correction of the measured responses to take into account imperfections in the equipment by referring network parameters to the impedance standards used to calibrate the equipment. A complete description of this type of equipment may be found in [9]. Commercial network analyzer/S-parameter instruments of this type are now available. For use as crystal measurement `systems, stable synthesized signal sources shall be included in the system; some systems include such sources while others need to be modified for this use. Such systems provide for calibration at the measurement reference plane with coaxial impedance standards, and are capable of very accurate and reproducible measurements [1O], [11]. The use of the scattering parameter methods, originally developed for application to microwave systems, allows for the separation of the trans-immittance parameters from the effects of shunt elements, so that the static capacitances C13 and C28 may be separated from the transmission characteristics and determined separately.' Also, the test

12'

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) fixture imperfections are to at least to a first approximation removed from the measurement, as the "calibration" of the system is done at the measurement ports, and the error correction algorithms remove the effects of the system up to the reference plane from the measurements.

These automatic network analyzer systems have proved to be the most satisfactory way of obtaining precise measurements of immittance over very wide frequency ranges. Either one-port reflection measurements or two-porl transmission measurements may be made as desired. For crystal unit measurements, the choice of one-port or two-porl measurement is generally arbitraty, as the two yield essentially identical values for the motional parameters, differing only in the values of the static capacitances. As a guide, the following are general recommendations:

One-port measurements

-

Low resistance crystal units (Rl < 10 Q); crystal units for oscillator applications; situations where minimum measurement time is important. High resistance crystal units (Ffl >100 f2); crystal units for filter use and some exacting oscillator applications; high frequency crystal units (f~ >100 MHz).

Two-porl measurements

-

Figure 7 shows the equivalent circuit of a crystal unit as connected for a one-porl measurement and figure 8 shows the equivalent circuit of a crystal unit connected as a two-pofl device. The shunt capacitance Co of figure 7 includes the capacitances Cl and Cz of figure 8 in some combination (depending upon whether the enclosure is grounded or not) and thus differs from COof figure 8. The measured reflection response obtained for a one-port measurement is typified by figure 9, while figure 10 is a typical transmission response for a crystal unit in a two-pod configuration. A functional block diagram of the equipment required for the network analyzer method of measurement is shown in figure 11. The entire measurement and data reduction processes are controlled by computer programmed, so that operation is extremely simple, and measurement accuracy is essentially independent of operator skill.

10

(commercially available measurement

systems

The instrument systems just described can all be used for the measurement of piezoelectric resonator parameters; however, many require some modifications such as improved signal sources, the addition of frequency counters or special detectors, etc. There are also available various measurement systems designed specifically for resonator measurement. These range from the manually operated "crystal impedance meter" test oscillators to special automated transmission measurement systems available from several manufacturers. Some of these are based on transmission networks electrically equivalent to that specified by IEC Publication 444, and use sophisticated computercontrolled synthesizers and vector detectors. Some such systems also include auto-

13

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) matically controlled temperature chambers and switching networks to permit temperature testing of large numbers of units in batch mode.

The automated transmission test systems, shown in block diagram form in figure 12, with the capability of extensive mathematical data processing along with storage of measured transmission parameters during calibration with known impedances, provide better accuracy and repeatability than manually operated systems. These systems depend on the measurement of the output voltage of the test network, compared to the voltage of a reference channel. Considerable care is taken to isolate the reference channel from the test channel; however, the insertion impedance of the test device can only be obtained with respect to the assumed impedance of the reference resistors which are used to calibrate the system. These resistors are not coaxial devices and cannot be easily traced to national standards of impedance at high frequencies. Also, since the transmission parameters will be influenced by any shunt impedance between pins and ground, which cannot be separated without making other measurements, the accuracy of the derived parameters will be degraded, especially at higher frequencies. The use of several values of reference resistors permits modelling of the test fixture impedances, which reduces the requirement for fixture precision, and improves the precision of measurement over that which can be obtained with manual measurement systems or with oscillator methods.

Software and test fixtures specially designed for use with automatic network analyzer/scattering parameter systems are becoming commercially available. These software programmed are developed to operate with specific instruments and controllers and in some cases are available from the instrument manufacturers, while other programmed are furnished by third-party vendors. This availability has significantly reduced the cost of fully automated network analyzer systems for crystal unit measurements.

11

Comparison of the characteristics

of various measurement

systems

The various measurement systems described have some characteristics which are generally determined by the basic method employed. The following table gives a relative comparison of the basic methods with regard to these general characteristics.

14

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) Table 1- Comparison of various quartz crystal unit measurement methods
Type of measuring system Frequency range Probable accuracy of frequency measurement *5 to Ease of use Relative cost in $

Vacuum tube Cl-meters [obsolete)

8 kHz to 250 MHz

Good

*IO x 10-6

Low (only available on used market) (< 200)

Solid-state Cl-meters

8 kHz to 250 MHz 30 MHz max.

*2 to *5 x 10-6 &2 to is x 1o-=

Good

Moderate

(200 -2 000)
Complex Medium (-2 000)

Manual maximum transmission method (IEC Publication 302)

Manual bridge methods

1 kHz to 200 MHz 1 kHz to 200 MHz 1 MHz to 200 MHz

*1 to *5 x 10-6 *1 x 10-6

Complex

Moderate to high (2 000-20 000) Very high

Automatic bridge methods

Good

(-40 000)
*1 x

Locked loop zero-phase methods (IEC Publication 444-1)

10-6

Good

High

(20 000-30 000)

Computer-controlled zero-phase methods (IEC Publication 444-1)

1 MHz to 200 MHz

*1 x

10-6

Very
good (note 1)

Veryhigh (-40 000)

Computer-controlled network analyzer methods (note 2)

1 GHz max.

*o,1 x 10-6
(note 3)

Very good

Very high (-35 000)

NOTES 1 The use of these systems is very easy, once suitable test software profyammes are available. The design of such programmed can be involved and expensive. However, test software and special test fixtures for crystal unit measurements with automatic network analyzers are be+ming commercially avail-

able. 2

,

Comparable precision can be achieved using transmission fixtures similar to the IEC x-network use of computerized error correction methods.

by

3 As frequency increases above about 200 MHz, expected precision estimates will degrade due to problems in precise definition of the interface between test fixture and devfce, as well as the lower Q values of high frequency devices.

15

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) 12 Parameter determination with automated S-parameter systems

The automatic network analyzer systems described obtain the scattering parameters of the device under test, fully corrected for system error terms. From these S-parameters, the admittance parameters of the device are calculated using standard transformations. The measurements are made at several frequencies around series resonance of the unit, so that an array of measurement frequencies and corresponding Y12-data is obtained, from which the equivalent electrical parameters may be estimated. One method of estimation is by means of an iterative non-linear least squares method [11] which directly calculates the "best fit" values for /?1, f.,, Cl and Co. If C13 and C2a are also required, the Y,, and Y12 admittance parameters are also needed from the measurement, There are several different approaches for non-linear least squares estimation, including the variable metric method [11 ], which converges rapidly but requires calculation of both first and second derivatives at each frequency; the Gauss-Newton method, which converges much more slowly; and the Marquardt method of steepest descent, which uses first derivative information only. For any of these iterative methods, it is necessary to obtain good initial estimates of the parameters if reliable and rapid convergence is to be assured. Initial estimates can be obtained with one of the linear methods below. Depending on the need for precision, and the importance of rapid measurement, the linear methods may provide adequate results without further processing.

If only the motional parameters are needed (Rl, L, and Q, these may be obtained from the real component of Y,z (i.e. G12) in the following manner [10]. The expression for G,z is from equation (3): RI G= `2 *+[47c(f - f,) LJ 2

The reciprocal of this expression then is:

(15)

which has the following properties: a) a minimum value of /?1 at f= f~; b) dE/df is zero at f= fs; c) when f~ and l?, are known, L, can be determined from the coefficient of the (f- $)2 term. Consequently if the reciprocals of the G12 values are calculated and fitted to a quadratic function of frequency, fs is found directly as the value of f for which the first derivative of the function is zero. Evaluating the function at this value of f then gives the value of RI directly:

16

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) E = K, + fK2+ f2K3 Series resonance frequency is: K2 (16)

f~. ---

2K3 Substituting this vaiue for f in the expression for E above, n, is: K; R1=K1--- 4K3
Itshould be noted that in the presence of a shunt conductance term Go the value of R, wiil be in error.

Equating the coefficients of the f2 terms in equations (15) and (16) above, the vaiue of L, may be calculated as:

L, = :G

and Cl may be calculated from the defining equation

1

c,.

-- Lt w:

Since Co is not contained in the theoretical expression for G12, no estimate of Co is obtained from this analysis. The advantage of this method of estimating the motional parameters is that it is very fast, requiring few calculations. it has the disadvantages that accuracy is degraded if points lying further than about one Q-bandwidth from series resonance are inciuded in the caicuiation, and it is quite susceptible to error in the presence of random noise in the measured data. A much more robust iinear method makes use of both real arid imaginary components of the transadmittance data. This method makes use of a linear least squares technique to fit a circle in the Y-plane to the measured Y12-points, and then uses the measured data to obtain the reactance as a function of frequency to allow estimation of series resonance frequency and inductance, as described below.

The derivation of motional parameters from two-port measurements is illustrated in figure 14. First, the corrected transadmittance values
Y12 =

G12 +J912

17

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) are calculated at each frequency of measurement, and the transimpedance vectors are calculated as: G B 12
- i

z12

= g2 :::2

=

Rs + jXS

G;2 + Bf2

The values of Rs and X* are plotted in figure 14, and the solid curves represent leastsquares fitted polynomial functions fitted to the data points. (To avoid computational difficulties, the frequency co-ordinates are transformed by subtracting a constant vaiue approximately equai to the resonance frequency.) Resonance frequency, $ is then determined at the intercept of the smoothed X. function on the zero reactance axis. The resonance resistance: Rr, is the vaiue of tk'e smoothed Rs function at this vaiue of the frequency co-ordinate.

To obtain vaiues of f~, L, and RI a circie in the Y-piane is fitted to the measured Y12 vaiues; this circie wiii be centred at the point i Gc= Go+2R, ` Bc = OS CO

The measured data points are then transited aiong radii to iie on the fitted circie to smooth the data effectively. (This is a tacit assumption that random errors in each measured component are equaiiy probable.) Then, using the "smoothed" vaiues (after being transited to iie on the fitted circie) B. is subtracted from each susceptance component, thus mathematically removing COeffects from the data.

After removing COeffects, the new admittance vectors wiii represent oniy the motionai arm parameters. Transformation to the Z-piane resuits now in a constant reai component Rs = RI. The X~ component wiii now be essentially a straight iine over a relatively wide frequency range, intercepting the zero reactance axis at f~, and having a siope

dXJdf= 4xL1 with the accuracy of the narrow band approximation. These calculations are performed mathematically by the computer, but the graphical representation illustrates the method. The ioad parameters, fL and RL, can be calculated from the motbnai parameters and the vaiue of CO;however, for smali vaiues of CL particuiariy, the accuracy of this extrapoiaon may not be adequate. With the network anaiyzer, additional measurements can be made in the frequency range at which the insertion reactance of the crystai unit is approximately equai to the magnitude of the ioad capacitor reactance, and the ioad parameters can then be interpolated quite accurately. To accomplish this without the use of a speciai test fixture, the approximate ioad resonance frequency is calculated using the f~, Cl and Co parameters already determined. Then, measurements are made at severai frequencies

18

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) near this value, and the Z12-vectors calculated at each frequency. The resistive and reactive components are then fitted to polynomial functions of frequency as before, as shown graphically in figure 15. The "smoothed" reactance function is used to interpolate the precise value of t for which X., is precisely equal to the magnitude of the reactance of the specified load capacitor, giving an accurate value of fL. The R~ function is then evaluated at this value of f to obtain an accurate measure of RL.

The smoothed X* function may then be used to calculate several paired values of load frequency and load capacitance over a range of *1 O % of the specified CL value. From these, a polynomial function relating frequency to toad capacitance can be formed by a least squares method,

fL= /$ + K2CL+ K3&L+ K4&L
and the pulling sensitivity, S, calculated as the derivative of this function S= dfLldCL= K2 + 2K3CL + 3Kh@L and may be evaluated for the specified load capacitance, as well as for other values within the data range. (Extrapolation beyond the range for which data were obtained is always dangerous!). It must be kept in mind that load resonance parameters cannot be isolated from the influence of Co, including any stray capacitances introduced by wiring paths, etc. These strays will include the Cl ~ and C23 values of the crystal unit as well as any strays from the circuit being used. It is the responsibility of the circuit designer to establish the total effective CL value for his amtication. It is often useful. for this reason to obtain the f,, /?, and S load parameters at ~everal CL values, such as ~0,5 pF, M,0 pF and *1,5 pF ~ffe~ent from the specified value.

All of these parameters may also be determined from one-port measurements as well, bearing in mind that the Co-parameter is different with the one-port connection.

13

Precautions

for making precise measurements

When the best possible estimation of the equivalent circuit parameters is desired, special attention shall be given to avoiding environmental effects which can have a ve?y s"@nificant influence on the results. These include the temperature, temperature gradients, drive level, and characteristics of the test fixture, as discussed below.

13.1

Thermal effects

The frequency, resistance and motional impedance of a crystal unit all depend to some degree on the temperature and the rate of change of temperature of the unit during the measurement. In addition, since parameters are estimated from a series of measurements at several frequencies near resonance, it is especially important that the unit should not be disturbed during the process of obtaining these measurements as any drift would 19

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) distort the best-fit estimation function. [n addition, if close correlation of results obtained at different times is desired, it is important that the measurements be made at precisely the same temperature or that the temperature coefficients of the parameters be accurately known so that all measurements can be corrected to a common temperature value.

Minimizing thermal gradient effects requires that all the units to be tested, the test fixtures and the instruments be allowed to reach equilibrium with the environment of the test room before attempting to make measurements. In addition, crystal units should be handled with plastic tweezers or other non-conducting means to avoid heating by finger contact. Protection from air currents, heat sources and small fluctuations in room temperature can be provided by placing a relatively massive shield over the unit when it is installed in the test fixture. The temperature of the unit during test can be determined by monitoring the temperature of this shield with a precision thermometer if sufficient time has been allowed for equilibrium to be reached. An accurac of better than 0,1 "C is required if frequency 2 correlation to within better than 0,05x 10- is needed, as it is not unusual for a crystal unit to exhibit frequency changes as great as 0,5 x 10- per degree.

Because of this sensitivity, special crystal units having very low temperature coefficients of frequency near room temperature are advisable for correlating measurement equipment in the factory. 13.2 Drive level effects

It has been widely observed and reported that the parameters of quartz crystal units, especially frequency and resistance, depend on the level of excitation. The effects are approximately proportional to the square of the drive current, so that precision measurements should ideally be made at low drive levels. For thickness shear modes, a test current of no more than about 200 PA or 300 PA r.m.s. is usually satisfactory, while !owfrequency flexure types may require levels as low as 10 vA. Also, if measurement results are to be repeated @ different times, it is necessary that all measurements be performed at essentially the same drive level.

13.3

Test fixture conskleratlons

Most crystal units are equipped with either radial lead wires extendirlg from one surface of the enclosure, or with metallic pads on one surface for "surface mounting" to the equipment. Unfortunately, neither of these configurations is compatible with the coaxial connectors usually found on r.f. test equipment so that some kind of adapting test fixture is needed. The crystal unit measurements can be no more accurate than the characterization of the test fixture itself. If an automatic network analyzer method is used, the fixture up to the reference plane will be included in the calibration of the equipment, and the main requirement is that the system as calibrated remains unchanged during the measurement.

One point to consider especially for high frequency measurements is the added capacitance and inductance that might be introduced at the connection between crystal leads and the test fixture due to excess lead length of the crystal unit. To eliminate this problem,

20

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) the test fixture connector should be a hollow conductor so that any excess lead wire can extend within the connector pin. Also it should be possible to calibrate the system with known impedances which do not disturb the character of the reference plane. If the measurement is to be "traceable" to national standards, the reference impedances shall be certified from first principles, such as short or open circuits, or they shall be equipped with coaxial connections or other adapters which are certified by a standards laborato~. Test fixtures and calibration standards which meet these requirements are now commercially available.

13.4

Transients in the measuring system

When measuring crystal units it should be recognized that transient behaviour will occur, when excitation frequency is changed in both the instrumentation (such as the settling time for a synthesizer after a frequency is programmed or the time required for a switch closure to become stable or the time required for a detector to reach a stable indication), and in the device itself. The latter may well be the longer time, particularly for low frequency or high Q devices.

The behaviour of the crystal unit response immediately after a step change in excitation frequency has been made can be explained as consisting of two simultaneous transients. First, the initial frequency signal will decay with a time constant proportional to the ratio C?/f, and at the same time the new frequency signal will build up with a similar time constant. While both signals are present, transient behaviour of both amplitude and phase of the response will be observed, so that valid data representing the behaviour at the new frequency will be obtained only after waiting for the transients to decay adequately.

Figures 16 and 17 show a simulation of the response of a crystal unit connected in a 50 Q transmission system. It is assumed that the initial frequency was stabilized, and at time t = O, the synthesizer was set to a new frequency without any discontinuity of either amplitude or phase - a "perfect" synthesizer. The time scale has been normalized to units of Q/f~of the crystal unit, as these are values which would normally be known approximately for a crystal unit being measured. The horizontal lines represent dev~ations from the final amplitude and A0,5" phase, which are considered to be steady state response of A0,5 the minimum accuracy required for a precision measurement. Figures 18 and 19 are similar plots for a crystal unit having very different parameters; in terms of Q/fS, however, the settling time required is about the same. It is clear that instrument switching time and settling time as well as device settling time shall all be taken into consideration in the measurement programme.
`Yo

14

Measurement methods In the production environment

Test and measurement of crystal units in a production facility pose some specific problems. Generally, high throughput is required and devices are checked against specified tolerances on a "go" or "no-go" basis. In most cases not all parameters are specified, and therefore testing may be limited to include only those specified parameters together

21

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) with any additional measurements needed to assess the general quality of the product. Obviously, all devices need to be tested against specified parameter value tolerances; quality assessment, however, may be implemented on a sampling basis, especially if production quantities are large.

The equipment used for production testing can be selected on the basis of device requirements; i.e. if only frequency and resistance are specified, then relatively simple oscillator or transmission test facilities are adequate. The degree of automation of the test equipment will depend upon the quantity of product involved. The advantages of higher capacity and better reproducibility of data resutting from automated testing are usually sufficient justification in themselves. When some portion of the product requires measurement of L, (Cl) values, and/or determination of load parameters, fL, RL and SL, the one- or two~port S-parameter equipments will provide relatively fast measurement of all parameters without the need for additional test fixtures, and therefore will be a good choice. The one-port reflection equipment requires less measurement time than two-port systems but has other limitations, as previously discussed. The automated transmission type equipments are particularly suited to applications requiring temperature testing of devices.

Regardless of the test methods chosen for the production floor, it is advisable that at least one system be available which will permit complete characterization of a device, with measurements referred to acceptable, traceable impedance and phase standards. W4h this system, checks of calibration and accuracy of the production test equipment can be regularly conducted, and/or sampling tests of production units may be carried out to track, on a statistical basis, both the product performance and the validity of the production test equipment. The key to success is a regularly scheduled "calibration" of the production test equipment in terms of transfer standards which are referenced to the standard system, which, in turn, is calibrated to traceable impedance and phase standards.

15

Conclusion

In summary, the complete characterization of the static and motional equivalent electrical parameters of quartz crystal units is not a trivial undertaking. Several possible methods of measurement have been described in general terms, and brief descriptions of data reduction methods given for those automated systems offering the best obtainable accuracy and precision. Very little has been said here about the very significant problem of providing adequate test fixtures, nor have the questions of temperature-testing, unwanted mode scanning, and use-circuit characterization been addressed here. These questions present as much difficulty as the selection of basic measuring methods and need to be carefully considered in practice.

22

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) 16 [1] Blbliographle - Blbllography

IEC Publication 302: LMfh?itions normalisdes et m&hodes de mesure pour /es rt?sonateurs pk?zo~lectriques de frdquences inf&ieures ~ 30 MHz - Standard definitions and methods of measurement for piezoelectric vibrators operating over the frequency range up to 30 MHz, 1969. IEEE Standard No. 177: Standard definitions and methods of measurement piezoelectric vibrators, 1968. for

[2]

[3]

Gerber E.A. A review of methods for measuring the constants of piezoelectric vibrators, Proc. IRE, v. 41, No. 9, p. 1103, September 1953. Hafner E. The piezoelectric crystal unit: Definitions and methods of measurement, Proc. IEEE, v. 57, No. 2, p. 179, February 1969. Malinowski G. and Hafner E. Automated microcircuit bridge for measurement of quartz crysta/ units, Proc. Sznd Annual Frequency Control Symposium (AFCS), p. 354, 1978. Smythe R.C. An automated resonator measurement system using a reflection wefficienf bridge, Proc. 35th AFCS, p. 280, 1981. Malinowski G., Snider G. and Nyholm C. /mp/ementation of an automatic microcircuit measuring system for quartz crysta/, Proc. 35th AFCS, p. 286, 1981. Hotton W., Payne T., Smythe R.C. and Symonds D. Comparison of methods for measurement of quartz crystal resonators with load capacitance, Proc. 35th AFCS, p. 271, 1981. Geldart W., Haynie G. and Schleich R. A 50 Hz -250 MHz computer operated transmission measuring set, BSTJ, v. 48, No. 5, p. 1339, May-June 1969.

[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[1O] Pusterfi H.S. and Smith W.L. An automated crystal measuring system, Proc. 27th AFCS, p. 88, 1973. [11] Peach R.C., Dyer A.J. et al., New method for the measurement of quartz crysta/ resonator parameters, Proc. 36th AFCS, p. 297, 1982. Smolarski A.J. and Wojcicki M.S. Quartz crystal measurement system based on transmission line T-network, IEEE Trans. SU, No. 25, p. 300, 1978. Smolarski A.J. and Wojcicki M.S. Extension of frequency range of quattz c~sta/ measurement method based on transmission line T-network, IEEE Trans. SU, September 1981. Smith W.L. An overview of a proposed standard method for the measurement of the equivalent circuit parameters of quartz crystal units up to 1 GHz, Proc. 6th Quartz Devices Conference, p. 1, 1984. Smith W.L. EIA standard 512: Some further diswssion Quartz Devices Conference, p. 13, 1985. and comment, Proc. 7&

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

Semones Timothy, Software implementation of E/A 512, Proc. 8th Quartz Devices Conference, p. 108, 1986. Smith W.L. Final repcd, P-11 round robin crystal measurement experiment, Proc. 10th Quartz Devices Conference, p. 51, 1988. 23

[17]

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)

cPP
R, c,~ Rpl 1 Lpl 4) II d) L1.1 $* %2 2

0
R *,I

II
%.1

4 I %2

II C,*

) `1s ]

:C

pl

cq1

Lfvk-i*' R l,N C,N ,

1.N

=C q2

cp2= =
0 3

9 0

NOTE - This network is valid up to 35o MHz.

Figure 1- Nearly exact equivalent electrical network of a piezoelectric quartz resonator

24

Is

15544:2004

IEC 61080(1991)

Figure 2a - Equivalent network adequate for most applications. Three-terminal, two-porl model suitable over a bandwidth of * a few percent from OS= 1 / ~

J-"
NOTE - This network is valid up to 200 MHz.

Figure 2b - Two-terminal representation when enclosure is not grounded. C13 and C23 are included in the Co value

RI ~1 c'

Figure 2C - Simple two-terminal equivalent network, useful over very narrow bandwitdh when Co may be neglected

Figure 2- Simplifications of the equivalent electrical network

25

IEC

1S 15544:2004 61080 (1991)

+B

/\

@,co

`"'z\ ------ --___ ___ ,___, H Y

o

-B

Figure 3- Loousof a cfystal unittransadmittancefunction in the Y-plane (when no shuntoonductanoeGOis present) showingthe points correspondingto the fwe charaoterfstic frequencies

26

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) II

R

Ill
II II

o

I

I t

II

Ill 111 II
+ x I o 1

M
I II I I

-

) ,

II

t

A

II Ill

Izl
o

Ill
i
fm f, f, fa f"

Figure 4-

Impedance versus frequency characteristics of a quartz crystal unit near resonance

27

1S 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)

7
Amplifier / Phase adjuster 1~2 T

Counter

4b

Level meter

Figure 5a - Oscillator test circuit for crystal units (~ and 1?,)
f------. ------ ------ ------ (AGC)
Counter i I I f+ Level meter

------

----.

It
Amplifier

` Phase adjuster

-J

e,

,*2

e,

o
RT

I

Vector detector

Figure 5b - Modifications to oscillator method for improved accuracy and precision

c.

+-J--IQ
Figure 5C - Determination of fL and RL requires test fixture with added series capacitor

Figure 5-

Some possible oscillator test circuit configurations for crystal resonator measurements

28

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)

F
Tuneable source 1 Level adjustment Frequency control signal Vector detector

1

2

Figure 6-

Transmission measurement method for crystal resonators

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)

For a single-port measurement (reflection), the equivalent circuit is as shown in figure 7. 1
L, co c1 RI 2 GO. L R.

m

?

Figure 7

For a two-port measurement on a single resonator, the circuit is as given in figure 8.

+

Figure 8

30

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(19911
dB o *... **.*0*0****. . . ... OO. 00 .... -0.......9.*.....**** -lo -20 -30 40 -

-50 -60 . -70 27.526 27.535 Frequency, MHz

* 27,516

Number of calibration frequencies: Frequency point file: Error parameter file: Calibration date: Measurement demo: Crystal No.: Temperature: Start frequency: Stop frequency: No. of measured frequency points: Result calculated using one point in: Synthesizer level: Frequency (MHz) 27,5262301 AF Co (pF) 3,19 Rm (Q) 15,61

100 F5-600 ER5-600 16 Juiy 1984 16 July 1984 #37 23,2 "C 27,516000 MHz 27,535000 MHz 100 5 -4,0 Lm (mH) 2,7948 dBm Cm(pF) 1,19617E-02 Q 30957 P (pw) 9,19

(Hz) = 0,000

ACO(PF) = 0,464

Al?m(Cl) = 0,515 Pulling sensitivity: S(20) = -11,1206 l"E-61pF S(30) = -5,4291 l* E-61pF

ALm (mH) = 0,00000

Load resonance frequency: f(20) = 27,533329 MHz 430) = 27,531 t90 MHz

Figure 9- Reflection measurement

31

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)

dB

Oi'

-10
-20 -30 +0 -50 -60 -70

27,5

..* L
.**".. 27,55

27,6

Frequency, MHz

Number of calibration frequencies: Frequency point file: Error parameter file: Calibration date: Measurement demo: Crystal No.: Temperature: Start frequency: Stop frequency: No. of measured frequenoy points: Result calculated using one point in: Syntfresizer level: Frequency (MHz) 27,5263940 AF
(Iiz) =

100
F5-600 ET5-600 16 &dy 1984 16 July 19S4 #37 23,2 "C 27,600000 MHz 27,600000 MHz 100 6 -0,3 dBm

Co (pF) 2,56

Rm (Q) 15,77

Lm (mH) 2,9118

Cm(pF) 1,1481 OE-O2

Q 31934

P (pw) 6*98

0,017

ACO(PF) = 0,022

Al?m(Q) = 2,135 Pulling sensitivity: S(20) = -11,2833 l"E-6/pF S@) = - 5,4162 l"E-6/pF

ALm (mH) = 0,00002

Load resonance frequenoy: f(20) = 27,=3400 MHz I'(3O)= 27,531248 MHz

Figure 10- Transmission measurement

32

1S 15544:2004
IEC 61080(1991)

Frequency synthesizer

I
{j T @ $ ()' courbes Printer/plotter

Network analyzer

{, j ?? Wm w= Ym

44 S-parameter bridge + b T ? t (,]

Device under test

I
Temperature meaauring device

/\ < /

Figure 11-. Instrumentation block diagram

33

1S 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)

Reference line Synthesizer sourc -- Level adjustment 4 Power splitter po~ Vector detector 1

Control Control

Control Data

4i Y

I
I

Computer m !
1

"atas'o'"e

I
Terminal Plotter

Printer

Figure 12- Automation of the transmission measurement method

34

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)

I I

R6ference signal Power splitter Vector

r I L
Synthesizer source 4 Cent rol \

II

1- ----.
directional coupler

----

1.

I
d-

Control I

Control

Control Data Computer

Figure 13-

Automatic reflectometer impedance measurement method

35

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)

/

/

correc~~

for

/
~/ /"

co ---# /

/

/

Measured -

/

*

I

~1

I

I
I I
s

F?,
RI R, t

---- 8

----
+

---- 8

Measured s

I 0 1
t~

k

I
I
Correctd for

co
f

t f,

I

1 1 f,

Measured

Y12=G12+iB12
= B12- ~. Co

Corrected for CO,~z and Y,> = G12 + N;

Fitted polynomial interpolation functions provide data smoothing.

Figure 14-

Derivation of motional parameters from transadmittance measurements

36

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)

x, t
Reactance

1

CO*CL

----

----

----

--.

.--

u

I

o

I
Resistance .--.

f

Af

R. "1

t I
o

./"
---- -- ----

I .

`f'

I
I I

Figure 15- Derivation of load parameters from measured transadmittance above resonance:

z12=--=

1

G 12

jB12

=R~+jX~

Y 12

G,;+ B;2

G1~+ B~2

Fitted polynomial interpolation functions provide data smoothing.

37

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080 (1991)
Resonator f, (kHz) = 5000,085 Resonator Q = 2500000 Initial frequency from f. (H:) = -2,000 Frequency step (Hz) = 2,10 (QIF), seconds = 0,26190 0,18

m
c o s o . + s

(D

= $

0,17

0.16

0.15

0,14

0.13

0,12

0.11

0,00

1.00

2,00

3.00

4,00

5,00

6,00 Time in ~F units

Figure 16- Amplitude response of 5 MHz, 5th overtone resonator in 50 Cl system

38

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)
Resonator f. (kHz) = 5000,085 Resonator C?= 2500000 Initial frequency from f. (H:) = -2;000 Frequency step (Hz) = 2,10 (C)IF), seconds = 0,26190 I
0,000

1
0-

/

-8,00-

-16,00-

-24,00-

-32,00-

40,00.

48,00-

-56,00+
0,00

I

1,00

, 2,00

, 9,00

1 4*OO

` 5.00

6,00 Time in W F unfts

Figure 17- Phase response of 5 MHz, 5th overtone resonator, in 50 Q system

39

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)
Resonator f, (kHz) = 75,565 Resonator Q = 120000 Initial frequency from f. (H:) = -0,500 Frequency step (Hz) = 0,50 (CUF), seconds = 0,66059 0,22

e m
c g @ . fj

= 2 <

0,21

1
o,2a

0,19

0,18

0,17

0,16

0.15
0,00

1.00

2,00

3,00

4,00

5,00

6.00 Time in CYF units

Figure 18- Amplitude response of 75 kHz flexure resonator in 50 Q system

40

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)
Resonator f, (kHz) = 75,565 Resonator= 120000 Initial frequency from f. (H:) = -0,500 Frequency step (Hz) = 0,50 (QIF), seconds = 0,68059
I a m

0,00

2 n
0 ii ..=
c ."m

-

2

-5,00

-lo,oa

~
to

E

-I 5,0a

-20,0C

-25,0(

-30,0(

-35,0a 0,00 1,00
2,00 3.00 4.00 5,00 6,00

Time in Q/F units

Figure 19-

Phase response of 75 kHz flexure resonator in 50 Q system

41

Is 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)

Annex A Classification of quartz crystal unit measurement systems

Electrical parameters of quartz crystal units under constant measuring conditions may be classified into three distinct groups: i) Parameters characterizing desired (main) resonance; these parameters associated with the main motional arm of the equivalent circuit are of major importance. ii) Parameters characterizing unwanted modes. iii) Parameters characterizing the remainder of the equivalent circuit. In some cases the so-called "load" parameters characterizing the equivalent circuit of a quartz crystal unit connected in series with an external circuit (usually capacitive) are also needed. In the general case the quartz crystal unit must be treated as a three-terminal network, the third terminal being in the typical case a metal enclosure, which should be grounded. Three types of connection of the crystal unit are possible: one-port (two-terminal) connection in which one of the pins (leads) is grounded while the enclosure is floating; one-port (two-terminal) connection in which one of the pins (leads) is grounded and the enclosure is also grounded; two-port (three-terminal) connection in which only the enclosure is grounded. The true values of the motional arm parameters of the quartz crystal unit equivalent circuit resistance ~1 and (for the main resonance: series resonance frequency f,, motkmd motional capacitance Cl or inductance L,) are practically independent of the tyPe of connection. However, the type of connection strongly influences the distributed (static) capacitances CAB, CA~ and CB~. In the one-port connection, the effective shunt capacitance CO is to a first approximation the sum of the capacitance CAB between the pins of the unit and the capacitance CAH (or CBH) between the ungrounded pin and ground. The influence of distributed capacitance is different in various measuring methods and different applications, so it is important to specify the crystal unit lead connection to be used.
-

In general, the characterization of a quartz crystal unit requires many rather complex measurements to be made at different frequencies near series resonance, to form an estimate of the equivalent circuit parameters which will best approximate the electrical behaviour of the unit. Fortunately, in most cases only a few of the crystal unit equivalent parameters need to be determined, particularly in the production environment.

The two most important parameters are: the series resonance frequency f~ and the motional resistance RI. In a large number of cases, these may be approximated by measurement of zero-phase frequency fr and zero-phase insertion resistance f?r. These latter two parameters may be measured with a limited accuracy by simple and fast sing/e frequency methods (see clause 7). 42

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) More complex characterization of crystal units requires the use of several measurement frequencies, so rmdti-frequency methods are used. From the point of view of general principles the most important measuring methods may be classified as follows: i) Osci//atormethods (also called active methods) in which the frequency of oscillation of special oscillator circuits, into which the crystal unit to be measured is connected, is measured and assumed to be the zero-phase frequency of the crystal unit. ii) Transmission methods in which the crystal unit parameters are determined indirectly from measurements of the transfer function of the network formed by connecting the crystal unit (enclosure grounded) into a resistive network. Transmission methods may be divided into four sub-groups: a) Extremurn transmission methods (ETM) in which only information about the magnitude of the transfer function is used. The crystal unit frequency is identified as that at which the extremum (maximum) output voltage occurs. b) Phase transmission methods (PTM) in which information about the transfer function phase is used. The crystal unit frequency is identified as that at which the output voltage phase is the same as that obtained during preliminary calibration (in the ideal case, the output voltage is in phase with the input voltage). In these methods amplitude information is not needed to establish frequency of the unit, but must be obtained if the insertion resistance is to be calculated. Measuring sets using m or T-transmission networks are the most important examples of equipment used for ETM or PTM. c) Vector transmission methods (VTM) in which information about both the amplitude and phase of the transfer function is needed. In contrast to the ETM and PTM, which are fundamentally single frequency measurements, VTM typically require measurements at severai frequencies near resonance so that motional capacitance (or inductance) may also be determined. d) Scattering parameter methods (SPM) in which all four of the two-port scattering parameters of the three-terminal crystal unit connection are determined, and fully corrected for linear errors in measuring system and fixtures, at several frequencies near series resonance of the device. Such measuring sets require the use of dualdirectional couplers and vector detectors, such as those incorporated in network analyzers. iii) Impedance (admiffance) measuring methods in which one-port quartz crystal unit parameters are determined using the vector values of the crystal unit impedance (admittance) measured at several frequencies near resonance. The method of calculation is the same as for the SPM above, but the crystal unit is connected as a one-port (with one pin/lead grounded). Two sub-groups of impedance measurement may be distinguished: a) Direct immittance methods (DIM) in which equipment is used which reads out directly impedance (or admittance) values (e.g., various bridges or vector immittance meters).

43

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) b) F?ef/ection coefficient methods (RCM) in which the quartz crystal unit parameters are determined from the vector values of the reflection coefficient of the crystal unit connected to a system port of known impedance, at several frequencies. Various equipments measuring the complex reflection coefficient may be used in RCM. The most important are: sets containing directional coupler (or reflectometer) with a vector voltmeter, impedance meters utilizing directional bridges and some types of vector network analyzers.

Motional capacitance (inductance) may be calculated utilizing measurements of quartz crystal units at more than one frequency. Most important are three groups of methods:

i) Load capacitor methods (LCM) in which changes in resonance frequency due to the connection of load capacitances in series with the crystal unit are measured, and the motional capacitance calculated from the frequency difference. ii) Transfer function methods in which frequencies corresponding to chosen points on the transfer function versus frequency curve of the transmission network containing the crystal unit are determined. Two sub-groups of these methods are the most important:
a) Phase offset methods (POM) in which two frequencies corresponding to two equal (but opposite in sign) values of transfer function phase are measured. b) Magnitude offset method (MOM) in which two frequencies on opposite sides of the crystal unit resonance frequency with the same chosen value of transfer function magnitude are measured. iii) Admittance (impedance) methods in which frequencies corresponding to chosen points of the admittance (impedance) versus frequency curve are measured. The most important sub-groups of these methods are: a) /remittance phase methods (1PM) in which frequencies corresponding to chosen values of crystal immittance phase are used to calculate motional capacitance Cl (motional inductance l.,). b) /remittance magnitude methods (lMM) in which frequencies corresponding to chosen values of crystal unit immittance magnitude are used to calculate Cl (Ll). c) Computer aided methods (CAM) in which various algorithms are used to estimate Cl (Ll) from the immittance values measured at several frequencies near the series resonance frequency of the crystal unit. One of the more important of these methods uses the slope of the motional arm reactance versus frequency curve at the point of zero reactance.

The effective shunt capacitance Co (for one-port quartz crystal unit connection) or the three capacitances CAB = Co, CAH and CBH (for two-port connection) are typically measured at low frequencies using appropriate capacitance bridges (LFM). In some measurement methods it is possible to measure the values of these capacitances at frequencies near the nominal frequency of the quartz crystal unit (HFM); this possibility is important for crystal units operating at high frequencies (i.e. 100 MHz or above) as the effective values of Co change with frequency due to stray inductances and capacitances of the mounting system.

44

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) TABULATION OF MEASURING METHODS (A table of measuring methods is given on pages 93 to 97)

General assumptions: the main reason for the measuring method tabulation is to facilitate the preliminary choice of method;
. .

the structure of the table should allow the addition of new methods; the table should contain all the methods recommended or considered by IEC TechNo. 49*;

nical Committee

other methods used in practice in various countrie$. and recommended by national standards or industrial standards should also be included; the table should be maximally concise.

The accuracy of quartz crystal unit parameter measurements depends on many factors, including both the effects of other parameters of the crystal unit and the characteristics of the measurement equipment used. Among the most important factors are:

nominal frequency of the crystal unit; crystal unit quality factor; effective shunt capacitance of the crystal unit;
. uncontrolled stray reactance enclosure;

associated with the test fixtures and the crystal

-

temperature of the crystal unit and the measuring equipment; control of the drive level applied to the crystal unit during test.

Due to the very broad range of parameter values for quartz crystal units of various designs it is not possible to give accurate estimates of the accuracy obtainable with a particular method of measurement. Instead, it is proposed to use in the table three grades of accuracy: low, medium and high.

For typical quartz crystal units in the frequency range from about 1 MHz up to approximately 100 MHz intended for use in crystal-controlled oscillators "low" corresponds to frequency accu-rac not better than about 5 x 10-6; "medium" to a range of accuracies of 2 about 1 to 5 x 10- and "high" to accuracies better than about 1 x 10-6.

Abbreviations General: 1P

used:

= crystal unit measured in one-port configuration;

q

See the inside and outer back covers of this standard.

45

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080 (1991) 2P () IF 2F 3F MF 1: u crystal unit measured in two-pod mnnection; frequency range in megahertz; one-frequency method; two-frequency method; three-frequency method; multi-frequency method; method intended for mea!$urement of the quantity given after the column; method useful but not especially intended (in most cases existing documents do not specify detailed measuring procedures and accuracy is often unknown or difficult to determine);

low medium high

= comparative rating of measurement accuracy.

Frequencies: 1

f~

series resonance frequency

`S=

2z~;

fr fm fmT
fnT
$

resonance frequency (zero insertion phase); frequency of maximum admittance; frequency of maximum transmission; frequency of minimum transmission; frequency of transfer function zero phase; load resonance frequency; unwanted mode frequency.

fL fN

Resistances: RI R, RL = motional resistance; = resonance resistance (insertion resistance at zero phase); = load resonance resistance;

46

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) RN = unwanted mode resistance.

Clll-l measuring methods: LCM POM = load capacitor method; = transfer function phase offset method;

MOM = transfer function magnitude method; 1PM IMM CAM = immittance phase method; = immittance magnitude method; = computational method.

CO measuring methods: LFM HFM = low frequency method (below 1 MHz); = high frequency method (near crystal unit operating frequency or above).

47

1S 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991) Cross-referencetabulationof measuringmethods of quartz crystalunit parameters
(Asterisksr]in columns 1 to 7refer to notes in column8)

Main resonance Type of method Frequency Resistamx C1/L@ Unwanted resonances

co

Load resonance frequency~ and resistance 4

Notea

1 3SCILLATOR METHODS Srysta/ impedance neters q 2P

2

3
lF 1: R, low

4

5

6

7

8

IF 1: f, low

3F or 2F U(LCM) low -

lF U: f~, RL low " Depend on the type of CIM; test fixtures and load capacitors are not specified

rRANSMISSION WETHODS Fxtremum transmission `ETM) with K-type Tetwork 2P s 30 MHz) EC Publication 302 IF 1: fmT<fm medium lF 1: RI medium 3F I(LCM) medium IF lF U: f~, RL low x-network and load capacitors are not specified
q

U: fN,RN medium

1-30 MHz) EC Publication 444-4"

U(LCM) medium

-

U: fL,RL high

Intended for PTM

1-125 MHz) EC Publication 444"

u: fmT<fm medium

U: RI medium

U(MOM) medium

U: fN,RN medium

" Intended for PTM

With T-type network 1P [1 -60 MHz) Polish Industrial Standard

lF

IF

3F

IF

lF 1: f~, RL high With internal constant CLvalue

[1 -125 MHz) Polish Industrial Standard

1: f<fm<f, medium

1:Rf medium

U(MOM) medium

U: fN,RN medium

q High using FM variant

With special bridge network IEC Publication 283

u

u

fN,RN 1: medium"

q High for lower frequencies

48

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)

1
Phase methods (PTM) with x-type network 2P [1 -30 MHz) IEC Publication 444-4 :1-125 MHz) EC Publication 444

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

IF

lF

3F U(LCM) medium

lF

IF 1: fuRL high

1: f, medium*

1:R, medium

U: fN,RN low

U(HFM) low

q

High for lower frequencies

;1 -200 MHz) IEC Publication 444-1

I(POM) medium

[1 -200 MHz) IEC Publication 444-3

1: f medi?im

1: RI medium

I(POM) medium

U: fN,RN medium

With selective external Co compensation

With T- type network 1P [s30 MHz) Polish Industrial Standard [1 -60 MHz) Polish Industrial Standard [1 -125 MHz) Polish industrial standard Vector methods (VTM)

lF

lF

3F

lF

u: f, medium

U: R, medium

I(LCM) high

U: fuRL high 1: fL,RL

With five internal switched load capacitors With internal constant CL value

1: f, high

1: R, medium

U(POM) medium

u: fNp~ medium

MF 1: f, high 1: medium"

MF k R, high 1: medium*

MF I(CAM) high I(CAM) medium

MF lf: fN.RN high U: fN, RN medium

MF

MF U:fuRL
Computer-aided

2P (s0,1 MHz)
USA Industrial Standard [1 -125 MHz) IEC Publication 444

U(HFM)
low

U: fL. R~ Computer-aided " High for lower msdium frequencies

~ meter method S-paramater methods 2P (+) (0,1 -1000 MHz) USA Industrial Standard

1: f, high MF 1: f, high

k R,

Computer-aided

MF 1: RI high

MF I(CAM) high

MF U: fN,RN high

MF I(HFM)

MF U: f~, RL

Computer-aided Test fixtures are not specified

co, CM, c It&

49

IS 15544:2004 IEC 61080(1991)

1 IMMITTANCE METHODS Direct immittance methods (DIM)*

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

` Frequency ranges depend on the type sf equipment

LF capacitance bridges 2P

IF 1:Cv :AB, CBH, high
MF u: f, high* MF U: RI high* MF U(CAM) high*

rest fixtures are not specified

HF bridges

MF U(HFM) high*

MF U: fL, RL high*

Test fixtures are not specified ` Or medium, depending on accuracy of bridges Test fixtures are not BpeCified * Depend on accuracy DfVeCtOrimpedancemeter

1P

lF(IMM)

lF(IMM)

3F

lF(IMM)

lF

Vector impedancemeters

u: fm

medium*

U: RI medium*

U(IMM) medium*

U: fN,RN medium"

U(HFM)
medium

1P Vector impedance. meters Reflection coefficien t methods(RCM) 1P (+) (O,1-1OOOMHZ) USA Industrial Standard

lF(IPM) u: f, medium*

lF(IPM) U: R, medium*

3F U(IPM) medium*

lF(IPM) U: fN, RN medium*

lF U(HFM) medtum

` Depend on accuracy of vector impedancemeter

MF 1: f~ high

MF 1: RI high

MF I(CAM) high

MF U: fN, RN high

MF I(HFM) c hi:il

Computer-aided Test fixtures are not specified

(+)

Comparable precision can be obtained using transmission fixtures similar to the IEC x-network by the use of computerised error correction methods.

50

Bureau of Indian Standards
BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ot/ncfian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright
BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed Review publications maybe reproduced in any not preclude the free use, in the course as symbols and sizes, type or grade to the Director (Publications), BIS.

of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No, LTD 12 ( 1961 ).

Amendments
Amend No.

Issued Since
Date of Issue

Publication Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Telephones :23230131,
Regional Central Offices :

Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 23233375, 23239402 Website : www.bis.org.in

Telephones
Shah Zafar Marg

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 11 OOO2 : 1/14 C. 1. T. Scheme KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336,

23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 2254 1216, 2254 1442 { 2254 2519, 2254 2315
28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Eastern Northern Southern Western

Vll M, V. 1. P. Road, Kankurgachi 160022 600113

Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

: C. 1. T. Campus,

E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri : Manakalaya, MUMBAI 400093

(East)

Branches:

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printedat New India PrintingPress, Khurja,India

