( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 7354 ( Part VI ) - 1983

Indian Standard
GUIDE ON RELIABILITY OF ELECTRONIC ELECTRICAL ITEMS
PART VI INCLUSION OF RELIABILITY SPECIFICATIONS FOR COMPONENTS (

AND

CLAUSES INTO ( OR PARTS )

First Revision
Chairman PROF S. SAMPATH Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur

)
and

Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components Equipment Sectional Committee, LTDC 3

Members

Represxting

ADDITIONAL D I 11E o `I?o n, Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) STA~;DARIJS ( S & T ), RDSO JOTNT Dix~c~on. S,IAND.~RDS DI1 K (t$~N~~III, RDSO ( Alternate j National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Hyderabad SQ~ Lox I. M. G~NDOTRA ( Alternate ) CONTROLLER) CIL Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COL V. K. KIIAN~A ( Alternate ) DIZ P. K. DUTTA Peico Electronics and Electricals Ltd, Bombay SIIRI V. NARAYANAN ( Alternate ) SHRI B. P. GH~SH National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. C. MUKHEW~E ( Alternote) SHRI A. P. GUPTA Instrumentation Ltd, Kota SHRI I. S. SULAKH ( Alternate ) SHRI S. P. KULIURNI The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' Association, Bombay SFTRIS. M. KHURSALE ( Alternate ) SHRI H. C. MATHUR Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRI U. R. G. ACRARYA ( Alterrxzte ) SRRI D. C. MEHTA Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI R.-V. ISR~NI ( Alternate) SHRI S. R. MEHTA Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, Bombay SHRI T. C. GOSALIA ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyrzght 1983 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part bv any means except with written permission of the I' publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 7354 ( Part VI ) - 1983
( Continued

from page1 )
Members Representing personal capacity ( Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi Lucas-TVS Ltd. Madras In

DR K. B. MISRA
SRRI E. G. NAGAZUJAN SHRI K. R. ANANDA~UMARAN

NAIR SRRI C. RAN~ANATHAN (Alternate I Bhibha Atomic Research Centre; Trombay, Bombay SHREWD. V. PETKAR SHRI A. K. BABAR ( Alternate ) All India Radio, New Delhi SHRI V. B. PRADHAN SHRI N. J. NAIR ( Alternate ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD ISRO Satellite Centre ( ISAC ), Bangalore SHRI K. RAMGOPAL SHRI SIHARAN DE ( Alternate ) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd. Hvderabad SHRI K. S. PRAKASA Rao . SHRI S. S. SONWALKAR ( Alternate ) Directorate of Technical Development and ProducSHRI R. SOMASUNDARAM tion ( AIR ), Ministry of Defence SRRI R. N. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence (R & D ) COL J, VAR~HES~: SHRI P. K. SHCKLA C Alternate `, `Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI B. VIRESALINGAM ' SHRI V. MUTHAIAR ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member ) SHRI R. C. JAIN, Head ( Electronics ) ( Secretary )

Study

cif Statistical Problems of Reliability of Electronic Electrical Items Subcommittee, LTDC 3 : 1

and

Convener DR P. K. DC.TT.A Members LT-COL V. K. KHANNA Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) MAJ S. P. MURGAI ( Alternate ) SHRI V. NARAYANA Indian Statistical Institute, Hyderabad SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. RAXGOPAL ISRO Satellite Centre ( ISAC ), Bangalore DR Y. V. SOMAYAJULU National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI V. N. SHARMA ( Alternate ) COL J. VAI~GHESH: Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI P. K. SHU~LA ( Alternate ) Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay

2

Is : 7354

( Part VI ) - 1983

Indian Standard
GUIDE ON RELIABILITY OF E~LECTRONIC! AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS
PART VI INCLUSION iOR OF RELIABILITY CLAUSES ( OR INTO ) SPECIFICAT-IONS COMPONENTS PARTS

( First Revision

)

0.

FOREWOR'D

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part VI ) ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 January 1983, after the draft finalized by the Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Commitlee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first published in 1975. The revised to bring it in line with the latest technological the international level. standard is being developments at

0.3 This standard is intended to guide the writers of specifications and technical committees in consideration of factors which should be taken into account in inclusion of quantitative reliability clauses in specifications for components for electronic and electrical equipment. The other parts of this standard and Indian Standards *on reliability of electronic and electrical components and equipment are listed on page 17. 0.4 Although this standard is primarily intended for electronic or electrical components, it is also applicable to other types of .components used in electronic and electrical equipment and systems containing electromechanical and mechanical, including pneumatic and hydraulic devices. 0.5 This revision is largely based on IEC Publication 409 ( 1981 ) `Guide for the inclusion of reliability clauses into specifications for components ( or parts ) for electronic equipment', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). 3

IS : 7354 ( Part 1. SCOPE

VI ) - 1983

1.1 This standard ( Part VI ) is intended to be a guide for the inclusion of reliability clauses into specifications for components for electronic and electrical equipment. 1.1.1 It mainly applies to the case when a constant failure rate is assumed. Of the various categories of reliability clauses in the specifications for components, the present guide is currently directed at those applying to the finished product and relating to the estimation of failure rates from tests.
2. TERMINOLOGY

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, in IS : 1885 ( Part XXXIX )-1979"
following.

the terms and definitions specified shall apply, in addition to the to show complies to

2.1.1 Reliability Compliance Test - An experiment conducted whether or not value of a reliability characteristic of an item with its stated reliability requirements.

2.1.2 Reliability Determination Test - An experiment conducted determine the value of a reliability characteristic of an item.
NOTE Analysis of available data may also be used for reliability determination.

2.1.3 @Lal$ication Approval - The manufacturer is capable of producing ments of the specification.

process applied to show that a a component meeting the require-

2.1.4 Maintenance of Q/alifcation Approval - The procedure to be adopted to demonstrate that components produced by the manufacturer continue to meet the requirements of the specification. 2.1.5 Extension of Reliability Q~~a2iJication - The procedure to be adopted to demonstrate whether components produced by the manufacturer meet a better failure rate level than the qualified one. 3. GENERAL

3.0 There
The choice

are two basic Approaches A and B which may be followed. is dependent on the objectives to be met by the specification.

Both approaches are applicable to the testing of components which are essentially in continuous production or to the testing of an individual inspection lot.
*Electrotechnical items (Jirst revision ). vocabulary

: Part XXXIX 4

Reliability

of electronic

and electrical

IS : 7354 ( Part

VI ) - 1983

Compliance Testing - To be used 3.1 Approach A - Reliability when the principal purpose is to establish whether a specified failure rate The supplier's commitment is to demonstrate that the has been met. required failure rate level has been met at the required confidence level. Since the supplier commits to provide components with a failure-rate not worse than a specified level, the amount of testing is determined by the failure rate to which the component is qualified. Determination Testing - To be 3.2 Approach B - Reliability used when the principal purpose is to evaluate the reliabilityof the product. The supplier's commitment is to conduct the test as specified and report the results. The failure rate determined may be compared with that The failure rate being reported depends upon the from similar tests. amount of testing. A single specification nation tests. may contain both compliance test and determi-

When both are included, there should be a clear identification as to which test is the compliance test and which test is the determination test.
NOTE - The rate may be expressed in terms of hours, distance, quantities or units as may be appropriate. cycles or other

4. INFORMATION 4.1 Basic Control

TO

BE INCLUDED

IN SPECIFICATIONS

Concept

4.1.1 Individual Lot Control - All necessary information regarding the reliability of the parts is developed on each individual lot. The parts in each lot are totally characterized from the data generated on that lot. This concept is technically the following conditions apply: a) Assessed failure feasible; or b) Conditions preferred and should be used if either is economically of

rates are such that this treatment production are not met.

of continuous

4.1.1.1 Approach A ( reliabili!y compliance testing ) - Sufficient data are generated on a lot to determine the acceptability of the lot at the specified failure rate level. 4.1.1.2 Approach B ( reliability determination testing ) In this case, a reliability failure rate level requirement. is specified together with the method to be employed for results. 5 There is no test on the lot reporting the

IS : 7354 ( Part VI ) - 1983 4.1.2 Series Lot Control - Information regarding the reliability of the parts is accumulated over a series of lots. This concept should be used only when the component is manufactured in essentially continuous production and requires that the processes be under control in order to ensure the stability of reliability. In this context, the term `processes' means the complete design, manufacture, testing and quality control procedures.
NOTE - For a given vaiue of the assessed failure rate ( either determined required ) series lot control is usually less expensive than individual lot control. or

4.2

Statement

of Objectives

4.2.1 For Approach A ( reliability compliance testing ), the specification shall directly state the failure rate ( rates ) which will be provided together with the confidence level associated with these failure rates. 4.2.2 For Approach B ( reliability determination testing ), the specifications shall directly state the quantity of data which will be provided and the period of time over which it will be accumulated. 4.3 Test Method - The specification shall prescribe the test, normally an endurance test, to be used for the assessment of the reliability of the component. It shall state the severity and the duration of the test and whether the component is to be tested at rated or other conditions. 4.3.1 In general, the stress level specified maximum rated stress for the component. for the test shall be at the

:

4.3.2 When acceleration factors are known, a test stress level may be specified above maximum rated conditions in order to reduce the test time, or where the failure rate is constant, to reduce the sample size and/or test time. 4.3.2.1 Acceleration factor is proven quantitatively - The information clauses and acceptance requirements of the specification may specify the test to be performed to control the stability of this value. When none is specified, a conventional value derived from test results can be given for stabilized styles. Such tests mav be required periodically in time ( for example, every three years ), or periodically according to the number such as after a specified quantity has been produced. The specification shall state how specimens shall be taken from each production lot to form the test sample. 4.3.2.2 Qyantitative value af acceleration factor is not known - In the information clauses only, the specification may define the rules ( among others, statistical tests for comparing results ) and the tests to be carried out to establish the values appropriate to a particular component; these 6

Is : 7354 tests may be performed delivery where acceptance

( Part VI ) - 1983

before commencing delivery, or at a phase of is based on non-accelerated tests.

4.4 Criteria of Failure - The specification shall state the criteria of failure to be applied to determine whether a component has failed in the test specified in 4.3. 4.4.1 The criteria of failure may be the complete ponent or a-certain degree of degradation of selected 4.4.2 Only those parameters judged to be important use conditions for which the component is designed to be measured for determining the failure rate. failure of the comparameters. under should the typical be specified

4.4.3 Where appropriate, two or more failure criteria may be specified for a given parameter of a particular component; at least one shall apply A complete failure shall be counted to complete failure of a component. also as a degradation failure. The assessed failure rate then refers to the total number of failures which have occurred. 4.4.4 Under certain conditions, than one failure rate for components as defining component failure. it may having be desirable to specify more several parameters, specified

4.4.5 In the absence of any specification to the contrary, failure in respect to more than one criterion on a single specimen shall be considered only as one failure and constitutes one defective. 4.5 Periodicity of Test - The specification shall prescribe the periods at which the test specified in 4.3 shall be performed. These shall be either on a lot-by-lot basis and/or at specified intervals of time or quantity produced. 4.6 Failure-in-Time Distribution - The text of this guide deals mainly with those cases where an exponential failure in time distribution ( constant failure rate ) is either known or can be reasonably ~assumed to exist. The specification shall state, if applicable, early failure period and start of wear-out period. 4.7 Accumulation of Data ( Applicable to Series Lots Only ) The specification shall state what data shall be accumulated, together with the period over which it may be accumulated and its purpose. The results of a testing specified the prescribed period for the purposes rate achieved ( see 5 ). The in typical in 4.3 shall be accumulated over of calculating the assessed failure changes

information achieved may also be used for prescribing characteristics of components.

7

IS : 7354; ( Part VI ) - 1983 The method used to present the information preferably be selected from one of those given 1975*. mentioned above shall in IS : 7354 ( Part III )-

4.8 Exclusion of Data - Once the testing has begun, the results of al] testing performed on lots from the continuous process ~111 be included in the accumulation. Exceptionally, a lot may be found to be defective and not representative of normal production. If the mechanism of failure can be established and it can be shown to the satisfaction of the qualifying a.uthority that re-occurrence is not possible in future production, the data appropriate to that lot may be excluded from the accumulation. The data summary shall, however, indicate the number of lots so excluded. 4.9 Statement of Test Results terminology to be used in expressing - The specification shail state the the results of a test specified in 4.3.

4.9.1 Approrch A ( Reliability Compliance Testing ) - The statement shall be given as a failure rate using one of the specified levels. It shall be determined using the one-sided confidence interval of which the upper limit is related to a 60 percent or 90 percent confidence level for qualification and 10 percent, 60 percent or 90 percent for maintenance of qualification. The preferred values shall be 60 percent for qualification approval and 10 percent for maintenance of qualification. 4.9.2 Approach B ( Reliability Determination Testing ) - The statement shall indicate clearly the number of specimens tested, the number of defectives observed and the accumulated test time. The statement shall include the assessed failure rate calculated from the accumulated test It shall be determined using the one-sided confidence interval of results. which the upper limit is related to a 60 percent or 90 percent confidence The 60 percent level is preferred. level. The results shall be presented and additionally, the presentation years. 4.10 Qualification may be considered Approval in following preferably at intervals of six months may aggregate results for up to three approval other than

Procedure - Qualification two distinct parts: of the specification

a) Approval to all the requirements reliability; and b) Approval
Nova visions. 1-

to the specific
deals only

reliability
with the

provisions.
approval to the specific reliability pro-

This guide

*Guide on reliability of electronic and electrical ,reliability data on electronic and electrical components

( or parts ).

items:

Part

III Presentation

of

8

IS : 7354 ( Part VI ) - 1983
it should NOTE 2 - While this distinction is drawn here for the purpose of clarity, be noted, however, that both qualifications may be included in a single series of tests. The specification shall

the granting

of qualification

state the procedures to be adopted approval status to the component.

prior to

It shall state whether the sample to be subjected to the test specified in 4.3 may be taken from a single inspection lot or from several inspection In the latter case, the specification shall state whether the lots are lots. to be consecutive or selected over a period of time, The obtained initial qualification at a definite failure when the result of the tests is satisfactory. rate ( upper limit ) is

After that, extension of qualification to a lower failure rate or level or qualification at a higher failure rate ( when maintenance or qualification at the previous level is withdrawn ) shall comply with the same rules as for initial qualification. 4.11 Determination of Sample Size - The specification shall state the size of the sample to be subjected to the test specified in 4.3. Alternatively, it may refer to sampling plans from which the sample size may be derived. 4.11.1 Sample Size Derived from the Required Failure Rate (for Reliability Compliunce Testing ) - The sample size shall normally be derived from failure rate sampling plans agreed to between the customer and the manufacturer and choosen from Tables 1 and 2. Their fore, are constant. plans are based on the exponential distribution and, thereapplicable only during a period when the failure rate is size shall be derived rate from the following: limit at a specified criteria c ). confidence

The sample

a) Required failure level ); and b) Number

( upper allowed

of defectives

( acceptance

These tables give the total number of unit hours to be accumulated. The number of components to be tested is determined from there according to the se!ected test duration. This duration shall be in accordance with Table 3 of Appendix B of IS : 7354 ( Part III )-l'J75*, with 1 000 h and 2 000 h being preferred. 4.11.1.1 Qfialijcation and extension percent - As give11 in Table 1. of qualijcation:
items: Part ( or parts ).

conjdence
LII

level

60
of

*%uide on reliability of electronic and electrical reliability data on electronic and electrical components

Presentation

9

IS-: 7354 ( Part VI ) - 1983
TABLE 1 CUMULATIVE UNIT HOURS FOR REQUIRED RATE AT 60 PERCENT CONFIDENCE LEVEL ( Clauses4.11.1 and4.11.1.1 ~---__h_-_-~ In Percent per 1 000 h 10 1 0.1 0.01 0.001
~REQUIRED FAILURE RATE

FAILURE

)
UNIT HOURS, IN MILLIONS

In Failures per Hour 10-a 10-s 10-s lo-' 10-8

H = CUMULATIVE c------------c=o c=l c=2 0.009 17 0.091 7 0.917 9.17 91.7 0.020 3 0.203 2.03 20.3 203

h---_-_-_-_-----~ c=3 c-4 0.041 8 0.418 4.18 41.8 418

c=5 0.063 0.63 6.3 63 630

0.031 1 0.311 3.11 31 1 311

0.052 4 0.524 5.24 52.4 524

The period covered by tests for qualification addition to the qualified failure rate. 4.11.1.2 in Table 2.
TABLE 2

has to be given in As given

Maintenance

of qualification:

conjdence level 10 percent -

CUMULATIVE

10 PERCENT

UNIT

HOURSFOR REQUIRED CONFIDENCE LEVEL

FAILURE

RATE

AT

( Clauses 4.11.1, 4.11.1.2 and 4.12.2 ) r--_--_-h---_-_ In Percent per 1 000 h 10 1 0.1 0.01 O*OOl ,J
REQUIRED F AILU~E RATE

In Failures `per Hour lo-' 10-s 10-B 1o-' 10-s

H = CUMULA%WE UNIT HOURS, IN MULLIONS .`---_--------h________--_-~ c=5 c=3 c=4 c= 1 c=2 0.005 3 0.053 0.53 5.3 53 0.011 0.11 1.1 11 110 0.017 5 0.175 1.75 17.5 175 0.024 4 C.244 2'44 24.4 244 0.03 1 0.315 3.15 31.5 315

NOTE 1 -The prescribed accumulated number of unit hours may be achieved from tests on a single lot or by aggregation of test results from sequential lots over a period prescribed in the specification.

NOTE 2 - From the number of components to be tested, and the period for maintenance of qualification, the sample size for each test is determmed by the periodicity of test ( stv 4.12 ).

10

IS : 7354 ( Part

VI ) - 1983

the 4.11.1.3 Extension of qualijication - For extension of qualification, specification shall state how new stricter selections shall be made from the agreed failure rate sampling plans to derive the sample size, appropriate It shall to the better assessed failure rate, for the test specified in 4.3. also state which of the accumulated data may be taken into account in submitting for qualification approval to the better assessed failure rate. 4.11.2 Sample Size Fixed or Derived from Acceptance Quality Level ( AQL ) Tables iu hdian Standard spe@cation for sampling plans and procedures for inspection by attributes for electronic items ( under preparation ) ( Reliability Determination Testing ) - The sample size may be either fixed ( to be tested at a periodic interval )or changed in accordance with the manufactured quantities; in the latter case, the sample size shall be based on an AQL and inspection level selected from Indian Standard inspection by specification for sampling plans and procedures for attributes for electronic items ( under preparation ).
NOTE - Till such time the standard under preparation shall be as agreed to between the concerned parties. is published, the matter

From the cumulative unit hours accumulated during the observed number of defectives, the upper limit of calculated as follows:
Xe = -

the period and failure rate is

d+A H unit hours, to the observed level, and confidence level 60

where H = cumulative A = number number d = observed given in Table 3 according of defectives and the confidence number of defectives.

4.11.2.1 QrlaliJication and extension of qualijcation: percent - As given in Table 3.
TABLE
~BSERVBX, NUMIIER

3

NUMBER 1 2 1.1

A 3 1.18 4 1.25 5 1.3

OF DEEECTIVES A

0
0915

1.02

The standard failure rate level to which the parts may be qualified will be that standard level equal to or poorer than ,& ( Table 4 ).
TABLE IN PERCENT PER 1 000 h IN FAILURES PER HOUR 4 10 10-d QUALIFIED 1 10-s FAILURE RATE 0.1 10-e 0.01 IO-' 0.001 10-a

11

IS : 7354 ( Part VI ) - 1983
The specification can give component where it is desirable. intermediate levels for a particular

4.11.2.2 Maintenance of qualijcation at 10 percent conjidence level - Qualification is maintained through the continuation of the testing described in 4.11.2 associated with the specified AQL's or fixed samples. 4.11.2.3 Extension of quahjlcation - For extension of approval shall be sought to a new specification which sampling to more severe inspection requirements. qualification incorporates

The new inspection requirements shall be chosen from Indian Standard specification for sampling plans and procedures for inspection by attributes for electronic items ( under preparation ), and their choice shall be such as to reflect the increase in component hours required to demonstrate that the better assessed failure rate can be achieved. Where a fixed sample size has been used, the sample size or the number of test hours shall be matched to the new assessed failure rate. 4.12 Maintenance or Withdrawal of Qualification Approval The specification shall indicate the causes leading to the withdrawal of qualification approval and the conditions to comply with the maintaining qualification approval. 4.12.1 Period of Time - The specification shall state the period ( fixed or maximum ) over which requirements for maintenance of qualification approval have to be satisfied. The qualification test shall have been satisfactorily completed before the end of the prescribed period; otherwise, qualification approval is withdrawn. The preferential
TABLE
FAILURE RATE VALVE IS FAILIJKES PER HOUR

periods
5

of time are given in Table
PERIODS

5.

PREFERENTIAL

OF TIME

PREFERENTIAL c---------Short

PEWODS OF TINE IN MONTHS h-_-------,

Long

10-a 10-S 10-e 10-1 IO-8

3 3 6 9 18

3 6 12 24 36

12

IS : 7354 ( Part VI )- 1983 4.12.2 Sample Size Deriued from the Required Failure Rate - Qualification approval shall be withdrawn when the assessed failure rate, calculated from the accumulated data, is worse than the assessed failure rate, which has been claimed and for which qualification approval has been granted ( see acceptance criteria for maintenance of qualification in Table 2) . 4.13 Sample Size Fixed or Derived from AQL Tables - Qualification approval shall be withdrawn when the conditions specified in Indian Standard specification for sampling plans and procedures for inspection by attributes for electronic items ( under preparation ) for inspection for change from `normal' to `tightened' and those for `discontinuation of inspection' have occurred. The detail specification concerning the withdrawal sample size has been used. 5. ASSESSED FAILURE shall prescribe of qualification the rules to be obeyed approval where a fixed

RATE

5.0 A statement of the failure rate levels, either as a requirement or which can be demonstrated by a stated amount of testing, shall be included in the component specification. This statement should clearly indicate the failure rate level(s), the confidence level(s) involved, and the applicable stress level(s). These failure rate levels shall be used in purchasing components of a specified reliability.
NOTE It would be hazardous for equipment designers responsible for making preliminary calculations of mean times between failures ( MTBF ) to use the failure rates so defined without suitable precautions.

5.1 Preferred Failure Rate Levels - When a failure specified, the following preferred values should be used: 1 x 10-5, 1 x 10`6, 1 x 10-7 and 1 x 10-a per hour. the failure

rate

level

is

Except where the failure to fixed time periods only.

rate is constant,

rate levels apply

NOTE If in Procedure A ( reliability compliance testing ) intermediate failure rate ievels are desirable for a particular component class, such levels may be specified provided that each failure rate level is identified with specific acceptance test requirements. In any event, not more than five levels shall be provided in a single specification for a component.

Confidence Levels - The assessed failure rate shall be determined using the one-sided confidence interval of which the upper limit is related to a 90 percent, 60 percent or 10 percent confidence level.
5.2

SO percent is preferred for determination tests and for initial qualification, 10 percent is preferred for maintenance of qualification on a continuing basis. 13

s

: 7354 ( Part

VI ) - 1983

5.3 Relations Between Failure Rate, Confidence Level, Acceptance Number and Sample Size - The choice of confidence level and High acceptance number is a complex technical economic decision. confidence may require large samples, particularly in cases where the required failure rate is low. To numbers reduce the risk of might be preferred. unwarranted rejection, high acceptance

On the other hand, higher acceptance number confidence level increase the sample size and testing

plans for any given costs.

Table 6 shows in co1 3 the ratio of the sample size required for the first value of the variable parameters in co1 2 to the sample size required for the second value of those parameters.

TABLE
CONSTANT

6

SAMPLE

SIZE RATIO SAMPLE SIZE RATIO (3)

PARAMETERS

VARIABLE PARAMETERS

Acceptance number c = 0
constant failure rate Acceptance number G = 2 constant failure rate Confidence level 60 percent constant failure rate Confidence level and acceptance number are constant

Confidence level : 90 percent and 60 percent Confidence level : 90 percent and 60 percent c = 2 and 0 Failure rate 0.1 and 1 percent

2.5 l-7 3.4 10

6. RELIARILITY

TESTING

METHODS

6.1 Methods Depending Upon the Distribution of Failures with Time - Failure-in-time distributions may be categorized by a constant, increasing or decreasing failure rate during particular time intervals.
NOTE - As stated in 4.6 the text of this guide is mainly constant failure rate. applicable to the case of

6.1.1

Failure

Rate Constant with Time

6.1.1.1 Accumulated component time festing - Tests may be performed, for varying lengths of time. The results of all tests for all time periods are collected together and the failure rate calculated from the accumulated results. 14

IS : 7354 ( Part VI ) - 1983 The number of units exposed for each time period is multiplied by 1 the duration of the period and a unit hours product is determined. The unit hour products for all time periods are totalled to obtain a single unit hour sum representing the aggrJegate of all testing experience. 6.1.2 Failure Rate not Constant with Time - In some cases, the failuredistribution may be unknown. The approach to reliability in-time testing tvill, in part, be dependent on the nature of such distributions and the knowledge of them. 6.1.2.1 Variable time testing - In this method, the distribution of failures-in-time is estimated. This may be done by testing a sample for a fixed time interval and during this interval measuring the time occurrence of each failure. Alternatively a number of samples may be tested for a series of different time periods. The proportion of each sample failed at the end of its time period is then ~measured. In the case of the occurrence of early failure, the failure be calculated from the end of the early failure period. rate should

6.1.2.2 Fixed time interval testing - This method is preferred in those cases where the failure rate is either known to be other than constant or where it cannot reasonably be assumed to be constant. All tests shall be performed for fixed time periods. The restricted failure resultina to the t&e period rate estimates and the of each particular test. qualification are

For example, testing for a period of 500 h will permit the assessed failure rate to be calculated in terms of, for example, 10-5 per hour for 500 h. iVo assessment can be made directly from the data for the failure rate per 1 000 h or any other time base. 6.1.2.3 Sequential testing -This method may be based on the bution of failure with time or on the binomial law. When based the distribution of failure with time, a number of components are until the accumulated time and number of failures are sufficient When based upon the binomial law, the components are decision. for fixed time periods. 6.2 Fixed Failure of a specific quantity It failure. is normally distriupon tested for a tested

Number Testing - This method re.quires testing of units until a predetermined number have failed. neccessary to measure the time of occurrence of each

This method is more applicable in those instances components are involved, or where a very accurate required regarding the time of failure. 15

where expensive determination is

IS : 7354 ( Part VI ) - 1983 6.3 Tightened
which are Limits Testing - For those components expected to exhibit a degradation of the failure-determining parameter(s) at a known and predictable rate during life testing, the time required to, make a decision may be shortened by tightening the failure-determining, limits for the decision parameters. 6.4 Variables Testing - The use of a variables encouraged where the conditions for the applicability these conditions include the following: method should be are met. In general,.

a) Detailed knowledge of the distribution of the characteristic involved, with particular emphasis on knowledge of the shape of the distribution tails; and b) Use of a procedure for incorporating into the assessed failure rates derived from the variables data, the failures observed as a typical to the distribution. 7. CHECKLIST

PREPARING

OF FACTORS A RELIABILITY
or series lot control; or determination of test method, failure;

TO BE CONSIDERED SPECIFICATION
testing; test stress levels, acceleration

WHEN

4 Individual b) Compliance Cl Specification 4 Criteria of

factors;,

Periodicity of test; e> Qualification approval f>

procedure; size; from the required from AQL and and withdrawal of qualificafailure table; rate;

9)

Determination i) Sample ii) Sample

of sample

size derived

size fixed or derived qualification; by qualification;

h) Criteria j) Period
k)
Criteria tion.

for initial covered

for maintenance,

extension

.
INDIAN ON RELIABILITY EQUIPMENT Is:> Electrotechnical vocabulary 1885 ( Part XXXIX )-I979 electronic and electrical items ( jirst revision ) 2612-1965 7354 ( Part ( Part Recommendation components Guide on reliability I )-1975 II )-I975 for type approval of electronic OF ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND STANDARDS

: Part XXXIX
procedures

Reliability

of

and sampling

for electronic

and electrical reliability

items:

Part I Preliminary Part II Managerial

considerations

aspects of reliability of reliability of reliability, data on electronic availability and electri-

( Part III )-1975 Part III Presentation cal components ( or parts ) ( Part IV j-1974 Part IV Collection data from field performance ( Part

and maintainability

V )-1975 Part V Inclusion of lot-by-lot and periodic inspection procedures in specifications for electronic and electrical components ( or parts ) clauses into specifications for

( Part VI )-1983 Part VI Inclusion of reliability components ( or parts ) (Jirst r&ion ) 7690-1975 8161 ( Part ( Part ( Part

Mathematical guide to the terms and definitions for reliability equipment and components ( or parts ) used therein Guide for equipment I )-1976 V )-1981 VI )-I983 reliability testing: and procedures test plans for success ratio

of electronic

Part I Principles

Part V Compliance

Part VI Tests for validity

of a constant failure rate assumption rate and mean time execution

( Part VII )-1977 Part VII Compliance test plans for failure between failures assuming constant failure rate ( Part XI )-I983 Part XI Flow chart of reliability tests 9185 ( Part Endurance I )-1979 describing preparations

for and

( life ) test for electronic Part I Thermal endurance

and electrical

components:

( Part II )-1979 9186-1979 9692 ( Part

Part II Mechanical

endurance and electrical items

Guide for screening of electronic Guide on maintainability I )-I980

of equipment: to maintainability requirements programme and availability predictions in specifications and

Part I Introduction Part II

( Part II )-1980 contracts ( Part III )-I981 10139-1982

Maintainability

Part III Maintainability of reliability,

Presentation

maintainability

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units QUANTITY

SYSTEM'OF

UNITS

( SI UNITS)

UNIT

SYMBOL m kg 0 A K

Length Mass Time Electric current rhermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity
Units

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

cd mol

Amount of substance
Supplementary Qu ANTTTY

UNTT

SYMBOL

Plane angle Solid angle
Derived Units

radian steradian

rad or

QUANTITY POP32

UNIT

SYMBOL

DEFINITION

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal force

N

1 1

N = 1 kg.m/s* J = 1 N.m 1 V.s

Energy -Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress

J w
Wb T Hz S V Pa

1 W = 1 J/s lWb= 1 1 1 T = 1 Wb/m* S = 1 A/V V = 1 W/A 1 N/m'

1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-l)

1 Pa =

