IS 7784 (Part 1) : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2019) 


WRG HTP 
IR UR wa far GRI b Sosa — Ma arar 


ANT 1 STATA AT 


(GT gero ) 


Indian Standard 


DESIGN OF CROSS DRAINAGE 
WORKS — CODE OF PRACTICE 
PART 1 GENERAL FEATURES 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


July 2013 Price Group 7 


Canals and Cross Drainage Works Sectional Committee, WRD 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Canals and Cross Drainage Works Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources 
Division Council. 


Cross drainage works are structures which are constructed to negotiate an aligned carrier channel/canal over, 
below or at the same level of a drainage or another carrier channel/canal. 


This standard was first published in 1975 and revised in 1993. 


This revision has been taken up in the light of the comments received from the members. The salient changes 
made in this revision are as follows: 


a) Table indicating losses for type of transition has been deleted and values for coefficient of expansion or 
contraction for various transitions (open and closed) has been added. 

b) Separate sub clauses on effect of channel sinuosity, checks, flumes (measuring structures), and hydraulic 
jump have been added under various losses due to different factors. 


This Code is formulated in two parts, Part | deals with general features and Part 2 with specific requirements, for 
various types of cross drainage works. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 7784 (Part 1) : 2013 


Indian Standard 


DESIGN OF CROSS DRAINAGE 
WORKS — CODE OF PRACTICE 
PART 1 GENERAL FEATURES 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) covers general features pertinent 
to the design of various types of cross drainage works 
and incorporates investigations and studies connected 
therewith. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below: 


IS No. Title 


1893 : 1984 Criteria for earthquake resistant 


design of structures (fourth revision) 


2912 : 1999 Liquid flow measurement in open 
channels — Slope area method (first 
revision) 

2951 Recommendation for estimation of 


flow of liquids in closed conducts: 
Head loss in straight pipes due to 
friction resistance 
Head loss in valves and fittings 
Glossary of term relating to river 
valley projects: 
(Part 11/Sec 5) : Hydrology, Section 5 Floods 

1977 
(Part 15/Sec 5) : Canal structures, Section 5 Cross 


(Part 1) : 1965 


(Part 2) : 1965 
4410 


1992 drainage works (first revision) 
5477 (Part 4): Methods for fixing the capacities of 
1971 reservoirs: Part 4 Flood storage 

7894 : 1975 Code of practice for stability analysis 
of earth dams 

8237 : 1985 Code of practice for protection of 
slope for reservoir embankments 
(first revision) 

10751 : 1994 Planning and design of guide banks 


for alluvial rivers — Guidelines (first 
revision) 


IS No. Title 


11532 : 1995 Construction and maintenance of 
river embankments (levees) — 
Guidelines (first revision) 

Guidelines for planning and design 
of river embankments (levees) (first 


revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


12094 : 2000 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 4410 (Part 11/Sec 5) and IS 4410 (Part 15/Sec 5) 
shall apply. 


4 CATEGORIES OF CROSS DRAINAGE 
WORKS 


Cross drainage works can be classified under the three 
broad categories listed at 4.1 to 4.3, based on the type 
of the structure to negotiate a canal over, below or at 
the same level of the drainage channel. 


4.1 Structures for Canal Over a Natural Drainage 
Channel 


The structures falling under this category are aqueducts, 
syphon aqueducts and culverts. Maintenance of 
structures in this category is relatively more convenient, 
as these are generally above the ground and hence open 
for inspection. 


4.2 Structures for Canal Underneath a Natural 
Drainage Channel 


The structures falling under this category are 
superpassages and syphons including well syphons. In 
case of syphons the maintenance is difficult as these 
run below the natural drainage channel and are, 
therefore, not easily accessible to inspection. 


4.3 Structures for Canal Crossing a Natural 
Drainage Channel at the Same Level 


Structures falling under this category are level crossings 
and inlets, with or without escapes. 


NOTE — Wherever the word ‘canal’ is used, it should be meant 
as canal/carrier channel. 


IS 7784 (Part 1) : 2013 


5 SELECTION OF THE TYPE OF CROSS 
DRAINAGE WORK 


5.1 While aligning the canal, the type of cross drainage 
work envisaged should always be kept in view. The 
economics of various types of cross drainage works 
vis-a-vis alternative alignments should be considered 
before deciding upon the site and type of crossing. As 
a general guide, for deciding upon the type of the cross 
drainage work, important considerations are as given 
below: 


a) Full supply level and functions of canal — 
vis-a-vis high flood level of the drainage 
channel; 

b) Topography of terrain; 

c) Regime of the stream; 

d) Foundation strata; 

e) Dewatering requirements; 

f) Ratio of design flood to be provided in 
drainage channel to the discharge in the canal; 
and 


g) Envisaged head loss. 


5.1.1 Full Supply Levels of Canal vis-a-vis High Flood 
Level (HFL) of Drainage Channel 


The choice of any particular type of cross drainage work 
is dependent on the high flood level (HFL) in the drainage 
channel to be negotiated. Aqueducts are generally 
proposed when the bed level of canal is well above the 
HFL of the drainage channel. Super passages are generally 
proposed when the full supply level (FSL) of the canal is 
well below the bed level of the drainage channel. When 
the bed level of the canal is at, or below, the HFL of the 
drainage channel, the depression of the bed of the drainage 
channel is often a more economical proposal and in such 
cases syphon aqueducts may be considered. 


5.1.2 Topography of Terrain 


Detailed examination of the topography of the terrain 
is essential to locate a stable reach of the drainage 
channel with good foundations permitting, preferably, 
a right-angle crossing. Topography of the terrain may 
also permit diversion of one channel into another and 
locating the cross drainage work below the confluence 
of the two channel for greater economy. 


5.1.3 Regime of Drainage Channel 


The regime of a drainage channel requires careful 
examination. For drainage channel carrying high 
sediment charges or drift materials, the possibility of 
choking up of the syphon and the effect of fluming of 
the drainage channel should be kept in view. 


5.1.4 Foundation Strata 


The selection of the most suitable site and a good 


design, for any cross drainage work is intimately related 
to the engineering properties of the foundation, sub- 
strata at various alternative sites. These properties have, 
therefore, to be determined by site explorations. Where 
an alternative site, meeting other criteria, is available, 
the final choice would obviously depend on the location 
where the sub-strata available close to the bed of the 
stream is firm. 


5.1.5 Dewatering Requirements 


In the execution of foundation works for cross drainage 
structures dewatering of foundations may pose serious 
problems. An accurate estimate of the cost and 
procedure of dewatering requires to be carefully worked 
out when designs involve laying of foundations below 
the ground water table. 


5.1.6 Ratio of Design Flood in Drainage Channel to 
the Discharge in Canal 


Negotiating a canal below the drainage channel is 
generally more difficult and involves more head loss. 
However, if the topography and other features warrant 
a choice to be made between canal syphon and syphon 
aqueduct, then canal syphon may be preferred, only if 
the ratio of canal discharge to the design flood is 
substantially low. 


5.1.7 Envisaged Head Loss 


The choice of any particular type of cross drainage work 
is also dependent on the head loss that can be permitted 
in the canal. Whereas higher head loss can throw some 
area out of command, restriction on head loss may 
necessitate provision of wider sections making the 
structure costly. 


6 DATA REQUIREMENT 


6.1 For any type of cross drainage work some data is 
required which is common to all types of cross drainage 
works. A location map for the work with results of sub- 
surface exploration conducted at site, cross-sections 
of the stream, upstream and downstream of the 
proposed site, should be prepared, as given in 6.2 to 6.9. 


6.2 An index map to a suitable scale showing the 
recommended location of the cross drainage structure, 
the alternative sites of crossings investigated and 
rejected, the existing communications, the general 
topography of the country and the important habitations 
in the vicinity. 


6.3 A catchment area map to a suitable scale, with 
contour markings at suitable intervals showing the main 
drainage channel from its sources together with all its 
tributaries. The map should also show the various 
locations of raingauge stations, gauging sites, etc, as 
also the general soil types and land use (that is forests, 
cultivated and uncultivated areas). The hydrological 


observation sites should also be marked. Existing, under 
construction or proposed embankments and flood 
management measures should also be shown. 


6.4 A detailed survey plan of the drainage channel to 
suitable scale showing important topographical features 
extending considerable distances, downstream and 
upstream, of the proposed site of crossing and either 
of its banks. 


6.5 A site plan to a suitable scale showing details of the 
site selected and extending upstream and downstream, 
of the centre line of the proposed crossing and covering 
its approaches to sufficient distances, so as to demarcate 
levels, cadestral survey plot numbers, important 
topographical features like depressions near the 
proposed alignment of canal, general sub-soil water 
levels (with slope, if possible), etc. 


6.5.1 The other requirements for the plan at 6.5 are: 


a) Reference to the position of the bench-mark 
used as datum with its full description and 
reduced level; 

b) Lines and identification numbers of the cross- 
sections and longitudinal sections of drainage 
channel taken within the scope of site plan and 
exact locations of their extreme points; 

c) Locations of the various trial pits and/or 
borings with their identification numbers; 

d) Contour of the drainage channel at intervals 
between 0.5 m to 1.5 m depending upon the 
terrain. This interval may be greater in 
mountainous regions; 

e) Direction of flow of water; 

Angle of direction of crossing; and 

g) Cross alignment of canal further upstream for 
some distance beyond the limits of cross 
drainage works. 


6.6 A cross-section of the drainage channel at the 
proposed site of the crossing to appropriate vertical 
and horizontal scales indicating the following 
information: 


a) Cross-section covering the bed and banks of 
the channel portion and the ground levels 
beyond the banks covering the entire flood 
plane, or from ridge to ridge at close intervals 
to sufficient distances on either side showing 
all uneven features and habitations, if any; 


b) Nature of the soil in bed, banks and 
approaches, with trial pit or bore-hole sections 
showing the levels and natures of the various 
strata down to stratum suitable from 
foundation considerations and from 
considerations of safe bearing capacity of 
soil; 


IS 7784 (Part 1) : 2013 


c) Low-water level; and 
d) Maximum flood level. 


6.7 Longitudinal section of the drainage channel 
covering a reasonable reach to suitable scale, showing 
the location of the cross drainage work, with levels of 
the observed flood, the low water and the bed levels at 
suitably spaced intervals along the line of the deep water 
channel. 


6.8 A note giving the salient features relating to the 
catchment area, the meteorological conditions 
experienced thereon, besides the following other points: 


a) Any predictable (future) alteration in the land 
use; 

b) Storages in the catchment (artificial or natural) 
and embankment breaches that have occurred 
in the past; 

c) Short duration intensity and frequency data 
in respect of rainfall in the catchment; 

d) Liability of the site to seismic disturbances; 

e) Likelihood of heavy sediment charge or 
floating timber; 

f) Particulars of foundation exploration data 
incidental to design requirements; and 

g) Recuperation tests, where foundation depth is 
more than 3 m below the water table and where 
the strata are pervious. 


6.9 A note giving the salient design features of structures 
existing upstream or downstream of the proposed site. 


6.9.1 Presence of dams, barrages, weirs, etc, on the 
natural drainage channel in the vicinity either upstream 
or downstream, may affect the hydraulic characteristics 
of the natural drainage channel, like obliquity and 
concentration of flow, scour, silting of bed, change in 
bed levels, flood levels, etc. These effects should be 
considered in the design of the cross drainage work. 


6.10 For preparing the design of a cross drainage 
structure, the following specified hydraulic data should 
also be made available. 


6.10.1 Canal 


a) Full supply discharge, Q; 
b) Bed width; 

c) Full supply depth; 

d) Water surface slope; 

e) Bed level; 

f) Bed slope; 

g) Full supply level; 

h) Top of bank level; 


j) Cross-section of canal showing natural ground 
level; 


IS 7784 (Part 1) : 2013 


k) Sub-soil water level; and 


m) Nature of bed material and value of ‘n’ 
(rugosity coefficient in Manning’s formula). 


6.10.2 Drainage Channel 


a) Extent and nature of drainage area (catchment 
area); 

b) Maximum annual rainfall and the period (year) 
of data; 

c) Maximum intensity of rainfall with year; 

d) Maximum observed flood discharge at the site; 

e) Maximum flood level; 

f) Water surface slope; 


g) Site plan of proposed crossing including 
contours; 

h) Log of borehole or trial pit data; 

j) Type of bed load of drainage channel; 

k) Longitudinal section of the stream for suitable 


distance upstream and downstream of the 
canal depending upon site conditions; 

m) Cross-section of the drainage channel for a 
distance of 100 m to 300 m upstream and 
downstream, at intervals of 10 m to 50 m; 

n) Waterways provided in road and railway 
bridges or other hydraulic structures on the 
drainage channel; 

p) Spring water level at the crossing site in May 
and October; and 


q) Silt factor. 


7 DESIGN FLOOD FOR DRAINAGE CHANNEL 


7.1 Design flood for drainage channel to be adopted 
for cross drainage works should depend upon the size 
of the canal, size of the drainage channel and location 


of the cross drainage. A very long canal, crossing a 
drainage channel in the initial reach, damage to which 
is likely to affect the canal supplies over a large area 
and for a long period, should be given proper weightage. 


7.2 Cross drainage structures are divided into four 
categories depending upon the canal discharge and 
drainage discharge. Design flood to be adopted for these 
four categories of cross drainage structures is given in 
Table 1. 


7.3 Where possible, the discharges determined by 
different methods mentioned in IS 5477 (Part 4) should 
be compared to see if any large variations are exhibited 
and the most reasonable value, giving weightage to the 
one based on observed data, should be adopted. Where 
there are cross drainage works already existing on the 
same drainage channel, full data regarding the observed 
flood should be obtained and the new cross drainage 
works designed, with such modifications in the design 
flood as may be considered necessary. 


7.4 To safeguard against unforeseen nature of flood 
intensities the foundation of the cross drainage structure 
should be checked for a check flood discharge of value 
20 percent higher than the design flood given in 
Table 1. 


8 HYDRAULIC DESIGN ASPECTS 


8.1 Waterway 


8.1.1 Waterway for across drainage work is fixed from 
hydraulic and economic considerations with particular 
reference to, 


a) design flood; 
b) topography of the site; 
c) existing and proposed section and slope of the 


Table 1 Design Flood Values 


(Clauses 7.2 and 7.4) 
SINo. Category of Structure Canal Discharge Estimated Drainage Discharge” Frequency of Design Flood 
m/s m/s 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) A 0-0.5 All discharges lin 25 years 
ii) B 0.5-15 0-150 lin 50 years 
Above 150 1 in 100 years 
iii) [e 15-30 0-100 lin 50 years 
Above 100 1 in 100 years 
iv) D Above 30 0-150 1 in 100 years 
Above 150 (see Note 2) 
NOTES 


1 The design flood to be adopted as mentioned in this table should in no case, be less than the observed flood. 
2 In case of very large cross drainage structures where estimated drainage discharge is above 150 cumecs and canal design discharge 
is more than 30 cumecs, the hydrology should be examined in detail and appropriate design flood adopted, which should in no case 


be less than 1 in 100 years flood. 


D This refers to the discharge estimated on the basis of river parameters corresponding to maximum observed flood level. 


drainage channel in the vicinity of the 
crossing; 

d) permissible afflux; and 

e) construction and maintenance aspects. 


8.1.2 In plains, the drainage channels are generally in 
alluvium and the waterway usually provided in works 
without rigid floor is about sixty to eighty percent of 
the perimeter, given by Lacey’s formula: 


P, =C [0]"? 
where 
P,, = wetted perimeter, in m; 
C = coefficient varying from 4.5 to 6.3 according 


to local conditions, the usual value adopted 
being 4.8 for regime channel; and 


Q = design flood, in m*/s. 


8.1.2.1 The value of wetted perimeter obtained 
from 8.1.2 is the total waterway between the two faces 
of the abutments. 


8.1.2.2 In works with rigid floors, however, waterway 
can be further flumed within the permissible limits of 
velocity negotiated through the available ventages. 
Ordinarily such velocities should be limited to the 
values given in Table 2. 


8.1.3 For sub-mountainous and mountainous terrains 
with flashy flows, the waterway is provided within the 
width of the existing stream. Where the slope of the 
natural drainage channel is quite steep suitable methods 
maybe adopted to bring the velocity within the desired 
limits. 


8.1.4 The minimum dimension of openings should be 


IS 7784 (Part 1) : 2013 


such as to permit, as far as possible, manual clearing 
of deposits therein. 


8.2 Clearance for Aqueducts 
8.2.1 Rectangular Openings 


The clearance shall depend upon the relative levels of 
the canal bed and high flood levels of the drainage 
channel. Values given in Table 3 are suggested as 
suitable minimum clearances (taking into account 
allowable afflux) for purposes of design, where 
available. 


8.2.1.1 If the minimum clearances specified in Table 3 
are not available; safety of the superstructure should 
be ensured against likely repercussions. 


8.2.2 Arch Openings 


Minimum clearance measured to the crown of the arch 
should normally be given as recommended in Table 4. 


8.2.3 In the case of drainage channels, where a bed 
rise due to progressive silting is anticipated, the 
permissible clearance specified in Table 4 should be 
increased to allow for such aggradations depending 
upon the extent of silting. 


8.2.4 Free Board 


On aqueduct structures, the free board is reckoned from 
the high flood level (including afflux) in case of 
drainage channel and from the full supply level in case 
of canals, to the formation level of guide bank or canal 
embankment. The free board should not be less than 
900 mm. Wherever heavy wave actions are anticipated, 
the free board should be suitably increased. 


Table 2 Maximum Permissible Velocities 
(Clause 8.1.2.2) 


SI No. Types or Floors Maximum Permissible Velocity 
m/s 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Metals face (steel and cast iron lined) 10 
ii) Face of concrete grade M 30 and above, 6 
Grade below M 30 4 
iii) Stone masonry face with cement pointing 3 
iv) Stone masonry face with cement plaster 4 
v) Brick masonry face with cement plaster 2.5 
vi) Brick masonry with cement pointing 2 
vii) Hard rock 4 
viii) Murum 1.5-2.0 
ix) Soil silt 0.7-1 
NOTES 


1 When the flow carries abrasive materials with it, the permissible values may be further reduced by 25 percent. 


2 Hard steel troweling, power floating, smooth surface finish and continuous long curing can have higher abrasion resistance and 
higher velocities than that given in this table can be permitted for surface using cement. 


IS 7784 (Part 1) : 2013 


Table 3 Minimum Vertical Clearances for 
Rectangular Openings 
(Clause 8.2.1) 


SI No. Design Flood Minimum Vertical Clearance 
m/s mm 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Below 3 450 
ii) 3 and above but below 30 600 
ili) 30 and above but below 300 900 
iv) 300 and above but below 3 000 1 200 
v) 3 000 and above 1 500 


Table 4 Minimum Clearances for Arch Openings 
(Clauses 8.2.2 and 8.2.3) 


SI No. Arch Opening, m Clearance 
(1) Q) (3) 


i) Less than 3 


Rise or 0.8 m, whichever is 
more 

2/3 rise or 1.0 m, whichever 
is more 

2/3 rise or 1.25 m, whichever 
is more 

2/3 rise or 1.5 m, whichever 
is more 


ii) 3 and above but less than 6 
iii) 6 and above but less than 21 


iv) 21 and above 


8.3 Clearance for Superpassages 
8.3.1 Clearance 


Clearances of about 50 percent of those recommended 
in 8.2.1 and 8.2.2 mutatis mutandis may be provided 
in case of superpassages. 


8.3.2 Free Board 


Free board recommended in 8.2.4 may be provided. 


8.4 Afflux 


8.4.1 The afflux to be adopted in the design should be 
such that which would correspond to the design flood. 


8.4.2 The afflux should be restricted to such a value 
that the resulting velocity does not cause serious bed 
scour in the drainage or does not create submergence 
which cannot be permitted. 


8.4.3 The effect of afflux on the submergence of the 
surrounding country should be specially studied. 


8.4.4 The afflux may be calculated by either of the 
methods given at 8.4.4.1 and 8.4.4.2. 


8.4.4.1 Rational formulae 


Broad crested weir discharge formula or orifice 
discharge formula depending upon the flow conditions 
through the cross drainage work openings, may be 
applied for calculating afflux. When the performance 
of the cross drainage work openings remains unaffected 
by the depth downstream of the obstruction, that is, a 


standing wave is formed, weir formula is applicable, 
otherwise the orifice formula holds good. 
Approximately, when the downstream depth D, above 
the crest is more than eighty percent of the upstream 
depth D, the Weir formula does not hold good. 


a) Weir formula: 
O = 1.70 C,LH*” 
where 
O = discharge through the openings, in m*/s; 


C,, = coefficient of discharge accounting for losses 
in friction; the values may be taken as under: 


Condition Value 

1) Narrow openings with or without 0.94 
floors 

2) Wide openings with floors 0.96 

3) Wide openings without floors 0.98 


L = linear waterway, in m; 


H =total energy head upstream of the 
obstruction in m, that is, D, + v? /2 g; 


D, = depth of flow upstream in m; 


v?/2 g = velocity head where v is the average 
velocity in the approach section worked 
out from the known width (W) of 
unobstructed section; and 


W = width of unobstructed section. 


b) Orifice formula 


0=G Dg]? m zo y? | 
2g 
where 

O = discharge through the opening, in m*/s; 

C, = coefficient of discharge; 

g = acceleration due to gravity, in m/s’; 

L = linear waterway, in m; 

D, = depth downstream of the obstruction, in m; 

h = afflux, in m; 

e = factor accounting for recovery of some 
velocity as potential head on emergence 
from the cross drainage work openings; and 

v = average velocity in approach section, in m/s. 


The value of ‘C,’ and “e” to be adopted are given in 
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. The afflux can be calculated knowing 
(a) the discharge, (b) the unobstructed width of the 
stream, and (c) the average depth downstream of the 
cross drainage work opening. 


IS 7784 (Part 1) : 2013 


a L 


A OR woup 


Fic. 2 COEFFICIENT “e” IN THE ORIFICE FORMULA 


IS 7784 (Part 1) : 2013 


8.4.4.2 Empirical formula 


When the area of obstruction is not very large compared 
to the original unrestricted area, the following formula 
gives reasonably good results: 


2 2 
h= ia +0.015 2 a 
17.85 a 


where 
h = afflux, in m; 
V = velocity in the unobstructed drainage 
channel, in m/s; 
A = unobstructed sectional area of the drainage 
channel, in m?; and 
a = sectional area of the drainage channel 


provided in the construction, in m?. 

If the value of V varies considerably in the unobstructed 
cross-section of the drainage channel, as in the case of 
a drainage channel which spills over its banks, V for 
the purposes of this formula may be taken as the average 
velocity in the main channel and correspondingly the 
value of A should be determined by dividing the total 
discharge by V. 


8.4.4.3 In case of readily erodable beds, full afflux as 
calculated from 8.4.4.1 or 8.4.4.2 may not occur. 


8.5 Depth of Scour 
8.5.1 Mean Depth of Scour 


The mean depth of scour, in metres, below the check/ 
high flood level may be calculated from the equation: 


D2 1/3 
1a 1a 22 


sf 


where 


D, = discharge, in cumecs /m width. The value of 
D, should be the maximum of the following: 


a) Design flood divided by the effective 
linear waterway between abutments or 
guide bunds, as the case may be. 

b) Value obtained should take into account 
any concentration of flow through a 
portion of the waterway assessed from 
the study of the cross-section of the 
drainage channel. Such modifications of 
the value may not be deemed applicable 
to minor cross drainage structures with 
overall waterway less than 60 m. 

c) Actual observation, if any. 


K, = Silt factor for representative sample of the 


bed material obtained up to the level of the 
deepest anticipated scour and given by the 
expression 1.76 [d,,]!?. 


where 


d,, = weighted mean diameter, in mm. 
NOTES 


1 d, may be taken as the grain size at 50 percent 


m 


passing from grain size distribution curve. 


2 The above method of estimating d,» is based on 
Lacey’s theory for regime conditions in alluvial beds. 


8.5.2 Maximum Depth of Scour for Design of 
Foundation 


The maximum depth of scour below the highest flood 
level (HFL) at obstructions and configuration of the 
channel should be estimated from the value of ‘d „ on 
the following basis: 


a) Forthe design of piers and abutments located 
in a straight reach and having individual 
foundations without any floor protection 


works: 
1) Inthe vicinity of : 2.00 d,, 
piers 
2) Nearabutments :1.27 d,, approach 
retained 
2.00 d,,, scour all 
around 


b) For the design of floor protection works, for 
raft foundations or shallow foundations, the 
following scour values should be adopted: 


1) in a straight reach :1.27 d,, 
2) at a moderate bend : 1.50 d,, 
3) at a severe bend T1739 dg, 
4) at a right angled bend : 2.00 a, 


NOTE — The values of scour depth obtained as above may be 
suitably modified where actual observed data is available. 


8.6 Loss of Head (Energy Loss) 


When water flows through any structure there are head 
losses due to various factors mentioned in 8.6.1 to 8.6.4. 
The total loss of head occurring for a flow is represented 
as the sum of these losses as applicable Thus, if the 
total loss of head is denoted by H then 


H=h,+h,+h,+h, 


where 
h, = losses at the inlet and outlet (for syphon); 
h, = losses at elbows or bends (for barrel); 
h, = losses due to transitions (other than syphon); 
and 
h, = losses due to skin friction (for barrel and 


trough). 


8.6.1 Loss of Head at the Inlet and at the Outlet of 
Syphons 


The formula for the losses at the entrance may be taken as: 


2 
v 
h =[1+ f] 20 
8 
where 

h, = loss of head at entrance or at exit, in m; 

f, = coefficient which provides for the loss of 
head on entry. It may be taken, for all 
practical design purposes, as 0.08 for a bell 
mouth entrance and as 0.505 for cylindrical 
entrance with sharp edges (unshaped mouth 
of the same sectional area of the barrel); 

v = velocity in syphon, in m/s; and 

g = acceleration due to gravity, in m/s”. 


8.6.2 Loss of Head Due to Elbows or Bends in Barrels 


The loss of head due to elbows or bends h,, may be 
computed in accordance with the procedure given in 
IS 2951 (Part 2). 


8.6.3 Well designed inlet and outlet transitions are 
necessary at the upstream and downstream approaches 
of cross drainage works. Following estimates of losses 
in the transitions h, generally hold for normal design 
and installation conditions. These are not applicable to 
syphons as for them this aspect is covered in 8.6.1. 


These losses exclude losses covered by introduction 
of trash racks on upstream approaches. 


Transitions are generally used at the inlet and outlet of 
structures and where changes occur in the water section. 
An accelerating water velocity usually occurs in inlet 
transitions and a decelerating velocity in outlet 
transitions. The most common types of open transitions 
are the streamlined warp, straight warp, and broken 
back (see Note). 


The depth of submergence of the top of the syphon 
opening is known as the water seal. For minimum 
hydraulic loss, a seal of 1.5 Ah,, (where Ah, is difference 
in velocity head), with a 76 mm minimum at the inlet 
headwall measured from the upstream water surface 
and no submergence at the outlet headwall should be 
provided. This submergence helps to prevent air and 
vortex problems. Outlet transitions should have no 
submergence of the opening in the headwall. If the 
submergence exceeds one-sixth of the depth of the 
opening at the outlet, the hydraulic loss should be 
computed on the basis of a sudden enlargement rather 
than as an outlet transition. The hydraulic loss, A; in a 
transition will depend primarily on the difference 


IS 7784 (Part 1) : 2013 


between the velocity heads at the open end of the 
transition and at the normal to centerline section of the 
closed conduit at the headwall. It is calculated using 
the equation: 


K (v? = v ) 
hz = Zz 
where 
v, = velocity of flow before the transition, in m/s; 
v, = velocity of flow after the transition, in m/s; 
g = acceleration due to gravity, in m/s? ; and 
K = coefficient of expansion or contraction. 


The following tabulation gives ‘K’ design values for 
various transitions: 


SI No. Type of Transition Inlet Outlet 


1) Open transition 
a) Streamlined warp to rectangular 0.1 0.2 


opening 

b) Straight warp to rectangular 0.2 0.3 
opening 

c) Straight warp with bottom 03 04 


corner fillets to pipe opening 
d) Broken back to rectangular 03 0.5 
opening 
e) Broken back to pipe opening 0.4 0.7 
f) Earth transition to pipe 05 1.0 


11) Closed transition 
a) Square or rectangular to round 0.1 0.2 
(maximum angle with 
centerline = 7.59) 


The maximum angle between the water surface and the 
centreline should not exceed 27.5? for inlet transitions 
and 22.5° for outlet transitions for the best hydraulic 
conditions, provided velocities are 3 m/s or less. In 
some structural design, it may prove economical to use 
25° to allow the same structure to be used for both 
inlets and outlets. A 30° angle is often used on inlet 
transitions with checks, in which case an additional loss 
is allowed for the checks. The maximum angle is 7.5° 
for tunnels or if velocities exceed 3 m/s. 


NOTE — The broken back refers to the intersection of the 
vertical and sloping plane surfaces on the sides of the transition. 


8.6.4 Loss of Head Due to Skin Friction in the Barrels 
and Troughs 


8.6.4.1 The loss of head due to skin friction in the 
barrels “A,” may be computed in accordance with the 
procedure given in IS 2951 (Part 1). 


IS 7784 (Part 1) : 2013 


8.6.4.2 Loss of head due to friction in troughs h, should 
be calculated by the Manning’s formula, namely: 


1 
= = RABI 
n 
where 
v = mean velocity, in m/s; 
R = hydraulic mean radius, in m; 
S = slope; and 


n 


Manning's constant. 


For uniform channel sections covered with sand and 
gravel, the equivalent Manning’s ‘n’ may be determined 
by the Strickler equation as given below: 


1/6 
_ 459 
21.1 


where 


ds, = particle size in which 50 percent of the bed 
material by weight is finer, in m. 


To choose the value of ‘n’ see IS 2912. Depending upon 
the smoothness, hardness and rendering of surfaces of 
the structure (concrete, plaster or masonry, etc), 
planeness, workmanship and quality control the value 
of rugosity coefficient ‘n’ may be reduced for design 
purposes from the typical value, so as to achieve 
reliability in head loss estimates. 


Manning’s constant depends upon the characteristics 
of the material and the surface roughness. In absence 


of actual investigation or established norms being 
available, value of Manning’s constant as given in 
Table 5 may be assumed. 


8.6.5 Effect of Channel Sinuosity 


Flow resistance in concrete lined canals generally 
increases with channel sinuosity. Canal structure piers 
located in the flow prism causes significant increase in 
water depth, especially in canals having very flat slope. 
To minimize losses, curves should have a minimum 
radius of 3 times the top width of canal at TBL, when 
the velocity is less than 1 m/s. For velocities greater 
than 1 m/s, consideration should be given to longer 
radius. 


8.6.6 Checks 


A loss equal to 0.5 times the difference in velocity head 
between the check opening and the upstream canal 
section is usually adequate, but more accurate 
computations may be required where head is critical. 
Use 0.03 m minimum loss for isolated checks in small 
canals and 0.015 m in large canals where check 
structures are provided with streamline transitions. 
About 1.1 m/s is the maximum velocity through check 
structures using stop planks, owing to difficulty in 
operation. A velocity of 1.5 m/s is not objectionable 
through most structures using gates. 


8.6.7 Flumes (Measuring Structures) 


To determine the total energy loss over a structure, it is 
recommended to study separately the parts of the 
structure, where energy is lost for different reasons. 
These parts and related losses are: 


Table 5 Values of Manning’s Coefficient 
(Clause 8.6.4.2) 


SI Type of Surface Material Value ofn 
No. € KEE-_—.....——— 
Range Normal Design Value 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Concrete: 
a) Hard, smooth finish, troweled 0.011-0.014 0.013 
b) Float finish 0.013-0.015 0.015 
c) Unfinished (not properly floated) 0.015-0.022 0.020 
d) Neat cement smooth finish 0.01-0.012 0.012 
e) Steel shuttering finish 0.012-0.018 0.016 
f) Wooden planks shuttering finish 0.014-0.020 0.018 
g) Large panel plywood shuttering finish 0.013-0.016 0.016 
h) Large panel smooth form finish, rich concrete (M 30 grade and above) 0.011-0.014 0.013 
with joints grounded smooth, and all defects rectified 
j) Gunited (rough job) 0.018-0.025 0.022 
k) Gunited (good plane job) 0.016-0.023 0.019 
m) Smooth concrete surface with epoxy or polymer treatment 0.009-0.012 0.011 
ii) Masonry: 
a) Glazed brick, good workmanship very fine joints 0.011-0.015 0.013 
b) Good quality brick masonry in cement mortar 0.012-0.018 0.018 
c) Rubble masonry in cement mortar 0.017-0.030 0.025 
d) Dry rubble 0.023-0.035 0.032 
e) Dressed ashlar masonry 0.013-0.018 0.016 


a) The losses between the upstream head 
measurement section (gauging station) and the 
control section in the throat. Here energy 
losses occur mainly due to friction and 
acceleration of flow. 


b) The losses due to friction between the control 
section and the section where the flow head 
at downstream referenced to weir sill could 
be measured. 

c) The losses due to incomplete conversion of 


kinetic into potential energy over the 
downstream transition. 


The head loss through flume can be calculated using 
the following formula: 


z L? n 
= 2 p1/3 
ROR 
where 

AH = head loss, in m; 
L = length in direction of flow, in m; 
R = hydraulic radius, in m; 
N = Manning’s roughness coefficient; 
C, = units coefficient for the Manning ‘n’; and 
v = average flow velocity, in m/s. 


8.6.8 Hydraulic Jump 


The hydraulic jump is an abrupt rise in water surface 
that occurs in open channel when water flowing at 
supercritical flow is retarded. It occurs frequently in a 
canal down stream from a regulating gate, or at the 
place where a steep channel slope suddenly flattens, 
such as at the bottom of a chute. If the jump is small, 
the change in depth is small, the water will not rise 
obviously and abruptly but will pass from the low to 
the high stage through a series of undulations gradually 
decreasing in size. When the jump is large, it is very 
obvious and abrupt and it involves a relatively large 
amount of energy loss through dissipation in the 
turbulence in the jump. 


The depth of flow before the jump is called the initial 
depth d,, and that after the jump is called sequent depth 
d,. 


The specific energy of the flow entering the jump is: 
E =d, + V;/ 2g 

The specific energy of the flow leaving the jump is: 
E, =d, + V,7/ 2g 


From these equations, the energy loss or head loss in 
hydraulic jump can be expressed by 


IS 7784 (Part 1) : 2013 


3 
AE =E, =p, =- 4) 


4 d,d, 


8.7 Transition Walls 


Transition walls as seen in plan, should at their ends, 
turn nearly at right angles to the flow in the channel 
and should extend for a minimum length of 0.6 m into 
the earth bank. Suitable pitching may be provided to 
the slopes, beyond the transition end. 


8.8 Fluming Ratio 


Except when dictated by conditions particular to a 
specific structure, a fluming ratio less than 70 percent 
may not be adopted. For the purpose of computing the 
fluming ratio of canal, the width at mid depth may be 
taken as one hundred percent. In drainage channel when 
the course is undefined, a fluming ratio from 70 to 
90 percent of the Lacey’s waterway may be adopted. 


8.9 Structure and Earth Work Connection 


The earth mass in vicinity of the rigid structures is the 
connection between rigid structure and flexible 
earthwork. The rigid structure is non settling, relative 
to the earthwork. The deflections, settlements and other 
movements in the rigid structure are comparatively very 
small. The rigid structure may consist of masonry, PCC, 
RCC, etc. The connection between rigid structures and 
earthwork is to be designed so as to reduce the 
differential settlement, and to avoid the possibility of 
formation of a separation (cleavage) between the two. 
The condition of connection between the rigid structure 
and the earthwork affects the seepage, creep coefficient 
and piping and thus affects the stability of the 
earthwork. 


For the connection, soil of proper qualities should be 
chosen. The method and the amount of compaction 
should be as required. 


8.9.1 The canal embankment adjoining the cross 
drainage structure should have adequate provisions to 
avoid possibility of any breach and to minimize 
seepage. The outer slope of the embankment should 
have a clear cover of 600 mm over the designed phreatic 
line (see IS 7894) for the worst combination of design 
flood in natural drainage channel and annual low water 
level. 


High earth banks (say over 5 m above ground) should 
be checked for stability of slopes and provision of rock- 
toe with filter should be made. Rip-rap or pitching 
should be done up to a level 0.5 m above HFL plus 
afflux as applicable (see IS 8237, IS 10751, IS 11532 
and IS 12094). For large drainage channel properly 
designed guide banks may be required. 


IS 7784 (Part 1) : 2013 


8.9.2 The water flow through various soil strata should be 
engineered. Flow net through earth work and foundation 
strata is to be estimated. Exit gradient of seepage water 
should be limited within the permissible limit. 


Adequate foundation depth or cut-off or curtain walls 
may be provided of suitable depth so as to get safe exit 
gradient, which may be worked out in accordance with 
Khosla theory for two dimensional flow. In large 
structures three dimensional seepage flow may be 
considered for estimating exit gradient. 


8.9.2.1 The permissible creep coefficient (head loss per 
unit length) through soil may depend upon degree of 
compaction, whether it is refilled, actions at soil structure 
connection or interface, relative movements between soil 
and rigid structure, probable settlements, etc. 


Generally the permissible value of exit gradient for flow 
through different types of soils can be adopted as below: 


a) Clay lin 4 

b) Shingle lin4to5 
c) Coarse sand lin5to6 
d) Fine sand linóto 7 


8.9.2.2 At entry end of seepage path, an allowance, as 
discount, should be assumed for settlement and 
inefficient maintenance, separation, cracking, etc. At 
exit end a discount or allowance should be assumed 
against erosion, scour or settlement. In absence of an 
estimate, the allowance may be 0.6 m high at entry point 
and | m at exit point. This allowance in height is the 
length over which creep coefficient is to be assumed 
as Zero. 


8.9.2.3 From the plot of flow net, the differential design 
pressure (soil and hydraulic) on the rigid structure can 
be estimated. 


8.9.3 The bottom slabs of box (or barrel) or culverts 
should be checked for safety against the uplift force in 
a severe combination of forces chosen. Checks should 
consist of, 


a) safety against movement or flotation during 
construction and in service; and further 
b) check for design stresses with severe 


combination of uplift. 


8.9.3.1 For safety against flotation or movement, if 
required, the gravity loads can be increased by increasing 
thickness of members, providing additional concrete or 
masonry for weight, or anchoring the members into the 
foundation strata or deeper. The sum of downward 
equilibrating forces should be at least 1.2 times the 
upward buoyancy force. For checking the stress condition 
in the members, the dead loads or the downward 
equilibrating force (such as anchorage) should be reduced 


by dividing these by 1.2. Anchorages and parts of 
anchorage system should be checked for stresses under 
full load required for safety against floating. 


8.9.4 When flow is through multi-barrel, at the upstream 
and downstream ends, stop-log grooves may be 
provided by extending the partition wall, so as to 
facilitate isolating one or more barrels for maintenance 
or repair. Ends of the partitions of multi-barrels should 
be provided with cut and ease water shapes so as to 
minimize the energy loss. 


8.10 Abrasion Resistance 


Structural members in the bed of the flow should be 
safe against abrasion loss. Depending on the velocity 
of flow and the abrasion causing debris (stone gravel, 
sand silt, etc) it may hold, the structural member in the 
bed should be hard enough and of sufficiently high 
strength or it should be given a treatment or wearing 
coat to enhance the abrasion resistance. Fitching of 
heavy weight stones, stone masonry or high grade 
concrete overlays may be provided. 


Apart from the bed of flow, the members on the sides 
may also be subjected to abrasion, though the material 
causing abrasion may be less effective on the sides than 
at the bottom. Hence due consideration for durability 
of sides, along with the flow should be given. 


9 FOUNDATION 


9.1 Foundations of a cross drainage work should be 
designed to satisfy the requirements of allowable 
bearing capacity of the foundation strata under critical 
loads including positive pressure conditions (that is no 
uplift or tension), seismic effects, anticipated scour and 
settlement. 


9.1.1 The sub-grade at the foundation level for known 
shape and size of foundations, depth below ground level, 
expected sub-soil water level and engineering properties 
should be safe in bearing capacity. Comparatively lower 
pressures are allowed on foundations on sub-grades 
prone to appreciable settlement. 


9.1.2 As far as possible, the foundation should bear on 
homogeneous, undisturbed and uniform sub-grade of 
fairly dense type. Where foundations have to be 
provided on sub-grade of different types suitable joints 
should be provided to avoid cracks due to differential 
settlement, the tolerance limit has to be evaluated for 
each case. 


9.1.3 The permissible maximum differential settlement 
of the foundation strata estimated should not exceed 
1 in 400. In case of structures sensitive to differential 
settlement, the tolerance limit has to be evaluated for 
each case. 


9.1.4 When the seismic effect is considered, higher 
bearing capacity may be adopted in accordance with 
IS 1893. 


9.1.5 The foundations should be taken sufficiently 
deep to secure firm strata from considerations of 
settlement, overall stability and avoidance of 
undermining due to erosion. The depth of foundation 
of various members should be such that these are safe 
against scour or are protected against it. If sound rock 
is met with, at the higher levels than the anticipated 
scour, scour criteria shall not be applicable. Tension 
(that is negative contact pressure) can be allowed only, 
if foundation strata consists of hard rock, however, 
such negative contact pressure should be neglected 
in the design calculations. 


9.1.6 Maximum depth of scour should be computed 
for stream as in 8.5 from check high flood level (CHFL). 
Either the foundation or cut-off wall if provided, under 
the foundation should be taken to a depth 1.333 times 
the scour depth estimated below CHFL or 1.05 times 
the scour depth estimated for probable maximum flood 
(PMP). Either depth of foundation, or depth of cut-off 
if provided, should also be governed by permissible 
gradient of seepage water as in 8.9.2. In case of canal 
having erodable bottom (that is unlined) similar checks 
should be done for full supply discharge. 


9.1.7 Where concrete or masonry floor is provided 
under the works, scour condition is not applicable and 
the foundations are usually taken to about 1.5 m below 
the floor levels with suitable cut-off for the concrete or 
masonry floors. However where such a floor is not 
provided, foundations are taken to provide a margin 
below the anticipated scour level (usually called grip 
length) of about 0.33 times the maximum depth of scour. 


10 MODEL STUDIES 


Owing to a number of complex factors in the design of 
hydraulic structures and specially when the designs are 
based on empirical formulae, adequate answers cannot 
be obtained through analytical methods only. Therefore, 
it would be in the best interest, if the designs for major 
cross drainage works are first tested on models. These 
studies should inter alia taken into account the impact of 
ancillary components of the structure, namely, the 
approaches, end connections, afflux bunds, floors, 
protection arrangements and any upstream or downstream 
structures on either the canal or the drainage channel. 


IS 7784 (Part 1) : 2013 


11 MISCELLANEOUS DETAILS 


11.1 Waterstops 


Waterstops, also referred to as water seals, are generally 
of three types, namely: (a) Rubber water seals, (b) Metal 
water seals, and (c) Synthetic material seals. The 
waterstops are used in and across all joints where 
leakages are detrimental to structural safety or the water 
needs are to be conserved. The locations where 
waterstops are provided in various types of cross 
drainage works are described below: 


a) Aqueduct — In R.C.C. through side walls and 
bottom slab over each pier in a continuous 
length and at the junction of transition and 
R.C.C. trough, both in the floor and wing walls. 
Syphon — At expansion joints and at the 
junction of each of the sloping limbs in a 
continuous form and at the junction of the 
transition walls and floors with the barrel, both 
at the entry and exit in a continuous form. 


b) 


c) Super passage — At the junction between the 
drainage trough wing walls, namely, trough 
wall of R.C.C. and wing wall of masonry and 


all the expansion joints in a continuous length. 


11.2 Weep Holes 


Weep holes are small openings in the retaining walls, 
like wings (that is transitions of natural stream). These 
are to facilitate the drainage of backfills and avoid build 
up of pressure. Weep holes may be provided above the 
flow net line of zero water pressure, under the condition 
of canal flowing full and natural stream with lowest 
annual flow. 


Weep holes if provided, should have filters with graded 
material suitably provided to avoid piping of earth fill 
behind the wall and also to avoid choking of the holes. 


The provision of weep holes should be so, as to not 
render the creep coefficient of seepage unsafe, and 
should also not contribute to enhanced loss of canal 
water. 


11.3 Bearings 


For safe transfer of load from superstructure to sub- 
structure suitable bearings should be provided between 
the trough bottom and pier/abutment to cater for the 
various movements occurring in the superstructure 
under different combinations of load. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 13 (0447). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 

NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Published by BIS, New Delhi 


