NAT Alan IS 1358 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


Css Get HIS oH ists! 
ch tere stv 


( FAT FATT ) 


Practice for Layout of 
Library Catalogue Code 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 01.140.20 


© BIS 2018 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2018 Price Group 3 


Documentation and Information Sectional Committee, MSD 05 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Documentation and Information Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems 
Division Council. 


This standard was earlier published in 1967. This revision is being taken up to describe the resource, authorized 
access points, inclusion of various formats of resources other than printed books and also machine readable 
catalogue. This standard also covers the electronic publications. 


Library catalogue is an essential tool for locating documents in a library. Generally, the library catalogue has to 
be in the language of the locality. There is a great need in India for establishing catalogue codes for the different 
Indian languages. With the development of library movement, other Asian countries are also on the eve of a 
similar situation. A general agreement on normative principles, style, and layout would be helpful. Even at the 
international level, thought is being turned on a comparative study of catalogue codes for arriving at some uniform 
practice. In this context, the Sectional Committee considered a revision necessary and useful. 


The elements to be included in a catalogue code may be considered to fall into the following five categories: 


a 


wa 


Essential elements, such as terminology and rendering of names to be included in all codes; 

b) Basic rules applicable to all kinds of documents; 

c) Supplementary rules to cover the more complex kinds of documents, such as a composite book, a multi- 
volumed book and a periodical publication; 


d) Modification of the basic rules, additional rules or both necessary in preparing lists, such as a union 
catalogue of books, a union catalogue of periodical publications, a national bibliography, and an 
abstracting or indexing periodical; and 

e) Supplementary rules to cover documents other than those mentioned above. 


This standard will augment the concept of sharing of bibliographic and authority data by the development of 
cataloguing codes. The statements will guide the inclusion of bibliographic and authority data for the formation 
of library catalogues, bibliographies and other datasets created by libraries. The objective is to achieve the 
consistency in descriptive and subject cataloguing. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following documents: 
RANGANATHAN (SR ). Standard for layout of a catalogue code An lib SC. 2, 1955; 28-32. 


RANGANATHAN (S R ). Heading and canons. 1955. S. Viswanathan, Madras; and G. Blunt & Sons, 
London. 


RANGANATHAN (SR). Classified catalogue code. 1964. Ed 5. Asia Publishing House, Bombay. 


IS 1358 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


PRACTICE FOR LAYOUT OF 
LIBRARY CATALOGUE CODE 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the essential elements to be 
covered by a library catalogue code and recommends a 
helpful sequence in which they should be given. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard given below contains provision which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS number Title 


796 : 1966 Glossary of cataloging terms 


3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


3.1 Catalogue codes, whether international, national, 
regional, or local, should preferably have a similar 
layout. 


3.2 The cataloguing codes are governed by certain 
principles leading towards the convenience of the user. 
The principle of interoperability is given preference 
in case of overlapping and conflicts due to application 
of number of principles. The various facets are as 
following: 


a) Vocabulary : The use of vocabulary is governed by 
the need of descriptions and controlled nature of 
names related to access of information. Vocabulary 
shall be as per IS 796; and 


b) Methods of representation. 


3.3 The cataloguing codes should cover the process for: 


a) Title and statement of responsibility (title and 
author); 

b) Edition; 

c) Material specific details (specifics such as 
coordinates and scale on a map); 

d) Place, publisher and date; 


e) Physical description (height, number of pages, 
playing time); 

f) Series; 

g) Notes; and 


h) Standard numbering and terms of availability 
(ISBN). 


3.4 It should provide chapters and rules on the following 
facets: 


a) Convenience of the user : Convenience means 
that all efforts should be made to keep all data 
comprehensible and suitable for the users. The 
word “user” embraces anyone who searches 
the catalogue and uses the bibliographic and/or 
authority data. Decisions taken in the making of 
descriptions and controlled forms of names for 
access should be made with the user in mind. 


b 


wm 


Representation : The description facilitates the 
access. The description of an entity relates to 
controlled forms of names of persons and bodies 
etc. The form of the first manifestation of the 
primary and original expression governs the work 
titles, otherwise a form used most commonly such 
as in references may be used. 


c 


wm 


Accuracy of data : The accuracy of bibliographic 
and authority data is required to represent the 
entity. It is significant to include the relevant data 
elements which are able for distinctions among 
entities. 


d) Economy and consistency : For more than one 
options, the method should be chosen which is 
based on maximum expediency and practicality. 
It should refer to the alternative which is related to 
the least cost and having the simplest approach. 


e 


wm 


Standardization : The access points should be 
described and constructed by following the 
principles of standard, uniformity and consistency. 


f) Integration and interoperability : The application 
of common set of rules should be applied for 
describing the various kinds of resources. This 
applies to the controlled forms of names of all types 
of entities also. The principles of standardization 
are required to ensure the interoperability of 
bibliographic and authority data. The controlled 


IS 1358 : 2018 


vocabulary should be applied for automatic 
translation, and discovery of data. 


wa 


Rational : The principles should be applied yet 
the cataloguing code must have the provisions of 
practical approach. The arbitrary nature should be 


g 


avoided. 

h) Bibliographic description Each entity and 
manifestation should be provided a separate 
bibliographic description. The bibliographic 


description should include attributes that are 
related to the item, the embodied work(s) and 
expression(s). It should rely on the item as 
representative for the manifestation. 


3.5 The Descriptive data should follow the international 
standard to foster better interoperability and accurate 
reuse of information. 


4 CONTENTS 


4.1 The code shall have the following groups of parts: 
a) Preliminaries, 
b) Auxiliaries, 
c) General entry, 
d) Specific entry, 
e) Lists of documents, and 
f) Documents other than conventional books and 
periodicals. 
4.2 It should provide chapters on cataloguing of: 
a) Material-specific details and particular material 
type; and 
b) Rules for scale and geographical coordinates 
(found only on maps), type of notation (found in 


musical scores), and chronological and volume 
designation (found in serials). 


5 PRELIMINARIES 


5.1 The group preliminaries shall have the following 
parts: 


a) Guiding principles, 
b) Terminology, and 
c) Name-of-person. 


5.2 Guiding Principles 


5.2.1 The part on guiding principles shall be devoted 
to the formulation of the principles helpful in drafting, 
explaining, and interpreting the rules of the code, while 
applying them. 

NOTE — It will be helpful if the part on guiding principles has 

sets of chapters dealing with items, such as the following: 

a) Canons of cataloguing, 

b) Laws of library science, and 


c) General normative principles. 


5.2.2 It shall provide chapter on resource description 
and following components: 


a) Description, 

b) Name access, 

c) Subject Analysis, 

d) Record formatting, and 


e) Record organization. 


5.3 Terminology 


The part on terminology shall contain definitions of 
technical terms and terms-of-art used in the code. 


5.3.1 Rules for the Process of Description 


The part devoted to the process of description while 
cataloguing should concentrate on: 


a) Concept and the transcription. It essentially 
involves the process of technically reading a 
resource avoiding the editorial interpolation. 


b) Rules on identification of the chief source and the 
information. 


c) Identification of other prescribed sources and the 
information and the methods to use such as the 
interpolation. 


d) Rules on Title proper, punctuation etc. 


e) The guidance on the statements of responsibility, 
edition statement, and any statement of 
responsibility that is associated with it. 


f) The rules for recording the place of publication, 
page numbers, series number, statement and any 
statement of responsibility associated with it, and 
if any other physical attributes of the document. 

5.3.2 The chapter should give specific information on: 

a) Language of the item, 

b) Source of title proper, 

c) Variant titles, 

d) Parallel titles, 

e) Statements of responsibility, 

f) Edition and history, 

g) Publication distribution, 

h) Physical description, 

j) Accompanying materials, 

k) Series, 

m) Other formats available, 

n) Contents, and 

p) Standard numbers. 


5.4 Authorized Access Points 


5.4.1 The authorized access points should be displayed 
in catalogue. The authorized access point should be 
given in the form of names of entities. The name of an 
entity should be considered as authority data. It should 


have identifiers. The inclusion of variant forms of name 
should be given. 


5.4.2 The construction of these points should consider 
standard language and script. The preference should be 
given to the information given in the manifestations of 
the concerned work in original language and script in 
case of names expressed in several languages. 


5.4.3 When the original language and/or script cannot 
be used in catalogue, the preference may be given to the 
forms related to manifestations and found in reference 
sources. The emphasis should be on the suitability 
of names for the easy understanding of users. The 
original language and script should be given preference 
whenever possible. 


5.4.4 The authorized form of name or a variant form 
of name should be used when the original form cannot 
be used. 


NOTE — It will be helpful if the part on terminology has sets 
of chapters dealing with items, such as the following: 


a) Work; 

b) Title; 

c) Author; 

d) Collaborator and sponsor; 

e) Document, its kind and its parts; 
f) Related document; 

g) Series; 


h) Elements needed in descriptive cataloguing, such as format, 
collation, imprint, editor-statement, author statement, and 
entry statement for author; 


j) Catalogue; 
k) Entry; and 
m) Heading. 


5.4.5 It should have chapters on the following aspects 
to rule out: 

a) Cataloguing or bibliographic description; 

b) Classification; 

c) Classifying; 

d) Indexing/subject heading; 

e) Thesaurus; 

f) Assigning subject headings; 

g) Geographical subject headings; 

h) Card catalogues; 

j) Foreign language books; 

k) Non-book materials; 


Preparation and reproduction of cards and other 
types of catalogues; and 


n) Physical processing of books/documents 


5.5 Name-of-Person 


The part on name-of-person shall be devoted to the 
structure, and the function of the successive words in the 
names-of persons belonging to different cultural groups. 


IS 1358 : 2018 


5.6 The authorized and variant forms of names for 
such entities as person, family, corporate body, work, 
expression, manifestation, item, and other theme 
as should be provided in language and script either 
available in original work or most suitable to users for 
access. The consistency is needed for collocating the 
bibliographic data for sets of resources. 


5.7 There should be control on the authorized forms of 
name, variant forms of name, and identifiers which are 
used as access points in the catalogue 


NOTES 


1 To facilitate the rendering of names, it is desirable that a 
schedule of entry elements in names-of-persons is given in the 
catalogue code for each cultural group, if no general guidance 
is sufficient. 


2 It will be helpful if the part on name-of-person has sets of 
chapter dealing with items, such as the following: 


a) Simple name, 
b) Compound name, 
c) Split given name, and 


d) Forms of name-of-person. 


6 AUXILIARIES 


6.1 The group auxiliaries shall have the following 
parts: 


a) Determination of authorship, 
b) Rendering of names, and 
c) Recording. 


6.2 The rules should be given on the following 
components: 


a) Finding the title proper. The source and the concept 
of the alternative title as well as the prominent 
language in which the title appears. 


b) Rules for the ‘Other title information’ and the 
concept of various forms of the title such as 
appearing on spine or inside pages, also the series 
title. 


c) Rules on identification of statements of 
responsibility. The information related to other 
persons, illustrators, translators, editors, etc., 
should also be given. 


d) How to ‘Check and use the edition statement’, 
about the recording of various editions in 
bibliographic details. 

e) About the identification of publication details and 
placing in the catalogue. 

f) It should guide about the information on preceding 


works, or other versions of the work as significant 
source of information. 


6.3 Determination of Authorship 


6.3.1 The part on determination of authorship shall 
provide guidance for the determination of the author(s) 
and the collaborator(s) of a document. 


IS 1358 : 2018 


6.3.2 Authorized access points for works and 
expressions (controlled) embodied in the resource 
should be included as access points to bibliographic 
data. The authorized access points for the creators of 
works should be also given. 


6.3.3 As creator of work, the corporate body should 
be considered when the works express the collective 
thought or activity of the corporate body. The corporate 
body is considered as creator also when clearly implies 
that the corporate body is collectively responsible for 
the content of the work. The wording of the title is 
taken in conjunction with the nature of the work. When 
a person signs the work in the capacity of an officer 
or servant of the corporate body, the corporate body is 
considered as creator. 


6.3.4 The persons, families, corporate bodies, and 
subjects should be included in determination of access 
and the description of information resource. 

NOTE — It will be helpful if the part on determination of 

authorship has sets of chapters dealing with items, such as the 

following: 

a) Person Vs person, 

b) Person Vs corporate body, 

c) Corporate Body Vs corporate body, and 


d) Name of original author merged in title. 


6.4 Rendering of Names 


6.4.1 The part on rendering of names shall provide 
tules for rendering names of different kinds, that is, 
name of person, place and corporate body and each of 
its organs, title of documents, and name of series, but 
not of subjects, special attention being given to multi- 
worded names. 


6.4.2 For rendering of names following provisions 
should be made: 


a) The rules should be provided for including and 
using the authorized form of name for the entity. 
The inclusion should consider the variant forms of 
name and rules for additional access related with 
names of related entities should be given. 


b) Rules should be formed for the ‘conventional 
name’, Choice of Preferred Name for Persons, 
Families, and Corporate Bodies also. 


c) The inclusion of variant names or variant forms 
of names for a person, family, or a corporate 
body should be ruled out. The guidelines for the 
authorized access point of one name or one form 
of name should be framed. 


d) There should be rules on various forms of the names 
found in manifestations. The clear guidelines on a 
commonly known (or ‘conventional’) name rather 
than the official name should be provided. 


e) The rules for corporate body for using different 
names as minor variations of one name should be 
guiding in nature. 


f) The rules on forms of name for persons should 
be able to provide guidelines on the choice of 
first word. The conventions of the country and 
language most associated with that person can be 
kept in rules. 


g) The code should provide rules for the form of 
name for families, and the choice of first word for 
the authorized access point. 


h) The rules for the form of name for corporate bodies 
should consider the preferred order as required. 


6.4.3 There should not be ambiguity on the language 
usage for the localization. The needs of the users 
of the catalogue should be kept while designing the 
code. Rules for placing of the name of the superior 
body should be given to avoid conflict as corporate 
body is part of a jurisdiction or territorial authority; 
as the corporate body’s name implies subordination to 
superior body such as ministry. 
NOTE — It will be helpful if the part on rendering of names 
has sets of chapters dealing with items, such as the following: 
a) Name-of-person, e) Conference, 
f) Title, 
g) Series, and 


b) Geographical name, 
c) Government, 


d) Institution, h) Pseudo-series. 


6.5 Recording 


The part on recording shall be devoted to the mechanics 
of cataloguing, such as language, writing, and 
arrangement of entries. 

NOTE — It will be helpful if the part on recording has sets of 

chapters dealing with items, such as the following: 

a) Language of entries, 

b) Script of entries, 

c) Articles and contractions, 

d) Style of writing and printing, and 


e) Arrangement of entries. 


7 GENERAL ENTRY 


7.1 The group general entry shall have the following 
parts: 


a) General subject entry, and 
b) Cross reference index entry. 


7.2 General Subject Entry 


The part on general subject prescribe the structure of 
such an entry. 


7.2.1 Entry shall prescribe: 


a) The rules for determining the subject of a 
document either with the aid of its class number or 
otherwise, say going up to the kernel title; 


b) The rules for rendering the name of a subject 
in the heading of the general subject entry for a 
document either with the aid of its class number 
or otherwise, say going up to the transformed title; 
and 


c) The individualizing element to resolve homonyms 
in the main heading and the sub-headings. 


7.2.2 The chapter devoted to subject headings should 
have rules on: 


a) Use of controlled vocabulary, 
b) Methods to index the topic of a resource, and 
c) Language variations. 


7.2.3 There should be chapter on rules related with use 
of Thesaurus. It should: 


a) Display the relationship of various terms. 


b) Provide the information on each descriptor to be 
followed. 


c) Provide guidelines about a scope note (SN), the 
method of usage; rules for possible synonyms: 
used for (UF). 


d) provide guidelines on the top term (TT), 
broader (BT), specific (NT = narrower term) and/ 
or related (RT) descriptors. 

NOTE — It will be helpful if the part on general subject entry 
has sets of chapters dealing with items, such as the following: 
a) Choice of class index (or subject) heading. 

b) Rendering of class index (or subject) heading, 

c) Class index entry, 

d) Homonym in class index headings, and 

e) P) Feature heading. 


7.2.4 There should be rules for type of cataloguing; 
descriptive cataloging and subject cataloging. The 
guidelines should cover the process of identifying and 
describing the bibliographic and physical form of an 
item, determining the name(s) and title(s) that will be 
used as access points, and recording these data in a 
bibliographic record. 


7.3 Cross Reference Index Entry 


The part on cross reference index entry shall prescribe 
the structure of such an entry. 


7.3.1 It shall deal with each kind of cross reference 
index entity, laying down the rules for the choice and 
rendering of ‘the referred from and the referred to’ 
headings. 

NOTE — It will be helpful if the part on cross reference index 


entry has sets of chapters dealing with items, such as the 
following: 


a) Structure and types of cross reference index entry, 
b) Alternative name entry, 

c) Variant-form-of-word entry. 

d) Pseudonym-real-name entry, 

e) Editor-of-series entry, and 


f) Generic-name entry. 


7.3.2 There should be rules for: 


a) The form of name for works, 
manifestations, and items. 


expressions, 


IS 1358 : 2018 


b) The creation of authorized access point from a 
title should be dealt precisely. 


c) The code should be able to provide guidelines 
for distinguishing among names by identifying 
characteristics in context of the variant forms of 
name. 


d) The rules for variant names and variant forms of 
name should be defined, in context with access 
point and authority data. 


8 SPECIFIC ENTRY 


8.1 The group specific entry for conventional books 
and periodicals shall have the following parts. 


a) Single-volumed simple book, 

b) Single-volumed composite book, 
c) Multi-volumed book, and 

d) Periodical publication. 


8.2 Single-volumed Simple Book 


The part on single-volumed simple book shall lay 
down rules for the choice, rendering and writing of 
the headings and other sections of the diverse kinds of 
specific entries for the conventional book. 

NOTE — It will be helpful if the part on single-volumed 


simple book has sets of chapters dealing with items, such as 
the following: 


a) Main entry, 
b) Cross reference entry or subject analytical, and 


c) Book index entry. 


8.3 Single-volumed Composite Book 


The part on single-volumed composite book shall lay 
down the rules necessary for covering the deviations 
from the rules for single-volumed simple book. 

NOTE — It will be helpful if the part on single-volumed 


composite book has sets of chapters dealing with items, such 
as the following: 


a) Ordinary composite book, and 
b) Artificial composite book. 


8.4 Multi-volumed Book 


The part on multi-volumed book shall lay down the 
additional rules necessary to cover multi-volumed 
books. 


8.5 Periodical Publication 


The part on periodical publication shall deal with the 
nature of the complexities in periodical publications 
as viewed from the angle of cataloguing, and shall 
prescribe rules for the kind of entries needed, the 
structure of each kind of entry and the contents of each 
section of an entry for a periodical publication with no 
complexity or with any one complexity, or with any 
combination of complexities. 


IS 1358 : 2018 


NOTE — It will be helpful if the part on periodical 
publication has sets of chapters dealing with items, such as the 
following: 


a) Simple periodical publication, 

b) Irregularity in volume number 

c) Interrupted Publication 

d) Change of title and sponsor, 

e) Amalgamation and splitting up, and 


f) Combination of complexities, 


8.6 The cataloguing code should have chapter/notes 
on: 


a) Encoding with MARC (Machine Readable 
Cataloguing); 

b) 3D Objects (Toy and tool etc.); and 

c) Rules on General Material Description (GMD). 


8.7 There should be rules on Statement of 
Responsibility, Publication Area related with GMD 
in the cataloguing code. 


9 LISTS OF DOCUMENT 


9.1 A code may deal with the preparation, arrangement, 
and layout of lists other than a library catalogue, such 
as abstracting and indexing periodicals. 


9.2 It shall indicate for each kind of list, the additional 
tules and deviations from the rules given in the earlier 
parts of the code. 

NOTE — It will be helpful if the part on lists of documents has 

sets of chapters on items, such as the following: 

a) Union catalogue of books, 


b) Union catalogue of periodical publications, 


c) National bibliography, 
d) Indexing periodical, and 
e) Abstracting periodical. 


10 DOCUMENTS OTHER THAN 
CONVENTIONAL BOOKS AND 
PERIODITCALS 


10.1 A code may deal with the catalogue of other 
kinds of conventional documents excluding books 
and periodical publications and nonconventional 
documents. 


10.2 The chapter(s) devoted to Non-book materials 
such as periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets, maps, 
photographs, pictures, posters, slides, film strips, 
motion pictures, video tapes, cassettes, microfilms and 
microfiches, computer disks, etc., should provide rules 
on various components such as 


a) Storage, 
b) Accessioning, and 
c) Cataloguing and filing. 


10.3 It shall indicate for each of the special kind of 
documents, the additional rules and deviations from the 
rules given in the earlier parts the code. 

NOTE — It will be helpful if the part on document other than 


conventional books and periodicals has sets of chapters dealing 
6th items, such as the following: 
a) Incunabula, f) Cinema reel, 

g) Picture, 

h) Map, 

j) Music notation, and 
k) Braille book 


b) Manuscript, 
c) Reprograph, 
d) Phonograph, 
e) Tape record, 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 05 (10617). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


