URNA Wad IS 16652 : 2017 
ji (Reaffirmed 2021) 
Indian Standard 


Rima ya meke ( Waal ) seta 
sat A Ya waert UT € 
meat & far mgs 


Guide for Implementation of 
Environmental Management Systems 
in Single Super Phosphate (SSP) 
Fertilizer Industry 


ICS 13.040.40 


© BIS 2017 


ada AM Rt 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF FS, 9 FGM WAL AMT, ve feeeit-110002 
Hizib z7 MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2017 Price Group 11 


Environmental Management Sectional Committee, CHD 34 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Environmental 
Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Generic Environmental Management System standard, namely IS/ISO 14001 : 2015 ‘Environmental management 
systems — Requirements with guidance for use’ has been revised and published in 2015 by ISO. Consequent to 
the revision of ISO 14001, organizations implementing EMS need to implement 2015 version of IS/ISO 14001 
within 3 years from the date of publication. Most of the Fertilizer industries in India are implementing IS/ISO 14001 
in their systems for managing environmental issues. In order to facilitate the fertilizer industry to quickly understand 
and pick up the benefits of the latest version of IS/ISO 14001, this standard has been developed for providing 
guidance specific to fertilizer industry. 


This standard provides guidance for implementation of Environmental Management Systems for Single Super 
Phosphate (SSP) Fertilizer Industry. Based on the guidance provided in the standard it can plan, establish, implement 
and maintain a framework to manage its environmental responsibilities in a systematic manner that contributes to 
the environmental pillar of sustainability. 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


GUIDE FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS IN SINGLE SUPER 
PHOSPHATE (SSP) FERTILIZER INDUSTRY 


1 SCOPE 


This standard provides guidance for implementation 
of Environmental Management Systems for Single 
Super Phosphate (SSP) Fertilizer Industry seeking to 
plan, establish, implement and maintain a framework 
to address environmental issues and to contribute to 
sustainable development. For this purpose, guidance 
for the requirements laid down in IS/ISO 14001 : 2015 
is provided in the standard. Each clause of the standard 
corresponds respectively with the clauses of 
IS/ISO 14001 : 2015. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following standard contains provision which, 
through reference in this text, constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
IS/ISO 14001: Environmental management systems 
2015 — Requirements and guidance for 


use (second revision) 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard, terms and definitions 
given in IS/ISO 14001 shall apply. 


4 CONTEXT OF THE ORGANIZATION 


Prior to indulging on development of an EMS, the 
organizations must always keep in mind that the more 
flexible the EMS is, the easier it will be to implement 
and the more flexible it will be for future changes. A 
gap analysis is a good way to determine what the 
current situation is, and where priority action is needed. 


The fundamental concept of IS/ISO14001: 2015 
standard is that organization determines internal and 
external environmental issues that are relevant to its 
purpose and affect the ability to achieve the intended 
outcome(s) of its EMS. The organization shall determine 
the needs and expectation of interested parties that are 
relevant to EMS and shall determine the boundaries and 
applicability of the EMS to establish its scope. Interested 


parties may include legal and regulatory authorities, 
customers, trade and professional associations, 
community groups, NGOs, suppliers, employees, etc. In 
setting the scope, the credibility of the EMS will depend 
upon the choice of organizational boundaries. Scoping 
shall not be used as means to exclude activities, products, 
services or facilities that have or can have significant 
environmental aspects. 


In order to continually improve its environmental 
performance, the organization shall establish, 
implement, maintain and review the environment 
management system. 


For initial and/or subsequent review, it is suggested that 
the management should make a formal announcement 
on the establishment of EMS compliant to current 
version of IS/ISO 14001, followed by identification of 
acore team, team leader, and the targeted timelines from 
start to end. 


The review should take into account all the activities, 
products and services of the organization. The review 
should identify and include information on deviation 
from regulatory requirements, if any, and impacts on 
the environment, alongwith policy, programmes, 
procedures, training and work instructions, and 
operational controls. Where relevant, the ability of 
suppliers and subcontractors to comply with the EMS 
programme and applicable regulatory requirements 
should also be evaluated. It is recommended that the 
initial/subsequent review considers energy use, resource 
conservation and information systems so that these 
aspects may be integrated into the EMS programme, if 
not done earlier. 


The environmental experts/members of project team 
should collate applicable national, state, local 
regulations and self-subscribed requirements. These 
should be compared with the obvious environmental 
impacts. The compliance to regulatory requirements is 
the starting point for an IS/ISO14001 compliant EMS. 
To sum up, the outputs of Initial Review/gap analysis 
should deliver: 


a) A SWOT of the organization’s current overall 
environmental management. 

b) Key focus areas for immediate improvement 
of environmental management programmes or 


IS 16652 : 2017 


procedures that should be strengthened to 
establish conformance with the standard. 


Consider the following as sources of valuable 
information: 


e Equipment manufacturers 


e Suppliers and vendors such as waste disposal 
companies 


e Third party organizations such as inspection, 
testing and calibration laboratories 


Government agencies 
Industry associations 
EHS databases 
Community 


Consider benchmarking against other organizations 


4.1 General Requirements 


This section of the standard mentions the basic 
requirement to have a formal EMS that is documented, 
approved, disseminated, maintained and continually 
improved over time. 


The EMS should be broadly based on the flowchart in 
Fig. 1. 


5 LEADERSHIP 


5.1 Leadership and Commitment 


Top management shall participate in formulation of 
environmental policies considering concerns of 


interested parties and shall provide all necessary 
resources for achieving the objectives of EMS. 
Leadership participation in periodic EMS reviews and 
promoting continual improvements through setting 
EMS objectives and targets supports organizational 
environmental strategic planning. 


5.2 Environmental Policy 


Environmental Policy is the driver for implementing 
and improving organization’s EMS. The Policy shall 
be defined by the top management. The Policy should 
be periodically reviewed during Management Review. 
Top management should initiate the Policy and provide 
direction to the EMS team. 


The Policy should: 
e be clear, concise and practically 
implementable. 


e be relevant to the significant aspects of 
activities, products and services. 


e account for regulatory compliance obligations. 

e ensure the prevention of pollution and 
protection of environment and continual 
improvement. 

e ensure establishment and implementation of 
an effective EMS. 

e be communicated within organization to the 
workforce and available to interested parties. 

e bereviewed and updated periodically. 


Environmental 
Policy 


Control |(Route 


| 

| 

| 

| 

| 

| 
Improvement | 
Route | 
| 

| 

| 

| 

| 

| 


NOTE — OCP — Operational Control Procedure. 


EMP — Environmental Management Program. 
Aspect Numbers 500, 50, 450, 15 are only for illustrations. 


Fic. | EMS Process Flowchart 


2 


The Policy becomes the foundation for establishing the 
EMS principles. The Policy establishes broad level 
goals for environmental performance against which the 
effectiveness of the EMS will be evaluated. It provides 
vision and commitment of the top management towards 
the environment. The very fact that the policy statement 
can have a significant impact on the company’s image, 
it needs to be clear and verifiable. Policy needs to be 
clearly understood by workforce to achieve intended 
outcome. 


The Environmental Policy duly established by the top 
management is to be made available to all interested 
parties. Everyone at the organization should understand 
the policy and what is expected of him/her in order to 
maintain an EMS. 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Impacts include emissions to air; generation of 
wastewater, hazardous waste; contamination of soil and 
groundwater; energy use, material use, noise nuisance 
etc. Complaints from third parties should be included 
while developing list of aspects. 


The organization should have a mechanism to identify 
all the environmental aspects and their impacts related 
to activities, products and services that are within the 
scope of its environmental management system. There 
should also be a mechanism to shortlist significant 
aspects. This should preferably be done through defined 
criteria for significance with due consideration to life 
cycle perspective, inputs and outputs of its processes, 
management of change including planned or new 
developments or new or modified activities, products 


Use the up-to-date version of the Environmental 
Policy. 

Effectively communicate the Policy to all 
concerned that is explain, communicate, and verify 
that employees and contract personnel have 
understood the policy and can correlate with their job 


Environmental 
Policy 


responsibilities . 


While communicating the policy, make sure to focus 


on the three key areas: 
- compliance with laws and regulations; 
- pollution prevention; and 


= continual improvement. 


Top management shall assign responsibility and 
authority for implementation and reporting by 
appointing a “Management Representative (MR)” 
who shall ensure that EMS conforms to IS/ISO 
14001. It is recommended to appoint MR who has 
good knowledge on EMS. 


6 PLANNING 


6.1 General 


All aspect of interested parties expectation, scope and 
boundaries to be considered to ensure the inclusivity 
of overall business while planning the EMS. 


6.1.1 Environmental Aspects 


Environmental aspects are the elements of an 
organization’s activities, products, services or physical 
resources, which may have potentially beneficial or 
harmful impacts on the environment. The aspects 
typically include processing, storage, transfer, 
transportation, discharges and emissions, raw materials 
and energy use, waste recycling, noise, and dust etc. 


Prevention 


za 
D = 
oO D 
= = 
2 D 
a 

= 2 
So Ss 
8 £ 


and services. The criteria should become a part of the 
EMS manual of the organization. Each aspect should 
be scrutinized for significance and results recorded. It 
is not necessary to apply the same criteria cut-off for 
all departments. A careful evaluation of the size and 
nature of activities should help decide the criteria. 


Identification ofaspects is essential and important, since 
the rest of the system is built on mitigating the impacts 
of these aspects. When the aspects are systematically 
identified, they can be managed. Identification of 
aspects is a continual process under the EMS system. 
The aspects identification process includes present and 
future impacts that the activities are having, and will 
have on the environment. While doing so, it is 
imperative to consider legal, financial and business risks 
associated with the aspects. 


6.1.1.1 Identification of environmental aspects 


One may begin by asking the following questions while 
identifying the environmental aspects and their impacts: 


e Do the organization’s activities, products and 
services affect the environment? If yes, what 
and how much impact footprint they leave? 


IS 16652 : 2017 


e Are these impacts adverse? 


e Are procedures in place for the identification 
and control of adverse environmental impacts 
for existing, new or altered products and 
services? 


e Are there setups at the organization that have 
special environmental concerns which must 
get addressed? 


e Are there situations where an event of a 
process failure or human error, the 
environmental impacts would be severe? 


e What is the likelihood of an emergency? 


e Do activities have resource conservation 
potential? Can these be identified and 
potential estimated? 


e What would be the scope of the identified 
environmental impacts? 


As the environmental aspects of an organization’s 
activities, products, or services interact or can interact 
with the environment, these are mainly related to: 


e use of material and natural resources like raw 
materials, water and energy; 


e use or generation of hazardous chemicals such 
as sulphuric acid; 


emissions to air; 

wastewater ; 

storm water; 

leakage / overflow from storage tanks; 
solid / liquid process wastes; 

noise generation; 

VOC emissions; and 


discarded chemical containers/ metallic scraps 
and other solid and hazardous wastes. 


While identifying environmental aspect it is important 
to consider normal, abnormal and emergency operating 
conditions, shut down and start up conditions and other 
reasonably foreseeable situations. 


The Environmental impact is change to the environment 
whether adverse or beneficial, wholly or partially 
resulting from an organization’s environmental aspects. 


For example: Boiler operations. 


The significant environmental aspects are the current 


issues with the greatest potential for environmental 
impact. 


While determining significance, criteria should be 
defined and deployed. As applicable, evaluation of 
aspects should include all phases of operations from 
the design phase to R&D, marketing, outsourcing, 
purchasing, production, hazardous waste and solid 
waste management, product packaging, distribution, 
sales and utilization of the finished product. 


6.1.2 Determination of Compliance Obligation 


Organization needs to identify the compliance 
obligations that are applicable to its environmental 
aspects and determine how they apply to organization. 
While identifying legal obligations, it may include; 
National and international laws, state and local 
government legal requirements and provisions under 
permits like consent to operate, licenses for storages 
for hazardous substances etc. Compliance obligation 
shall also consider all interested parties concerns related 
to its environmental aspects like transportation of 
product, warehouse storage etc. 


These requirements can be partially established by 
reviewing the previously completed aspects and 
impacts considering: 


e How the organization identifies, tracks and 
accesses legal requirements? 


e How changes in the requirements are tracked? 


e How employees and others, such as sub- 
contractors and suppliers are informed of any 
changes in legal requirements? 


e How organization creates awareness and 
competency of the workforce on legal 
requirements? 


The basic purpose of identifying and maintaining access 
to legal requirements is to ensure that the organization 
is aware about its legal obligations. It will also support 
the awareness and competency of the workforce. The 
purpose of identifying these items is to ensure that all 
operations take into account all applicable legal 
obligations. 


The organization should include all requirements 
pertinent to its aspects and impacts in the development 
of its Legal obligations list, including: 


Fuel consumption Natural resource depletion 


Boiler operations 


Boiler blow down Water pollution 
Water consumption Natural resource depletion 


c) Site-specific requirements of operating 
permits/consents. 
d) Allapplicable Environmental Laws. 


Register of regulation is prepared, updated from time- 
to-time and compliance requirement adhered and 
monitored. 


A typical list of legal obligation is given in Annex A 
6.1.3 Determining Significant Environmental Aspects 
Significant environmental aspects are determined by 
applying specific criteria to each aspect. 
These are: 

a) Legal Requirements (LC), 

b) Interested Party Concerns (IPC), 

c) Business Concerns (BC), and 

d) Environmental Concerns (EC). 


The suggested SSPD rating criteria has four elements 
on which every aspect (other than those where 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Total Marks = Weightage x Marks (for summation 


of all criteria) 


Cut of Marks = 300; Beyond which an impact to be 
considered as significant 
NOTE — 5 Marks should be the most severe/highest and 1 
least. 
The baseline cut off for Final score should be fixed. 
Therefore, the aspects that have Final score of more 
than the cut-off are significant. 


Based on the above, aspects are identified as significant 
or non-significant. 


It should be ensured that all aspects that are under 
control and influence of the organization are covered. 
These aspects shall be used to define objectives and 
targets. 


Typical Environmental Aspects of a SSP Fertilizer plant 
are given in Annex B for reference. 


SSPD EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS 


Marks Severity Scale (SC) Probability (P) Duration (D) 
(SV) 
1 Low Within 2 m Once in a month Less than 30 min 
2 Moderate Within plant Once a fortnight 30 min to 4h 
3 High Within works Once a day 4hto8h 
4 Injury Within 3 km radius from works Once a shift 8hto24h 
5 Fatal Beyond 3 km radius from works Occurs frequently > 1 Day 


overriding criteria is applicable) should be numerically 
rated. The product of all four elements gives the final 
score to the aspect. 


The four elements are: 
a) Scale (SC) — Area of impact 
b) Severity (SV) — Degree of damage 
c) Probability (P) — Occurrence of the impact 
with and without existing controls 
d) Duration (D) — Duration of impact 


Any impact falling under LC, IPC or BC shall be 
considered as significant. The SSPD criteria shall be 
applied to those impacts, which are not falling under 
the LC, IPC, BC. To begin with, any of the impact 
having total score (SV x SC x P x D) equal to or more 
than 300 shall be treated as significant environmental 
aspect. This score shall be gradually lowered to cover 
all the environmental aspects. All aspects related with 
significant environmental impacts shall be treated as 
significant environmental aspects. 

NOTE — Evaluation of significant environmental impacts may 


vary from organization to organization and subject to criteria 
defined for significance. 


6.2 Environmental Objectives and Planning to 
Achieve Them 


6.2.1 Environmental Objectives 


This is the transition point from identification of 
significant environmental aspects to continual 
improvement. The objectives and targets should be 
aligned with the environmental policy and significant 
aspects and impact, which support the organization’s 
commitment to continual environmental improvement. 
Due consideration should be given to the financial, 
operational and business limitations of the 
organization. 


Continual improvement cannot be achieved until 
objectives and targets are defined, implemented and 
maintained. 


In setting environmental objectives and target, all 
significant aspects are to be considered. The objectives 
shall lead to improvement in reduction in specific raw 
materials consumption, other process materials, 
improving energy efficiencies, specific water 


IS 16652 : 2017 


consumption, emissions and effluents etc. Objectives 
should be set to establish short and long-term goals in 
environmental performance. 


For all objectives and targets, measurable 
environmental performance indicators should be 
established that could later be used for environmental 
performance evaluation. This shall provide information 
to management about the functioning of IS/ISO14001 
and become basis for a “Management Review”, when 
coupled with audit reports and financial performance 
data. Each objective and target should have a clearly 
specified base year/time as well as the Target Year/time. 


e Involve operational staff as they best sets 
objectives and targets. Since they will be 
ultimately responsible for performance, they 
should be included in the decision-making 
process when developing Objectives and 
Targets. 

e Objectives should be consistent with the 
Policy. The Compliance, Pollution Prevention 
and Continual Improvement philosophy of the 
Policy should drive them. 

e Make Objectives flexible. Make a statement 
of the results desired, and allow staff members 
to define the “How” portion wherever 
possible. 

e Make Objectives simple, at first. Then build 
on them. 

e Make Objectives understood to all members 
of the organization. 

e Make Objectives and Targets SMART 
(Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic 
and Time bound). 

Check points for setting objectives 

e Are they consistent with the Policy ? 

e Are they practicable and can they be tracked 
and monitored? 

e Are they documented at relevant functions and 
levels in the organization? 

e Are they consistent with the business strategy? 


Some examples are: 


a) Reduction in specific consumption of Rock 
phosphate from “X” kg/kg SSP to “Y” kg/kg 


SSP, 

b) Reduction in specific water consumption per 
unit of SSP, 

c) Reduction in specific energy consumption per 
unit of SSP, 


d) Reduction in Fluoride emission per M3 of 
discharge to air, and 


e) Increase in training hours on EMS. 


6.2.2 Planning Actions to Achieve Objectives 


Organization shall establish an action plan to achieve 
objectives by defining responsibilities, methods, and 
timeframe for completion including provision of 
resources. The objective should be communicated to 
all concerned and a system to be established for internal 
tracking. 


Having identified the environmental Objectives and 
Targets, the next step shall be to have an action plan in 
place to accomplish them. The Environment 
Management Programmes (EMPs) should be integrated 
into the strategic plan of the organization. Scheduling 
of actions, resource allocation, and responsibilities 
should be specifically mentioned in the EMP. The 
actions must be included in the documentation of the 
EMP so that all operational practices and 
responsibilities are reviewed periodically. 


EMP is basically a “road map” with clearly specified 
actions, responsibilities by name and target dates. These 
should be reviewed by designated personnel and 
approved by the top management. It is not necessary 
to contain one EMP in one document. Linkage to other 
documents should be acceptable for the EMS audit. It 
should be ensured that the roles and responsibilities, 
processes and schedules are defined. 


Monitoring of EMPs is primarily the responsibility of 
the concerned line manager for each specific activity. 
They should routinely report to senior management the 
status of any/all environmental programs and projects 
under their control. This shall support integration of 
environmental issues into the scope of management 
concerns at the senior level. 


e Keep the EMPs simple. 


e Consider employee consultation/ input 
wherever possible. 


e Establish EMPs based on current programmes 
e Include health and safety programmes 


e Communicate the expectations of the EMPs 
to all concerned 


All EMPs shall be reviewed periodically to assess the 
status of implementation. 


Re-evaluate the action plans when changes occur in 
procedures or facilities. 


7 SUPPORT 


7.1 Resources 


For an EMS to be functionally effective, individual roles 
and responsibilities must be clearly defined as they 
relate to the overall implementation of the EMS. Top 
management should provide the resources needed to 


ensure that the EMS is effectively implemented. A 
Management Representative (MR) appointed by top 
management is responsible to oversee the 
implementation of the EMS. Organizational 
organogram should be made to support EMS 
implementation. 


To ensure effective development and implementation 
of an EMS, it is necessary to allocate appropriate 
resources, and assign appropriate roles, responsibilities 
and authorities. Top management of the organization 
defines and documents the responsibilities, authorities 
and interrelationships of all key personnel. The key 
roles that effect environmental performance should be 
included in the employee’s job profile and performance 
evaluation. All employees of the organization should 
clearly understand their environmental roles and 
responsibilities, as well as understand the importance 
of the environmental objectives. 


7.1.1 The Role of MR 


The MR should be a member of the facilities 
management team. MR should have overall 
responsibility for compliance with the requirements of 
the EMS, and should ensure that regulations are 
complied with. 


7.1.2 Staff Roles and Responsibilities 


The specific responsibilities of the MR do not absolve 
line management from compliance responsibilities for 
regulations and operational requirements of the EMS. 
For example, line managers may be delegated the 
responsibility to detail operating procedures which 
operations staff must follow. 


While defining roles and responsibilities organization 
should ensure that: 


IS 16652 : 2017 


e All roles, responsibility and authority are 
defined for environmental management, 


The roles are communicated, 
Adequate resources allocated, 
MR appointed, and 


Integration of EMS into other business 
management functions. 


7.2 Competence 


Management has an essential role in developing 
organizational awareness and motivation by 
communicating environmental Policy and 
demonstrating commitment. 


The basic intent of building competency through 
training and awareness is to ensure that employees 
understand processes, procedures and their 
responsibilities for effective implementation of EMS. 
The training should also include managers to ensure 
that they understand the EMS, know their 
responsibilities towards EMS. 


Training need identification and execution of training 
programs should consider the following: 


e New Employee Hiring 

e Change in Job Description 

e Corrective Action notes failure to follow 
instructions 

e New or Altered Procedures/Processes 

e Changed EMS Aspects/ Objectives 


e Target New Regulations (local, state or 
national) 


e Job under performance 
e EMS Audits 


A typical training matrix 


Raising awareness of the strategic Senior 


importance of environmental 
management 


Raising general environmental awareness 


Skills Enhancement 


Management 


All Employees 


Employees with 
environmental 


To gain commitment and alignment of the 
environmental policy. 


To gain commitment to the environmental 
policy, objectives and targets and to instill 
a sense of individual responsibility 


Improve performance in specific areas— 
operations, R&D, engineering 


responsibilities 


Compliance 


Employees whose 
actions can affect 
compliance 


Ensure regulatory and internal 


requirements for training are met. 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Employees should also be kept updated on the regulatory 
changes that affects their job performance. Training 
modules for management and operations staff should be 
developed to ensure the continuing education. Where 
in-house training is not adequate, out-sourced training 
should be utilized. 


The subcontractors and others with any impact on the 
EMS are equally important and should receive training 
consistent with their impact on the system. The MR/HR 
should be responsible for the establishment of training 
requirements within the organization. Training should 
also include communication of the following: 


e Requirements of the system, the importance of 
regulatory compliance, and the importance of 
compliance with environmental policy. 


e The potential negative environmental effects 
of the employee’s work. The positive effects 
of improved performance on their part. 


e Their responsibilities in achieving compliance 
with the policies, regulations and EMS 
requirements. 


e Consequences of non-conformances. 


Training requirements should be more detailed for those 
individuals that are responsible for verification of 
environmental performance, either regulatory compliance 
verification or EMS conformance verification. These 
include internal auditors. The training requirements and 
records should be maintained as a part of the 
documentation of the EMS. On-the-job instruction should 
be included, but clearly documented where required. 


7.3 Awareness 


It is important that persons doing work under the 
organization control shall be aware of the Environmental 
Policy and commitments, Environmental aspects and 
significant impacts related with their work. They also 
contribute significantly to overall EMS improvements. 
Responsible team for EMS implementation must 
organize periodic awareness sessions on Environmental 
Policy, Organizational objectives and key applicable 
legal requirements to enhance awareness, achieve 
compliance and improvements. 


7.4 Communication 


Effective communications helps in motivating 
employees, understand their environmental 
responsibilities, processes and procedures, monitor 
environmental performance and identify areas for 
improvement. Organization shall determine other internal 
and external communication relevant to environmental 
management system including what it will communicate, 
when to communicate, whom to communicate and what 
shall be the methods and tools to communicate. 


Communication shall be transparent, credible, clear, 
appropriate and reliable. 


7.4.1 Internal Communication 


Communication in an EMS includes the communication 
of internal and external environmental information to 
management, and the communication from management 
to others regarding environmental impacts. The 
communication should be designed to: 


e demonstrate management’s commitment to the 
environment; 

e make others aware of the environmental policy 
and commitments; 


e address concerns about the environmental 
activities by external parties; 

e announce the strategic environmental 
management approach; and 

e establish a line of communication defining 
emergency responsibilities. 


7.4.2 External Communication 


The organization’s top management, the MR or the 
designated liaison should be the only one to release 
information to third parties about environmental matters. 
Be as open to third party inquiries as possible, 
acknowledge the existence of problems where they arise, 
communicate about them, and find solutions as early as 
possible. 


Consider communication strategies for neighbours, 
community groups, other interest groups, local officials, 
regulatory agencies, and emergency responders. 
Communication should be clear enough to leave no room 
for misinterpretation. 


7.5 Documented Information 


The intent of documentation is to ensure that organization 
create and maintain documented information in a manner 
sufficient to implement the EMS. The entire EMS right 
from the development of the policy through the 
implementation, operation and management review need 
to be formally and appropriately documented, that is, 
written, authorized, approved, practiced, monitored and 
finally reviewed. The documentation includes all aspects 
of EMS from Policy to management review and records. 
Documentation can be in the form of hard copies or 
electronic copies maintained on computer system, 
ensuring accessibility as necessary. 


The implementation of EMS requires specific actions, 
in order of priority, dealing with processes, products, 
services, projects, facilities that relate to the already 
established environmental Significant Aspects, 
Objectives and Targets. The actions should be included 
in the documentation of the EMS so that operational 
practices and responsibilities are reviewed, revised and 
deployed. 


The EMS documentation development should define the 
structure of documentation and records that need to be 
maintained. This can be broadly outlined in the EMS 
Manual. It is suggested to have the documentation 
maintained at three levels namely, 


a) Level-1 that includes the EMS Manual that 
describes the commitment of the Management 
towards environmental protection. The manual 
should be fully aligned with the IS/ISO14001 
standard requirements. This should mainly 
include the business brief, policy and 
responsibilities of senior management. 

b) Level-2 documentation that include 
environmental aspects impacts evaluation 
sheets, environmental legal register, 
Operational Control Procedures (OCPs), 
environmental objectives and targets, EMPs 
and an on-site emergency plan. The line 
managers and frontline working staffnormally 
use this level documentation. 

c) Level-3 routine and non-routine records that 
provide evidence that the EMS is effectively 
working. Various standardized forms and 
formats used to maintain records should also 
be included here. This level of documentation 
is typically used by operating staff to record 
their day-to-day actions on environmental 
management. 


Ensure that relevant documents are cross-referenced 
across the three levels. 


The suggested list of documents under EMS but not 
limited to is as under: 


a) Scope of EMS; 

b) Environmental Policy; 

c) List of aspect and associated impact 
assessment; 

d) Compliance obligation — legal register; 

e) Procedure(s) for establishing criteria and 
determining significant aspect and 
organizational risks and opportunities and 
criteria used for this purpose; 

f) Environmental objectives; 

g) Planning to achieve objectives; 

h) Evidence of competency; 

j) Internal and external communication; 

k) Emergency preparedness and response plan; 

m) Evidence of monitoring, measurement, analysis 
and evaluation results; 

n) Evidence of compliance, internal audit results; 
and 

p) Management reviews. 


Keep the documents and records simple and up-to-date. 


Documentation is not required for every procedure or 


IS 16652 : 2017 


work process. Employee experience, skill, qualifications, 
standard techniques, good work practices are all adequate 
alternatives. Manufacturer’s operating instructions may 
also be employed where they get the tag of “Documents 
of external origin”. 


Work instructions should be clear and concise. Each step 
in the instructions or the procedures should 4be given 
sequentially, and language should be for the easy 
understanding of the end user. 


Make sure that all the documents, records, forms and 
formats are appropriately identified and numbered. For 
good control over the documentation, the responsibility 
and authority of preparation, review, approval, issue and 
changes to these, and their withdrawal and disposal 
should be clearly documented. To ensure that the current 
versions are being used and the older versions are 
withdrawn. One good way to have effective control is 
by document version control. 


Similarly, where documents are placed in a soft form 
that is on the local intranet, the authority of their access 
and maintenance should be clearly defined. 


Generally, the authority of control over documents should 
lies with the MR. 


8 OPERATION 


8.1 Operational Planning and Control 


Operational control over all activities significantly 
affecting the environment is a requirement of 
IS/ISO 14001. To assure this, Operating Control 
Procedures (OCPs) should be written down for these 
activities. This provides consistency when changes in 
people occur, and identifies employees as to what their 
job responsibilities are. Care should be taken to include 
all functions (like purchase, marketing, transportation, 
contract manufacturing etc) that may have a direct or 
indirect environmental impact. 


Maintaining up-to-date master list of all the EMS 
documents to control the existence, organization and 
ownership of each procedure, is a good idea. 


The starting point of implementation of the EMS is the 
establishment of Operational Controls to verify that the 
EMS is in place. 


Preparation of OCPs should preferably be delegated to 
departments under the direction of the area Manager and 
the MR. The department should review environmental 
requirements and effects within their area of operation 
as defined in the Aspects, Objectives and Targets. Other 
way out is to centralize, it with the MR. This activity is 
usually well accomplished by a team. 


Integration of OCPs with other management systems 
further strengthens the commitment of the organization 
to environmental stewardship. 


IS 16652 : 2017 


What to do: 


Develop written OCPs for controlling key activities and operations that are associated with 


Significant Aspects. 


Ensure that these OCPs cover all normal and abnormal operating conditions, including emergencies; 


plant shut down and start up. 


Ensure that employees are trained on these OCPs. 


Once operational controls are established, consider what maintenance and calibration activities will 


be required for those procedures. 


Review procedures with those performing the work to ensure they are correct and to generate ideas 
for improvement (you should preferably talk with them prior to developing the procedure). 


8.2 Value Chain Control 


Most of the SSP manufacturers import Rock Phosphate 
and also have arrangement with toll manufacturers to 
satisfy the customer requirements. IS/ISO 14001 includes 
the suppliers and toll manufacturers’ environmental 
performance. A record of such external suppliers and 
vendors shall be assessed and recorded to demonstrate 
life cycle approach in EMS. 


8.3 Emergency Preparedness and Response 


Emergency response needs to be planned well in advance. 
Emergency preparation and procedures should be 
established (documented), implemented (put into action) 
and maintained (tested and tried through training and mock 
drills) to respond to unplanned events. Procedures should 
define control mechanisms, operational requirements and 
other controls during these events. 


For an operating site emergencies may arise and they do 
not come knocking at the doors. These are all unplanned 
events that may have serious environmental impacts. The 
philosophy behind emergency preparations is to pre-plan 
emergency actions to mitigate, reduce, and/or eliminate 
the EHS impacts that can carry huge financial 
implications. This investment is generally recovered the 
first time a serious incident occurs but is also difficult to 
quantify. Insurance costs may also be negotiated and 
brought down based on enhanced preparedness. 


Most organizations would have an Emergency Action/ 
Response Plan in place. It needs to be reviewed at least 
once from environmental impact viewpoint. The 
additional requirement to be taken care of is that all 
significant environmental aspects that qualify the 
definition of environmental emergency are adequately 
addressed. The potential emergencies can be marked 
while doing the Gap analysis and also during the aspect- 
impact evaluation where emergency events may be made 
a mandatory overriding criteria for significance, meaning 
that if an emergency situation is possible, label the aspect 
as significant. 


8.3.1 Potential Emergency in SSP Plant 
a) Fire (Coal crushing and feeding/ FO heating/ 


10 


HSD storage /Empty Bag storage); 


b) Explosion (LPG, DA-Oxygen gas cylinders 
storage/handling/use; Pressure Vessel 
operation); 

c) Major Leakage/ Spillage of sulphuric acid / 
Scrubber acidic water / FO; 

d) Scrubber malfunction during mixer operation 
causing accidental release of HF gas; 

e) Structural collapse; and 

f) Natural Calamity (Earth quake / Heavy Rains). 


A periodic emergency drill must be carried out 
considering potential emergency scenarios and 
effectiveness of drill should be assessed by top 
management for improvements. All documents and 
records of such drills and reviews shall be maintained. 


9 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 


9.1 Monitoring, Measurement, Analysis and 
Evaluation 


Measurement and monitoring are performed to see if 
the requirements of EMS implementation, OCPs, 
Objectives and Targets are being met. The EMS manual 
should include procedures for this measuring and 
monitoring process. Measurement and monitoring 
requirement of key performance indicators should be 
identified and included in the Monitoring and 
Measurement Plan. The Plan should define the EMS and 
environmental parameters to be measured/ monitored, 
frequency and responsibility for monitoring and 
instruments/ equipment to be employed for monitoring. 
To ensure that the monitoring equipment always 
provides the correct results, periodic calibrations, 
internally or externally should be carried out. 


The review of monitoring should help in identifying areas 
that need Corrective Action and/or improvement. 


Identification of the key performance indicators that will 
be used to monitor the EMS implementation should be 
an integral part of the actions taken for environmental 
management. The statement “What get measured gets 
managed” applies here too. 


Make sure to 


IS 16652 : 2017 


e Identify key process characteristics and how to monitor them? 
e Develop a process to review compliance with regulations (audits?). 
e Determine how to measure the performance in relation to the EMS Objectives and Targets? 


Ask the key questions 


e Which operations and activities can have significant environmental impacts? 
e What are the key characteristics of these operations and activities? 


e Howto measure these characteristics? 
Take actions 


Objectives and Targets of the EMS. 
e Focus on those issues that can be controlled. 


Keep monitoring requirements limited to KEY process characteristics. 

Make sure equipment are routinely maintained and calibrated. 

Regulatory compliance should be integral to the measuring and monitoring programs for the EMS. 
Cross check that the measuring and monitoring verifies conformance with the Policy, and 


e Ensure that the resources to implement the program as defined are provided. 


For performance evaluation, key performance indicator 
need be identified based on significant aspects and may 
be classified into: Operational performance indicator 
(OPI), Management performance indicator (MPI) and 
Environmental condition indicator (ECT) etc. 


9.1.1 Evaluation of Compliance 


The standard expects that the overall responsibility for 
evaluation of compliance to the applicable legal and 
other requirements of the organization are entrusted to 
few responsible individuals. The periodicity of 
compliance evaluation should be clearly established and 
specified. The regulatory requirements should be 
compiled with and a compliance status report prepared 
and periodically updated. The report should be 
presented to organization’s top management with key 
features including the non-compliances, if any, 
discussed during the management review. 


Compliance to Legal and other requirements being one 
of the cornerstones of EMS (6.1.3) needs to be ensured 
and periodically verified. 


The responsibility of obtaining legal compliance that 
includes licenses to operate should be clearly spelt out. 
An appropriate person may be nominated with the 
distinct responsibility for the same. MR and HODs 
should oversee that other self-imposed requirements 
are complied with. MR should keep the top 
management abreast on the compliance status and 
possible concern areas regularly and during the 
management review. 


A periodic review of environmental legal compliance 
may be established to ensure compliance. All key 
records such as review of documented information, 
facility inspections by statutory authorities, sampling 
and testing to comply with the statutory standards shall 
be maintained. 


11 


9.2 Internal Audit 


An EMS should include routine systems audits. The 
audits should be carried out in order to determine 
whether the EMS conforms to plan arrangements for 
environmental management including the requirements 
of IS/ISO 14001 and to determine whether the EMS 
has been effectively implemented and maintained. 
Additionally, it should provide information on the 
results of audits to management. 


The EMS must identify the frequency of internal audits. 
These qualifications are essential for internal auditors. 


a) 


Good knowledge and appreciation of the 
technical and environmental aspects of facility 


operations. 

b) Up-to-date information on environmental laws 
and regulations. 

c) Understanding of the EMS. 

d) Trained in EMS auditing techniques. 


The intent of auditing is to inform the management to 
make decisions aligned to EMS vision of the company. 
Identified personnel are trained in-house to be made 
competent in delivering the objective information to 
be useful for system modification/improvement. One 
good way to train internal auditors in operating their 
EMS is to involve employees from one department in 
the audits of another. This can be performed in 
conjunction with internal auditors of other 
organizations prescribing to IS/ISO14001 based EMS 
certification to gain “internal” as well as external 
perspective. 


Procedures should clarify audit scope, audit frequency, 
auditor qualifications, reporting requirements and 
follow-up. Two major objectives should be expected 
from an audit: 


IS 16652 : 2017 


a) Determine if the system is effective in 
achieving the expectations of the Policy. 

b) Determine compliance with the environmental 

management system as outlined by the EMS 

Manual, Aspects-impacts, Objectives and 

Targets, EMPs, OCPs, and to check for their 


effective implementation. 
The audit should be carried out with respect to: 


a) 


Compliance to the requirements of 
IS/ISO 14001. 


b) Compliance to Environmental Policy. 

c) Effectiveness of EMPs. 

d) Organizational Structure. 

e) Communication, Staff awareness and training. 

f) Monitoring and feedback. 

g) Status of the non-conformity report and the 
implementation of the corrective and 
preventive action. 

h) Compliance against Legal and Other 


requirements. 
The internal auditors should follow the following basic 
steps: 


a) Investigate and understand the management 
systems. 

b) Assess the internal controls including 
awareness of personnel. 

c) Review of records, sampling and verification. 


The auditors should make use of Questionnaires, 
Checklists, Interviews, Measurements and direct 
observations as the audit tools, depending on the nature 
of function being audited. 


Additionally the auditor should: 


a) 
b) 


focus on objective conformance evidence. 
discuss audit findings with operational staff 
during the audit. This may lead to a better 
understanding of root causes and systemic 
failures. It shall also identify and record areas 
for improvement and action plans. 

c) perform audits with the area team as it has the 
requisite technical, regulatory, management, 
and operational expertise to effectively 
determine “operational control”. 

d) where possible consider auditing for EMS 
conformance along with regulatory 
compliance. To support this, the structure of 
the EMS audit protocol should address the 
legal issues at the heart of the audit. 

record the non-conformance in the audit 
report/sheet, inform the auditee team about the 
same and ask for suggested remedies, 
corrective and preventive actions. Where the 


12 


auditee teams are weak, the auditor should 
support them by suggesting solutions and 
clarifying the requirements. 


9.3 Management Review 


Management Review is an essential part of the continual 
improvement of the EMS. The improvement process 
does not end with the establishment of an initial Policy, 
realization of initial Objectives, or certification of the 
EMS to a Standard. Management Review is the 
essential element for systems improvement, alongwith 
preventive and corrective action. The scope of a 
Management Review of the EMS should include all 
environmental potentialities for organization’s 
activities, products and services. 


The Review should assess the extent of compliance or 
nonconformance to the EMS Standard, and then review 
the effectiveness of corrective as well as preventive 
actions. Management Review should also suggest 
corrective measures to solve problems identified in 
EMS design, intent, or scope. The form of the 
Management Review could be a dedicated internal audit 
of the system for “top management’. This Audit and 
Review will be more effective if the participants have 
the requisite expertise. The report from such a review 
should be submitted to the top management, the MR, 
and appropriate line management. 


The management review should be conducted at two 
levels, namely departmental and organization. Agenda 
for departmental reviews, to be chaired by HOD, should 
include: 


a) Minutes of previous Departmental review 
meeting; 

b) Results of the EMS Audits; 

c) Performance against Objectives and Targets, 
progress of EMPs; 

d) Environmental Incidences / Learning 
Incidences; 

e) Corrective and Preventives Actions; and 

f) Specific training and resource requirements. 


The MR should plan for conducting the required 
organization level Management Review. The agenda 
of management review, to be chaired by Organization 
Head, should include: 


a) Minutes of previous MR Meeting; 

b) Results of the EMS Audits (Internal and 
External); 

c) Communication from Relevant Interested 
Parties including complaints; 

d) Performance against Objectives and Targets; 

e) Progress against EMPs; 

f) Compliance against Legal and Other 


requirements; 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Management Review? 


Is “top management” involved in the process? 

Are the results being documented? 

Is there a follow-up procedure for action items that result from the review? Any 
changes since the last management review should be considered as to how they 
might impact the actual or potential environmental aspects of the firm. Someone 


should be responsible for follow-up. 
Does the review include the financial efficacy of the programme’s activities? 


Questions to Ponder During Management Reviews 


Did we achieve our objectives and targets? (If not, why not?) Should we modify 


our objectives? 


Is our environmental policy still relevant to what we do? 

Are roles and responsibilities clear and do they make sense? 

Are we applying resources appropriately? 

Are the procedures clear and adequate? Do we need more? Should we eliminate 
some? 


Are we monitoring our EMS (for example, via system audits)? What do the 
results of those audits tell us? 
What changes in activities, products, or services effect the EMS and its 


effectiveness? 


Do changes in laws or regulations require us to change some of our approaches? 
What stakeholder concerns have been raised since our last review? 
Is there a better way? What else can we do to improve? 


g) Review of suitability of Environmental Policy 
and Objectives; 

h) Corrective and Preventives Actions; 

j) Specific resource requirements; 

k) Changing circumstances, including 
developments in legal and other requirements 
related to the environmental aspects; and 

m) Recommendations for Improvement. 


The frequency of management review should be clearly 
specified in the EMS Manual. Care should be taken 
not to conduct too many or too few reviews. In general 
2-3 reviews during a year should be sufficient. The MR, 
along with the organization’s head, EHS Head, and 
other senior management representatives should review 
the overall effectiveness of the EMS. The results of the 
review should be used to determine modifications to 
the EMS required for achieving continual improvement. 
Follow-up at a later date to verify that the EMS 
modifications were effective is also needed. 


10 IMPROVEMENT 


10.1 Non-conformity, Corrective Action and 
Preventive Action 


The results of monitoring and measurements, audit 
findings and other systemic reviews should be 
documented and reviewed, and must lead to corrective 
actions. Procedures should be in place so that the 
organization is able to ensure that Corrective Action 
has taken place, and that it has been effective. 


13 


Further, the root cause of the systemic failure should 
be determined, if possible. Patterns and trends should 
be noted and analyzed. Preventive actions should be 
employed on potential non-conformities, for example 
those potential situations where if action is not taken 
now would lead to non-conformity. These should lead 
to determination of preventive actions that must be 
taken and documented. 


The corrective action and preventive action part of any 
EMS will be the most scrutinized by regulatory agencies 
in the event of a catastrophe. It will also be one of the 
most scrutinized parts of the EMS during a certification 
audit because of its importance in reducing the potential 
of an environmental catastrophe. Certifying agencies 
would expect the organization to show documentation 
that several corrective and preventive actions have been 
taken which conforms to the design specifications of 
the EMS, and that follow-up has occurred. 


There are a great many causes for such failures, 
including items such as human fatigue, error, poor 
equipment or equipment maintenance, or errors in the 
design of the EMS itself. By recording the events of a 
non-conformance and its corrective action and 
preventive action, patterns of success and failure of 
the EMS can be reviewed and the system, the 
equipment, or the people adjusted accordingly. 


Non-conformance may be identified with the help of, 


a) monitoring and measurement activities. 


IS 16652 : 2017 


It should be understood that 


Preventive Actions normally include analysis 
of environmental performance indicators to 
determine probabilities of non-conformance. 


Preventive Actions usually, but not always, are 


targetted around engineering and/or 
administrative changes against potential non- 
conformity 


b) audits (internal or external). 

c) communication from interested parties 
(Internal or External). 

d) evaluation of compliance against Legal and 
Other requirements. 

e) in-process supervision and control. 

f) environmental Incidence Record. 


It is important to understand the difference between 
Corrective Actions and Preventative Actions. 


If there is a recognizable pattern of non-conformance, 
a good practice should be to register the Corrective 
Action and report it. 


Some methods for inquiry, corrective and preventive 
measures are: 


a) Determine the cause; 

b) Decide if an immediate action is required. If 
Yes, decide the action to be taken; 

c) Take action to lower the risks to acceptable 
levels; 

d) Check to see if measures are effective; and 

e) Seeifthere are any shortcoming of Corrective 


Actions and Preventive Actions. 


14 


Corrective Action will be the process changes or 
procedural activities that are initiated if and when the 
deviations are detected identifying root cause 


Corrective Actions are focused to eliminate the root 
cause of deviation and is the responsibility of the 
supervisor in a department 


The MR should review and record pertinent EMS 
performance information with management and 
employees alike. This should include non-compliances 
identified in internal audits, complaints, monitoring 
deviations, incidents, improvement resulting in waste 
reduction, pollution prevention or others reducing 
environmental adverse impact. 


As with the reporting of Corrective Actions, it should 
be clear to all employees that everyone is responsible 
for resolving non-conformances as well. Emphasis is 
on problem solving rather than focusing on the negative 
aspects of human error can go a long way in achieving 
this goal. 


10.2 Continual Improvement 


Organizational shall demonstrate its continual 
improvement through trend analysis. The year on year 
objectives should demonstrate improvements against 
established environmental performance indicators. 


Some example of improvement trends are reduction in 
specific consumption of raw material over last three 
years (OPI), trend of improvements in energy 
efficiencies (OPI), Ambient air quality (ECI), Number 
of trained EMS auditors (MPI), Reduction in number 
of incidents and accidents (MPI), etc. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 6.1.2) 


TYPICAL LIST OF LEGAL OBLIGATIONS 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Act / Rules 


Procedural Requirements 


Department 
Responsible 


The Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 
with latest amendments and The 
Water (Prevention and Control 
of Pollution) Rules, 1975 with 
latest amendment. 


e Application for Consent to Establish 
(before taking any step for establishing 
an industrial unit) in the prescribed form 
of the concerned State Pollution Control 
Board along with prescribed fee 


e Application for Consent to Operate 
(before commissioning the facility of the 
company) in the prescribed form of the 
concerned State Pollution Control Board 
along with the Prescribed fee 


e Application for renewal of Consent to 
Operate before its expiry in the 
prescribed form of the concerned State 
Pollution Control Board along with the 
prescribed fee 


e Submit compliance reports against 
consent conditions including monitoring 
results with the applicable wastewater 
discharge standards at the intervals 
prescribed by the State Pollution Control 
Board 


The Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 
1977 with latest amendment and 
The Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Cess Rules, 
1978 with latest amendment 


e Submit water cess returns to the 
concerned State Pollution Control Board 
in the prescribed format and payment of 
water cess on receipt of the bill. 


Central Ground Water Authority 
(CGWA) 2012 


e Notified Area — 80 Blocks for Non- 
industrial use of ground water 


e Non Notified Area — water recharging for 
water withdrawal and permission for new 
bore well from District Magistrate / 
Collector 


The Air (Prevention and Control 
of Pollution) Act, 1981 and The 
Air (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Rules, 1982 


e Application for Consent to Establish 
(before taking any step for establishing 
an industrial unit) in the prescribed form 
of the concerned State Pollution Control 
Board along with prescribed fee 


15 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Act / Rules 


Procedural Requirements 


Department 
Responsible 


e Application for Consent to Operate 
(before commissioning of the facility of 
the company) in the prescribed form of 
the concerned State Pollution Control 
Board along with the prescribed fee. 


e Application for renewal of consent to 
operate before its expiry in the 
prescribed form of the concerned State 
Pollution Control Board along with the 
prescribed fee. 


e Submit compliance reports against 
consent conditions including monitoring 
results with the applicable emission 
standards at the prescribed intervals 


The Environmental (Protection) 
Act, 1986 and The Environment 
(Protection) Rules, 1986 


e Obtain Environmental Clearance (EC) 
in case industry falls in the Schedule I of 
revised EIA notification of 2006 from 
Ministry of Environment and Forests. 
This is applicable for new as well as 
modernisation / expansion projects 
falling under Schedule I. 


e Submit compliance reports against EC 
conditions including monitoring results 
with the applicable emission standards at 
the prescribed intervals 


e Submit environmental statement to the 
concerned State Pollution Control Board 
in the prescribed Form V before 30" 
September every year for the last 
financial year. The environmental 
statement to be submitted by those units 
who require consent under Water Act or 
Air Act or Authorisation under Hazardous 
Wastes (Management and Handling) 
Rules or both. 


The Hazardous Wastes 
(Management Handling and 
Transboundary Movement) 
Rules, 2008 with latest 
amendment. 


e Application for authorisation in the 
prescribed form of the State Pollution 
Control Board 


e Application for renewal of 
authorisation before its expiry with the 
concerned State Pollution Control Board 
in the prescribed form. 


16 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Act / Rules 


Procedural Requirements 


Department 
Responsible 


e Provide the filled in copies of manifest 
(Form XIII) as prescribed to the 
transporter of the waste and the 
concerned State Pollution Control Board. 


Occupier to provide transporter with 6 copies 
of the manifest (Form 13) as per the colour 
codes indicated below: 


Copy 1 (White) forwarded to Pollution 
Control Board by the Occupier 


Copy 2 (Light Yellow) Signed by the 
transported and retained by the Occupier 


Copy 3 (Pink) Retained by the operator of a 
facility 


Copy 4 (Orange) Returned to the transported 
by the operator of facility after accepting 
waste. 


Copy 5 (Green) Forward to Pollution Control 
Board by the operator of facility after disposal 


Copy 6 (Blue) Returned to the occupier by the 
operator of the facility after disposal 


e Obtain no objection certificate in case 
the HW is transported for the final 
disposal to a facility for treatment, 
storage and disposal existing in other 
state, other than the state where HW is 
generated, then Occupier shall obtain 
NOC from SPCB of both the states. 


In case of transportation of hazardous wastes 
through a State other than the State of origin 
or destination, the Occupier shall intimate the 
concerned State Pollution Control Boards 
before he hands over the hazardous wastes to 
the transporter 


e Occupier to provide transporter the 
relevant information regarding the 
nature of the wastes and measures to be 
taken in case of emergency (Form 10 — 
transport emergency card) 


e Maintain Records of Hazardous Wastes 
in the prescribed format (Form 3). 


e Submit annual return regarding 
disposal of Hazardous wastes in the 
prescribed format (Form 4) to the 
concerned State Pollution Control Board. 


17 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Act / Rules 


Procedural Requirements 


Department 
Responsible 


Report to the State Pollution Control 
Board of the accident occurred on the 
site or during transportation of hazardous 
wastes (Form 5). 


Follow specified procedure for Import, 
in case involved in importing Hazardous 
waste. 


Maintain the record of import of 
hazardous wastes in the prescribed form 
(Form 6A). 


Follow specified procedure for export, in 
case involved in exporting hazardous 
wastes. 


Inform the Central Government 
(Ministry of Environment & Forests) of 
the permission sought for exporting, 
permission granted for export and 
details of export in Form 7. 


Obtain approval for hazardous waste 
processing 


Display board for public for hazardous 
waste storage, reuse/recycle and disposal 
updated monthly 


Manufacture, Storage and 
Import of Hazardous Chemical 
Rules / Amendment Rules, 1989 
with latest amendment 


Following shall apply to industrial activity in 
which a hazardous chemical satisfies any of 
the criteria listed in Part I of the Schedule I or 
listed in Part II of Schedule I: 


Occupier to identify major accident 
hazards and take adequate steps for 
prevention and control and provide to the 
persons working on the site information, 
training, equipment including antidotes. 


Occupier to arrange or develop 
information on safety data sheets 
(Schedule 9) 


Label every container of hazardous 
chemicals of its content name and 
address of the manufacture / importer and 
physical, chemical and toxicological. 


Occupier to follow specified procedure 
for import of hazardous chemicals, in 
case involved in the import. 


18 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Act / Rules 


Procedural Requirements 


Department 
Responsible 


Notify major accident within 48 hours 
to the concerned authority (Schedule 5) 
in the prescribed form (Schedule 6). 


Submit notification of site to the 
concerned authority (Schedule 5) and 
obtain the approval at least three months 
before commencing that activity 


Update notification of site in case of 
increase or decrease in the maximum 
threshold quantity of a hazardous 
chemical, to which rule applies. 


Occupier to prepare and keep up-to- 
date on-site emergency plan (Form 11). 
(Concerned authority to prepare and keep 
up-to-date an adequate on-site emergency 
plan. Occupier to provide the information 
for this purpose.) 


Occupier to conduct mock drill of the 
on-site emergency plan every six months 
and submit the report to the concerned 
authority 


Occupier to provide information to the 
outside persons or through district 
emergency authority about the nature of 
major accident hazards and do’s and 
don’ ts 


Occupier to submit safety report 
(Schedule 8) to the concerned authority at 
least 90 days before commencing that 
activity. 


Occupier to submit safety audit report 
to the concerned authority carried out 
with the help of an expert not associated 
with such industrial activities. 


The Public Liability Insurance 
Act / Rules, 1991 WITH 
LATEST AMENDMENT 


Owner to provide relief as specified in 
the Schedule in case of death or injury to 
any person (other than workman) or 
damage to property from the accident 
occurred while handling hazardous 
chemicals on the principle of no fault. 


Owner to draw insurance policy (ies) 
more than paid-up capital of the 
undertaking but less than Rs. 50 crore. In 
case is involved with handling hazardous 
chemicals more than prescribed under 
PLI Rules, 1991. 


19 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Act / Rules 


Procedural Requirements 


Department 
Responsible 


e Owner to pay additional amounts as 
prescribed to the insurer not exceeding 
the amount of premium to the 
Environment Relief Fund to be 
established under the Act. 


e Owner to provide any information 
required by the Ministry of Environment 
& Forests or any agency authorised for 
ascertaining compliance. 


The Bio-Medical Waste 
(Management and Handling) 
Rules, 1998 as amended till 
2003 


e The treatment and disposal of bio- 
medical wastes shall be as per Schedule I. 
Schedule I include 10 different categories 
of bio-medical wastes along with 
different treatments and disposal 
methods. 


e Occupier to set up requisite bio-medical 
waste treatment facility as per prescribed 
time schedule in Schedule VI. 


e Occupier to provide label in containers of 
bio-medical wastes as per Schedule IV in 
case of transportation outside the 
premises. 


e Not to store bio-medical wastes beyond 
a period of 48 h. 


e = Every occupier involved in handling of 
bio-medical wastes providing treatment / 
services to equal to or more than 1 000 
patients per month shall make an 
application in Form 1 to the prescribed 
authority for grant of authorisation. 


e Every occupier / operator of a facility to 
submit an annual report to the 
prescribed authority in Form 2 by 31* 
January every year to include information 
about the categories and quantities of bio- 
medical wastes handled during the 
previous year. 


e Every occupier / operator of a facility to 
maintain records of handling of bio- 
medical waste. 


e To report accident occurred while 
handling bio-medical wastes in the 
prescribed Form 3 to the prescribed 
authority. 


20 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Act / Rules 


Procedural Requirements 


Department 
Responsible 


Explosive Act, 1884 
e Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 


e Procurement of gas cylinders having 
valid inspection and testing of cylinders 
and valves including construction as per 
specified standard with proper labelling 
and colour coding 


e Storage of gas cylinders away from 
sources of heat (direct flame), direct 
sunlight and no hot work to be carried in 
vicinity 


e Cylinders to be stored and transported 
with provision of fall protection and 
valves to be provided with cap for 
protection 


e Flash back arrestors to be provided 
during use of oxygen and DA/LPG gas 
cylinders 


e Limitation on storage of gas cylinders 
(LPG 100 kg) 


The Petroleum Act, 1934 (as 
Amended till 1977) and The 
Petroleum Rules, 1976 (as 
Amended till 2002) 


e Obtain license for import/storage of 
petroleum to India (excluding the 
exemptions as specified in Section 7, 8 & 
9 of The Petroleum Act) 


Petroleum Class B 


If the total quantity in possession at any one 
place does not exceed 2 500 litres and none of 
it is contained in a receptacle exceeding 1 000 
litres in capacity. 


Petroleum Class C 


If the total quantity in possession at any one 
place does not exceed 45 000 litres and such 
petroleum is transported or stored in 
accordance with the rules under Section 4. 


Petroleum Class A 


In case it is not intended for sale and the total 
quantity in his possession does not exceed 30 
litres. 


e Obtain prior approval/ license of 
specification and plans of premises for 
storage. 


The Factories Act, 1948 (as 
Amended till 1987) & State 


e Obtain Factory License and Renew it 


21 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Act / Rules 


Procedural Requirements 


Department 
Responsible 


Factories Rules 19xx 


Lay down a detailed Health and Safety 
Policy at the time of registration for the 
factory involving hazardous process and 
intimate such policy to chief inspector 
and local authority and also inform the 
change made in the policy. 


Draw an on-site emergency plan and 
detailed disaster control measures and 
obtain approval of the chief inspector and 
make known to the workers and general 
public in the vicinity. 


Set up safety committee consisting of 
equal number of representatives of 
workers and management in a factory 
where a hazardous process takes place or 
where hazardous substances are used or 
handled. 


Notify prescribed authority about the 
occurrence of an accident, which causes 
death or any bodily injury by reason of 
which the person is prevented from 
working for a period of 48 h or more 
and/or Dangerous Occurrence 


The following classes of dangerous 
occurrences, whether or not they are attended 
by personal injury or disablement : 


1. 


Bursting of a plant used for containing or 
supplying steam under pressure greater 
than atmospheric pressure. 


Collapse or failure of a crane, derrick, 
which, hoist or other appliances used in 
raising or lowering persons or goods, or 
any part thereof, or the overturning of a 
crane. 


Explosion, fire, bursting out, leakage or 
escape of any molten metal, or hot liquid 
or gas causing bodily injury to any person 
or damage to any room or place in which 
persons are employed. 


Explosion of a receiver or container used 
for the storage at pressure greater than 
atmospheric pressure of any gas or gases 
(including air) or any liquid or slid 
resulting from the compression of gas. 
Collapse or subsidence of any floor, 
gallery, roof, bridge, tunnel, chimney, 
wall, building or any other structure. 


22 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Act / Rules 


Procedural Requirements 


Department 
Responsible 


e Occupational Disease as provided in the 
schedule to Factories Act/Rules 


Approval of Building layout/plan 

e Structural Stability Inspection of plant 
building 

e Testing of lifting tools, tackles and 
machines 

e Testing of Pressure Vessel 


e Use of Work Permit for Work at Height 
(above 2 m from floor/platform), 
Confined Space Entry, Electrical Line, 
Hot Work in flammable/combustible 
storage area (HSD/ Coal/ lubricant oil) 


e Information to workers: MSDS of 
chemicals, SOP for use, handling, storage 
and disposal 


e Provision of eye wash fountain and 
showers near hazardous chemical storage 
and handling 


e Guarding on machinery 

e OHC with trained nurse / First Aiders 

e Medical check 

— Fitness Certificate of each personnel 

— Eye Examination of crane, MHV operator 
— Audiometry exposed to high noise 


— Spirometry exposed to dusty/ hazardous 
chemical work environment 


e Adequate Illumination at workplace and 
walk way 


e Ergonomics — manual load lifting and 
handling 


e PPE Provision and Use 


e Fire Extinguishers and Fire Bucket 
provision 


e Conduct quarterly Mock Drills 
Dangerous Operations - safety precautions 


The Chemical Accidents 
(Emergency Planning, 
Preparedness and Response) 
Rules, 1996 / 2000 


The major accident hazard installation in the 
industrial pockets shall aid, assist and 
facilitate the functioning district/ local crisis 
group. 


The National Environment 
Tribunal Act, 1995 


On death of any person (other than a 
workman) or damage to any property or 
environment on account of an accident, the 
owner shall be liable to pay for such death, 


23 


IS 16652 : 2017 


Act / Rules 


Procedural Requirements 


Department 
Responsible 


injury or damage. 


The Batteries (Management & 
Handling) Rules, 2001 
Amendment 2010. 


Consumer to avail discount in lieu of used 
batteries and make agreement with supplier 
for buy back of used lead batteries. 


Six Monthly Return submission for Batteries 


The Ozone Depletion Substances 
(Regulation) Rules, 2000 


Maintain records for ODS used 


E-Waste Rules, 2011 


Electricity Act and Electricity 
Rules 1956 and 2005 


Consumers or bulk consumers of EEE listed 
in Schedule 1 of the Rules shall ensure that e- 
waste generated by them is channelized to 
authorized collection centres or registered 
dismantlers or recyclers or is returned to the 
take back services provided by the producers. 


e Inspection of Electrical Equipments — 
Transformer 
Earth Pit testing 
Provision of earthing and double earthing 
to MCC 

e ELCB provision 

e First Aid Display chart 

e Danger sign boards on PCC and MCC 

and lighting DB 

Transformer Oil testing 

Electrical license 

Authorised personnel displayed 

Class A contractor deployed 


Central Motor Vehicle Act and 
Rules 


License of Driver 

PUC Certificate 

Hazardous Material transportation 
training 

HAZCHEM Label 

First Aid Box and Fire Extinguisher 
e TREM CARD 


NOTE — Organization to identify & define. 


24 


ANNEX B 


(Clause 6.1.3) 


IS 16652 : 2017 


TYPICAL ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS OF A SSP FERTILIZER PLANT 
(BUT NOT LIMITED TO) 


SI No. 


Activity 


Environmental Aspect 


Environmental Impact 


A. SSP (Single Super Phosphate) Production 


1. Rock phosphate handling 


1.1 Unloading of rock phosphate Rock phosphate spillage Land pollution, resource 
depletion 
1.2 Rock phosphate feeding to Rock phosphate spillage Air pollution due to 


hopper 


emission of dust 


2. Grinding of rock phosphate 


2.1 Ball mill Operation Rock phosphate dust Air pollution due to 
over consumption of rock emission of dust 
High Noise Resource depletion 
Noise pollution 
2.2 Operation of DC bags High Noise Noise pollution 
Bag damage in operation high | Air pollution 
stack emission 
Bag damage Waste generation 
2.3 Ground rock phosphate Rock phosphate spillage Air pollution and 
handling. Resource depletion 
3. Handling and storage of sulphuric acid 
3.1 Transfer of sulphuric acid Acid spillage on land Land pollution, ground 
water pollution 
Over consumption of acid Resource depletion 
3.2 Spent acid tanker unloading Acid spillage on land Land pollution, ground 
water pollution 
Over consumption of acid Resource depletion 
3.3 Acid storage. Sudden acid leakage. Acid spillage on land 
causing land and water 
pollution 
4. Operations in acidulation section 
4.1 Mixing of rock, acid and silica Release of Fluoride gas at work | Air pollution 
water. environment and stack 
emission 
4.2 Cleaning of Pre-mixer and Release of Fluoride gas at work | Air and water pollution 
Mixer environment and effluent water 
generation 
4.3 Cleaning of duct lines of Pre- Release of Fluoride gas at work | Air and water pollution 
mixer, Mixer and Den environment and effluent water 
generation 
4.4 Cleaning of scrubbing tower Release of Fluoride gas at work | Air and water pollution 
environment and effluent water 
generation 
4.5 Chimney cleaning Consumption of raw water. Water pollution 
Release of waste water Ground water depletion 
5. Draining of silica water 
5.1 Spillage of acidic water and Acidic water spillage Land pollution 
silica sludge 
d2 Transfer of silica water to Acidic water spillage water pollution 


scrubber 


25 


IS 16652 : 2017 


of GSSP 


SI No. Activity Environmental Aspect Environmental Impact 
5.33 Shifting of dry silica Acidic silica spillage. Land nuisance 
6. Transportation of green SSP Emission of gasses at work Air pollution 
through crane place 
B. GSSP (Granulated Single Super Phosphate) production 
1. SSP handling 
1.1 SSP feeding at RM hopper by Spillage of SSP Air pollution 
crane 
1.2 Material handling in process by | Spillage of SSP Air pollution 
conveyor belts 
1.3 Material handling in process by | Spillage of SSP Air pollution 
bucket elevator 
1.4 Screening of material Spillage of SSP Air pollution 
2. Granulation, Drying and Cooling of Product 
2.1 HAG operation Generation of coal dust in Air pollution 
handling 
High noise Noise pollution 
Stack emission Air pollution 
2.2 Granulation, Drying and cooling | Emission of SSP dust Air pollution 


High noise 


Noise pollution 


3. Equipment cleaning 


3.1 Hopper descaling Emission of SSP dust Air pollution 
3.2 Drum descaling Emission of SSP dust Air pollution 
3.3 Cleaning of chain mill Emission of SSP dust Air pollution 
3.4 Screens cleaning Emission of SSP dust Air pollution 
3.5 Crushing of Over size material Emission of SSP dust Air pollution 
from chain mill 
High noise Noise pollution 
3.6 Cyclone cleaning Emission of SSP dust Air pollution 
4. Material packing and stacking in 50 Kg bags 
4.1 Filling of 50 Kg Bags Spillage of GSSP Land pollution 
4.2 Weighment and stitching of 50 Spillage of GSSP Land pollution 
Kg bags 
4.3 Shifting of bags up to 60 m Spillage of GSSP during Land pollution 
distance and stacking of bags up | shifting 
to 30 bags height. 
5. Quality Control 
5.1 Handling & sampling of Leakage or spillage, Land pollution, ground 
inflammable materials. Emission of vapors water pollution 
Waste generation Fire 
5:2 Handling & sampling of non- Leakage or spillage, Land pollution, ground 
flammable materials water pollution 
Waste generation 
5.3 Tanker checking Leakage or spillage, Land pollution, ground 
water pollution 
Waste generation 
5.4 Carrying of samples from store Leakage or spillage, Land pollution, ground 
and plants to QC Lab water pollution 
Waste generation 
5.5 Washing of Glassware Glassware Breakage/ waste Waste generation 
generation Water pollution 
Waste water generation 
5.6 Storage of retained samples Spillage Waste generation 
Land pollution 
5.7 Disposal of retained samples. Spillage, Waste generation Waste generation 


26 


IS 16652 : 2017 


SI No. Activity Environmental Aspect Environmental Impact 
Land pollution 
5.8 Storage of Analytical grade Leakage, spillage, Waste generation 
chemicals Land pollution 
5.9 Disposal of chemical waste Spillage Waste generation 
obtained during testing Land pollution 
6. Supply Chain 
6.1 Loading / Dispatch of PSSP/ Vehicle Movement/ bag drop / | Air pollution 
Rock phosphate/ GSSP unloading cause fugitive dust 
Tractor / dumper movement emission 
Vehicle engine running causing | Air pollution 
exhaust fume 
oil consumption Resource depletion 
During movement gear/ brake | Water pollution, Land 
oil Pollution 
leakage Resource 
Depletion 
Blow horn Noise pollution 
6.2 Working at Computer Power consumption Resource consumption 
electronic waste generation Land pollution 
7. EHS 
7.1 Plant safety inspection and Waste generation, Land pollution 
modification Energy consumption Resource depletion 
7.2 Mock Drills Fugitive emission Air pollution 
Consumption of water Water consumption 
Generation of contaminated Waste water generation 
water Land contamination 
Generation of solid waste 
T3 ITM of fire extinguishers Generation of solid waste, Air pollution 
resource consumption Water pollution 
Fugitive emission Land contamination 
Water consumption 
Waste water generation 
7.4 Conduct Training Energy consumption Land contamination 
Generation of solid waste Power consumption 
Resource consumption 
7.5 O&M RO Energy consumption Resource depletion 
Generation of treated waste Land pollution 
water Ground water pollution 
Generation of contaminated 
water 
Generation of solid waste 
7.6 O&M STP Energy consumption Resource depletion 
odour Local nuisance 
Generation of treated waste Land pollution 
water Ground water pollution 
Generation of contaminated 
water 
Generation of solid waste, 
7.7 Recording of bore well and Generation of solid waste, Land pollution 
plant supply water meters Resource consumption Ground water depletion 
reading and ground water level | Ground water depletion/raw 
water availability 
7.8 Inspection and maintenance of Stack emission Air Pollution 
PCE (scrubber, Haz waste Leakage from storage pit Water pollution 


27 


IS 16652 : 2017 


SI No. | Activity Environmental Aspect Environmental Impact 
storage pit, cyclones, bag filter, | Leakage from PCE Land pollution 
dust collector) 

7.9 Inspection and maintenance of | Rain water wastage not Ground water depletion 
storm water drains and RWH recharged/reused contamination 
structures Chemicals contaminants in 

Rain water? 
7.10 O&M of HF analyzer Compressed air consumption Land contamination 
Air emission Power consumption 
Resource consumption Non-operation of SSP for 
Waste generation high HF/ Business 
concern & crop 
damage/IPC 
7.11 Prepare Documentation and Resource consumption Land contamination 
maintain Records Waste generation Resource depletion 
7.12 Inspection of Sulphuric acid Leakage/ Spillage of acid from | Land Contamination 
storage tank Water Pollution 
On-Site Emergency 
7.13 Inspection and testing of lifting | Over consumption of Land contamination 
tools/tackles/machines & PV resources/ waste generation Resource depletion 
Energy consumption 
Water consumption 
7.14 Monitoring and testing for Over consumption of Over consumption of 


stack, ambient air and waste 
water 


resources/ waste generation 
Energy consumption 


resources/ waste 
generation 


8. Human Resources 


8.1 Office work Wastes (Paper work, Land pollution, resource 
Electronic and Plastic Waste depletion 
& other waste) generated 
through routine work 
8.2 Energy Uses of Electricity Over consumption of 
resources 
8.3 Training & Development Manpower Utilization-Skill, Over consumption of 
8.4 Infrastructure Facility resources 
8.5 Welfare- Canteen Waste Generation & Water Water, land and over 
Consumption, Fuel Usages consumption of resources 
8.6 Welfare-Drinking Water Waste Water, land and over 
consumption of resources 
8.7 Welfare-Toilet Waste Air, water, land and over 
consumption of resources 
8.8 Visitor Management Waste Land pollution 
8.9 Vehicle Management-Inside Exhaust emission Air pollution 
Plant 
8.10 Housekeeping Waste Air, water and land 
pollution 
8.11 Horticulture Waste, Tree plantation, Air, water and land 


Horticulture development/ 
Green House 


pollution, green cover 
area increase and 
seasonal flowering 


9. Electrical Maintenance 


9.1 Maintenance of grid sub station | Waste equipment Land pollution 
9.2 Maintenance & Overhauling of | Leakage of Oil Disposal of Land contamination due 
Transformer cotton waste, waste equipment | to leakage of oil Land 
pollution 
9.3 Operation of Transformer Fire & Explosion of Air pollution due to fire 
Transformer energy (resource) 


28 


IS 16652 : 2017 


SI No. | Activity Environmental Aspect Environmental Impact 
Power consumption consumption 
(transformer losses) 
9.4 Maintenance of Motors Generation of cotton waste Disposal of cotton waste 
Waste equipment land pollution 
9.5 Operation of power and motor Generation of gases during Air pollution 
control centers short-circuit 
9.6 Maintenance of power and Disposal of waste clothes Land pollution 
motor control panel Disposal of overheated end 
pieces of cables & damaged 
spares 
9.7 Maintenance of diesel generator | Power consumption Energy (resources) loss 
Leakage of diesel Land pollution 
Fumes exposure Air pollution. 
Noise pollution Noise pollution 
9.8 Lighting & air conditioning Power consumption Energy(resources) loss 


maintenance 


Waste equipment 
Release of gases 


Land pollution 
Air pollution 


10 .Mechanical Maintenance 


10.1 Gas cutting and welding work Exhaust gases emission in Air pollution 
surrounding Land pollution 
Waste generation 
10.2 Maintenance at height/ rigging Waste generation Land Pollution 
work 
10.3 Maintenance of gear box Leakage of gear box oil Land/ Water pollution 
Waste generation 
10.4 Maintenance of pumps Leakage of hazardous liquid Water pollution 
(SILICA WATER)from pump | land pollution 
Waste generation 
10.5 Maintenance of acid line Leakage of hazardous acid Water pollution 
(SULPHURIC ACID) from Land pollution 
acid line Air pollution 
Waste generation 
Fumes generation 
10.6 Operation on lathe, grinding and | Waste generation Land pollution 
drilling operation 
10.7 V belt operation and Waste generation Land pollution 
maintenance 
10.8 Lubrication and greasing work Old grease /oil waste Land pollution 
generation 
10.9 Maintenance at HAG Waste generation Land pollution 
10.10 Conveyor belt maintenance Waste generation Land pollution 
10.11 Bucket elevator maintenance Waste generation Land pollution 
10.12 Den maintenance work Waste generation Land pollution 
11. Instrumentation 
11.1 Maintenance of SMF batteries Disposal of waste clothes Land pollution 
for UPS Damaged spares Land pollution 
Disposal of waste clothes Land pollution 
Damaged spares Land pollution 
Disposal of USED battery Land /Water pollution 
11.2 Maintenance of electronic Disposal of PCBs or Land pollution 
Instruments. components. 
11.3 Maintenance of sewing machine | Disposal of waste clothes Land pollution 
Damaged spares Land pollution 


29 


IS 16652 : 2017 


SI No. | Activity Environmental Aspect Environmental Impact 
11.4 HF analyzer Disposal of waste clothes Land pollution 
Damaged spares Land pollution 
12. Stores 
12.1 Unloading, storage and transfer | Spillage and leakage, Fire Air pollution, 
of HSD hazards Water pollution, 
Land pollution, 
Resource depletion 
Emergency 
12.2 Storage of lube oil/Paints Leakage of drums, Air pollution, 
Emission from thinner drum Water pollution, 
Land pollution, 
Resource depletion 
12.3 Handling & storage of Used oil | Improper handling storage Legal concern, 
Water pollution, 
Land pollution, 
Resource depletion 
12.4 Collection, segregation, disposal | Solid waste, Land corrosion. Water pollution, 
and transportation of Non- Land pollution 
hazardous waste 
12.5 Unloading/Placement/Storage Land corrosion Land pollution, 
of steel Resource depletion 
12.6 Collection, handling and Improper handling, Acid Air pollution, 
disposal of used batteries spillage Water pollution, 
Land pollution, 
Resource depletion 
12.7 Oxygen/DA cylinder loading / Valve damage due to sudden Air pollution , 


unloading 


fall of cylinders, 


Resource depletion, 
Environmental hazards 


30 


IS 16652 : 2017 


ANNEX C 
SUMMARY OF REQUIREMENTS OF IS/ISO 14001:2015 


There are 18 requirements of the IS/ISO 14001:2015 standard: 


a) 
b) 
c) 


d) 
e) 


f) 
g) 


h) 


D 
k) 


Initial Environmental Review 
Environmental Policy — develop a statement of the organization’s commitment to the environment 


Environmental Aspects and Impacts — identify environmental attributes of products, activities and 
services and their effects on the environment 


Legal and Other Requirements — identify and ensure access to relevant laws and regulations 


Objectives and Targets and Environmental Management Programme — set environmental goals 
for the organization and plan actions to achieve objectives and targets 


Structure and Responsibility — establish roles and responsibilities within the organization 


Training, Awareness and Competence — ensure that employees are aware and capable of their 
environmental responsibilities 


Communication — develop processes for internal and external communication on environmental 
management issues 


EMS Documentation — maintain information about the EMS and related documents 
Document Control — ensure effective management of procedures and other documents 


Operational Control — identify, plan and manage the organization’s operations and activities in line 
with the policy, objectives and targets, and significant aspects 


Emergency Preparedness and Response — develop procedures for preventing and responding to 
potential emergencies 


Monitoring and Measuring — monitor key activities and track performance including periodic 
compliance evaluation 


Evaluation of Compliance — develop procedure to periodically evaluate compliance with 
legal and other requirements 


Nonconformance and Corrective and Preventive Action — identify and correct problems and 
prevent recurrences 


Records — keep adequate records of EMS performance 


EMS Audit — periodically verify that the EMS is effective and achieving objectives and 
targets 


Management Review — review the EMS 


31 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 34 (2181). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


