NAT HIAF IS 3615 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


asiaa sie aaaea raet 
eara 


(FAT JETT ) 


Glossary of Terms Used in 
Refrigeration and Air Conditioning 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 01 .020; 23.120; 27.120 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2020 Price Group 18 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

This standard was first published in 1967 and subsequently revised in 2007. The second revision has been taken up 
to include the other terms that are generally being used in the field of refrigeration and air conditioning. 


This glossary of terms has been prepared for the guidance of manufacturers, users of refrigeration and air 
conditioning equipment and others concerned to assist them in the correct interpretation of the common terms 
used in this trade. It is hoped that this standard will help in establishing a generally recognized meaning and 
eliminate ambiguity and confusion arising out of individual interpretation. 


Definitions have been arranged in alphabetical order and cross references have been given wherever necessary. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following International 
Standards: 


a) ASHRAE Terminology 


b) BS 5643 : 1984 Glossary of refrigeration, heating, ventilating and air conditioner terms — British 
Standards Institute 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is compiled with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the rules of the test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


1 SCOPE 


2 TERMINOLOGIES 


ANNEX A 


CONTENTS 


IS 3615 : 2020 


Page No. 


93 


IS 3615 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN REFRIGERATION 
AND AIR CONDITIONING 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard is intended to provide definitions of 
words and terms employed in all phases of activities 
connected with refrigeration and air conditioning. 


2 TERMINOLOGIES 
For this standard the following definitions shall apply: 


2.1 Absolute Filter — It is a filter having an efficiency 
of 99.90 percent or higher, capable of dealing with 
particle sizes down to 0.01 micrometre. (See HEPA 
filter). 


2.2 Absolute Humidity — It is the measure of water 
vapor (moisture) in the air, regardless of temperature 
and expressed as grams of moisture per cubic meter of 
air (g/m°). 


2.3 Absolute Pressure — A positive value of a pressure 
when the datum pressure is absolute zero. 


2.4 Absolute Temperature — It is temperature as 
measured above absolute zero. 


2.5 Absolute Vacuum — It is a space totally void of 
matter (theoretical). 


2.6 Absolute Viscosity — It is force per unit area 
required to produce unit-relative velocity between two 
parallel areas of fluid unit distance apart. Also called 
coefficient of viscosity. 


2.7 Absolute Zero Temperature — It is zero point on 
an absolute temperature scale (see Kelvin temperature 
and Rankine temperature). 


2.8 Absorbate — It is substance absorbed by absorbent. 


2.9 Absorbent — A material which, due to an affinity 
for certain substances, extracts one or more such 
substances from a liquid or gaseous medium with 
which it is in contact and which changes physically 
or chemically, or both, during the process. Calcium 
chloride is an example of a solid absorbent, while 
solutions of lithium chloride, lithium bromide, and the 
ethylene glycols are examples of liquid absorbents. 


2.10 Absorber — It is a device containing liquid for 
absorbing refrigerant vapour or other vapours. In an 
absorption system, it is that part of the low side used 
for absorbing refrigerant vapour. 


2.11 Absorptance — It is defined as the: 


a) absorbed portion of the radiant energy striking a 
surface. 


b) the ratio of radiant flux absorbed by a body to that 
incident upon it. 


2.12 Absorption — It is a process whereby a 
material extracts one or more substances present in an 
atmosphere or mixture of gases or liquids accompanied 
by physical change or chemical change, or both, of the 
material. 


2.13 Absorptivity — Absorbed portion of the radiant 
energy striking unit area of a substance. (Compare to 
absorptance). 


2.14 Acceptable Indoor Air Quality — Air in 
which there are no known contaminants at harmful 
concentrations as determined by cognizant authorities 
and with which a substantial majority (80 percent 
or more) of the people exposed do not express 
dissatisfaction. 


2.15 Acceptable Performance — A component or 
system able to meet specified design parameters under 
actual load. 


2.16 Acceptable Thermal Environment — An 
environment that is substantial majority of the 
occupants would find thermally acceptable. 


2.17 Acceptance Angle — The angular zone within 
which radiation is accepted by the receiver of a 
concentrator. Radiation is said to be accepted because 
radiation incident within this angle reaches the absorber 
after passing through the aperture. 


2.18 Access Door — A door provided in a unit casing, 
wall, floor, ceiling, duct, etc, to permit inspection, 
entrance, or availability to concealed parts or devices. 


2.19 Accessory — Part or assembly that aids the 
effectiveness of equipment without changing its 
function. 


2.20 Accidental Release — It is unanticipated emission 
of a regulated substance or other extremely hazardous 
substance into the ambient air from a stationary source. 


2.21 Accumulator — It is a storage chamber for low- 
side liquid refrigerant, also known as surge drum or 


IS 3615 : 2020 


surge header; also, a pressure vessel whose volume is 
used in a refrigerant circuit to reduce pulsation. 


2.22 Acoustic Anemometer — It is a device to sense 
velocity of air at a point by use of the Doppler effect on 
the velocity of sound. It may also sense temperature. 


2.23 Activated Alumina — It is a form of aluminium 
oxide, which absorbs moisture readily and is used as a 
drying agent. 


2.24 Activated Carbon — It is a form of carbon made 
porous by special treatment by which it is capable 
of absorbing various odours, anaesthetics, and other 
vapours. 


2.25 Active Chilled Beam — It is a convector with 
integrated air supply where primary air plus induced 
air pass through the cooling coil(s). Cooling medium is 
generally water. 


2.26 Active Power — The product of the voltage 
across a branch of an alternating current circuit and the 
component of the electric current that is in phase with 
the voltage. 


2.27 Active Tracer Gas Release — It is the controlled 
release of a tracer gas by a pressurized system or pump. 
(Term is used in ventilation rates measurement.) 


2.28 Actuator — It is a device, either electrically, 
pneumatically, or hydraulically operated, that acts as a 
motor to change the position of movable devices such 
as valves or dampers. 


2.29 Acute Toxicity — The adverse health effect(s) 
from a single, short-term exposure, as might occur 
during an accidental release of refrigerants or other 
toxic chemicals. 


2.30 Adaptive Model — A model that relates indoor 
design temperatures or acceptable temperature ranges 
to outdoor meteorological or climatological parameters. 


2.31 Adiabatic Process — It is a thermodynamic 
process during which no heat is extracted from or 
added to the system. 


2.32 Adjusted Net Total Capacity — The gross 
sensible capacity less the actual fan power. 


2.33 Adopting authority — The agency or agent that 
adopts a standard. 


2.34 ADPI — Stands for ‘Air diffusion performance 
index’. It is percentage of the measurements taken 
within an occupied space where the effective draft 
temperature is between -1.5 and +1K, with the air 
velocity less than 0.35 m/s 


2.35 Adsorbent — It is a material which has the ability 
to cause molecules of gases, liquids, or solids to adhere 


to its internal surfaces without changing the adsorbent 
physically or chemically. Certain solid materials, such 
as silica gel and activated alumina, have this property. 


2.36 Adsorption — The action, associated with 
surface adherence, of a material in extracting one or 
more substances present in an atmosphere or mixture 
of gases and liquids, unaccompanied by physical or 
chemical change. Commercial adsorbent materials 
have enormous internal surfaces. 


2.37 Aeration — It is a process of exposing a substance 
or area, to air circulation. 


2.38 Aerodynamic Excitation — It is the time 
varying loads acting on the blades of a fan due to 
nonconformities of the airflow. 
NOTE — Spatial non-uniformities of airflow, which are 
steady in time, give rise to harmonic excitation at frequencies 
which are integer multiples of the rotation rate of the fan. 
Time excitations of the airflow give rise to random excitation. 
Turbulence of the airflow gives rise to random excitation. 


2.39 Aerosol — It is an assemblage of small particles, 
solid or liquid, suspended in air. The diameters of the 
particles may vary from 100 microns to 0.01 micron or 
less; that is dust, fog, smoke. 


2.40 Age of Air — It is time of passage of air from one 
point to another within an indoor space. 


2.41 Agitator — It is a device causing turbulent motion 
in a fluid confined in a tank. 


2.42 Air Alternator — It is a device which 
automatically switches the air from one side of the ice 
tank to the other. 


2.43 Air Change — Introduction of new, cleansed, or 
recirculated air to conditioned space, measured by the 
number of complete changes per unit time. 


2.44 Air Changes — A method of expressing the 
amount of air leakage into or out of a building or room 
in terms of the number of building volumes or room 
volumes exchanged. 


2.45 Air Cleaner — It is a device used to remove 
airborne impurities. 


2.46 Air Conditioner, Room — Room Air conditioner 


a) Window type: The entire assembly is fitted in the 
room wall being air-conditioned. 


b) Split Type: The evaporator unit is fitted inside 
the conditioned room while the condensing 
unit comprising of compressor, condenser etc 
is installed outside the room. Both the units are 
connected through copper pipe of suitable size. 


2.47 Air Conditioning — It is the process of treating 
air so as so as to control simultaneously its temperature. 


2.48 Air Conditioning Unit — It is an assembly 
of equipment for the treatment of air so as to control 
simultaneously its temperature, humidity, cleanliness, 
and distribution to meet the requirements of a 
conditioned space. 


2.49 Air Conditioning Unit, Cooling (Heating) — 
It is a specific air-treating combination, consisting 
of means for ventilation, air circulation, air cleaning, 
and heat transfer, with control means for cooling (or 
heating). 


2.50 Air Conditioning, Comfort — It is the process 
of treating air so as to control simultaneously its 
temperature, humidity, cleanliness, and distribution to 
meet the comfort requirements of the occupants of the 
conditioned space. 


2.51 Air Conditioning, Complete — It is the process 
of air conditioning in which the temperature and 
humidity are independently controlled. 


2.52 Air Conditioning, Industrial — It is the process 
of air conditioning for other uses other than comfort. 


2.53 Air Conditioning, Summer — It is the comfort 
air conditioning carried out primarily when outside 
temperature and humidity are above those to be 
maintained in the conditioned space. 


2.54 Air Conditioning, Winter — It is the process 
of heating, humidification, air distribution, and air 
cleaning, where outside temperatures are below the 
inside room temperature. 


2.55 Air Conditioning, Year-Round System — It is a 
complete system, which ventilates, heats and humidifies 
in winter, cools and dehumidifies in summer, the air 
in the spaces under consideration and provides the 
deserved degree of air cleanliness and motion. 


2.56 Air Cooler — It is a factory-encased assembly of 
element whereby the temperature of air passing through 
the device is reduced. 


2.57 Air Cooler Unit — It is a specific air treating 
combination of means of air circulation and cooling. 


2.58 Air Cooler, Dry — It is an equipment that removes 
sensible heat from the dehydrated air whenever it leaves 
the dehydrator at an elevated temperature. 


2.59 Air Cooler, Dry-Type — It is a forced circulation 
air cooler wherein heat transfer is not implemented by 
a liquid spray during the operating period. 


2.60 Air Lateral — It is a pipe which supplies the air 
to the ice cans contained in the freezing tank. 


2.61 Air Main — It is a pipe which carries air to the 
air laterals supplying ice cans contained in the freezing 
tank. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.62 Air — The atmosphere; the mixture of invisible, 
odourless, tasteless gases (nitrogen, oxygen and other) 
that surrounds the earth. 


2.63 Air Treatment — It is a process by which one 
or more of the following characteristics of air are 
modified: 


a) Temperature; 
b) Humidity; and 
c) Cleanliness. 


2.64 Air Tunnel — It is a refrigerated tunnel with rapid 
air circulation through which the product to be frozen 
is passed. 


2.65 Air Washer — It is a washer spray system or 
device for cleaning, humidifying or dehumidifying 
the air. 


2.66 Air, Ambient — It is the air surrounding an object. 


2.67 Air, Outdoor — It is the air taken from outdoors 
and, therefore, not previously circulated through the 
system. 


2.68 Air, Outside — It is external air; atmosphere 
exterior to refrigerated or conditioned space and 
ambient (surrounding) air. 


2.69 Air, Recirculated — It is the returned air passed 
through the conditioner before being again supplied to 
the conditioned space. 


2.70 Air, Reheating of — In an air conditioning 
system, the final step in treatment in the event the 
temperature is too low. 


2.71 Air, Return — It is the air returned from 
conditioned or refrigerated space. 


2.72 Air, Saturated — It is the moist air in which 
the partial pressure of the water vapour is equal to the 
vapour pressure of water at the existing temperature. 
This occurs when dry air and saturated water vapour 
coexist at the same dry-bulb temperature. 


2.73 Air, Standard — It is the dry air at a pressure 760 
mm Hg at 21° C temperature and with a specific volume 
of 0.833 m*/kg. 


2.74 Air/Cloth Ratio — It is value used in dust 
collector calculations to measure air velocity through 
the bag filter media. 


NOTE — Air/cloth ratio is calculated by dividing active 
volumetric airflow by the effective area of the cloth media. 


2.75 Air/Gas Ratio — It is the ratio of the air volume 
to the gas volume. A specified ratio is necessary to 
achieve a desired character of combustion. 


2.76 Air/Mass Ratio — It is the ratio of the mass of 
atmosphere in the actual earth to sun path to the mass 


IS 3615 : 2020 


which would exist at sea level if the sun were directly 
overhead. 


2.77 Air/Media Ratio — It is the value used in dust 
collector calculations to measure air velocity through 
non-cloth bag filter media (for example, paper 
cartridges). 

NOTE — Aijr/media ratio is calculated by dividing 


active volumetric airflow by the effective area of the cloth 
media. 


2.78 Airborne Droplet Nuclei — Particles are 
released when an infected host coughs or sneezes; 
droplet nuclei are formed when mucus coating these 
particles evaporates and the virus becomes airborne. 
Also known as quanta. 


2.79 Airborne Particles — The impurities as solid or 
liquid particulate matter from whatever source. 


2.80 Airborne Sound — It is the sound that 
reaches the point of detection by radiation through the 
air. 


2.81 Airflow — It is the: 


a) movement of air usually within boundaries (such 
as, ducts). 


b) volume of air per unit time. 


2.82 Airflow Rate (Q) — The volume of standard 
air per unit of time that moves past a given plane, 
expressed in cubic feet per minute (cfm) or litres per 
second (L/s). 


2.83 Airflow Resistance — It is deterrent (due 
to friction, change of direction, etc.) to the passage 
of air within an air-distribution system and/or 
equipment. 


2.84 Airflow Retarder — A material or construction 
that adequately impedes transmission of air under 
specified conditions. 


2.85 Airfoil — A cross sectional blade shape of a fan 
type that is used to optimize flow to reduce turbulence. 


2.86 Airing — It is natural ventilation by window 
opening. 
2.87 Airtight Construction — The construction 


in which the building envelope is designed with a 
continuous air barrier. 


2.88 Airtightness — A qualitative term describing 
the integrity of the building envelope relative to air 
permeation; the resistance of the building envelope to 
the flow of air and entrained moisture. 


2.89 AK Factor — The effective area of an air terminal 
device equal to the measured airflow rate divided by 
the velocity reading of a particular instrument used in a 
prescribed manner. 


2.90 Alkylbenzene — A synthetic hydrocarbon 
composed of a benzene ring attached to one or more 
saturated hydrocarbon chains. 


2.91 Allocation Device — A device that monitors 
parameters used to determine the net HVAC energy 
consumed in conditioning an individual unit. 


2.92 Alpha-Value (a-Value) — The ratio of path 
pressure drops, including fully open control damper 
pressure drop, to the pressure drop across the fully open 
damper at design flow. 


2.93 Alteration — Replacement or addition to 
a building or its systems and equipment; routine 
maintenance, repair, and service or a change in the 
building’s use classification or category shall not 
constitute an alteration. 


2.94 Alternating Current — Electric current in an 
electrical circuit that periodically reverses polarity. 


2.95 Alternative Energy Sources — The non- 
depletable sources alternative to energy derived from 
combustible waste or heat recovery processes. 


2.96 Ambient Air — Air within a defined space. 
Air surrounding a building, the source of outdoor air 
brought into a building, etc (usually outdoor air or the 
air in an enclosure under study). 


2.97 Ambient Air Conditions — They are 
characteristics of the environment. For example, 
temperature, relative humidity, pressure, and motion. 


2.98 Ambient Noise — All noise associated within a 
given environment at a given time, including noise from 
the sound source of interest (for example, background 
noise plus the particular sound of interest). 


2.99 Ambient Pressure — It is the: 
a) environmental pressure in which a device operates. 
b) pressure of the medium surrounding a device. 


c) pressure of the surroundings relative to zero 
absolute pressure. 


2.100 Ambient Temperature — It is the temperature 
of the medium (such as, air, water, or earth) into which 
the heat of equipment is dissipated. 


2.101 Ammonia Refrigerant — Anhydrous ammonia 
(NH,). 


2.102 Analyzer — It is a device in the high side of 
an absorption system for increasing the concentration 
of refrigerant in the vapour entering the rectifier or 
condenser. 


2.103 Anechoic Termination — It is a device placed 
at the end of a test duct to prevent excessive reflection 
of the sound waves back into the test duct where they 
would interfere with the waves to be measured. 


2.104 Anemometer — It is an instrument for measuring 
the velocity of fluid. 


2.105 Aneroid Barometer — A barometer in which a 
change of atmospheric pressure relative to a vacuum 
bends a metallic surface connected to a pointer. 


2.106 Aneroid Capsule — A thin, disc-shaped box 
or capsule, usually metallic, partially evacuated and 
sealed, held extended by a spring, that expands and 
contracts with changes in atmospheric or gas pressure. 


2.107 Angle of Discharge — It is the largest included 
angle between centre lines of principal jets of the 
primary airstream. 


2.108 Angle of Incidence — It is the angle between the 
solar beam and the normal to the aperture plane of the 
solar collector. 


2.109 Angle Valve — A valve in which the inlet and 
outlet are at an angle, usually 45° or 90°. 


2.110 Annual Fuel-Utilization Efficiency (AFUE) — 
It is the ratio of annual output energy to annual input 
energy, which includes any non-heating season pilot 
input loss and, for gas- or oil-fired furnaces or boilers, 
does not include electric energy. 


2.111 Annual Heating Load — The heating load for 
the entire one-year simulation period (for example, 
for hourly simulation programs, this is the sum of 
the hourly heating loads for the one-year simulation 
period). 


2.112 Annual Incident Unshaded Total Solar 
Radiation — It is the sum of direct solar radiation 
and diffuse solar radiation that strikes a given surface 
for the entire one-year simulation period when no 
shading is present (for example, for hourly simulation 
programs, this is the sum of the hourly total incident 
solar radiation for the one-year simulation period). 


2.113 Annual Mean Zone Air Temperature — It 
is the average zone air temperature for the one-year 
simulation period (for example, for hourly simulation 
programs, this is the average of the hourly zone air 
temperatures for the one-year simulation period). 


2.114 Annual Sensible-Cooling Load — It is the 
sensible-cooling load for the entire one-year simulation 
period (for example, for hourly simulation programs, 
this is the sum of the hourly sensible cooling loads for 
the one-year simulation period). 


2.115 Annual Transmitted Solar Radiation — It 
is the sum of direct solar radiation and diffuse solar 
radiation that strikes a given surface for the entire one- 
year simulation period when no shading is present (for 
example, for hourly simulation programs, this is the 
sum of the hourly total incident solar radiation for the 
one-year simulation period.) 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.116 Annular Flow — It is a form of two-phase flow 
in a pipe where the gas forms the core and the liquid 
flows annularly against the internal walls of the pipe. 


2.117 Anticipating Control — The _ control 
methodology that is actuated faster than normal to 
produce a smaller differential of the controlled variable. 


2.118 Antisiphon Valve — It is a valve or mechanical 
device that eliminates siphon flow. 


2.119 Apparatus Dew Point (ADP) — The effective 
coil surface temperature when there is dehumidification. 
This is the temperature to which all the supply air would 
be cooled if 100 percent of the supply air contacted the 
coil. On the psychrometric chart, this is the intersection 
of the condition line and the saturation curve, where 
the condition line is the line going through entering air 
conditions with slope defined by the sensible heat ratio 
([gross sensible capacity]/ [gross total capacity]). 


2.120 Apparent Load — It is a value that can be 
calculated for a system based on the quantity of the 
fluid flow, the average temperature of the entering fluid, 
and the average temperature of the space. 


2.121 Apparent Power — It is product of the volts and 
amperes of a circuit. This product generally is divided 
by 1 000 and designated in kilovolt-amperes (kVA). It 
comprises both real and reactive power. 


2.122 Apparent Solar Time — It is time based on the 
apparent angular motion of the sun across the sky, with 
solar noon the time the sun crosses the meridian of the 
observer. 


2.123 Apparent Temperature — It is the temperature 
of an object as determined from the measured radiance. 


2.124 Apparent Thermal Conductivity — It is 
a measured property of a material or assembly of 
materials; heat flows by a combination of conduction, 
convection, radiation, and latent heat exchange and 
may depend on orientation, direction, or both. The 
specific test conditions (that is, sample thickness, 
orientation, environment, environmental pressure, 
surface temperature, mean temperature, temperature 
difference, and moisture distribution) should be 
reported with the values. The symbol K is used to 
denote the lack of pure conduction or to indicate that 
all values reported are apparent. Materials with a low 
apparent thermal conductivity are called insulation 
materials. 


2.125 Apparent Volumetric Efficiency — On an 
indicator card, it is the ratio of suction line length to 
stroke. 


2.126 Application Part-Load Value (APLV) — A 
part load value is based on operation at actual design 
conditions. Typically used in system design and 
specification. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.127 Application Rating — A rating based on tests 
performed at application rating conditions (other than 
standard rating conditions). 


2.128 Application-Specific Controller (ASC) — The 
digital controller dedicated to a specific application, 
such as a VAV box or water-source heat pump. 


2.129 Approach — In an evaporative cooling device, 
the difference between the average temperature 
of the circulating water leaving the device and the 
average wet-bulb temperature of the entering air. In 
a conduction heat exchanger device, the difference in 
temperature between the leaving treated fluid and the 
entering working fluid. 


2.130 Approximate Lethal Concentration (ALC) — 
The concentration of a substance, such as a refrigerant, 
that is lethal to even a single test animal when tested by 
the same conditions as for an LC50 test. 


2.131 Aquastat — A thermostat designed for use in 
water. 


2.132 Aquifer — It is a geologic unit that is capable of 
yielding groundwater to a well in sufficient quantities 
to be of practical use. 


2.133 Archimedes principle — A body immersed in a 
fluid undergoes an apparent loss in weight equal to the 
weight of the fluid it displaces. 


2.134 Area, Core — It is the total plane area of the 
portion of a grille, face, or register bounded by a line 
tangent to the outer edges of the outer openings through 
which air can pass. 


2.135 Area, Free — It is the total minimum area of 
the openings in an air inlet or outlet through which air 
can pass. 


2.136 Arithmetic-Mean Temperature Difference — 
In a parallel flow or counter flow heat exchanger, the 
arithmetic mean of the temperature differences between 
the two fluids at both ends of the exchanger. 


2.137 Arrestance — It quantifies filter efficiency 
by mass of particles removed or arrestance and is 
generally only used to measure performance of 
prefilters or low efficiency filters, efficiencies measured 
by weight give little indication of their performance for 
the smallest, lightest particles (the most respirable and 
hazardous). 


2.138 Atmospheric Dust Spot Efficiency — It is 
measure of the ability of a device to remove the staining 
portion of atmospheric dust from the test air. 


2.139 Arrestance dust, Synthetic — Compounded test 
dust used for arrestance measurement and for loading 
filters. 


2.140 Aspect Ratio — It is the ratio of the length of 
the core of a grille, face, or register to the width in air 
distribution outlets. In rectangular ducts, it is the ratio 
of width to depth. 


2.141 Aspirated Psychrometer — _ Psychrometer 
having mechanical means for rapidly circulating air to 
be tested over dry and wet bulbs. 


2.142 Aspiration — It is production of movement in a 
fluid by suction created by fluid velocity. 


2.143 Assembly — It is portion of an envelope 
component represented by an arrangement and 
connection of building construction materials with a 
specific thermal transmittance or thermal conductance. 


2.144 Atmospheric Condenser — Condenser in 
which the pipes in open air are cooled by water flowing 
over them. 


2.145 Atmospheric Dust — It is particulate matter 
naturally occurring in the air. 


2.146 Atmospheric Freeze Drying — It is a process 
in which the solid phase of the solvent is sublimed at 
atmospheric pressure. 


2.147 Atmospheric Pressure — The standard 
atmospheric reference pressure (assumed sea level) 
is defined by the International Civil Aeronautics 
Organization (ICAO) as 101.325 kPa. In I-P units, the 
value is approximately 14.696 psi, or 29.921 inches of 
mercury at 32°F. 


2.148 Atmospheric Tower — Air movement through a 
cooling tower by aspiration or natural convection (also 
called natural draft cooling tower). 


2.149 Atomization — It is the process of reducing to 
fine spray. 


2.150 Atomize — It is a process to create a fine spray 
from a liquid. 


2.151 Attenuation — The decrease in the sound 
level between the source and the receiver from 
various mechanisms, such as geometrical divergence, 
atmospheric absorption, and building structures. 


2.152 Attic Fan — Exhaust fan to exhaust air near the 
top of a building while air, generally cooler, is forced 
(drawn) in at lower levels. 


2.153 Attic Ventilation — Introduction of cool, 
outdoor air into an attic by exhausting its warm air to 
the outdoors. 


2.154 Authority of a Controller — It is ratio of 
effect on a manipulated variable of one input signal as 
compared to that of another. 


2.155 Automatic Changeover — The change over 
from one mode of operation to another without operator 
intervention (for example, a thermostat that changes 
from heat to cool without need for manual operation of 
levers or setpoints). 


2.156 Automatic Control Device — A device capable 
of automatically controlling devices without manual 
intervention. 


2.157 Automation 


a) It is implementation of process by automatic 
means. 


b) Investigation, design, development, and 
application of methods of rendering processes 
automatic, self-moving, or self-controlling. 


c) Theory, art, or technique of making a process 
more automatic. 


2.158 Auxiliary Air — It is unconditioned or partially 
conditioned supply or supplemental air delivered to a 
laboratory at the laboratory fume hood to reduce room 
air consumption. 


2.159 Auxiliary Devices — They are equipment, such 
as, relays and switches to manipulate signals (also 
known as controls). 


2.160 Auxiliary Fuel — Fuel used in an auxiliary 
thermal source. 


2.161 Auxiliary Thermal Source — A source of 
thermal energy, other than solar, used to provide the 
service water heating, usually in the form of electrical 
resistance heat or thermal energy derived from 
combustion of fossil fuels. 


2.162 Available Energy — Energy in the form of shaft 
work or in a form completely convertible to shaft work 
by ideal processes. 


2.163 Average Age of Air — It is average of local mean 
ages of air measured throughout an indoor airspace. 


2.164 Average Air Outlet Speed — It is the time- 
averaged speed of the air from each individual supply 
air outlet. 


2.165 Average Arrestance — For an air cleaning 
device with efficiencies less than 20 percent in the 
size range of 3.0 — 10.0 um, the average value of 
the arrestances made on the device during the 
loading test, weighted by the amounts of dust fed 
to the device during each, incremental, dust-loading 
step. 


2.166 Average ASHRAE Arrestance — The average 
value of the arrestances made on a single filter during 
the loading test, weighted by the dust fed to the filter 
between successive arrestance measurements. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.167 Average dust-spot Efficiency — The average 
value of the dust spot efficiencies made on a single 
filter during the loading test, weighted by the dust fed 
to the filter during the intervals between successive 
dust spot tests. 


2.168 Avogadro’s Law — Under the same conditions 
of pressure and temperature, equal volumes of all gases 
contain equal numbers of molecules. 


2.169 Axial Fan — Fan that moves air in the general 
direction of the axis about which it rotates. 


2.170 Axial Flow Compressor — It is a turbo- 
compressor in which the compressed fluid generally 
flows in a direction parallel to the axis of rotation. 


2.171 Axonometric Drawing — A perspective 
drawing showing plan and partial elevations on the 
same drawing. 


2.172 Azeotrope — A mixture of liquids whose 
vapor and liquid phases in equilibrium have identical 
compositions (the boiling point is constant). 


2.173 Azeotropic Blend — A blend containing two or 
more refrigerants whose equilibrium vapor and liquid 
phase compositions are the same at a given pressure. 
At this pressure, the slope of the temperature versus 
composition curve equals zero, which mathematically 
is expressed as (dt/dx) p = 0, which, in turn, implies 
the occurrence of a maximum, minimum, or saddle 
point temperature. Azeotropic blends exhibit some 
segregation of components at other conditions. The 
extent of the segregation depends on the particular 
azeotrope and the application. 


2.174 Azeotropic Point — A temperature at which a 
liquid mixture boils and produces a vapor having the 
same composition as the liquid. 


2.175 Azeotropic Refrigerant — A blend that contains 
two or more refrigerants whose equilibrium vapor phase 
and liquid phase compositions are the same at a given 
pressure. The temperature of an azeotropic refrigerant 
remains constant as it evaporates or condenses at 
constant pressure (compare to [zeotropic refrigerant]). 


2.176 Azeotropic Temperature — The temperature at 
which the liquid and vapour phases of a blend have the 
same mole fraction of each component at equilibrium 
for a specified pressure. 


2.177 Babo’s law — Addition of a non-volatile solid to 
a liquid in which it is soluble lowers the vapor pressure 
of the solvent in proportion to the amount of substance 
dissolved. 


2.178 Back Pressure — The static pressure existing at 
the outlet of an operating pressure relief device due to 
pressure in the discharge line. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.179 Back Pressure Valve — An automatic valve 
located between the evaporator outlet and the 
compressor inlet that responds to its own inlet pressure 
that prevents the evaporator pressure from falling 
below a selected value (also known as evaporator 
pressure regulator). 


2.180 Back Siphonage — A reverse flow in a 
water system caused by negative pressure in an 
incoming pipe when the point of use is at atmospheric 
pressure. 


NOTE — Back siphonage generally is more evident in an open 
water system. 


2.181 Backdraft Damper — A device which, when 
mounted in a duct or opening, permits the flow of air in 
one direction only. Can be gravity (counter weighted) 
or power operated. 


2.182 Backflow — The reverse flow in a water system 
from the normal or intended direction. 


NOTE — Backflow generally is more evident in an open water 
system. 


2.183 Backflow Preventer — It is a device designed to 
prevent reverse flow in a water system. 


NOTE — Term normally used where back-pressure-type 
backflow is implied. 


2.184 Backflow Prevention — The program, 
ordinance, or code designed to prevent backflow into 
a potable water system and to discover, eliminate, and 
prevent all uncontrolled cross connections, existing or 
potential. 


2.185 Background Irradiance — Irradiance at the 
entrance aperture of the infrared sensing system that 
is not radiated directly from the object being 
investigated. 


2.186 Background Noise — Total noise from all 
sources other than a particular sound that is of interest. 
Compare to [[ambient noise]]. 


2.187 Back-Siphonage Preventer — See [[backflow 
preventer]]. 


2.188 Backward-Curved Impeller — It is the 
centrifugal rotor in which the convex sides of blades 
face in the direction of rotation. 


2.189 Backward-Inclined Impeller — It is a 
component of a centrifugal fan or pump consisting 
of simple flat blades backwardly inclined to match 
the velocity pattern of the fluid passing through the 
impeller wheel for high-efficiency operation. Impeller 
blade width and length affect flow rate and pressure or 
lift performance. 


2.190 Baffle — It is a partition or deflector used 
for diverting fluid, usually in the form of a plate or 
wall. 


2.191 Baffle, Refrigerator — It is a plate, wall, or 
partition which is designed to perform one or more of 
the following functions: 


a) To pervert contact of food with refrigerated 
surfaces; 


b) To prevent dripping of condense on food; and 


c) Toregulate and/or direct circulation of refrigerated 
air. 


2.192 Balance Point — The outdoor temperature 
at which a building’s heat loss to the environment is 
equal to internal heat gains from people, lights, and 
equipment. 


2.193 Balanced Draft — Two fans connected to a 
combustion unit, one to supply the combustion air and 
the other to induce draft. 


2.194 Balanced Flow — Fluid flows where the 
design supply flow volumetric rate equals the design 
return/exhaust volumetric rate. Also called balanced 
ventilation or balanced system. 


2.195 Balanced Heat Recovery — It occurs when 
internal heat gain equals recovered heat, and no external 
heat is introduced to the conditioned space. Maintaining 
balance may require raising the temperature of 
recovered heat. 


2.196 Balanced Relief Valve — A pressure relief valve 
that incorporates means of minimizing the effect of 
back pressure on the operational characteristics of the 
valve (opening pressure, closing pressure, and relieving 
capacity). 


2.197 Balancer — A commonly used term for the 
person or firm that performs testing, adjusting, and 
balancing of HVAC systems. 


2.198 Balancing — The methodical proportioning 
of air and hydronic flows through the system mains, 
branches, and terminal devices using acceptable 
procedures to achieve the specified airflow or hydronic 
flow within testing, design, and installation limitations. 


2.199 Balancing Damper — A adjustable blade device 
to control airflow. 


2.200 Balancing Station — An assembly to measure 
and control fluid flow; composed of a measuring device, 
a volume control device, and recommended lengths of 
straight ductwork or pipe leading into and out of the 
measuring device. 


2.201 Balancing Valve — It is a metering-type valve 
with locking positions to control hydronic flow. 


2.202 Ball Valve — A valve consisting of a rotatable 
ball witha hole through its centre typically manufactured 
in either full port (opening) or conventional (reduced) 
port (opening) construction. 


2.203 Barometer — It is an instrument for measuring 
atmospheric pressure. Standard atmosphere is the 
equivalent of 14.696 psia (101.325 kPa) or 29.92 in. 
(760 mm) of mercury at 32°F (0°C). 


2.204 Barometric Condenser — It is an apparatus in 
which steam is condensed at reduced pressure by direct 
contact with water. 


2.205 Barometric Damper — It is the: 


a) Counterweighted damper set so that variations 
in chimney barometric pressure will cause the 
damper to open or close gradually to maintain a 
constant draft directly upstream of the damper. 


b) Mechanically balanced damper that rotates from 
changes in pressure within breeching to bleed air 
into the breeching to maintain a steady draft. 


2.206 Barometric Effect — The variations in 
barometric pressure caused by altitude or weather 
changes. 


2.207 Barometric Pressure — It is the pressure of the 
atmosphere relative to zero absolute pressure (a perfect 
vacuum). 


2.208 Base Temperature — It is the temperature from 
which temperature departure is calculated (for example, 
degree-day). 


2.209 Base Use — Primary HVAC system losses 
incurred and auxiliary system energy consumed in 
maintaining a central HVAC energy source available 
for consumption by all residents. 


2.210 Baseboard Radiator — It is a steam, hydronic, 
or electric heating device located at or near the floor. 


2.211 Baseline Building Design — A computer 
representation of a hypothetical design based on the 
proposed building project. This representation is 
used as the basis for calculating the baseline building 
performance for rating above standard design. 


2.212 Baseline Building Performance — The annual 
energy cost for a building design intended for use as a 
baseline for rating above standard design. 


2.213 Baseline Data — The measurements and facts 
describing facility operations and design during the 
baseline period. This will include energy use or demand 
and parameters of facility operation that govern energy 
use or demand. 


2.214 Baseline Model — The set of arithmetic 
factors, equations, or data used to describe the 
relationship between energy use or demand and other 
baseline data. A model may also be a simulation 
process involving a specified simulation engine and 
set of input data. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.215 Baseline Period — The period of time selected 
as representative of facility operations before retrofit. 


2.216 Basis of Design (BOD) — A document that 
records the concepts, calculations, decisions, and 
product selections used to meet the owner’s project 
requirements and to satisfy applicable standards and 
guidelines. The document includes both narrative 
descriptions and, lists of individual items that support 
the design process. 


2.217 Baudelot Cooler — Liquid cooler in which the 
liquid to be cooled passes by gravity over a refrigerated 
surface (also known as, falling film surface cooler). 


2.218 Beam Irradiance — Irradiance received from 
the sun without significant change in direction from the 
sun’s apparent position. 


2.219 Bellows — It is defined as: 


a) A flexible, corrugated chamber that converts 
pressure variation into mechanical movement. 


b) It is a flexible, fluid-containing vessel that will 
expand or contract as a result of a change in the 
pressure of the contained fluid. Can be used to 
transmit force and/or motion in a pneumatic or 
hydraulic system or as a sensor of temperature or 
pressure when the bellows is sealed. 


2.220 Bellows Seal — A mechanical seal of flexible, 
corrugated-metal bellows with one end attached to a 
ring pressed against the shoulder of the shaft, the other 
end to a disc pressed against the housing. 


2.221 Bellows Valve — It is the packless valve, in 
which a bellows forms the seal between the adjustment 
spindle and the valve body. 


2.222 Benching Machine — It is a portable device for 
elevating and stacking ice blocks. 


2.223 Bifurcated Fan — It is a tube axial (ducted) fan 
whose motor is mounted outside a bifurcated (divided) 
duct with only the blades of the fan located in the 
airstream. 


2.224 Bimetallic Element — It is an element formed 
of two metals having different coefficients of thermal 
expansion, used as a temperature control device. 


2.225 Bin — A class interval or grouping, typically for 
outdoor air temperature. 


2.226 Bin Method — It is the energy calculation 
method, usually used in prediction, in which the annual 
(or monthly) energy use of a building is calculated 
as the sum of the energy used for all of the outdoor 
temperature bins. The bin method allows heat pump (or 
other heater or cooler) performance, which is different 
for each bin, to be accounted for. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.227 Binary — It is characteristic or property 
involving a selection, choice, or condition, in which 
there are two possibilities: 


a) as binary numbers in a computer that is, on/off, or 
b) open/closed switch position. 


2.228 Binary Vapour Cycle — The thermodynamic 
cycle relative to the varying condensing and evaporating 
temperatures of a non-azeotropic mixture of two fluids. 


2.229 Biocide — A chemical substance capable of 
killing living organism, usually in a selective way. 


2.230 Blackbody — It is defined as the: 
a) Body that absorbs all the radiant energy falling on it. 


b) Body that has the maximum, theoretical, radiant- 
energy emittance at a given temperature (see also 
[absorber]). 


2.231 Blackbody Equivalent Temperature — It is 
apparent temperature of an object as determined from 
the measurement of its radiance and the assumption 
that it is an ideal blackbody with emissivity of 1.0. 


2.232 Blade Pitch — The angle between the chord 
of the blade and the plane of rotation (axial fan) or 
centreline of the rotor hub. The pitch may be constant 
for the length of the blade, or it may be larger at the 
blade root than at the tip. 


2.233 Blade Twist — The property of a propeller blade 
describing the variation of the pitch from the blade root 
to the tip. 


2.234 Blanch — This is a process of sterilization. In 
the case of vegetables to be canned, cooked, or frozen, 
this is usually by dipping in a hot water bath. 


2.235 Blanket Thermal Insulation — It is relatively 
flat and flexible insulation in coherent form, furnished 
in units of substantial area. 


2.236 Blast Coil — The heat transfer surface, most 
frequently of an extended surface arrangement, over 
which air is blown to be heated or cooled, depending 
on the temperature of the fluid within the coil. 


2.237 Blast Freezer — The chamber in which cold air 
is circulated rapidly around products to be frozen so 
that freezing occurs rapidly enough to avoid formation 
of large ice crystals which may damage the product. 


2.238 Blast Gate — It is a heavy-duty duct closure 
device. 


2.239 Blast Gate Damper — A sliding damper in an 
air-handling system. 


2.240 Blast Heater — It is set of heat transfer coils 
or sections used to heat air which is drawn or forced 
through them by a fan. A unit heater. 


10 


2.241 Bleed Valve — A valve that has a fixed orifice 
incapable of being closed by an action of the valve, 
permitting a flow through or in parallel with the main 
valve port. 


2.242 Bleeder — It is a pipe attached to a unit, such 
as a condenser, to bleed off liquid refrigerant parallel 
to main flow. 


2.243 Blends — Refrigerants consisting of mixtures of 
two or more different chemical compounds, often used 
individually as refrigerants for other applications. 


2.244 Blind Flange — Flange used to seal the end of 
a pipe. 


2.245 Block Thermal Insulation — It is a rigid 
insulation preformed into rectangular units. 


2.246 Blowdown 


a) Discharge of water from a steam boiler or open 
recirculating system that contains high total 
dissolved solids. The addition of makeup water 
will reduce the concentration of dissolved solids 
to minimize their precipitation. 


b 


ma 


In pressure relief-devices, the difference between 
actuation pressure of a pressure relief valve and 
reseating pressure, expressed as a percentage of 
set pressure or in pressure units. 


2.247 Blower — A ducted centrifugal fan used in a 
heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning system. 


2.248 Blower Door — An assembly consisting of a 
fan/blower and a calibrated flow measuring station 
[orifice plate, flow nozzle(s), flow ring, etc.] used 
for pressurizing or depressurizing a building 
envelope. 


2.249 Blowoff Valve — It is a safety valve that 
maintains a predetermined pressure in a vessel by 
discharging excess gas to the atmosphere. 


2.250 Blowthrough Unit — It is an air-handling unit 
with a section or sections downstream of the supply air 
fan. 


2.251 Boiler — A closed, pressure vessel that uses fuel 
or electricity for heating water or other fluids to supply 
steam or hot water for heating, humidification, or other 
applications. 


2.252 Boiler Burner Unit Boiler designed 
especially for gas and oil and sold integrally with the 
burner. 


2.253 Boiler Capacity — It is designed maximum rate 
of heat output. 


2.254 Boiler Crown Sheet — The part of a boiler 
forming the top of the furnace in a firebox boiler or the 
equivalent surface in other types. 


2.255 Boiler Feed Pump — A pump that returns 
condensed steam, makeup water, or both directly to the 
boiler. Normally installed with a large receiver. 


2.256 Boiler Feedwater — It is the water supplied to a 
boiler by pumping. 


2.257 Boiler Feedwater Heater — It is an apparatus 
for raising the temperature of the boiler feedwater, 
usually with exhaust steam. 


2.258 Boiler Foaming — Carryover of slugs of water 
into the piping from overloading of the boiler. Compare 
to [boiler priming]. 


2.259 Boiler Generator — A part of an absorption 
machine in which the refrigerant vapor is driven off by 
heat. 


2.260 Boiler Heating Surface — Surfaces of the boiler 
that are exposed to the products of combustion on one 
side and water on the other, expressed in area units (of 
the side receiving the heat). 


2.261 Boiler Horsepower — Equivalent evaporation 
of 34.5 Ib of water per hour from and at 100°C (212°F). 
This is equal to heat output of 970.3 Btu/Ib/h x 34.5 1b 
= 33 475 Btu/h, approximately 9 809.5 W. 


2.262 Boiler Priming — The carryover of boiler water 
with the steam due to insufficient steam space, faulty 
boiler design, or operating conditions. Compare to 
[[foaming]]. 


2.263 Boiler Rating — Designed maximum rating 
of a steam or water boiler expressed as the total heat 
transferred by the heating surfaces in Btu/h (kW). 
Sometimes expressed in horsepower or pounds (torque, 
kilograms) of steam per hour. Compare to [[boiler 
capacity]. 


2.264 Boiler Water Leg — The space that contains 
water between the outer shell and furnace shell. 


2.265 Boiler Waterline — The level at which water is 
maintained within a steam boiler. 


2.266 Boiling Point — It is the temperature at which 
the vapour pressure of a liquid equals the absolute 
external pressure at the liquid-vapour interface. 


2.267 Boil-off Gas — It is liquefied gas lost by 
vaporization during storage in a tank. 


2.268 Bolometer — It is a sensitive thermal device for 
measuring radiant energy. 


2.269 Bonding — It is the connection to ground 
potential of a metal part on an appliance or component 
which may become energized by an electrical fault or 
may develop a static charge (also known as electrical 
ground). 


11 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.270 Booster — An accessory to increase output of, 
for example, a compressor, pump, or header. 


2.271 Boot — The sheet metal transformation piece 
used to make connection between round and rectangular 
ductwork. 


2.272 Bore — It is the inside diameter of a hollow 
cylinder or of a hole. 


2.273 Boundary Conditions The physical 
conditions (values of physical quantities, conditions of 
energy interchange, etc.) imposed on a system at the 
boundaries separating the system from its surroundings. 


2.274 Boundary Layer — It is the region of retarded 
fluid flow near the surface of a body moving through the 
fluid or past which the fluid moves. See also [[Flow]]. 


2.275 Boundary Layer Flow — It is the flow of that 
portion of a viscous fluid in the area of a body in contact 
with the fluid and in motion relative to the fluid. 


2.276 Bourdon gauge — A mechanical pressure 
measuring instrument that senses pressure with a curved 
oval tube that tends to straighten when the pressure 
increases and recurves when the pressure decreases. 


2.277 Boyle’s Law — The product of the volume of a 
gas times its pressure is a constant at fixed temperature. 
Also known as Mariotte’s law. 


2.278 Brackish Water — The impure water with a 
lesser content of salt than seawater, but higher than that 
of potable water. 


2.279 Branch 


a) It is another section of the same size or smaller 
in ducts, piping, or conduit, at an angle with the 


main. 
b) Section of pipe or duct from a main to a terminal 
device. 
2.280 Branch Circuit — The circuit conductors 


between the final overcurrent device protecting the 
circuit and the outlet(s). The final wiring run to the 
load. 


2.281 Branch Line — The air supply line connecting a 
controller and controlled device. 


2.282 Breaker — It is a relatively poor conductor of 
heat used to join the liner and outer shell of an internally 
refrigerated container, such as, a refrigerator. 


2.283 Breaker Strip — Refrigerator cabinet, a separate 
insulating element or integral insulating extension of 
the cabinet interior surfaces around the periphery of the 
cabinet door or drawer opening(s) which functions as a 
thermal barrier to minimize heat flow to the interior of 
the cabinet. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.284 Break-even Temperature — It is the outdoor 
temperature at which total heat losses from conditioned 
spaces equal internally generated heat gains. 


2.285 Breakthrough — A condition that occurs in 
a gas phase filter when, as contaminated air passes 
through a filter, the outlet contaminant concentration 
reaches a predetermined percentage of the challenge. 


2.286 Breakthrough Time — For gas phase filters, 
the sudden decline in efficiency and is defined as the 
operating time (at constant operating conditions) before 
a certain penetration is achieved. 


2.287 Breather Plug — It is a removable plug, cap, or 
other means of venting a space containing insulating 
material through vapour-tight sheathing to the interior 
of a refrigerated compartment. 


2.288 Breathing Zone — The region within an 
occupied space between planes 3 and 72 in. (75 and 
1 800 mm) above the floor and more than 2 ft. (600 mm) 
from the walls or fixed air-conditioning equipment. 


2.289 Brine — Any liquid cooled by the refrigerant 
and used for the transmission of heat without a change 
in its state, having no flash point or a flash point above 
68° C. 


2.290 Brine, Electrolytic — Any brine capable 
of causing chemical decomposition of one of two 
dissimilar metals by electrolysis. 


2.291 Briquette Ice — Ice produced as small, regularly 
shaped and sized pieces. 


2.292 British Thermal Unit (Btu) — It is the quantity 
of heat required of one pound of air-free water through 
one-degree Fahrenheit at a constant pressure of one 
normal atmosphere. 

NOTE — This definition is given only for guidance though we 

use SI units. 

1 Btu = 0.2519 kcal/h. 


2.293 Btu Meter — It is a metering system capable 
of measuring the energy added to or extracted from 
an electric or fluid stream. Also called thermal energy 
meter, heat meter, or thermal meter. 


2.294 Bubble-point Temperature — A liquid-vapor 
equilibrium point for a volatile pure liquid or for a 
multicomponent mixture of miscible, volatile, pure 
component liquids, in the absence of non-condensable, 
where the temperature of the mixture at a defined 
pressure is the minimum temperature required for a 
vapor bubble to form in the liquid. 


2.295 Buffer 


a) It is a digital circuit element used to increase the 
number of outputs a circuit can drive or to convert 


12 


input or output levels for signal level compatibility. 
Also, any isolating amplifier stage. 


b 


wm 


An insulating circuit used to avoid reaction of a 
drive circuit on any driven circuit. 


c 


wa 


Salts or other compounds that reduce the changes 
in the pH of a solution upon the addition of an acid 
or alkali. 


d 


wa 


A storage device used to compensate for a 
difference in rate of flow, data, time, or occurrence 
of events when transmitting data from one device 
to another. 


2.296 Buffer Tank — It is the tank fitted into a circuit 
to dampen fluctuations in flow. 


2.297 Buffer Zone — It is an unconditioned part of a 
building containing some or all of the distribution system. 


2.298 Building — A structure wholly or partially 
enclosed within exterior walls, or within exterior and 
party walls, and a roof, affording shelter to persons, 
animals, or property. 


2.299 Building Automation System (BAS) — An 
energy management system, usually with additional 
capabilities, relating to the overall operation of the 
building in which it is installed, such as equipment 
monitoring, protection of equipment against power 
failure, and building security. Compare to [[building 
management system]]. 


2.300 Building Envelop Leakage — It is the overall 
leakage of the building characterized by the airflow rate 
at a given pressure difference across the envelope of the 
building. 


2.301 Building Envelope 


a) It is the outer elements of a building, including 
walls, windows, doors, roofs, and floors, including 
those in contact with earth. 

b) The exterior plus the semi-exterior portions of a 
building. For the purposes of determining building 
envelope requirements, the classifications are 
defined as follows. Building envelope, exterior: the 
elements of a building that separate conditioned 
spaces from the exterior. Building envelope, semi- 
exterior: the elements of a building that separate 
conditioned space from unconditioned space or 
that enclose semi heated spaces through which 
thermal energy may be transferred to or from the 
exterior, to or from unconditioned spaces, or to or 
from conditioned spaces. 


2.302 Building Envelope Opaque Areas — All the 
exposed areas of a building envelope which enclose 
space, except for openings for windows, skylights, 
doors, and building service systems (that is, all areas 
of a building envelope that permit passage of radiant 
energy in or out of the building space). 


2.303 Building Envelope Void — Any localized area 
of the building envelope that has a thermal resistance 
significantly different from the area surrounding it. 
The void may be due to partial or complete absence of 
thermal insulation. 


2.304 Building Information Model (BIM) — It is a 
data specification for representing building information 
for the purposes of interoperable data exchange. Also, 
a data model of a specific building or its systems, 
components, or other information elements based on 
that specification. 


2.305 Building Information Modelling (BIM) — It 
is the human activity of using BIM software and other 
related software, hardware, and technologies to create 
and use in a building information model. 


2.306 Building Management System (BMS) — This 
is an energy management system relating to the overall 
operation of the building in which it is installed. It 
often has additional capabilities, such as equipment 
monitoring, protection of equipment against power 
failure, and building security. It may also be a direct 
digital control (DDC) system where the mode of 
control uses digital outputs to control processes or 
elements directly. 


2.307 Building Material — Any element of the 
building envelope, other than air films and insulation, 
through which heat flows and that is included in the 
component U-factor calculations. 


2.308 Building Space — It is the volume of a building 
that exchanges air with outdoor (ambient) air. The 
building volume is the space that is deliberately 
conditioned for human comfort (ft? [m3]). 


2.309 Building Thermal Envelope — The elements 
of a building that enclose spaces and which control or 
regulate heat and mass transfer (air, water vapor, and 
entrained moisture) between the interior spaces and the 
building exterior. 

NOTE — The interior surfaces of insulated floors, walls, 


windows, and ceilings generally comprise the thermal envelope. 
Compare to [[thermal envelope]]. See [[air infiltration]]. 


2.310 Bulb — It is the portion of a thermal sensing 
system that is placed in the controlled (or measured) 
variable. 


2.311 Buoyancy Inertial Parameter — A parameter 
derived from the dimensionless Richardson number 
relating fluid inertial forces to buoyancy forces in a 
storage device. 


2.312 Butterfly Damper 


a) A damper consisting of a plate turning on a 
diametral axis inside a duct. 

b) The pair of flaps hinged to a common diametrical 
spindle and permitting flow in one direction only. 


13 


IS 3615 : 2020 


c) Two flaps in ‘V’ arrangement. 


2.313 Butterfly Valve — The valve in which the 
regulating mechanism is a circular or elliptical disc that 
is rotatable about an axis. 


2.314 Bypass — A pipe or duct, usually controlled 
by valve or damper, for conveying a fluid around an 
element of a system. 


2.315 Bypass Air — Any portion of the mixed air that 
circumvents conditioning. 


2.316 Bypass Factor — This is the percentage of the 
air that does not come into contact with the coil; the 
remaining air is assumed to exit the coil at the average 
coil temperature. 


2.317 Bypass Leakage — The unwanted passing of 
untreated air into the treated air between the components 
within casings such as filters or coils within a section. 


2.318 Bypass Terminal — The air terminal unit using 
a method of volume modulation whereby airflow is 
varied by distributing that volume required to meet the 
load, the balance of primary air being diverted to the 
return. 


2.319 Calculated Variable 


a) The variable that cannot actually be measured 
directly but one which can be calculated by 
measuring other variables (for example, measure 
wet-bulb temperature and measure dry-bulb 
temperature to determine enthalpy). 


b) It is a variable that is calculated from one or more 
inputs. 


2.320 Calorie — It is the quantity of heat required to 
raise the temperature of 1g of water through 1° C, at a 
constant pressure of one normal atmosphere. 


2.321 Calorimeter — It is a device for measuring heat 
quantities, such as machine capacity, combustion heat, 
specific heat, vital heat, heat leakage, etc. 


2.322 Calorimeter, Compressor — It is an apparatus 
for determining the refrigerant flow rate, and 
subsequently, the capacity of a refrigerant compressor 
by measuring the heat input required to balance the 
refrigerating effect produced in the evaporator by the 
compressor. 


2.323 Calorimeter, Condensing unit — It apparatus 
for determining refrigerant flow rate, and subsequently 
the capacity of a condensing unit by measuring the 
heat input required to balance the refrigerating effect 
produced in the evaporator by the condensing unit. 


2.324 Calorimeter, Room — It is test facility for 
small air conditioners, consisting of two contiguous 
calorimeters with a common partition through which 
the air conditioner to be tested is mounted. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.325 Capacity — It is the usable output of a system 
or system component in which only losses occurring in 
the system or component are charged against it. 


2.326 Capacity Reducer — In a compressor, it is a 
device, such as a clearance pocket, movable cylinder 
head, or suction bypass, by which compressor capacity 
can be adjusted without otherwise, changing the 
operating conditions. 


2.327 Capacity, Air Conditioner, Useful Latent 
(Dehumidifying) — It is the available refrigerating 
capacity of an air conditioner for removing latent heat 
from the space to be conditioned. 


2.328 Capacity, Air Conditioner, Useful Sensible 
— It is the available refrigerating capacity of an air 
conditioner for removing sensible heat from the space 
to be conditioned. 


2.329 Capacity, Air Conditioner, Useful Total — It is 
the available refrigerating capacity of an air conditioner 
for removing sensible and latent heat from the space to 
be conditioned. 


2.330 Capacity, Condensing Unit — It is the 
refrigerating effect in kcal/h produced by the difference 
in total enthalpy between refrigerant liquid leaving the 
unit and the total enthalpy of the refrigerant vapour 
entering the unit. 


2.331 Capacity, Cooler Refrigerating, Net — It is 
the rate of heat removal from a fluid flowing through 
a cooler (air, water, brine, etc.) at stated conditions; 
the difference in specific enthalpies of the cooling 
fluid entering and leaving the cooler. In case frosting 
occurs within the cooler, the latent heat of fusion and 
the sub cooling heat of the ice (frost) must be added in 
determining the net cooler refrigerant capacity. 


2.332 Capacity, Expansion Valve — It is the 
refrigerating effect in kcal/h, produced by the 
evaporation of refrigerant passed by the valve under 
specified conditions. 


2.333 Capacity, Ice Making — It is the actual 
productive ability of a system making ice in a given 
period. 


2.334 Capacity, Ice Melting Equivalent — It is the 
amount of heat absorbed by one kilogram of ice at 0° C 
in liquefying to water at 0° C. 


2.335 Capacity, refrigerating — It is the rate of heat 
removal from a medium or space to be cooled at stated 
conditions. The term refrigerating effect is used to 
denote heat transfer to or from the refrigerant itself in 
a refrigerating system, whereas the term refrigerating 
capacity is used to denote the rate of heat removal from 
a medium or space to be cooled. 


14 


2.336 Capacity, Refrigerating Compressor — It is the 
rate of heat removal by the refrigerant assigned to the 
compressor in a refrigerating system. This is equal to the 
product of the mass rate of refrigerant flow produced by 
the compressor and the difference in specific enthalpies 
of the refrigerant vapour at its thermodynamic state 
entering the compressor and the refrigerant liquid at 
saturation temperature corresponding to the pressure of 
the vapour leaving the compressor. 


2.337 Capacity, Refrigerating Gross — It is the total 
rate of heat removal from all sources by the evaporator 
of a refrigerating system at stated conditions. It is 
numerically equivalent to the system refrigerating 
effect. 


2.338 Capacity, Refrigerating System — It is the 
cooling effect produced by the change in total enthalpy 
between the refrigerant entering the evaporator and the 
refrigerant leaving the evaporator. 


2.339 Capacity, Refrigerating, Net — It is the 
remaining rate of heat removal from all sources by 
the evaporator of a refrigerating system, at stated 
conditions, after deducting internal and external heat 
transfers to the evaporator that occur before distribution 
of the refrigerating medium and after its return. 


2.340 Capacity, Refrigerating, Useful — It is the 
refrigerating capacity available for the specific ultimate 
cooling function for which the system was designed. 


2.341 Capacity, Refrigerating, Volumetric — It is 
the refrigerating capacity of a system per unit volume 
of refrigerant circulated at the compressor suction. 


2.342 Capillary — It is the action by which the surface 
of a liquid, where it is in contact with a solid (as in a 
slender tube), is raised or lowered. 


2.343 Capillary Tube — In refrigeration practice, it 
is a tube of small internal diameter used as a liquid 
refrigerant flow control or expansion device between 
high and low sides; also used to transmit pressure from 
the sensitive bulb of some temperature controls to the 
operating element. 


2.344 Carbonation — It is the absorption of injected 
carbon dioxide (CO,) into a liquid, usually preceded or 
accompanied by liquid cooling. 


2.345 Carnot Cycle The ideal, reversible 
thermodynamic cycle composed of two isothermal 
processes and two adiabatic processes. The cycle 
represents the maximum, theoretical conversion of heat 
energy into mechanical energy. 


2.346 Carnot-cycle Efficiency — It is the conversion 
of heat to work, which is limited by the temperature at 
which conversion occurs as (T1 — T2)/T1, where T1 is 


the higher absolute temperature where heat is absorbed, 
and T2 is the lower absolute temperature where heat is 
rejected. 


2.347 Cascade Refrigerating System — The system 
having two or more refrigerant circuits, each with a 
pressure-imposing element, condenser, and evaporator, 
where the evaporator of one circuit cools the condenser 
of another (lower temperature) circuit. 


2.348 Casing — It is the enclosure normally housing 
fans, coils, filters, or other components and generally 
made of metal lined where necessary with material for 
thermal insulation and/or acoustic attenuation. 


2.349 Cavitation 


a) It is formation by mechanical forces of vapor 
in liquids; specifically, the formation of vapor 
cavities in the interior or on the solid boundaries 
of liquids in motion, where the pressure is reduced 
to a critical value without a change in ambient 
temperature. 


b 


wm 


formation of cavities on a surface of a solid by 
liquid moving over it with velocity high enough 
to induce erosion of the surface when the cavity 
collapses. c) in pumps, cavitation occurs when the 
pressure of the fluid is below the vapor pressure of 
the fluid at that temperature. Cavitation has been 
described as having marbles or small stones inside 
the impeller casing. Cavitation over an extended 
period of time will erode the impeller and cause 
pump failure. 


2.350 CBR (Chemical, Biological, and/or 
Radiological) — It is generally used with respect to 
airborne contaminants. 


2.351 CDD — [Cooling Degree Day]. See [Degree 
Day]. 


2.352 Ceiling Outlet — A round, square, rectangular, 
or linear air diffuser located in the ceiling which 
provides a horizontal distribution pattern of primary 
and secondary air over the occupied zone and induces 
low velocity secondary air motion through the occupied 
zone. 


2.353 Cellular Elastomeric Thermal Insulation — 
The insulation composed principally of natural or 
synthetic elastomers or both, processed to form a 
flexible, semi rigid orrigid foam, havinga predominately 
closed-cell structure. Insulation is usually expressed in 
k value (Btu/h-ft-°F [w/m-°K]). 


2.354 Cellular Filter — It is air filter of juxtaposed 
square or rectangular elements which can be easily 
dismantled for cleaning or replacement. 


2.355 Cellular Polystyrene Thermal Insulation 
Board — The insulation composed of cellular 
polystyrene in the form of boards, produced by heat 


15 


IS 3615 : 2020 


and pressure from expansion of foamable polystyrene 
beads within a mould (bead board) or by in situ foaming 
of molten polystyrene in an extrusion mode (extruded 
board). 


2.356 Cellular Polyurethane Thermal Insulation — 
It is the insulation composed principally of the catalysed 
reaction product of polyisicyanate and polyhydroxy 
compounds, usually processed with fluorocarbon gas 
to form a rigid foam having a predominately closed- 
cell structure. 


2.357 Celsius Temperature — The temperature scale 
used with the SI system in which the freezing point of 
water is 0°C, the triple point is 0.01°C, and the boiling 
point is 100°C; absolute zero is minus 273.15°C. 
(Formerly referred to as the centigrade scale). 


2.358 Centaxial Fan — It is in-line duct fan with 
centrifugal blades which can develop static pressures 
higher than normal duct fans. Also identified as a 
tubular centrifugal fan. 


2.359 Central Control — It is the ability to control all 
functions from one central location, thereby enabling 
the operator to request and respond to all commands 
from one physical or network location. 


2.360 Centrifugal Compressor — It is a nonpositive 
displacement compressor that depends, in part, on 
centrifugal forces for pressure rise. 


2.361 Centrifugal Exhauster — It is a factory- 
assembled fan consisting of one or several centrifugal 
wheels connected to a motor and enclosed in a housing. 
A back-draft damper can be provided. 


2.362 Centrifugal Fan — It is the fan in which the air 
enters the impeller axially and leaves it substantially in 
a radial direction. Fan rotor or wheel within a scroll- 
type casing (shroud) that includes supports for either 
belt drive or direct connection. Centrifugal-fan-types 
are as follows: forward curve, backwardly inclined 
(backward curved), airfoil, or radial blade design. Fans 
can be provided as single width, single inlet (SWSI) or 
double width, double inlet (DWDJ) configurations and 
are limited to 16 predefined arrangement types based 
on discharge location and rotation. 


2.363 Centrifugal Freeze Drying — It is the process 
in which a liquid product is vacuum frozen while being 
centrifuged in order to avoid foaming. 


2.364 Centrifugal Pump — It is the pump having 
a stationary element (casing) and a rotary element 
(impeller) fitted with vanes or blades arranged in a 
circular pattern around an inlet opening at the centre. 
The casing surrounds the impeller and usually has the 
form of a scroll or volute. Centrifugal pump types are 
inline or base mounted. Pump arrangements are end 
suction, horizontal, or vertical split case. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.365 Centrifuge — It is a device for separating 
substances of different densities by centrifugal action. 


2.366 Certificate of Readiness — It is a document 
stating that all equipment, systems, and controls have 
been correctly installed; operated as specified; tested, 
adjusted, and balanced; and are verified as ready for 
functional performance testing and other acceptance 
procedures. 


2.367 CFC — Chlorofluorocarbon 
2.368 Change of State 


a) It is referred to change from one of the three 
phases, solid, liquid, or gas, to another. 


b) The occurrence in a remote system causing the 
contact of an alarm or status device to move from 
one of two possible positions to the other (for 
example, into alarm, causing the contact of an 
alarm device to close or return to normal, causing 
the contact to open). 


2.369 Changeover— 


a) It is the change from heating to cooling or vice 
versa. 


b) It I the change from one set of controls to another. 


2.370 Changeover Temperature — The outdoor 
temperature the designer selects as the point of 
changeover from cooling to heating by the HVAC 
system. 


2.371 Charge Capacity — It is the amount of heat that 
can be transferred into the storage device at a specified 
rate for a specific set of values for the initial temperature 
of the storage device, the temperature rise of the exiting 
fluid, and the mass flow rate of fluid through the storage 
system. 


2.372 Charge Neutralizer — It is a device that brings 
the charge distribution of the aerosol to a Boltzmann 
charge distribution. This represents the charge 
distribution of the ambient aerosol. 


2.373 Charge Test Time — It is the duration of a 
single transient test in which energy is added to the 
storage device. 


2.374 Charging Connection — It is the device to 
enable a refrigerating system to be charged with 
refrigerant. Also, the tube or hose through which 
charging is accomplished. 


2.375 Charging Valve — It is the valve used to charge 
or add refrigerant to a system or add oil to a compressor 
crankcase. 


2.376 Charles’ law — This law states that, at constant 
pressure, the volume of a fixed mass or quantity of 
gas varies directly with the absolute temperature. Also 
known as Gay-Lussac’s law. 


16 


2.377 Check Valve — It is the valve allowing fluid 
flow in one direction only. (also known as nonreturn 
valve). When flow is initiated, the force of the fluid 
flowing opens a disc from its seating surface, allowing 
flow. Upon deactivation of flow, the disc returns the 
valve seat and does not allow backflow. There are two 
main types of check valves: swing-check valves and 
lift-check valves. 


2.378 Chemically Active or Toxic — These are the 
materials corrosive or in-themselves toxic or productive 
of poisonous gases or fluids. Flammable or explosive 
materials easily ignited, including materials known to 
be fire producers or explosives. 


2.379 Chill — It is a process of refrigeration moderately, 
as to meats, without freezing. 


2.380 Chilled Beam Systems — It is the chilled ceiling 
systems have a very low profile (often flush with the 
ceiling) and work by means of convection heat transfer 
and induced air movement in the room in which they 
are placed. Chilled ceilings lack the ability to control 
the humidity or provide ventilation and must be paired 
with a ventilation system in order to maintain latent 
heat gains. 


2.381 Chilled Water — The water used as a cooling 
medium (particularly in air-conditioning systems or in 
processes) at below ambient temperature. 


2.382 Chiller (Drip Tray) — A drawer or receptacle 
located directly beneath the refrigerated surfaces of 
a manual or semi-automatic defrosting refrigerator 
for chilling of food and/or water collecting during 
defrosting. It may also serve as a baffle to regulate 
compartment temperature. 


2.383 Chiller (Drip Tray) Volume — It is the 
product of the mean inside width and length of the 
tray and the mean height between the inside bottom 
of the tray and the outside bottom of the surface of 
the refrigerated plate or coil when the tray is in its 
lowest position. 


2.384 Chilling (Cooling) — It is the process of lowering 
of the temperature of a substance by the removal of 
heat in the temperature range above freezing. 


2.385 Chilling Room — It is a room where products 
are cooled prior to cold storage. 


2.386 Chlorofluorocarbon— 


a) It is generally, any of several compounds 
composed of carbon, fluorine, and chlorine, used 
chiefly as refrigerants and as blowing agents 
in plastic foams. Compare to [[fluorocarbon]]; 
[[halocarbon]]. 

b) It is a fully halogenated (no hydrogen remaining) 
halocarbon containing chlorine, fluorine, and 
carbon atoms. 


2.387 Chronic Toxicity — It is adverse health effect(s) 
from long-term, repeated exposures. This information 
is used, in part, to establish [[TLV-TWA]], [[PEL]], or 
consistent indices. 


2.388 Circulating Fan — It is the free flow propeller 
fan designed to circulate the air in a room without any 
air duct. 


2.389 Circulation-type Evaporator — The flooded 
evaporator comprising a low-pressure receiver, in 
which the unvaporized refrigerant returns to the 
evaporator inlet by gravity or by means of a pump or 
an ejector. 


2.390 Circulator — It is a small pump, typically 
fractional horsepower. 


2.391 Class of Construction — For the building 
envelope, this is a subcategory of roof, above-grade 
wall, below-grade wall, floor, slab-on-grade floor, 
opaque door, vertical fenestration, or skylight. 


2.392 Class of Refrigerating System — This phrase 
formerly in extensive use but now becoming obsolete 
as a result of code change to classification. Systems are 
classified according to the degree of probability that a 
leakage of refrigerant will enter occupied areas. The 
two classifications are high probability system or low 
probability system. 


2.393 Clean Space — A defined area in which the 
concentration of airborne particles is controlled within 
specified limits; air that has been treated to remove 
pollutants, particulates, and odours. 


2.394 Cleanroom — It is the specially constructed, 
enclosed area environmentally controlled with respect 
to airborne particulates, temperature, humidity, air 
pressure, air-pressure flow patterns, air motion, 
vibration, viable organisms, and lighting. 


2.395 Clear Ice — The block ice obtained by agitating 
water during freezing and subsequently removing, by 
suction, the core of unfrozen water where impurities 
are concentrated (also known as crystal ice). 


2.396 Clear Zone — When outlets are placed within or 
near the test zone, a clear zone is defined as the space 
around the outlet within which long-term occupancy is 
not recommended. 


2.397 Clearance — It is the distance between the 
item requiring maintenance and the closest interfering 
surface. 


2.398 Clo—Aunit used to express the thermal insulation 
provided by garments and clothing ensembles, where 
1 Clo = 0.88 ft2-h-°F/Btu (0.155 m?-°C/W). 


2.399 Clo Unit — It is the unit of measurement of the 
insulation or thermal resistance of clothing. 


17 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.400 Closed Crankcase Compressor — It is the 
enclosure in which the crankcase is completely sealed 
from the atmosphere but connected with the low- 
pressure side of the system. 


2.401 Closed Cycle — A refrigeration system where 
the fluid is used without introduction of new fluid. 


2.402 Closed Process — It is a series of changes of 
state in a system at the termination of which the system 
is reverted to its original state. 


2.403 Closed System — A heating or refrigerating 
piping system in which circulating water or brine 
is completely enclosed, under pressure above 
atmospheric, and shut off from the atmosphere, except 
that the expansion/compression tank could be open to 
the atmosphere. 


2.404 Closed-loop Control 


a) The control system in which the effect of the 
control action on the controlled variable is sensed 
and used by the controller to provide a new output 
(also known as feedback control). Compare to 
[[open-loop control]]. 


b) It is the signal path that includes a forward path, 
a feedback path, and a summing point and that 
forms a closed circuit. 


2.405 Clothing/Ensemble Insulation — It is the 
resistance to sensible heat transfer provided by a 
clothing ensemble. Expressed in Clo units. 

NOTE — The definition of clothing insulation relates to heat 


transfer from the whole body and, thus, also includes the 
uncovered parts of the body, such as head and hands. 


2.406 Cloud Point — It is the temperature at which 
a clear liquid becomes hazy or cloudy due to the 
formation of crystals or particles when tested under 
standardized conditions. 


2.407 Coanda Effect — It is the characteristic of an 
airstream that causes it to cling to the surface along 
which it flows. The velocity of the airstream as it passes 
along the surface generates low pressures. This action 
causes surrounding air to be aspirated. 


2.408 Coaxial Condenser — It is the water-cooled 
condenser in which water and refrigerant flow in 
parallel paths but in opposite directions. 


2.409 Cock Valve — It is generally a plug valve, 
usually for regulating the flow of a fluid, and requiring 
a wrench for operating. 


2.410 Coefficient of Performance (COP) (Heat 
Pump) — It is the ratio of the rate of heat delivered 
to the rate of energy input, in consistent units, for a 
complete operating heat pump plant or some specific 
portion of that plant, under designated operating 
conditions. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.411 Coefficient of Performance (COP) 
(Refrigerating) — It is the ratio of the rate of 
heat removal to the rate of household combination 
refrigerator -freezers operating energy input, in 
consistent units, for a complete at average temperatures 
between — 12°C and 0°C shall refrigerating plant or 
some specific portion of that be considered part of the 
general refrigerated plant, under designated operating 
conditions compartment. 


2.412 Coefficient of Performance(COP), Compressor, 
Heat Pump — It is the ratio of the compressor heating 
effect (heat pump) to the rate of energy input to the shaft 
of the compressor, in consistent units, in a complete heat 
pump, under designated operating conditions. 


2.413 Coefficient of Performance (COP), 
Compressor, Refrigerating — It is the ratio of the 
compressor refrigerating effect to the rate of energy 
input to the shaft of the compressor, in consistent units, 
in a complete refrigerating plant, under designated 
operating conditions. 


2.414 Cogeneration — The sequential production of 
either electrical or mechanical power and useful thermal 
energy (heating or cooling) from a single energy form. 


2.415 Coil — A cooling or heating element made of 
pipe or tubing with or without external fins. 


2.416 Coil, Direct Expansion — It is a coil using the 
direct method of refrigeration. 


2.417 Coil, Expansion — An evaporator constructed 
of pipe or tubing. 


2.418 Coincident Demand — The metered demand of 
a device, circuit, or building that occurs at the same 
time as the peak demand of the building or facility or at 
the same time as some other peak of interest, such as a 
utility’s system load. This should properly be expressed 
so as to indicate the peak of interest (for example, 
“demand coincident with the building peak’). 


2.419 Colburn Heat Transfer Equation — It is the 
dimensionless heat transfer equation used in calculating 
natural convection movement of heat from vertical 
surfaces or horizontal cylinders to fluids (gases or 
liquids) flowing past these surfaces. The symbol is jH. 


2.420 Colburn Mass Transfer Equation — The 
dimensionless mass transfer equation consisting of the 
Sherwood number divided by the Reynolds number 
and the Schmidt number to the 1/3 power. The symbol 
is jD. 

2.421 Cold Storage — It is a process of preserving 
perishables on a large scale by refrigeration. 


2.422 Collector Cover Glazing — The material 
covering the aperture to provide thermal and 
environmental protection. 


18 


2.423 Collector Time Constant — The time required 
for the fluid leaving a solar collector to attain 63.2 
percent of its steady-state change following a step 
change in irradiance. 


2.424 Collector-loop Heater — A heater installed 
within the collector loop when testing the solar 
domestic-water heating system with a nonirradiated 
array. 


2.425 Collimation Angle — It is the angle within 
which the radiation beams from the source depart from 
the line drawn from the source to the receiver. 


2.426 Color Temperature — It is the temperature of a 
perfect radiator (blackbody) that would emit the same 
relative intensity at two wavelengths (usually red and 
green lights) as the relative intensity radiated by the 
subject surface. 


2.427 Combination Control — The control device in 
which one or more control variables are being monitored 
(such as a combination high- and low-pressure control 
for a refrigerant system). 


2.428 Combination Space-Heating and Water- 
Heating Appliance — A unit that is designed to 
provide space heating and potable water heating from a 
single, primary energy source. 


2.429 Combined Appliance — It is an assembly 
consisting of a heat pump or air conditioner, a 
desuperheater, a water heater, and if required, a potable 
water pump; the assembly provides space conditioning 
and domestic hot water. 


2.430 Combined Cycle Gas Turbine — It is the 
device that uses waste heat boilers to capture exhaust 
energy for steam generation. 


2.431 Combined Heat and Power System (CHP) — 
The system combining power production with the use 
of a lower-quality heat by-product of power generation 
for district heating. 


2.432 Combined Panel — A complete ceiling panel 
that is designed and can be independently installed and 
operated for both sensible cooling and sensible heating 
of an indoor space through heat transfer between the 
thermally effective panel surfaces and the occupants 
and/or the indoor space by thermal radiation and natural 
convection. 


2.433 Combined Performance Factor Cooling 
Season (CPFCS) — It is the seasonal coefficient of 
performance of the combined appliance when used 
to meet both the space-cooling and domestic water- 
heating loads that occur during the space-cooling 
season. The quantity is dimensionless. 


2.434 Combined Radiative and Convective Surface 
Coefficient — It is the constant of proportionality 


relating the rate of combined convective and radiative 
heat transfer at a surface to the temperature difference 
across the air film on that surface. 


2.435 Combined Section of an Air-handling Unit — 
It is the section within which two or more functions are 
combined. 


2.436 Combined Space-Heating and Water-Heating 
Mode — It is an operating mode where the heat pump 
is space heating and the desuperheater is heating 
domestic water. 


2.437 Combined Surface Coefficient 
[Combined Radiative and Convective 
Coefficient]. 


See 
Surface 


2.438 Comfort Chart — It is a chart showing effective 
temperatures with dry-bulb temperatures and humidity 
(and sometimes air motion) by which the effects of 
various air conditions on human comfort may be 
compared. 


2.439 Comfort Cooling — Refrigeration used for 
comfort as opposed to refrigeration used for storage or 
manufacture. 


2.440 Comfort Line — It is a line on the comfort chart 
showing relation between the effective temperature and 
the percentage of adult feeling comfortable. 


2.441 Comfort Zone — Average of the range of 
effective temperatures over which the majority (50 
percent or more) of adults feel comfortable; extreme of 
the range of effective temperatures over which one or 
more adults feel comfortable. 


2.442 Comfortable Extreme — It is the range of 
effective temperatures over which one or more adults 
feel comfortable. 


2.443 Commercial Refrigerator 


a) A refrigerated enclosure containing goods which 
are accessible to the exterior through a door. 


b) The types of refrigerators used commercially, 
including reach-ins, walk-ins, and refrigerated 
display cases (all types being either service 
or self-service, which are used by business 
establishments). 


2.444 Commercial System — It is heating, cooling, or 
refrigerating system used in a commercial or business 
place. 


2.445 Compartment, Freezer — The compartment 
in a household refrigerator designed for short-term 
storage of food at temperatures below 0°C. In a 
household combination refrigerator-freezer, it is 
that compartment(s) designed for storage of foods at 
temperatures of —12° C average or lower. In a household 
freezer, it is that compartment or compartments 


19 


IS 3615 : 2020 


designed for extended storage of frozen foods at a 
recommended rating temperature of —18 °C, having 
inherent capability for the freezing of food. 


2.446 Compartment, General Refrigerated — The 
general refrigerated compartment(s) in a household 
refrigerator, ‘all-refrigerator’, or combination 
refrigerator-freezer is that compartment(s) designed 
for the refrigerated storage of food at an average 
temperature above 0°C. Special compartments 
designed for the storage of fresh foods to temperatures 
near 0°C shall be considered part of the general 
refrigerated compartment. Special compartments of 
household combination refrigerator-freezers operating 
at average temperatures between —12 °C and 0°C 
shall be considered part of the general refrigerated 
compartment. 


2.447 Compartments, Butter, Margarine, or 
Cheese — Compartments provided for the storage of 
butter, margarine, or cheese. 


2.448 Compartments, Special — Those compartments 
designed for maintaining special environmental 
conditions for an articular type of product or purpose. 


2.449 Component Direct Evaporative Cooler — A 
self-contained cabinet without a fan whose primary 
functions are: 


a) the conversion of the sensible heat of unsaturated 
air passing through the cabinet to latent heat by 
the process of evaporating recirculating or non- 
recirculating water directly exposed to this air; and 


b) the movement of this air through the cabinet that 
allows a portion of this water to evaporate. 


2.450 Component of Ventilation or Air Condition- 
ing — The single, functional element forming a part of 
a ventilation or an air-conditioning installation. 


2.451 Compound Compression — The compression 
that is accomplished by stages, as in two or more 
cylinders in series. 


2.452 Compound Compressor — The compressor in 
which compression is accomplished by stages, as in 
two or more cylinders. 


2.453 Compound Gauge — The pressure gage that 
indicates pressures above and below atmospheric 
pressure. 


2.454 Compound-Refrigerating System — It is a 
multistage refrigerating system where a single charge of 
refrigerant circulates through all stages of compression. 


2.455 Compressibility — It is ease with which a 
fluid may be reduced in volume by the application of 
pressure. Compressibility depends on the state of the 
fluid as well as the type of the fluid itself. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.456 Compressibility Factor — This is relative 
variation of the departure from the perfect gas laws. 


2.457 Compressing Cycle — The refrigerating cycle 
composed of four principal stages: 


a) vaporization of the refrigerant, 
b) compression of the vapor, 

c) liquefaction of the vapor, and 
d) expansion of the liquid. 


2.458 Compression — In a compression refrigeration 
system, it is a process by which the pressure of the 
refrigerant is increased. 


2.459 Compression Efficiency — It is the ratio of 
work required to compress, and reversibility, all the 
vapour delivered by a compressor (per stage) to the 
actual work delivered to the vapour by the piston or 
bladder of the compressor. 


2.460 Compression, Compound — It is the process of 
compression by stages in two or more cylinders. 


2.461 Compression, Dual — Split suction valving 
arrangement on compressor for carrying two suction 
pressures. 


2.462 Compression, Multistage — It is the process of 
compression in two or more steps, where the discharge 
of one earlier stage compressor is connected with the 
suction of next higher stage compressor. 


2.463 Compressor Unit, Refrigerant — A 
refrigerating component designed to compress a 
specific refrigerant vapour, consisting of compressor, 
prime mover, and regularly furnished accessories. 


2.464 Compressor, Booster — It is a compressor for 
very low pressures, usually discharging into the suction 
line of another compressor. 


2.465 Compressor, Centrifugal — A nonpositive 
displacement compressor which depends for pressure 
rise, at least in part, on centrifugal effect. 


2.466 Compressor, Compound — It is a compressor 
in which compression is accomplished by stages, as in 
two or more cylinders. 


2.467 Compressor, Double Acting — One which 
has two compression strokes per revolution of the 
crankshaft per cylinder that is, both faces of the piston 
are working faces. 


2.468 Compressor, Double Suction — It is split 
suction; valving arrangement on compressors for 
carrying two suction pressures. 


2.469 Compressor, Horizontal — It is a compressor 
with horizontal cylinder or, in small sizes, with 
horizontal crankshaft. 


20 


2.470 Compressor, Motor, Sealed (Hermetic Type) 
— A combination consisting of a compressor and motor, 
both of which are enclosed in the same housing, with 
no external shaft or shaft seals, the motor operating in 
the refrigerant. 


2.471 Compressor, Open-Type — It is a refrigerant 
compressor with a shaft or other moving part extending 
through its casing to be driven by an outside source of 
power, thus requiring a shaft seal or equivalent rubbing 
contact between a fixed and moving part. 


2.472 Compressor, Positive Displacement — It is a 
refrigerant compressor in which increase of refrigerant 
gas or vapour pressure is attained by changing the 
internal volume of the compression chamber. 


2.473 Compressor, Reciprocating — It is a positive 
displacement compressor in which the change in 
internal volume of the compression chamber(s) is 
accomplished by the reciprocating motion of one or 
more pistons. 


2.474 Compressor, Refrigerant — It is a component 
of a refrigerating system which increases the pressure 
of a compressible refrigerant fluid and simultaneously 
reduces its volume, while moving the fluid through the 
device. 


2.475 Compressor, Refrigerant, Accessible Hermetic 
(Semi-hermetic) — It is a hermetic refrigerant 
compressor whose housing is seated by one or more 
gasketed joints and is provided with mean of access for 
servicing internal parts in the field. 


2.476 Compressor, Refrigerant, Mechanical — It is 
a mechanically operated component of a refrigerating 
system which draws in refrigerant in a gaseous state 
and discharges it at a higher pressure. 


2.477 Compressor, Refrigerant, Welded Hermetic, 
Sealed Unit — A hermetic refrigerant compressor 
whose housing is permanently sealed by welding 
or brazing and is not provided with means of access 
for servicing internal parts in the field. Or, a motor 
compressor assembly having the compressor contained 
within a gas-tight casing through which no shaft 
extends. Drive is usually by a motor within the same 
casing but may be induced by external means. 


2.478 Compressor, Rotary — It is a positive 
displacement compressor in which the change in 
internal volume of the compression chamber(s) is 
accomplished by the rotary motion of a positive 
displacement member(s). 


2.479 Compressor, Screw — It is a positive 
displacement compressor in which pressure is 
increased by contrarotating intermeshing screw from 
members. 


2.480 Compressor, Scroll It is a positive 
displacement compressor in which scroll compressor 
has one scroll or spiral orbiting in path defined by a 
matching fixed scroll. The fixed scroll is attached to 
the compressor body. The orbiting scroll is couple to 
the crankshaft in orbit rather than rotated. The orbiting 
motion creates a series of gas pockets traveling 
between the two scrolls. On the outer portion of 
the scroll the pocket draw in gas, and then move it 
to centre of the scroll where it’s discharged. As the 
gas moves in the increasing smaller inner pocket, 
the temperature and pressure increase to the desired 
discharged pressure 


2.481 Compressor, Single-Acting — It is a compressor 
in which one compression stroke per revolution of the 
crank for each cylinder takes place. 


2.482 Compressor, Vertical — It is a compressor with 
a vertical cylinder or, cylinders in small sizes, with a 
vertical crankshaft. 


2.483 Computer and Data Processing Room 
(CDPR) Unitary Air Conditioner — It is a unitary air 
conditioner, for a computer and data processing room, 
consisting of one or more assemblies that include a DX 
evaporator or chilled-water cooling coil, an air-moving 
device, and air-filtering devices. The air conditioner 
may include a compressor, condenser, humidifier, or 
reheating device. 


2.484 Concealed Fixing — The installation of an 
air-terminal device where the attachment to the duct, 
wall, or ceiling is hidden from view to room occupants. 


2.485 Concentration — It is a number specifying the 
composition of a solution with respect to the constituent 
names, as gram salt per litre of brine. 


2.486 Condensate The liquid formed by 
condensation of a vapour. In steam heating, water 
condensed from steam; in air conditioning, water 
extracted from air, as by condensation on the cooling 
coil of a refrigeration machine. 


2.487 Condensation — It is the process of changing 
a vapour into liquid by the extraction of heat. 
Condensation of steam or water vapour is affected in 
either steam condensers or dehumidifying coils and the 
resulting water is called condensate. 


2.488 Condenser (Refrigerant) — A heat exchanger 
in which the refrigerant, compressed to a suitable 
pressure, is condensed by rejection of heat to an 
appropriate external cooling medium. 


2.489 Condenser, Air Cooled Refrigerant — It is 
a refrigerant condenser in which heat rejection is 
accomplished entirely by raising the temperature of the 
air used as a cooling medium. 


21 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.490 Condenser, Atmospheric Refrigerant — It is a 
condenser cooled with water which is exposed to the 
atmosphere. 


2.491 Condenser, Evaporative Refrigerant — A 
refrigerant condenser in which part of the heat rejection 
may be accomplished by raising the temperature of an 
air steam passing over a heat exchange surface and the 
remainder by evaporation of water sprayed or otherwise 
distributed over the heat exchange surface. 


2.492 Condenser, Open-Shell-and-Tube — It is a 
condenser in which the cooling fluid usually water 
passes through a number of tubes in order to liquefy the 
refrigerant passing through the shell. 


2.493 Condenser, Secondary — It is the condenser of 
a secondary system, also, a condenser and a secondary 
system where the condenser is cooled by the evaporator 
of the secondary system. 


2.494 Condenser, Submerged — Condenser piping 
submerged in a bath of condenser water. 


2.495 Condenser, Water-Cooled Refrigerant — It 
is a refrigerant condenser in which heat rejection is 
accomplished entirely by raising the temperature of the 
water used as a cooling medium. 


2.496 Condensing Refrigerating Effect — The 
condensing heat added to the refrigerant vapour in the 
refrigerant compressor unit. 


2.497 Condensing Unit, Hermetically Sealed — 
A sealed condensing unit in which the housing is 
permanently sealed by welding or brazing and is not 
provided with means of access for servicing internal 
parts in the field. 


2.498 Condensing Unit, Mechanical, Performance 
Factor — It is the ratio of its capacity to its energy 
input, expressed in kcal/k Wh. 


2.499 Condensing Unit, Refrigerant — An assembly 
of refrigerating components designed to compress and 
liquefy a specific refrigerant, consisting of one or more 
refrigerant. 


2.500 Condensing Unit, Service-Sealed — A sealed 
condensing unit in which the housing is sealed by one 
or more gaskets and means of access are provided for 
servicing internal parts in the field. 


2.501 Condition, Steady State, Refrigerator — 
Steady state condition shall be considered to be 
established during a stabilization period under either 
cyclic or continuous conditions when: 


a) the average general refrigerated compartment 
temperature in household refrigerators, ‘all 
refrigerators’, or combination refrigerator-freezers 


IS 3615 : 2020 


does not vary more than 0.6°C in two cycles (if 
cycling occurs) or in 2 h, whichever is longer; 


b) the average general refrigerated compartment 
temperature in household refrigerators, ‘all 
refrigerators’, or combination refrigerator- 
freezers does not vary more than 0.6°C in two 
cycles (if cycling occurs) or in 2h, whichever is 
longer; and 


c) The average frozen food temperature in household 
refrigerators, combination refrigerator-freezers, 
or household freezers is changing at a rate not 
exceeding 0.6°C in 24 h, based on temperature 
observations covering a period of not less than 8 h. 


2.502 Conditioned Air — The air treated to control 
its temperature, relative humidity, purity, pressure, and 
movement (also treated air). 


2.503 Conditioned Space — It is that part of a building 
that is heated and/or cooled and/or humidity controlled 
for the comfort of occupants. 


2.504 Conditions, Steady — An operating state of a 
system, including its surroundings, in which the extent 
of change with the time of all the significant parameters 
is so small as to have no important effect on the 
performance being observed or measured. 


2.505 Conductance, Surface Film — It is the time 
rate of heat flow per unit area under steady conditions 
between a surface and a fluid for unit temperature 
difference between the surface and the fluid. 


2.506 Conductance, Thermal — It is the time rate 
of heat flow through a body (frequently per unit area) 
from one of its bounding surfaces to the other for a unit 
temperature difference between the two surfaces, under 
steady conditions. 


2.507 Conduction, Thermal — It is the process of heat 
transfer through a material medium in which kinetic 
energy is transmitted by the particles of the material 
from particle to particle without gross displacement of 
the particles. 


2.508 Conductivity, Thermal — It is the time rate 
of heat flow through unit area and unit thickness of 
a homogeneous material under steady conditions 
when a unit temperature gradient is maintained in 
the direction perpendicular to area. Materials are 
considered homogeneous when the value of the thermal 
conductivity is not affected by variation in thickness or 
in size of the sample within the range normally used in 
construction. 


2.509 Connection in Parallel — The system in which 
flow is divided among two or more channels from a 
common starting point or header. 


2.510 Connection in Series — The system in which 
flow through two or more channels is in a single path 


22 


entering each succeeding channel only after leaving the 
first or previous channel. 


2.511 Console Air Conditioner — See [packaged air 
conditioner]. 


2.512 Constant Cut-In — It is used in refrigerating 
devices constructed to permit the cut-in point to remain 
constant while providing a variable cut-out (variable 
differential) range when the setting is changed. 


2.513 Constant Pressure Expansion Valve — 
The valve that maintains a constant output pressure 
regardless of the input pressure. 


2.514 Constant-level Valve — It is a device for 
maintaining within a reservoir a constant level of fluid 
(for example, oil fuel for delivery to an oil burner). 


2.515 Contact Cooling — The cooling achieved by 
direct contact with a cold surface. 


2.516 Contact Freezing 


a) Acontact freezer is a freezer in which the product 
is frozen by contact with a refrigerated surface. 


b) Freezing of produce by direct contact with a 
refrigerated surface. Crust freezing (shell freezing) 
is very quick freezing of the outer part of a product 
(mainly poultry), and final freezing is completed 
by conventional methods. 


2.517 Contact Icing — The process of chilling in 
which finely crushed ice is placed in direct contact with 
the product in its unpacked or packed state. 


2.518 Continuous Insulation (ci) — Insulation that 
is continuous across all structural members without 
thermal bridges other than fasteners and service 
openings. It is installed on the interior or exterior or is 
integral to any opaque surface of the building envelope. 


2.519 Contra-rotating Fan — It is a technique 
whereby parts of a mechanism rotate in opposite 
directions about a common axis, usually to minimise 
the effect of torque. 


2.520 Control — It is any manual or automatic device 
for regulation of a system or component in normal 
operation. If automatic, the implication is that it is 
responsive to changes of pressure, temperature, or any 
other property whose magnitude is to be regulated. 


2.521 Control, Dual Effect — It is a control responsive 
to temperatures of two zones or to two variable 
conditions. 


2.522 Controlled Atmosphere Storage (Gas 
Storage) — It is the artificial addition of carbon 
dioxide to the atmosphere, particularly in large 
concentration, with no attempt to regulate the amount 
of oxygen. 


2.523 Controller, High Pressure — A pressure 
controller designed to control the pressure at a selected 
point on the high-pressure side of a refrigerating 
system. 


2.524 Controller, Low Pressure — A pressure 
controller designed to control the pressure at a selected 
point on the low-pressure side of a refrigerating system. 


2.525 Controller, Pressure — It is an automatic 
control device actuated by pressure, designated to be 
responsive to pressure convection, transfer of heat by 
the movement of fluid. 


2.526 Convection, Forced — Convection resulting 
from forced circulation of a fluid, as by a fan, jet, or 


pump. 


2.527 Convection, Natural Circulation or 
movement of gas or liquid (usually air or water) taking 
place due to differences in density resulting from 
temperature changes. 


2.528 Convective Film Coefficient — The constant 
of proportionality relating the convective rate of heat 
transfer at a surface to the temperature difference across 
the air film on that surface. 


2.529 Convector — An agency of convection. In 
heat transfer, a surface designed to transfer its heat to 
a surrounding fluid largely or wholly by convection. 
The heated fluid may be removed mechanically or by 
gravity (gravity connector). Such a surface may or may 
not be enclosed or concealed. 


2.530 Cool — To remove heat in an environment 
generally at a temperature not below —1°C (33°F). 
Compare to [[refrigerant]]. 


2.531 Cooling Efficiency Ratio (CER) — It is a ratio 
calculated by using the formula: 
CER = (C+ FEVE 

where: 

C= cooling capacity, Btu/h (W), 

FE = fan electrical input, 

E= total electrical input (W). 

2.532 Cool Down The reduction of space 


temperature down to occupied setpoint after a period of 
shutdown or setup. 


2.533 Cooling Load Factor (CLF) — This factor is 
used to represent the temperature difference between 
indoor and outdoor air with the inclusion of the heating 
effects of solar radiation 


2.534 Cool Storage — Technology or systems used to 
store cooling capacity. Normally applies to comfort or 
air-conditioning applications. 


23 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.535 Coolant — A single-phase fluid (usually a liquid) 
used for transferring heat from one place to another. 
Sometimes referred to as heat transfer fluid, brine, and/ 
or secondary refrigerant (see [[refrigerant]]). 


2.536 Cooler, Brine (Water) — Evaporator for cooling 
brine in an indirect system. 


2.537 Cooler, Cold Storage — An insulated room 
maintained at 0°C or above. 


2.538 Cooler, Non-priming — Tubes are omitted from 
with a medium held at a temperature lower than that 
the top segment of the shell leaving a gas space above 
of the air. Cooling may be accompanied by moisture 
the tubes about equal to one-fourth of the inside shell 
addition (evaporation), by moisture extraction diameter 
(dehumidification), or by no change whatever of 
moisture content. 


2.539 Cooler, Oil — It is a heat exchanger for the 
purpose of cooling oil in lubrication system. 


2.540 Cooler, Sensible Heat — It is a form of 
cooling surface using water, brine, or direct expansion 
refrigerant. It is always located on the leaving side of 
the dehydrator but frequently treats in addition a large 
volume of room air which is not circulated through the 
dehydrator for moisture reduction. 


2.541 Cooling Coil — It is an arrangement of pipe or 
tubing which transfers heat from air to a refrigerant or 
brine. 


2.542 Cooling Effect, Sensible, Air Cooler — It is 
the difference between the total cooling effect and the 
dehumidifying effect in kcal/h. 


2.543 Cooling Effect, Total, Air Cooler — It is the 
difference between the total enthalpy of the dry air 
and water vapour mixture entering the cooler per hour 
and the total enthalpy of the dry air and water vapour 
mixture leaving the cooler per hour, expressed in kcal/h. 


2.544 Cooling Element — It is the heat transfer 
surface containing refrigerating fluid in the location 
where refrigerating effect is desired. 


2.545 Cooling Medium — Any substance whose 
temperature is such, that it is used with or without a 
change of state, to lower the temperature of other 
bodies or substances. 


2.546 Cooling of Air — Reduction in air temperature 
due to the abstraction of heat as a result of contact 
with a medium held at a temperature lower than that 
of the air. Cooling may be accompanied by moisture 
addition (evaporation), by moisture extraction 
(dehumidification), or by no change whatever of 
moisture content. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.547 Cooling Power — It is the maximum rate of 
heat-removal from a cooling plant operating under 
normal conditions. 


2.548 Cooling Range — In a water cooling device, it is 
the difference between the average temperature of the 
water entering the device and the average temperature 
of the water leaving it. 


2.549 Cooling, Direct Method of — It is a system 
in which the evaporator is in direct contact with 
the material or space refrigerated or is located in air 
circulating passages communicating with such spaces. 


2.550 Cooling, Evaporative — It is the process of 
evaporating part of a liquid by supplying the necessary 
latent heat from the sensible heat of the main bulb of 
the liquid which is thus cooled. 


2.551 Cooling, Indirect Method — It is a system 
in which a liquid, such as brine or water, cooled by 
the refrigerant, is circulated to the material or space 
refrigerated or is used to cool air so circulated. 


2.552 Cooling, Regenerative — It is the process of 
utilizing heat which must be rejected or absorbed in one 
part of the cycle to perform a useful function in another 
part of the cycle by heat transfer. 


2.553 Cooling, Surface — It is a method of cooling air 
of other gas by passing it over cold surfaces. 


2.554 COP Degradation Factor (CDF) — This is a 
multiplier (<1) applied to the full-load system COP or 
COP2. CDF is a function of part-load ratio (also see 
[[part-load ratio]]). 


2.555 Core Sucking and Filling System — A 
combination consisting of a pump, distributing piping, 
hose, and device by which water containing impurities 
may be withdrawn from the unfrozen core of an ice 
block, and by means of connection to the source of 
water supply; the core may be refilled with pure water. 


2.556 Corrected Effective Temperature — The 
effective temperature corrected by accounting for the 
effect of radiation. See also [[operative temperature]]. 


2.557 Corrosion — The rusting or deterioration of a 
substance (usually a metal) because of a reaction to its 
environment. 


2.558 Corrosion Inhibitor 


a) Typically, a chemical agent that protects internal 
machine parts from the corrosive effects of 
the absorbent solution in the presence of an air 
chemical agent that slows corrosion of metal parts 
of a system. 


b) It is substance added to a brine or other cooling 
medium. 


24 


2.559 Corrosivity — The capacity of an environment 
or environmental factor to bring about destruction of a 
specific metal by the process of corrosion. 


2.560 Counter Flow Heat Exchanger — The heat 
exchanger in which fluids flow in opposite directions 
approximately parallel to each other; inlets for the two 
fluids are at opposite ends of the exchanger. 


2.561 Counter Flow Heat Transfer — The directional 
pattern of the heat transfer fluids used in energy-exchange 
equipment where the warmest fluid ‘A’ indirectly 
contacts the warmest fluid ‘B’ at the entering side of the 
equipment and the coldest fluid ‘A’ indirectly contacts 
the coldest fluid ‘B’ at the leaving side of the equipment. 
Most energy exchange equipment is designed to use 
this method of heat transfer as it creates the highest log 
mean temperature difference (LMTD). When an energy 
exchange equipment is designed for counter flow heat 
transfer, and it is correctly connected in the field, the 
results would be loss in heat transfer capacity. 


2.562 Counter flow tower — One in which air, drawn 
in through air inlets at the tower perimeter (induced 
draft) or forced in (forced draft) at the base by the fan 
flows up through the fill material in a direction opposite 
to the falling hot water. 


2.563 Cowl — It is the air terminal device intended 
to be installed above a natural ventilation exhaust 
duct with the aim (by creating negative pressure and 
depending on wind speed) of avoiding reverse flow and 
increasing flow rate. It may or may not have moving 
parts. 


2.564 Creep Action — It is slow make/break action 
of a switch mechanism in a controller, as differentiated 
from snap action or toggle action. 


2.565 Critical Velocity — It is the velocity above 
which fluid flow is turbulent. 


2.566 Cross Connection 


a) The connection between supply and return line in 
a hydronic system. May be used to balance system 
pressure, maintain a minimum circulation flow 
rate or temperature, etc. 

b In a piping system, a connection in which a pipe 
carrying potable water is connected to a closed 
vessel (or system) that is above atmospheric 
pressure and that contains nonportable fluid. This 
is typically the point where a backflow preventer 
is required. 


2.567 Cross Pipe — The fitting with four branches in 
the same plane with right angles between them. 


2.568 Cross Ventilation 


a) The natural ventilation in which the airflow mainly 
results from wind pressure effects on the building 


facades and where stack effects in the building are 
of less importance. 


a) Itis type of ventilating with air supply and exhaust 
points at opposite sides of ventilated space. 


2.569 Cross-Connection Control Backflow 
Prevention — The installation of a backflow preventer 
or a vacuum breaker at each cross connection on a 
premise to protect both premise system and the main 
system. 


2.570 Crossflow Heat Exchanger — The heat 
exchanger in which fluids flow perpendicular to each 
other. Compare to [[Counter flow Heat Exchanger]]. 


2.571 Crossflow Tower — The tower in which air, 
drawn or forced in through the air intakes by a fan, 
flows horizontally across the fill section perpendicular 
to the falling hot water. 


2.572 Crossover — It is migration between airstreams. 


2.573 Crosstalk — This is undesirable transfer of 
energy from active signal line(s) to one or more 
independent signal lines, creating signals that may 
reach proportions to cause system errors. 


2.574 Cryocooling (Cryogenic Cooling) — It is 
cooling below —153°C (—244°F, 120 K). 


2.575 Cryogenic Liquid — Liquefied gas below 
—153°C (-244°F, 120°K). 


2.576 Cryogenics — The science that deals with the 
production of very low temperatures and their effect on 
the properties of matter. 


2.577 Cryogrinding Process (Freeze Grinding) — 
It is grinding at a low temperature of a substance that 
otherwise could not be ground or would be spoiled by 
the temperature rise resulting from the operation. 


2.578 Cryohydrate — A frozen mixture of water and 
salt; brine mixed in eutectic proportions to give the 
lowest freezing point. 


2.579 Cryopump — It is a device designed for 
producing an ultrahigh vacuum by condensation or 
adsorption of a gas at a very low temperature, usually 
below —196°C (—320°F, 77 K). 


2.580 Cryostat — A batch operating apparatus in 
which a cryogenic liquid or solid evaporates to maintain 
a cryotemperature, which need not be constant but may 
vary in a predetermined fashion. 


2.581 Cryotemperature (Cryogenic Temperature)— 
The temperature within a few degrees of absolute zero 
(2.2 K). 


2.582 Cryotrap — It is surface cooled below —153°C 
(—244°F, 120 K) in order to condense vapours. Can be 
used to reduce pressure. 


25 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.583 Crystal Formation — It is the zone of 
maximum, temperature range in freezing in which 
most of the freezing takes place (about 0.8° C to 1.1° C 
for water). 


2.584 Cutting Room — The cold room in locker plants 
where animal carcasses are cut up into commercial 
sizes, such as, rib, roast, legs, etc. 


2.585 Cycle, Binary Vapour — A refrigerating 
cycle in which two separate refrigerants are used, 
one superimposed upon augmenting the cycle of the 
other. 


2.586 Cycle, Closed — It is any cycle in which the 
primary medium is always enclosed and repeats the 
same sequence of events. 


2.587 Cycle, Defrosting — It is a refrigeration cycle 
which permits the cooling unit to defrost during ‘OFF’ 
period. 


2.588 Cycle, Refrigerating A sequence of 
thermodynamic processes through which a refrigerant 
passes, in a closed open system, to absorb heat at a 
relatively low temperature level and reject heat at a 
higher temperature level. 


2.589 Cycle, Refrigerating, Ideal Basic Vapour 
Compression — A closed refrigerating cycle in which 
the refrigerant vapour compressed reversibly and is 
entropically, desuperheated irreversibly and condensed 
reversibly at constant pressure expanded irreversibly 
and adiabatically, and evaporated reversibly at constant 
pressure. 


2.590 Cycle, Reversible — Theoretical thermodynamic 
cycle composed of a series of reversible processes, 
which can be completely reversed, for example, Carnot 
cycle. 


2.591 Daily Range — It is the difference between high 
and low temperatures for a typical day. Used in HVAC 
load calculations. 


2.592 Dalton’s Law This law states that, 
each constituent of a mixture of gases behaves 
thermodynamically as if it alone occupied the space. 
The sum of the individual pressures of the constituents 
equals the total pressure of the mixture. 


2.593 Damp Building — A building that has a persistent 
and excessive accumulation of moisture which will, if 
allowed to persist, shorten the intended useful life of 
the building’s contents, materials, structural fasteners, 
or systems. 


2.594 Damper — A valve, or plate, used to regulate the 
flow of air or other fluid. 


2.595 Damper, Multiple Louvers — It is a damper 
having a number of adjustable blades. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.596 Dead Air Pocket — This is stagnant area in a 
space unaffected by air circulation (also known as dead 
zone). 


2.597 Dead-end Trap — The piping arrangement for 
collecting oil or liquid refrigerant from suction gas 
prior to entry to a compressor. 


2.598 Declination of Sun — It is the angle above or 
below the equatorial plane. It is plus if north of the 
plane and minus if below. Celestial objects are located 
by declination. 


2.599 Dedicated Outdoor Air — A ventilation system 
that delivers 100 percent outdoor air to each individual 
space in a building. 


2.600 Dedicated Outdoor Air System (DOAS) — 
This is an HVAC system specifically designed to 
condition 100 percent outdoor air to appropriate design 
conditions (temperature and humidity) and deliver this 
air to other systems or spaces. 


2.601 Deep Ground Temperature — It is ground 
temperature at or below a soil depth of two meters. 


2.602 Deep Vacuum — It is vacuum of 1 000 um Hg 
(130 Pa) or less of absolute pressure (also known as 
high vacuum). 


2.603 Defrost, Automatic — A defrost system in 
which the defrost cycle is automatically initiated and 
automatically terminated with automatic resumption 
of normal refrigeration at the conclusion of the 
defrost operation. The defrost water is disposed off 
automatically. 


2.604 Defrost, Manual — Manual defrost is one in 
which defrosting of refrigerated surface is accomplished 
by natural or manual means with manual initiation and 
manual termination of the overall defrost operation. 


2.605 Defrost, Semi-automatic — A defrost system 
in which the defrost cycle is manually initiated and 
automatically terminated, with automatic resumption 
of normal refrigeration at the conclusion of the defrost 
operation. Defrost water is disposed off automatically 
or collected in a container for subsequent manual 
removal. 


2.606 Defrost, Semi-automatic, Fast — A semi- 
automatic fast defrost system is the same as a 
semiautomatic defrost except that a means of 
accelerating defrosting is provided. 


2.607 Defrosting — It is the process of removing 
unwanted ice or frost from a cooling surface. 


2.608 Degradation Coefficient — It is measure of 
efficiency loss due to cycling of equipment. 


26 


2.609 Degree Day (Kelvin-day) — This is the 
difference in temperature between the outdoor mean 
temperature over a 24 h period and a given base 
temperature, used in estimating heating and cooling 
energy use. For any one day, there are as many degree 
days (Kelvin-days) as there are degrees Fahrenheit 
(degrees Celsius) departure of the mean temperature 
for the day from the base temperature. 


2.610 Degrees of Freedom (DOF) — It is the number 
of parameters that determine the state of a physical 
system. 


2.611 Dehumidification — It is the process of 
condensation of water vapour from air by cooling 
below the dew point or the removal of water vapour 
from air by chemical or physical methods. 


2.612 Dehumidifier — An air cooler or washer used 
for lowering the moisture content of the air passing 
through it; and an absorption or adsorption device for 
removing moisture from air. 


2.613 Dehumidifier, Surface — An air-conditioning 
unit, designed primarily for cooling and dehumidifying 
air through the action of passing the air over wet 
cooling coils. 


2.614 Dehumidifying Effect — The mass of water 
condensed during cooling or the equivalent refrigerating 
capacity expressed in terms of the latent heat of the 
water condensed per unit of time. 


2.615 Dehydration — The removal of water vapour 
from air by the use of absorbing or adsorbing materials; 
and the removal of water from stored goods. 


2.616 Dehydrator — This is a device for removing 
moisture from refrigerant or other substances. 


2.617 Deicing — This is intentional melting of an ice 
layer. 


2.618 Delivery Effectiveness — It is the ratio of the 
thermal energy transferred to or from the conditioned 
space to the thermal energy transferred at the equipment 
distribution system heat exchanger. Energy delivered 
to or from the conditioned space includes distribution 
system losses to the conditioned space. 


2.619 Demand 


a) It is the time rate of energy flow. In many other 
countries, demand is commonly used with other 
energy sources, especially district heat. 


b 


wm 


The highest amount of power (average Btu/h over 
an interval) recorded for a building or facility in a 
selected time frame. 


NOTE — Demand charges offset construction and maintenance 
of a utility’s need for large generating capacity. 


2.620 Demand Control — An application that utilizes 
input signals that measure the past and current demand 
and provide control of future use to maintain or reduce 
the target level. 


2.621 Demand Defrost — Automatic defrosting 
system in which the defrost cycle is initiated by a drop- 
in performance of the refrigerating system. 


2.622 Demand Factor — It is the ratio of the maximum 
electric demand to the connected load, usually monthly 
or annually. 


2.623 Demand Interval — It is the period during 
which kilowatt demand is monitored by a utility 
service, usually 15 or 30 min. 


2.624 Demand Limit Tripping — It is the removal 
of interruptible or deferrable load(s) at the user level 
when electric power or current flow to that user, or to a 
portion of the load, exceeds a specified level for more 
than a specified time, as determined by agreement. The 
automatic function can be enabled or disabled remotely 
by the serving utility via centralized communication. 


2.625 Demand Limiter — A device that monitors 
user electric power demand and causes that demand 
to be limited in a manner not to exceed a selected or 
programmed maximum value. 


2.626 Demand Load — It is actual load on a circuit at 
any time. Sum of all loads which are on. Equal to the 
connected load minus the loads that are off. 


2.627 Demand Period — It is electric power demand 
interval. 


2.628 Demand Savings — The reduction in the 
demand from the pre-retrofit baseline to the post-retrofit 
demand once independent variables (such as weather or 
occupancy) have been adjusted for. This term is usually 
applied to billing demand, to calculate cost savings, or 
to peak. 


2.629 Demand-Limited Storage — This is thermal 
storage system controlled to limit the electric power 
demand. 


2.630 Dense-Air System — The cold-air system 
maintained under pressure greater than atmospheric in 
which air is compressed, heat of compression dissipated, 
and the air, chilled by expansion and performance of 
work, can create useful refrigeration. 


2.631 Deposition — The direct formation of the solid 
phase by cooling a vapor below the triple point. 


2.632 Desiccant — Any absorbent or adsorbent, liquid 
or solid, that will remove water or water vapour from a 
material. In a refrigeration circuit the desiccant should 
be insoluble in the refrigerant. 


27 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.633 Desiccation — It is any process for evaporating 
water or removing water vapour from a material. 


2.634 Design Working Pressure — It is the maximum 
allowable working pressure for which a specific part of 
a system is designed. 


2.635 Desorption — It is liberation of a gas held in a 
substance by sorption. 


2.636 De-super Heater — It is a refrigerant-to-water 
heat exchanger that transfers heat from high-pressure, 
high-temperature refrigerant to domestic water. Heat 
transfer occurs when the heat pump (air conditioner) 
operates to satisfy the building space conditioning 
load. Within the refrigeration circuit, the desuperheater 
is located between the compressor discharge and 
the reversing valve of a heat pump or between the 
compressor discharge and the inlet to the refrigerant- 
to-air condenser of an air conditioner. 


2.637 De-super Heating Coil — This is a heat 
exchanger, preceding the condenser or incorporated in 
it, for removing all or part of the superheat. 


2.638 De-super Heating Heat Rejection — It is 
sensible heat rejection from gaseous refrigerant in 
a condenser. Occurs prior to the gas-to-liquid phase 
change. 


2.639 Determination — A complete set of measu- 
rements for a particular point of operation of a fan. 


2.640 Deviation 


a) It is the difference between the setpoint and the 
value of the controlled variable at any point in 
time. 


b) The difference between a single result and the 
mean of many results. 


2.641 Dew Point, Apparatus — That temperature 
which would result if the psychometric process 
occurring in a dehumidifier, humidifier, or surface 
cooler were carried to the saturation condition of the 
leaving air while maintaining the same ratio of sensible 
to total heat load in the process. 


2.642 Dew Point, Room — It is the dry-bulb (dewpoint, 
etc) temperature of the conditioned room or space. 


2.643 Dewar Flask — It is a silvered vacuum flask 
with double walls with the space between the walls 
highly evacuated. 


2.644 Dew-Point Rise — The increase in moisture 
content (specific humidity) of air expressed in terms of 
rise in dew-point temperature. 


2.645 Diagram, Indicator Pressure-volume 
diagram tracing condition of gas in a compressor or 
engine cycle in terms of pressure and volume displaced. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.646 Dial Thermometer — It is a device that indicates 
temperature by a pointer moving over a circular scale. 


2.647 Differential 


a) Of a control, the difference between cut-in and 
cut-out temperatures or pressures. 


b) Range in which the controlled variable must pass 
in order to actuate various control functions. 


2.648 Differential Pressure — It is the difference in 
pressure between any two points in the system. 


2.649 Differential Temperature 


a) This is the difference in temperature that exists 
between any two points or states when measured 
on the same temperature scale. 


b) In control terminology, the difference in 
temperature between the high event and the low 
event. 


2.650 Diffuse — It indicates that flux propagates 
in many directions as opposed to a single direction, 
as in a direct beam, which refers to collimated flux. 
When referring to reflectance, it is the directional 
hemispherical reflectance less the specular reflectance. 

NOTE — Diffuse has been used in the past to refer to 

hemispherical collection of transmitted or reflected radiation 


(including the specular component). This use is deprecated in 
favour of the more precise term hemispherical. 


2.651 Diffuse Reflectance — It is the directional 
hemispherical reflectance less the specular reflectance. 


2.652 Diffuse Sky Irradiance — The solar radiation 
that has been scattered in passing through the earth’s 
atmosphere. It is equal to the global irradiance less the 
direct-normal and ground-reflected components. 


2.653 Diffuse Solar Radiation — These are solar 
radiation received from the sun after its direction has 
been changed by scattering by the atmosphere or other 
objects, such as the ground. 


2.654 Diffuser Air — A circular, square, or rectangular 
air distribution outlet generally located in the ceiling and 
comprised of deflecting members discharging supply air 
in various directions and planes and arranged to promote 
mixing of primary air with secondary room air. 


2.655 Diffuser, Air Ceiling — It is an air diffuser 
suitable only for ceiling mounting. 


2.656 Diffuser, Air, Adjustable Flow Rate — It is an 
air diffuser incorporating a device for varying air flow 
rate without affecting the direction of the air jets. 


2.657 Diffuser, Air, Fully Adjustable — An air diffuser 
that incorporates independent devices to achieve the 
following: 


a) Variation of the direction of air jets without 
alteration of the air flow rate, and 


28 


b) Variation of the airflow rate without alteration of 
the direction of the air jets. 


2.658 Diffusible, Air, Adjustable Pattern — It is an air 
diffuser that incorporates an integral device by means 
of which the direction of the air jets can be varied. 


2.659 Diffusion 


a) It is the displacement of the molecules of a fluid 
within another fluid. 


b) The distribution of air within a space by an outlet 
discharging supply air in various directions and 
planes. 


2.660 Diffusion Absorption System — It is the 
refrigerating absorption system that, in addition to 
refrigerant and absorbent, also has an inert medium 
(such as, hydrogen) to balance pressure in the various 
parts of the refrigerating circuit. 


2.661 Diffusion Area — It is the effective area covered 
by a jet of air on leaving an outlet air device. 


2.662 Diffusion Coefficient — It is the ratio of the 
mass flow of a substance diffusing through a surface 
of unit area to the rate of variation in the concentration 
of this substance normal to this surface. Also known as 
Mass Diffusivity Ratio. 


2.663 Dimensions, Overall The projected 
dimensions of a device, usually on horizontal and 
vertical planes, that can be used to determine whether 
the device will tit in an assigned space or can be moved 
through a designated passageway. 


2.664 Direct Exhaust System — It is the mechanical 
venting system supplied or recommended by the 
manufacturer through which the products of combustion 
pass directly from the furnace or boiler to the outside 
and which does not employ a means of draft relief. 
Includes units that have small air passages in the flue 
that have an opening area that is not in excess of 10 
percent of the cross-sectional area of the stack. 


2.665 Direct Expansion (DX) — See [[Direct- 
Expansion (DX) Refrigeration Systems]]. 


2.666 Direct Ice Contact — The ice storage system 
using a method of heat exchange in which ice is formed 
by direct refrigeration and melted by immersion in 
circulating water or secondary coolant. Also called 
static direct contact storage. 


2.667 Direct Normal Irradiance — The irradiance 
received from the sun without significant change of 
direction from the apparent position of the sun. See also 
[[pyrheliometer]]. 


2.668 Direct Vent System — The system that provides 
outdoor air directly to a unit for combustion and for 
draft relief and which provides for discharge of all flue 
gases to the outside atmosphere. 


2.669 Direct-Expansion (DX) Refrigeration Systems 


a) It is a system in which the cooling effect is 
obtained directly from the expansion of the liquid 
refrigerant into a vapor. 

b) It is the common term applied to an air- 

conditioning or refrigeration system that utilizes 

the vapor-compression refrigeration cycle. In 

a vapor-compression refrigeration cycle, the 

refrigerant removes heat in the evaporator by 

directly expanding the entering liquid refrigerant 
into vapor as it leaves the evaporator. The vapor is 
then compressed and piped to a condenser where 
the heat removed by the evaporator and the heat 
of compression are rejected to another medium 
so that the gaseous refrigerant is condensed to 

a liquid. The liquid is then piped to a pressure 

reducing device/metering device to be supplied to 

the evaporator. 


2.670 Direct-Injection Humidifier — It is a device 
that injects steam directly into the airflow. 


2.671 Directional Thermal Emittance — It is the 
ratio of the radiance from a surface in a particular 
direction to the radiance in that direction from a 
blackbody at the same temperature under the same 
conditions. 


2.672 Direct-Return Piping System — It is the two- 
pipe system in which the heat transfer medium supplied 
to the first load is the first returned to the heat transfer 
equipment. 


2.673 Disc Valve — It is the compressor valve 
consisting of a metal disc that is lifted from an orifice 
in order to control fluid flow. See [[Diaphragm Valve]]. 


2.674 Discharge Capacity — It is the amount of 
thermal energy that can be removed from the storage 
device during a period of time and for a specific set of 
values for the initial temperature of the storage device, 
the temperature of the entering fluid, and the mass flow 
rate of fluid through the storage system. 


2.675 Discharge Coefficient — In the flow of fluids 
through nozzles and orifices, discharge coefficient is the 
product of the velocity coefficient and the contraction 
coefficient. 


2.676 Discharge Line — It is the line through which 
refrigerant vapor flows from a compressor to a 
condenser (also known as hot gas line). 


2.677 Discharge Line Valve — It is the shutoff valve 
fitted to a compressor (or in the discharge line adjacent 
to it) which can be used to isolate the compressor from 
the discharge line (also known as discharge stop valve). 


2.678 Discharge or Intake Velocity (Vk) — The 
discharge or intake velocity (Vk) of an outlet or inlet, 


29 


IS 3615 : 2020 


in fpm (m/s), is the velocity of the airstream measured 
at specified locations relative to the face of an outlet or 
inlet. 


2.679 Discharge Pressure 


a) It is the pressure generated on the leaving side of a 
fan or pump. 


b) The pressure generated on the output side of a gas 
compressor in a refrigeration or air-conditioning 
system. The discharge pressure is affected by 
several factors: size and speed of the condenser 
fan, condition and cleanliness of the condenser 
coil, and the size of the discharge line. An 
extremely high discharge pressure coupled with 
an extremely low suction pressure is an indicator 
of a refrigerant restriction. It is also called high- 
side pressure or head pressure. 


wm 


It is the operating pressure in a system measured in 
the discharge line at the compressor or fan outlet. 


2.680 Discharge Sound Power Level — The sound 
power that is transmitted from a device emanating 
sound and proceeding out of a device such as a terminal 
outlet. 


c 


2.681 Discharge Temperature — It is the temperature 
of fluid as discharged, such as from a fan or compressor 
(also known as delivery temperature). 


2.682 Discharge Test Time — It is the duration of a 
single transient test in which energy is removed from 
the storage device. 


2.683 Discharge Valve — It is the valve that allows 
compressed fluid to flow from the cylinder and prevents 
return flow in a compressor (also known as delivery 
valve or outlet valve). 


2.684 Discharge-loss Coefficient The actual 
discharge airflow rate divided by the theoretical 
discharge airflow rate at a given pressure difference. 


2.685 Displacement Flow — The movement of 
air within a space in a piston- or plug-type motion. 
Minimal mixing of the room air occurs in ideal 
displacement flow, which is desirable for removing 
pollutants generated within a space. The laminar flow 
air-distribution system that sweeps air across a space 
may produce displacement flow. 


2.686 Displacement Ventilation System — A type of 
air-distribution system, used only for cooling purposes, 
in which air at a temperature below room temperature 
is supplied to the floor level at a low discharge velocity 
[<100 fpm (0.5m/s)] and is returned near ceiling level. 
Thermal plumes, which develop over heat sources in 
the room, drive the overall floor to ceiling air motion, 
producing a stratified environment with cooler and 
fresher air near the floor and warmer and less fresh air 
near the ceiling. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.687 Disposable Filters — The filters that are 
designed to operate through a specified performance 
range and then be discarded and replaced. An example 
is the cartridge filter. 


2.688 Distribution Law — The law states that, if a 
substance is dissolved in two immiscible liquids, the 
ratio of its concentration in each is constant. 


2.689 Distribution System 


a) Conveying means, such as ducts, pipes, and wires, 
to bring substances or energy from a source to 
the point of use. The distribution system includes 
auxiliary equipment such as fans, pumps, and 
transformers. 


b 


wm 


The parts of a cooling tower, beginning with the 
inlet connection, that distribute the hot, circulating 
water within the tower to the points where it 
contacts the air. 


2.690 Distribution System Efficiency — It is the ratio 
between the energy consumption by the equipment if 
the distribution system had no losses (gains for cooling) 
to the outdoors or effect on the equipment or building 
loads and the energy consumed by the same equipment 
connected to the distribution system under test. 


2.691 Distributor — It is a device for dividing flow of 
liquid fluid between parallel paths in an evaporator or 
in other types of heat transfer apparatus. 


2.692 District Cooling — The concept of providing 
and distributing, from a central plant, cooling energy 
to a surrounding area (district) of tenants or clients 
(residences, commercial businesses, or institutional 
sites). Compare to [[District Heating]]. 


2.693 District Energy System — It is the centralized 
facility for generation and distribution of the heating 
and cooling and/or power needs of a community, rather 
than individual heat or cold generators (that is, furnace 
or air conditioner) at each residential, commercial, or 
institutional site. 


2.694 District Heating — The concept of providing 
and distributing, from a central plant, heating energy 
to a surrounding area (district) of tenants or clients 
(residences, commercial businesses, or institutional 
sites). Compare to [[district cooling]]. 


2.695 District-Cooling System Cooling Density — 
It is the measure of cooling demand per unit area. 
Customary units are kW/hectare or tons/acre. 


2.696 District-Heating System Heating Density — 
It is the measure of heating demand per unit area. 
Customary units are kW/hectare or therms/acre. 


2.697 Diversion Pipe Fitting — A venturi jet or 
orifice in a tee that induces flow through branch lines 


30 


by reducing the pressure in the main line following the 
branch. 


2.698 Diversity Factor — A ratio, or percentage, 
obtained when the total output capacity of a system is 
divided by the total output capacity of all the terminal 
devices connected to the systems. Example: to express 
the ratio of VAV supply air fan capacity to the total 
capacity of the VAV terminal devices as a percentage. 


2.699 Diverting Element — It is the element to divert 
the flow of air from one duct to another. 


2.700 Diverting Valve — It is a three-way valve piped 
to supply a single source of fluid to either of two outlets. 
Compare to [[mixing valve]]. 


2.701 Domestic Hot Water 


a) It is heating water for domestic or commercial 
purposes other than space heating and process 
requirements. 


b) The potable hot water as distinguished from hot 
water used for heating. 


2.702 Domestic Water Coil — It is the coil of tubing 
within a boiler to heat water for potable use; usually a 
hot-water tank is used for hot-water storage. 


2.703 Door Dike — A door dike is a projection 
on the door which extends into the refrigerated 
compartments(s) and which functions primarily as 
a barrier to minimize heat flow to the interior of the 
cabinet. 


2.704 Door, Refrigerator, Left Hand — It is a door 
which is hinged on the left-hand side of the door when 
viewed facing the cabinet. 


2.705 Door, Refrigerator, Right Hand — It is a door 
which is hinged on the right-hand side of the door when 
viewed facing the cabinet. 


2.706 Double-Acting Compressor — It is the 
compressor which has two compression strokes per 
revolution of crankshaft per cylinder (that is, both faces 
of the piston are working faces). 


2.707 Double-Bundle Condenser — It is the condenser 
that contains two separate tube bundles, allowing the 
option of either rejecting the heat to the cooling tower 
or to another building system requiring heat input. 


2.708 Double-Check Valve Backflow Preventer — 
It is a backflow prevention device designed to protect 
water supplies from contamination. It consists of two 
check valves assembled in series, usually with a ball 
valve or gate valve installed at each end for isolation 
and testing. Often, test cocks (very small ball valves) 
are in place to attach test equipment for evaluating 
whether the double-check assembly is still functional. 


The double-check valve assembly is suitable for 
prevention of back pressure and back siphonage 
but is not suitable for high-hazard applications. It 
is commonly used on lawn irrigation, fire sprinkler, 
and combi-boiler systems. May also be referred to as 
double-check assembly (DCA). 


2.709 Double-Contact Freezer — It is the contact 
freezer in which the product to be frozen is placed 
between two refrigerated surfaces and makes contact 
with both. 


2.710 Double-Detector Check (DDC) Backflow 
Preventer — This device designed to serve as a detector 
check on fire-protection systems where pollutants are 
involved. 
NOTE — DDC includes a line size, approved double-check 
valve backflow preventer with a metered bypass, into which 
has been incorporated a three-quarter inch, approved, double- 
check valve backflow preventer. 


2.711 Double-Pipe Condenser (Tube-in-Tube 
Condenser) — It is the condenser constructed of 
concentric tubes in which the refrigerant circulates 
through the annular space and the cooling medium 
through the inner tube. 


2.712 Double-Pipe Heat Exchanger — It is two pipes 
arranged concentrically, one within the other, and in 
which one fluid flows through the inner pipe and the 
other through the annulus between them. 


2.713 Double-Riser Suction Line — An arrangement 
of two vertical suction lines in order to ensure oil 
entrainment or carryover at minimum load. Often the 
minimum load line is smaller than the full-load suction 
riser. 


2.714 Double-Seated Valve — It is the valve having 
two seats and two discs arranged so that the upstream 
pressure is acting on one side of one disc and the 
opposite side on the other disc. This acts to cancel 
system forces and allows the use of a smaller actuator. 


2.715 Double-Suction Compressor — It is the 
split suction valving arrangement on compressor for 
carrying two suction pressures. 


2.716 Double-Suction Riser — See [Double-Riser 
Suction Line]. 


2.717 Double-Wall Heat Exchanger — In this 
exchanger two fluids separated by two walls with 
the space between open to the atmosphere so that a 
fracture on one wall will not transfer one fluid into the 
other. Used in water systems with a potable fluid and a 
potentially hazardous fluid. 


2.718 Down-Discharge Makeup Air — The makeup 
air delivered directly to the interior plenum of an 
exhaust hood such that it is introduced vertically 


31 


IS 3615 : 2020 


downward, typically from the front edge of the hood. 
Sometimes this kind of makeup air is referred to as an 
air curtain. 


2.719 Down-Feed System It is the piping 
arrangement for heating, air-conditioning, or 
refrigerating systems in which heating and cooling fluid 
is circulated through supply mains which are above the 
levels of the heating or cooling units they serve. 


2.720 Down-Flow-Type Central Furnace — It is the 
furnace designed with airflow essentially in a vertical 
path, discharging air at or near the bottom of the 
furnace. 


2.721 Draft — A current of air, when referring to 
the pressure difference which causes a current of air 
or gases to flow through a flue, chimney, heater, or 
space; or when referring to a localized effect caused by 
one or more factors of high air velocity, low ambient 
temperature, or direction of air flow, whereby more 
heat is withdrawn from a person’s skin than is normally 
dissipated. 


2.722 Drain Pan — It is the vessel or tray placed under 
an evaporator coil or cooling coil to receive condensed 
moisture, melted frost, or ice. Also called a drip tray or 
a defrost pan. 


2.723 Drain Plug (Drain Cock) — It is the removable 
plug or key-operated draw-off valve intended to permit 
the removal of fluids or condensates. 


2.724 Draft Rate DR — Estimated percentage of 
people dissatisfied due to annoyance by draft. 


2.725 Drain Valve — It is the valve fitted to the lowest 
point of an apparatus or refrigeration system for the 
purpose of tapping or draining the system. 


2.726 Draught — See [Draft]. 


2.727 Drawdown — It is the difference between the 
static water level and the active-pumping water level. 


2.728 Drier — A manufactured device containing a 
desiccant, placed in the refrigerant circuit, its primary 
purpose being to collect and hold within the desiccant 
all water in the system in excess of the amount which 
can be tolerated in the circulating refrigerant. 


2.729 Drift — In a water spray device the entrained 
unevaporated water carried from the device by air 
movement through it. 


2.730 Drinking Water Cooler — An assembly 
which either employs or is used in conjunction with a 
mechanical condensing unit for the purpose of cooling 
drinking water. 


2.731 Drinking Water Cooler, Bottled — A cooler 
which employs a bottle for storing the supply of water 


IS 3615 : 2020 


to be cooled and which utilizes a faucet for filling 
glasses or cups. 


2.732 Drinking Water Cooler, Bubbler-type — A 
cooler which is equipped to use water under pressure 
from a piped system as a supply to the cooler and 
which employs a valve in the drinking water line for 
controlling the flow of water to a bubbler or open 
flowing stream so that the water maybe drunk without 
utilizing glasses or cups. 


2.733 Drinking Water Cooler, Capacity — The 
quantity of a water cooler will cool in a given ambient 
temperature with a given incoming water temperature 
and a given outgoing water temperature, under steady 
state conditions. 


2.734 Drinking Water Cooler, Electric A 
completely self-contained unit comprised of an 
insulated cabinet, evaporator, and electric motor-driven 
condensing unit. 


2.735 Drinking Water Cooler, Faucet Pressure 
Type — A cooler which is equipped to use water under 
pressure from a piped system as a supply to the cooler 
and which utilizes a faucet for filling glasses or cups. 


2.736 Drinking Water Cooler, Pressure Type — It is 
a type of water cooler, which employs a closed cooling 
chamber having connections for inlet water under 
pressure and outlet for cold water. 


2.737 Drinking Water Cooler, Self-contained — A 
factory made assembly, in one structure which includes 
a complete mechanical refrigerating system and which 
has the primary function of cooling potable water and 
also provides for dispensing such water, by either 
integral or remote means or both. 


2.738 Drinking Water Cooler, Storage Type — It is a 
type of water cooler, which stores and cools the water 
in the same container or separate containers. Such 
water coolers may or may not be filled with plumbing 
connection for water inlet, drain, overflow, etc. 


2.739 Drip 


a) A pipe, or a steam trap and a pipe considered as a 
unit, which conducts condensation from the steam 
side of a piping system to the water or return side 
of the system. 

b) Water which appears on thawing frozen food, 
water melting from evaporator, or water dropping 
from a cooling surface. 


2.740 Droop 


a) The deviation from the no-load control point that 
results from a change in the heating or cooling 
load. 


b) A linear term referring to the percentage decrease 
in output voltage for a square wave or rectangular 


32 


wave as a function of time. Also, can apply to 
voltage error caused by leakage in a sample and 
hold circuit. 


Cc 


wm 


It is the vertical distance (hv) between the lowest 
horizontal plane tangent to a specified isovel and 
the centre of the core of an air jet (of an air jet in 
mixing air diffusion). 


2.741 Drop-in Refrigerant — The replacement 
refrigerant that has thermodynamic properties 
similar to one being replaced and does not require air 
conditioning or refrigerating equipment to be replaced 
but may require modifications. 


2.742 Droplet Condensation This is the 
phenomenon encountered when the condensate does 
not wet the cold surface but settles in the form of 
separate droplets. 


2.743 Drum Cooler — A rotating refrigerated cylinder 
whose surface is in contact with the liquid to be cooled. 


2.744 Dry-Bulb Temperature (DBT) — It is the 
temperature of air measured by a thermometer freely 
exposed to the air, but shielded from radiation and 
moisture 


2.745 Dry Ice — A term used to describe solid carbon 
dioxide (CO,) on account of its sublimation into gas 
without intermediate liquefaction. 


2.746 Dryer — An appliance that removes moisture. 
Compare to [[drier]]. 


2.747 Dual Compression — The compression of 
refrigerant entering a single cylinder from two sources 
at different suction pressures. 


2.748 Dual Thermostat 


a) A pneumatic thermostat designed to maintain 
one temperature during the day and a lower 
temperature during the night. 


b) The changes thermostat output from direct 
acting (DA) to reverse acting (RA) for seasonal 
changeover. 


c) It is two temperature controls in one enclosure. 


2.749 Dual-Duct Air-Conditioning System — It is 
the system of a central plant that produces conditioned 
air at two temperatures and humidity levels to supply 
air through two independent duct systems to the points 
of usage where mixing may be carried out. 


2.750 Dual-Duct Terminal — The terminal that 
mixes, for individual zonal needs, varying portions of 
two independent sources of primary air. 


2.751 Dual-Effect Compressor — The compressor 
in which the cylinders have an additional suction inlet 
partway along the compression stroke which enables 


refrigerant to be drawn in at two different suction 
pressures. 


2.752 Dual-Effect Control It is the device 
responsive to temperatures of two zones or to two 
variable conditions. 


2.753 Dual-Heating System — The heating system 
utilizing two fuel or energy sources, such as gas, oil, 
coal, or electric power, either as alternate sources or 
with one as a booster to the other. 


2.754 Dual-Pressure Control 


a) A combined pressure-regulating device, one part 
connected to the low-pressure side of the system 
and one part to the high-pressure side of the 
system, with a common switch mechanism. 


b) It is two pressure controls in one enclosure. 


c) The use of a single device to accomplish some 
form of pressure control at two distinct setpoints, 
such as a dual-pressure switch. 


2.755 Dual-Pressure Regulator Upstream 
pressure regulator equipped with two controls, used in 
refrigerant suction lines to provide freeze-up protection 
or for safety pressure relief. 


2.756 Dual-Pressure Relief Device — The two 
pressure relief devices mounted on a three-way valve 
that allows one device to remain active while the other 
is isolated. 


2.757 Dual-Temperature Refrigerator — The two- 
compartment refrigerated cabinet with one used for 
chilling foods and the other for either freezing foods or 
storing frozen products. 


2.758 Duct — A passageway made of sheet metal or 
other suitable material, not necessarily leak tight, used 
for conveying air or other gas at low pressures. 


2.759 Ductless Hood — A listed, packaged system 
incorporating a hood, a fan, and air-treatment devices 
designed to remove most grease and particulate matter 
from the airstream before reintroducing the treated air 
into the occupied space. 


2.760 Ductwork — A system of ducts for distribution 
and extraction of air. See [[system]]. 


2.761 Dulong-Petit Law — The law states that, the 
product of the specific heat per gram and the atomic 
weight of many solid elements at room temperature 
have almost the same value, about 6.3 calories per 
degree Celsius (264 J/K). 


2.762 Dump Water — The water drainage from an ice 
maker to control the clarity of ice or to prevent scaling. 


2.763 Dump-Trap Liquid-Return Heating System — 
The method of separation and automatic return of 


33 


IS 3615 : 2020 


liquid refrigerant from an accumulator in the low side 
to the high side of the plant. 


2.764 Dunnage — These are strips of wood used in 
stowing cargo to provide air space between pieces or 
packages. 


2.765 Dust — An air suspension (aerosol) of particles 
of any solid material usually with particle size less than 
100 microns. 


2.766 DX — [[Direct-Expansion (DX) Refrigeration 
Systems]]. 


2.767 Dynamic Characteristics of a Fan — The 
resonance frequencies and mode shapes of a fan. 


2.768 Dynamic Head Loss — The reduction in the 
velocity head during flow, consisting of friction or 
energy losses per length of pipe and losses associated 
with bends, fittings, valves, etc. The most common 
equation used to calculate major head losses is the 
Darcy-Weisbach equation. Older, more empirical 
approaches are the Hazen-Williams equation and the 
Prony equation. 


2.769 Dynamic Ice — Ice formed on a cooling surface, 
then removed to be stored in an insulated container 
(tank). 


2.770 Dynamic Pressure — See [[ Velocity Pressure]]. 


2.771 Dynamic Suction Head — This is given by 
positive static suction head minus friction head and 
minus velocity head. 


2.772 Dynamic Suction Lift — This is sum of suction 
lift and velocity head at the pump suction when the 
source is below the pump centreline. 


2.773 Dynamic Viscosity — Force per unit area 
required to produce unit-relative velocity between two 
parallel areas of fluid unit distance apart. Also called 
coefficient of viscosity. 


2.774 Dynamometer — A device for measuring power 
output of a running engine or motor. 


2.775 Ebullator — A device inserted in flooded 
evaporator tubes to prevent the evaporator from 
becoming oil bound or the refrigerant liquid from 
becoming quiescent at a pressure lower than its boiling 
point. 


2.776 Economizer 


a) A process employing heat recovery equipment or 
heat exchangers. 


b) A device that, on proper variable sensing, initiates 
control signals or actions to conserve energy. 
A control system that reduces the mechanical 
heating and cooling requirement. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.777 EDB — 
Temperature]. 


See [Entering Dry-Bulb (EDB) 


2.778 Energy Efficiency Ratio (EER) — It is the 
ratio of the cooling capacity (in British Thermal Units 
[BTU] per hour) to the power input (in watts). 


2.779 Effect, Chimney — The tendency of air or gas 
in a duct or other vertical passage to rise when heated 
due to its lower density in comparison with that of the 
surrounding air or gas; in buildings, the tendency toward 
displacement (caused by the difference in temperature) 
of internal heated air by unheated outside air due to the 
difference in density of outside and inside air. 


2.780 Effect, Cooling, Total — The difference 
between the total enthalpy of the dry air and water 
vapour mixture entering a unit per hour and the total 
enthalpy of the dry air and water vapour (and water) 
mixture leaving the unit per hour, expressed in kcal/h. 


2.781 Effect, Dehumidifying — The heat removed in 
reducing the moisture content of air, passing through a 
dehumidifier from its entering to its leaving condition. 


2.782 Effect, Heating, Compressor (Heat Pump) — 
The rate of heat delivery by the refrigerant assigned 
to the compressor in a heat pump system. This is 
equal to the product of the mass rate of refrigerant 
flow produced by the compressor and the difference 
in specific enthalpies of the refrigerant vapour at its 
thermodynamic state leaving the compressor and 
saturated liquid refrigerant at the pressure of the vapour 
leaving the compressor. 


2.783 Effect, Humidifying — The latent heat of 
vaporization of water at the average evaporating 
temperature multiplied by the number of kilograms of 
water evaporated per hour and expressed in kcal/h. 


2.784 Effect, Refrigerating — It is the rate of heat 
removal by a refrigerant in a refrigerating system. This 
is equal to the product of the mass rate of refrigerant 
flow in the system and the difference in specific 
enthalpies of the refrigerant at two designated points in 
the system or two designated thermodynamic states of 
the refrigerant. The term refrigerating effect is used to 
denote heat transfer to or from the refrigerant itself in 
a refrigeration system, whereas the term refrigerating 
capacity is used to denote the rate of heat removal from 
a medium or space to be cooled. 


2.785 Effect, Refrigerating, Compressor — The 
rate of heat removal by the refrigerant assigned to the 
compressor in a refrigerating system. This is equal to the 
product of the mass rate of refrigerant flow produced by 
the compressor and the difference in specific enthalpies 
of the refrigerant vapour at its thermodynamic state 
entering the compressor and refrigerant liquid at 
saturation temperature corresponding to the pressure of 
the vapour leaving the compressor. 


34 


2.786 Effect, Refrigerating, Condensing Unit — 
The rate of heat removal by the refrigerant assigned to 
the condensing unit in a refrigerating system. This is 
equal to the product of the mass rate of refrigerant flow 
produced by the condensing unit and the difference in 
the specific enthalpies of the refrigerant vapour entering 
the unit and the refrigerant liquid leaving the unit. 


2.787 Effect, Sun — Solar energy transmitted into 
space through windows and building materials. 


2.788 Effect, Total Cooling — The difference between 
the total enthalpy of the dry air and water vapour 
mixture entering a unit per hour and the total enthalpy 
of the dry air and water vapour (and water) mixture 
leaving the unit per hour, expressed in kcal/h. 


2.789 Effective Air Change Rate — The constant 
outdoor air change rate that would result in the same 
average pollutant concentration over the same period of 
time as actually occurs under varying conditions. 


2.790 Effective Compressor Work — The network 
input absorbed at the shaft of a compressor, irrespective 
of time. 


2.791 Effective Draft Temperature — A calculated 
temperature difference that combines air temperature 
difference and measured air speed at each test point. 


2.792 Effective Efficiency 
a) Overall efficiency. 


b) The ratio of the work absorbed in conveying and 
compressing a unit mass of refrigerant in a perfect 
compressor and the work absorbed, per unit mass 
of refrigerant, by the shaft of an actual compressor. 


2.793 Effective Emittance of an Air Space — The 
combined effect of emittances from the boundary 
surfaces of an air space, where the boundaries are 
parallel and of a dimension much larger than the 
distance between them. 


2.794 Effective Freezing — It is the time required 
from a given initial temperature to freeze a product and 
to lower its temperature at the thermal centre to a given 
value. 


2.795 Effective Length of a Duct — The dimension 
by which a straight duct contributes to the length of an 
air-distribution installation. 


2.796 Effective Length of a Fitting — The dimension 
by which a duct fitting contributes to the length of an 
air-distribution installation. 


2.797 Effective Power Input — The average electrical 
power input to the equipment within a defined interval 
of time, in watts (that is, the sum of: the power input 
for operation of the compressor, excluding additional 
electrical heating devices; the power input of all 


control and safety devices of the equipment; and the 
proportional power input of the conveying devices for 
the transport of the heat transfer media through the heat 
pump only. Also, indoor-side and outdoor-side pumps, 
whether internal or external, whether provided with the 
equipment or not). 


2.798 Effective Temperature 
Temperature]. 


— See [Operative 


2.799 Effective Temperature Difference — The 
difference between the room air temperature and the 
supply air temperature at the outlet in the room. 


2.800 Effectiveness — Ratio of actual energy transfer 
to the maximum possible transfer. 


2.801 Effectiveness Ratio of a Heat Exchanger 
— It is the ratio of the actual heat transfer to the 
thermodynamically limited maximum heat transfer 
possible in a counterflow exchanger of infinite transfer 
area. 


2.802 Efficiency, Compression — Ratio of work 
required to compress, adiabatically and reversibly, all 
the vapour delivered by a compressor (per stage) to the 
actual work delivered to the vapour by the piston or 
blades of the compressor. 


2.803 Efficiency, Mechanical — It is the ratio of the 
compression energy or work of a compressor to the 
energy or work input. 


2.804 Efficiency, Volumetric, Apparent — It is the 
ratio of length of suction line, on indicator card, to 
stroke. 


2.805 Efficiency, Volumetric, Due to Cylinder 
Heating — It is the ratio of the total to the apparent 
volumetric efficiency. It is also called real or no- 
clearance volumetric efficiency. 


2.806 Efficiency, Volumetric, Total — It is the ratio 
of the actual volume of gas moved by the compressor 
or pump to the actual displacement of the compressor 
or pump. 


2.807 Ejector — A device which builds up a high fluid 
velocity in a restricted area to obtain a lower static 
pressure at that point so that fluid from another source 
may be drawn in. 


2.808 Elbow — A pipe or duct fitting to make an 
angle between connected pipes or ducts. If angle is not 
specified, a 90° angle is implied. 


2.809 Electric Space Heating Permanently 
installed electric heating as the principal source of 
space heating throughout an entire dwelling or business 
establishment. 


35 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.810 Electrolytic Hygrometer — It is a device 
that indicates relative humidity from the electrical 
resistance of a hygroscopic salt. 


2.811 Element, Electric Heating — It is a unit 
assembly consisting of a resistor, insulated supports 
and terminals for connecting the resistor to electric 
power. 


2.812 Element, Pressure Imposing — Any device 
or portion of the equipment used for the purpose of 
increasing the pressure upon the refrigerant. 


2.813 Emergency Relief Valve — A manually operated 
safety valve for discharge of refrigerant in case of fire 
or another emergency. 


2.814 Emissive Power — See [Emittance]. 


2.815 Emissivity — The capacity of a material to emit 
radiant energy, emittance is the ratio of the total radiant 
flux emitted by a body to that emitted by an ideal black 
body at the same temperature. 


2.816 Emittance — The ratio of the radiant flux emitted 
by a physical surface to that emitted by a blackbody at 
the same temperature and under the same conditions. 


2.817 Emulsion — It is a relatively stable suspension 
of small but not colloidal particles of a substance in a 
liquid, the suspended particles being undissolved. 


2.818 Enclosed Liquid Cooler 


a) An apparatus for cooling fluid out of contact with 
the atmosphere. 


a) A heat exchanger consisting of an assembly of 
tubes containing the liquid to be cooled within a 
pressure-tight vessel. 


2.819 Energy — It is defined as capacity for producing 
an effect. Having several forms, which may be either 
stored or transient, and can be transformed from one 
into another. Forms include thermal (heat), mechanical 
(work), electrical, radiant, and chemical. 


2.820 Energy, Internal — The sum of all the kinetic 
and potential energies contained in a substance due 
to the states of motion and separation of its several 
molecules, atoms, and electrons. It includes sensible 
heat (vibration energy) and that part of the latent heat 
that is represented by the increase in energy during 
evaporation. 


2.821 Enhancement Factor — The water vapor 
pressure enhancement factor, f, is the ratio of the actual 
partial pressure, pwvs, of saturated water vapor in 
moist air to the vapor pressure of pure water (H,O), e, 
at the same temperature. [f = pwvs(p, t)/e(t)]. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.822 This factor accounts for the non-ideal behaviour 
of saturated water vapor in air due to: 


a) the effect of 
imperfections), 


intermolecular forces 


(gas 


b) the effect of pressure on the properties of the 
condensed phase, and 


c) the effect of dissolved gases. 


2.823 Entering Dry-Bulb (EDB) Temperature — 
The temperature that a thermometer would measure 
for air entering the evaporator coil. (for example, for 
a draw-through fan configuration with no heat gains or 
losses in the ductwork, EDB equals the indoor dry-bulb 
temperature). 


2.824 Entering Wet-Bulb (EWB) Temperature 
— The temperature that the wet-bulb portion of a 
psychrometer would measure if exposed to air entering 
the evaporator coil. For a draw-through fan with no 
heat gains or losses in the ductwork and no outdoor 
air mixed with return air, this would also be the zone 
air wet-bulb temperature. For a similar configuration, 
but when outdoor air is mixed with return air, EWB 
equals the mixed-air wet-bulb temperature. For 
mixtures of water vapor and dry air at atmospheric 
temperatures and pressures, the wet-bulb temperature 
is approximately equal to the adiabatic saturation 
temperature (temperature of the air after undergoing a 
theoretical adiabatic saturation process). The wet-bulb 
temperature given in psychrometric charts is really the 
adiabatic saturation temperature. 


2.825 Enthalpy — A thermodynamic property of a 
substance defined as the sum of its internal energy plus 
the quantity pv/J, where p = pressure of the substance, v 
= volume, and J = mechanical equivalent of heat. 


2.826 Enthalpy, Specific — It is enthalpy per unit 
weight of a substance. 


2.827 Entrainment Flow — Systems with ceiling- 
based supply air diffusers and return air grilles are 
common examples of air-distribution systems that 
produce entrainment flow (also known as conventional 
mixing). 


2.828 Entropy — The ratio of the heat added to a 
substance to the absolute temperature at which it was 
added. 


2.829 Entropy Specific — It is entropy per unit weight 
of a substance. 


2.830 Entry Loss — The loss in pressure caused by a 
fluid stream flowing into a pipe, duct, hood, or vessel. 


2.831 Envelope — The boundary surface of points of 
equal terminal velocity that describe the air-diffusion 
profile. Envelope is also referred to as isovel. 


36 


2.832 Envelope Component — The major section of 
the entire envelope, such as the opaque walls above 
grade, ceilings, slabs, floors, glazings, doors, or walls 
below grade. 


2.833 Envelope Floor — The lower portion of 
the building envelope, including opaque area and 
fenestration, that has conditioned or semi heated space 
above and is horizontal or tilted at an angle of less than 
15 °C (60 °F) from horizontal but excluding slab-on- 
grade floors. For the purposes of determining building 
envelope requirements, the classifications are defined 
as follows: 


a) Mass floor: A floor with a heat capacity that 
exceeds: 


1) 7 Btu/ft?-°F (39.7 watt h/m? °C); or 


2) 5 Btu/ft?:°F (28.4 watt h/m?-°C) provided that 
the floor has a material unit mass not greater 
than 120 lb/ft? (1924.6 kg/ m°). 


b) Steel joist floor: a floor that: 
1) is not a mass floor, and 


2) that has steel joist members supported by 
structural members. 


c) Wood framed and other floors: all other floor 
types, including wood joist floors. 


2.834 Environment — All of the elements over which 
a designer has no control and that affect a system and 
its input or output. 


2.835 Environmental Chamber — Enclosed space 
designed to create a particular environment (also 
known as climatic chamber). 


2.836 Environmental Conditions — The natural or 
controlled conditions of air and radiation prevailing 
around a person, an object, a substance, etc. 


2.837 Environmental Systems — The systems that 
primarily use a combination of mechanical equipment, 
airflow, water flow, and electrical energy to provide 
heating, ventilating, air conditioning, filtration, 
humidification, and dehumidification for the purpose 
of human comfort or process control of temperature 
and humidity. 


2.838 Enzyme — It is a complex organic substance 
such as diastase, pepsin, etc, capable of transforming, 
by catalytic action, some other compound; a soluble 
ferment. 


2.839 Equal Friction Method Duct Sizing — The 
method in which ducts are sized so that their frictional 
resistance per unit length is constant. 


2.840 Equalizer — It is a piping arrangement to 
maintain a common liquid level or pressure between 
two or more chambers. 


2.841 Equalizer, External In a_ thermostatic 
expansion valve, a tube connection from a selected 
control point in the low-side circuit to the pressure 
sensing side of the control element such that the control- 
point pressure is transmitted to the actuating element 
(diaphragm or bellows). This connection provides a 
means for compensating for the pressure drop through 
accessories and the evaporator. 


2.842 Equalizer, Internal In a thermostatic 
expansion valve, an integral internal port or passage 
whereby the actuating element (diaphragm or bellows) 
is exposed to pressure leaving the valve. 


2.843 Equalizing Damper — It is a device to maintain 
constant downstream static pressure or volume flow. 


2.844 Equilibrium — It is the steady-state condition 
during which the fluctuations of variables being 
measured remain within stated limits. 


2.845 Equilibrium-Point Dryness (EPD) — The 
water content of a liquid refrigerant after being in 
contact with a specific drier at a particular temperature 
long enough to reach an equilibrium state. EPD is 
expressed in milligrams of water per kilogram of 
refrigerant (ppm). 


2.846 Equipment — A devices that serve all or part of 
the building and may include electric power, lighting, 
transportation, or service water heating, including, 
but not limited to, furnaces, boilers, air conditioners, 
heat pumps, chillers, water heaters, lamps, luminaires, 
ballasts, elevators, escalators, or other devices or 
installations. 


2.847 Equipment Capacity — The manufacturer’s 
rated capacity at the defined rating point for HVAC 
equipment. Equipment capacity should be adjusted for 
altitude and other effects. 


2.848 Equivalent Evaporation — The amount of 
water a boiler would evaporate, in litre per hour, if 
it received and vaporized feed water at 100°C and 
atmospheric pressure. 


2.849 Ethylene Glycol — The clear, colourless liquid 
used to depress the freezing point of water for use as a 
secondary coolant in HVAC &R systems. Inhibitors are 
required to control corrosion caused by ethylene glycol 
solutions. 


2.850 Eudiometer — An instrument for volumetric 
measurement and analysis of gases. 


2.851 Eupatheoscope — It is an instrument for 
assessing comfort environment in terms of operative 
temperature. 


2.852 Eutectic — The mixture of substances whose 
solid and liquid phases in equilibrium have identical 


37 


IS 3615 : 2020 


composition. Such a mixture has a minimum freezing 
point. 


2.853 Eutectic Ice — It is frozen eutectic mixture used 
as cold accumulation. 


2.854 Eutectic Plate — A thin, rectangular container 
containing eutectic mixture, generally with a coil to be 
connected to a refrigerating system in order to freeze 
the mixture. 


2.855 Eutectic Point — It is the freezing temperature 
of a liquid mixture that produces a solid phase of the 
same composition. 


2.856 Eutectic Solution — The mixture that melts 
or freezes, normally at a specific temperature, with 
constant composition. The mixture’s melting point 
is usually the lowest possible for mixtures of given 
substances. 


2.857 Evacuated Thermal Insulation — Insulation 
consisting of double walls, with the space between 
them (with or without packing) evacuated (also known 
as vacuum insulation). 


2.858 Evaporating Temperature It is the 
temperature at which a fluid vaporizes at a given 
pressure. 


2.859 Evaporation — Change of state from liquid to 
vapour. 


2.860 Evaporative Equilibrium (of a Wet-Bulb 
Instrument) — The condition attained when the wetted 
wick has reached a stable and constant temperature. 
(When the instrument is exposed to air at velocities 
over 5 m/s, this temperature may be considered to 
approach the true wet-bulb temperature). 


2.861 Evaporator (Refrigerant) — It is a heat 
exchanger in which the liquid refrigerant, after 
reduction of its pressure (expansion), is evaporated by 
absorption of heat from the medium to be cooled. 


2.862 Evaporator, Dry Type — An evaporator of the 
continuous tube type where refrigerant from a pressure 
reducing device is fed into one end and the suction line 
connects to the outlet end. 


2.863 EWB — See [Entering Wet-Bulb (EWB) 
Temperature]. 


2.864 Excess Air — In combustion, percent of air 
greater than that required theoretically to completely 
oxidize the fuel. 


2.865 Exergy — It is the property of a system that is 
the maximum useful work possible during a process 
that brings the system into equilibrium with a heat 
reservoir. Exergy is a combination property of a system 
and its environment because unlike energy, it depends 


IS 3615 : 2020 


on the state of both the system and environment. The 
exergy of a system in equilibrium with the environment 
is zero. Exergy is neither a thermodynamic property of 
matter nor a thermodynamic potential of a system. 


2.866 Exfiltration — It is air flow outward through a 
wall, leak membrane, etc. 


2.867 Exhaust Opening — It is any opening through 
which air is removed from a space which is being heated 
or cooled, or humidified or dehumidified, or ventilated. 


2.868 Exhauster — A fan used to withdraw air under 
suction. 


2.869 Exit Air — Air with acceptable quality that may 
be removed from the space for pressurization control. 


2.870 Exitance — Total radiant flux that leaves unit 
area of a surface. The sum of the radiant flux emitted and 
reflected by the surface plus any radiant flux transmitted 
through that surface. Compare to [[radiosity]]. 


2.871 Expansion Valve, Capacity — It is the 
refrigerating effect in kcal/h produced by the 
evaporation of refrigerant passed by the valve under 
specified conditions. 


2.872 Expansion Valve, Superheat — It is the 
difference between the temperature of the thermal bulb 
and the temperature corresponding to the pressure at the 
outlet or at the equalizer connection, when provided, of 
a thermostatic expansion valve. 


2.873 Expansion Valve, Superheat Change — The 
change in superheat of a thermostatic expansion valve 
required to open the valve at a predetermined amount. 


2.874 Expansion, Coefficient of — It is the change in 
length per unit length or the change in volume per unit 
volume per degree change in temperature. 


2.875 Expansion, Dry — It is a processor heat removal 
by a refrigerant in an evaporator fed by a flow control, 
responsive to temperature or pressure, or both, at some 
point in the evaporator or to the difference between 
high- and low-side pressures and not to the liquid level 
in the evaporator. All entering refrigerant is evaporated 
before being re-circulated. 


2.876 Expansion, Multistage — Passing volatile 
refrigerant through two or more pressure reducing 
devices, connected in series, usually with an evaporator 
between them, operating at one pressure and a second 
evaporator fed through both devices at a lower pressure. 


2.877 Expendable Refrigerant 


a) Liquefied gas (generally liquid nitrogen) whose 
vapor is lost after change of phase. 


b) Solid carbon dioxide (dry ice). 


38 


2.878 Extended Surface — It is heat transfer surface, 
one side of which is increased in area by the addition of 
fins, discs, or other means. 


2.879 Exterior Building Envelope — See [Building 
Envelope]. 


2.880 External Defrosting — Defrosting using heat 
from external sources. 


2.881 External Equalizer — In a_ thermostatic 
expansion valve, a connection from a selected point 
in the low-pressure part of the circuit to the system 
pressure-sensing side of the actuating element such 
that the selected point pressure is transmitted to the 
actuating element (for example, diaphragm or bellows). 


2.882 External Heat — Heat generated from sources 
outside the conditioned area. This heat from gas, oil, 
steam, electricity, or solar sources supplements internal 
heat and internal process heat sources. Recovered 
internal heat can reduce the demand for external heat. 


2.883 External Static Pressure Loss — See [Static 
Pressure Loss]. 


2.884 Extract Air — Airflow leaving a treated space. 
Compare with return air. 


2.885 Eyebrow Hood — An eyebrow hood is mounted 
directly to the face or top of an appliance above the 
opening(s) or door(s) from which effluent is emitted, 
overhanging the front of the opening(s) to capture the 
effluent. Mounting height is fixed. 


2.886 Fabric Filter — The filter having a textile-based 
filter medium. 


2.887 Facade Area — The area of the facade, including 
overhanging soffits, cornices, and protruding columns, 
measured in elevation in a vertical plane parallel to the 
plane of the face of the building. Non-horizontal roof 
surfaces shall be included in the calculation of vertical 
facade area by measuring the area in a plane parallel to 
the surface. 


2.888 Face Area — The total plane area of the portion 
of a grille, coil, or other item bounded by a line tangent 
to the outer edges of the openings through which air 
can pass. 


2.889 Face Velocity — It is the rate of air movement at 
the face of the device (airflow rate divided by face area), 
expressed in m/s (fpm) to three significant figures. 


2.890 Fahrenheit Temperature — Temperature 
scale used with the I-P system in which, at standard 
atmospheric pressure, the boiling point of water is 
212°F and its freezing point is 32°F; absolute zero is 
minus —459.69°F, 


2.891 Fan — It is device for moving air by two or more 
blades or vanes attached to a rotating shaft. 


2.892 Fan curve — It is diagram showing the pressure/ 
volume characteristics of a fan, and often the power 
required by the fan. 


2.893 Fan, Attic — An exhaust fan to discharge air 
near the top of a building while cooler air is forced 
(drawn) in at a lower level. 


2.894 Fan, Centrifugal — A fan rotor or wheel within 
a scroll-type housing and including driving mechanism 
supports for either belt drive or direct connection. 


2.895 Fan, Economizer — A device which prevents 
operation of the fan motor on a cold diffuser during the 
shutdown period after the coil has been defrosted. 


2.896 Fan, Exhaust — A fan used to remove or exhaust 
air from space. 


2.897 Fan, Propeller — A propeller or disc-type wheel 
within a mounting ring or plate and including driving 
mechanism supports for either belt drive or direct 
connection. 


2.898 Fan, Shroud — A protective housing which 
surrounds the fan and which may also direct the flow 
of air. 


2.899 Fan, Tube axial — A propeller or disc-type 
wheel viscous within a cylinder and including driving 
mechanism support for either belt drive or direct 
connection. 


2.900 Fan, Vane axial — A disc-type wheel within a 
cylinder, a set of air guide vanes located either before 
or after the wheel, and including driving mechanism 
supports either for belt drive or direct connection. 


2.901 Fanning Friction Factor — It is dimensionless 
number f used in studying fluid friction in pipes, equal 
to the pipe diameter times the drop-in pressure in the 
fluid due to friction as it passes through the pipe divided 
by the product of the pipe length and the kinetic energy 
of the fluid per unit volume. 


2.902 Feedwater Economizer This is heat 
exchanger installed in the hot-gas duct between the 
boiler and the stack to transfer a portion of the heat 
(that would be lost up the stack) to the feedwater. 


2.903 Fenestration 


a) This term commonly used to refer to any opening, 
usually glazed, in a building envelope; windows. 
Examples include windows, plastic panels, 
clerestories, skylights, glass doors that are more 
than one-half glass, and glass block walls. 


b) In an external wall of a building, any area that 
allows light to pass. 


39 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.904 Fenestration Elements 
a) Framing, mullions, muntins, and dividers. 
b) Glazing material, either glass or plastic. 
c) External shading devices. 
d) Internal shading. 


e) Integral (between glass) shading systems or 
devices. 


2.905 F-factor — The perimeter heat loss factor for 
slab-on-grade floors, expressed in Btu/h-ft?:°F (W/ 
m?:°K),. 


2.906 Fick’s Law — The rate of diffusion of matter 
across a plane is proportional to the negative of the 
rate of change of the concentration of the diffusing 
substance in the direction perpendicular to the plane. 


2.907 Film Boiling Boiling phenomenon 
corresponding to the development of a continuous 
vapor layer on the heating surface that separates this 
surface from the boiling liquid. 


2.908 Film Coefficient — It is the heat transferred 
between a surface and a fluid in unit time through unit 
area induced by unit temperature difference. 


2.909 Film-Cooling Tower — Cooling tower with a 
type of packing over which the water spreads in a thin 
film. 


2.910 Film-Forming Condensation — This is the 
phenomenon encountered when the condensate wets a 
cold surface to form a continuous film that separates 
this surface from the vapour. 


2.911 Filter — It is a device to remove solid material 
from a fluid. 


2.912 Filter Press — It is a device for separating solid 
and liquid matter under pressure so that the solid residue 
is compressed into briquettes to facilitate removal. 


2.913 Filter, Air Cleanable — It is a filter in which the 
medium can be washed or wiped. 


2.914 Filter, Air Replaceable Media — It is a non- 
cleanable filter in which the filter medium, when dirty 
is discarded and replaced by a new one. 


2.915 Filter, Air, Dust Holding Capacity — The 
mass of duct which a filter can retain at rated airflow 
during an increase in resistance from that under clean 
conditions to the resistance at some arbitrary chosen 
value. It is usually twice the value of the pressure drop 
at clean conditions. 


2.916 Filter, Air, Electrostatic — An air filter that 
applies an electric charge to the dust particles in the 
air stream, and collects, precipitates or builds up the 
particles on plates of opposite charge. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.917 Filter, suction-line — It is device installed in the 
suction line of a refrigerating system for the purpose 
of removing solid contaminants. The device generally 
consists of a shell with fittings and an internal filtering 
element. 


2.918 Filtration — The process of passing a liquid 
through a porous material in such a manner as to 
remove suspended matter from the liquid. 


2.919 Fin — An extended surface to increase the heat 
transfer area, as metal sheets attached to tubes. 


2.920 Fin Pitch — It is number of transverse fins per 
unit length of tube. 


2.921 Fin Spacing — It is distance between two 
successive transverse fins on a tube. 


2.922 Final Filter 


a) A filter positioned in the last filtering position in 
an air-handling system. 


b) The filter used to collect the loading dust that has 
passed through a device during the test procedure. 


2.923 Final Resistance 


a) The resistance at which a filter, or filter media, 
should be replaced. 


b) The resistance to airflow of the air-cleaning 
device at which the test is terminated and results 
calculated, expressed in Pa (in. of water). 


2.924 Finned Length — It is distance between the two 
end fins (excluding lengths for return bends and other 
overall lengths). 


2.925 Finned surface area — It is total area of fins and 
prime surface of tube or plate to which fins are attached. 


2.926 Fire Damper — It is a device that interrupts 
airflow automatically through part of an air system to 
restrict passage of flame. Installed in a fire-rated wall 
or floor and closes automatically in the event of fire to 
maintain the integrity of the fire-rated separation. 


2.927 First Air — In a cleanroom, air that issues 
directly from the HEPA filter before it passes over any 
work location. 


2.928 Flammability — It is the ability of a material 
to burn. 


2.929 Flammable Refrigerant — The refrigerant that 
is ignitable when mixed with air (for example, ethyl 
chloride, methyl chloride, and the hydrocarbons). 


NOTE — See IS 16656/ISO 817 for flammability categories. 
2.930 Flare Fitting — It is a type of soft-tube connector 


which requires the flaring of the tube to provide a 
mechanical seal. 


40 


2.931 Flash Chamber — Separating tank placed 
between the expansion valve and evaporator in a 
refrigeration system to separate and bypass any flash 
gas formed in the expansion valve. 


2.932 Flash Point — Temperature of combustible 
material, as oil, at which there is a sufficient vaporization 
to support combustion of the material. 


2.933 Flashing — The physical transformation of 
a fluid from its liquid state into its vapor or gaseous 
state. It is caused by the actual pressure of the fluid 
being lower than the vapor pressure of the fluid at that 
operating temperature. 


2.934 Flexible Duct — The ducts constructed of 
flexible materials, such as polymeric films, metal foils, 
and impregnated fabrics, and used to connect rigid duct 
to air devices and terminals. 


2.935 Flexible-Shaft Centrifugal Compressor — The 
impeller and shaft are a one-piece assembly, the latter 
of a small diameter so that it can flex and spontaneously 
balance the inertial forces resulting from rotation. 


2.936 Floc Point — The temperature observed at the 
start of the formation of wax or other solid; determined 
by a standardized test to assess the low-temperature 
compatibility of certain petroleum products with 
refrigerants. 


2.937 Flooded Evaporator — Refrigerant evaporator 
characterized by no organized flow, in which most 
of the evaporator surface is in contact with the liquid 
refrigerant, and from which the refrigerant exits at a 
vapor quality of one, without significant superheat. 


2.938 Flotation — It is a method of treating materials 
floating in a liquid. It is an ice-making method in which 
ice floats away from the surface on which it has been 
frozen. 


2.939 Flow — It is continuous motion of a fluid in 
pipes, ducts, channels, or through openings. 


2.940 Flow, Turbulent — It is fluid flow in which the 
fluid moves transversely as well as in the direction 
of the tube or pipe axis, as opposed to streamline or 
viscous flow. 


2.941 Flowmeter 


a) A device employing a detecting element that 
determines the flow rate of a volatile refrigerant 
in the gaseous or liquid phase within a closed 
conduit by measuring a suitable response of the 
detecting element. 


b 


wm 


A device for measuring or determining the mass 
or volumetric flow rate of a fluid in a duct, pipe, or 
terminal device. 


2.942 Fluid — It is substance, as a liquid or gas, that 
is capable of flowing, and which changes shape when 
acted on by a force. 


2.943 Fluid, Heat Transfer — Any gas, vapour, 
or liquid used to absorb heat from a source at a high 
temperature and reject it to a lower temperature 
substance. 


2.944 Fluid, Primary It is the refrigerant, 
distinguish from secondary fluid or brine. 


2.945 Fluid, Refrigerating — Any fluid used to 
transfer heat between cold refrigerant and the substance 
or bodies to be cooled, by circulation of the fluid without 
change of state or by an evaporation-condensation 
process at essentially equal pressures. 


2.946 Fluid, Secondary — Fluid cooled by the 
refrigerant in an indirect method of refrigeration. 


2.947 Fluidized-Bed Freezer — Having a perforated 
bottom through which an upward flow of cold air 
suspends the produce, usually of small unit size, and 
causes it to flow like a fluid. 


2.948 Fluorocarbon — Any ofa broad group of organic 
compounds analogous to hydrocarbons in which all or 
most of the hydrogen atoms of the hydrocarbon have 
been replaced by fluorine; some types also contain 
chlorine, and these are called chlorofluorocarbons. 
The saturated, aliphatic-type fluorocarbons comprise 
the series of refrigerants developed by Midgeley in the 
1930s. 


2.949 Foaming — Formation of a foam or froth of oil- 
refrigerant due to rapid boiling out of the refrigerant 
dissolved in the oil when the pressure is suddenly 
reduced. This occurs when the compressor starts 
operating, and if large quantities of refrigerant have 
been dissolved, large quantities of oil may boil out and 
be carried through the refrigerant lines. 


2.950 Fog — Suspended liquid droplets generated by 
condensation from the gaseous to the liquid state or by 
breaking up a liquid into a dispersed state, such as by 
splashing, foaming, and atomizing. 


2.951 Forced Circulation Air Cooler — It is a cooler 
which includes a fan or a blower for positive air 
circulation. 


2.952 Fore Cooler — In an ice plant, a device for 
cooling the water for ice making before it enters the 
cans; pre-cooler. 


2.953 Forecooler — It is a device for cooling water 
before pouring into ice-making cans; precooler in an 
ice plant. 


2.954 Four Pipe Air-Conditioning System — This 
is a multiple piping arrangement in which each unit is 


41 


IS 3615 : 2020 


fitted with supply and return pipes separately for hot 
and chilled water. 


2.955 Fractionation — A change in composition of a 
blend by preferential evaporation of the more volatile 
component(s) or condensation of the less volatile 
component(s). 


2.956 Free Delivery-Type Air Cooler — It is a cooler 
taking air from and discharging it-directly to the space 
to be treated without any element external to the cooler 
to impose air resistance. 


2.957 Free Delivery-Type Unit — It is a device which 
takes in air and discharges it directly to the space to 
be treated without external elements which impose air 
resistance. 


2.958 Freeze/Thaw Resistance — The property of a 
material which permits it to be alternately frozen and 
thawed through many cycles without damage. 


2.959 Freezer — A refrigerated chamber maintained 
substantially colder than the freezing point temperature 
of the contents. 


2.960 Freezer, Carrying — Cold storage freeze room, 
generally kept between —147°C and —7°C, to receive 
and hold frozen goods. 


2.961 Freezer, Household — A cabinet which is 
designed for the extended storage of frozen food at a 
recommended temperature of —18°C at 32 °C ambient, 
with inherent capability for the freezing of food and a 
source of refrigeration, and it is intended for household 
use. 


2.962 Freezer, Household, Chest — It is a household 
freezer which is accessible from the top. 


2.963 Freezer, Household, Upright (Vertical) — 
An upright freezer is a household freezer which is 
accessible from the front. 


2.964 Freezer, Sharp — It is a storage freezer room, 
generally kept at —34°C to —23°C, to receive unfrozen 
goods and freeze them. 


2.965 Freeze-Up — It is failure of a refrigerating 
unit to operate normally due to formation of ice at the 
expansion device. A valve may freeze shut or open, 
causing improper refrigeration in either case. On a coil, 
frost formation to the extent that air flow stops or is 
severely restricted. 


2.966 Freezing — It is the process of changing a 
liquid substance or the liquid content of a food or other 
commodity to a solid state by the removal of heat. 


2.967 Freezing Method, Refrigerated Plate — It 
is heat transfer by means of the direct contact of 
refrigerated plates with the packaged product. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.968 Freezing Method, Spray — Refrigerated liquid 
is sprayed into an insulated enclosure containing the 
product to be frozen. 


2.969 Freezing Method, Tray — It is a method of 
freezing food by subjecting it to moving refrigerated 
air. The food is arranged on shallow trays which are 
placed in portable racks and put in an insulated chamber 
through which the air is blown. 


2.970 Freezing Point — It is the temperature at 
which a given liquid substance will solidify or 
freeze upon removal of heat. Freezing point for water 
is 0°C. 


2.971 Freezing Time — It is the time for any complete 
freezing process to take place. 


2.972 Freezing, Quick — It is the process of freezing 
of a food or other commodity at a rapid rate of 
temperature reduction to produce a desired crystalline 
structure in the frozen product. 


2.973 Fresh Air Makeup — The volume of outdoor 
air introduced into a space. 


2.974 Friction Factor 


a) Any of several dimensionless numbers used 
in studying fluid friction in pipes, equal to the 
Fanning friction factor times some dimensionless 
constant. 


b) Coefficient used to calculate friction forces due to 
fluid flow. 


c) Quotient of the tangential force exerted by a fluid 
on a surface (per unit area) by half the product of 
the density and the square of the velocity. 


2.975 Friction Head — The height of liquid that 
represents system resistance caused by the flow. 


2.976 Friction Loss — It is the pressure loss due 
to friction between a flowing fluid and its contact 
surface. 


2.977 Frost Back — It is the flooding of liquid from an 
evaporator into the suction line, accompanied by frost 
formation on the suction line in most cases. 


2.978 Frozen Food — Any food in which the water 
contained in it is in the solid form. 


2.979 Fume — Solid particles formed by condensation 
of vapors of solid materials or a discharge gas or 
byproduct of combustion or chemical process. 
Very small airborne particles, usually less than one 
micrometer in size, from burning or melting materials 
or a chemical process. 

NOTE — Popularly, the term fumes refers to any kind of air 


contaminant; many laws and regulations add a qualification 
that the contaminant have some unwanted action. 


42 


2.980 Fume Hood (Generic Term) — It is a 
fume-collection device mounted over a work space, 
table, or shelf and serving to conduct unwanted 
gases away from the area enclosed. The least effective 
fume hood is a canopy hood, open on four sides. 
The most effective fume hood effective is an enclosed 
hood with operable front sash and fixed sides and 
back. 


2.981 Fume-Hood Face — It is the plane of minimum 
area at the front portion of a laboratory fume hood 
through which air enters when the sash is fully opened 
or opened to a stop position [usually in the same plane 
as the sash(es) when present]. 


2.982 Fume-Hood System — An arrangement 
consisting of a fume hood, its adjacent room 
environment, and the air exhaust equipment (such 
as blowers and ductwork) required to make the hood 
operable. 


2.983 Fumes — Solid particles commonly formed 
by the condensation of vapours from normally solid 
materials such as molten metals. Fumes may also be 
formed by sublimation, distillation, calcination, or 
chemical reaction wherever such processes create 
airborne particles predominantly below one micron 
in size. Such solid particles sometimes serve as 
condensation nuclei for water vapour to form smog. 


2.984 Fumigation — In the food industry, exposure 
of a product to gaseous substances, generally to kill 
insects, their eggs, and larvae. 


2.985 Functional Performance Testing (FPT) 


a) The process of determining the ability of the 
HVAC system to deliver heating, ventilating, and 
air-conditioning services in accordance with the 
final design intent. 


b 


wm 


That full range of checks and tests carried out 
to determine if all components, subsystems, 
systems, and interfaces between systems function 
in accordance with the contract documents. In 
this context, function includes all modes and 
sequences of control operation, all interlocks and 
conditional control responses, and all specified 
responses to emergency conditions. 


2.986 Furnace 


a) It is an enclosed chamber or structure in which 
heat is produced, as by burning fuel or by 
converting electrical energy. 


b) It is the part of a warm-air heating system in 
which energy is converted to heat. 


2.987 Fusible Plug — It is a device having a 
predetermined melting temperature member for the 
relief of pressure (gauge): 


a) an instrument for measuring pressure or liquid 
level; and 


b) also, an arbitrary scale of measurement for sheet 
metal thickness, wire, and drill diameters, etc. 


2.988 Fusion — It is a chemical term for a change of 
phase from solid to liquid. 


2.989 Garment Insulation (Iclu) — The increased 
resistance to sensible heat transfer obtained from 
adding an individual garment over the nude body. It is 
expressed in clo units. 


2.990 Gas — It is a usually highly superheated vapour 
which, within acceptable limits of accuracy, satisfies 
the perfect gas laws. 


2.991 Gas Constant — The coefficient R in the perfect 
gas equation pv = Rt. 


2.992 Gas, Flash — It is the gas resulting from the 
instantaneous evaporation of refrigerant in a pressure 
reducing device to cool the refrigerant to the evaporation 
temperature at a reduced pressure. 


2.993 Gas, Foul (Non-condensable Gas) — It is a gas 
in a refrigerating system, which does not condense at 
the temperature and partial pressure at which it exists 
in the condenser, therefore imposing a higher head 
pressure on the system. 


2.994 Gas, Inert — A gas that neither experiences nor 
causes chemical reaction nor undergoes a change of 
state in a system or process; for example, nitrogen or 
helium mixed with a volatile refrigerant. 


2.995 Gas/Air Mixture 


a) Lean mixture: Gas/air mixture of which the 
air content is more than adequate for complete 
combustion, and the resultant combustion gases 
will contain an excess of oxygen. 


b) Rich mixture: Gas/air mixture of which the air 
content is not sufficient for complete combustion 
and the resultant combustion gases will contain 
burnable but unburned hydrocarbons. 


2.996 Gaseous State — It is one of the three basic 
states of matter, characterized by the greatest freedom 
of molecules and the lack of any inherent fixed shape 
or volume. 


2.997 Generator — Basic part of an absorption 
system. A still provided with means of heating, used to 
drive refrigerant out of solution. 


2.998 Glass, Gauge — It is a device for showing a 
liquid level. 


2.999 Glass, Sight — Glass tube used to indicate the 
liquid level in tanks, bearings, and similar equipment. 


43 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1000 Glazing of Foods — It is freezing a coat of ice 
on frozen foods by dipping in water, the latent heat of 
the coat being absorbed inwards. 


2.1001 Glide — The absolute value of the difference 
between the starting and ending temperatures ofa phase- 
change process by a refrigerant within a component of 
a refrigerating system, exclusive of any subcooling or 
superheating. This term usually describes condensation 
or evaporation of a zeotrope. 


2.1002 Global Irradiance 


a) Quantity of solar energy incident on a unit surface 
area in unit time through a unit hemisphere above 
the surface, expressed in Btu/h-ft? (W/m?) (also 
known as hemispherical irradiance). 


b) The global (or hemispheric) solar radiant energy 
is the quantity of solar energy incident upon a unit 
surface area in unit time through a unit hemisphere 
above the surface, expressed in W/m? (Btu/[h-ft?]). 


2.1003 Global Warming Potential (GWP) — It is 
an index developed to provide a simplified means of 
describing the relative ability of a chemical compound 
to affect radiative forcing, if emitted to the atmosphere, 
over its lifetime in the atmosphere, and thereby to affect 
the global climate. Radiative forcing reflects the factors 
that affect the balance between the energy absorbed 
by the earth and the energy emitted by it in the form 
of longwave infrared radiation. The GWP is defined 
on a mass basis relative to carbon dioxide. The GWP 
for a compound must be calculated up to a particular 
integrated time horizon, for example, 20, 100, or 500 
years. The time horizon most widely accepted is 100 
years. 


2.1004 Graduated Acting — Term applied to a control 
instrument or device which functions to give throttling 
control; that is, operates between full ‘ON’ and full 
‘OFF’ position. 


2.1005 Graetz Number — It is a dimensionless 
number used in calculation of streamline flow, equal 
to the mass flow rate of a fluid times its specific heat at 
constant pressure, divided by the product of its thermal 
conductivity and a characteristic length. Also spelled 
Gratz number. Symbol Gz or NGz. 


2.1006 Graham’s Law — This law states that the rate 
of diffusion of a gas is inversely proportional to the 
square root of its density. 


2.1007 Grain of Moisture — The convenient unit of 
measurement of water vapor. 1 grain = 1/7 000 pound 
avoirdupois (historically, the average weight of a grain 
of wheat). 


2.1008 Grashof Number — It is a dimensionless 
number used in the calculation of free convection 
of a fluid caused by a hot body, equal to the product 


IS 3615 : 2020 


of the fluid’s coefficient of thermal expansion, the 
temperature difference between the hot body and the 
fluid, the cube of a typical dimension of the body, and 
the square of the fluid’s density divided by the square 
of the fluid’s dynamic viscosity. Also known as free 
convection number. Symbol Gr or NGr. 


2.1009 Gravity, Specific — Density compared to 
density of standard material; reference usually to water 
or to air. 


2.1010 Grease Duct — A containment system for the 
transportation of air and grease vapor. The system is 
designed and installed to reduce the possibility of 
the accumulation of combustible condensation, thus 
reducing the possibility of damage if a fire occurs 
within the ventilation system. 


2.1011 Grease-Laden Exhaust — It is the effluent 
from a cooking process that contains grease particles or 
grease vapor. This type of exhaust requires a rated hood 
(for example, Type I, Type I). 


2.1012 Grease-Removal Device — A listed device 
(such as, but not limited to, baffle filters, removable 
extractors, and stationary extractors) designed and 
installed to remove grease vapor and/or particles from 
the airstream. 


2.1013 Grease Tight — Constructed and performing 
in such a manner as to prevent the passage of grease 
under normal operating conditions. 


2.1014 Grid — A device for lifting a row of ice cans. 


2.1015 Grill — It is a louvered or perforated covering 
for an air passage opening which can be located in the 
side wall ceiling, or floor. 


2.1016 Grille — The louvered or perforated covering 
for an opening in an air passage which can be located 
in a wall, ceiling, or floor. 


2.1017 Gross Building Envelope Floor Area — The 
gross floor area of the building envelope, excluding 
slab-on-grade floors. 


2.1018 Gross Capacity — This is the load (uncorrected) 
that a machine, apparatus, device, or system is designed 
to deliver. 


2.1019 Gross Conditioned Floor Area — It is the 
gross floor area of a conditioned space. 


2.1020 Gross Floor Area — It is the sum of the 
floor areas of all the spaces within the building with 
no deductions for floor penetrations other than atria. 
Gross floor area is measured from the exterior faces of 
exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating 
buildings, but it excludes covered walkways, open 
roofed-over areas, porches and similar spaces, pipe 
trenches, exterior terraces or steps, roof overhangs, 


44 


parking garages, surface parking, and similar features. 


2.1021 Gross Refrigerating Capacity — Total rate 
of heat removal from all sources by the evaporator 
of a refrigerating system at stated conditions. It is 
numerically equal to the system refrigerating effect. 


2.1022 Gross Roof Area — The area of the roof 
measured from the exterior faces of walls or from the 
centreline of party walls. 


2.1023 Gross Semi-heated floor area — The gross 
floor area of semi-heated spaces. 


2.1024 Gross Sensible Capacity — It is the rate of 
sensible heat removal by the cooling coil for a given set 
of operating conditions. This value varies as a function 
of performance parameters such as EWB, ODB, EDB, 
and airflow rate. (Also see [sensible heat]). 


2.1025 Gross Total Capacity — The total rate of both 
sensible heat and latent heat removal by the cooling 
coil for a given set of operating conditions. This value 
varies as a function of performance parameters such as 
EWB, ODB, EDB, and airflow rate. 


2.1026 Gross Wall Area — The area of the wall 
measured on the exterior face from the top of the floor 
to the bottom of the roof. 


2.1027 Ground Coupling — In a thermal storage 
system or a heat pump, a closed loop of piping, plastic 
tubing, or ducting used as a heat exchanger between the 
ground (acting as a low-grade heat source or heat sink) 
and a circulating fluid. 


2.1028 Ground-Loop Heat Pump Application — The 
heat pump using a brine solution circulating through 
a subsurface piping loop functioning as a heat source/ 
heat sink. 


2.1029 Gillotine Damper — An isolation damper with 
a blade which is withdrawn from the duct area when the 
damper is fully open. 


2.1030 Habitable Space — The building space 
intended for continual human occupancy; such space 
generally includes areas used for living, sleeping, 
dining, and cooking but does not generally include 
bathrooms, toilets, hallways, storage areas, closets, or 
utility rooms. 


2.1031 Halogenated Chlorofluorocarbon — Fully 
halogenated chlorofluorocarbon is one in which 
all of the hydrogen atoms are replaced by chlorine 
and fluorine atoms. Atmospheric lifetimes of fully 
halogenated chlorofluorocarbons are long (75 years for 
CFC 11 and 111 years for CFC 12). 


2.1032 Heating Degree Day (HDD) — It is a 
measurement designed to quantify the demand for 
energy needed to heat a building 


2.1033 Head 


a) It is energy per unit mass of fluid divided by 
gravitational acceleration. 


b) In fluid statics and dynamics, it is a vertical linear 
measure 


2.1034 Head, Dynamic — In flowing fluid, the sum 
of the static and velocity pressures at the point of 
measurement (same as total head). 


2.1035 Head, Static — The static pressure of a fluid 
expressed in terms of the height of a column of the fluid, 
or of some manometric fluid, which it would support. 


2.1036 Head, Total — In flowing fluid, the sum 
of the static and velocity pressures at the point of 
measurement. 


2.1037 Head, Velocity — In a moving fluid, it is 
the height of the fluid or of some manometric fluid 
equivalent to its velocity pressure. 


2.1038 Heat — It is the form of energy that is 
transferred by virtue of a temperature difference. 


2.1039 Heat Capacity — It is the amount of heat 
necessary to raise the temperature of a given mass 
one degree. Numerically, the mass multiplied by the 
specific heat. 


2.1040 Heat Conductor — It is a material capable of 
readily conducting heat. 


2.1041 Heat Exchanger — A device specifically 
designed to transfer heat between two physically 
separated fluids. 


2.1042 Heat Exchanger, Air-to-Air Heat 
exchanger that transfers heat from an exhaust airstream 
to a separated supply airstream. 


NOTE — Fixed plate, rotary wheels, heat pipes, run-around 
coil loops, and shell-and-tube are the most common types. 


2.1043 Heat Exchanger, Counterflow Heat 
exchanger in which fluids flow in opposite directions 
approximately parallel to each other; inlets for the two 
fluids are at opposite ends of the exchanger. 


2.1044 Heat Exchanger, Crossflow — Heat exchanger 
in which fluids flow perpendicular to each other. 


2.1045 Heat Exchanger, Direct Contact — Heat 
exchanger in which the fluids exchanging heat are 
brought into contact with each other 


2.1046 Heat Exchanger, Double Wall — Heat 
exchanger in which two fluids are separated by two 
walls with the space between open to the atmosphere 
so that a fracture on one wall will not transfer one fluid 
into the other. Used in water systems with a potable 
fluid and a potentially hazardous fluid. 


45 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1047 Heat Exchanger, Double-Pipe — One in which 
two pipes are arranged concentrically, one within the 
other, and in which one fluid flows through the inner 
pipe and the other through the annulus between them. 


2.1048 Heat Exchanger, Heat Pipe — Heat exchanger 
in which tubular closed chamber containing a volatile 
fluid; in which heating one end of the pipe causes the 
liquid to vaporize and transfer to the other end where it 
condenses and dissipates its heat. The liquid that forms 
flows back toward the hot end by gravity or by means 
of a capillary wick. 


2.1049 Heat Exchanger, Parallel Flow — Heat 
exchanger in which fluids flow approximately parallel 
to each other and in the same direction. 


2.1050 Heat Exchanger, Shell-and-Tube — Heat 
exchanger in which nest of tubes or pipes, or a coil 
of tube or pipe, contained in a shell or container. The 
pipe(s) carries a fluid through it, while the shell is also 
provided with an inlet and outlet for flow of another 
fluid. — tube and fin type: The heat exchanger having 
no of tubes surrounded by fins. The gas inside the tube 
is cooled by the blowing air passing through the fins 
-Micro Channel Heat exchanger with multiple micro 
tubes having smaller diameter are used to transfer 
refrigerant. 


2.1051 Heat Exchanger, Plate — Heat exchanger in 
which fixed plates that separate and keep the hot and 
cold fluids separate. 


2.1052 Heat Interchanger — It is a device to transfer 
heat from the liquid refrigerant to the suction gas; also 
known as heat exchanger. 


2.1053 Heat of Fusion — Latent heat involved in 
changing between the solid and the liquid states. 


2.1054 Heat of Reaction — Heat per unit mass or per 
mole of one of the reagents of products of reaction in a 
chemical reaction; exothermal if given off, endothermal 
if absorbed. 


2.1055 Heat of the Liquid — It is enthalpy of a mass 
of liquid above an arbitrary zero. 


2.1056 Heat Pump — A refrigerating system employed 
to transfer heat into a space or substance. The condenser 
provides the heat while the evaporator is arranged to 
pick up heat from air, water, etc. By shifting the flow of 
air or other fluid, a heat pump system may also be used 
to cool the space. 


2.1057 Heat Pump, Cooling and Heating 
A refrigerating system designed so that the heat 
extracted at a low temperature and the heat rejected 
at a higher temperature may be utilized alternately 
or simultaneously for cooling and heating functions 
respectively. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1058 Heat Pump, Heating — A refrigerating system 
designed primarily to utilize the heat rejection from the 
system for a desired heating function. 


2.1059 Heat Rejection Effect — Condensing, that 
portion of the total refrigerant heat rejecting effect of 
a condenser which is used for condensing the entering 
refrigerant vapour to a saturated liquid at the entering 
refrigerant pressure. 


2.1060 Heat Rejection Effect, Subcooling — It is the 
total refrigerant heat rejection effect less the condensing 
heat rejection effect. 


2.1061 Heat Rejection Effect, Total Refrigerant — 
The total useful capacity of a refrigerant condenser for 
removing heat from the refrigerant circulated through 
it. 


2.1062 Heat Transmission — Any time rate of heat 
flow; usually refers to conduction, convection, and 
radiation combined. 


2.1063 Heat, Humid — It is the ratio of increase of 
enthalpy per kilogram of dry air, with its associated 
moisture, to rise of temperature under conditions of 
constant pressure and constant specific humidity. 


2.1064 Heat, Latent — Change of enthalpy during 
a change of state, usually expressed in kcal/kg. With 
pure substances, latent heat is absorbed or rejected at 
constant temperature at any pressure. 


2.1065 Heat, Latent of Condensation — It is the 
difference in specific enthalpy of a condensable fluid 
between its dry saturated vapour state and its saturated 
liquid state at the same pressure. 


2.1066 Heat, Latent of Condensation or Evaporation 
(Specific) — Thermodynamically, it is the difference 
in the specific enthalpies of a pure condensable fluid 
between its dry saturated vapour state and its saturated 
(not subcooled) liquid state at the same pressure. 


2.1067 Heat, Sensible — Heat which is associated 
with a change in temperature; specific heat exchange of 
temperature; in contrast to a heat interchange in which 
a change of state (latent heat) occurs. 


2.1068 Heat, Specific — The ratio of the quantity of 
heat required to raise the temperature of a given mass 
of any substance one degree to the quantity required 
to raise the temperature of an equal mass of a standard 
substance (usually water at 15°C) one degree. 


2.1069 Heat, Vital — Heat generated by fruits and 
vegetables in storage, due to ripening. 


2.1070 Heater — An apparatus or appliance to supply 
heat to a space or a fluid. 


46 


2.1071 Heating, Regenerative (or Cooling) — It is 
a process of utilizing heat, which must be rejected or 
absorbed in one part of the cycle, to perform a useful 
function in another part of the cycle by heat transfer. 


2.1072 HEPA Filter 
a) A high-efficiency particulate air filter. 


b) A filter with removal efficiencies of 99.97 percent 
or higher for a mass median particulate size of 
0.30 um (microns). 


2.1073 Herringbone Evaporator  (v-coil) 
Evaporator in which the tubes, arranged in the vertical 
plane, are bent in the form of a V. 


2.1074 Hydro Fluorocarbon (HFC) — A halocarbon 
that contains only fluorine, carbon, and hydrogen. 


2.1075 High Pressure Side (High Side) — It is 
that portion of a refrigerating system operating at 
approximately the condenser pressure. 


2.1076 Higher Heating Value (HHV) — The amount 
of heat produced per unit of fuel when complete 
combustion takes place at constant pressure, the 
products of combustion are cooled to the initial 
temperature of the fuel and air, and the vapor formed 
during combustion is condensed. HHV is expressed in 
Btu/Ib (J/kg) or Btu/ft? (W/m*) for gaseous fuel and in 
Btu/lb (J/kg) or Btu/gal (J/l) for liquid fuel. 


2.1077 Heating Load Factor (HLF) 


a) Itis ratio of the heating building load to the steady- 
state heating load. 


b) It is ratio of the total heating of a complete cycle 
for a specified period, consisting of an on time and 
off time, to the steady-state heating done over the 
same period at constant ambient conditions. 


2.1078 Hoarfrost — Deposit of ice crystals produced 
in a manner similar to dew but at a temperature 
below 0°C (32°F ). 


2.1079 Hold Over — In an evaporator, the ability 
to stay cold after heat removal from the evaporator 
stops. A material used to store heat in latent or sensible 
form. 


2.1080 Holding Charge — Reduced quantity of 
refrigerant or inert gas used to avoid the ingress of air 
and moisture into a component before start-up (also 
known as service charge). 


2.1081 Holdover Coil — An apparatus to store cold by 
fusion of ice or eutectic on a refrigerated coil. 


2.1082 Hot Gas Line — A line used to convey 
discharge gas from the compressor to the evaporator 
for the purpose of defrosting. 


2.1083 Hot/Humid Climate — The climate in which 
the wet-bulb temperature is 19°C (67°F ) or higher for 
3 500 h or more or 23°C (73°F ) or higher for 1 750 h 
or more during the warmest six consecutive months of 
a year that is typical for that geographic area. 


2.1084 Hourly Free-Floating Zone Air Temperature — 
A zone or space air temperature for a given hour 
when heating and cooling equipment is off or for an 
unconditioned space. 


2.1085 Hourly Heating Load — It is heating load for 
a given hour. 


2.1086 Hourly Incident Unshaded Solar Radiation — 
The sum of direct solar radiation and diffuse solar 
radiation that strikes a given surface for a given hour. 


2.1087 Humid Heat — The ratio of increase of enthalpy 
of moist air to the rise of temperature expressed per 
unit mass of the dry air component under conditions of 
constant pressure and humidity ratio. 


2.1088 Humidifier — It is a device to add moisture 
to air. 


2.1089 Humidifier, Central — It is a device which 
humidifies air to be circulated through ducts in an air 
conditioning system. 


2.1090 Humidifier, Room Spray Type — It is an air 
humidifier which sprays water directly into the room. 


2.1091 Humidify — It is adding water vapour to the 
atmosphere; adding water vapour or moisture to any 
material. 


2.1092 Humidifying Effect — Product of the mass of 
water evaporated times the latent heat at the evaporating 
temperature. 


2.1093 Humidistat — It is a regulatory device, 
actuated by changes in humidity, used for the automatic 
control of relative humidity. 


2.1094 Humidity — It is the water vapour within a 
given space. 


2.1095 Humidity Ratio (Specific Humidity) — The 
weight of water vapour (steam) associated with one- 
kilogram weight of dry air. 


2.1096 Humidity, Absolute — It is the weight of water 
vapour per unit volume. 


2.1097 Humidity, Percentage The ratio of 
the specific humidity of humid air to that of saturated 
air at the same temperature and pressure, usually 
expressed as a percentage (degree of saturation: 
saturation ratio). 


47 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1098 Humidity, Relative — The ratio of the 
molfraction of water vapour present in the air to the 
molfraction of water vapour present in saturated air 
at the same temperature and barometric pressure. 
Approximately, it equals the ratio of the partial pressure 
or density of the water vapour in the air to the saturation 
pressure or density, respectively, of water vapour at the 
same temperature. 


2.1099 HVAC Duct — The duct and fittings used for 
conveying air in residential, commercial, institutional, 
and industrial heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning 
systems. 


2.1100 HVAC System — The equipment, distribution 
systems, and terminals that provide, either collectively 
or individually, the processes of heating, ventilating, or 
air conditioning to a building or portion of a building. 


2.1101 HVAC System End-to-End Accuracy — It is 
the combined end-to-end accuracy of the EMCS (energy 
monitoring and control system) and the accuracy with 
which the EMCS sensors represent the HVAC process. 


2.1102 HVAC Zone — A space or group of spaces, 
within a building with heating, cooling, and ventilating 
requirements, that are sufficiently similar so that 
desired conditions (for example, temperature) can 
be maintained throughout using a single sensor ( for 
example, thermostat or temperature sensor). 


2.1103 Hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) — A halocarbon 
that contains only fluorine, carbon, and hydrogen. 


2.1104 Hydrolysis — It is the process of splitting-up 
of compounds by reaction with water, for example, of 
dichlorodifluoromethane or methyl chloride with water, 
in which case acid materials are formed. 


2.1105 Hydrometer — It is an instrument which, by 
the extent of its submergence, indicates the specific 
gravity of the liquid in which it floats. 


2.1106 Hydronic Distribution System — A thermal 
distribution system that uses water or a mixture of water 
and additives as the distribution medium in a building. 


2.1107 Hydronic System Balancing — Adjusting 
water flow rates through hydronic distribution system 
devices, such as pumps and coils, by manually 
adjusting the position valves or by using automatic 
control devices, such as automatic flow control valves. 


2.1108 Hydronics — The science of heating and 
cooling water. 


2.1109 Hydroscopic — Absorptive of moisture; readily 
absorbs and retains moisture. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1110 Hydrostatic Pressure 


a) It is the normal force per unit area that would be 
exerted by a moving fluid on an infinitesimally 
small body immersed in it if the body were carried 
along with the fluid. 


b) Pressure exerted by a fluid at rest. 


2.1111 Hygrometer — It is an instrument responsive 
to humidity conditions (usually relative humidity) of 
the atmosphere. 


2.1112 Hygrometry — It is the branch of science that 
deals with the measurement of humidity 


2.1113 Hygrostat — It is an automatic control, 
responsive to humidity. 


2.1114 Hyperbolic Tower — The cooling tower of 
hyperbolic shape that depends on natural draft for air 
movement through the tower. The air movement can be 
either crossflow or counterflow. 


2.1115 Ice Bank — It is a thermal accumulator in 
which during off-peak periods of refrigeration demand, 
ice is formed, and in which, during peak periods 
of refrigeration demand, compressor capacity is 
supplemented by melting ice. 


2.1116 Ice Can — An open content top tank or can 
have properly formed and reinforced sheet metal 
which, when submerged in a chilled antifreeze solution 
in an ice tank, will permit the freezing of its water into 
a block of ice of a desired form or weight. 


2.1117 Ice Can Frames — It is a metal frame or 
support in which a number of ice cans are fixed so as 
to enable them to be handled as a group rather than as 
individual cans. 


2.1118 Ice Can Truck — A wheeled frame with arm 
and hoist suitably arranged to be moved over the ice 
tank top for lifting individual cans from the tank. 


2.1119 Ice Maker Cycle — A cycle type automatic ice 
maker has separate and sequence water fill, freezing 
and harvesting phases of the ice making operation. 


2.1120 Ice Maker, Non-cyclic — A non-cyclic type 
(continuous) automatic ice maker has simulated 
water supply freezing and/or harvesting phases in the 
icemaking operation. 


2.1121 Ice Making Capacity — It is the amount of ice 
that a refrigerating plant is able to produce in a given 
period of time. 


2.1122 Ice Point — It is the temperature at which water 
freezes under normal atmospheric pressure 760 mm Hg 
and 0°C. 


2.1123 Ice Storage, Bin Rating — The capacity of an 
automatic ice-maker storage bin is the average weight 


48 


of ice contained in the bin when the bin-fill device 
terminates the ice-making operation. 


2.1124 Ice Tank Grating and Covers — A framework 
of wood, metal, or combination of both, which positions 
the ice cans in the ice-making tank and upon which are 
supported removable covers, usually of wood, above 
the cans to exclude dirt and the warmer air of the tank 
room. 


2.1125 Ice Tray — An ice tray is a container for 
freezing water in to ice. 


2.1126 Ice Tray Capacity Rating — The weight of 
water with the tray filled to within mm of the top and 
with the grids in place. 


2.1127 Ice Tray, Automatic-Fill — An automatic- 
fillice tray provides for automatic filling with water for 
freezing into ice. 


2.1128 Ice-Melting Equivalent — It is the amount 
of heat absorbed by one kilogram of ice at 0°C in 
liquefying to water at 0°C. 


2.1129 Icing — Chilling. 


2.1130 ID 
a) [[Induced Draft]]. 
b) Also, I.D., Inside Diameter. 


2.1131 Ideal Gas — The gas whose internal energy 
and enthalpy depend solely on temperature and, which 
is defined by pressure times specific volume divided by 
temperature, is a constant for a unit mass (PV/T = R). 
Also called perfect gas. 


2.1132 Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health 
(IDLH) — The maximum concentration from which 
unprotected persons are able to escape within 30 min 
without escape-impairing symptoms or irreversible 
health effects. 


2.1133 Indicating Thermometer — The thermometer 
designed for the visual display of temperature. 


2.1134 Indirect Cooling System — The system in 
which a liquid such as brine or water, cooled by the 
refrigerant, is circulated to the material or space to be 
refrigerated or is used to cool air so circulated. 


2.1135 Indirect Evaporative Cooler 


a) A heat and mass transfer device used to sensibly 
cool a primary airstream without addition of 
moisture, by means of an evaporatively cooled 
secondary airstream. Since the secondary air 
provides wet-bulb depression, it represents a heat 
sink to the primary air. 


b 


wm 


an indirect evaporative cooling device consisting 
of an indirect evaporative-cooling heat exchanger, 
a means of delivering and distributing water to the 


wet passages of the heat exchanger, a basin for 
collecting water, a recirculating water pump, and 
the piping that connects the basin and the water 
distribution system. 


2.1136 Indirect Evaporative Cooler with Integrated 
Heat Exchanger — An indirect evaporative cooling 
device with integrated primary (dry) and secondary 
(wet) air passages in a single sensible and evaporative 
heat exchanger. 


2.1137 Indirect Evaporative Cooling Unit — A 
packaged, semi-packaged, or component indirect 
evaporative cooling unit. The term cooling unit is also 
used interchangeably for evaporative cooling unit or 
evaporative cooler. 


2.1138 Indirect Fired — Machines using steam or hot 
liquids as a heat source. 


2.1139 Indirect Heat Exchanger — It is the heat 
exchanger taking heat from steam or water rather than 
heat directly (also known as water heater). 


2.1140 Indirect Ice Contact — Ice storage system using 
a method of heat exchange in which ice in containers is 
formed and melted by a circulating secondary coolant 
enclosed in a pipe or tube (also known as internal melt). 


2.1141 Indirect Load Management It is 
subfunction of power system distribution automation 
that implements economic incentives to induce user 
action, including automation provided by the user. 
Characterized by user local control of loads in response 
to economic incentives applied. Also called passive 
load management. 


2.1142 Indirect Refrigerating System — The system 
in which a secondary coolant, cooled or heated by the 
refrigerating system, is circulated to the air or substance 
to be cooled or heated. 


2.1143 Indirect System — It is the refrigerating system 
in which secondary coolant, cooled by a refrigerant, is 
circulated to the material or space to be cooled or is 
used to heat or cool circulated air. 


2.1144 Indirect-Fired Generator — Usually of the 
shell-and-tube type with the absorbent solution either 
flooded or sprayed outside the tubes and the heat source 
(steam or hot fluid) inside the tubes. 


2.1145 Indirect-Fired Heater — It is one in which 
combustion products do not come into contact with 
the material to be heated; heating of the material is 
accomplished by radiation or conduction from the 
heated surface. 


2.1146 Indirect-Heating System — It is system in 
which a fluid, such as air, is circulated to the material 
or space to be heated or is used to heat air so circulated. 


49 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1147 Indoor Air — The air inside the building 
envelope. 


2.1148 Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) — Attributes of 
the respirable air inside a building (indoor climate), 
including gaseous composition, humidity, temperature, 
and contaminants. See also [[indoor environment 
quality (IEQ)]]. 


2.1149 Indoor Air Volume — The entire air volume 
of a space or building in which the ventilation air is 
distributed, including ductwork and plenums. The 
volume of indoor furnishings, equipment, and occupants 
must be subtracted from the gross indoor volume that is 
based on interior dimensions of the space or building. 


2.1150 Indoor Coil — The heat exchanger that removes 
heat from or adds heat to the conditioned space. 


2.1151 Indoor Environment Quality (IEQ) — A 
perceived indoor experience of the building indoor 
environment that includes aspects of design, analysis, 
and operation of energy efficient, healthy, and 
comfortable buildings. Fields of specialization include 
architecture, HVAC design, thermal comfort, indoor air 
quality (IAQ), lighting, acoustics, and control systems. 
See [[indoor air quality (IAQ)]]. 


2.1152 Indoor Side — It is that part of the system that 
removes heat from or adds heat to the indoor airstream. 


2.1153 Induced Air Temperature The air 
temperature of the internally induced airflow. The 
mixed airstream resultant temperature of the mix of 
room air temperature stream with supply airstream. 


2.1154 Induced Draft — The fan-induced movement 
of hot gases from the heat-absorbing equipment. 


2.1155 Induced-Draft Water-Cooling Tower — It 
is the type of mechanical draft tower in which one or 
more fans are located in the air outlet to induce airflow 
through the air inlets. 


2.1156 Induction Unit, High-Pressure — It employs 
nozzles which produce a high velocity jet. The high 
velocity jet of primary air induces a flow of secondary 
air through coils located in the secondary air stream. 


2.1157 Induction Unit, Low-Pressure It is 
essentially an induction-type convector. It uses a jet of 
conditioned air (or primary air) to induce into the unit 
a flow of room or secondary air which mixes with the 
primary air. The mixture is discharged into the room 
through a grill at the top of the unit. Heating coils are 
located in the secondary air stream for use in heating. 


2.1158 Infiltration — It is air flowing inward as 
through a wall, leak, etc. 


2.1159 Infrared Emittance — It is the ratio of the 
infrared spectrum radiant flux emitted by a physical 


IS 3615 : 2020 


body to that emitted by a blackbody at the same 
temperature and under the same conditions. 


2.1160 Infrared Radiation (IR) — These are the 
range of electromagnetic radiation wavelengths greater 
than those of visible light and shorter than those of 
microwaves; generally, between 0.8 micrometre and 
1 millimetre. IR originates from either incandescent 
or non-incandescent hot bodies or from flames. The 
energy is used as a means of direct heat transfer from the 
source to the object(s) to be heated without materially 
heating the intervening air. 


2.1161 Initial Resistance — The pressure loss of the 
device operating at a specified airflow rate with no dust 
load, expressed in Pa (in of water). 


2.1162 Input Rating — The fuel burning capacity of 
an appliance in British thermal units per hour (Btu/h) 
[kilowatts (kW)] as specified by the manufacturer. 
Appliance input ratings are based on sea-level operation 
and need not be changed for operation up to 2 000 ft 
(600 m) altitude. 


2.1163 Insert System — A combined appliance where 
refrigerant tubing is inserted directly into the water 
heater, usually through one of the ports on the water 
heater; the inserted tubing is the desuperheater. 


2.1164 Insertion Thermostat 


a) Thermostat that has an element that is inserted 
directly into the airstream of a duct or pipe. 


b) Thermostat with the sensing member in the sensed 
variable but with the controlling element outside. 


2.1165 Insolation — Solar radiation incident on the 
solar collector. See [[instantaneous irradiance]]. 


2.1166 Instantaneous Efficiency — It is the ratio of 
the energy removed by the transfer fluid per unit of 
collector area to the total solar radiation incident on the 
collector per unit area (aperture or gross) during a test 
period for which the condition of the test corresponds 
to the steady state or quasi-steady state. 


2.1167 Instantaneous Heater — A self-contained 
packaged water-heating device that is capable of 
providing a continuous supply of hot water at a 
predetermined temperature without any storage 
capacity. Energy sources can be fuel fired (natural gas/ 
propane), electric, or steam fired. The term is typically 
utilized for domestic water-heating applications, 
but pool, spa, and radiant heating systems are also 
an application. Another term that is used on smaller 
heaters is point-of-use heaters. Some manufacturers 
allow for multiple unit installations when the need for 
larger capacity is required. 


2.1168 Instantaneous Irradiance — The rate at which 
solar radiation is incident on a unit surface area in unit 
time, measured in Btu/(h-ft?) [W/m?]. 


50 


2.1169 Instantaneous Thermal Efficiency — The 
amount of energy removed by the transfer fluid per unit 
of gross collector area during the specified time period 
divided by the global total solar radiation incident on 
the collector per unit area during the same test period, 
under steady state or quasi-steady state. 


2.1170 Insulation, Fill — Granulated, shredded, or 
powdered material prepared from vegetable, animal, or 
mineral origin. It can come in bulk or batt form. 


2.1171 Insulation, Sound — It is an acoustical 
treatment of fan housings, supply ducts, space 
enclosures, and other parts of system and equipment 
for isolation of vibration or to reduce transmission of 
noise. 


2.1172 Insulation, Thermal — A material having 
a relatively high resistance to heat flow and used 
principally to retard the flow of heat. 


2.1173 Integrated Heater — A boiler operated in 
conjunction with an indirectly fired storage water 
heater or an external storage tank in which domestic 
water, heated by the boiler, is stored. 


2.1174 Integrated System 


a) More than one building system, such as, lights 
and air distribution, combined into a common 
design. 


b) System in which many subsystems of a building 
are combined into a single package (for example, 
fire, security, clock, and HVAC). 


2.1175 Integrator — A device using signals from 
temperature and flow sensors through time for 
computing thermal energy transferred. 


2.1176 Intercooler (Interstage Cooler) — It is an 
apparatus for cooling compressed gas or vapor between 
two compression stages. 


2.1177 Intercooling — It is removal of heat from 
compressed gas between compression stages. 


2.1178 Intermediate Pressure (Interstage Pressure) 
— The pressure prevailing between stages of multistage 
compression. 


2.1179 Internal Discharge Makeup Air — The 
makeup air delivered directly to the interior of an 
exhaust hood such that it is exhausted without entering 
the occupied space. Sometimes this kind of makeup air 
is called short-circuit makeup air. 


2.1180 Internal Energy — Sum of all kinetic and 
potential energies contained in a substance due to the 
states of motion and separation of its several molecules, 
atoms, and electrons. It includes sensible heat (vibration 
energy) and that part of latent heat represented by the 
increase in energy during evaporation. 


2.1181 Internal Heat — Total passive heat generated 
within the conditioned space. It includes heat generated 
by lighting, computers, business machines, occupants, 
and mechanical and electrical equipment such as fans, 
pumps, compressors, and transformers. 


2.1182 Internal Process Heat — Heat from industrial 
activities and sources such as wastewater, boiler flue 
gas, coolants, exhaust air, and some waste materials. 
This heat is normally wasted unless equipment is 
included to extract it for further use. 


2.1183 Internal Static Pressure Loss — See [[Static 
Pressure Loss]]. 


2.1184 Interstitial Space — A space between two 
zones, rooms, or floors of a building. 


2.1185 I-P units (Inch-Pound Units) — Units using 
inches, pounds, and other designations. Examples are: 
foot, Btu, horsepower, gallon. As compared to SI unit 
system. 


2.1186 Irradiance 


a) Ata point of a surface, quotient of the flux incident 
on an element of a surface containing the point, 
divided by the area of that element, measured in 
watts per square meter. 


a) Radiant flux 
Irradiance]]. 


density. See also [[Solar 


2.1187 Irradiation — It is the process of subjecting 
foods, etc, to radiations of special wavelengths, such 
as the 0.253 7 micron wavelength, which kills certain 
bacteria; the quantity of radiant energy incident on a 
surface per unit time and unit area. 


2.1188 Isenthalpic Expansion — Expansion of a 
fluid during which no heat or mechanical energy is 
exchanged with the surroundings; the enthalpy remains 
constant. 


2.1189 Isentropic — An adjective describing a 
reversible adiabatic process; a change taking place at 
constant entropy. 


2.1190 Isobar 
a) Line at one barometric pressure. 
a) Line graph of state representing an isobaric 


process. 


2.1191 Isobaric — An adjective used to indicate a 
change taking place at constant pressure. 


2.1192 Isochome 
constant volume. 


Thermodynamic change at 


2.1193 Isochor — The graph that shows the variation 
of one quantity with another; for example, the variation 
of pressure with temperature when the volume of the 
substance is held constant. 


51 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1194 Isolated System — In thermodynamics, a 
system that can interchange neither matter nor energy 
with its surroundings. 


2.1195 Isolation Devices — Devices that isolate HVAC 
zones so that they can be operated independently of one 
another. Also, a device, such as a service valve, that 
allows maintenance of a portion of a system. Isolation 
devices include, but are not limited to, separate systems, 
isolation dampers/valves, and controls providing 
shutoff at terminal boxes. 


2.1196 Isomer — One of a group of substances having 
the same ultimate chemical composition but different 
molecular structures. 


2.1197 Isopsychric — It is state of constant relative 
humidity. 


2.1198 Isothermal — An adjective used to indicate a 
change taking place at constant temperature. 


2.1199 Jacketing — It is surrounding by a confined 
bath or stream of fluid for temperature control or heat 
absorption. 


2.1200 Jet — Concentrated airstream formed as 
primary air leaves the diffuser. 


2.1201 Jet Cooling — Quick chilling process using air 
at very high speed forced around the products, usually 
while those products are continuously moving on a 
conveyor belt. 


2.1202 Jet Freezing — Quick freezing process using 
cold air at very high speed forced onto the produce. 
Also called blast freezing. 


2.1203 Jind Filter — A filter used to collect the dust 
passing a device during an arrestance test. 


2.1204 Joint Brazed, High-Temperature — A gas- 
tight joint obtained by the joining of metal parts with 
alloys which melt at temperatures higher than 816°C 
but less than the melting temperatures of the joined 
parts. 


2.1205 Joint Brazed, Low-Temperature — A gas- 
tight joint obtained by the joining of metal parts with 
metallic mixtures or alloys which melt at temperatures 
below 816°C but above 538°C . 


2.1206 Joint, Mechanical — A gas-tight joint obtained 
by the joining of metal parts through a positive holding 
mechanical construction (such as flanged joint, screwed 
joint, flared joint). 


2.1207 Joint, Soldered — A gas-tight joint obtained by 
the joining of metal parts with metallic mixture alloys 
which melt at temperatures below 538°C. 


2.1208 Joint, Welded — A gas-tight joint obtained by 
the joining of metal parts in the plastic or molten state. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1209 Joule-Thomson Effect — It is the ratio of 
temperature change to pressure change (dt/dp) of 
an actual gas in a process of throttling or expansion 
without doing work or interchanging heat. 


2.1210 Kelvin Temperature SI absolute 
temperature scale on which the triple point of water is 
273.16 K and the boiling point is approximately 373.15 
K (1 K = 1°C). The Kelvin is the fraction 1/273.16 of 
the temperature of the thermodynamic triple point of 
water. 


2.1211 K-Factor (Thermal Conductivity) — The 
time rate of steady-state heat flow through a unit area of 
a homogeneous material, induced by a unit temperature 
gradient in a direction perpendicular to that unit area. 
Units are Btu in./h-ft?-°F or Btu/h-ft-°F [W/(m-K)]. 


2.1212 Kilovolt Ampere (kVA) — The product of the 
line current (amperes) times the nominal system voltage 
(kilovolts) times 1.732 for three-phase currents. For 
single-phase applications, kVa is the product of the line 
current (amperes) times the nominal system voltage 
(kilovolts). 


2.1213 King Valve (Master Valve) — 


a) Stop valve between receiver and liquid main in a 
refrigeration system. 


b) Stop valve on boiler head. 


2.1214 Kirchoff’s Law — It is the ratio of the 
emissivity of a heat radiator to the absorptivity of the 
same radiator is the same for all bodies, depending on 
frequency and temperature alone, and is equal to the 
emissivity of a blackbody. 


2.1215 Lag — The delay in action of the sensing 
element of a control device due to the time required 
for the sensing element to reach equilibrium with the 
property being controlled; namely temperature lag, 
flow lag, etc. 


2.1216 Latent Cooling Capacity — The rate, expressed 
in Btu/h (W), at which the equipment removes latent 
heat (reduces the moisture content) of the air passing 
through it under specified conditions of operation. 


2.1217 Latent Cooling Effect — It is that portion of the 
cooling effect that results in water vapor condensation 
in the air circulating through the equipment. 


2.1218 Latent Heat — The change in enthalpy 
associated with a change in humidity ratio, caused by 
the addition or removal of moisture. 


2.1219 Latent Heat Load — Cooling load required to 
remove latent heat (also known as moisture tons or wet 
tons). 


2.1220 Latent Heat of Condensation — The quantity 
of heat released on change of unit mass of saturated 


52 


vapor to saturated liquid with no change in temperature, 
measured in J/kg (Btu/Ibm ). 


2.1221 Latent Heat of Fusion — The quantity of heat 
required to change a unit mass of ice to water at 0°C 
(32°F ) temperature, measured in J/kg Btu/lbm (Btu/ 
Ibm ). 


2.1222 Latent Heat of Vaporization — The quantity 
of heat required to cause a change of state of a substance 
from a saturated liquid to a saturated vapor with no 
change in temperature, measured in J/kg (Btu/Ibm ). 


2.1223 Latent Storage — Use of a phase change of a 
medium for storing heating or cooling capacity. 


2.1224 Law of Partial Pressure, Dalton’s — Each 
constituent of a mixture of gases behaves as if it alone 
occupied the space. The sum of the individual pressures 
of the constituents equals the total pressure of the 
mixture. 


2.1225 Laws of Thermodynamics, First and 
Second — The first law states, in effect, the 
conservation of energy principle, particularly equating 
heat and mechanical energy and denying perpetual 
motion in so far as it implies a creation of energy. The 
second law states that the quality of energy varies as 
to form, particularly that heat energy is only in part 
capacity in a given transformable into mechanical 
energy. It denies the possibility of a machine operating 
in a cycle and developing mechanical energy from a 
single source of heat. 


2.1226 Leak Detector — A device used to detect 
refrigerant leaks in a refrigerating system, Halide torch- 
a flame tester that generally uses alcohol and burns 
with a blue flame, but when the sampling tube draws in 
Freon vapour, the flame color changes to bright green. 


2.1227 Leakage 


a) Volumetric flow rate required to maintain a 
constant static pressure in the test section. 


a) The amount of air interchanged between the room 
side and outdoor side through a unit as a result 
of construction features, faulty sealing techniques, 
temperature differential, or height differential. 


2.1228 Leakage Class — Divisions of airtightness 
based on normalized leakage. 


2.1229 Life-Cycle Assessment — It is the process 
of evaluating a component, product, assembly, 
building, etc. and its development from the moment of 
extraction of raw materials, transportation, processing, 
manufacturing, use, recyclability, and disposal and 
assigning a value or assessment of its cumulative and 
ultimate social, environmental and economic costs, 
benefits, and impacts. This is often referred to as a 
cradle-to-grave or cradle-to-cradle assessment. 


2.1230 Life-Cycle Cost — The cost of equipment 
over its entire life including operating, maintenance, 
and repair/replacement cost. May also include 
decommissioning cost. 


2.1231 Lift — It is the vertical distance that fluid must 
be pumped to reach a specified height. 


2.1232 Liner — It is the enclosure forming the interior 
of the general refrigerated compartment and/or some 
freezer compartment(s). The complete liner comprises 
the compartment liner in the cabinet, the exposed 
breaker strip surfaces, and the door liner(s). 


2.1233 Liquefaction — A change of state to liquid; 
generally used instead of condensation in case of 
substance ordinarily gaseous. 


2.1234 Liquid — It is state of matter intermediate 
between crystalline substances and gases in which 
the volume of a substance, but not the shape, remains 
relatively constant. 


2.1235 Liquid Indicator — It is a device, frequently 
combined with a strainer, located in the liquid line 
and having a sight port by which liquid flow may be 
observed for the presence of bubbles. 


2.1236 Liquid Line — It is the tube or pipe carrying 
the refrigerant liquid from the condenser or receiver of 
a refrigerating system to a pressure-reducing device. 


2.1237 Liquid Refrigerant Receiver — A vessel in a 
refrigerating system designed to insure the availability 
adequate liquid refrigerant for proper functioning of 
the system and to store the liquid refrigerant when the 
system is pumped down. 


2.1238 Liquid Refrigerant Separator — A vessel 
permanently installed in the low-pressure side of 
a system for the purpose of trapping unvaporized 
refrigerant. 


2.1239 Liquid Refrigerant Separator — A vessel 
permanently installed in the low pressure side of 
a system for the purpose of trapping unvaporized 
refrigerant. 


2.1240 Liquid, Volatile — Any liquid, which 
evaporates readily at atmospheric pressure and room 


temperatures. 


2.1241 Liquor — A solution used in absorption 
refrigeration. 


2.1242 Liquor, Strong (Rich) — A solvent with 
relatively high concentration of solute. 


2.1243 Liquor, Weak — A solvent with relatively low 
concentration of solute. 


53 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1244 Lithium Bromide — An absorption system 
where water (R-718) is the refrigerant and lithium 
bromide (LiBr) is the absorbent. 


2.1245 Load — The amount of heat per unit time 
imposed on a refrigerating system or the required rate 
of heat removal. 


2.1246 Load Factor — It is the ratio of actual mean 
load to a maximum load or maximum production 
capacity in a given period. 


2.1247 Load, Usage — It is the sum of the air change, 
product, and miscellaneous loads on a refrigerator; the 
sum of the loads exclusive of wall heat gains. 


2.1248 Loading Dust — A compounded, synthetic 
dust used for air cleaner capacity and efficiency testing. 


2.1249 Local Mean Air Velocity — The magnitude of 
the time-averaged vector of velocity at a point of an 
airstream. 


2.1250 Locker Plant It is a cold storage 
establishment containing food storage boxes or lockers 
for individual users. 


2.1251 Loop 


a) Electric circuit containing a complete, continuous 
path, as in a feedback loop. 


b) Sequence of instructions that is repeated until an 
exit condition prevails. 


2.1252 Loss of Charge Protector 


a) A device that is capable of discerning the loss of 
refrigerant charge in a refrigerating machine and 
of reacting to protect the apparatus from motor 
burnout. 


b) Splitting of a condensate line to permit vapors 
to pass above and condensate to pass below an 
obstruction. 


2.1253 Louver — An assembly of sloping vanes 
intended to permit air to pass through and to inhibit 
transfer of water droplets. 


2.1254 Low-Pressure Side (Low Side) — It is 
that portion of a refrigerating system operating at 
approximately the evaporator pressure. 


2.1255 Lubricant Circulation Rate — It is the 
ratio of the mass of lubricant circulating through a 
refrigerant system to the total mass of refrigerant and 
lubricant flowing through the system at a specified set 
of operating conditions. 


2.1256 Lyophilization It is the process of 
dehydrating a frozen substance under conditions of 
sublimation for example, vacuum freeze-drying. 


IS 3615 : 2020 
2.1257 M and V — Monitoring and Verification. See 
[[Monitoring]] and [[Verification]]. 


2.1258 Magnetic Cooling — Cryocooling by adiabatic 
demagnetization of certain paramagnetic substances. 


2.1259 Main — It is the pipe for distributing to or 
collecting from various branches. 


2.1260 Makeup Air 
a) Dedicated replacement air. 


b) Air brought into a building from the outdoors to 
replace air that is exhausted. Makeup air may or 
may not be conditioned. 


c) Any combination of outdoor and transfer air 
intended to replace exhaust air and exfiltration. 

d) In a clean room, air introduced to the secondary 
air system for ventilation, pressurization, and 
replacement of exhaust air. 


e 


wm 


In a laboratory or kitchen, outdoor air deliberately 
brought into the building from the outside and 
supplied to the vicinity of an exhaust hood 
to replace air, vapor, and contaminants being 
exhausted. Makeup air is generally filtered and fan 
forced, and it may be heated or cooled depending 
on the requirements of the application. Makeup air 
may be delivered through outlets integral to the 
exhaust hood or through outlets in the same room. 


2.1261 Makeup Air Unit — A air-handling unit that 
provides 100 percent outdoor air to offset air that is 
exhausted and exfiltrated, often providing conditioning 
or treatment of the outdoor air. 


2.1262 Makeup Water — Water supplied to replenish 
the water of a system. 


2.1263 Manifold — It is that portion of main in which 
several branches are close together. Also, single piece 
in which there are several fluid paths. 


2.1264 Manometer — An instrument for measuring 
pressures; essentially a U-tube partially filled with 
a liquid, usually water, mercury, or a light oil, so 
constructed that the amount of displacement of the 
liquid indicates the pressure being exerted on the 
instrument. 


2.1265 Manual Damper — It is a device that can be 
used to manually adjust the airflow rate by manual 
operation. 


2.1266 Manual Expansion Valve — A hand-operated, 
needle-type valve for controlling the flow of liquid 
refrigerant to an evaporator. 


2.1267 Manual Reset Valve — It is an automatic 
shutoff valve installed in a supply piping and set to shut 
off when unsafe conditions occur. The device remains 
closed until manually reopened. 


54 


2.1268 Mass — The quantity of matter in a body as 
measured by the ratio of the force required to produce a 
unit acceleration to the acceleration. 


2.1269 Maximum Allowable Charging Period — 
The period of time within which charging of the 
thermal storage device must be completed. This period 
is typically determined by the utility rate structure, the 
building operating schedule, and the design operating 
strategy. 


2.1270 Maximum Allowable Pressure 


a) It is the maximum gage pressure permitted on a 
completed system. 


b) The setting of the pressure-relieving devices 
protecting the system. 


2.1271 Maximum Deviation — For a set of multiple 
measurements of a physical property, from which 
statistical methods have been used to remove spurious 
data points, the greatest of the deviations of the set of 
indicated values from the mean of the set. 


2.1272 Maximum Outdoor Air Damper — A 
modulating damper or set of dampers used to 
control the outdoor airflow to the system in excess 
of minimum ventilation outdoor air for free cooling 
(airside economizer). Also called economizer outdoor 
air damper. May also serve to provide the minimum 
outside airflow control. 


2.1273 Maximum Temperature Glide The 
difference between the saturated liquid temperature 
(bubble point) and the saturated vapor temperature (dew 
point) for the ‘as-formulated’ blend composition at 
constant pressure. For a given pressure, the evaporator 
temperature glide in a direct-expansion system will 
typically be 70 percent to 80 percent of the maximum 
temperature glide (as the refrigerant blend entering the 
evaporator is a mixture of liquid and vapor) and not at 
the saturated liquid temperature of the ‘as-formulated’ 
blend composition. 


2.1274 Maximum Usable Cooling Supply 
Temperature — It is the maximum fluid supply 
temperature at which the cooling load can be met 
without adversely affecting latent space conditions. 


2.1275 Maximum Usable Discharge Temperature — 
It is the maximum fluid temperature at which usable 
cooling can be obtained from the thermal storage 
device. 


2.1276 M Btu/h — One thousand Btu per hour. An I-P 
unit of power. In SI, use watts or kilowatts. 


2.1277 Mean Monthly Outdoor Air Temperature — 
This temperature is based on the arithmetic average of 
the mean daily minimum and mean daily maximum 
outdoor (dry-bulb) temperatures for the month in 
question. 


2.1278 Mean Radiant Temperature (MRT) — The 
theoretical uniform surface temperature of an enclosure 
in which an occupant would exchange the same amount 
of radiant heat as in the actual nonuniform enclosure. 


2.1279 Mean Temperature — It can be calculated as 
the average of temperature readings over a period of 
time or the average of the high and low temperatures 
over a given time. 


2.1280 Mean Velocity — An average of the 
instantaneous air velocity over an interval of time. 


2.1281 Measurement Station — Element inserted in 
the ductwork that facilitates the determination of air 
temperature, air humidity, airflow rate, and/or pressure. 


2.1282 Meat Keeper — A meat keeper is an enclosed 
compartment or container which is designed for the 
storage of fresh meat at or near 0° C. 


2.1283 Mechanical Chiller — It is the refrigerating 
machine using mechanical energy input to generate 
chilled water. 


2.1284 Mechanical Cooling — Process of reducing 
the temperature of a fluid by using vapor compression, 
absorption, desiccant dehumidification combined 
with evaporative cooling, or other energy-driven 
thermodynamic means. Indirect or direct evaporative 
cooling alone is not considered mechanical. 


2.1285 Mechanical Efficiency — The ratio of the 
compression energy or work of a compressor to the 
energy or work input. 


2.1286 Mechanical Energy — It is capacity for doing 
work, usually expressed in work units (foot-pounds or 
newton-meters); sometimes in heat units (Btu or joule). 
Energy may be inherent in the speed of a body (kinetic 
energy) or in its position relative to another body 
(potential energy). 


2.1287 Mechanical Heating— Raising the temperature 
or change of phase of a solid or fluid by use of fossil- 
fuel burners, electric resistance heaters, heat pumps, or 
other systems that require energy to operate. 


2.1288 Mechanical Refrigerating System 
Refrigerating system using mechanical compression to 
move the refrigerant from the low-pressure side and to 
deliver it to the high-pressure side of the system. 


2.1289 Mechanical Seal — Seal with small enough 
clearance between moving parts to provide pressure 
tightness and minimize leakage between mechanical 
parts. 


2.1290 Mechanical Ventilation 


a) Itis the active process of supplying or removing air 
to or from an indoor space by powered equipment 


55 


IS 3615 : 2020 


such as motor-driven fans and blowers but not by 
devices such as wind-driven turbine ventilators 
and mechanically operated windows. 


a 


wma 


Ventilation provided by mechanically powered 
equipment, such as motor-driven fans and blowers, 
but not by devices such as wind-driven turbine 
ventilators and mechanically operated windows. 


2.1291 Mechanical, Draft-water Cooling Tower — 
The tower through which air movement is affected by 
one or more fans. There are two main types: forced 
draft with fans located at the air inlet and induced draft 
with fans located at the air exhaust. See also [[cooling 
tower]]. 


2.1292 Medium Pressure Refrigerant System — 
The system whose gage pressure at room temperature 
(23.3°C [74°F ]) is greater than atmospheric pressure 
but typically less than 100 psig (689 kPa). Common 
medium pressure refrigerants include R-12, R-500, and 
R 134a. 


2.1293 Medium Temperature Refrigerated 
Storage — The temperature range for maintaining 
food product above freezing in refrigeration 
applications. Typically, 3°C to 5°C (35°F to 40°F ). 


2.1294 Melting — Change of state from solid to liquid. 


2.1295 Melting Point — For a given pressure, the 
temperature at which the solid and liquid phases of the 
substance are in equilibrium. 


2.1296 MERV Rating — See [Minimum Efficiency 
Reporting Values (MERV)]. 


2.1297 Metabolic Heat — Heat produced by oxidation 
of food elements (that is, metabolism) in humans or 
animals. The met represents the average heat produced 
by a sedentary man, approximately 90 kcal/h or 100 W 
(340 Btu/h). 


2.1298 Metabolic Rate 


a) The rate of energy production of the body. The 
rate varies with the type of activity. 


a) The rate of transformation of chemical energy into 
heat and mechanical work by metabolic activities 
within an organism, usually expressed in terms of 
unit area of the total body surface. Metabolic rate 
is expressed in met units. 


2.1299 Metabolism — It is the chemical change 
in living cells by which energy is provided for vital 
processes. 


2.1300 Metered Data — The energy end use data 
collected over time using a measuring device or group 
of measuring devices. 


2.1301 Metered Demand — The average time rate of 
energy flow over a period of time. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1302 Methanol (Methyl Alcohol) — (CH,OH) 
Colorless, toxic, flammable liquid with a boiling at 
65.0°C (148.9°F ) and having a flash point (open cup) 
of 54°F (12.2°C). 


2.1303 Microclimate — Conditions such as 
temperature, humidity, and motion of air within an 
enclosure or limited outdoor area. 


2.1304 Minimum Efficiency Reporting Values 
(MERV) — It is the scaled rating of the effectiveness of 
air filters. The scale is designed to represent the worst- 
case performance of a filter when dealing with particles 
in the range of 0.3 to 10 micrometres. The MERV rating 
is from | to 16. Higher MERV ratings correspond to a 
greater percentage of particles captured on each pass, 
with a MERV rating of 16 filters capturing more than 
95 percent of particles over the full range. 


2.1305 Minimum Outdoor Air Damper — A damper 
in parallel with the maximum outdoor air damper 
to provide the minimum outdoor air required for 
ventilation. 


2.1306 Mixed Air 
a) Air that contains two or more streams of air. 


b) Combined outdoor air and recirculated air. 


2.1307 Mixed Flow Fan — The fan whose 
characteristics combine both centrifugal and axial 
airflow. 


2.1308 Mixing Air Diffusion — Air diffusion where 
the mixing of supply air and room air is intended. 


2.1309 Mixing Box (blending box; mixing unit) — It 
is a compartment into which two air supplies are mixed 
together before being discharged. 


2.1310 Mixing Section — A section for the mixing of 
two air streams at differing temperatures or humidity 
or both. 


2.1311 Mixing System — A type of air-distribution 
system in which conditioned air is delivered to the space 
at a velocity sufficient to promote complete mixing 
of supply air with room air, thereby maintaining the 
entire volume of air in the space at a relatively uniform 
temperature, humidity, and air quality condition. A 
conventional overhead air distribution, which supplies 
and returns air at ceiling level, is an example of a 
mixing system. 


2.1312 Mixing Valve — A three-way valve to mix two 
fluids. Compare to [Diverting Valve]. 


2.1313 Mixture, Eutectic — A mixture, which melts 
or freezes normally at constant temperature and 
with constant composition. Its melting point is 
usually the lowest possible for mixtures of the given 
substances. 


56 


2.1314 Modular Air-Conditioning System — On- 
site assembly of prefabricated components, each with 
a functional role in an air-conditioning (air-circulation, 
air-filtration, cooling, heating, humidification, etc.) 
system. 


2.1315 Modulating — It is a control, tending to adjust 
by increments and decrements; also one modified by 
variation of a second condition. 


2.1316 Moisture Carryover — The retention and 
transport of water droplets in a gas stream (usually air) 
(for example, water droplets formed by bridging fins of 
a coil and transported by the airstream). 


2.1317 Moisture Content — It is the amount of 
moisture per unit volume of porous material, w, in lbm/ 
ft? (kgm/m*). 


2.1318 Moisture Ratio — It is the amount of moisture 
per unit weight of dry porous material or the volume of 
moisture per unit volume of dry material, in percent. 


2.1319 Moisture Removal Capacity — The mass of 
water vapor removed from the process air per unit of 
time and expressed in kg/h (Ib/h). 


2.1320 Moisture Removal Rate — The mass of water 
vapor removed from the desiccant per unit of time via 
the regeneration process (desorption) and expressed in 
kg/h (Ib/h). 


2.1321 Mol Fraction Water Vapor — In humid air, 
it is the ratio of the number of water vapor mols to 
the total number of mols in the mixture. Compare to 
[[humidity]]. 


2.1322 Mole (Mel) — It is a weight of a substance 
numerically equal to its molecular weight. The unit is 
a gram mol. 


2.1323 Molecular Sieve — An adsorbent composed 
of porous alumino-silicates with pores of uniform 
molecular dimensions which will selectively adsorb 
molecules of the substance to be gathered. 


2.1324 Mollier Diagram (Mollier Chart) — The 
graph of enthalpy versus entropy of a vapor on which 
isobars, isothermals, and lines of equal dryness are 
plotted. 


2.1325 Monitoring and Verification (M and V) Plan 


a) A plan for gathering of relevant measurement 
data over time to evaluate equipment or system 
performance. The plan defines specific M 
and V methods to be used, including baseline 
determination, performance period measurements, 
savings verification calculations, and acceptance 
criteria. The M and V methods chosen are 
consistent with the current facility requirements 
(CFR). During the implementation phase, a list is 


developed of specific instrumentation and data- 
gathering equipment that must be maintained 
at the site. During the hand-off phase, the type, 
frequency, and distribution of M and V reports to 
be submitted for approval is confirmed. 


b 


wm 


Equipment to measure and record the parameters 
of the HVAC and R systems (that is, temperature, 
humidity, pressure, electric current, kW, and volts). 


Gathering of relevant measurement data 
over time to evaluate equipment or system 
performance (for example, chiller electric 
demand, inlet evaporator temperature and flow, 
outlet evaporator temperature, condenser inlet 
temperature, and ambient dry-bulb temperature 
and relative humidity or wet-bulb temperature, for 
use in developing a chiller performance map (for 
example, kW/ton versus cooling load and versus 
condenser inlet temperature). 


2.1326 Multicellular Metal-Foil Thermal 
Insulation — Thermal insulation consisting of 
waffled or corrugated sheets of metal foil to form a 
cellular structure. 


Cc 


wa 


2.1327 Multichannel Heat Exchanger — It is an 
apparatus in which fluids exchange heat by flowing in 
an assembly of separated channels. 


2.1328 Multilayer Thermal Insulation — Many thin 
layers of materials combined to obtain a very high 
thermal resistance (superinsulation). 


2.1329 Multishell Condenser — The condenser 
consisting of a number of closed shell-and-tube units. 


2.1330 Multistage Compression — Compression in 
two or more stages; usually the low-stage compressor 
discharges to the suction of a higher-stage compressor. 


2.1331 Multistage Compressor — Compressor in 
which compression is accomplished in more than two 
stages in separate cylinders or impellers. 


2.1332 Multistage Expansion — This process allows 
refrigerant to pass through two or more expansion 
valves in series with each other. 


2.1333 Multistage Refrigerating System — The 
system in which compression of refrigerant is carried 
out in two or more steps. 


2.1334 Multizone 


a) Air-conditioning unit capable of handling variable 
loads from different sections of a building 
simultaneously. 

b) Spatial divisions of a building having different air- 
conditioning loads. 


2.1335 Natural Convection Air Cooler — An air cooler 
depending upon natural convection for air circulation. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1336 Nebulize — To supply very fine water spray or 
steam into an airstream or enclosure. 


2.1337 Negative Air Pressure 


a) In a building, it is a pressure lower than pressure 
outdoors. 
NOTE — As the negative pressure increases, outdoor air is 
drawn in through any openings in the building envelope. 

b) In building spaces, pressure lower than pressure in 
adjacent spaces or rooms. 


2.1338 Net Capacity 


a) The maximum load that a machine, apparatus, 
device, or system is capable of carrying under 
service conditions. 


b) Capacity (volume) of a room after deducting the 
loss of space due to coils, columns, air ducts, 
dunnage, and other dedicated space required to 
provide air circulation. 


2.1339 Net Cooler Refrigerating Capacity — The 
rate of heat removal from a fluid flowing through a 
cooler (air, water, brine, etc.) at stated conditions; 
the difference in specific enthalpies of the cooling 
fluid entering and leaving the cooler. In case frosting 
occurs within the cooler, the latent heat of fusion and 
the subcooling heat of the ice (frost) must be added in 
determining the net cooler refrigerating capacity. 


2.1340 Net Exhaust Flow Rate — The exhaust flow 
rate for a hood minus any internal discharge makeup 
airflow rate. 


2.1341 Net Latent Cooling Effect — The total useful 
capacity of the air conditioner for removing water 
vapor from the space to be conditioned. 


2.1342 Net Refrigerating Effect 


a) The product of the mass rate of water or brine 
flow and the difference in enthalpy of the 
entering and leaving water or brine, expressed in 
heat units per unit of time. It is expressed also by 
the total refrigeration effect less the heat leakage 
losses. 


b) (Condensing unit capacity) The rate at which heat 
is removed from outer media by a refrigerant in 
the low-pressure side or by the difference in total 
enthalpy between refrigerant liquid leaving the 
unit and the total enthalpy of the refrigerant vapor 
entering it. 


c) (Packaged air conditioners) The rate at which 
heat is removed from the airstream, as measured 
entering the cooling coil and leaving the unit. 


d) The rate at which heat is removed by the primary 
refrigerant from the cooling medium (secondary 
coolant) that is used to transmit the refrigerating 
effect. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1343 Net Refrigeration Capacity — This is portion 
of the total refrigeration capacity of a liquid cooler 
that produces useful cooling. This is the product of 
the mass flow rate of liquid, specific heat of the liquid, 
and the difference between entering and leaving liquid 
temperatures expressed in energy units per unit of time. 
It is represented also by the total refrigeration capacity 
less the heat leakage rate 


2.1344 Net Sensible Capacity — The gross sensible 
capacity less the default rate of fan heat assumed by the 
manufacturer; this rate of fan heat is not necessarily the 
same as for the actual installed fan. 


2.1345 Net Total Capacity — The gross total capacity 
less the default rate of fan heat assumed by the 
manufacturer; this rate of fan heat is not necessarily the 
same as for the actual installed fan. (See [[Adjusted Net 
Total Capacity]]). (Also see [[Gross Total Capacity]]). 


2.1346 Net Total Cooling Capacity — Total cooling 
capacity with fan power adjustment. 


2.1347 Net Total Cooling Effect — The refrigeration 
capacity available for space and product cooling. It 
is equal to the gross total cooling effect less the heat 
equivalent of energy required to operate the cooler. 


2.1348 Neutral Pressure Level — The building 
height at which there is no difference between inside 
and outside building static air pressure. Also known as 
neutral zone. 


2.1349 Newton’s Law of Cooling — The rate of heat 
flow out of an object by both natural convection and 
radiation is proportional to the temperature difference 
between the object and its environment and to the 
surface area of the object. 


2.1350 Night Cover — The removable cover placed 
over an open-top refrigerated display case during 
overnight periods in order to reduce energy transfer 
with the environment. 


2.1351 Night Setback Thermostat — Manual or 
automatic reset of temperature control point of a 
thermostat, usually coupled with a start-up time for 
restoration of desired daytime temperature level. 


2.1352 No-Frost Refrigerating System 


a) System in which all the refrigerated surfaces in 
the cabinet are defrosted by an automatic defrost 
system. 


b) Use of a secondary coolant sprayed on evaporator 
surfaces to prevent formation of frost; water 
absorbed in the coolant is removed by distillation. 


2.1353 Noise — It is sound, or a sound of any sort; 
especially sound without agreeable musical quality. 


58 


2.1354 Noise Criteria Curves (NC Curves) — Curves 
that define the limits which the octave-band spectrum 
of a noise source must not exceed if a certain level of 
occupant acceptance is to be achieved. 


2.1355 Nominal Capacity 


a) The capacity recorded and reported by a given 
test. 


b) The capacity reported by the manufacturer for a 
specified device. 


2.1356 Nominal Freezing — For a given product 
of specified dimensions and at an initial uniform 
temperature of 0°C (32°F ), the time it takes for the 
thermal centre to reach —10°C (14°F ). 


2.1357 Nominal Size of an Air Terminal — The 
nominal value of dimensions of the prepared opening 
(duct) into which the air terminal device is to be fitted. 


2.1358 Nominal Size of Duct and Fitting — The 
reference dimension used for designation, calculation, 
and application of duct and fitting. 


2.1359 Nominal Storage Capacity — A theoretical 
capacity of the thermal storage device, which in 
many cases is greater than the usable storage capacity. 
This measure should not be used to compare usable 
capacities of alternative storage systems. 


2.1360 Nominal Time Constant — The indoor air 
volume of a space or building divided by the rate of 
outdoor air supply; the nominal time constant also 
equals the average age of air exiting from the space or 
building. The reciprocal of the nominal time constant is 
called the nominal air change rate. 


2.1361 Noncyclic Ice Maker — Continuous ice 
maker with simultaneous water supply, freezing, and 
harvesting phases in the ice-making operation. 


2.1362 Non-Isothermal Jet — The jet in which the 
primary air temperature differs from the mean space 
temperature. 


2.1363 Nonstandard Part-Load Value (NPLV) — 
A single-number part-load efficiency figure of merit 
calculated and referenced to conditions other than IPLV 
conditions for units that are not designed to operate at 
standard rating conditions. 


2.1364 Non-Volatile Refrigerant — Refrigerant that 
remains a liquid during the process of absorbing heat 
within the air cooler. 


2.1365 Normalized Leakage — The dimensionless 
value calculated from the leakage area, building height, 
and floor area that describes the relative airtightness of 
the building envelope. 


2.1366 Nozzle — It is a short tube with a taper or 
constriction used to speed up or direct a flow of fluid. 


2.1367 Nusselt Number The dimensionless 
number, used in calculation of forced convection, 
that gives a measure of the ratio of total heat transfer 
to conductive heat transfer, equal to the heat transfer 
coefficient times a characteristic length divided by the 
thermal conductivity. 


2.1368 Occupant Sensor — It is a device that detects 
the presence or absence of people within an area and 
that causes lighting, equipment, or appliances to be 
regulated accordingly. 


2.1369 Occupant-Controlled Naturally Conditioned 
Spaces — Those spaces where the thermal conditions 
of the space are regulated primarily by the opening and 
closing of windows by the occupants. 


2.1370 Occupiable Space 


a) Any enclosed space inside the pressure boundary 
(including, but not limited to, all habitable spaces, 
toilets, closets, halls, storage and utility areas, and 
laundry areas) and intended for human activities. 


b) The portion of the premises accessible to or 
occupied by people, excluding machinery rooms. 


2.1371 Occupied Zone — The portion of the space that 
is normally occupied. The occupied zone is typically 
defined as encompassing all space from the floor level, 
excluding the space from the floor to 0.076 m (0.25 ft 
) above the floor, to 1.83 m (6 ft ) above the floor and 
excluding the space from the wall to 0.61 m (2 ft ) away 
from any wall. 


2.1372 Odour — A quality of gases, liquids, or 
particles that stimulates the olfactory organ. 


2.1373 Odour Dispersion Time — Time taken 
to reduce odour to a defined level from a given 
concentration and resulting from a standard test. 


2.1374 Odour Reduction Time — Efficiency of the 
reduction of odours by a device. 


2.1375 Off-Cycle Defrosting 


a) Method of defrosting in which the temperature of 
the evaporator coils is allowed to rise naturally 
during an off-cycle, during which no refrigerant is 
supplied. 


b) rapid heating of the evaporator coil during the off 
part of each cycle. 


2.1376 Off-Peak System — Refrigerating or cooling 
system with control that normally avoids use of power 
during peak-load periods and usually requires means 
for storage of energy. 


2.1377 Oil — Oil is various viscous, combustible, 
water-immiscible liquids that are soluble in certain 


59 


IS 3615 : 2020 


organic solvents, and may be animal, vegetable, 
mineral, or synthetic in origin. 


2.1378 Oil Charge — It is a normal quantity of oil ina 
reciprocating compressor or engine. 


2.1379 Oil Receiver — It is a vessel for receiving 
and separating collected oil prior to returning to or 
discharging from the refrigerating system. 


2.1380 Oil Removal — It is removal of oil or oil vapor 
from a refrigerant vapor. 


2.1381 Oil Return — It is migration of oil from the 
evaporator to the crankcase of the compressor. 


2.1382 Oil Separator — A device for separating oil 
and oil vapour from the refrigerant, usually installed in 
the compressor discharge line. 


2.1383 Oil Still — It is a device to separate oil from 
refrigerant by a distillation process. 


2.1384 Oil, Refrigerating — It is a stable fluid which 
is compatible with system components, will form a 
friction-reducing film between rubbing surfaces, seal 
critical clearances, and has low-temperature properties 
suitable for the application. The oil used for cooling the 
moving / rotating parts inside the compressor 


2.1385 Oil, Synthetic — It is a synthesized material, 
often derived from petroleum compounds, but 
containing no petroleum oil fractions, that can act as 
a lubricant. 


2.1386 Olf — Unit for quantifying the source strength 
of air pollution. One olf is the emission rate of air 
pollutants (bioeffluents) from a standard person. 


2.1387 One-Pipe Hydronic System — The piping 
system in which a single pipe loop provides the cooling 
or heating distribution to multiple devices or through 
secondary or tertiary loops. 


2.1388 One-Pipe Steam System — The piping system 
in which the condensable vapor withdrawn from the 
supply main passes into a heating unit and returns as 
condensate to the same supply main. 


2.1389 Open = Shell-and-Tube Condenser 
Condenser in which the water passes in a film over 
the inner surfaces of the tubes, which are open to the 
atmosphere. 


2.1390 Open System — Heating or refrigerating piping 
system in which the circulating water or brine return 
main is connected to an open-vented elevated tank that 
serves as a reservoir to accommodate expansion and 
contraction of the fluid and as an inspection point for the 
condition of the fluid. See also [[Down-Feed System]]. 


2.1391 Open-Brine Refrigerating System — The 
system in which the circulating brine returns to an open 


IS 3615 : 2020 


tank which serves as a reservoir for the pump suction 
and as an inspection tank for the condition and flow of 
brine. 


2.1392 Open-Loop Control — The control system 
in which the effect of the control action is not felt by 
the sensed variable (for example, outside air when it is 
used for reset). Compare to [[Closed-Loop Control]]. 


2.1393 Open-Loop Control System — The control 
system that controls outputs by inputs only and where 
the actual system output is not considered. 


2.1394 Open-Spray Recovery Loop Exchanger 
— The extended surface cooling towers with 
interconnecting piping placed in supply and exhaust 
airstreams. A circulated heat and mass transfer fluid 
is alternately brought in direct contact with each 
airstream. 


2.1395 Open-Type Compressor — The refrigerant 
compressor with a shaft or other moving part extending 
through its casing to be driven by an outside source of 
power, thus requiring a shaft seal or equivalent rubbing 
contact between fixed and moving parts. 


2.1396 Operating Efficiency — It is the ratio of output 
to input. 


2.1397 Operating Life — Expected useful life of a 
device, usually expressed in number of operations or 
years/months/hours of typical operation. 


2.1398 Operating Pressure — The pressure occurring 
at a reference point in a system when the system is in 
operation. 


2.1399 Operative Temperature — The uniform 
temperature of an enclosure in which an occupant would 
exchange the same amount of heat by radiation plus 
convection as in the actual nonuniform environment. 
Compare to [[Mean Radiant Temperature]]. 


2.1400 Optimum Operative Temperature — The 
operative temperature that satisfies the greatest possible 
number of people at a given clothing and activity level. 
See [[Operative Temperature]]. 


2.1401 Optimum Refrigerant Charge — This is the 
charge achieving maximum possible refrigerant effect 
within design limitations. 


2.1402 Optimum Start — A control system that is 
designed to automatically adjust the start time of an 
HVAC system each day with the intention of bringing 
the space to desired occupied temperature levels 
immediately before scheduled occupancy. 


2.1403 Organic Compound — Originally a chemical 
compound produced by a life process. Now it is 
generally understood to include all compounds 
containing carbon. 


60 


2.1404 Outdoor Air 


a) Air outside a building or taken from the external 
atmosphere and, therefore, not previously 
circulated through the system. 


b) Ambient air that enters a building through a 
mechanical ventilation system, through intentional 
openings for natural ventilation, or by infiltration. 


2.1405 Outdoor Air Change Rate — It is the ratio 
of the volumetric rate at which outdoor air enters a 
building space to the building volume with identical 
volume units (normally expressed in units of air 
changes per hour). 


2.1406 Outdoor Air Fraction — The outdoor air 
fraction is the ratio of the volumetric flow rate of 
outdoor air brought in by the air handler to the total 
supply airflow rate. 


2.1407 Outdoor Coil — The heat exchanger that 
rejects heat to, or absorbs heat from, a source external 
to the conditioned space. 


2.1408 Outdoor Dry-Bulb Temperature (ODB) — 
See [Dry-Bulb Temperature]. 


2.1409 Outdoor Side — The part of the system that 
rejects heat to or absorbs heat from a source external to 
the indoor airstream. 


2.1410 Outlet, Ceiling — A round, square, rectangular, 
or linear air diffuser located in the ceiling, which 
provides a horizontal distribution pattern of primary 
and secondary air over the occupied zone and induces 
low-velocity secondary air motion through the occupied 
zone. 


2.1411 Outlet, Slotted — A long, narrow air 
distribution outlet, comprised of deflecting members, 
located in the ceiling, side wall, or sill, with an aspect 
ratio greater than , designed to distribute supply air in 
varying directions and planes, and arranged to promote 
mixing of primary air and secondary room air. 


2.1412 Outlet, Varied — A register, or grill, equipped 
with vertical and/or horizontal adjustable vanes. 


2.1413 Output — It is capacity; duty; performance; 
net, refrigeration produced by a system. It is equal to 
the load imposed. 


2.1414 Outside Air Opening — It is any opening used 
as an entry for air from outdoors. 


2.1415 Overall Heat Transfer Coefficient — Heat 
flow per area for a given construction and for an overall 
temperature difference of one degree. 


2.1416 Overall System Efficiency — It is the ratio 
of the useful energy at the point of use to the thermal 
energy input over a designated time period. 


2.1417 Overall Thermal Transfer Value (OTTV) — 
Quantity of heat transferred per unit of temperature 
difference into a building through its walls or roof, 
due to solar heat gain and outdoor/indoor temperature 
difference. 


2.1418 Overhead System — Heating, air-conditioning, 
or radiant system in which the heating or cooling 
emission is overhead. 


2.1419 Overpressure — The pressure in excess of the 
designed normal operating range. 


2.1420 Overrun — In ice cream freezing, the ratio of 
the volume of ice cream to the volume of the mix used. 


2.1421 Ozone — Triatomic oxygen (OS) sometimes 
used in air conditioning or cold storage as an odour 
eliminator; can be toxic in certain concentrations. 


2.1422 Packaged Air Conditioner — A complete air- 
conditioning unit, including refrigeration compressor, 
cooling coils, fans, filters, automatic controls, etc., 
assembled into one casing (also known as self- 
contained unit. 


2.1423 Packaged Direct-Evaporative Cooler — A 
self-contained unit including a fan and fan motor whose 
primary functions are: 


a) the conversion of the sensible heat of unsaturated 
air passing through the cabinet to latent heat by 
the process of evaporating recirculating or non- 
recirculating water directly exposed to this air, and 


b) the movement of this air through the unit. 


2.1424 Packaged Indirect Evaporative Cooler — 
An indirect evaporative cooler with integrated or non- 
integrated primary and secondary air passages and 
provided with both primary and secondary air moving 
devices. This device also includes the entire water 
distribution, collection, and recirculation system with 
pump and piping. This type may have provisions for 
installation of other heat and mass transfer devices, 
such as a direct evaporative cooler and auxiliary heating 
and cooling coils. 


2.1425 Packaged Terminal Air Conditioner 
(PTAC) — A factory selected wall sleeve and separate 
unencased combination of heating and cooling 
components, assemblies, or sections. It may include 
heating capability by hot water, steam, or electricity 
and is intended for mounting through the wall to serve 
a single room or zone. 


2.1426 Packaged Terminal Heat Pump (PTHP) — 
A PTAC capable of using the refrigerating system in a 
reverse cycle or heat pump mode to provide heat. 


2.1427 Packing — It is the stuffing around a shaft or 
valve stem to prevent fluid leakage. 


61 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1428 Packing Plant — An establishment engaged 
in the slaughtering, dressing, and processing of 
animals; also used in connection with the processing of 
vegetables or fish. 


2.1429 Panel Cooler — The refrigerated flat surface. 


2.1430 Parallel Fan-powered VAV Box — A terminal 
device that combines a true VAV box in parallel with 
a fan and optional heating coils. Fan operation is 
intermittent. 


2.1431 Parallel-Flow Heat Exchanger — The heat 
exchanger in which fluids flow approximately parallel 
to each other and in the same direction. 


2.1432 Parallel-Flow Heat Transfer — A directional 
pattern of heat transfer fluids used in energy exchange 
equipment where the warmest fluid ‘A’ indirectly 
contacts the coldest fluid ‘B’ at the entering side of the 
exchanger. 


2.1433 Partial Pressure 


a) Partial pressure of component i for any (ideal or 
nonideal) gas mixture is the product of the mole 
fraction of the component, x,, and the mixture 
pressure, p. [ p, = x,° p for any gas mixture]. 

b) The portion of total gas pressure of a mixture 
attributable to one component (Dalton’s law of 
gases). 


2.1434 Partially Halogenated Chlorofluorocarbon 
— A chlorofluorocarbon in which hydrogen atoms 
exists in the compound with chlorine and fluorine 
atoms. Partially halogenated chlorofluorocarbons are 
not expected to have high ozone depleting potential 
(ODP). Average atmospheric lifetime is about 2 years 
for HCFC 21 and 13 to 25 years for HCFC 22. Compare 
to [[Halogenated Chlorofluorocarbon]]. 


2.1435 Part-Load Ratio — It is the ratio of the net 
refrigeration effect to the adjusted net total capacity for 
the cooling coil. (Also see [[Net Refrigerating Effect]] 
and [[Adjusted Net Total Capacity]].) 


2.1436 Part-Load Value — A single number figure of 
merit expressing part-load efficiency for equipment on 
the basis of weighted operation at various partial-load 
capacities for the equipment; expressed in kilowatts per 
ton of refrigeration. 


2.1437 Passive Chilled Beam — Uses a pipe 
surrounded by a coil in order to form a radiator system. 
Passive chilled beams have no method for maintaining 
the humidity of a room and must be paired with a 
ventilation system in order to maintain latent heat gains. 


2.1438 Passive System 


a) A combined appliance that does not use a water 
pump but relies on thermosiphon flow through 


IS 3615 : 2020 


the desuperheater and water heater; generally the 
desuperheater is mounted on the side of the water 
heater or at an elevation lower than the water heater. 


b) A system where natural forces are utilized for 
HVAC purposes in lieu of mechanical/electrical/ 
chemical sources. 


2.1439 Pasteurization — It is heat treatment, usually 
at 55°C to 70°C, for killing bacteria, as in milk, without 
greatly changing its chemical composition. 


2.1440 Phase-Change Material (PCM) — It is a 
substance with a high heat of fusion which, melting 
and solidifying at a certain temperature, is capable of 
storing and releasing large amounts of energy. 


2.1441 PD 
a) Pressure Dependent; 
b) Pressure Difference; and 
c) Pressure Drop. 


2.1442 Peak Discharge Rate — The maximum rate 
at which heat is added to storage (cooling discharged 
from storage). 


2.1443 Percent Outdoor Air — It is the volumetric 
outside airflow rate expressed as a percentage of total 
supply airflow rate. 


2.1444 Perfect Mixing — A theoretical airflow 
distribution pattern within a ventilated space where the 
supply air is instantaneously and uniformly mixed with 
the air in the space such that the concentration of all 
constituents in the air, and the age of air, are spatially 
uniform. 


2.1445 Perforated Ceiling — Perforated ceiling 
panels used to distribute the air uniformly throughout 
the ceiling or a portion of the ceiling. Filter pads may 
be used to achieve a similar result. 


2.1446 Performance Factor — The ratio of the useful 
output capacity of a system to the input required 
to obtain it. Units of capacity and input need not be 
consistent. 


2.1447 Perimeter Zone — Any space with at least one 
surface exposed to exterior loads. 


2.1448 Permanent Bleed Rate — The capacity of 
the permanent bleed provision, expressed either as a 
percentage of the nominal capacity or in kW (Btu/h or 
tons) of refrigerating effect produced by the evaporation 
of that amount of refrigerant flow. 


2.1449 Perfluorocarbon (PFC) — A hydrocarbon 
composed only of fluorine and carbon. 


2.1450 Phase 


a) In thermodynamics, one of the states of matter, as 
solid, liquid, or gaseous. 


62 


b) Electrically, an alternating current whose 
alternations have a definite time relation to the 
rotational position of the alternator. In a polyphase 
machine, the phases are separated by 360 electrical 
degrees divided by the number of phases. 


2.1451 Phosphorous Pentaoxide — It is a drier 
material which becomes gummy on reacting with 
moisture and, hence, is not used as a drying agent in 
refrigerating systems. 


2.1452 Piggyback Refrigerating System — Two 
chilling plants, centrifugal and absorption, usually 
steam driven, using the same steam supply in sequence, 
with chilled water running counterflow to stream. 


2.1453 Pilot Valve — The small valve where the 
opening or closing directly influences a larger valve, as 
in a servo system. 


2.1454 Plane Radiant Temperature — Uniform 
temperature of an enclosure where the radiance on 
one side of a small plane element is the same as in the 
nonuniform actual environment. 


2.1455 Plaque and/or Sump — The volume generated 
by embossed areas on the interior surfaces of the 
general refrigerated and/or freezer compartments. 


2.1456 Plate Evaporator — Evaporator consisting of 
two plates containing channels for the circulation of 
refrigerant or a set of tubes connected to and between 
the two plates. 


2.1457 Plate Freezer — The contact freezer in which 
the refrigerated surface is a flat metal plate. Compare to 
[Double-Contact Freezer]. 


2.1458 Plate Liquid Cooler — The heat exchanger 
made of thin plates so formed that liquid to be cooled 
flows through the passage between the plates and the 
cooling fluid flows through the alternate passages. 


2.1459 Plate-Type Condenser 


a) An air-cooled condenser consisting of plates 
between which are arranged channels for the 
circulation of refrigerant. 


b) The water-cooled condenser consisting of a coil 
through which the refrigerant circulates, arranged 
between two plates, with water circulating 
between coil and plates. 


2.1460 Plenum Chamber — An air compartment 
connected to one or more distributing ducts. 


2.1461 Point, Critical — Of a substance, state point 
at which liquid and vapour have identical properties; 
critical temperature, critical pressure, and critical 
volume are the terms given to the temperature, pressure, 
and volume at the critical point. Above the critical 
temperature or pressure there is no line of demarcation 
between liquid and gaseous phases. 


2.1462 Point, Triple — It is the state point at which 
three phases of a given substance (that is solid, liquid, 
and gas) exist in equilibrium. 


2.1463 Polytropic-Change — Any set of changes in a 
gas represented by the equation: 


PV" = constant 


2.1464 Pond, Spray — It is an arrangement for 
lowering the temperature of water in contact with 
outside air by evaporative cooling of the water. The 
water to be cooled is sprayed by nozzles into the space 
above a body of previously cooled water and allowed 
to fall by gravity into it. 


2.1465 Power Roof Ventilator — A fan designed for 
curb mounting on a roof or, within size and design 
constraints, for wall mounting. Air enters the fan in a 
typical axial arrangement but discharges radially from 
the centrifugal impeller and turns 90 degrees to exit 
through the top of the fan. 


2.1466 Power Ventilator — The fan consisting of a 
centrifugal- or axial-type impeller with integral driver 
in a weather-resistant housing with base designed to 
fit (usually by means of a curb) over a wall or roof 
opening. 


2.1467 Parts Per Million (PPM) — Concentration by 
volume of one part of a gas (or vapor), or by weight of 
a liquid or solid, per million parts of air or liquid 


2.1468 Prandtl Number 


a) Itis a dimensionless number used in calculation of 
forced and free convection, equal to the dynamic 
viscosity times the specific heat at constant 
pressure, divided by the thermal conductivity. 


b) It is a dimensionless number used in calculation 
of diffusion in flowing systems, equal to the 
kinematic viscosity divided by the molecular 
diffusivity. Symbol is Pr or Pr. Also known as 
Schmidt number 1 (Sc, Sc, or NSc1). 


2.1469 Precipitator, Electric — A device for removing 
dust from the air by means of electric charges induced 
on the dust particles. 


2.1470 Pre-cooler — A device for transferring heat 
from the incoming potable water to the spill. 


2.1471 Pre-cooler 


a) A cooler for the removal of sensible heat before 
shipping, storing, or processing. 

b) A device for cooling a fluid before it enters some 
piece of apparatus. 


2.1472 Pre-cooling — It refers to the practice of 
preparing fruits and vegetables for shipment by cooling 
before or after they enter a car. 


63 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1473 Predicted Mean Vote (PMV) — The index 
that predicts the mean value of thermal sensation votes 
of a large group of persons, expressed on a seven-point 
scale. 


2.1474 Predicted Percentage Dissatisfied (PPD) — 
The index that predicts the percentage of a large group 
of people who are likely to feel thermally dissatisfied 
for the body as a whole (that is, feel either too warm 
or too cold). 


2.1475 Preheat Coil — The heating coil installed 
upstream of cooling coil or at the front of an air- 
handling system to preheat air. 


2.1476 Preheating 


a) Heating a food product prior to a subsequent 
treatment. 


b) In air conditioning, to heat the air ahead of other 
processes. 


c) To heat the water prior to heating by the auxiliary 
thermal source. 


2.1477 Pre-heating — In air conditioning, to heat the 
air in advance of other processes. 


2.1478 Preliminary Run — Successive sets of readings 
compiled during continuous cooler operation with the 
objective of establishing a steady-state condition. 


2.1479 Prescriptive Design — For energy compliance 
alternatives, a prescriptive design includes specified 
assumptions concerning shape, orientation, HVAC, and 
other system design features. The prescriptive design 
is compared with the proposed design using the annual 
energy cost method. 


2.1480 Pressure — The normal force exerted by a 
homogeneous liquid or gas, per unit of area, on the wall 
of the container. 


2.1481 Pressure Change of an Expansion Valve — 
The change in outlet pressure of a constant pressure 
expansion valve required to open the valve at a 
predetermined amount. 


2.1482 Pressure Drop — It is the static pressure loss 
in fluid pressure, as from one end of duct to the other, 
due to friction, etc. 


2.1483 Pressure Equalizing — Allowing high- and 
low side pressures to equalize or nearly equalize during 
idle periods as by use of an unloading valve or by a 
vapour lock liquid control, or nearly equalizing inlet 
and discharge pressures on the compressors. In either 
case, it is to reduce starting torque load. 


2.1484 Pressure Imposing Element — Any device 
or portion of the equipment used for the purpose of 
increasing the pressure upon the refrigerant. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1485 Pressure Limiting Device — A pressure 
actuated mechanism designed to automatically stop the 
operation of a compressor or other pressure-producing 
component at a predetermined maximum or minimum 
pressure. 


2.1486 Pressure Regulator, Evaporator (Back 
Pressure Valve) — An automatic valve located 
between the evaporator outlet and compressor inlet 
that is responsive to its own inlet pressure or to the 
evaporator or refrigerator temperature and functions 
to throttle the vapour flow when necessary to prevent 
the evaporator pressure from falling below a selected 
value. 


2.1487 Pressure Relief Device — A valve or rupture 
member designed to relieve excessive pressure 
automatically. 


2.1488 Pressure, Absolute — Pressure referred to a 
perfect vacuum. It is the sum of gauge pressure and 
atmospheric pressure. 


2.1489 Pressure, Atmospheric — It is the pressure 
due to the weight of the atmosphere. It is the pressure 
indicated by a barometer. Standard atmospheric 
pressure or standard atmosphere is the pressure of 
76 cm of mercury having a density of 13.5951 g/cm? 
under standard gravity of 980.665 cm/sec 


2.1490 Pressure, Balance — It is in a system or 
container equal to that which exists outside. 


2.1491 Pressure, Critical — Vapour pressure 
corresponding to the critical state of the substance at 
which the liquid and vapour have identical properties. 


2.1492 Pressure, Discharge — An operating pressure 
in a refrigerating system measured in the discharge line 
at the compressor outlet. 


2.1493 Pressure, 
atmospheric. 


Gauge — Pressure above 


2.1494 Pressure, Hydrostatic — The normal force per 
unit area that would be exerted by a moving fluid on an 
infinitesimally small body immersed in it if the body 
were carried along with the fluid. 


2.1495 Pressure, Operating — It is the pressure 
occurring at a reference point in a refrigerating system 
when the system is in operation. 


2.1496 Pressure, Partial — It is the portion of total gas 
pressure of a mixture attributable to one component. 


2.1497 Pressure, Saturation — The saturation 
pressure for a pure substance for any given temperature 
is that pressure at which vapour and liquid, or vapour 
and solid, can co-exist in stable equilibrium. 


64 


2.1498 Pressure, Static — The normal force per unit 
area that would be exerted by a moving fluid on a small 
body immersed in it if the body were carried along 
with the fluid. Practically, it is the normal force per 
unit area at a small hole in a wall of the duct through 
which the fluid flows (piezometer) or on the surface 
of a stationary tube at a point where the disturbances, 
created by inserting the tube, cancel. It is supposed 
that the thermodynamic properties of a moving fluid 
depend on static pressure in exactly the same manner as 
those of the same fluid at test depend upon its uniform 
hydrostatic pressure. 


2.1499 Pressure, Suction — An operating pressure in 
a refrigerating system measured in the suction line a 
pressure, total. It is the sum of the static pressure and 
the velocity pressure at the point of measurement. 


2.1500 Pressure, Vapour — The pressure exerted by 
vapour. If a vapour is kept in confinement over liquid 
so that the vapour can accumulate above the liquid, the 
temperature being held constant, the vapour pressure 
approaches a fixed limit called the maximum or saturated 
vapour pressure dependent only on the temperature 
and the liquid. The term vapour is sometimes used 
synonymous with saturated vapour pressure. 


2.1501 Pressure, Velocity — In a moving fluid, remove 
cable of causing an equivalent velocity, if applied to 
move the same fluid through an orifice, such that all 
pressure energy expended is converted into kinetic 
energy. 


2.1502 Pressure-Type Air Cooler — It is a cooler for 
use with one or more external elements which impose 
air resistance. 


2.1503 Pressurized Stair Shafts — A type of smoke 
control system in which stair shafts are mechanically 
pressurized with outdoor air to keep smoke from 
contaminating them during a fire incident. 


2.1504 Prevention of Vacuum System — A refrigerant 
pressure-control system that prevents refrigerant loss 
and infiltration into idle low-pressure chillers and is 
also used to pressurize for leak testing without the use 
of noncondensables. 


2.1505 Primary Air 


a) Any air that is mixed with fuel at or in a burner 
prior to burning. 


b) In a cleanroom, air that recirculates through the 
work space. 


c) treated supply air that enters the space through any 
supply air device, such as, air outlet or through 
any air supply terminal, such as, a VAV unit or fan 
terminal unit. The air is not mixed with space air 
before entering the space. 


2.1506 Primary Air Temperature — Air temperature 
of the primary airflow (for example, supply airflow 
from an air-handling unit). 


2.1507 Primary Refrigerant Working fluid 
of a refrigerating cycle (as opposed to secondary 
refrigerant). 


2.1508 Primary Surface 


a) (Direct surface), Portion that is exposed to 
radiation from fires and transfers heat directly to 
the air being heated. 


b) Surface that is in direct contact with both the heat- 
absorbing and heat-emitting media. 


2.1509 Process Load — The load on a building 
resulting from the consumption or release of process 
energy. 


2.1510 Properties, Thermodynamic — Basic qualities 
used in defining the condition of a substance, such as 
temperature, pressure, volume, enthalpy, entropy. 


2.1511 Propylene Glycol — Clear, colourless liquid 
used to depress the freezing point of water for use as a 
secondary coolant in HVAC&R systems. 


NOTE — Inhibitors are required to control corrosion caused 
by glycol solutions. 


2.1512 Psychrometer — It is an instrument for 
measuring relative humidities by means of wet- and 
dry-bulb temperatures. 


2.1513 Psychrometric Chart — It is graphical 
representation of the properties of moist air, usually 
including wet and dry bulb temperatures, specific and 
relative humidities, enthalpy, and density. 


2.1514 Psychrometry— The branch of physics relating 
to the measurement or determination of atmospheric 
conditions, particularly regarding the moisture mixed 
with the air. 


2.1515 Pull-Down Load — The unmet cooling load 
that accumulates during a period when cooling is not 
provided to the load and that must be met upon system 
start-up. Maximum pull-down load generally occurs on 
a monday morning. 


2.1516 Pull-Down Test — First operational check on 
a refrigerating installation to measure the time taken 
to pull the temperature down to the desired conditions 
while also measuring the temperatures, pressures, and 
associated data. 


2.1517 Pull-down Test — It is first operational check 
on a refrigerating installation to measure the time taken 
to pull the temperature down to the desired conditions, 
while also measuring the temperatures, pressures, and 
associated data. 


65 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1518 Pump Down — It is the operation by which 
the refrigerant in a charged system is pumped into the 
liquid receiver. 


2.1519 Purge 
a) Removal of air from a hydronic system. 


b) Removal of non-condensable gases from a 
refrigeration system. 


c) Removal of unburned gases from a combustion 
chamber. 


d) To get rid of whatever is impure or undesirable. 


2.1520 Purge Recovery System — It is the system 
used to recover refrigerant from purged mixture of 
gases and water (also known as purger). 


2.1521 Purge System — Required on lithium bromide 
absorption equipment to remove non-condensables 
(air), which leak into the machine, or hydrogen (a 
product of corrosion), which is produced during 
equipment operation. Even in small amounts, non- 
condensable gases can reduce chilling capacity and 
even lead to solution crystallization. Purge systems for 
larger sizes above 100 tons (359 kW) of refrigeration 
typically consist of these components: vapor pickup 
tube(s), non-condensable separation and storage 
tank(s), and vacuum pump or valving system. 


2.1522 Purge Valve — A device to allow non- 
condensable gases to flow out of a system. 


2.1523 Purger — It is a device for removing non- 
condensable gas from refrigerant condensers or for 
removing low-concentration liquor from absorption 
system evaporators. 


2.1524 Purging — It is the act of blowing out gas from 
a refrigerant containing vessel, usually for the purpose 
of removing non-condensables. 


2.1525 Pyranometer — Radiometer used to measure 
solar radiation received from the whole hemisphere 
(two steradians). 


NOTE — The instrument is suitable for measurement of global 
or diffuse solar radiation. 


2.1526 Pyrgeometer — A radiometer used for 
measuring the incoming atmospheric infrared radiation 
spectrums from approximately 4 um to 100 um ona 
black surface at ambient air temperature. The solar 
shortwave radiation is excluded from the energy 
measured. 


2.1527 Pyrheliometer — A radiometer used to 
measure the direct or beam solar irradiance incident on 
a surface normal to the sun’s rays. 


2.1528 Pyrometer — It is an instrument for measuring 
high temperature. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1529 Pyrunometer — A radiometer used to measure 
the total solar radiation incident upon a surface per 
unit time per unit area. This energy includes the direct 
radiation, the diffuse sky radiation, and the solar 
radiation reflected from the foreground. 


2.1530 Quality of Wet Vapour — It is the fraction by 
weight of vapour in a mixture of liquid and vapour. 


2.1531 Radiance — The total radiant flux emitted 
from a surface through unit projected area by unit 
solid angle. It includes the self-emitted radiation plus 
reflections from sources other than the object evaluated 
as interpreted from the direction of measurement. 
The term intensity of radiation is sometimes used as a 
synonym for radiance. See also [[radiosity]]. 


2.1532 Radiance at a Point on a Surface — The 
quotient of the flux incident on an element of a surface 
containing the point, by the area of that element, 
measured in watts per square meter, W/m? (Btu/ft’). 


2.1533 Radiant — The radiating rays of light; emitting 
or reflecting beams of light; vividly shining; glowing; 
brilliant. 


2.1534 Radiant Asymmetry Temperature — It is the 
difference between the plane radiant temperature of 
the two opposite sides of a plane element. See [[Plane 
Radiant Temperature]]. 


2.1535 Radiant Barrier — A surface of low emissivity 
(less than 0.1) placed inside an attic or roof space above 
(but not touching) the distribution system to reduce 
radiant heat transfer. 


2.1536 Radiant Energy — Energy passing through 
space in the form of electromagnetic radiation (such as 
light or ultraviolet or infrared radiation) or as a stream 
of particles (for example, electrons or protons). 


2.1537 Radiant Flux — The time rate of flow of 
radiant energy (watts). 


2.1538 Radiant Flux Density — It is the measure of 
radiant power per unit area flowing across or onto a 
surface (also called irradiance). 


2.1539 Radiant Heat — The heat transferred by 
radiation. 


2.1540 Radiant Panel — A heating or cooling surface 
that delivers 50 percent or more of its heat transfer 
by radiation, which may be either an integral part of 
the building ( for example, floor or ceiling heating) or 
detached from the building elements ( for example, 
suspended ceiling panel). 


2.1541 Radiant Reflectance (Luminous 
Reflectance) — It is the ratio of the reflected radiant 
(or luminous) flux to the incident radiant (or luminous) 
flux. 


66 


2.1542 Radiant Transmittance (Luminous 
Transmittance) — It is the ratio of the transmitted 
radiant (or luminous) flux to the incident radiant flux. 


2.1543 Radiant-Cooling System — A sensible cooling 
system that provides more than 50 percent of the total 
heat flux by thermal radiation. 


2.1544 Radiant-Heating System — A sensible heating 
system that provides more than 50 percent of the total 
heat flux by thermal radiation. 


2.1545 Radiation, Thermal — It is the process of 
transmission of heat through space by wave motion; 
the passage of heat from one object to another without 
warming the space between. 


2.1546 Radiative Forcing — It represents the net 
amount of infrared radiation absorbed by gases in the 
atmosphere. The radiative forcing of a gas depends on 
the efficiency with which it traps infrared radiation 
and its concentration in the atmosphere. Atmospheric 
concentration depends on emission rates and the 
atmospheric lifetime of the gas. 


2.1547 Radiator Valve — A manual or automatic 
valve that controls the flow of the fluid to a radiator. 


2.1548 Radioactive — A materials that emit ionizing 
radiation. 


2.1549 Radiometer — An instrument for measuring 
irradiance in energy or power units. 


2.1550 Radiosity — Total radiant flux that leaves 
unit area of a surface. The sum of radiant flux emitted 
and reflected by the surface, plus any radiant flux 
transmitted through that surface. 


2.1551 Ranque-Hilsch Effect — This is spot-cooling 
effect produced in a tube into which gas is introduced 
tangentially, producing vortex flow. 


2.1552 Ranque-Hilsch Tube — It is a device in which 
the Ranque-Hilsch effect is produced. (also known as 
pulse tube). 


2.1553 Rated Airflow — The airflow rate in m?/s (cfm) 
at which the device is tested. 


2.1554 Rated Operating Pressure — The tested 
maximum positive pressure at which a device or 
component is rated. 


2.1555 Rating — The assigned values of those 
performance characteristics, under stated rating 
conditions, by which a unit may be chosen to fit its 
application. These values apply to all units of like 
nominal size and type (identification) produced by the 
same manufacturer. 


2.1556 Receiver — A vessel in the refrigerating system 
designed to ensure the availability of adequate liquid 


refrigerant for proper functioning of the system and to 
store the liquid refrigerant when the system is pumped 
down. 


2.1557 Recirculated Air — Air taken from a space 
and returned to that space, usually after being passed 
through a conditioning system. The part of the return 
air that is reused. Air removed from a space and reused 
as supply air. 


2.1558 Recirculating Unit — A remote unit with 
cooling that is provided at the dispensing valve 
and accomplished by circulating cold water or cold 
carbonated water through one of the lines and returning 
the same to a refrigeration unit. 


2.1559 Recirculation of Discharge Air 


a) A condition pertaining to air-cooled condensers in 
which a portion of the discharge air enters along 
with the fresh air; the amount of recirculation 
is determined by equipment design, placement 
in regard to adjoining objects, and atmospheric 
conditions. The effect is generally evaluated on 
the basis of the decrease in unit capacity. 

b) condition pertaining to cooling towers and 

evaporative condensers in which a portion of 

the discharge air enters along with the fresh 
air; the amount of recirculation is determined 
by equipment design, placement in regard to 
adjoining objects, and atmospheric conditions. 

The effect is generally evaluated on the basis of 

the increase in entering wet-bulb temperature 

compared to the ambient. 


2.1560 Reclaimed Refrigerants — The refrigerants 
reprocessed to the same specifications as new 
refrigerants by any means, including distillation. Such 
refrigerants have been chemically analysed to verify 
that those specifications have been met. 


2.1561 Recommissioning — An application of the 
commissioning process requirements to a project that 
has been delivered using the commissioning process. 
This may be a scheduled recommissioning developed 
as part of an ongoing commissioning process or it may 
be triggered by use change, operations problems, or 
other needs. 


2.1562 Re-cooling 
a) Cooling of air that has been previously heated. 


b) Lowering the temperature of air that has been 
previously heated by a mechanical heating system. 


2.1563 Recover — To remove refrigerant in any 
condition from a system and store it in an external 
container. 


2.1564 Recoverable Heat — It is the portion of thermal 
input to a prime mover and that is not converted to 
mechanical power and can be reclaimed. 


67 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1565 Recovered Energy — Energy reclaimed for 
useful purposes and that would otherwise be wasted. 


2.1566 Recovered or Reclaimed Heat — It comes 
from internal heat sources. It is used for space heating, 
domestic or service water heating, air reheat in air 
conditioning, process heating in industrial applications, 
or other similar purposes. Recovered heat may be 
stored for later use. 


2.1567 Recovered Refrigerants Refrigerants 
removed from a system in any condition without 
necessarily testing or processing them. 


2.1568 Rectifier — In refrigeration, an externally 
cooled heat exchanger in the high side of an absorption 
system for condensing absorbent and separating it from 
refrigerant before passing it to the condenser. 


2.1569 Recycle To reduce contaminants in 
used refrigerants by separating oil, removing non- 
condensables, and using devices such as filter driers to 
reduce moisture, acidity, and particulate matter. 


2.1570 Recycled Refrigerants — Refrigerants for 
which contaminants have been reduced by oil separation, 
removal of non-condensable gases, and single or 
multiple passes through filter driers or other devices that 
reduce moisture, acidity, and particulate matter. 


2.1571 Reducer, Pressure, Liquid Refrigerant — 
It is a device or devices, in a refrigerating system, in 
which the pressure of the fluid is reduced from that of 
condensed liquid to that of the evaporator. 


2.1572 Re-expansion Line — The curve on an 
indicator card, representing the pressure; the total 
volume relationship of clearance fluid during the initial 
portion of the return stroke of the piston prior to the 
opening of the suction valve. 


2.1573 Reference Filters — The dry-media-type 
filters that are carefully measured for resistance and 
initial efficiency immediately after a test system is 
qualified. These filters serve as references to ensure 
that the test system continues to operate as it did when 
it was qualified. 


2.1574 Reference Temperature — The temperature at 
an appropriate, fixed location within the test zone, for 
example, at 42 in. (1.1 m) above the floor for an office 
space served by a mixing air system. 


2.1575 Reflectance 


a) A portion of the incident radiation on a surface 
that is reflected from the surface. 
NOTE — For an opaque surface, the sum of the reflectance 
and the absorptance is unity at equilibrium. Absorptances and 
reflectances are of various types, as are emittances. 

b) It is the ratio of the light reflected by a surface to 
the light incident upon it. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1576 Reflective Thermal Insulation — The 
insulation that reduces radiant heat transfer across 
spaces by use of one or more surfaces of high reflectance 
and low emittance, for example, aluminium foil. 


2.1577 Reflectivity — The portion of the radiation- 
striking unit area of a surface that is not absorbed or 
transmitted by the surface. See [Reflectance]. 


2.1578 Refrigerant — The fluid used for heat transfer 
in a refrigerating system, which absorbs heat at a low 
temperature and a low pressure of the fluid and rejects 
heat at a higher temperature and a higher pressure of 
the fluid, usually involving changes of state of the fluid. 


2.1579 Refrigerant Charge — The designated 
amount of refrigerant required for proper functioning 
of a closed refrigerating system. 


2.1580 Refrigerant Rectifier 


a) In an absorption system, rectifier is the device 
between the analyser and the condenser for 
condensing the traces of absorbent. 


b) Ina vapour compression system, a heat exchanger 
in which refrigerant is boiled off from oil 
refrigerant bled from the evaporator. 


2.1581 Refrigerant, Flammable — Any refrigerant 
which will burn when mixed with air, such as ethyl 
chloride, methyl chloride, and the hydrocarbons. 


2.1582 Refrigerant, Secondary — Any volatile or 
non-volatile substance in an indirect refrigerating 
system that absorbs heat from a substance or space to 
be refrigerated and rejects this heat to the evaporator of 
the refrigerating system. 


2.1583 Refrigerated Plate Freezing — It is the heat 
removal by direct contact of the packaged product with 
refrigerated plates. 


2.1584 Refrigerated Truck End Bunker — A 
refrigerated vehicle where the space given to the ice 
or cooling element is in the end of the truck or rail car. 


2.1585 Refrigerating Effect, Condensing — The 
condensing heat rejection effect less the heat added 
to the refrigerant vapour in the refrigerant compressor 
unit. 


2.1586 Refrigerating Effect, Net Water (Brine) 
Cooler — The product of the weight rate of water 
or brine flow and the difference in enthalpy of the 
entering and leaving water or brine expressed in heat 
units per unit of time. It is expressed also by the total 
refrigeration effect less the heat leakage losses. 


2.1587 Refrigerating Effect, Sub-cooling — The 
additional refrigeration effect made available by 
subcooling the refrigerant liquid in the condenser. 


68 


2.1588 Refrigerating Effect, Total, Water (Brine) 
Cooler — It is the product of the weight rate of 
refrigerant flow and the difference in enthalpy of the 
entering and leaving refrigerant fluid, expressed in heat 
units per unit of time. 


2.1589 Refrigerating Medium — Any substance 
whose temperature is such that it is used, with or without 
a change of state, to lower the temperature of other 
bodies or substances below the ambient temperature. 


2.1590 Refrigerating Plant — A _ complete 
refrigerating system with all accessories, controls, 
and other apparatus required for its utilization and its 
enclosing structure. 


2.1591 Refrigerating System Performance Factor 
— The ratio of the useful refrigerating effect of the 
system to the power input. 


2.1592 Refrigeration (Cooling), Direct Method of — 
A system in which the evaporator is in direct control 
with the material or space refrigerated or is located 
in air circulating passages communicating with such 
spaces. 


2.1593 Refrigeration (Cooling), Indirect Method 
of — It is a system in which a liquid, such as brine 
or water, cooled by the refrigerant, is circulated to the 
material or space refrigerated or is used to cool air so 
circulated. 


2.1594 Refrigeration, Pipe Line — It is a service to 
a group of buildings with a refrigerant supply from a 
central refrigerating plant. 


2.1595 Refrigerator — It is a container and means 
of cooling it, such as a domestic refrigerator, or a 
large container, such as a storage refrigerator, service 
refrigerator, etc. 


2.1596 Refrigerator, Commercial — It is a general 
category referring to any of the many types of 
refrigerators used commercially. Includes reach-ins, 
walk-ins, and refrigerated display cases (all types 
being either service or self-service, which are used by 
business establishments). 


2.1597 Refrigerator, Domestic — It is a refrigerator 
for the home, cooled by a mechanical or other type 
of condensing unit or by other means, having one or 
more compartments for preserving food either above or 
below freezing. 


2.1598 Refrigerator, Electric — It is a completely 
self-contained unit comprising an insulated cabinet, 
evaporator, and electric-motor-driven condensing unit. 


2.1599 Refrigerator, Gas — A refrigerator motivated 
by thermal energy of burning gas. 


2.1600 Refrigerator, Household, ‘All- 
Refrigerator’ — An all-refrigerator is a household 
refrigerator which does not include a compartment 
designed for the storage of food at temperatures below 
0°C. It may include means designed for freezing and 
storage of ice. 


2.1601 Refrigerator, Household, Frost Free 
Insulated cabinet of suitable volume and equipment 
for household use, cooled by one or more energy 
consuming means having one or more compartments 
intended for the preservation of food, one at least of 
which is suitable for the storage of fresh food, in which 
all compartments are automatically defrosted with 
automatic disposal of the defrost water, and at least one 
compartment is cooled by a frost-free system. 


2.1602 Refrigerator, Reach-in — It is a service 
refrigerator. 


2.1603 Refrigerator, Self-Service — Any of a number 
of refrigerators generally found in food stores and other 
stores of the self-service type, wherein the customer 
helps himself or herself. This maybe of the open type 
or with doors which the customer opens. 


2.1604 Refrigerator, Service — Generally, any of the 
various types of commercial refrigerators of the reach- 
in type or refrigerated display cases from which an 
attendant serves a customer, as differentiated from self- 
service refrigerators. 


2.1605 Refrigerator, Walk-in — It is a refrigerated 
cooler or freezer with large entry doors suitable for foot 
traffic. 


2.1606 Refrigerator-Freezer, Household, 
Combination — A household combination refrigerator- 
freezer is a cabinet which consists of two or more 
compartments, with at least one of the compartments 
designed for the storage of foods at temperatures above 
0°C and with at least one of the compartments designed 
for the storage of foods at temperatures of —12°C 
average or below. It has a source of refrigeration and is 
intended for household use. 


2.1607 Refrigerator-Freezer, Household, Limited 
Freezer Combination — A limited-freezer combination 
refrigerator-freezer is a household combination 
refrigerator-freezer which has at least percent of its 
total net refrigerated volume at a temperature above 
0°c. 


2.1608 Regain of Moisture — The amount absorbed 
by any material in percent of weight of that material. 


2.1609 Regeneration Air — The airstream used as a 
carrier for the desorbed moisture and/or a mechanism 
to transfer heat for the regeneration of the desiccant in 
a dry desiccant system. 


69 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1610 Regeneration Heater — A device used to 
heat the solid desiccant regeneration air or the liquid 
desiccant. 


2.1611 Regeneration Specific Heat Input — Energy 
per unit moisture removed expressed in kJ/kg (Btu/Ib). 


2.1612 Regenerative Air-Cycle System — It is the air- 
cycle refrigerating system fitted with heat regenerators. 


2.1613 Regenerative Cooling — This is a process of 
using heat that must be rejected or absorbed in one part 
of the cycle to perform a useful function in another part 
of the cycle. 


2.1614 Regenerative Heating — Heat rejected in one 
part of a system and used to perform a useful function 
in another part. 


2.1615 Register — It is a combination grill and damper 
assembly covering an air opening. 


2.1616 Regulation — Refreezing of water that has 
resulted from the melting of ice under pressure (does 
not require refrigeration). 


2.1617 Reheat — Application of sensible heat to 
supply air that has been previously cooled below the 
temperature desired for maintaining the temperature of 
the conditioned space. 


2.1618 Reheat Coil 
downstream of cooling coil. 


installed 


Heating coil 


2.1619 Reheat Terminal — Terminal that heats a 
single source of supply air. 


2.1620 Reheat VAV Box — It is true VAV box with a 
reheat coil mounted on the discharge of the unit. 


2.1621 Reheating — Raising the temperature of air 
that has been previously cooled either by mechanical 
refrigeration or an economizer system. 


2.1622 Relative Humidity (rh, RH) 


a) It is the ratio of the mole fraction of water vapor 
to the mole fraction of water vapor saturated at the 
same temperature and barometric pressure. 


b) Ratio of the partial pressure or density of water 
vapor to the saturation pressure or density, 
respectively, at the same dry-bulb temperature and 
barometric pressure of the ambient air. 


2.1623 Relief Air 


a) All return air that is discharged directly to the 
outside or exhausted by separate exhaust fans. 


b) The building return air discharged by the air- 
handling unit (AHU) equipment to control 
building pressure when an HVAC system is 
operating in the economizer cycle. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1624 Replacement Air — The outdoor air that is 
used to replace air removed from a building through 
an exhaust system. Replacement air may be derived 
from one or more of the following: makeup air, 
supply air, transfer air, and infiltration. However, the 
ultimate source of all replacement air is outdoor air. 
When replacement air exceeds exhaust, the result is 
exfiltration. 


2.1625 Residual Moisture — In a freeze-dried 
product, the ratio of the mass of residual water to the 
original mass of product. 


2.1626 Residual Pressure — In freeze drying, the 
pressure of the gas (usually air) at the trap. 


2.1627 Resistance, Thermal — It is the reciprocal of 
thermal conductance. 


2.1628 Resistively, Thermal — It is the reciprocal of 
thermal conductivity. 


2.1629 Resorption-Type Refrigerating System — 
The system in which the refrigerant vapor is not 
condensed to a pure liquid but is absorbed in a weak 
solution from which it is subsequently evaporated at a 
lower temperature to produce refrigeration. 


2.1630 Respiration — It is the release of carbon 
dioxide and heat by the ripening of perishables in 
storage; also, the breathing process of animals. 


2.1631 Response Time 


a) Output, expressed as a function of time, resulting 
from the application of specified input. 


b) Time (preferably in seconds, may also be in cycles 

of supply frequency) required for the output 
quantity to change by some agreed-on percentage 
of the differential output quantity in response to a 
step change input. 
NOTE — in measurement, the initial and final output quantities 
shall correspond to the test-output quantities. The response 
time shall be the maximum obtained including differences 
arising from increasing or decreasing output quantity or time 
phase of signal application. 


c 


wa 


Time for a measuring sensor to reach 90 percent of 
the final value after a step change. For a measuring 
system that includes only one exponential time 
constant function, the 90 percent response time 
equals 2.3 times the time constant. 


2.1632 Return Air — Air returned from conditioned 
or refrigerated space. 


2.1633 Reverse Cycle Defrosting — Defrosting an 
evaporator by reversing its function with that of the 
condenser. 


2.1634 Reynolds Number — A dimensionless number, 
designated Re, that indicates whether the fluid flow 
is laminar or turbulent. For flow in a pipe, transition 


70 


generally occurs between Reynolds numbers of 2 300 
and 4 000. 


2.1635 Rigid Duct — The ducts constructed of rigid 
materials such as metal and fiberglass duct board. 


2.1636 Rigid Duct Flow Area — It is calculated by 
using the average inside duct dimensions determined 
by measurement of a minimum of three representative 
sections of the duct envelope. 


2.1637 Rime Ice — It is the granular deposit of 
opaque ice on a surface, formed by quick freezing of 
supercooled water droplets. 


2.1638 Rock Bed Regenerative Cooling System — It 
is the system of air conditioning in which packed beds 
of crushed stone or gravel are used for both evaporative 
cooling and heat energy storage. 


2.1639 Roof Spray Cooling — The system that 
reduces heat gain through a roof by cooling the outside 
surface with a water spray; suited for only temporary 
treatment because high humidity may be introduced by 
air intakes on the roof. 


2.1640 Rooftop Air Conditioner — The packaged 
air conditioner mounted on a roof, the conditioned 
air being discharged directly into the rooms below or 
through a duct system. 


2.1641 Room Dry Bulb (Dew Point) — It is the dry 
bulb (dew-point) temperature of the conditioned room 
or space. 


2.1642 Room, Quick Freezer — Room kept at very 
low temperature for the purpose of freezing foodstuffs 
rapidly. 


2.1643 R-value 


a) It is the measure of the acoustical absorption 
properties of a room; the average absorption of 
all the surfaces in a room times the total surface 
divided by the average reflection. 


b) (Also known as thermal resistance), It is the 
quantity determined by the temperature difference, 
at steady state, between two defined surfaces of a 
material or construction that induces a unit heat 
flow rate through unit area (R = AT/q). R-value is 
the reciprocal of thermal conductance. 


2.1644 Safe Pressure — The maximum pressure 
a system can be subjected to without component 
failure. 


2.1645 Safety Head — In a compressor, a cylinder 
head held in place by a spring of such strength that it 
will not be compressed during normal operation but 
will be moved by solid or liquid matter or abnormal gas 
pressure between it and the piston, thereby protecting 
the compressor. 


2.1646 Salinometer — Hydrometer calibrated in salt 
concentration. 


2.1647 Saponify — It is turning to soap, as oil 
in contact with an alkali or alkaline refrigerant. 
Chemically, to cause an ester to react with an inorganic 
base, the products being an alcohol and an acid (either 
free or in the form of a salt). By extension, to hydrolyze 
compounds other than esters. 


2.1648 Saturated Air 


a) Air that holds the maximum water vapor possible 
at a specified temperature and pressure. 


b) Moist air in which the partial pressure of the water 
vapor is equal to the vapor pressure of water at the 
existing temperature. 


2.1649 Saturated Liquid — The liquid existing at the 
saturation temperature and pressure. 


2.1650 Saturated Water-Vapour Pressure — The 
water-vapour pressure at the saturation temperature 
corresponding to the reference pressure and without 
any liquid phase. 


2.1651 Saturation — It is the condition for co- 
existence in stable equilibrium of a vapour and liquid or 
a vapour and solid phase of the same substance. As an 
example, steam over the water from which it is being 
generated. 


2.1652 Saturation, Degree of (Saturation Ratio) — 
The ratio of the specific humidity of humid air to that 
of saturated air at the same temperature and pressure, 
usually expressed as a percentage. 


2.1653 Scale 
a) The formation of thick corrosion product layers on 
a metal surface at high temperature. 
b) The precipitation of water-insoluble constituents 
on a surface. 


2.1654 Scale Inhibitor — It is the substance added 
to water used in condensers, boilers, piping, and 
cooling towers to prevent or minimize the formation of 
insoluble deposits. 


2.1655 Scale Setting 


a) A control setpoint at which temperature is to be 
maintained. 


b) It is a indicated temperature to which a thermostat 
is set. 


2.1656 Scale Trap — In a refrigeration system, an 
arrangement for gravitational separation of the larger 
impurities from a refrigerant. 


2.1657 Scrubber (Air Washer) 


a) A device for reducing the carbon dioxide (CO,) 
content of a controlled-atmosphere. storage room. 


71 


IS 3615 : 2020 


b) System to reduce noxious substances from 
a flowing stream, as in chimneys or process 
discharges. 


2.1658 Seal — It is a device to prevent the passage of 
gas or liquid into or out of a pipe, container or along a 
shaft. 


2.1659 Seal, Bellows — Metal bellows used in a shaft 
seal or in place of a packing for valves; also used in 
long pipe lines instead of gaskets to compensate for 
expansion of the line with temperature. 


2.1660 Seal, Shaft — A rubbing seal or stuffing box 
used to prevent fluid leakage between the shaft and 
bearing of a compressor or other fluid-moving device. 


2.1661 Secondary Air 


a) Air for combustion supplied to the furnace to 
supplement the primary air (after ignition). 


b) Air prevailing in a treated space. 


c) Air used to reject heat to an ambient environment 
or elsewhere. 


d) Primary air recirculated through a terminal unit. 


2.1662 Secondary Condenser — The condenser 
cooled by the evaporator of a secondary system. 


2.1663 Secondary Coolant (Secondary Fluid) — 
Any liquid used for the transmission of heat without 
vaporization. 


2.1664 Secondary Fluid — A fluid of known properties 
( for example, water, steam, or brine) that is used as a 
heating medium. 


2.1665 Secondary Refrigerant 


a) A volatile refrigerant (usually a single refrigerant 
or an azeotropic mixture) of known properties that 
is used as a heating medium. 


b) Volatile or non-volatile substance in an indirect 
refrigerating system that absorbs heat from a 
substance in space to be refrigerated and transfers 
this heat to the evaporator of the refrigerating 
system. 


2.1666 Secondary Surface — In extended surface 
exchangers, the additional surface that is not in direct 
contact with both the heat-absorbing and heat-emitting 
media (also known as indirect surface). 


2.1667 Secondary Transfer Fluid 
a) The fluid that flows through the condenser as a 
coolant. 


b) Fluid that flows through a heat exchanger that 
transfers thermal energy from the primary transfer 
fluid to the application that uses solar energy. 


2.1668 Self-Contained Air Conditioning (Cooling) 
Unit — An air conditioning unit having the means for 


IS 3615 : 2020 


ventilation, air circulation, air cleaning, and air cooling, 
and the controls thereof, in the same cabinet with the 
condensing unit. Self-contained air-conditioning 
units are classified according to the method of 
rejecting condenser heat (water cooled, air cooled, 
and evaporatively cooled); the method of introducing 
ventilation air (no ventilation, ventilation by drawing 
air from outside, ventilation by a combination of the 
two methods); and the method of discharging air to the 
room (free delivery or pressure type). 


2.1669 Semi-packaged Primary Indirect 
Evaporative Cooler (Semi-packaged Primary 
IEC) — A component an indirect evaporative cooler 
provided with a primary air-moving device, that 
delivers primary air. This device also includes the 
entire water distribution, collection, and recirculation 
system with pump and piping. 


2.1670 Semi-packaged Secondary Indirect 
Evaporative Cooler (Semi-packaged Secondary 
IEC) — A component an indirect evaporative cooler 
with integrated or non-integrated primary and secondary 
air passages and provided with a secondary air moving 
device, which delivers secondary air. This device also 
includes the entire water distribution, collection, and 
recirculation system with pump and piping. 


2.1671 Sensible Heat Ratio, Air Cooler — It is the 
ratio of sensible cooling effect to total cooling effect of 
an air cooler. 


2.1672 Sensitivity — A measure of the smallest 
incremental change to which an instrument can 
respond. 


2.1673 Sensitivity Ratio — In instrumentation, ratio 
of a change in output magnitude to the change of input 
that causes it after the steady state has been reached. 


2.1674 Sensor — It is a device or instrument designed 
to detect and measure a variable. 


2.1675 Series Fan-Powered Terminal — The terminal 
where primary airflow is modulated and mixed with 
induced air by a continuously operated integral fan to 
provide a relatively constant volume of discharge. 


2.1676 Series Perimeter Loop-Heating System — 
A hot-water heating system in which each radiator is 
connected in series with the next and all flow returns to 
the boiler in the loop. Also known as a single pipe or 
one pipe system. 


2.1677 Set Pressure — The pressure at which a pressure 
relief device or pressure control is set to operate. 


2.1678 Setback — It is reduction of heating (by 
reducing the setpoint) or cooling (by increasing the 
setpoint) during hours when a building is unoccupied 
or during periods when lesser demand is acceptable. 


72 


2.1679 Setpoint — The point at which the desired 
temperature (°C [°F ]) of the heated or cooled space 
is set. 


2.1680 Shading Coefficient — It is the ratio of absorbed 
and transmitted solar heat relative to fenestration fitted 
with shading devices to that occurring with unshaded 
single-strength glass. 


2.1681 Shading Coefficient (SC) — It is the ratio of 
solar heat gain at normal incidence through glazing 
to that occurring through standard thickness of 
clear, double-strength glass. Shading coefficient does 
not include interior, exterior, or integral shading 
devices. 


2.1682 Shaft Ventilation — Natural ventilation by 
means of a duct mounted vertically or near vertically. 


2.1683 Shape Factor — Radiation angle factor. 


2.1684 Sharp Freezer — A cold storage freezer room, 
generally kept at —34°C to —23°C (-30°F to —10°F ), to 
receive unfrozen goods and freeze them. 


2.1685 Shelf — A shelf is any surface generally 
horizontal, within the cabinet which is provided for the 
storage of food. 


2.1686 Shelf, Adjustable — An adjustable shelf is 
one which can have its position changed without the 
use of tools. 


2.1687 Shelf, Average Height — The average shelf 
height is the average clear height, weighted by area, 
above all shelves included in the net shelf area. 


2.1688 Shelf, Door — It is any surface on the door, 
which can be used for the storage of food. 


2.1689 Shelf, Fractional — It is a shelf which is less 
than either the width or the depth, or both, of the full 
shelf. 


2.1690 Shelf, Full — It is a shelf, which essentially 
tills the interior cross-section of the cabinet. 


2.1691 Shelf, Net Area, for Household Freezers — A 
calculated value based on the net areas of main shelves, 
door shelves, bottoms of suspended containers or 
dispensers, and the bottom of the liner(s). 


2.1692 Shelf, Net Area, for Household Refrigerators, 
All-Refrigerators and Combination Refrigerator- 
Freezers — A calculated value based on the net 
areas of the main shelves, door shelves, bottoms of 
suspended containers or dispensers, and the bottom 
of the liner(s) of the general refrigerated and freezer 
compartments. 


2.1693 Shelf, Revolving — It is a shelf, which can be 
either partially or fully rotated. 


2.1694 Shelf, Roll Out, Sliding, or Swing Out — It 
is a shelf, which can roll, slide, or pivot forward on its 
support(s). 


2.1695 Shell and Tube — Pertaining to heat exchangers 
in which a nest of tubes or pipes, or a coil of tube or 
pipe, is contained in a shell or container. The pipe (or 
pipes) carries a fluid through it, while the shell is also 
provided with an inlet and outlet for a fluid flow. 


2.1696 Silencer — A device or unit installed in air duct 
systems to reduce air noise in the duct. 


2.1697 Silica Gel — A form of silicon dioxide which 
absorbs moisture readily and is used as a drying agent. 


2.1698 Simulation Model — A computer model that 
provides information on the energy-using systems in 
a building ( for example, HVAC, lighting, occupancy, 
plug loads, building envelope). The model serves as 
the input data for a specific computer building energy 
simulation program, along with weather data. When 
run, the computer simulation program will predict 
the energy use and demand in the described building 
for a time interval specified in the simulation model. 
Depending on the kind of simulation program and 
how it is set up to run, various kinds of output may be 
produced. 


2.1699 Simulation Program — A computer program 
that is capable of simulating the energy performance of 
building systems. 


2.1700 Single-Duct Air-Handling System — The 
system in which the air, having been conditioned, is 
distributed to various zones through a single duct. 


2.1701 Single-Duct Unit — Air-terminal unit assembly 
having one ducted air inlet and a device for regulating 
the airflow rate so it is independent of inlet pressure 
changes. 


2.1702 Single-Stage Compression The 
compression from evaporator to condenser pressure by 
passing through one compressor stage only. 


2.1703 Single-Zone System — An HVAC system 
serving a single HVAC zone. 


2.1704 Slab Insulation — Thermal insulation applied 
under slab on ground construction. 


2.1705 Slab Thermal Insulation Semirigid 
insulation preformed into rectangular units having 
a degree of suppleness particularly related to their 
geometrical dimensions. 


2.1706 Sling Psychrometer — It is a hygrometer of 
two matched thermometers, one with its bulb wetted 
and the other dry, capable of being whirled rapidly on a 
sling to indicate the temperature differences related to 
relative humidity. 


73 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1707 Sludge — It is a product of decomposition of 
oil resulting from impurities, moisture, or chemical 
reactions and favoured by excessive temperature. 
Sludge may be mushy, gummy, or hard. 


2.1708 Slugging — It is the effect produced by droplets 
of liquid refrigerant or oil, or a mixture of both, that 
reach the cylinder of a compressor. 


2.1709 Slurry — Suspension of a solid in a liquid. 


2.1710 Smoke 


a) Small solid and/or liquid particles produced by 
incomplete combustion of organic substances, 
varying in size often in the range of 0.1 to 0.3 um. 


b) The airborne solid and liquid particulates and gases 
evolved when a material undergoes pyrolysis or 
combustion, together with the quantity of air that 
is entrained or otherwise mixed into the mass. 


2.1711 Smoke Control System — An engineered 
system that uses mechanical fans to produce airflows 
and pressure differences across barriers to limit smoke 
movement. 


2.1712 Smoke Control Zone — A space within a 
building enclosed by smoke barriers, including the 
top and bottom, that is a part of a zoned smoke control 
system. 


2.1713 Smoke Exhaust System — A mechanical or 
gravity system intended to move smoke from the smoke 
zone to the exterior of the building, including smoke 
removal, purging, and venting systems, as well as the 
function of exhaust fans used to reduce the pressure in 
a smoke zone. 


2.1714 Smoke Management System — An engineered 
system that includes all methods that can be used singly 
or in combination to modify smoke movement. 


2.1715 Smoke Zone — The smoke control zone in 
which the fire is located. 


2.1716 Smudging — The black marks on ceilings and 
air outlets, generally caused by dirt particles suspended 
in the room air. This dirt is entrained in the mixed 
airstream and is deposited on the ceiling and outlet. 


2.1717 Solar Absorptance — It is the ratio of the 
solar spectrum radiant flux absorbed by a body to that 
incident on it. 


2.1718 Solar Energy — Energy derived directly from 
the sun’s rays, both as diffuse and beam radiation 
(excludes indirect methods such as photosynthesis, 
wind, etc.). 


2.1719 Solar Energy Source — The source of thermal, 
chemical, or electrical energy derived from direct 
conversion of incident solar radiation at the building site. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1720 Solar Heat Gain — The solar energy flowing 
into a space or structure. Units are expressed in 
kilowatts (Btu/h). 


2.1721 Solar Heat Gain Coefficient (SHGC) — The 
ratio of the solar heat gain entering the space through 
the fenestration area to the incident solar radiation. 
Solar heat gain includes directly transmitted solar heat 
and absorbed solar radiation, which is then reradiated, 
conducted, or convected into the space. 


2.1722 Solar Irradiance — It is the rate at which solar 
energy is received, per unit area. See also [[Irradiance]]. 


2.1723 Solar Loss Through Window — The fraction 
of total solar radiation transmitted through the 
window(s) that is reflected by opaque surfaces and 
retransmitted back out the window(s). 


2.1724 Solar Noon — The instant at which the sun 
reaches its maximum altitude on the horizon at any 
given location. 


2.1725 Solar Radiation — The transmission of radiant 
energy from the sun. 


2.1726 Solar Simulator — A source of radiant energy 
simulating the solar radiation. 


2.1727 Solar Time — The time of the day as indicated 
by the apparent position of the sun. 


2.1728 Solar-Optical Properties — The spectral, 
radiant, or luminous transmittance, reflectance, 
and absorptance within the range of wavelengths 
characterizing solar radiation, that is, 300 to 3 000 nm. 


2.1729 Solidification Point The temperature 
at which a liquid substance will solidify, but not 
necessarily crystallize, on removal of heat (usually at 
standard atmospheric pressure). Compare to [[Freezing 
Point]]. 


2.1730 Solution, Eutectic — It is a mixture which 
melts or freezes, normally at constant temperature and 
with constant composition. Its melting point is usually 
the lowest possible for mixtures of the given substances. 


2.1731 Solution, Strong (Rich) — It is a solvent with 
relatively high concentration of solute. 


2.1732 Solution, Weak — It is a solvent with relatively 
low concentration of solute. 


2.1733 Sorbant — An absorbent or adsorbent medium 
that remains completely or substantially in a single 
phase during the process of absorbing or releasing heat 
by means of a refrigerant. Such media include liquids 
and solids. 


2.1734 Sorbate — The substance absorbed by or 
adsorbed on a sorbent. 


74 


2.1735 Sorbent — It is a material which extracts one 
or more substances present in an atmosphere or mixture 
of gases or liquids with which it is in contact, due to an 
affinity for such substances. 


2.1736 Sorption — It is a general term covering both 
absorption and adsorption. 


2.1737 Space-Cooling-Only Mode — An operating 
mode that occurs during space cooling when either 
the desuperheater water pump has automatically 
cycled off or the rate of heat transfer to the domestic 
water has become negligible. With respect to seasonal 
performance calculations, this mode occurs when the 
water heating load is satisfied but a space-cooling load 
remains. 


2.1738 Specific Enthalpy — Enthalpy per unit mass 
of substance. 


2.1739 Specific Entropy — Entropy per unit mass of 
a substance. 


2.1740 Specific Heat (CP) — The ratio of the quantity 
of heat required to raise the temperature of a given mass 
of any substance one degree to the quantity required to 
raise the temperature of an equal mass of a standard 
substance one degree (usually water at 15°C [59°F ]). 
The units are expressed in J/(kg:K) [Btu/Ib-°F ]. 


2.1741 Specific Humidity 


a) It is the he ratio of the mass of water to the total 
mass of a moist air sample. 


b) The ratio of the mass of water vapor to total mass 
of a moist air sample (including water vapor and 
dry air) in a particular volume. Specific humidity 
is expressed as a ratio in units of lb of moisture/ 
lb of dry air or grains of moisture/Ib of dry 
air (kilograms of water vapor per kilogram of 
mixture). See also [[Absolute Humidity]]. 


2.1742 Specific Infiltration Ratio — It is the ratio 
of infiltration to leakage area; a normalized quantity 
that indicates the intensity of the weather relative to 
infiltration. 


2.1743 Specific Refrigerant Flow Rate — The 
refrigerant flow rate in lb/min (g/s) required to produce 
one ton (one kW) of refrigeration. 


2.1744 Specific Superheat 


a) Difference in specific enthalpies of a pure 
condensable fluid between vapor at a given 
temperature above saturation and vapor at the dry 
saturated state at the same pressure. 


b) Superheat in a unit quantity of fluid. 
2.1745 Specific Volume (SV) — The volume of a unit 


mass of a material. Usually expressed in m*/kg (ft/lb ). 
The reciprocal of density. 


2.1746 Split Air-conditioning System — The air- 
conditioning system consisting of equipment provided 
in more than one assembly or enclosure, usually with 
supply air-distribution equipment housed separately 
from refrigerant-condensing equipment. 


2.1747 Split Condenser — The condenser comprising 
several heat-exchanging components operating on one 
or several refrigeration systems. 


2.1748 Spot Cooling — Cooling the air of a limited 
portion of an enclosed space without the use of walls 
or partitions. 


2.1749 Spray Deck — It is an overhead bunker where 
air is cooled and circulated by brine sprays. 


2.1750 Spray Pond — It is an arrangement for lowering 
the temperature of water by evaporative cooling of the 
water in contact with outside air. The water to be cooled 
is sprayed by nozzles into the space above a body of 
previously cooled water and allowed to fall by gravity 
into it. 


2.1751 Spray-Type Air Cooler — It is a forced 
circulation air cooler, wherein the coil surface capacity 
is augmented by a liquid spray during period of 
operation. 


2.1752 Stabilized Temperature — A condition in 
which a temperature is considered to be stabilized 
when three successive readings taken at intervals of 10 
percent of the previously elapsed duration of the test, 
but not less than five-minute intervals, vary no more 
than 3°C (5°F ). 


2.1753 Stack — The portion of the exhaust system 
downstream of the draft diverter, draft hood, or 
barometric draft regulator. 


2.1754 Stack Effect 


a) The movement of air into and out of buildings, 
chimneys, flue gas stacks, or other containers and 
is driven by buoyancy. Buoyancy occurs due to a 
difference in indoor to outdoor air density resulting 
from temperature and moisture differences. The 
result is either a positive or negative buoyancy 
force. The greater the thermal difference and the 
height of the structure, the greater the buoyancy 
force, and thus the stack effect. The stack effect is 
also referred to as the chimney effect, and it helps 
drive natural ventilation and infiltration. 

b) The movement of air or other gas in a vertical 

enclosure ( for example, duct, chimney, building), 

induced by the density difference between the 

air or other gas in the enclosure and the ambient 

atmosphere. 

NOTE — stack effect is a significant concern in heating- 

system design for tall buildings in cold climates. Sometimes 

referred to as chimney effect. 


75 


IS 3615 : 2020 


c) Pressure difference caused by the difference in 
density between indoor and outdoor air due to an 
indoor/outdoor temperature difference. 


d) The vertical airflow within buildings caused by 
temperature differences between the building’s 
interior and exterior. 


2.1755 Stagnation Temperature — The temperature 
that exists at a stagnation point in a fluid flow. At a 
stagnation point, the speed of the fluid is zero, and all 
of the kinetic energy has been converted to internal 
energy. In incompressible fluid flow and in isentropic 
compressible flow, the stagnation temperature is equal 
to the total temperature at all points on the streamline 
leading to the stagnation point. 


2.1756 Standard Atmosphere for Reference — Air 
at a temperature of 15° C, a relative humidity 
of 65 percent, and a pressure of 101.3 mbar. 


2.1757 Standard Rating — A rating based on tests 
performed at standard rating conditions. 


2.1758 Standard Rating Conditions Rating 
conditions used as the basis for comparison of 
performance characteristics. 


2.1759 Stanton Number — A dimensionless number 
used in calculation of forced convection, equal to 
the heat transfer coefficient of a fluid divided by the 
product of the specific heat at constant pressure, the 
fluid density, and the fluid velocity. Symbol St or NSt. 
Also known as the Margoulis number M. 


2.1760 Static Discharge Head — The static pressure 
of a fluid at the outlet of the pumping device, expressed 
in terms of the height of a column of the fluid or of the 
height of some manometric fluid that it would support. 


2.1761 Static Gage Pressure — Static pressure 
relative to the atmosphere. 


2.1762 Static Head — The pressure due to the weight 
of the fluid above the point of measurement. In a closed 
system, static head is equal on both sides of the pump. 


2.1763 Static Pressure — The actual pressure of the 
fluid, which is associated not with its motion but with 
its state. The pressure is exerted uniformly throughout 
the entire fluid. The portion of the fluid pressure which 
exists by virtue of the degree of compression only. 
If expressed as gage pressure, it may be negative or 
positive. In a dynamic system, static pressure is the 
difference between total and velocity pressures, in 
water (H,O) (kPa). 


2.1764 Static Pressure Loss 


a) External static pressure loss for forced-air systems 
using packaged air-handling equipment; the static 
pressure loss resulting from airflow through the 


IS 3615 : 2020 


supply and return ductwork and other elements 
external to the packaged air-handling unit. 


b 


wm 


Internal static pressure loss for forced-air systems; 
the static pressure loss resulting from airflow 
through the internal elements of the packaged 
air-handling unit. These internal elements may 
include such items as filters, coils, dampers, 
mixing sections, etc. 


Cc 


wa 


Total static pressure loss for forced-air systems; 
the sum of the external static pressure loss and 
the internal static pressure loss. The term is not 
applicable to an individual fan or a fan located 
within a builtup air-handling unit. Fans are rated 
by the term fan total static pressure, which is not 
the same as fan total pressure. 


2.1765 Static Regain Method Duct Sizing — The 
method in which ducts are sized so that the regain in 
static pressure due to decreased velocity between two 
points totally or partially compensates for the frictional 
resistance between the points. 


2.1766 Static Suction Head — The static pressure of 
a fluid at the inlet of the pumping device, expressed in 
terms of the height of a column of the fluid or of the 
height of some manometric fluid that it would support. 
It is a positive value. See [[Static Suction Lift]]. 


2.1767 Static Suction Lift — The static pressure of a 
fluid at the inlet of the pumping device, expressed in 
terms of the height of a column of the fluid or of the 
height of some manometric fluid that it would support. 
It is a negative value. 


2.1768 Static Temperature — The temperature which 
exists by virtue of the internal energy of the air only. If 
a portion of the internal energy is converted into kinetic 
energy, the static temperature is decreased accordingly. 


2.1769 Steady State — It is a state of a system in 
which movement of matter or energy phenomena are 
taking place when the various physical phenomena are 
independent of time. 


2.1770 Steady-State Condition — The condition 
existing when a uniform renewal cycle of a self- 
renewable air cleaner maintains essentially constant 
performance. Steady state is reached when the system 
is operating in a uniformly repetitive manner, for 
example, cycling between two resistance levels. 


2.1771 Steam, Dry Saturated — Steam at the 
saturation temperature corresponding to the pressure 
and containing no water in suspension. 


2.1772 Steam, Superheated — Steam at a temperature 
higher than the saturation temperature corresponding to 
the pressure. 


76 


2.1773 Steam, Wet Saturated — Steam at the 
saturation temperature corresponding to the pressure 
and containing water particles in suspension. 


2.1774 Stefan-Boltzmann Law — Total energy 
radiated from a blackbody is proportional to the fourth 
power of the temperature of the body. Also known as 
the fourth power law. 


2.1775 Sterilization — Heating foods or other materials 
to kill micro organisms, usually to a temperature of 
100°C (212°F ) or higher. 


2.1776 Still Air Freezing — Freezing of produce in a 
room without mechanical movement of air. 


2.1777 Stirling Cycle — Theoretical thermodynamic 
cycle comprising two isothermal processes and two 
isochoric processes. 


2.1778 Stokes’ Laws — The wavelength of 
luminescence excited by radiation is always greater 
than that of the exciting radiation. 


2.1779 Storage Capacity — The amount of thermal 
energy required to complete one charging cycle of 
a thermal storage device. The storage capacity will 
always be a greater value than the usable discharge 
capacity of the thermal storage device. Compare to 
[[Discharge Capacity]]. 


2.1780 Storage Efficiency — Discharge capacity 
divided by charge capacity. 


2.1781 Storage Inventory — The amount of usable 
cooling energy remaining in a thermal storage device 
at any given time. 


2.1782 Storage Medium — The material in the 
storage device, independent of the containing structure, 
in which the major portion of the energy is stored. 


2.1783 Storage Water Heater — A closed vessel 
in which water is heated by the combustion of fuels, 
electricity, or any other source and is stored and 
withdrawn for use external to the system at pressures 
not exceeding 1 102.4 kPa (160 psig ), including the 
apparatus by which heat is generated and all controls 
and devices necessary to prevent water temperatures 
from exceeding 98.9°C (210°F ). 


2.1784 Stored Heat — The heat from external or 
recovered heat sources that is held in reserve for later 
use. 


2.1785 Straddle Refrigerating Unit (Saddle Unit; 
Plug Unit) — The factory assembled refrigerating 
system mounted at high level in the insulated wall of a 
cold store with the evaporator inside the store and the 
rest of the unit outside. 


2.1786 Strainer — It is a device for withholding 
foreign matter from a flowing liquid or gas. 


2.1787 Stratification — The division into a series 
of layers, as with thermal gradients across a fluid in 
motion or at rest. 


2.1788 Stratification Index — A parameter that 
indicates the degree of thermal stratification in a storage 
device. 


2.1789 Stratified Airflow — Layers of air at different 
temperatures or different velocities flowing through 
a duct or plenum system and affect fan and/or pump 
performance in the distribution system. 


2.1790 Stratified Fluid — A region of fluid in which 
the density decreases monotonically in the upward 
direction and is stably stratified. 


2.1791 Stratified Storage — A thermal storage vessel 
in which a thermocline exists. 


2.1792 Stratified System — An air-distribution 
system that, during the cooling operation, limits the 
amount of mixing in the space and instead relies on 
thermal plumes to produce a stratified environment 
with cooler and fresher air near the floor and warmer 
and less fresh air near the ceiling. Examples are 
underfloor air-distribution system (UFAD) and DV 
systems. 


2.1793 Strong Liquor (Rich Liquor; Strong 
Solution) — A solvent with a relatively high 
concentration of dissolved refrigerant. 


2.1794 Structural Thermal Insulation — Insulation 
used as a part of the load carrying frame of a structure, 
such as the walls of a cold room or the body of a 
refrigerated vehicle. 


2.1795 Subcooled Liquid — The liquid whose 
temperature is lower than the condensation temperature 
at its given pressure. 


2.1796 Subcooler — A heat exchanger for cooling 
liquid refrigerant below its condensing temperature at 
a given pressure. 


2.1797 Subcooling — At a defined pressure, the 
difference between a given liquid temperature and the 
bubble point temperature. 


2.1798 Sub-cooling — Process of cooling refrigerant 
below condensing temperature for a given pressure; 
also, cooling a liquid below its freezing point where it 
can exist only in a state of unstable equilibrium. 


2.1799 Subcooling Heat Rejection Effect — Total 
refrigerant heat rejection effect less the condensing 
heat rejection effect. 


77 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1800 Subcooling Refrigerating Effect The 
additional refrigeration effect made available by 
subcooling the refrigerant liquid in the condenser. 


2.1801 Sub-cooling, Heat of (Specific) — The 
difference in specific enthalpies of a pure condensable 
fluid between the saturated (not sub-cooled) liquid state 
and the cooled liquid at a given temperature below its 
condensation temperature at the same pressure. 


2.1802 Sublimation — It is a change of stale directly 
from solid to gas without appearance of liquid. 


2.1803 Submerged Coil Condenser/Submerged 
Condenser — A condenser in which the piping is 
submerged in a vessel containing cooling water. 


2.1804 Suction Inlet — It is the port through which 
gas enters. 


2.1805 Suction Line — It is the tube or pipe which 
carries the refrigerant vapour from the evaporator to the 
compressor inlet. 


2.1806 Sun Effect — Solar energy transmitted into 
space through windows and building materials. 


2.1807 Superchilling — Chilling a product to a 
temperature very near or sometimes below its freezing 
point. 


2.1808 Supercooled Liquid — The liquid in which 
the existing temperature is lower than the saturation 
temperature for the given pressure. 


2.1809 Supercooling — Cooling a substance below 
the normal freezing point without solidification. 


2.1810 Supercritical — The state of fluids at pressures 
and temperatures above their critical values. Also used 
loosely, and especially for helium, for the state of the 
liquid at pressures exceeding the vapor pressure. 


2.1811 Superheat (Specific) — It is the difference in 
specific enthalpies of a pure condensable fluid between 
vapour at a given temperature above saturation and 
vapour at the dry saturated state at the same pressure. 


2.1812 Superheated Steam — Steam at a temperature 
higher than the atmospheric pressure boiling 
temperature. 


2.1813 Superheated Vapor — Vapor at a temperature 
greater than the saturation temperature. The pressure 
and temperature of superheated vapor are independent 
properties, since the temperature can increase while the 
pressure remains constant. See [[superheat]]. 


2.1814 Superheater — A heat exchanger used on 
flooded evaporators, wherein hot liquid on its way to 
enter the evaporator is cooled by supplying heat to dry 
and superheat the wet vapour leaving the evaporator. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1815 Supersaturated Air — The humid air that 
contains in a unit mass of dry air a mass of water vapor 
greater than would be contained in saturated air at the 
same temperature; the excess water may remain in the 
form of fog. 


2.1816 Supersaturated Vapor Vapor in a 
metastable equilibrium at a pressure higher than the 
saturation pressure corresponding to its temperature. 
See [[Supersaturation]]. 


2.1817 Supersaturation 


a) It is the condition of metastable equilibrium in a 
solution where the solute remains dissolved at a 
temperature lower than the initial solidification 
temperature. 


b) Condition of metastable equilibrium in which a 
vapor is at a pressure higher than the saturation 
pressure corresponding to its temperature. 


2.1818 Supply Air 


a) The air delivered by mechanical or natural 
ventilation to a space, composed of any 
combination of outdoor air, recirculated air, or 
transfer air. 


b 


wm 


Air entering a space from an air-conditioning, 
heating, or ventilating apparatus for the purpose 
of comfort conditioning. Supply air is generally 
filtered, fan forced, and either heated, cooled, 
humidified, or dehumidified as necessary to 
maintain specified conditions. Only the quantity 
of outdoor air within the supply airflow may be 
used as replacement air. 


2.1819 Supply Mains 


a) (Pneumatic) The air supply piping to all controllers 
or other devices requiring a main air supply. 


b) Pipes through which the heating or cooling 
medium of a system flows from the source of heat 
or refrigeration to the runouts and risers leading to 
the heating or cooling units. 


c) Source of electric power to a system. 
2.1820 Supply Pressure 
a) Energy source to a controller or auxiliary device. 
b) Pressure of supply mains of a pneumatic control 
system. 


2.1821 Surface Cooling — It is a method of cooling 
air or other gas by passing over cold surfaces. 


2.1822 Surge Drum — See [Accumulator]. 


2.1823 Surroundings — Immediate outside space of a 
thermodynamic system. 


2.1824 Swamp Cooler — Slang for evaporative 
cooler. 


78 


2.1825 Sweating — It is the condensation of moisture 
from air on a surface which is below the dew-point 
temperature. 


2.1826 System — A heating or refrigerating scheme or 
machine usually confined to those parts in contact with 
the heating or refrigerating medium. 


2.1827 System, Absorption — A refrigeration system 
in which the refrigerant gas evolved in the evaporator 
is taken up in an absorber and released in a generator 
upon the application of heat. 


2.1828 System, Air Agitation — A combination 
consisting of a power-driven blower, distributing 
piping, and flexibly connected fittings for delivering air 
to the water in ice cans for the purpose of agitating the 
water and promoting the production of clear ice. 


2.1829 System, Brine Spray — It is a refrigerating 
scheme for cooling by a mist or spray of brine. 


2.1830 System, Cascade — It is that system having 
two or more refrigerant circuits, each with a pressure 
imposing element, condenser, and evaporator, where 
the evaporator of one circuit cools the condenser of 
another (lower temperature) circuit. 


2.1831 System, Central Fan — A mechanical indirect 
system of heating, ventilating, or air conditioning, in 
which the air is treated or handled by equipment located 
outside the rooms served, usually at a central location, 
and conveyed to and from the rooms by means of a fan 
and a system of distributing ducts. 


2.1832 System, Central Plant — A system with two 
or more low sides connected to a single, central high 
side; a multiple system. 


2.1833 System, Closed Brine — A refrigerating 
system in which the circulating brine is completely 
enclosed and shut off from the atmosphere throughout 
the cycle except for a vented expansion tank at the high 
point of the system. 


2.1834 System, Commercial — A refrigeration system 
used in a commercial and/or a business place, such as a 
meat market, store, florist shop, hotel, office building, 
restaurant, candy shop, bakery, or other place of similar 
commercial enterprise, assembled and installed in the 
manufacturing and/or business portion of any building. 


2.1835 System, Compression — It is a refrigerating 
system in which the pressure imposing element is 
mechanically operated. 


2.1836 System, Cycle Defrost — In household 
refrigerators and combination refrigerator-freezers 
only, a system in which the refrigerated surfaces of the 
general refrigerated compartment are defrosted by an 
automatic defrost system. Defrost water is disposed off 


automatically or collected in a container for subsequent 
manual removal. A characteristic of a cycle defrost 
system is that nominal refrigerated food temperatures 
are maintained during operation of the automatic 
defrost system. 


2.1837 System, Dense Air — A cold air system 
maintained under pressure greater than atmospheric in 
which air is compressed, heat of compression dissipated, 
and the air, chilled by expansion and performance of 
work, can create useful refrigeration. 


2.1838 System, Direct Expansion — A refrigerating 
system in which the evaporator is in direct contact with 
the refrigerated material or space or the evaporator is 
located in air circulating passages communicating with 
such spaces. 


2.1839 System, Dual Temperature Brine — In 
chilling, the use of an initial brine temperature, followed 
by a lower brine temperature. 


2.1840 System, Duct — It is a series of ducts, elbows, 
and connectors to convey air from one location to 
another. 


2.1841 System, Flooded — A system in which only 
part of the refrigerant passing over the heat transfer 
surface is evaporated, and the portion not evaporated is 
separated from the vapour and recirculated. 


2.1842 System, Indirect — It is a refrigerating system 
in which a liquid, such as brine or water, cooled by 
the refrigerant, is circulated to the material or space 
refrigerated or is used to cool air so circulated. 


2.1843 System, Industrial — A system used in the 
manufacture or processing of materials, such as ice 
making plants, cold storage warehouses, ice cream 
plants, dairy plants, packing houses, chemical plants, 
and other places of similar industrial enterprise. 


2.1844 System, Low Pressure — In air conditioning, a 
distributing system delivering air to ordinary ventilating 
grills at low velocities with low static losses through 
the supply grills. 


2.1845 System, Mechanical Refrigerating 
A refrigerating system employing a mechanical 
compression device to remove the low-pressure 
refrigerant enclosed in the low-pressure side and to 
deliver it to the high-pressure side of the system. 


2.1846 System, Multiple — A system using the direct 
method in which refrigerant is delivered to two or more 
evaporators in separate rooms or refrigerators. 


2.1847 System, No-frost — A system in which all the 
refrigerated surfaces in the cabinet are defrosted by an 
automatic defrost system. Characteristics of a no-frost 
system are: 


79 


IS 3615 : 2020 


system is automatically operated to prevent 
formation of frost on all refrigerated surfaces, 

b) no accumulation of ice or frost forms on the stored 
food, 


nominal refrigerated food temperatures are 
maintained during operation of the automatic 
defrost system(s), and 


c) 


d) water from defrosting is disposed offautomatically. 


2.1848 System, Off-Peak — It is a system with control 
which normally avoids use of power during peak load 
periods, usually having eutectic or water-ice hold-over 
means. 


2.1849 System, Open Brine — A refrigerating system 
in which the circulating brine returns to an open tank 
which serves as a reservoir for the pump suction and as 
an inspection tank for the condition and flow of brine. 


2.1850 System, Refrigerating — Any system which, 
in operation between a heat source and a heat sink (in the 
thermodynamic sense) at two different temperatures, is 
able to absorb heat from the heat source at the lower 
temperature and reject heat to the heat sink at the higher 
temperature. 


2.1851 System, Refrigerating, Absorption-Type — 
A refrigerating system in which refrigeration is effected 
by evaporation of a refrigerant in a heat exchanger 
(evaporator), the resulting vapour being then absorbed 
by an absorbent medium from which it is subsequently 
expelled by heating at a higher partial vapour pressure 
and condensed by cooling in another heat exchanger 
(condenser). 


2.1852 System, Refrigerating, Compression-Type — 
It is a refrigerating system in which the temperature 
and pressure of gaseous refrigerant are increased by a 
mechanically operated component. In most cases, the 
refrigerant undergoes changes of state in the system. 


2.1853 System, Refrigerating, Hermetically Sealed 
Compression — It is a refrigerating system utilizing a 
hermetic refrigerant compressor. 


2.1854 System, Removable Unit — A refrigerating 
system which is readily removable as one unit from the 
cabinet or space which it cools and from the building in 
which it is used without disconnecting any refrigerant- 
containing part of the system. 


2.1855 System, Run-Around — A regenerative-type 
closed secondary system in which a continuously 
circulated fluid abstracts heat from the primary system 
fluid at one place, returning this heat to the primary 
system fluid at another place. 


2.1856 System, Self-Contained (Single Packaged) 
Refrigerating — It is a completely factory-assembled 
and factory-tested refrigerating system in a suitable 


IS 3615 : 2020 


frame or enclosure, in which all of the refrigerant 
containing parts are permanently connected at the 
factory. 


2.1857 System, Steam Jet — A refrigerating system 
in which high pressure steam, supplied through a 
nozzle and acting to eject vapour from the evaporator, 
maintains the requisite low pressure on one side and 
produces a higher pressure on the other by virtue of 
compression followed by circulation/ distribution of 
passage. 


2.1858 System, Unitary Refrigerating — A complete 
factory-assembled and factory-tested refrigerating 
system comprising one or more assemblies which may 
be shipped as one unit or separately but which are 
designed to be used together. 


2.1859 System, Vapour — It is a refrigerating system 
employing a condensable vapour as the refrigerant. 


2.1860 System, Water Vacuum — In refrigeration, 
one which employs a vacuum to bail water at the 
temperature desired; one which employs evaporating 
water vapour as the refrigerant. 


2.1861 System, Welded — One in which all refrigerant 
joints are brazed or welded. 


2.1862 System, Year-Round Air Conditioning — It 
is an air-conditioning system which ventilates, heats, 
and humidifies in winter, cools and dehumidifies in 
summer the spaces under consideration, and provides 
the desired degree of air motion and cleanliness. The 
system includes the following equipment, whether it is 
located within the structure served or external to it: the 
refrigerating system and the heat generating system; 
any piping systems used to convey the heating and 
cooling media to suitable heat transfer surfaces; pumps, 
accessories, automatic controls, and interrelated 
electrical work. The heat transfer portions of the system 
generally include, as required, preheater, fans, systems 
of distributing ducts, piping, and necessary means of 
manual or automatic control. 


2.1863 Tank, Brine 


a) In an ice plant, the main freezing tank, in which 
the cans are immersed while ice is being produced. 


b) In a brine-circulating system, a storage tank or 
balance tank for brine. 


c) In domestic and commercial fields, a container 
surrounding the evaporator and filled with brine for 
storing refrigerant or for equalizing temperature at 
various points of the evaporator, especially in ice 
cream cabinets. 


2.1864 Tank, Brine Expansion — It is a vented 
reservoir in a closed circulating brine system for the 
accommodation of volume expansion of brine due to 
temperature change. 


80 


2.1865 Tank, Brine Return — It is a reservoir in an 
open circulating brine system for the storage of brine 
at the pump suction and for inspection of the condition 
and flow of brine, 


2.1866 Tank, Dip — A tank located conveniently to the 
can dump and supplied with water, in which the ice can 
be immersed to thaw the ice block loose from the can. 


2.1867 Tank, Freezing — A container kept at low 
temperatures for storing foodstuffs or for freezing 
foodstuffs. 


2.1868 Tank, Tee-Making — A tank arranged with 
proper accessories to hold an evaporator and antifreeze 
solution and ice cans, the cans being immersed in the 
solution which usually is in circulation around the 
evaporator and the cans. 


2.1869 Tank, Water Fore cooling — It is a tank where 
inlet water is cooled prior to freezing. 


2.1870 Tankless Heater — A heat exchanger for 
indirect heating of water, typically for domestic use, 
which is designed to be used without a water storage 
tank. See [Instantaneous Heater]. 


2.1871 Task/Ambient Conditioning (TAC) System — 
Any space-conditioning system that allows occupants 
to individually control the thermal environment in 
the localized zone of their workspace while still 
maintaining acceptable environmental conditions in the 
surrounding ambient spaces. 


2.1872 Temperature — It is the thermal state of matter 
with reference to its tendency to communicate heat to 
matter in contact with it. If no heat flows upon contact, 
there is no difference in temperature. 


2.1873 Temperature Difference, Diffusion — It is the 
temperature difference between the air temperature at 
supply opening and design indoor temperature. 


2.1874 Temperature Difference, Effective — It is the 
difference between the room air temperature and the 
supply air temperature at the outlet to the room. 


2.1875 Temperature Difference, Mean — Mean of 
difference between temperatures of a fluid-receiving 
and a fluid-yielding heat. 


2.1876 Temperature, Absolute 
expressed in degrees above absolute zero. 


Temperature 


2.1877 Temperature, Absolute Zero — The zero 
point on the absolute temperature scale 273.16° below 
zero of the centigrade scale. 


2.1878 Temperature, Critical The saturation 
temperature corresponding to the critical state of the 
substance at which the properties of the liquid and 
vapour are identical. 


2.1879 Temperature, Dew-Point — The temperature 
at which the condensation of water vapour in a space 
begins for a given state of humidity and pressure as the 
temperature of the, vapour is reduced; the temperature 
corresponding to saturation (100 percent relative 
humidity) for a given absolute humidity at constant 
pressure. 


2.1880 Temperature, Dry-Bulb — It is the temperature 
of a gas or mixture of gases indicated by an accurate 
thermometer after correction for radiation. 


2.1881 Temperature, Effective — An arbitrary 
index which combines into a single value the effect 
of temperature, humidity, and air movement on the 
sensation of warmth or cold felt by the human body. 
The numerical value is that of the temperature of still, 
saturated air which would induce an identical sensation. 


2.1882 Temperature, Low — Temperature below 
ordinary refrigerating plant requirements, for example, 
from —1° C down; also any pan of a system below 
another parallel refrigerating level of temperature. 


2.1883 Temperature, Mean Radiant (MRT) — The 
temperature of a uniform black enclosure in which 
a solid body or occupant would exchange the same 
amount of radiant heat as in the existing non-uniform 
environment. 


2.1884 Temperature, Room — The temperature of 
any room, for example: 


a) Aroom in which a refrigerator is being operated or 
tested; and 


b) A room being conditioned for the comfort of 
occupants. 


2.1885 Room temperature used colloquially to mean 
the ordinary temperature one is accustomed to find in 
dwellings. 


2.1886 Temperature, Saturation — Of a fluid, 
the boiling point corresponding to a given pressure; 
evaporation temperature; condensation temperature. 


2.1887 Temperature, Wet-Bulb — Thermodynamic 
wet-bulb temperature is the temperature at which liquid 
or solid water, by evaporating into air, can bring the 
air to saturation adiabatically at the same temperature. 
Wet-bulb temperature (without qualification) is the 
temperature indicated by a wet-bulb psychrometer 
constructed and used according to specifications. 


2.1888 Temperature, Wet-Bulb Depression — It 
is the difference between dry-bulb and wet-bulb 
temperatures. 


2.1889 Terminal Casing Leakage — The amount 
of air in ft?/min (L/s at standard conditions) escaping 
from the terminal at a given inlet pressure with only 


81 


IS 3615 : 2020 


the outlet(s) blocked and with the damper/valve fully 
opened. 


2.1890 Terminal Damper Leakage — The amount 
of air in ft?/min (L/s at standard conditions) passing 
through a fully closed damper/valve at a given inlet 
pressure. 


2.1891 Terminal Unit — A device that regulates the 
volumetric flow rate and/or the temperature of the 
controlled medium. 


2.1892 Test Air — The air that flows through the device 
being tested. During the test, test air should be at the 
temperature, humidity, pressure, and atmospheric dust 
concentration prevailing at the time of the test. Test air 
for arrestance and dust-holding capacity measurement 
may be indoor ambient air. 


2.1893 Test Panel — Any sensible heating or cooling 
panel that is used in testing for performance and/or 
rating purposes. 


2.1894 Test Period — The time over which quasi- 
steady-state conditions are maintained for each 
measured point. 


2.1895 Test Pressure — Pressure, usually higher 
than the design working pressure, to which a piece 
of equipment is subjected for testing according to 
specified procedures. 


2.1896 Test Pressure Loss — The differential in total 
pressure between the inlet and the outlet sections of 
a test duct or across a test fitting. For test fittings, the 
fitting is assumed to have zero length. For multiflow 
fittings, the total pressure loss shall be determined for 
each stream separately. 


2.1897 Test Rooms The two environmental 
chambers where all components of the combined 
appliance are installed and tested; one chamber is 
used to maintain specified indoor ambient conditions, 
while the second chamber is used to maintain specified 
outdoor ambient conditions. 


2.1898 Testing — The use of specialized and calibrated 
instruments to measure conditions such as temperatures, 
pressures, rotational speeds, electrical characteristics, 
velocities, fluid flows, etc., used in HVAC and R. 


2.1899 Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing — A 
systematic process or service applied to heating, 
ventilating, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems and 
other environmental systems to achieve and document 
air and hydronic flow rates. The adjustment of fluid 
flow rates through distribution systems by manually 
adjusting the position of dampers, valves, etc., or by 
using automatic control devices to control the position 
of dampers, actuators, valves, etc. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1900 Thaw Needle — A small tube with valved 
head, connected by hose to a source of warm water or 
steam, which may be inserted in the air agitation tube 
in an ice can for the purpose of thawing the air agitation 
tube loose from the ice block. 


2.1901 Thawing — Changing free water, or contained 
water as in foods, from the solid phase to the liquid 
phase by the addition of heat. 


2.1902 Theoretical Storage Capacity — The sum 
of the products of masses and heat capacities of all 
components (including the transfer fluid) contained 
within the insulating envelope of the thermal storage 
device. 


2.1903 Therm — Quantity of heat equivalent to 100 
000 Btu. 


2.1904 Thermal Absorptance — Ratio of the radiant 
flux absorbed by a physical surface to that incident on 
it. 


2.1905 Thermal Anemometer — A device that relies 
on the cooling effect of the airflow to change the 
temperature of a heated body in proportion to the air 
speed. Types include hot-wire anemometer, heated- 
bulb thermometer, heated-thermocouple anemometer, 
and heated-thermistor anemometer. 


2.1906 Thermal Anomalies Heat loss 
characteristics of a physical condition or structure that 
are not in accordance with intended design or calculated 
characteristics. 


2.1907 Thermal Boundary Resistance — It is the 
ratio of temperature difference to heat flux across the 
boundary between two distinct media (solid/solid or 
solid/fluid) (also known as thermal contact resistance). 


2.1908 Thermal Break The non-conducting 
physical structure, such as a frame around a door or 
window acting to retard heat flow. 


2.1909 Thermal Bridge — It is low thermal resistance 
path connecting two surfaces. 


2.1910 Thermal Comfort — The condition of mind 
which expresses satisfaction with the surrounding 
thermal environment and is assessed by subjective 
evaluation. Thermal comfort is affected by heat 
conduction, convection, radiation, evaporative heat 
loss, and relative air motion. 


2.1911 Thermal Conductance (C-factor) — Thermal 
conductance is the heat flux through a flat body induced 
by a unit temperature difference between the surfaces 
of that body. Units are W/[m?:K] (Btu/h-ft?-°F ). 


2.1912 Thermal Conductivity (K-factor) — The time 
rate of steady-state heat flow through unit thickness of 
unit area of a homogeneous material, induced by a unit 


82 


temperature gradient in a direction perpendicular to the 
isothermal planes of that unit. Units of k are in Btu-in/ 
(h-ft?-°F), Btu-ft/(h-ft?-°F), or W/(m-K). Thermal 
conductivity must be evaluated for a specific mean 
temperature, thickness, age, and moisture content. See 
also [[thermal conductance]]. 


2.1913 Thermal Conductor — It is a material that 
transmits heat by conduction. 


2.1914 Thermal Convection — Transfer of heat by 
a fluid moving by natural variations in density (in the 
absence of conduction and radiation). 


2.1915 Thermal Delay — The time period between 
the energization of a heat-producing device and the 
measurable effect of the heat produced until equilibrium 
conditions are reached. 


2.1916 Thermal Diffusion — It is the phenomenon 
in which a temperature gradient in a mixture of fluids 
gives rise to a flow of one constituent relative to the 
whole mixture. 


2.1917 Thermal Diffusivity — It is the physical 
quantity that determines the rate of heat propagation in 
transient state processes. Thermal conductivity divided 
by the product of density and specific heat. Units are 
ft/s or m’/s. 


2.1918 Thermal Efficiency — Energy output as a 
percentage of the energy input of a machine or process. 


2.1919 Thermal Emissivity — It is the radiation 
property of a material, evaluated with its surface 
optically smooth and clean, and of sufficient thickness 
to be opaque. 


2.1920 Thermal Emittance — A surface property of 
a material governing the emission of thermal radiation 
relative to that emitted by a perfect emitter, or black 
body, at the same surface temperature. 


2.1921 Thermal Energy — Energy possessed by a 
system caused by the motion of the molecules and/or 
intermolecular forces; that is, heat. 


2.1922 Thermal Energy Meter — See [Btu Meter] or 
[Watt Meter]. 


2.1923 Thermal Energy Storage 


a) Thermal energy storage may refer to a number 
of technologies that stores energy in a thermal 
reservoir for later reuse. They can be employed to 
balance energy demand between day time and night 
time. The thermal reservoir may be maintained at a 
temperature above (hotter) or below (colder) than 
that of the ambient environment. The principal 
application today is the production of ice, chilled 
water, or eutectic solution at night, which is then 
used to cool environments during the day. 


b) Thermal energy storage technologies store heat, 
usually from active solar collectors in an insulated 
repository for later use in space heating, domestic 
or process hot water, or to generate electricity. 
Most practical active solar heating systems have 
storage for a few hours to a day’s worth of heat 
collected. There are also a small but growing 
number of seasonal thermal stores used to store 
summer heat for space heating during winter. 


2.1924 Thermal Envelope — The elements of a 
structure that enclose conditioned spaces and that 
control transmission of heat, air, and water vapor 
between the conditioned spaces and the exterior. See 
also [Building Thermal Envelope]. 


2.1925 Thermal Environment — The surrounding 
atmosphere characterized by parameters such as 
air temperature, wet-bulb temperature, dew-point 
temperature, water vapor pressure, total atmospheric 
pressure, relative humidity, and specific humidity. 


2.1926 Thermal Equilibrium — Equilibrium obtained 
in a system when the temperatures are nonvarying. 


2.1927 Thermal Expansion — Increase in one or more 
of the dimensions of a solid body or a liquid volume, 
caused by a temperature rise. 


2.1928 Thermal Frequency Response The 
response of a thermal system to a periodic thermal 
excitation expressed as a function of frequency. 


NOTE — Thermal frequency response usually is displayed 
by polar plot of amplitude attenuation and time lag versus 
frequency. 


2.1929 Thermal Inertia — It is ability of a material, 
depending on its density and specific heat, to store heat 
and to resist temperature change. 


2.1930 Thermal Input — It is heating or cooling effect 
delivered to a product or space. 


2.1931 Thermal Insulation The material or 
assembly of materials used to provide resistance to heat 
flow. Also see [blanket thermal insulation]. 


2.1932 Thermal Insulation Fill — Insulation in 
granular, nodular, fibrous, powdery, or similar form 
designed for installation by pouring, blowing, or 
hand placement. Examples are mineral or glass fiber, 
cellulosic fiber, diatomaceous silica, perlite, silica 
aerogel, and vermiculite. 


2.1933 Thermal Lag — Delay in action of the sensing 
element of a control device due to the time required 
for the sensing element to reach equilibrium with the 
property being controlled or measured. 


2.1934 Thermal Load — Thermal requirement of a 
system under specified conditions. 


83 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1935 Thermal Neutrality — The indoor thermal 
index value corresponding with a mean vote of neutral 
on the thermal sensation scale. 


2.1936 Thermal Output — Heating or cooling effect 
put out by a source or removed from a storage device. 


2.1937 Thermal Plume — The airflow created by a 
convective heat source that rises due to natural thermal 
buoyancy. Plume formation and growth are dependent 
on the intensity of the heat source and on the degree of 
stratification of the ambient air. 


2.1938 Thermal Radiance — It is the rate of radiant 
emission through unit solid angle over unit projected 
area of a source in a stated angular direction from the 
surface (usually the normal). Units are watts per square 
metre. 


2.1939 Thermal Radiant Flux Density — The rate of 
radiant energy emitted from unit area of a surface in all 
radial directions of the overspreading hemisphere. See 
also [Radiant Flux Density]. 


2.1940 Thermal Radiation — The transmission of 
energy by means of electromagnetic waves emitted due 
to temperature. Radiant energy of any wavelength when 
absorbed may become thermal energy that increases 
the temperature of the absorbing body. 


2.1941 Thermal Reflectance Fraction of the 
incident radiation on a surface that is reflected from 
that surface. 

NOTE — For an opaque surface, the sum of reflectance, 


transmittance, and absorptance is unity at any wavelength of 
radiation. 


2.1942 Thermal Regain — The fraction of distribution 
system losses (gains for cooling) that are returned to the 
conditioned space. 


2.1943 Thermal Relay 


a) The relay which is activated by change in 
temperature. 


b) The relay in which the displacement of the moving 
contact member is produced by heating of a part of 
the relay under the action of electric currents. 


2.1944 Thermal Resistance — (R-value), It is the 
reciprocal of the time rate of heat flow through a unit 
area induced by a unit temperature difference between 
two defined surfaces of material or construction under 
steady-state conditions. Units of thermal resistance 
are h-ft?-°F/Btu (m?:°K/W). Thermal resistance is the 
reciprocal of the thermal conductance. 


2.1945 Thermal Sensation — A conscious feeling 
commonly graded into the categories cold, cool, 
slightly cool, neutral, slightly warm, warm, and hot; it 
requires subjective evaluation. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1946 Thermal Storage 


a) Accumulation of energy in a body or system in the 
form of sensible heat (temperature rise) or latent 
heat (change of phase). 


b) Full storage: Thermal storage system having 
capacity to meet all on-peak cooling or heating 
requirements by being charged off peak, and 
without energy added on peak. 


c) Fully charged condition: The state of a thermal 
storage device at which, according to the design, 
no more heat is to be removed from the thermal 
storage device. This state is generally reached 
when the control system stops the charge cycle as 
part of its normal control sequence. 


d) Fully discharged condition: The state of a thermal 
storage device at which no more usable cooling 
energy can be recovered from the storage device. 


e) Normally interchangeable term with cool storage 
or ice storage when addressing air-conditioning 
thermal storage systems. 


f) Technology or systems of accumulating cooling or 
heating capacity for subsequent use. 


g) Temporary storage of high or low-temperature 
energy for later use. 


2.1947 Thermal Storage Charge — To supply cooling 
or heating to storage. 


2.1948 Thermal Storage Efficiency — It is the ratio 
of the integrated discharge capacity to the hypothetical 
maximum available capacity for a single cycle of 
operation (also known as cycle figure of merit). 


2.1949 Thermal Storage Load Levelling — The 
charging a thermal storage system at a constant rate 
during a complete cycle. 


2.1950 Thermal Storage Medium — The substance 
in which cooling or heating energy is stored. 


2.1951 Thermal Superinsulation — Insulation of 
very high thermal resistance. Usually refers to that used 
in cryo-engineering. 


2.1952 Thermal Time Lag 


a) Phase difference in hours between the exterior and 
interior surface temperatures when the exterior 
surface is subjected to a sine wave temperature 
change having a 24 h period. 


b) Time interval by which the peak thermal response 
falls behind (lags) the peak thermal excitation in a 
thermal system. 


2.1953 Thermal Transmittance — Heat transmission 
in unit time through unit area of a material or 
construction and the boundary air films, induced by 
unit temperature difference between the environments 
on each side (also known as U-factor). 


84 


NOTE — This heat transmission rate is also called the overall 
coefficient of heat transfer. U, in Btu/h-ft?-°F (W/[m?:K)). 
Thermal transmittance is sometimes called the overall 
coefficient of heat transfer or U-factor. Thermal transmittance 
includes surface film conductance. 


2.1954 Thermal Unit — The quantity or rate of heat 
energy or equivalent in work or electrical energy. 


2.1955 Thermistor — It is a thermoelectrical element 
in which the electrical resistance falls appreciably 
with a rise in temperature; often used as a temperature 
sensor. 


2.1956 Thermocouple — It is a device for measuring 
temperature, utilizing the fact that an electromotive 
force is generated whenever two junctions of two 
dissimilar metals in an electric circuit are at different 
temperature levels. 


2.1957 Thermodynamic Equilibrium — Equilibrium 
in a system when the physical variables have uniform 
values that do not change in time. Furthermore, if the 
system is not an isolated one, these variables should 
have the same values for both the system and its 
surroundings. 


2.1958 Thermodynamic Properties — Those data 
needed to calculate the equilibrium relations among 
pressure, volume, and temperature along with the 
enthalpy and entropy of the fluid in the liquid and vapor 
states. 


2.1959 Thermodynamic Shock — The implosive 
impact in liquid, caused by sudden condensation of 
vapor into its subcooled liquid. This phenomenon can 
occur when the liquid is about 33°C to 47°C (60°F to 
85°F ) cooler than the saturation temperature of the 
contact vapor. It creates a loud sound and can cause 
severe local pressure stresses in the container or piping 
system. 


2.1960 Thermodynamic System — In 
thermodynamics, a region in space or a quantity of 
matter bounded by a closed surface in which thermal 
actions occur. The surroundings include everything 
external to the system, and the system is separated 
from the surroundings by the system boundaries. These 
boundaries can be either movable or fixed, either real 
or imaginary. 


2.1961 Thermodynamic Trap — The steam (disk) 
trap constructed with a cap containing a steel disc, 
which fits against a flat seat. Condensate, discharging 
at close to saturation temperature, increases in velocity 
and draws the disc down toward the seat, due to the 
lower pressure caused by the increased velocity 
(Bernoulli effect). Condensate discharging from high 
to low pressure flashes off and creates the closing 
pressure above the disc within the cap. As this flash 
steam condenses, pressure is dissipated, and the cycle 
repeats. The trap has limited air venting capabilities. 


2.1962 Thermodynamic Work — The mechanism 
that transfers energy from one system to another 
without accompanying transfer of entropy. Units of 
thermodynamic work are Btu (Wh). 


2.1963 Thermodynamics — It is the science of heat 
energy and its transformations to and from other forms 
of energy. 


2.1964 Thermoelectric Refrigeration — It is a 
method for cooling by the Peltier effect. 


2.1965 Thermometer — It is an instrument for 
measuring temperature. 


2.1966 Thermometry — The part of applied physics 
relating to the measurement of temperature. 


2.1967 Thermophysical Properties — Those data 
needed to calculate heat transfer and fluid flow 
characteristics of the fluid. Thermophysical properties 
include both thermodynamic (equilibrium) and 
transport properties. 


2.1968 Thermophysics — The study of physical 
phenomena related to heat. 


2.1969 Thermopile — A number of thermocouples 
wired consistently in series or parallel to measure small 
or average temperature differences. 


2.1970 Thermosiphon — Circulation by the forces 
induced by the differences in densities of cooler and 
warmer fluids. 


2.1971 Thermosiphon Exchanger — A tube, or coils 
with interconnecting piping, placed in supply and 
exhaust airstreams and filled with a refrigerant heat 
transfer fluid. 


2.1972 Thermostat — An automatic control device 
actuated by temperature and designed to be responsive 
to temperature. 


2.1973 Thermostat, Direct-Acting It is an 
instrument for activating a control circuit upon sensing 
a predetermined low temperature. 


2.1974 Thermostat, Reverse-Acting — It is an 
instrument for activating a control circuit upon sensing 
a predetermined high temperature. 


2.1975 Thermostat, Room — It is a thermostat 
properly located in a room so as to respond to 
representative room temperature and thereby control 
heating or cooling devices. 


2.1976 Thermostatic Balanced Pressure Steam 
Trap — The trap installed on the discharge side of a 
heating unit and designed to pass air freely on start- 
up and condensate at a subcooled temperature, but 
to prevent steam vapor passing into the return. It can 
have a bellows or encapsulated metallic diaphragm 


85 


IS 3615 : 2020 


containing a small quantity of volatile liquid. At the 
bottom of the diaphragm or bellows is attached a 
hardened, self centering valve head operating on the 
pressure side of the valve seat. At ordinary temperatures 
and atmospheric pressure, the valve is fully open to 
permit free passage of air and cold condensate. The trap 
discharges at a fixed temperature below that of steam 
saturation temperature and closely follows the steam 
pressure/temperature curve. 


2.1977 Thermostatic Bimetallic Steam Trap — 
The trap installed where low-temperature discharge 
is required. It incorporates a bimetallic element that, 
when heated, deflects and causes a downstream valve 
head to be drawn up, closing the orifice. It discharges 
air and cold condensate freely on start-up. 


2.1978 Thermostatic Control — An automatic control 
device or system used to maintain temperature at a 
fixed or adjustable setpoint. 


2.1979 Thermostatic Expansion Valve — A device 
for controlling superheat by regulating the mass flow of 
refrigerant to a refrigeration load, actuated by changes 
in equalizer pressure and temperature sensing element 
temperature. 


2.1980 Thermostatic Regulator — A evaporator 
pressure regulator that is sensitive to temperature. 


2.1981 Thermostatic Switch — A device within an 
electric controller for completing or interrupting an 
electrical circuit in response to a temperature change. 


2.1982 Three-Pipe Air-Conditioning System — The 
multipipe arrangement in which each unit is fitted 
with two supply pipes (hot and chilled water) and a 
single return pipe common to the central heater and 
refrigerating system. 


2.1983 Throttling, of a Fluid — It is an irreversible 
adiabatic process which consists of lowering pressure 
by an expansion without work. 


2.1984 Throw — The horizontal or vertical axial 
distance an air stream travels after leaving an air outlet 
before the maximum stream velocity is reduced to a 
specified terminal level. 


2.1985 Ton of Refrigeration — The quantity of heat 
absorbed in the melting of 1 ton (2 000 Ib) of water ice 
per 24 h, that is, 72 575 kcal/day, or 3 024 kcal/ h. 


2.1986 Total Heat (See Enthalpy)— A thermodynamic 
property ofa substance defined as the sum of its internal 
energy plus the quantity Pv/J, where P = pressure of the 
substance, v = volume, and J = mechanical equivalent 
of heat. 


2.1987 Tower, Water-Cooling — It is an enclosed 
device for evaporatively cooling water by contact 
with air. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.1988 Tower, Water-Cooling, Atmospheric 
One in which the air movement through the tower is 
dependent only upon atmospheric conditions; also 
known as natural draft cooling tower. 


2.1989 Tower, Water-Cooling, Forced-Draft — It is 
a mechanical draft water-cooling tower having one or 
more fans located in the air entering the tower. 


2.1990 Tower, Water-Cooling, Induced-Draft — It is 
a mechanical draft water-cooling tower having one or 
more fans located in the air leaving the tower. 


2.1991 Tower, Water-Cooling, Mechanical-Draft — 
It is a water-cooling lower utilizing one or more fans 
to move the air through the tower, the fans being an 
integral part of the tower. 


2.1992 Transfer Air — Air transferred from one room 
to another through openings in the room envelope, 
whether it is transferred intentionally or not. The 
driving force for transfer air is generally a small 
pressure differential between the rooms, although one 
or more fans may be used. 


2.1993 Transfer Fluid — The fluid that carries energy 
between two heat transfer devices. 


2.1994 Transmission — In thermodynamics, a general 
term for heat travel; properly, heat transferred per unit 
of time. 


2.1995 Transmittance, Thermal (U Factor) — It is 
the time rate of heat flow per unit area under steady 
conditions from the fluid on the warm side of a barrier 
to the fluid on the cold side, per unit temperature 
difference between the two fluids. 


2.1996 Transpiration Cooling The cooling 
produced by evaporation of fluid lost by a body or 
material. 


2.1997 Traverse — The method of measuring air and 
fluid volumetric flow in ductwork and piping systems. 


2.1998 Trombe Wall — Wall that is sun facing and 
built from material that can act as a thermal mass (such 
as stone, metal, concrete, adobe, or water tanks). A 
highmass wall that stores heat from solar gain during 
the day and slowly radiates the heat. 


2.1999 Trough, Drip (Drain) — It is a device for 
channelling water. 


2.2000 True Solar Time — The local standard time 
adjusted by the equation of time (determined from an 
astronomical almanac) and the longitude correction 
(four times the difference between the standard 
longitude of the observer’s time zone and the observer’s 
actual longitude). A time reference used to compute the 
apparent position of the sun. 


86 


2.2001 Tube, Capillary — In refrigeration practice, 
a tube of small internal diameter used as a liquid 
refrigerant flow control or expansion device between 
high and low sides; also used to transmit pressure from 
the sensitive bulb of some temperature controls to the 
operating clement. 


2.2002 Tunnel Cooler — Chilled, elongated space for 
cooling foodstuffs on a movable transport system by 
rapid circulation of cold air. 


2.2003 Tunnel Freezer Elongated enclosure 
provided with rapid cold air circulation for the freezing 
of foodstuffs. Also called a freezing tunnel or blast 
freeze tunnel. 


2.2004 Turboexpander (Expansion Turbine) — In 
cold air or gas refrigeration cycles, a turbine in which 
the compressed gas expands and produces mechanical 
energy. 


2.2005 Turbulator — The flow-enhancing device to 
increase coil heat transfer efficiency. 


2.2006 Turbulent Flow — Fluid flow in which the 
velocity varies in magnitude and direction in an 
irregular manner throughout the mass. Turbulent flow 
exists when the Reynolds Number exceeds a value of 
2 000 to 4 000. 


2.2007 Turning Vane — A series of single thickness 
or airfoil radius sheet metal guides placed within 
a rectangular duct elbow to reduce turbulence and 
associated pressure drop within the elbow and to direct 
air around the bend. 


2.2008 Type I Hood — A hood designed to capture 
smoke and/or grease-laden vapor produced by a cooking 
process, incorporating listed grease removal devices 
and fire suppression equipment. Type I hoods fall into 
two categories: listed and nonlisted. Conventional, 
or nonlisted hoods are hoods that meet the design, 
construction, and performance criteria of the applicable 
national and local codes. 


2.2009 Type II Hood — A hood designed to capture 
heat, odors, products of combustion, and/or moisture 
where smoke or grease laden vapor is not present. A 
Type II hood may or may not have filters or baffles and 
does not have a fire suppression system. 


2.2010 U — Unit thermal conductance or overall heat 
transfer coefficient, W/(m?-K) (Btu/(h-ft?-°F). 


2.2011 Unconditioned Space — A space within a 
building that is not conditioned space. 


2.2012 Underfloor Air-Distribution System 
(UFAD) — An air-distribution system that uses an 
underfloor plenum (open space between the structural 
concrete slab and the underside of a raised-floor system) 


to deliver conditioned air into the space, typically 
through floor diffusers. Air is returned at a level above 
the occupied zone (typically at the ceiling level). 
Under cooling operation, UFAD systems produce a 
stratified environment, similar in principle to that of 
displacement systems. The primary difference between 
these systems is that UFAD outlets deliver air at higher 
velocity, producing greater mixing in the area near the 
outlet discharge. 


2.2013 Unit Cooler 


a) An assembly of cooling coils with drain pan, fan, 
and enclosure. 


b) direct cooling, factory made encased assembly 
including an  air-cooling coil, refrigerating 
compressor and condenser, fan and motor 
(usually), and directional outlet, including the 
necessary automatic controls. 


2.2014 Unit Heater — A heater consisting of a fan 
for circulating air over a heat exchange surface, all 
enclosed in a common casing. 


2.2015 Unit Ventilator — A fan coil unit package 
devised for applications in which the use of outdoor 
and return air mixing is intended to satisfy tempering 
requirements and ventilation needs. 


2.2016 Unitary System — One or more factory- 
made assemblies that normally include an evaporator 
or cooling coil and a compressor and condenser 
combination. 


2.2017 Unloader — A device on or in a compressor 
for equalizing the high- and low-side pressures for a 
brief period during starting in order to decrease the 
starting load on the motor; also a device for controlling 
compressor capacity by rendering one or more cylinders 
ineffective. 


2.2018 Upfeed System — The piping arrangement for 
a heating, air-conditioning, or refrigerating system in 
which heat transfer fluid is circulated through supply 
mains that are below the levels of heating or cooling 
units they serve. 


2.2019 Usable Storage Capacity — Total amount of 
cooling discharged from a thermal storage device, at or 
below the maximum usable discharge temperature, for 
a particular storage cycle. 


2.2020 Useful Refrigerating Effect — The rate at 
which heat is removed by the primary refrigerant, or 
by the secondary refrigerant, between two specified 
points, taking into account the conditions of use. 


2.2021 Vacuum — The state in which the fluid, 
usually gas, pressure is lower than atmospheric 
pressure. 


87 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.2022 Vacuum Cooling (Vacuum Chilling) 
Cooling by vaporization under vacuum of part of the 
water contained in the material to be cooled. 


2.2023 Vacuum Freezing — The freezing of a 
substance by lowering pressure to induce vaporization 
of a part of the solvent (usually water). 


2.2024 Valve Seat — The stationary portion of the 
valve which, when in contact with the movable portion, 
stops flow completely. 


2.2025 Valve, Back Pressure (Evaporator Pressure 
Regulator) — An automatic valve located between 
the evaporator outlet and compressor inlet that is 
responsive to its own inlet pressure or to the vapour 
flow when necessary to prevent the evaporator pressure 
from falling below a selected value. 


2.2026 Valve, Charging — A valve used to charge 
or add refrigerant to the system or add oil to the 
compressor crankcase 


2.2027 Valve, Check — It is a valve allowing fluid 
flow in one direction only. 


2.2028 Valve, Constant Pressure Expansion — It is 
a controlling device for regulating the flow of volatile 
refrigerant into a cooling unit, actuated by changes in 
pressure of the low side. 


2.2029 Valve, Diaphragm — A form or packless 
valve, manually or mechanically actuated; also, a valve 
actuated by pressure of a motivating fluid on one side 
of the diaphragm which seals the motivating fluid from 
the flowing fluid controlled by the valve. Flowing and 
motivating fluids may, but need not, be the same. 


2.2030 Valve, Direct-Acting Diaphragm — It is one 
which closes with the admission of fluid pressure to a 
diaphragm and opens when pressure is released. 


2.2031 Valve, Discharge — On a compressor, the 
valve which allows compressed refrigerant to flow 
from the cylinder to the discharge main. 


2.2032 Valve, Emergency Relief — It is a manually 
operated valve for the discharge of refrigerant in case 
of fire or other emergency. 


2.2033 Valve, Expansion — It is a valve for controlling 
the flow of refrigerant to the cooling element. 


2.2034 Valve, Expansion, Automatic — It is a device 
which regulates the flow of refrigerant from the 
liquid line into the evaporator to maintain a constant 
evaporator pressure. 


2.2035 Valve, Expansion, Hand — It is a manually 
operated needle-type valve for controlling the flow of 
liquid refrigerant to an evaporator. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.2036 Valve, Expansion, Thermostatic — It is a 
controlling device for regulating the flow of volatile 
refrigerant into a cooling unit, actuated by changes in 
evaporator pressure and superheat of the refrigerant 
leaving the cooling unit. The basic response is to 
superheat. 


2.2037 Valve, Float Refrigerating — Valve controlled 
by liquid level and valve actuated by float in a liquid 
container. 


2.2038 Valve, Low-Side Float — A float valve, 
operating by changes in level of low-pressure liquid, 
that opens at low level and closes at high level. 


2.2039 Valve, Packless — It is a valve which does not 
use packing to prevent leaks around the valve stem. 
Flexible material is generally used to seal against leaks 
and still permit valve movement. 


2.2040 Valve, Pressure Relief — A valve held closed 
by a spring or other means and designed to relieve 
automatically pressure in excess of its setting; also 
called a safety valve. 


2.2041 Valve, Purge — A device to allow fluid to flow 
out of a system, particularly non-condensable gases; 
also called a drain valve. 


2.2042 Valve, Reducing — It is a valve, which 
maintains a uniform pressure on its outlet side 
irrespective of how the pressure on its inlet side may 
vary above the pressure to be maintained. 


2.2043 Valve, Reverse-Acting Diaphragm — It is a 
valve, which opens with the admission of fluid pressure 
to a diaphragm and closes when pressure is released. 


2.2044 Valve, Service — A valve intended to help 
isolate an apparatus from the rest of the system; may 
be a stop valve. 


2.2045 Valve, Solenoid — A valve which is closed by 
gravity, pressure, or spring action and opened by the 
movement of a plunger due to the magnetic action of 
an electrically energized coil, or vice versa. 


2.2046 Valve, Stop — It is a shut-off valve, other than 
a valve for controlling the flow of refrigerant. 


2.2047 Valve, Suction — In a compressor, the valve 
which allows refrigerant to enter the cylinder from the 
suction line and prevents return flow. 


2.2048 Valve, Suction Pressure Regulating — An 
automatic valve located between the evaporator outlet 
and the compressor inlet that is responsive to its own 
outlet pressure and functions to throttle the vapour flow 
so as to prevent; the suction pressure at the compressor 
inlet from exceeding a selected value. It is used 
primarily to prevent overload on compressor motors. 


88 


2.2049 Valve, Thermal A valve controlled 
by a thermally responsive element, for example, 
a thermostatic expansion valve which is usually 
responsive to suction or evaporator temperature. 


2.2050 Valve, Water Regulator — It is an automatic 
valve to control the flow of cooling water through a 
condenser. 


2.2051 Vane, Ratio — In air distributing devices, it 
is the ratio of depth of vane to shortest opening width 
between two adjacent grill bars. 


2.2052 Vapor 


a) Gas, particularly one near equilibrium with its 
liquid phase and one that does not follow the gas 
laws. The term is usually used instead of gas to 
refer to a refrigerant, or in general, to any gas 
below the critical temperature. 


b) Substance in the gaseous state that can also exist as 
a liquid or solid at normal atmospheric conditions. 
Compare to [[Gas]]. 


2.2053 Vapor Concentration — In a mixture of 
water vapor and dry air, the mass of water vapor in a 
specific volume of the mixture. Compare to [[Relative 
Humidity]]. (Also known as absolute humidity or water 
vapor density number). 


2.2054 Vapor Jet — The refrigerating cycle using 
an ejector to compress the refrigerant vapor from the 
evaporator to the condenser. The term steam jet is used 
when water is the refrigerant. 


2.2055 Vapor Lock — Formation of vapor in a liquid 
line that reduces mass flow compared to the flow of the 
total liquid at the same pressure differential. 


2.2056 Vapor Pressure — The pressure exerted by a 
vapor. If a vapor is kept in confinement over its liquid 
so that the vapor can accumulate above the liquid with 
the temperature constant, the vapor pressure reaches a 
maximum called the saturated vapor pressure. 


2.2057 Vapor Refrigerating System — The system 
using a condensable vapor as the refrigerant. 


2.2058 Vaporization — Change of phase from liquid 
to vapor. 


2.2059 Vapour — It is a gas, particularly one near to 
equilibrium with the liquid phase of the substance and 
which does not follow the gas laws. It is usually used 
instead of gas for a refrigerant and, in general, for any 
gas below the critical temperature. 


2.2060 Vapour Barrier — A moisture impervious 
layer applied to the surfaces enclosing a humid space 
to prevent moisture travel to a point where it may 
condense due to lower temperature. 


2.2061 Vapour Lock — The formation of some vapour 
or all vapour in a liquid line reducing weight flow as 
compared to weight flow in liquid phase with the same 
pressure differential. 


2.2062 Vapour Lock Device — An orifice, capillary 
tube, or other device having a restricted passage of fixed 
size for liquid refrigerant. It restricts flow of vapour of 
that same liquid to a lower rate of flow with the same 
pressure difference. 


2.2063 Vapour Wet, Quality of — It is the fraction 
by weight of vapour in a mixture of liquid and vapour. 


2.2064 Vapour, Saturated — Vapour in equilibrium 
with its liquid that is, when the numbers per unit time of 
molecules passing in two directions through the surface 
dividing the two phases are equal. 


2.2065 Vapour, Superheated — Vapour at a temperature 
which is higher than the saturation temperature (that is, 
boiling point) at the existing pressure. 


2.2066 Vapour, Water — It is used commonly in 
air conditioning parlance to refer to steam in the 
atmosphere. 


2.2067 Variable Flow — Throttling control of water 
during a cooling or heating process. 


2.2068 Variable Output — For each element of a 
control system, a physical quantity whose changes are 
governed ultimately by the functioning of the element. 


2.2069 Variable Refrigerant Flow (VRF) System — 
An engineered direct-expansion (DX) multi-split 
system incorporating at least one variable capacity 
compressor distributing refrigerant through a piping 
network to multiple indoor fan-coil units, each capable 
of individual zone temperature control, through 
integral zone temperature control devices and common 
communications network. Variable refrigerant flow 
utilizes three or more steps of control on common, 
interconnecting piping. 


2.2070 Variable Volume, Variable Temperature 
(VVT) — The combination of varying both airflow and 
temperature in response to space load, for the purpose 
of resetting temperature to maintain greater low-load 
airflow to the space than in a true variable volume 
system. 


2.2071 Variable-Capacity Equipment — The heating 
and cooling equipment that operates in stages of different 
capacity depending on building load, for example, 
electric furnaces with several separate heater elements. 


2.2072 Variable-Frequency Drive (VFD) — An 
electronic device that varies its output frequency to 
vary the rotating speed of a motor, given a fixed input 
frequency. Used with fans or pumps to vary the flow in 
the system as a function of a maintained pressure. 


89 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.2073 Variable-Speed Control of a Fan — A method 
of controlling airflow produced by a fan by means of 
adjusting the speed or revolutions per minute (rpm) of 
the fan. 


2.2074 Variable-Speed Drive 
Frequency Drive]. 


See [Variable- 


2.2075 VAV Box — Variable-air volume terminal device. 


2.2076 Velocity — A measurement of the distance 
travelled per unit of time. This quantity is defined by its 
magnitude and direction at any point of the flow. 


2.2077 Velocity Coefficient — It is the ratio of the 
actual velocity of gas emerging from a nozzle to the 
velocity calculated under ideal conditions; it is less 
than one because of friction losses. 


2.2078 Velocity Pressure 


a) In a moving fluid, the pressure that would induce 
an equivalent velocity if applied to move the same 
fluid through an orifice, so that all pressure energy 
is converted into kinetic energy. Velocity pressure 
is always a positive value, in water (H,O) (kPa). 


b) It is the difference between the total pressure and 
static pressure (relative to the same datum). 


2.2079 Velocity Reduction Method Duct Sizing — 
The method in which ducts are sized so that selected 
velocities occur in specific duct lengths. 


2.2080 Vent— A connection in any system or enclosure 
that may be open to atmosphere or to a lower pressure, 
space, or vessel and is intended for the transfer of any 
fluid. A vent can be used for either intake or relief 
purposes. 


2.2081 Vent Connector — The portion of the venting 
system that connects the gas appliance or its draft hood 
to the chimney or vent terminal. 


2.2082 Vent Damper — A device intended for 
installation in the venting system of an individual, 
automatically operated, fossil-fuel-fired appliance in 
the outlet or downstream of the appliance draft control 
device, which is designed to automatically open the 
venting system when the appliance is in operation and 
to automatically close off the venting system when the 
appliance is in a standby or shutdown condition. 


2.2083 Vent Gas — All gases in a flue during 
combustion in the combustion chamber, including 
reaction products such as excess air, carbon dioxide, 
carbon monoxide, oxygen, water vapour, nitrogen, and 
other inserts. Also known as Flue Gas. 


2.2084 Vent Limiter — A device that limits the flow 
of air from the atmospheric diaphragm chamber of a 
gas pressure regulator to the atmosphere. A vent limiter 
may be a limiting orifice or other limiting device. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.2085 Vent or Air Intake Terminal — A device 
that is located on the outside of a building and may 
be connected to a furnace or boiler by a system of 
conduits. It is composed of an air intake terminal 
through which the air for combustion is taken from 
the outside atmosphere and an exhaust terminal from 
which flue gases are discharged. 


2.2086 Vent Pipe 


a) Discharge piping connected to a safety or relief 
valve. 


b) The passages and conduits in a direct vent or direct 
exhaust system through which gases pass from the 
combustion chamber to the outdoor air. 


2.2087 Vent Relief 


a) Opening in a tank, duct, or other piece of 
equipment, sealed to prevent escape of material 
within normal pressures, but arranged to open 
automatically to relieve excessive pressure. 


b) Relief opening in a pressure regulator, normally 
open to the atmosphere. 


2.2088 Vented Crawlspace — A crawlspace with 
an open vent area 1/150" of its floor area with vents 
distributed over all exterior surfaces. 


2.2089 Ventilation — It is the process of supplying 
or removing air by natural or mechanical means to or 
from any space. Such air may or may not have been 
conditioned. 


2.2090 Viscosity — It is that property of semi-fluids, 
fluids, and gases by virtue of which they resist an 
instantaneous change of shape or arrangement of parts. 
It is the cause of fluid friction whenever adjacent layers 
of fluid move with relation to each other. 


2.2091 Viscosity, Absolute — The force per unit area 
required to produce unit relative velocity between two 
parallel areas of fluid unit distance apart; also called 
coefficient of viscosity. 


2.2092 Viscosity, Kinematic — It is the ratio of 
absolute viscosity to density of a fluid. 


2.2093 Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) — 
Organic compounds in the vapor state present in an 
indoor atmosphere. 


2.2094 Volatile Refrigerant — A refrigerant that 
changes from the liquid to the vapor state in the process 
of absorbing heat. 


2.2095 Volume, Refrigerated, Net — The net 
refrigerated volume of household refrigerators and 
combination refrigerator-freezers is the sum of the 
net general refrigerated volume and the net freezer 
refrigerated volume. The net refrigerated volume 
of a household ‘all-refrigerator’ is the net general 
refrigerated volume. The net refrigerated volume 


90 


of a household freezer is the net freezer refrigerated 
volume. 


2.2096 Volume, Refrigerated, Net Freezer — It is 
that portion of the net refrigerated volume below 0°C 
average for household refrigerators (exception, see 
volume, refrigerated, net general) and —13.3°C average 
or below for household combination refrigerator- 
freezers and household freezers. 


2.2097 Volume, Refrigerated, Net General — 
That portion of the net refrigerated volume above 
0°C average for household refrigerators and ‘all 
refrigerators’ or above —12° C average for household 
combination refrigerator-freezers. Regardless of its 
temperature, the volume of the refrigerated chiller 
tray and other special compartment(s) for storage of 
fresh food near 0°C is to be included in the net general 
refrigerated volume. 


2.2098 Volume, Specific — It is the volume of a 
substance per unit mass; the reciprocal of density. 


2.2099 Volumetric Air Flow Rate — Volumetric flow 
of air over specified time, usually expressed in 1/s or 
m*/h. 


2.2100 Volumetric Efficiency Due To Cylinder 
Heating — It is the ratio of the total to the apparent 
volumetric efficiency. Also called real or no-clearance 
volumetric efficiency. 


2.2101 Volumetric Heat Capacity — The change in 
heat stored in unit volume of material for unit change 
of temperature. 


2.2102 Volumetric Moisture Capacity — The change 
in stored moisture per unit volume of porous material 
and per unit moisture potential change. 


2.2103 Volumetric Total Efficiency — It is the ratio of 
the actual volume of gas moved by the compressor or 
pump to actual displacement of the compressor or pump. 


2.2104 Wall Section — A cross section of wall 
arranged chiefly to reveal conductivity characteristics. 


2.2105 Walls — Those portions of the building 
envelope that are vertical or tilted at an angle of 30 
degrees or less from the vertical plane. 


a) Above grade — All the exterior walls of any given 
story if 50 percent or more of the gross exterior 
wall area of the story is exposed to outside air. 


b 


wm 


Below grade — All the exterior walls of any given 
story if more than 50 percent of the gross exterior 
wall area of the story is below grade. 


Cc 


ma 


Mass wall — A wall constructed of concrete, 
concrete masonry, insulating concrete form (ICF), 
masonry cavity, brick (other than brick veneer), 
earth (adobe, compressed earth block, rammed 
earth), and solid timber or logs. 


2.2106 Waste Heat 


a) Heat rejected from the building (or process) 
because its temperature is too low for economic 
recovery or direct use. 


b) Unused heat rejected from a system, usually a heat 
engine or combustion furnace, to its surroundings. 


2.2107 Water, Circulating — In a water-cooled or 
water-cooling device, it is the quantity of water entering 
the device per unit of time. 


2.2108 Water, Cooling — Water used for condensation 
of refrigerant; condenser water. 


2.2109 Water, Make-Up Water supplied to 
replenish, as water replacing that lost by evaporation. 


2.2110 Water, Raw — In ice making, any water used 
for ice making except distilled water. 


2.2111 Waterside Economizer — A heat exchanger 
that uses the condenser water side of the system 
for cooling without requiring the operation of the 
chiller. Also a coil on the air entering side of a heat 
pump or HVAC unit that uses condenser water flow 
to precondition the entering air when conditions are 
favourable. See also [[cooling]]. 


2.2112 Waterside Economizer Cooling 
Economizer process that uses cooling tower-water 
directly or indirectly in the cooling coils, permitting 
the chiller to be shut down when the outside wet-bulb 
temperature is sufficiently low. 


2.2113 Wax — It is a solid material which may separate 
on cooling of oil-refrigerant mixtures. 


2.2114 Weep — Drip from frozen foods. 


2.2115 Weight Factor, Frozen Food — The conversion 
factor for a net freezer space weight rating is kg/m. It is 
recognized that many commercially available packaged 
frozen foods weigh less than kg/m. 


2.2116 Wet Compression System — The system 
of refrigeration in which some liquid refrigerant is 
mixed with vapor entering the compressor to cause the 
discharge vapor from the compressor to be saturated, 
rather than superheated. 


2.2117 Wet Return 


a) In a refrigeration system, where the connections 
between the evaporator outlets and the low- 
pressure receiver through which the mixture of 
vapor and overfeed liquid is drawn. 

b) In a steam system, where a return pipe carries 
condensate, the pipe is usually located below the 
level of the waterline in the boiler. 


91 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.2118 Wet Saturated Steam Steam at the 
saturation temperature corresponding to the pressure 
and containing water particles in suspension. 


2.2119 Wet Ton (Moisture Ton) — Latent heating or 
cooling load. See [[Ton of Refrigeration]]. 


2.2120 Wet-Bulb Depression The difference 
between the dry-bulb and wet-bulb temperatures at the 
same location. 


2.2121 Wet-Bulb Temperature — The temperature 
indicated when a thermometer bulb is covered with a 
water saturated wick over which air is caused to flow 
at approximately 4.5 m/s (900 ft/min) to reach the 
equilibrium temperature of water evaporating into the 
air when the heat of vaporization is supplied by the 
sensible heat of the air. 


2.2122 W-Factor — U-factor converted into electrical 
terms for calculations in electric heating. The amount 
of heat flow, in watts per square foot per degree 
Fahrenheit temperature difference (W/ft?-F) between 
air on the inside and air on the outside of the building 
section (wall, floor, roof, or ceiling). For conversion, 
W = 0.293U. 


2.2123 Wien’s Displacement Law — When the 
temperature of a radiating blackbody increases, 
the wavelength corresponding to maximum energy 
decreases in such a way that the product of the absolute 
temperature and the wavelength is constant. 


2.2124 Wien’s Radiation Law — The intensity of 
radiation emitted by a blackbody per unit wavelength, 
at that wavelength at which this intensity reaches a 
maximum, is proportional to the fifth power of the 
temperature. 


2.2125 Wind Chill — The apparent temperature 
felt on exposed skin due to wind. The degree of this 
phenomenon depends on both air temperature and wind 
speed. The wind chill temperature (often popularly 
called the wind chill factor) is always lower than the air 
temperature for values where the wind chill formula is 
valid. In cases where the apparent temperature is higher 
than the air temperature, the heat index is used instead. 
Wind chill is always expressed as a temperature. 
Compare to [[Chill Factor]], which is always expressed 
as time. 


2.2126 Window Air Conditioner — It is a room air 
conditioner designed for mounting in window. 


2.2127 Wiredrawing — It is restriction of area for a 
flowing fluid, causing a loss in pressure by (internal and 
external) friction without loss of heat or performance of 
work; throttling. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


2.2128 Work, Effective — The net mechanical 
energy required by, or load imparted to, the piston of 
a compressor. 


2.2129 Work, Indicated — Work equivalent of 
indicator card area for a reciprocating compressor or 
engine. 


2.2130 Working Fluid — A medium evolving within a 
thermodynamic cycle. 


2.2131 Working Pressure Range — The range of 
pressures the system is expected to experience during 
normal operation. 


2.2132 Wort — The unfermented infusion of malt that, 
when fermented, produces beer. 


2.2133 Zeotrope — Blend comprising multiple 
components of different volatilities that, when used in 
refrigeration cycles, change volumetric composition 
and saturation temperatures as they evaporate (boil) or 
condense at constant pressure. 


2.2134 Zeotropic — It refers to blends comprising 
multiple components of different volatility that, 
when used in refrigeration cycles, change volumetric 
composition and saturation temperatures as they 
evaporate (boil) or condense at constant pressure. The 


92 


word is derived from the Greek words zein (to boil) 
and tropos (to change). 


2.2135 Zeotropic Refrigerant — A zeotropic 
refrigerant contains two or more components whose 
equilibrium vapor phase and liquid phase compositions 
differ. The temperature of a zeotropic refrigerant 
changes as it evaporates or condenses at constant 
pressure (Compare to [Azeotropic Refrigerant]). 


2.2136 Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics — If two 
systems are both in thermal equilibrium with a third 
one, they are in mutual thermal equilibrium. 


2.2137 Zone 


a) A separately controlled heated or cooled space. 


b) One occupied space or several occupied spaces 
with similar occupancy category, occupant 
density, zone air distribution effectiveness, and 
zone primary airflow per unit area. 


c 


wm 


Space or group of spaces within a building 
for which the heating, cooling, or lighting 
requirements are sufficiently similar that desired 
conditions can be maintained throughout by a 
single controlling device. 


2.2138 Zone Valve — The valve that modulates water 
flow to a thermal zone in response to a downstream 
temperature signal. 


IS 3615 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Annapurna Electronics and Services Ltd, Hyderabad 

Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 

Blue Star Ltd., Mumbai 

Carrier Aircon Ltd, Gurgaon 

Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore 

Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 

Consumer Education and Research Centre, 
Ahmedabad 

Danfoss Industries Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 

Electrical Research and Development Association, 


Vadodara 
Emerson Climate Technologies(India) Pvt Ltd, 


Karad 
Godrej & Boyce Mfg Co Ltd, Mumbai 
Honeywell International India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 
Indian Institute of Chemical Engg, Kolkata 
Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 
Ingersoll Rand, Bangalore 
International Copper Association India, Mumbai 
Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


LG Electronics India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 


Representative(s) 


Pror (Dr) Ravi Kumar (Chairman) 


SHRI G. K. PRASAD 
SHRI J. S. Sastry (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER PANDITA 
SHRI KAMAL SHAIKH(A/ternate) 


SHRI JITENDRA BHAMBURE 
SHRI SUNIL JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI BIMAL TANDON 
Suri D. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI A. R. Ravi KUMAR 
SHRI GUJJALA B.BALARAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 


Ms SwETA MAHAJAN 


SHRI MADHUR SEHGAL 
Suri K. L. NAGAHaRI (Alternate) 


SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
SHRI RAKESH PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
SHRI D.P.DESPANDE (Alternate) 


SHRI Burzin J. WADIA 
SHRI ABHIJIT A. ACHAREKAR(A/ternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR KAVALATH 
Dr Nitin Karwa (Alternate) 


Dr D.SATHIYAMOORTHY 
Dr Supr K. Das (Alternate) 


DR JYOTIRMAY MATHUR 
SHRI ASHISH RAKHEJA 


SHRI MITTAKOLA VENKANNA 
SHRI JEYAPRAKASH GuRUSAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV RANJAN 
SHRI SHANKAR SAPALIGA (Alternate) 


SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 
Suri C. M. Patuak (Alternate) 


SHRI ADITYA ANIL 
SHRI RAJAT SHRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. SURYANARAYAN 
Suri S. K. Jna (Alternate) 


93 


IS 3615 : 2020 


Organization 
Refrigeration & Airconditioning Mfr Association, 
New Delhi 
Samsung India Electronics Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Spirotech Heat Exchanger Pvt Ltd, Bhiwadi 


SRF Ltd 
The Chemours India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 


UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Voltas Ltd, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organizationn in Interest of Consumer 
Voice, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (H.No. 03, Savita Vihar, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, 
Mayur Vihar, Phase -1 Extension, Delhi) 


Directorate General, BIS 


Representative(s) 


SHRI GURMEET SINGH 
Suri R. K. Menta (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV CHOUDHARY 
SHRI KALICHARAN SAHU (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL BHARDWAJ 
SHRI DwiJESH GAUTAM (Alternate) 


SHRI RABINDEER N. KAUL 


SHRI VIKAS MEHTA 
Suet Nisuit SHAH (Alternate) 


Suri P. S. CHIDAMBARAM 
SHRI GIRISH SETHI (Alternate) 


SHRI V. MANJUNATH 
SHRI SATISH Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI RITESH SINGH 
Suri A. D. KuMBHAR (Alternate) 


Suri H. WADHWA 
Suri B. K. Mukuopapuyay (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. AGRAWAL 


Suri P. K. MUKHERJEE 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms KuusuHBsu JYOTSNA KINDO 
ScIENTIST ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


94 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (10123). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


