NAT Hab IS 4950 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Ron de dent wore — fates 


( Teel JAQ ) 


Bacon Rashers, 
Canned — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 67.120.10 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM eat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HMM, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2022 Price Group 3 


Slaughter House and Meat Industry Sectional Committee, FAD 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Slaughter and Meat Industry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division 
Council. 


With the continued growth of bacon factories in the country, the demand for bacon rashers has been growing in the 
civilian as well as the defense establishments. In view of the vastness of the country and spread over of consumers 
in distant places where fresh rashers are not available, it is imperative to meet the requirement by the supply of 
canned bacon. This standard is, therefore, being prescribed to help in exercising proper quality control of canned 
bacon rashers, 


This standard was first published in 1968. In this revision, test methods have been updated. The standard has been 
brought out in the latest style and format of the Indian Standards. It also incorporates three amendments issued to 
this standard. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E 


In the formulation of this standard, due consideration has been given to the provisions of the Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006 and the Rules framed thereunder and the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 
2011. However, this standard is subject to the restrictions imposed under these, wherever applicable. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4950 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
BACON RASHERS, CANNED — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the requirements and the 
methods of sampling and test for canned bacon rashers. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 

1151:2021 Refined sugar (third revision) 

1723: 1973 Specification for pork (first revision) 

1743 : 1973 Specification for mutton and goat meat 
canned in brine (first revision) 

2475: 1979 Smoked bacon (first revision) 

2491 : 2013 Food hygiene — General principles — 
Code of practice (third revision) 

4251: 1967 Quality tolerances for water for 
processed food industry 

4352: 1967 Specification for pork luncheon meat, 
canned 

7224: 2006 lodized salt, vacuum evaporated 
iodized salt and refined iodized salt 
(second revision) 

3 TYPES 


For the purpose of this standard, the material shall be of 
the following types: 


a) Bacon rashers (middle and shoulder), and 
b) Streaky rashers. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Hygienic Requirements 


The material shall be prepared and handled under strict 
hygienic conditions by persons free from contagoius and 
infectious diseases and only in premises maintained in 
a thoroughly clean and hygienic conditions and having 


adequate and safe water supply (see IS 2491) and duly 
approved and licensed by the public health authorities 
concerned. All workers shall use clean, washed, white 
clothings, necessary precautions shall be taken to 
prevent incidental contamination of the product from 
soiled equipment or from personnel suffering from 
injuries. 


4.1.1 All equipment coming in contact with raw 
materials or product in the course of manufacture shall 
be kept clean. An ample supply of steam and water, 
hose, brushes and other equipment necessary for proper 
cleaning of machinery and equipment shall be available. 
The equipment may be sterilized by immersion in or 
swabbing with hypochlorite or other suitable chlorine 
solution. 


4.1.2 Quality of water used for processing shall 
conform to IS 4251. 


4.2 Raw Materials 


4.2.1 Bacon —The bacon from which rashers are 
derived shall be properly cured and smoked and shall 
not be over fat. The bacon with more than 2.5 cm thick 
layer of adipose tissue (back fat) shall be taken as over 
fat. It shall conform to IS 2475. 


4.2.2 Salt — Salt used shall conform to IS 7224. Salt 
shall be not less than 1 percent and not more than 
3.5 percent in the finished product when tested 
according to the method prescribed in Annex A. 


4.2.3 Nitrate and Nitrite — The nitrate content shall not 
exceed 0.05 percent by weight (expressed as sodium 
nitrate) and the nitrite content 0.02 percent by weight 
(expressed as sodium nitrite) in the finished product 
when according to the methods prescribed in Annex B 
and Annex C respectively. 


4.2.4 Sugar — Sugar, if used, shall conform to IS 1151. 
4.3 Preparation and Processing 


4.3.1 The rashers shall be evenly cut and shall be of 
even thickness. Irregular slices shall not be included. 


4.3.2 The containers shall be thoroughly cleaned by 
means of hot water jets or other approved methods and 
then kept inverted to drain and dry before filling. If 
the cans are lacquered, the lacquer used shall be heat 
resistant and of such quality that it does not impart any 


IS 4950 : 2022 


foreign unpleasant taste and smell to the contents of the 
can; and does not peel off during processing and storage 
of the product. The lacquer shall not be soluble in fat or 
brine to any extent. The cans shall show no evidence of 
rusting. 


4.3.3 The rashers shall be uniformly placed on a sheet 
of parchment paper or cellulose film or butter paper, 
folded up and placed in the cans. 


4.3.4 The filled cans shall be exhausted and hermetically 
sealed. Processing shall be at such temperature and for 
such length of time as will ensure proper cooking and 
preservation of the finished product. 


4.4 Finished Product Requirements 


4.4.1 Vacuum Requirements 


The cans shall give a vacuum of not less than 10 cm Hg 
at 27 + 2 °C under normal atmospheric pressure when 
tested according to the method prescribed in Annex D. 


4.4.2 The product shall have a pleasant flavour, 
characteristic taste, neither excessive salty nor sweetish. 
The product shall be free from any foreign odour or 
flavour, such as, putrid, stale, fermented, rancid, and 
musty and stagy pork odour. 


4.4.3 The product shall be free from foreign material, 
such as dirt, insect parts, wood, glass and metal particles. 


4.4.4 The material shall also conform to the limits for 
metallic impurities and microbiological activity as 
prescribed in Table 1. 


5 PACKING AND MARKING 


5.1 Packing 
5.1.1 Packing in Cans 


Subject to the agreement between the purchaser and the 
vendor, each can (if not lacquered for meat packing) 
shall be coated on the inner side with edible gelatin, lard 
or lined with vegetable parchment paper before filling 
the product. 


5.1.2 Packing in Cases 


Unless otherwise specified, cans shall be packed in 
cases sufficiently strong to withstand rough handling 
during transit. 


5.2 Marking 


The cans may be labeled either by printing or stenciling 
on the can themselves or by pasting printed labels as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the vendor. The 
label shall bear the following information: 


a) Name and type of the material; 

b) Name and address of the manufacturer; 

c) Net quantity of the contents of the container; 

d) Batch number or code number-embossed indelibly 
on the container; 

e) The words ‘Best before ....... ” (month and year to 
be indicated); and 


f) Any other requirement as stipulated under Food 
Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and Regulations 
framed thereunder and Legal Metrology 
(Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011. 


5.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the products 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


6 SAMPLING 


Sampling of bacon rashers, canned, shall be done 
according to the method prescribed in Appendix of 
IS 4352. 


7 TESTS 


Tests shall be carried out as prescribed in 4.2.2, 4.2.3, 
4.4.1 and the relevant appendix specified in col 4 of 
Table 1. 


Table 1 Limits for Metallic Impurities and Microbiological Activity 


(Clauses 4.4.4 and 7) 
SI No. Characteristic Requirements Method of text (Ref to Appendix in IS 1743) 
1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Arsenic, ppm, Max 1 B 
ii) Lead, ppm, Max 5 C 
iii) Copper, ppm, Max 15 D 
iv) Zinc, ppm, Max 19 E 
v) Tin, ppm, Max 140 F 
vi) Microbiological Activity Total satisfy the requirements of the test G 


IS 4950 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.2.2) 
DETERMINATION OF SODIUM CHLORIDE 


A-1 REAGENTS 


A-1.1 Sodium Carbonate Solution, 5 percent (w/v). 


A-1.2 Dilute Nitric Acid (1 : 4), free from lower oxides 
of nitrogen by boiling till it becomes colourless. 


A-1.3 Standard Silver Nitrate, 0.1 N. 
A-1.4 Nitrobenzene 


A-1.5 Ferric Allum Indicator Solution, a saturated 
solution of ferric alum FeNH,(SO,),-12H,O. 


A-1.6 Standard Potassium Thiocyanate Solution, 


with hot water, filter and wash. Return the residue to 
the platinum dish and ignite to ash. Dissolve the ash 
in the dilute nitric acid. Filter and wash the residue 
thoroughly. Collect the filtrate and washings and add to 
the water extract. To this solution, add a known volume 
of the standard silver nitrate solution in slight excess. 
Stir well, add 5 ml of nitrobenzene, shake and add 
5 ml of the ferric alum indicator solution and a few ml 
of the dilute nitric acid. Titrate the excess silver nitrate 
with the standard potassium thiocyanate solution until 
permanent light brown colour appears. 


A-3 CALCULATION 


0.1 N. Sodium chloride, percent by weight = 
A-2 PROCEDURE OA a 
W 
A-2.1 Preparation of Sample 
i o f f where 
Pass the material through a mincing machine twice to er : ur dard sil ná 
ensure thorough mixing. Transfer the minced sample o he ne d eae oring stangard stivet nitrate 
to a large porcelain mortar and grind with a pestle for Somon ALLEN, 
5 min or ensure homogeneity. N = normality of the standard silver nitrate; 
V,= vol i l, of the standard potassi 
A-2.2 Weigh accurately about 5 g of the finely ground eee : A 
: ; : : thiocyanate solution used; 
and thoroughly mixed sample in a platinum dish and : : 
add 20 ml of the sodium carbonate solution. Evaporate N,= normality of the standard potassium 
to dryness and ignite as thoroughly as possible at thiocyanate; and 
a temperature not exceeding dull redness. Extract W= weight in g, of the material taken for the test. 
ANNEX B 


(Clause 4.2.3) 
DETERMINATION OF NITRATE 


B-1 APPARATUS 


B-1.1 Photoelectric Colorimeter 
B-2 REAGENTS 


B-2.1 Standard Silver Sulphate Solution — Dissolve 
4.397 g of silver sulphate (Ag,SO,) nitrate-free, in 
one liter of water. One millilitre, of this solution is 
equivalent to one milligram of chlorine. 


B-2.2 Alumina Cream 


B-2.3 Phenol Disulphonic Acid Solution — Dissolve 
25 g of pure white phenol in 150 ml of sulphuric acid. 
Add 75 ml of fuming sulphuric acid (13 to 15 percent 
of SO,) and heat for 2 h at 100 °C. 


B-2.4 Ammonium Hydroxide, Concentrated 


B-2.5 Standard Nitrate Solution — Dissolve 0.607 g 
of sodium nitrate (analytical reagent grade) in one litre 
of nitrate-free water. Evaporate 50 ml of this solution 
to dryness in a porcelain dish. When cool, treat with 
2 ml of phenol disulphonic add solution, grind and stir 
with a glass rod to ensure intimate contact and dilute 
to 500 ml in a graduated flask. One millilitre of this 
solution contains 0.01 mg of nitrogen or 0.04 mg of 
nitrate (NO,) or 0.06 mg of sodium nitrate (NaNO,) 


B-3 PROCEDURE 


B-3.1 Extract 100 g of the thoroughly prepared sample 
by boiling 6 to 7 times, with successive 35 to 50 ml 


IS 4950 : 2022 


portions of water. Decant the extract through muslin 
cloth or filter paper into an evaporating basin and 
evaporate to a volume of about 35 ml, make up the 
volume to 50 ml, take a 5 ml aliquot and make up the 
volume to 100 ml. Take 2 ml of this solution for the test 
and dilute it to 50 ml in a 100 ml flask. Add sufficient 
standard silver sulphate solution to precipitate all but 
about 0.5 mg of chlorine. Heat to boil and allow to 
settle or add a little alumina cream, filter and wash with 
small quantities of hot water. Evaporate the filtrate to 
dryness in a porcelain dish on a steam-bath. Cool and 
treat with 2 ml of the phenol disulphonic acid solution. 
Dilute with water and slowly add ammonium hydroxide 


solution until maximum colour development occurs. 
Filter, if necessary. Transfer to the colorimeter tube and 
read the colour. Prepare at least three replications and 
take the average. 


B-3.2 Prepare a series of standards by diluting suitable 
aliquots of the standard nitrate solution. Develop and 
read the colour in the same manner as in the case of 
the test solution and prepare a standard curve. From the 
curve, determine the weight of nitrate present in the test 
solution and calculate the percentage of nitrate in the 
sample. 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.2.3) 
DETERMINATION OF NITRITE 


C-1 APPARATUS 


C-1.1 Photoelectric 
Spectrophotometer 


Colorimeter or 


C-2 REAGENTS 


C-2.1 Mercuric Chloride Solution (HgCl,), saturated 


C-2.2 Modified Griess Reagent — Dissolve 0.5 g of 
sulphanilic acid in 150 ml of acetic acid (15 percent 
by volume). Boil 0.1 g of a-naphthylamine in 20 ml of 
water until dissolved and pour while hot into 150 ml of 
dilute acetic acid. Mix the two solutions and store in a 
brown glass bottle. 


C-2.3 Standard Nitrite Solution — Dissolve 1.1 g of 
silver nitrite (AgNO,) in nitrite-free water. Precipitate 
the silver with sodium chloride solution. Dilute to one 
litre, mix and allow to settle. Dilute 100 ml of the liquid 
to one liter and then further dilute 10 ml of this solution 
to one liter using nitrite-free water in each case. One 
millilitre of the final solution contains one microgram of 
nitrogen or five micrograms of sodium nitrite (NaNO,). 


C-3 PROCEDURE 


C-3.1 Weigh accurately 5 g of the prepared sample 
into a 50 ml beaker. Add about 40 ml of nitrite-free 


water heated to 80 °C. Mix thoroughly with glass rod, 
taking care to break up all the lumps and transfer to a 
500 ml graduated flask. Wash the beaker and the rod 
with successive portions of the hot water, adding all 
the washings to the flask. Adds sufficient hot water to 
bring the volume to about 300 ml. Transfer the flask 
to a steam-bath and let it stand for two hours, shaking 
occasionally. Add 5 ml of the mercuric chloride 
solution and mix. Cool to room temperature, dilute to 
the mark with nitrite-free water and mix again. Filter, 
dilute suitable aliquot to the mark in a 50ml graduated 
flask. Add 2 ml of the modified Griess reagent, mix 
and allow the colour to develop for an hour. Transfer 
a suitable portion of the solution to the photometer 
cell and determine the absorbance at a wave length of 
520 mu, setting the instrument to zero absorbance with 
blank of 50 ml water plus 2 ml of the modified Griess 
reagent. 


C-3.2 Prepare a series of standards by diluting suitable 
aliquots of the standard nitrite solution to the mark in a 
50 ml graduated flask, add 2 ml of the modified Griess 
reagent and proceed in the same manner as with the test 
solution. From the absorbance values of the standard 
solutions, prepare a standard curve and determine the 
weight of nitrite present in the test solution and calculate 
the percentage of nitrite in the sample. 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 4.4.1) 
RECORDING OF VACUUM OF THE CANS 


D-1 The vacuum in the can may be determined with an 
electric recording type machine or a vacuum gauge of 


the piercing type without opening the can. 


IS 4950 : 2022 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Slaughter House and Meat Industry Sectional Committee, FAD 18 


Organization 


National Research Centre on Meat, Hyderabad 


Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export 
Development Authority (APEDA), New Delhi 


All India Meat and Livestock Exporters Association, 
Mumbai 


Animal Welfare Board of India, Balabhgarh, Haryana 
AOV Exports Private Limited, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 


Confederation of Indian Food Trade and Industry, 
New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Food Technological Research Institute, 
Mysore 


CSIR-Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


CSIR-National Environmental Engineering Research 
Institute (NEERI), Nagpur 


Deonar Slaughterhouse, Mumbai 


Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, 
New Delhi 


Hind Agro Industries Limited 


Indian Stainless Steel Development Association 
(ISSDA), Gurugram 


Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar 


Kerala Veterinary and Animal Sciences University, 
Thrissur 


Minister of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying, New Delhi 


National Research Centre for Pig, Guwahati 
People for Ethical Treatment of Animals, Mumbai 


Tamil Nadu Vet & Animal Sciences University, 
Chennai 


In Personal Capacity 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Dr S. B. BARBUDDHE (Chairman) 


SHRI UMESH KUMAR 
Ms SAMIDHA Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr D. B. SABHARWALL 


SHRI M. G. JAYASIMHA 
SHRI AJAY TANDON 
Ms PRIYANKA GUPTA 


DR NUSRATH NAZIR 


Dr T. S. UMA 
DR GIRISH POPHALI 


DR YOGESH JAYPRAKASH SHETYE 
DR KALIMPASHA AHMEDKHAN PATHAN 


DIRECTOR 
DR FIRDAUS JAHAN 


SHRI SIRAJUDDIN QURESHI 
SHRI S. K. RANJHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ROHIT KUMAR 
SHRI RAJEEV GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR S. K. MENDIRATTA 


Dr SunuL B. 
DR VASUDEVAN V. N. (Alternate) 


Dr M. K. AGNIHOTRI 


Dr R. THOMAS 


DR MANILAL VALLIYATE 
Ms BHUVANESHWARI GUPTA (Alternate) 


Dr R. NARENDRA BABU 
DR S. EZHILVELAN 


Dr V. K. Moni 


SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (FAD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI RAJPAL 
SCIENTIST “D” (FAD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 18 (14407). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western E Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAL 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


