( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 12683( Part 2 ) - 1986

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATI-ON
PART 2

FOR ELECTRICAL
INSULATION TESTS

RELAYS

Relays Sectional
Chairman *SHRI V. S. DORAI

Committee,

ETDC

35

Refwesentinp Tata Hydro-Electric Bombay Power Supply Co Ltd,

Members Hindustan Steel Ltd, Rancbi SERI -EL D. BATRA SHEI G. K. SARAB ( Alternate ) Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi SHRI R. C. BHATIA SHRI M. K. CHAUDHARY ( Alternate ) Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras SHRI T. B. CHIKKOBA SHRI V. V. SAXPATH ( Alternate ) Railway Board, New Delhi DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( PSI-11 ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR, S&T ( Alternate ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( CIP ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SHRI K. L. GARU ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi SARI S. KRISHNA ( Alternate ) Bombay Electric Supply & Transport UnderSHRI S. G. KARADEAR taking, Bombay SHRI M. A. KARIM ( Alternate ) Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. S. KAUSHIKKAR SERI DEVENDERNATH ( Alternate ) Universal Electrics Ltd, 24 Parganas SERI G. K. MALAVIYA SHRI C. GHOSH ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. C. MUKHERJEE SHRI D. P. MUKHERJEE( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bombay SHRI NACHHATTERSINCJH SHRI R. RA~ASUBBAIAH ( Alternate I ) SHRI S. G. DESECPANDE ( Alternate II )
*Shri V. S. Dorai was Chairman for the meeting in which this standard wae finalircd. ( Cbntinucdon page 2 )

0 BUREAU

Copyright 1988

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Cofiyrighf Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act

IS : 12083 ( Part 2 ) - 1986
( Continuedfrom
SHRI

page 1 ) Representing Easun Reyrolle Relays and Devices, Tamil Nadu Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay Ltd,

Members S. NATARAJAN

Snar A. A. PAUL SHRI P. P. KARHADE ( Alternate) University of Roorkee, Roorkee SHRI A. K. RAJA Aluminium Industries Ltd, Trivandrum SHRI R. RAWANUJAN SHRI B. NARAYANAN ( Alternate ) Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Vadodara SHRI U. V. RAO SHRI P. U. BHAT ( Alternate) Tata Hydro-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, SHRI A. M. SAHNI Bombay *SHRI V. S. DORAI ( Alternate ) ASEA Ltd, Bangalore Da M. T. SANT SHRI B. S. PALE1 ( Alternate ) U. P. State Electricity Board, Lucknow SHRI B.S. SHARMA SHRI C. P. GUPTA ( Alternate) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI S. SIVASUBRAMANIAN New Delhi SHRI P. K. HALDAR ( Alternate ) Haryana State Electricity -Board, Chandigarh SUPERINTENDINQENQINEER SHRI HARNARINDER
SHRI s. 1'. SURI SINQH (

Alternate ) National Phvsical New Delhi

Laboratorv ,

( ,

CSIR

1. ,.

SRRI S. C. GAIW ( Alternate ) Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI G. N. THADANI SHRI S. G. GOKHALE ( Alternate ) Jyoti Ltd. Vadodara DR K. K. T~AKKAR D,r B. K. DAS~UPT~ ( Alternate) Karnataka Electricity Board, Bangalore SHRI B. K. VENKAT~SH SARI K. T. RAF~ASWAMY ( Alternate ) Director General, BIS ( Ex-@cio Member ) SRI~I S. P. SACHDEV, Director ( Elec tech ) Secretary SHRI K. M. BHATIA Joint Director ( Elec tech ), BIS

*Shri V. S. Dorai was Chairmanforthe

meeting

in which this standard

WBR finalized.

2

IS : 12083 ( Part 2 ) - 1986

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR ELECTRICAL RELAYS
PART 2 INSULATION TESTS 0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 3 December 1986, after the draft finalized by the Relays Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council.

0.2 This standard prescribes requirements for voltage tests, including impulse withstand test and insulation resistance test for electrical relays in general. A separate series of standards is being brought out for electrical Specific/supplement requirements for relays for power system protection. protection relays will be covered in the appropriate parts of that series of standards. 0.3 For each type of electrical relay, the degree of severity of test requirements is intended to be stated in the individual standard on that type of relay. In case the degree of severity is not mentioned, guidance given in Appendices A and C should be followed. Appendix B provides guidance for selection of degrees of severity for clearances and creepage distances and other aspects related to insulation of electrical relays. 0.4 Additional requirements may be necessary for particular types relays, such as static relays and will be stated in the relevant standard the electrical relays. of of

0.5 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Pub 255-5 (1977) `Electrical Relays, Part 5: Insulation tests for elecElectrotechnical Commission. trical relays', issued by the International 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

3

IS t 12083 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) specifies tion of relays used in electrical field. general requirements for the insula-

1.2 This standard also applies to associated ancilliary devices such as shunts, series resistors, transformers, used and tested together with electrical relays, except where the device is covered by a separate Indian Standard. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, in addition to those given in IS : 1885 ( Part 9 )-1986*, the following definitions shall apply. 2.2 Live Part normal use. Any conductor or conductive part which is at voltage in

2~3 Exposed Conductive Part - A conductive part which can readily be touched and which is not a live part but which may become live under fault conditions.
NOTE I - For relays which are not enclosed, form the exposed conductive parts. the frame, the fixing devices etc,

NOTE 2 - For relays which are enclosed, the conductive parts which are accesrible when the relay is mounted in its normal position of use, including those of its fixing surface, form the exposed conductive plus. Small parts such as inscription plates, screws and reviets which are isolated fr3m the circuits are not taken into consideration.

2.4 Rated Insulation Voltage ( of a Relay Circuit ) - The value of voltage which conventionally designates a relay circuit and to which dielectric tests, clearances and creepage distances are referred. between two conductive parts along a 2.5 Clearance - The distance thread stretched or the shortest path between these two conductive parts. 2.6 Creepage Distance - The shortest distance between two conductive parts along the surfaee of an insulating material or along the joint between two insulating bodies. 2.7 Dielectric Test - A test of short duration which consists of applying a specified voltage to the insulation to prove that it is in accordance with the rated insulation voltage of the circuit, as stated by the manufacturer. 2.8 Impulse Voltage Test - A test which consists of applying a specified impulse voltage to the insulation to prove the ability of the relay to withstand, without damage, overvoltages of very high values and very short durations. *Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 9 Electrical 4
relays (Jirst reoision ).

18 t 12083 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 3. ASSESSMENT OF RATED INSULATION
all circuits

VOLTAGES

3.1 Standard Values ofRated
lation voltages of one or following series of values:

Insulation Voltages -

The rated insuof a relay shall be chosen from the

30, 60, 127, 250, 380, 500,

660, 750 and 1 OCO V.

3.2 Assessment of Rated Insulation voltage shall be assessed as follows:

Voltage -

The rated

insulation

a) For insulation between live parts and exposed conductive parts: not less than the rated voltage of circuit under consideration; b) For insulation between the parts of one circuit, except as provided in item 3.2(e) below : not less than the rated voltage of the circuit under consideration; c) For insulation between the parts of two independent circuits; the rated insulation voltage shall be at least equal to the higher rated voltage of these circuits; d) For insulation of circuits to be energized transformermers, at least 250 V; directly via instrument

e) For gap between open contacts: unless otherwise agreed to between the manufacturer and the user, no rated insulation voltage shall be specified; and f) For circuits of a relay having rated voltages exceeding 1 000 V : no rated insulation voltage is specified and tests for such circuits shall be as agreed to between the manufacturer and the user.

3.3 Unless otherwise specified in the relevant standard on electrical relay, the rated insulation voltage, as determined in 3.2 shall be declared, by the If the rated insulation voltage is higher than the circuit manufacturer. rated voltage [ see 3.2(a) 1, the relay may be operated at this higher potential with respect to earth. 3.4 For relays which are used in equipment that is not subject to safety requirements, zero rated insulation voltage may be declared, provided that this is specified in the relevant standard on electrical relay. Such relays shall be marked with the symbol @ of Table 2.
subjected to

NOTE - Zero rated insulation voltage denotes that the relay is not the insulation test requirements. 4. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

TESTS

REGARDING

INSULATION

4.1 Insulation
measurement ( See 7 ).

tests include dielectric ( steady-state voltage ) ( see 3 ), of insulation resistance ( see 6 ), and impulse voltage tests

5

IS ; 12083( Part 2 ) - 1986 4.1.1 These tests, which are type tests, acceptance tests or routine tests as indicated in this standard, are applicable to relays in a new condition ( see also 5.6 ).
4~2 Unless otherwise specified in the relevant relay standard, the atmospheric conditions for insulation tests shall not be outside the following ranges: a) Ambient b) Relative 4.2.1 without 4.3 air temperature: humidity: 86.10s 15 to 35"C, and ). and 45 to 75 percent,

c) Air pressure:

to 106*1Os Pa ( 860 to 1 060 mbar

The tests are to be applied self-heating. tests shall be performed:

to the relays in a dry condition

Insulation

a) Between each circuit and the exposed conductive nals of each independent circuit being connected b) Between independent circuits, the terminals circuit being connected together; and

parts, the termitogether; independent

of each

c) When specified, between the terminals of a given circuit (applicable only to impulse voltage tests-see 7 ); this condition will be specified, if necessary, in the relevant relay standard and applies also to static relays in general. 4.3.1 Unless obvious, the independent described by the manufacturer. circuits are those which are so

4.3.2 Further, by agreement between the manufacturer the insulation of open-contact circuits may be tested.

and the user,

4.3.3 Circuits having the same rated insulation voltage may be connected together when being tested to the exposed conductive parts. The test voltage shall be applied directly to the terminals. For relays with an insulating enclosure, the exposed conductive parts shall be represented by a metal foil covering the whole enclosure except the terminals around which a suitable gap shall be left so as to avoid flashover to the terminals. Insulation tests requiring this metal foil shall be performed as type tests only. 5. DIELECTRIC

TESTS

Dielectric ( steady-state voltage ) tests shall be performed as type, acceptance and routine tests, unless otherwise specified in the relevant electrical relay standard. 5.2 Value of Test Voltage - Dielectric tests shall be made by applying the voltage given in Table 1 unless otherwise specified in 5.2.1, 5.2.2 and 5.2.3 The test voltage series shall be as specified in the relevant electrical relay standard. If not specified, the guidance given in Appendix A should

5.1 General -

6

IS : 12083 ( Part be followed. Where rated voltage has a value different tion voltage, the voltage value corresponding to insulation voltage from Table 1 shall be chosen. 5.2.1 For circuits to be energized directly the test voltage shall not be less than 2 kV.r

2 ) - 1986

from rated insulanext higher rated transformers,

via instrument

5.2.2 When testing between two circuits which are intendedlto be always at the same potential (for example, directly connected to the same phase), the test voltage shall be reduced to 500 V or twice the rated insulation voltage, whichever is higher. 5.2.3 When by agreement between the manufacturer dielectric test between open contacts is to be performed, test voltage shall also be agreed. and the user, a the value of the

5.3 Test Voltage Source - The test voltage source shall be such that, when applying half the specified value to the relay under test, the voltage drop observed is less than 10 percent. The source voltage shall be verified with an accuracy better than 5 percent. The test voltage shall be substantially sinusoidal and at a frequency between 45 and 65 Hz. However, by agreement, tests may alternatively be performed with a dc voltage, the value of which shall be l-4 times of that given in Table 1.

TABLE

1

DIELECTRIC ( Clauses 5.2,

TEST

VOLTAGES

5.3 and 5.4.1 )

TATED

INSULATION

VomaaE

V

TEST VOLTAGE ~_~~~~__~*_~~~____~ Series B Series A kV kV

Series C kV (4) 1'0 1'0 1'5 2'0 2'5 2'5 3-o 3.0 3.0

(1)
30 -60 127 250 380 500 660 750 1000

(2)
0'5 0.5 0'5 1'0 1-o 1'5 l-5 1'5 2'0

(3) 0'5 1.0 1.0 1'5 1'5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.0

5.4 Test Method - The open-circuit voltage of the testing equipment is It is then initially set to not more than 50 percent of the specified voltage. applied to the relay under test. Form this initial value, the test voltage shall be raised to the specified value in such a manner that no appreciable 7

IS I 12083 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 transients occur and maintained for 1 minute. smoothly to zero as rapidly aspossible. It shall then be reduced

5.4.1 For acceptance and routine tests, and unless otherwise agreed between the manufacturer and the user, the test voltage may be maintained for 1 second; then removed. In this case, the test voltage shall be 10 percent higher than the value specified in Table I. 5.5 Test Requirements -- During the dielectric test, no breakdown or flashover shall occur. Other criteria (for example, a leakage current limit) shall be observed when so specified in the relevant electrical relay standard. 5.6 Repetition of Dielectric Tests - For a relay in a new candition, dielectric tests may be repeated, if necessary, to verify its performance, the test voltage value being the specified value. When dielectric tests are repeated, for example, for final measurement after an endurance test, they shall be made at the reduced values specified in the relevant electrical relay standard. 6. MEASUREMENTS OF INSULATION RESISTANCE 6.1 Measurements of insulation resistance when specified in the relevant electrical relay standard shall be performed in accordance with 4.3. 6.2 has 500 6.3 fied The insulation resistance shall be determined when a steady value been reached and at least 5 s after applying a dc voltage of about v. The insulation resistance so measured shall not be less than that speciin the relevant electrical relay standard.
insulation purposes. resistance values may be different for safety

minimum NOTE -The purposes and for functional

VOLTAGE TEST 7.1 General - Impulse voltage test shall be performed as type test, General guidance for selection of test voltage values is given in Appendix D. 7.2 Value of Impulse Voltage - Impulse voltage tests shall be made by applying an impulse, the peak value of which shall be chosen from the following values, as specified in the relevant electrical relay standard: 0, 1 and 5 kV ( tolerance 2,: percent ) 7.2.1 The test in accordance with 4.3(a) shall be carried out, unless otherwise specified, between each circuit ( or each group of circuits having the same insulation ) and the exposed conductive parts at the impulse voltage specified for this circuit ( or this group of circuits ). 8

7. IMPULSE

IS : 12083 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 7.2.2 The test in accordance with 4.3(b) cuits shallbe carried out, unless otherwise voltage specified for the two circuits.
7.2.3 impulse The test in accordance with voltage specified for the circuit between specified, two independent cirat the higher impulse be carried out at the

4.3(c) shall under test.

7.2.4 When zero impulse test voltage is specified, circuits is exempted from the impulse voltage test. 7.2.5 The test voltage level shall be the open-circuit rator before its connection to the relay. 7.3 Waveform and Generatar Characteristics-A impulse in accordance with IS : 2071 ( Part 2 )-1976* The parameters a) Front b) Time time: are: 1.2 ps & 30 percent; 50 ps f and 20 percent.

the relay or any of its vohage of the gene-

standard lightening shall be used.

to half-value:

NOTE - Tests performed with other waveforms, for example, high-frequency oscillatory waveforms may be specified but such tests are considered to be functional tests and are normally relevant only to static relays.

shown

The recommended in Appendix D.

standard generator

test circuit is used,

and impulse it shall have and 2 m.

generator

are

7.3.1 If an alternative characteristics: a) Output b) Output 7.3.2 The impedance: energy:

the folIowing

500 R & 10 percent; f 10 percent.

0.5 J

length

of each test load shall not exceed

7.4 Test Procedure --Impulse voltage tests shall be carried out in accordance with 4.3. The impulse voltage shall be applied to the appropriate points accessible from the outside of the relay, the other circuits and the exposed conductive parts being connected together and to earth. During these tests, no input or auxiliary energizing quantity shall be applied to the relay. Three positive and three negative impulses shall be applied at intervals of not less than 5 seconds. 7.5 Test Requirements - After the test, the relay shall still comply all the relevant performance requirements. with

NOTEA flashover ( disruptive discharge ) which causes no damage is not The manufacturer shall decide whether or not to necessarily a criterion of failure. eliminate the cause, provided other criteria of acceptance are met.

7.6 Repetition of Impulse voltage test shall be performed
*Methods of high voltage testing:

Voltage Test - In general, the impulse If a further test only once on a new relay.
Part 2 Test procedures (jrsl revision ).

9

IS : 12083 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 is required, voltage. it shall be performed at 60 percent of the specified impulse and surround-

7.7 The advice on safety measures for operating personnel ings during the test is given in Appendix IL 8. MARKING

8.1 The symbols indicated below shall be used when the marking'of the test voltage(s) is specified in the relevant electrical relay standard or when the manufacturer chooses to mark the relay. The marking is also applicable to relays in accordance with 3.4. 8.1.1 In the absence of marking of the test voltage, the manufacturer should state the insulation level(s) of the relay. 8.2 The symbols for marking of the dielectric test voltage are given in the upper part of Table 2. For test voltages above O-5 kV, the value in kilovolt is shown inside the star.
TABLE 2 SYMBOLS FOR MARKING OF THE TEST VOLTAGE SYM33OL (2) ( Clauses 3.4, 8.2 and 8.3 ) TEST VOLTAQE (1) Dielectric test roltage: Test voltage 500 V Q

Test voltage 2 kV )

above 500

V (for example,

Relay not subjected lm@dsc test voltage:

to a voltage test

Q cl
2
0

Test voltage

1 kV

Test voltage

5 kV

Relay

not subjected to an impulse-test

0 V

IS I 12083 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 8.3 The symbols for marking
lower part of Table 2. of the impulse test voltage are given in the

-APPENDIX A ( Clauses 0.3, 5 2 andB-1 5 )
GUIDANCE FOR DETERMINING THE VALUE DIELECTRIC TEST VOLTAGE OF

A-l.

Table

For assessment of value of dielectric test voltage, guidance is given in 3. The manufacturer should consider this guidance when designing a relay, taking into account its probable intended use. Likewise, the user may conclude from the series ( A, B or C ) whether or not a particular relays is adequate for his purpose. '
TABLE 3 GUIDANCE FOR INSULATION STRESSES ON INSULATIONDUE ASSESSMENT CONSEQUENCES OF INSULATIONFAULTS AS ( Clauses A-l and A-2)

DIELECTRIC TEST
VOLTAGE SERIES

DECREASEOBDIELECTRIC STRENGTIIDUETOENVIRO-

RBLATED To TEE AVAILATO SPIKES AND NMENTAL INFLUENCES BLEPOWERINTHIS (INSIDE THE ENCLOSURE IA SURGES EXCEEDIYQ THE: RATED INSUCIRWIT [ see A-2(b) ] TRED~REE OFPROTECL ATION VOLTAGE WON 1s LESS L THAN IP 50' FOR INTERNAL Pall~s) (2) Small Medium Large (3) Small Medium Large of protection (4) Negligible Medium Severe provided by enclosures

(1) A B C

*`IP 50' is defined in IS : 2147-1962 `Degrees for low-voltage switchgear and controlgear.' A-2.

The

a)

following explanations apply to Table 3: The appropriate series is that the stated conditions of which cover all effects to which the relay will be subjected during operation. Insulation faults in circuits connected to the supply mains or energized via measuring transformers should always be considered as resulting in severe consequence. series may apply to different circuits of a relay. In this case, the insulation between them should be designed according to the higher series. C gives explanation of severity of voltage concerning tests. over-voltage phenomena

b)

Cl Different
A-3. Appendix
for assessment

11

IS : 12083 ( Part

2 ) - 1986

APPENDIX ( czause 0.3 )

B
OF

GUIDANCE FOR DETERMINING THE VALUES CLEARANCES AND CREEPAGE DISTANCES B-O. GENERAL
determining

- This appendix the values of clearances

is intended and creepage

to serve as a guide distances.

for

B-l.

In determining the values of clearances recommended that the points given in B-l.1

and creepage distances, it is to B-l.5 should be considered.

If a clearance or a creepage distance it interrupted by one or more conducting parts, either one of the sections between these parts should at least be the prescribed minimum value or the sum of the two longest sections should at least be l-25 times the prescribed minimum value. Individual sections less than X mm* in length should not be taken into consideration in the calculation of total length of clearances and creepage distances. B-I.2 In determining a creepage distance, grooves at least Xmm wide and X mm deep should be measured along their contour. Grooves having any dimension less than those dimensions and any grooves liable to become filled with dust should be neglected and direct distance only measured. B-l.3 In determining a creepage distance, ridges less than X-mm should be neglected. Those at least X mm high are measured along their contour, if they are integral parts of a component in insulating material (for instance by moulding or welding) and along the shorter of the two paths: length of joint or profile of ridge, if they are not integral parts of a component in insulating material.

B-l.1

B-l.4
figures:

The application

of the foregoing

rules is illustrated or exclusion or exclusion

by the following of a groove of a ridge in

a) Fig. 1, 2 and 3 indicate a creepage distance; b) Fig. 4 and 5 indicate creepage distance;

the inclusion the inclusion

in a is of dis-

of the joint when the ridge c) Fig. 6 indicates the consideration formed by an inserted insulating barrier, the external profile which is longer than that of the inserted portion; and how to determine the creepage d! Fig. 7, 8, 9 and 10 illustrate tance to fixing means situated in recesses in insulating parts.
*The value of X is under consideration. relays ,Y = 1 mm. In the meantime it is proposed

to apply for

12

FIG. 1

A

FIG. 2

A

Y////////////////

FIG. 3

FIG. 4 13

IS : 12683 ( Part 2 ) - 1986'

FIG. 5

FIQ. 6

FIG. 7

FIG. 8 14

IS : 12083 ( Part 2 ) - 1986

FIG. 9

FIG. 10
A = Insulating material C = Conducting part F = Creepage distance FIG.

1 TO

10 MEASUREMENTOF CREEPAGE DISTANCES

B-l.5 For determining values of clearances and creepage distances, guidance is given in Table 4 and refers to the test voltage series in accordance with Appendix A. B-2. The following explanations apply to Table 4: a) Values not included are under consideration, p,ending uniform regulations. b) For clearance, L - L denotes the minimum values between two live parts and L - A denotes the minimum values between a live part and an exposed conductive part. When the specified clearance L - A is greater than the corresponding creepage distance specified in column (a) or (b), the creepage distance from the live part to the exposed conductive part shall not be less than the clearance. 15

TABLE

4

GUIDANCE

FOR DETERMINATION ( Clauw

OF CLEARANCES B-l.5 und B-2 ) SERIES B

AND

CREEPAGE

DISTANCES

SERIESA RATED INSULA~10~ VOLTAGE C-----A----c~ Creepage Distance Clearance C---*---T a b v (1) 30 60 127 Q\ 250 380 500 660 750 1 000 0'5 0'5 1 1.5 2 0.5 0'5 1 1.5 2 0'5 I 1'5 2 3 mm (2) mm (3) mm (4)

y--h-Clearance mm (5) 1 1'5 2 3 4 -

---7 Creepage Distance r---h---~ a b mm (6) mm (7) 1 1'5 i 3 4 2 2.5 3 4 6

SEsIES c --~---L----___T Clearance Creepage Distance A--_T y-hr-L-L a L-A -7 mm (8) mm (9) inm (10) mm (11) 2 3 4 6 5 6 8 3 3 4 6 2 4 6 10 3

-

-

-

IS : 12083( Part 2 ) - 1986 c) For creepage
distances, the values given in columns (a) and (b) are applied in conjuction with the shape of the creepage path and the comparative tracking index of the insulating material in accordance with IS : 2824-1975*. for determination of the applicable column is given in

d) Guidance Table 5.
TABLE 5

GUIDANCE

FOR DETERMINATION ( Clause B-2 )

OF CREEPAGE

DISTANCES

COMPARATIVE TRACKINU INDEX OB INSULATING MATERIALS

MINIMUN CREEPAGE ~DDISTANCE BOR A CREEPAQE PATH -_---~ r-_---__h--With Ridges Without Ridges b a+b 2 a a+b 2 a a

From 120 up to and including ~From I75 up to and including Over 400

174 400

B-3. Unless otherwise specified in the relevant relay standard or unless and the user, clearance and creepage agreed between the manufacturer distance requirements do not apply to relays or parts of them which are adequately protected from dust. An adequate protection may be assumed with relays having a degree of protection of at least IP 50, in accordance with IS : 2147-1962t.

APPENDIX C ( Clauses 0.3 and A-3 )
EXPLANATIONS CONCERNING OVERVOLTAGE PHENOMENA

C-l. Overvoltages
considered

beyond the rated voltage and which may need to be for the assessment of the severity of voltage tests are as follows: of the system is the maximum value which operating conditions at any time;
tracking index for of low solid insulating voltage materials and

a) The highest voltage occurs under normal

*Method for determining comperative under moist conditions (first rcvrsion ). tDegrees of protection provided by controlgear.

enclosures

switchgear

17

IS t 12083 ( Part

2 ) - 1986 or dc

b) Temporary voltage variations are those at power frequency which may be assumed to occur up to some minutes; and

c) Voltage transients, such as those resulting from system switching, which are of short duration of the order of milliseconds or microseconds. C-2. Overvoltages may cause breakdown or premature ageing of insulation, or may interfere with the function of the relay, depending upon their magnitude, their shape or frequency, their duration and upon the points of relay where they occur. Regarding the latter, a distinction is made between: a) overvoltages which occur between the conductors of one circuit, b) overvoltages which occur between different circuits, and c) overvoltages which occur between the conductors and parts of one circuit together to earth.

APPENDIX

D

( Clauses 7.1 and 7.3 )
GWIDANCE D-l. RECOMMENDED ASSEMBLY FOR IMPULSE IMPULSE VOLTAGE TESTS FOR GENERATOR

VOLTAGE

D-1.1 For generation of impulse volsages as specified in 7, an assembly as shown in Fig. II and consisting of components as given in Table 6 is recommended.
TABLE kV (1) 1 5 *Tolerances 6 COMPONENTS OF IMPULSE
RI* %*

VOLTAGE

ASSEMBLY
Cl* c**

TEST VOLT AUE

k&-i (2) 0.08 1'80 for the value of each component

ka (3) o-5 0'5

PF (4) 1'0 0'035

nF (5) O-8 0'8

shall be f 1 percent.

18

IS : 12083 ( Part 2 )- 3986

RELAY

CASE II

TO TEST POINTS ON RELAY A A

I GENERATOR CASE

SCHEMiTlCi ONLY I

SCHEMATIC ONLY

dc VCiLTAGE SOURCE WITH HIGH OUTPUT IMPEDANCE

FIG. 11

RECOMMENDED ASSEMBLY FOR GENERATION OF IMPULSE VOLTAGE APPLICATION OF TEST VOLTAGES

D-2. RECOMMENDED

D-2.1 Relays Exempted from Impulse Voltage Test - Relays which are exempted from the impulse voltage test may be used as part of protective equipment, as it is not necessary to apply a withstand test voltage to 19

IS I 12083 ( Part 2 ) -. 1986 the relay since the equipment will be tested in acordance specification. D-2.2 Relays to be Tested with 1 kV with 1 kV may be used where: with the relevant tested

Relays or relay circuits

a) the auxiliary circuits ( power supply circuits ) of the relay are connected to a voltage supply used exclusively for the power supply of static relays. If the leads are short, and in the absence of switching on other circuits connected to the supply, the levels of transient voltage on the supply leads will be low ( less than 1 kV ); b) the input energizing circuits of the relays are not connected directly to instrument transformers or where good screening and earthing is employed on the connecting leads; c) the output circuits are connected to a load by short lead lengths; and d) normally, desirable. no voltage test is required but an extra-high security is

D-2.3 Relays to be Tested with 5 kV with 5 kV may be used where:

Relays or relay circuits tested

a) the auxiliary energizing circuits ( power supply circuits ) of the relay are connected to a common battery, etc. Due to the long lead lengths, longitudinal transient voltages of a relatively high value may appear on the supply leads and transverse voltages may arise from switching in other circuits connected to the same battery or supply source; b) the input energizing circuits of the relay are connected to instrument transformers and/or where long lead lengths are involved and no effective screening and earthing is employed; c) the output circuits are connected to a load by long leads with the result that longitudinal transient voltages of a relatively high value may appear at the output terminals; and d) normally, a lower test voltage in terms of 3.2 is sufficient but an extra-high security is required.
NOTE - A relay may have different test voltage for its input energizing circuits, auxiliary energizing circuits and output circuits.

20

1s~ 12083~( Part 2 ) - 1986

APPENDIX ( Clause7.7 )
ADVICE E-l. ON SAFETY

E

MEASURES

Insulation tests and adequate dimensioning of clearances and creepage distances contribute to the safety of the operating personnel and the surroundings; however, particularly for relays to be operated at voltages exceeding extra-low voltage and not to be contained within cubicles and the like, further safety measures shall be taken. E-2. Further guidance on safety aspects in electro-mechanical be followed according to IS : 9249 ( Part 1 )-1979*. E-3. The safety aspects in static stated by the manufacturer. protection relays should relays be followed may as

*Safety requirements for indicating and recording electrical measuring and their accessories: Part 1 Common safety requirements for instruments.

instrutnehta

21

INTERNAPIONAL
Base Units Quantity Length Mass lime Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary Quantity Plane angle Solid angle Units Units

SYSTEM
Unit metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

OF UNltS
Symbol m kg
S

($31 UNITS)

A K cd mol

Unit radian steradian

Symbol rad sr

Derived

Quantity Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric Pressure, conductance force stress Electromotive

Unit newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volts Pascal

Symbol N J W Wb T HZ S V Pa 1 1 N

Defmition = 1 kg.mlsg 1 N.m 1 J/s 1 V.s 1 Wb/ma 1 A/V 1 W/A 1 N/ma

J =

1 W = 1 Wb = 1 T 1 S 1 V = = =

1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-1)

1 Pa =

