**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13416-1 (1992) : Recommendations for preventive measures 
against hazards at workplaces, Part 1: Falling material 
hazards prevention [CED 29: Construction Management 
including safety in Construction] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i imzzmn^a rafrg amsBs 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13416 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

PREVENTIVE MEASURES AGAINST HAZARDS 
AT WORKPLACES — RECOMMENDATIONS 

PART 1 FALLING MATERIAL HAZARDS PREVENTION 



UDC 690554 : 658382 



© BIS 1992 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June 1992 Price Groap 1 



Safety in Construction Sectional Committee, CED 45 



FOREWORD 

This Irdian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
Safety in Construction Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 

Many accidents are caused by fall of materials, tools and equipments at construction sites. To 
prevent fatalities/injuires, dislocation and delay of work and financial loss, it is necessary to pre- 
vent fall of materials. Therefore, causes of falling of materials have to be studied and analysed 
and suitable remedial measures have to be taken to prevent their fall. 



IS 13416 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 



Indian Standard 

PREVENTIVE MEASURES AGAINST HAZARDS 
AT WORKPLACES — RECOMMENDATIONS 



PART1 FALLING MATERIAL HAZARDS PREVENTION 



1 SCOPE 



1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) lays down the causes 
and places of falling materials and the measures 
to be taken at worksites to prevent their falling. 

2 FALL OF MATERIALS 

2.1 Some of the places from where construction 
materials, tools and equipments are likely to fall 
at construction worksites and their probable 
causes are as follows : 

a) From scaffolds during erection, alteration 
or dismantling of a structure; 

b) Failure of scaffolds fully or partly; 

c) Failure of working platform, gangway, 
trestles or scaffolds; 

d) Fall from cradles, chairs, skips, etc; 

e) From ladd:rs; 

f) Through opening in floors or walls or 
from down stairway; 

g) Through fragile roofirg materials; 

h) From sloping roofs, and unquarded flat 
roofs; 

■]) From building structures under demolition; 

k) From structural frame work during erec- 
tion; 

m) From within excavation areas; 

n) From hoists; and 

p) From trucks while unloading materials. 

2.2 Improperly stacked or transported construc- 
tion or dismantled materials are often the 
sources for fall of materials at construction 
worksites. 

3 FALLING MATERIALS HAZARDS 
PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 

3.1 it shall be ensured th; t scaffolds, platforms, 
gangways, trestles, ladders, centring and shutter- 
ing materials, etc, are strong and properly desi- 
gned. 

3.2 Stacking of materials at worksite and work- 
ing platforms shall be done properly. 

3.3 Railings and barricades shall be provided at 
all vulnerable places. 



3.4 Walkways, stairs, etc, shall be kept clear, 
clean and well lit, naturally or artificially. 

3.5 Tools, stackles and plants shall be maintain- 
ed in good working conditions. 

3.6 Falling material hazards shall be prevented 
by means of safety nets, coverings to walkways, 
by barricading the area, etc. 

3.7 The risks involved with falling materials 
may also be reduced by channelling traffic or 
personnel to routes where materials are less 
likely to fall. 



3.8 Tool boxes shall be 
chances of fall of tools. 



provided to reduce 



3.9 Excavated and other materials shall be kept 
away from edges of trenches. During night 
time lights should be provided at intervals. 

3.10 Materials and tools should be properly 
lowered in trenches. No material should be 
thrown. 

3.11 Small tools may also be chained to belts of 
workmen to prevent their fall from heights due 
to slipping from hands. 

3.12 Discarding of waste materials by throwing 
down the sides of the building shall be prohibi- 
ted. The provision of refuse chutes for small 
items and the use of lifting equipment to remove 
large ones should be adequately notified and 
enforced. The use of cleaning teams working 
after work hours should reduce potential 
hazards. 

3.13 Where there is a danger of collapse of stru- 
ctures, steps should be taken to provide tem- 
porary support and barricade the unsafe /A)n>; 
until repairs are made. 

3.14 Suitable personal protective < . qirpment of 
approved quality shall be worn at construction 
worksites* 

3.15 Planks of working platforms shall be kept 
close to each other to avoid gaps in-b. i tween the 
planks. 

3.16 All the exposed side edges <'■( platforms 
shall be provided with toe bea?d> to prevent 
falling of loose materials. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard* Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 



m 



BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications* No part of these publications may be reprodu ced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications )» BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference : 

Doc : No. CED 45 ( 4871 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 



NEW DELHI 110002 



f 331 01 31 
1 331 13 75 



Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 

CALCUTTA 700054 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 235 0216 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 

BOMBAY 400093 6 32 92 95 

Branch es : AHMAD A BAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR, 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR L'JCKNOW. PATNA. 
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Swatantra Baarat Press. Delhi, India 



