IS 12970 ( Part P/Sea 2 ) : 1992 ( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian Standard

SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICESINTEGRATED CIRCUITS
PART 2 DIGITAL INTEGRATED CIRCUITS RATINGS AND CHARACTERISTICS Section 2 Integrated Circuit ESSENTIAL Memories

UDC 621'3'049'77'037'37

Q

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN.

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG t Price Group 5

NEW DELHI 110002 November 1992

Semiconductor

Devices

and Integrated

Circuits

Sectional

Committee,

LTD 010

CONTENTS

Page
SCOPE REFERENCES TERMINOLOGY LETTER SYMBOLS

... . .. . .. . .. ... .. . ... ... . ..

1 1
1 1

STATIC AND DYNAMIC READ/ WRITE MEMORIESAND READ-ONLY MEMORIES FIELD PROGRAMMABLEREAD-ONLY MEMORIES . . . . ..

i 5

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee the `Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. the draft finalized had been approved by by

This standard is one of the series of standards on integrated circuits and Section 2 of the series of standards on essential ratings and characteristics of digital integrated circuits, covering integrated circuit memories. This is to be read in cojunction with IS 12970 ( Part 1) : 1990 and IS 12970 ( Part Z/Set 1 ) : 1992. This standard is based on the IEC Pub 748-2 `Semiconductor devices integrated circuits: Digital integrated circuits' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). Part 2

It is proposed to withdraw the IS 7441 ( Part I ) : 1974, dealing with essential ratings and characteristics of digital integrated circuits, as soon as the clauses mentioned therein are covered in the new series [ IS 12970 ( Part l/Set 1 to 3 ) I.

IS 12970 ( Part 2lSec 2 ) : 1992

Indian Standard SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
PART 2 DIGITAL INTEGRATED CIRCUITS CHARACTERlSTlCS Section 2 1 SCOPE This standard covers the essential ratings and characteristics of digital integrated circuit memories. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following necessary adjuncts
IS No.

ESSENTIAL

RATINGS

AND

Integrated

Circuit Memories

The block diagram should be sufficiently detailed to enable the individual timctional units within the memory (for example, address decode, chip enable, `buffer' output circuits, etc) to be identified, togetherwith their external connections. 5.2.2 Functional Description

Indian Standards to this standard:

listed below are

Title
Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 7 Semiconductor devices, Section 5 Integrated circuits and microelectronics Letter symbols for semiconductor devices: Part 1 General aspects

The functions performed by the- circuit shall be specified and the followinginformationshall be stated:
a) the total numberof bits of information capable of being stored in the memory circuit; b) the number of bits per word capable of being stored in the memory circuit; c) the method of addressing; d) the function(s) performed by each terminal, together with a statement of each control signal required, and the necessary sequence of instruction (see also 5.7.2.1); and e) for dynamic refreshing. memories, the method of

IS 1885 (Part 7/ Set 5) : 1971

3715 (Part 1): 1971 12970 (Part 1) : 1990 12970 (Part 2/ Set 1) : 1992

(first

revision )
1

Semiconductor devices circuits: Part Integrated General

Semiconductor devices Integrated Circuits: Part 2 Digital integrated circuits and characessential ratings teristics, Section 1 General

5.3 Ratings (Limiting Values) 53.1 Provision of 7 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set 1992 shall apply together with the following: 1) :

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard (Part 2/Set 2) the terms and definitions given in IS 1885 (Part 7/Set 5) shall be applicable in addition to 3 of IS 12970 (Part 1) : 1990. 4 LETTER SYMBOLS

a) in 7.2.1 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set 1) : 1992 then the permissible excess values, their duration and the duty cycle should be stated; b) two new characteristics below: to be added, as given

For the purpose of this standard, the letter symbols given in IS 3715 (Part 1) : 1971 shall be applicable. 5 STATIC MEMORIES AND DYNAMIC AND READ-ONLY READ/WRITE MEMORIES

1) power dissipation (where appropriate) maximum value of continuous power dissipation. 2) input transition times (where appropriate), for dynamic memories minimum values. 5.4 Recommended Operating Conditions (Within the Specified Operating Temperature Range) 5.4.1 Provision of 8 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set 1992 shall apply together with: If the device requires voltage sequencing, sequencing before a conditioning should be 1 1) :

5.1 Circuit Identification The provision shall apply. 5.2 Functiunal

and Description

of 5 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set 1) : 1992 Specifications

52.1 Block Diagram

The provisions

of 6.1 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set 1992 shall apply together with the following :

1) :

any pre-conditioning suchas dummy cycles or 9 signal valid operation, this predefined.

IS 12970 ( Part 2/Set 2 ) : 1992 5.5 Static Electrical Memories Characteristics for Bipolar
3 Where a fixed sequence of enable and/or select signals is specified (see 5.7.21) and the last of these signals always determines the actual access time, then only the access times for the first and last of the signals in this sequence need be stated.

5.5.1 Provision of 9 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set 1992 shall apply. 5.6 Static Memories Electrical Characteristics for

1) :

5.7.1.2 Sense recovey only ) Maximum 1) : value.

time (for readjwrite memories

MOS

5.6.1 Provision of 10 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set 1992 shall apply. 5.7 Dynamic Electrical Characteristics

NOTE - If both `read' and `write' functions are controlled by a single terminal, then `read access time' and `sense recovery time' will be the same, and only one of these times is required.

5.7.1.3 Output disable times Output disable times from the end of each relevant enable and select signal. Maximum values.

Each electrical characteristic of 5.7.1 should be stated under specified electrical worst-case conditions with respect to the recommended range of supply voltage(s) as stated in 8.1 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set 1) : 1992. Limit values as required by 5.7.1 or, if these are not mutually acceptable to manufacturer and user, typical values should be stated either:

NOTE-Theoutput disable time is the time interval between the cessation of a specified enable/select signal, and the instant at which the output data are no longer valid.

5.7.1.4 Transition times ( see Note 1) Transition times should be stated under specified conditions (see Note 2), depending on the following conditions:

a) b)

over the specified range of operating temperatures (for example, as a curve), or at a temperature of 25OC, and at the maximum and the minimum operating temperatures.

a)

Alternative (b) should be used only if the worst-case value of the characteristic over the whole temperature range can be deduced from the values given at the specified temperatures. In all cases, limit values applicable stated. 5.7.1 Times Circuit The following conditions. Characterising at 25OC should be

if the typical value of transition time is comparable to (see Note 3), or greater than, the typical value of propagation time, then a maximum value of transition time shoylld be stated; the typical value of transition time is less than 10 ns, a minimum value should be stated (see Note 4); and if both conditions (a) and (b) are fulfilled, then both minimum and maximum values should be stated.

b> if 4

the Response

of the

times should be stated under specified

Transition times, when required should be stated for both directions of transition (that is t,, and t, should be stated).
NOTES 1 In general, values of these times that apply for each or both directions of transition of the output signal should be given. In some cases (for example, MOS memories), provided it is known that only one direction of transition is significant (for example, output voltage changing towards the supply voltage), only this value need be stated. 2 The specified conditions of measurement should include. the characteristics of the input pulse and oscilloscope (or other appropriate measuring system) and the configuration and component values of the output loading network. 3 The transition time is considered comparable to propagation time if its value exceeds 50 percent of the value of propagation time. 4 The object here is to state when very short transition times may be obtained, which may give rise to overshoot and coupling problems using practical loads.

5.7.1.1 Access times (see Notes 1 and 2) a) Read access time. b) Access time from each enable and select signal specified for the memory (see Note 3). c) Address access time (not applicable where the address information is not accepted until it is clocked into the memory). Maximum values should be stated for each of these access times.
NOTES 1 Specified measurement conditions should be given in order to ensure that all control signals are applied early enough so that they do not affect the specified access times. 2 The reference conditions for the measurements of access times must include the maximum permissible values of set-up times.

5.7.2 Requirement at the Inputs to Ensure Correct Sequential Operation 2

IS 12970 ( Part t/Set

2 ) : 1992

5.7.2.1 Stntic memories
The following timing requirements are applicable to static read/write memories and are in accordance with the general principles given in 11.3 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set 1). A timing diagram should be given, comprising a complete set of signals that would be required to enable each functional operation of the memory to be set up and measured. This set up of signals should be in accordance with the control signals included in Item (d) of 5.2.2. The timing sequence to be used should be stated and all time intervals that need to be known by the user for correct operation of the memory should be stated. In general, the following times should be stated.

c) Hold times - By analogy with set-up times, minimum values for the following:

1) 2)

address after end-of-write hold time or address hold time after end-of-enable/ select (see Note 1); enable/select hold time afterend-of-write or write hold time after end-of-enable/ select (see Note 1);

or 3) data-in hold time after end-of-write data-in hold time after end-of-enable/select (see Note 1); 4) for complex memories having more than one enable or select control signal, at least one additional hold time for each additional enable or select signal is required.
NOTE 1 -The choice of write or enable/select as the reference pulse depends on which one becomes inactive first, and this should be in accordance with the timing sequence given in 5.7.2.1. If the relative sequence in which write and enable/ select become inactive is irrelevant, this should be stated, and values for both options in i) and iii) should be given.

a) Cycle times - Read cycle time, write cycle time and, where appropriate, read-write cycle time and/or write-read cycle time. Minimum values.

NOTE --In(b) to(e) inclusive, the terms `enable' and `select' are beingusedsynonymously, since no formaldefinitions have yet been agreed. Wherever the term `enable/select' occurs, the term to be used is that whichisappropriate to the memory being specified. It should be noted that the set-up and hold times given in (b) and (c) assume that the memory does not have a latch facility operated by the enable/select input. If it does, then set-up and hold times referenced to end-of-write and end-ofenable/select should be referenced to simply `write or enable/ select'.

For a memory having no enable/select facility, values for (1) and (3) only are required (that is, two times are required). d) Write recovery time Minimum value.

NOTE - In some memories, write recovery time and address after end-of-write hold time are the same and only one of the quantities need be stated in such cases.

b) Set-up times following :

-

Minimum

values

for the

e) Pulse durations (widths) for the following: a) b) write pulse duration

Minimum

values

1) 2)

address set-up time before write, or address set-up time before enable/select (see Note 1); enable/select of-write; set-up time before end573.2

(width);

where appropriate, enable/select pulse duration (width) [see item (4) of(b)].

Dynamic memories

3) data-in set-up time before end-of-write, for a stated minimum value of enable/ select pulse duration (width)(seeNote 1); or 4) data-in set-up time before end-of enable/ select, for a stated minimum value of enable/select pulse duration (width) (see Note 1); and for complex memories having more than one enable or select control signal, at least one additional set-up time for each additional enable or select signal is required.

timing requirements are applicable to dynamic read/write memories, and are in accordance with the genera1 principles given in 11.2 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set 1) : 1992. A timing diagram should be given, comprising a complete set of signals that would be required to enable each functional operation of the memory to be set up and measured. This set of signals should be in accordance with the control signals included in 5.2.2 (d). The timing sequence to be used and all time intervals that need to be known by the user for correct operation of the memory should be stated. In general, the following times should be stated: a) Memories with enable input, excluding memories with multiplexed address inputs. `) 1) Set-up times i) Address set-up time before enable. 3

The following

5)

NOTE -The choice of write or enable/select as the reference pulse depends on which one becomes inactive first, and this should be in accordance with the timing sequence given in 5.7.21. If the relativesequence in whichwriteandenableselect become inactive is irrelevant, this should be stated and values for both (3) and (4) should be given.

For memory having no enable/select facility, values of (1) and (3) only are required (that is two times are required).

IS 12970 ( Part 2/Set 2 ) : 1992 ii) iii) Read set-up time before enable. Chip-select set-up where appropriate. time before enable, b) Memories with multiplexed 1) Set-up times address inputs

iv) Write set-up time before enable. v) vi) Minimum Data-in set-up time before write. Data-in set-up time before enable. values.

9

Row-address set-up address-select.

time before time

rowbefore

ii) Column-address column-address iii) Read set-up address-select.

set-up select. time

before

column-

2) Hold times

9
ii) iii) iv) v) vi) Minimum

Address hold time after enable. Read hold time after enable. Chip-select hold time after enable, where appropriate. Write hold appropriate. time after enable, where

iv) Data-in set-up time before columnaddress-select, where appropriate. v) Data-in set-up time before write. set-up vi) Write address-select. set-up vii) Write address-select. viii) time time before before columnrow-

Data-in hold time after enable. Data-in hold time after write. Minimum values.

Chip-select set-up time before columnaddress-select, where appropriate.

values. Hold times

2) 3) Cycle times

i)

i)
ii) iii) iv) Minimum

Read cycle time. Write cycle time. Read-modify-write appropriate. Read-write values. (widths) (width). (width). (width). maximum values. Minimum cycle time, where

Column-address address-select.

hold time after rowtime time after after co'umncolumn-

ii) Read hold address-select. iii) Write hold address-select.

cycle time, where appropriate. iv) Write hold time after row-address-select. hold v) Data-in address-select. hold vi) Data-in address-select. time time after after columnrow-

4) Pulse duration i) ii) iii) Minimum

Read pulse duration Write pulse duration Enable pulse duration and, where appropriate, time

vii) Data-in hold time after write. viii) Chip-select hold time after address-select, where appropriate. row-

values. Delay time between input signals

5) Precharge Minimum value.

3)

6) Refresh time interval Maximum value. times Minimum times, 4)

i) Delay time between column-addressselect signal becoming inactive and rowaddress-select signal becoming active. ii) Delay time between column-addressselect signal becoming active and rowaddress-select signal becoming inactive. values. Cycle times i) Read cycle time. ii) Write cycle time. 4

7) Transition i) ii) iii)

Enable rise time. Enable fall time.

Read-write mode select transition as appropriate. and maximum values.

Minimum

IS 12970 ( Part Z/Set 2 ) : 1992 iii) iv) v) Minimum Read-write cycle time, where appropriate. Read-modify-write appropriate. cycle time, where Where appropriate, the above information should be given for clock inputs acting as pulsed power supplies. Where appropriate, this information given for standby operation. should also be

Page cycle time, where appropriate. values. (widths) pulse pulse (width). duration duration

5.10 Mechanical Ratings, Characteristics Data

and Other

5) Pulse durations

0
ii) iii)

Row-address-select (width). Column-address-select (width). Write pulse duration minimum times

Any specific mechanical or enviromnental rating applicable to the integrated circuit memory should be stated (see also 5.5 of IS 12970 (Part 1) : 1990. 5.11 Supplementary 5.11.1 Information

Output Loading Capability

Where appropriate, 6) Precharge i) ii) iii) Minimum,

and/or maximum values.

The maximum

number of specified loads that can be driven from each output. This information may be given for more than one type of load.

Row-address-select

precharge time. to row-addressprecharge time.

5.11.2

Noise Margins

Column-address-select select precharge time. Column-address-select and where appropriate,

Information about the memory that enable noise margins to be calculaled is given in 5.5 and 5.6 (see also 17.2 of Section 1 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set 1). 5.11.3 Interconnections ofSimilar Units

maximum

values.

7) Refresh time interval Maximum value. times transition times. times, times. as

Examplesof logic operations (forexample, wired-OR) that may be performed by interconnecting similar memory units should be stated. 5.11.4

Type of Output Circuit

8) Transition i) ii) iii) Minimum 5.7.3

Row-address-select Read/write appropriate.

Information should be given regarding the type of output circuit, for example, three-state, opencollector, open-drain, push-pull. 5.115

transition

Interconnections to Other Types of Circuits

Enable (chip select) transition and maximum values.

Where, appropriate, details of the interconnections to other circuits, for example, sense amplifiers, buffers, should be given. 5.12 Handling Precautions

Input and Output Capacitances

Typical and maximum values of input and output capacitances under specified conditions. 5.8 Power or Current (Static Operation) Drawn from Each Supply

Provision of 8 of IS 12970 (Part 1) : 1990 shall apply. 6 FIELD-PROGRAMMABLE MEMORIES READ-ONLY

Maximumvalues of current into each supply terminal under worst-case conditions and for both active and standby modes if these are significantly different from each other. The typical values under nominal operating conditions should also be given.

6.0 The material in this clause is intended to cover programmable and reprogrammable read-only memories, the latter being: a) either ultraviolet programmable. b) or electrically programmable. 6.1 Circuit Identification erasable erasable and and electrically electrically

5.9 Power or Current Drawn From Each Supply
(Dynamic Operation) Curve(s) showing the typical values of current required from the power supply(ies) versus the pulse repetition frequency, or typical values at two specified pulse repetition frequencies. This (these) should be recommended operating given under specified conditions. 5

and Description

The provisions of 5 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set ljshall apply, together with the following addition to 5.2 (Technology):

IS 12970 ( Part 2/Set 2 ) : 1992 `This statement should also include details of the type of storage cell : diode matrix, fusible link. floating-gate avalanche-injection type, etc.' 6.2 Functional specitinations

4 4

the method of addressing

for read mode;

the function(s) performed by each terminal, together with a statement of each control signal required, and the necessary sequence of operations or instructions; the method of programming; the method of erasing the contents of the whole memory or a selected part of it; level in the unprogrammed state.

6.2.1 Block Diagram A block diagram or equivalent circuit information the digital integrated circuit should be given. of

4 0

I31output

The block diagramshould identify the functionof each external connection and, where no ambiguity may occur, can also show the terminal numbers. If the encapsulation has metallic parts, any connection to them from external terminals should be indicated. The connections with any associated external electrical elements should be stated, where necessary. As additional information, the complete electrical diagram can be reproduced, but not necessarily with indications of the values of the circuit components. The block diagram should be. sufficiently detailed to enable the individual functional units within the memory (for example, address decode, chip enable, "buffer" output circuits, programming/erasing control circuits, etc) to be identified, together with their external connections. 6.2.2 Identification of Terminals should be identified on the

6.3 Ratings (Limiting Values) The provisions of 7 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set 1) : 1992 shall apply, the following should be added: a) in 7.2.1 : ` . .... .. then the permissible excess values, theirdurationand the duty cycleshould bc stated'. b) new clause 7.5 : `Maximum number of programming-erasing cycles permitted (where appropriate)`. 6.4 Read Mode 6.4.1 Recommended Operating Conditions the specified operating temperature Range) See 8 of IS 12970 (Part USec 1) : 1992. 6.4.2 Static Electrical Characteristics should be stated: (With in

The following terminals block diagram:

The following electrical characteristics a) Input and output currents

4 b)

supply terminals, that is, terminals intended to be connected to the power supplies; input or output terminals, that is, terminals into which or out of which signals are passed. The term `signal' include both pulse and more complex waveforms; input/output terminals, that is, terminal that may function at different times as input or output terminals; three-state output terminals, that is, output terminals that may be controlled to give a high-impedance condition; multi-functional terminals, that is, terminals that may be used at different times for different fulrctions, for example, programming and erasing. Description should should be be

1) 2)

For bipolar integrated circuits, the requirements of 9 and 9.3 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set 1) : 1992, shall apply. For MOS integrated circuits, the requirements of 10, 10.2.1 and 10.2.2 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set 1) : 1992, shall apply *

4 d) 4

b) Input and output voltages 1) For bipolar integrated circuits, the requirements of 9 and 9.1 of IS 12970 (Part l/Set 1) : 1992, shall apply. For MOS integrated circuits, the requiements of 10 and 10.1 of Section 1 of IS 12970 (Part 2/Set l), shall apply. voltage(s) (Part 2/

2)

6.2.3 Fwctional

c) Input clamping

The functions performed by the circuit specified and the following information siated:

The requirements of 9.2 of IS 12970 Set 1) : 1992 shall apply. d) Output short-circuit current(s) values. leakage &rents

of informationcapable a) the total numberofbits of being stored in the memory circuit; b) the number of bits per word capable of being stored in the memory circuit; 6

Maximum

and/or minimum

e) Input and output appropriate)

(where

1s 12970 ( Part t/%x Maximum values. pulses, number of programme programming should be stated. pulses)

2 ) : 1992 during

f,) Input and output capacitances Typical conditions. and maximum values under specified If an erasing procedure is necessary gramming, it should be specified. 6.5.2 Recommended 6.4.3 Dynamic 6.4.3.1 General Electrical Characteristics Programming before pro-

Conditions

The specified conditions for programming should be stated in accordance with 8 of IS 12970 (Part 2/ Set 1). When the temperature range to be used for the programming procedure is different from the operating temperature range, this should be specified. The following electrical conditions characteristics should be stated with maximum minimum values: and/or and/or

The requirements of 5.7 concerning the conditions of supply voltages and operating temperatures applicable to dynamicelectrical characteristics, apply. 6.4.3.2 circuit Times characterizing the response of the

The following electrical characteristics should be stated. They are intended to apply to the memory circuit after it has been programmed: Access a> times of 5.7.1.1 shall apply.

a) power supply current(s) and/or voltage(s) when the programme pulse is applied; b) programming current(s) and/or voltage(s) at specified terminals to which the programme pulse is applied; and c) input current(s) and/or terminal for programming 6.5.3 Timing Requirements having separate progrtrmmr voltage(s) control. at any

The requirements

b) cl

Output disable time(s) The requirements of 5.7.1.3 shall apply.

Output data valid time(s) Minimum value(s) from the end of each relevant enable and/or select signal.

6.5.3.1 Devices terminal(s)

4
6.4.4

Transition

times of 5.7.1.4 shall apply.

The requirements Timing Requirements

A timing diagram should be given, and the following timing requirements stated:

a)
timing

Programme pulse duration (width) minimum and maximum values

. .... .. .....

Where appropriate, any or all of the following requirements should be stated: Set-up a> times value(s) `Address' before

b) cl

Programme pulse rise time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . minimum and/or maximum values Programme pulse fall time minimum and/or maximum .... ... ..... ..... ....... values

Minimum

(For example: set up time.)

`Enable'

4

Programme duty cycle (where ..... ........... ....... ... .. ...... ..... ...... . appropriate) maximum value time . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . should be stated for the pulse or

b)

Hold times Minimum value(s) `Address' after `Enable' hold

Set-up e>

Minimum values following set-up times:

(For exanlple: time.)

1) address 2)

before programme progra mme enable (see Note),

c)

Read cycle times Minimum and/or maximum Mode Procedure values.

data-in before programme pulse gramme enable (see Note), and

or pro-

6.5 Programming 6.5.1 Programming

3) programme enable before progra mmc pu kc (where appropriate). f) Hold times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The recommended programming procedure should be stated. Where appropriate, the verification method and conditions (for example, sense voltage, static and dynamic characteristics of the programme 7

Minimum values should be stated for the following hold times: 1) address after end of programmc programme enable (see Note); pulle or

IS 12970 ( Part 2/Set 2 ) : 1992 2) data-in after end of programme programme enable (see Note); 3) address after end of data-m; 4) programme enable after end of programme pulse (where appropriate).
NOTE - The choice of `programme pulse' or `programme enable' as the reference pulse depends on which one becomes inactive first, and this should be in accordance with the given timing diagram.

pulse

or

6) Hold times i) ii) address after end of erase pulse minimum value ... . . .... .

enable after end of erase pulse (where appropriate) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . minimum value

b) Devices without separate erase terminals Requirements 6.6.2 are under consideration.

653.2 Devices terminals Requirements

without

separate

programme

Ultraviolet Erasable Memories erasing conditions with their tolerances, should

are under consideration.

6.6.2.1 Recommended The following be stated: quantities,

6.6 Erasing Mode (If Applicable) The erasing procedure and the range of operating temperatures at which this operation may be carried out should be stated. 6.6.1 Electrically 6.6.1.1 Erasable Memories erasing conditions

a) ultraviolet

light wavelength; on the transparent

b) ultraviolet light intensity window of the case; and c) exposure time. 6.7 Number of Programming

Recommended

- Erasing Cycles

The following electrical conditions during erasing should be stated, with maximum and/or minimum values: a) power supply current(s) and/or when the erase pulse is applied; voltage(s),

The minimum number of programming-erasing cycles that can be achieved for specified operating conditions should be stated.
NOTE This number is likely to be a function of the programme and/or erase pulse conditions, theoperating time and temperature.

current(s) and/or voltage(s) at b) erasing specified terminals to which the erase pulse is applied; and c) input current(s) and/or voltage(s) at any other terminal used for an erasing operation.
NOTEWhen the temperature range to be used for the erasing procedure is different from the operating temperature range, this should be specified.

6.8 Data Retention Information Where appropriate, for example for electrically erasable and electrically programmable read-only memories, the following data retention information should be stated: a) maximum b) minimum number of read operations, data retention time. and

6.6.1.2 Timing requirements a) Devices The following

(erasure)

having separate erase terminals timing requirement should k stated:

6.9 Power or Current (Static Operation)

Drawn from Each Supply

1) 2)

Erase pulse duration (width) . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. .. . . . . minimum and maximum values Erase pulse rise time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. maximum and/or minimum values

Maximum values of current into each supply terminal at worst-case conditions and for both active and standby mode if these are significantly different from each other. Typical values at normal operating conditions should also be given. 6.10 Power or Current (Dynamic Operation) Drawn from Each Supply

3) Erase pulse fall time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. . . . .. . . . . . . maximum and/or minimum values 4) Erase'duty cycle (where appropriate) maximum value. 5) Set-up times : 9 ii) address before start of erase pulse . .. . .. . . minimum value enable before start of erase pulse (where . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . appropriate) minimum value 8 ..... .....

Curve(s) showing typical values of current required from the power supply(ies) versus the pulse or typical values at two repetition frequencies specified pulse repetition frequencies. These should be given for specified recommended operating conditions for information purposes. Where appropriate, the above information should be given for clocks acting as pulsed power supplies. Where appropriate, this information given for standby operation. should also be

IS 12970 ( Part t/Set 2 ) : 1992 6.11 Mechanical Ratings, Characteristics and Other Data Any specific mechanical or environmental ratings applicable to the programmable read-only memory should be stated (see also 5.5 of IS 12970 (Part 1) : 1990. 6.12 Supplementary Information 6.13 Handling Precautions the following information should output circuit, for example, three-state, collector, open-drain, push-pull (totem-pole). 6.12.5 Interconnections open-

to Other Types of Circuits

Where appropriate, details of the interconnections to other circuits, for example, sense amplifiers, buffers, should be given.

6.12.1 Output Loading Capabiliry The maximum number of specified loads that can be driven from each output. This information may be given for more than one type of load. 6.12.2 Electrical Noise Margins Information about the programmable read-only memory that enables noise margins to be calculated is given in 17.2 of IS 12970(Part 2/Set 1) : 1992. 6.12.3 Interconnections of Similar Units

Where appropriate, be stated:

8)

handling precautions, as in 8 of IS 12970 (Part 1) : 1990 for electrostatic sensitive programmable read-only memories; precautions necessary to avoid excessively high voltages during programming; special conditions after programming, for example, covering the transparent window to prevent the exposure to detrimental light in the case of ultraviolet erasable read-only memories; precautions to be observed against electromagnetic and nuclear radiation.

b) cl

Examples of logic operations (for example wired-OR) that may be performed by interconnecting similar memory units should be stated. 6.124 Type of Output Circuit should be given regarding the type of

Information

d)

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Br~eau Q/" Ztuliurl Stmtlurtls Act, lY86 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by RIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization. marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ). BIS. \ Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. LT 10 ( 1219 ) Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg. New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg ' Maniktola 37 84 99, i 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 1 53 23 84 235 02 16, { 235 15 19, 632 92 95, I 632 78 91,

331 01 31 I 331 13 75 37 85 61, 37 86 62 53 16 40, 235 04 42, 235 23 15 632 78 58, 632 78 92

Eastern

: l/14 C. I. T. Schema VII M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, : C. I. T. Campus, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol,

Northorn Southern Western

160036 600113

MADRAS

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

Andheri

( East )

Branches

: AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COIMBATOKE, JAIPUR, KANPUR,

Printed at Printrade,

New Delhi, India

