( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS f4545(Parf 5)-

1983

Indian Standard

METHODSOFMEASUREMENTON RECEIVERS FOR TELEVISIONBROADCAST TRANSMISSIONS
PART ( 5 SENSITIVITY

First Revision )
Sectional Committee, LTDC 20

Radio Communications
Chairman SHRI H. S. JOLLY Members

Representing

All India Radio, New Delhi

to Shri H. S. Jolly ) ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR STANDARDS (S&T ) JOINT DIFUZT~R STANDARDS ( S & T ) - IV (Alternate ) A. BHOMICIC ( AIternare ) SHRI A. IQ. BLT-CDR

Sam 0. P. ICHUSHU ( Alternate

Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ) Ministry of Defence ( DPI) ( N ), New Delhi Development Commissioner, New Delhi Indian TV Manufacturers Small Scale Industry,

CDR S. S.

BAIDWAN

SI-IIU V. V. R. PRABEU ( Alternule ) Smu Ii. M. BHATNA~AR

SHFUV. K. SETHI ( AIternate ) SHRI H. S. cHANDItAMOULI Sx-nu K. RAMASBSHU ( Altcrnale ) SHRI R. 0. DEODHAR

Association,

New Delhi

Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore Wireless Planning and Co-ordination Wing ( Ministry of Communications 2, New Delhi Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New ~Delhi Indian Telephone Industries Ltd. Bangalore National Test House, Calcutta The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers Association ( RETMA ). Bombay Peico Electronics & Electdcals Ltd, Bombay Federation of Associations of Small Industries of India, New Delhi Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers, New Delhi Directorate of Coordination ( Police Wireless ), Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi
( Continued on page 2 )

SHRI M. L. DHAR SHRI P. K. DHIN~RA( AIIernate ) SHRI A. K. GHOSE

SHRIN. KRISHNAN KUTTY ( Alternate ) SHRI B.P. GHOSE SHRI B. C. M~ICHEUJEE ( Alternate )

SHRI J. GUPTA
SERI J. GUPTA

SHRI T. S. Bux~ ( Ailernate )

SHRI P. S. SACHDEV ( Alternate ) SHRJ B. S. GUPTA

DR S. K. HAJELA

SHRI S. JANAKIRAMAN SHRI R. P. MATHUR( Alternate ) LT-COL KIUSHANLAL LT-COL B. S. NATRAJAN ( Alternate )

@ Copyrighr 1986

INDIAN STANDARDS

INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of ~copyright under the said Act.

IS:4545(Pab5)-1983 ( Continued from page
1)

Members Smr R. LALWANI SHRI V. V. CHAUDHARY ( Alternate ) SHRIR. C. PANDEY SHRI C. M. KRISHNA MURTHYI Alternate ) Snro A. K. N. PRASAD SHRI M. G. SRIDHARAN ( Alternate ) SKI W. V. R~MANA SHRI K. P. RAMASWAMY SHRI K. B. BORKER ( Afternate ) SHRI P. K. RANQOLB
SHRI M.

Representing Posts & Telegraphs Board, New Delhi Ministry of Defence ( DTD & P ) ( AIR ), Bangalore Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore

Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad Directorate General of Doordarshan, New Delhi Centr;ilarectronics Directoog Engineering Research Institute, New

SHRI H. K. JAIN ( Afternate ) SANKARALIN~AM SHRI R. S. ARORA ( Alternate )

General of Supplies and Disposals,

Alternate ) SHRI C. G. SUBRAMANYAN
SHRI SURESHCHANDRA SHRI K. K. TANWA

&RI S. SHARMA DR K. S. K. SAX (

Department of Electronics, New Delhi Electronics Trade and Technology Corporation Ltd, New Delhi Development

SHRI ISHWAR DUTT ( Alternate)

National Physical Laboratory! New Delhi Direcgto;;; General of Techmcal Development, Gujarat Communications and Electronics Vadodara Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member )

New Ltd.

SHRI H. S. DWEY ( Alternate ) SHRI C. M. THIRUMURTHB SHRI N. SRINIVASAN, Director ( Electronics )

Secretary SHRI D. K. NAYYAR Assistant Director ( Electronics ), ISI

Panel for TV Receivers, LTDC 2O/P3
Convener

Smo N. N. MOHANTB Members SHRIA. S. GUIN ( Alternate to Shri N. N. Mohanty ) SHRI M. L. ARORA ASSISTANT~WIRELESS ADVISER ( PLANNINQ~) SHRI H. M. BHATNA~AR SHRI R. B. LAL ( Alternate ) SHRI R. S. BHATNA~AR SHRI K. B. BORKL?R SHRI M. BUTCHIRAJU

All India Radio, New Delhl

M/s Chawla & Company, New Delhi Wireless Planning and Coordination Wing ( Ministry of Communication ), New Delhi Indian TV Manufacturers Association, New Delhi

Federation India Directorate Electronics

of Associations of Small Industries Ltd, New Delhi General of Doordarshan, New Delhi Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad

of

SHRI P. JANARDHAN( Alternate I SHRI R. K. CHAKRAVARTI SHRI A. GHAPFAR SHRI S. JANAKIRAM SHRI R. L. KANDOI SHRI S.

MITRA

Department of Electronics, New Delhi U.P. Electronics Corporation Ltd, Lucknow Relations Department, Information & Public Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad The Radio Electronic and Television Manufacturers Association, Bombay ElectE;lmiReglonal Test Laboratory ( North ), New

SHRI A. RAZZAQUB REPRESENTATIVE

SHIU INDERJ~T BANAUDHA ( Alfernate SHRI-C. L. KAUL ( Alternate II )

I)
Centra;,atylcs Engineering Research Institute, Tamil Nadu Local Administration Radio and Television Manufacturers Organization, Madras Electronics Trade and Technology Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi _Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore Electronic Components Industries Association. New Delhi National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi

SHIU P. K. SANDELL SHRI C. G. SUBRAMANYAN (Alternate I ) SHRI C. S. ARORA ( AIternate II )

SHRI V. V. R. SASTR~ &RI V. K. fhKHRI

SHRI SURESH CHANDRA SHRI INDERJEBTBANAUDHA (

Alternate )

2

IS:4545(Part5)-1983

Indian Standard

METHODSOFMEASUREMENTON RECEIVERSFORTELEVI~SIONBROADCAST TRANSMISSIONS
PART 5 ( SENSITIVITY

First Revision )
0. FOREWORD
Part 4 Synchronizing quality Part 6 Selectivity and response to undesired signals Part 7 Fidelity Part 8 Compatibility with audio visual recording equipment Part 9 Electrical and acoustic measurements at audio frequency 0.4 This standard ( Part 5 ) is largely based on IEC Publication 107 - 1 ( 1977 ) Recommended methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 1 General considerations electrical measurements other than those at audio-frequencies, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is it to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2- 1960*.
*Rules for rounding off numerical value (revised).

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part 5) (First Revision)

was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 6 December 1983, after the draft finalized by the Radio Communications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 The first version of IS : 4545 covered the methods of measurement for television broadcast receivers having only monochrome vision reception. With the introduction of colour television receivers, this standard is now being revised to make it applicable to receivers designed for both monochrome and colour vision reception and published in a number of parts to deal with different characteristics of television receivers. 0.3 This standard ( Part 5 ) covers methods of measurements for sensitivity of television receivers. Other parts in this series are: Part 1 General considerations
,

Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements Part 3 Geometrical properties of the picture

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard

( Part 5 ) covers methods of measurement for parameters relating to sensitivity of television receivers, namely :

1.2 This standard ( Part 5 ) shall be read in conjunction with 1s : 4545 ( Part 1 ) - 1983*.
2. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

a) Gain limited sensitivity;

b) 4
d) 4 Q

2.1 Measurements

d
h)

3

Noise limited sensitivity; Synchronizing sensitivity; Colour sensitivity; Co-efficient of reflection; Automatic gain control characteristics, static and dynamic; automatic gain control Chrominance characteristics; Colour killing and colour killer response time; and Maximum usable input signal level, single and multiple.
3

are carried out, unless otherwise stated, using the standard image and the standard video output voltage. Where performance is not measured on all channels in which the receiver is designed to operate, it shall be carried out on a representative number of channels. When an overall figure for the receiver sensitivity is required, it shall be corresponding to the channel having the lowest sensitivity and that channel shall be identified in the results.
*Methods of measurement on receivers broadcast transmissions : Part 1 General ( jirst revision ). for television considerations

IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) e 1983 3. STANDARD IMAGE AND STANDARD VIDEO OUTPUT VOLTAGE 3.1 Definition - A standard image is defined as a display in which those parts ofthe picture corresponding to white level have a luminance of 80 cd/m2, and those parts corresponding to black level have a luminance of 2 cd/m2 both in the absence of ambient illumination. Other levels of luminance may be used if the receiver has special characteristics or if the manufacturer's information infers that different values from those recommended should be used. In these cases, the levels of luminance used and why they were used shall be stated with the results. The standard image shall take the form of a test pattern in which the mean level of the picture modulation is close to 50 percent. The pattern shall include an area at white level sufficiently large for luminance measurements to be carried out conveniently and distinguished through interfering noise. The corresponding voltage excursion between black level and white level at the appropriate electrodes of the picture tube is the standard video output voltage. 3.2 Method of Measurement - The standard video output voltage is measured at the appropriate picture tube electrodes by means of an oscilloscope. Where a colour display tube uses different drive levels for the various guns, the greatest of them is considered to be standard video output voltage; the receiver grey scale tracking having been first correctly adjusted to correspond with the white point. Care shall be taken that any beam current limiting device does not influence results when defining the standard video output voltage. Alternatively, where appropriate, that beam current limiting shall be SO adjusted that it is not operative at the standard video output voltage. frequency of the television channel selected. The receiver is tuned in accordance with 3 of IS : 4545 ( Part 2 ) - 1983*. The controls of the receiver shall be adjusted for maximum sensitivity. The input signal level is then adjusted until the standard video output voltage is obtained, this level being the input level corresponding to the gain-limited sensitivity of the receiver. Measurements shall be carried out using a representative number of channels in each of the bands for which the receiver is designed. 5. NOISE LIMITED 5.1 Definition -The SENSITIVITY pps$oa,' ratio is the

ratio between the peak-to-peak black level to white level voltage swing at the appropriate picture tube electrodes corresponding to the standard image and the rms noise voltage at the same picture tube electrodes which occurs at 50 percent picture modulation. At the value of the input signal level that provides the standard video output voltage, this ratio may attain a value which is considered unacceptable. This value is not the same for all receivers. In cases, however, when it is considered practical to define a certain value for this ratio which limits the acceptability of the receiver performance, the available power input for which this value is obtained is called the noise-limited sensitivity. p-p signal -. The value may be marked on the rms noise ratio curve.

5.2 Methed of Measurement - Radio-frequency input signal containing monochrome picture modulation at levels, 0 percent, 50 percent and 100 percent, either simultaneously in the pattern ( see Fig. 1A ) or by adjustment of the pattern generator and with a switchable colour synchronizing signal, is applied to the input terminals of the receiver. Two sets of measurements are made, one with the colour synchronizing signal 4. GAIN LIMITED SENSITIVITY included so that the colour decoding circuit are 4.1 Definition - The gain limited sensitivity ~of operative and the other with the colour synchronizing signa! removed. the receiver is the lowest value of the available power from a signal source required to obtain The receiver is always set for standard video the standard image when the gain controls are output voltage. The level of the input signal is set for maximum amplification. varied in steps and at every step, the rms noise voltage is measured with an oscilloscope. Since 4.2 Method of Measurement - The input signal the rms noise voltage cannot be determined shall be television signal with test pattern picture content consistent with the standard image and exactly by this method, it is recommended that the ratio between the excursions observed on the with components giving 100 percent picture oscilloscope screen and the rms noise voltage be modulation. established before the measurement is carried The input signal is applied to the in ut lout. To do this, a noise signal of known rms terminals of the receiver as described in B of value and having a bandwidth approximately IS : 4545 (Part 1) - 1983*. The carrier frequency equal to the noise bandwidth of the receiver is of the signal generator is adjusted to the carrier applied to the oscilloscope. The bandwidth of
*Methods of measurement on receivers broadcast transmissions : Part 1 General (first revision ). for television considerations

*Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmiesions: Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements (first revision ). 4

IS:4545(Part5)-1983

Noise r.m.s.

vbltage value

calibrated

- -

100%

White

level

I

__----_--0%

Black

level

FIG. 1A

w
I,:,,

MODULATION

WAVEFORM

FOR SIGNAL TO NOISE RATIO MEASUREMENT

the oscilloscope shall be greater width of the receiver. NOTE 1 - As an aid

than the band-

6. SYNCHRONIZING

SENSITIVITY

to assessing the rms noise voltage on the oscilloscope screen, the signal from the receiver may be applied to both channels of a~dual trace oscilloscope. The traces are then shifted together until the two halos due to the noise just meet. A noise signal may then be applied alone to the two oscilloscope inputs. care being taken that the traces are not shifted, and the noise signal level adjusted again until the two halos just meet. The value of noise signal may be read from the calibrated signal generator out-

6.1 Definition - The synchronizing sensitivity is the level of the input signal applied to the receiver for which synchronization is completely or partly lost, causing the picture quality to become unacceptable. 6.2 Method of Measurement - The receiver is set up for a standard image with a television signal modulated by a test pattern applied to the input terminals. Subsequently, the input signal level is reduced in steps completely interrupting the signal on each occasion. The user controls are adjusted for optimum performance at each level. The level at which the picture becomes unacceptable due to loss of synchronization shall be noted, this input level being the synchronizing sensitivity. The manner in which the synchronization is lost shall also be noted. In some cases, the picture may be unacceptable due to noise or lack of contrast rather than loss of synchronization, in which case the syncronizing sensitivity cannot be defined. 7. CoLOUR SENSITIVITY ( NOT APPLICABLE TO MONOCHROME TV RECEIVERS ) 7.1 Definition - The colour sensitivity is the level of input signal applied to a colour receiver at which the colour decoding circuits cease to operate, causing colour values to become unacceptable or causing the receiver to revert to monochrome operation. 7.2 Method of Measurement - The receiver is set up for a standard image with a television signal modulated by a test pattern applied to the input. Subsequently, the input signal is reduced in steps, and at each input level the receiver controls are set for optimum performance. The

put.

The rm

~ratio is obtained

as a function

of the available power and a curve plotted as shown in Fig. 1B. The impairment caused by a given rms noise voltage is influenced by various characteristics of the receiver. This shall be kept in mind when comparing different receivers. receivers, Nore 2 - For monochrome second set of measurements shall be made. NOTE 3 - This measurement carried out using a suitable insturment.
fjignal-lo.noise
I i

only

the

may alternatively be video noise measuring

ratio

dB

+50

+40

+30

+20

+lO

-90

.-70

-50

-30

-10 Input

dB(mW) Signal Level

FIG.

1B

EXAMPLE OF SIGNAL-TO-NOISE

RATIO CURVE 5

IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) - 1983 level at which the picture colour quality becomes unacceptable for at which the receiver reverts to monochrome operation is noted, this input signal level being the colour sensitivity. The manner in which the picture colour reproduction becomes unacceptable shall be noted. 8. COEFFICIENT OF REFLECTION AT THE RECEIVER INPUT 8.1 Definition - Reflections at the receiver input are caused by a mismatch between the impedances of the specified aerial cable and the receiver input. If the receiver input impedance is called 2 and the characteristic impedance of the cable is R, the coefficient of reflection at the receiver input is: -p Z-R `-Z+R The voltage standing wave ratio(s) is: ..7= 1+IPI 1- IPI 8.2 Method of Measnrcment - A long aerial cable of the specified characteristic impedance is connected to the aerial input terminals of the receiver, which is switch-cd on and tuned to the appropriate channel. A signal generator is connected to the other end of the cable. The generator applies an unmodulated radio-frequency signal of constant emf and variable frequency to this end of the cable. The strength of the signal at this end is measured with a The combination of the signal genedetector. rator and the detector shall terminate the cable accurately with its characteristic impedance ( see Fig. 2A ) . The strength of the signal measured by the detector instrument is plotted as a function of the input signal frequency, first with the receiver end of the cable short-circuited and secondly with the receiver end of the cable connected to the aerial input terminals of the receiver. From these two curves ( see Fig. 2B ) the magnitude of the coefficient of reflection ( F I is derived as a function of frequency. The cable shall be long enough for a sufficient number of undulations to be recorded within a frequency range corresponding to the passband of the receiver. The frequency separation between adjacent minima is equal to:

nr=$
where v = velocity of propagation and 1 = length of the cable. in the cable,

when the far end of the cable is short-circuited.

Long

cable

I

I

FIG. 2A

OF REFLECTION CIRCUITARRANGEMENT FOR MEASUREMENT OF THECOEFFICIENT

Detected signal
Detected signal

."
fl

I`,

.*,..

I.

I
4

I
f2

f2

Fr.eqoency at the receiver detected signal with cable terminated receiver input terminals

Frequency with the

Detected

signal w.ith cgble short-circuited
BIG; 2~

R,~SULT a~ &I~ASUREMENT

OF THE COEFFICIENT OF REFLECTION

6

fS:4545(Part5)The attenuation of the cable shall below enough for the undulations to be of sufficient amplitude when the far end of the cable is short-circuited ( see Fig 2B ). The undulations may be displayed when a sweeping signal generator is used and the detected signal is made visible on an oscilloscope. The zero reference line may then be made visible by periodically blanking out the sweep-generator output. The coefficient of reflection shall be measured in each of the channels for which the receiver has been designed. Alternatively, any equivalent method, expressing the coefficient of reflection in terms of admittance or impedance as a function of frequency, may be used.
may be conweniently NOTE - This measurement carried out by means of reflectometer or bridge indicating the reflection coefficient directly. A normal television signal may then be used as a signal source in order that the automatic gain control of the receiver operates normally.

1983

If the receiver has a local-distant switch or a sensitivity control, measurements shall be made over a range of settings. A check may be made to find out to what extent the vision or the sound AGC characteristics change when the sound or the vision radiofrequency signal is switched off or when their relative levels are changed. The different effects occurring ~with a.m. or f.m. sound system shall be borne in mind. 9.3 Graphic Representation - The results are plotted on graphs showing the relative amplitude of the picture modultion at the picture tube electrodes, or the relative level of the sound output power, respectively, as a function of the input signal level. For the vision channel, an example of such a graph is shown in Fig. 3. 10. AUTOklATIC GAIN CONTROL DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS

9. AUTOMATIC GAIN CONTROL STATIC CHARACTERISTICS 9.1 Definition control ( AGC level of sound receiver to the -Each of the automatic gain ) characteristics relates the output or vision channels of a television input level of a television signal.

9.2 Method of Measurement - A television signal in accordance with the standards of the television system is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through any necessary matching networks. The relative levels of the vision and the sound carriers are adjusted to the ratio specified by the appropriate standards. The vision carrier is modulated with a monochrome test pattern video signal having parts corresponding to 100 percent modulation. The associated sounds carrier is 30 percent modulated with a suitable audio-frequency tone, for instance 1 kHz. The sensitivity, contrast and volume controls are so adjusted that standard video output voltage is obtained for a vision input signal level of -50 dB ( mW > and that the sound output power equals one-half of the maximum useful output power. The output signal level is then varied ( maintaining a constant ratio between the vision and sound input signal levels > and the output-voltage excursion between black level and white level, as well as the sound output power are measured as a function of the input signal level. The results are plotted and the input signal levels at which overloading, distortion or cross-modulation occurs, shall be noted on the graph. The measurements shall be repeated with the receiver adjusted in the same way, for some other recommended values of input signal level.
7

10.1 Definition -Each automatic gain control dynamic characteristic relates the output level of both sound and vision channels of a television receiver to the input level of a television signal when the input level is varying cyclically or is subject to a transient change. 10.2 Method of Measurement - A television signal in accordance with the standards of the television system is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through an attenuator, the attenuation of which is controllable by a lowfrequency signal. Any necessary matching networks are included between the signal generator and the controllable ~attenuator, and between the controllable attenuator and the receiver.
Relative to standard output voltage +20
Video dB

+10

0

_, o

-20 -80 -70
-60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 dB(mW)

Input
A: -30 Receiver set for standard video output voltage at an input level of dB (mw); B: -50 dB (mW); C: -70 dB (mW)

signal

FIG. 3 EXAMPLE OF AUTOMATIC GAIN CONTROL STATIC CHARACTERISTIC

IS : 4545_( Part 5 ) - 1983

The relative levels of the vision and sound carriers are adjusted to the ratio specified by the appropriate standards. The picture carrier is modulated with a monochrome test pattern video signal having parts corresponding to 100 percent modulation. The corresponding sound carrier is 30 percent modulated with a suitable audiofrequency tone, for instance 1 kHz. The sensitivity, contrast and volume controls are so adjusted that standard video output voltage is obtained for a vision input signal level of -50 dB ( mW ) and that the sound output power equals one half of the maximum useful output power. A low-frequency sinusoidal controlling signal is applied to the terminals of the controllable attenuator such that the signal level applied to the receiver varies by &3 dB in power. The frequency of the sinusoid is varied from a very low frequency such that the response time of the automatic gain control circuit does not influence the results, for instance 0'1 Hz, upto a frequency where the gain control circuitry does not influence the variations of video output voltage. The peak-to-peak variations of the video output voltage excursions between black level and white level, and variations of sound output power, corresponding to the variations of input signal level are measured over the defined range of If overloading distortion or crossfrequencies. modulation occur at certain frequencies, the effect shall be noted in the results and, if necessary, the range of variation of input signal level reduced, this level being shown in the results. The measurements shall be repeated with the receiver adjusted in the same way for some other recommended values of the mean input signal level. If the receiver has a local-distant switch or a sensitivity control, measurements shall be made over a range of settings. The measurements shall be repeated with a low-frequency squarewave controlling the attenuator and the video output voltage excursions between black level and white level, as well as the sound power, measured as a function of the time following the squarewave transition. The frequency of the squarewave should be sufficiently low for the response time of the AGC circuit to be fully displayed. 10.3 Graphic Representation - The results are plotted for sinusoidal variations on graphs showing the relative amplitudes of the picture modulation on the picture tube electrodes or the relative level of the sound output power as a function of frequency of variation of the input signal level. For the vision channel, an example of such a graph is shown in Fig. 4. Results for squarewave variation of the input signal level are plotted on graphs showing rela8

Variation of video ouiput

dB

1

10

100

Hz

Frequency of input signal level variation

EXAMPLEOF AUTOMATICGAIN CONTROL DYNAMICCHARACTERISTIC tive amplitude of the picture modulation at the picture tube electrodes. or the relative level of the sound output power as a function of time following the squarewave transition. For the vision channel, an example of such a graph is shown in Fig. 5.
Video output level relative to steady state input signal condition dB

FIG. 4

+3 +2
+1

0 -1

-2 -3
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

`70

ms

Time from change in input signal level

FIG. 5 EXAMPLEOF AUTOMATICGAIN CONTROL DYNAMICCHARACTERISTIC TRANSIENTRESPONSE
11. CHROMINANCE AUTOMATIC GAIN CONTROL CHARACTERISTIC ( NOT APPLICABLE TO MONOCHROME TV RECEIVERS ) 11.1 Definition -

gain control

The chrominance automatic characteristic relates the output

level of the chrominance component of the primary colour signals generated by the receiver decoder to the level of the chrominance carrier reference burst at the input to the decoder. This measurement principally applies tocolour coding systems using amplitude modulation of the chrominance subcarrier. 11.2 Method of Measurement - A television signal in accordance with the standards of the system is applied to the receiver through any necessary matching networks. The vision carrier is modulated with one of the recommended colour bar signals having the chrominance component at 75 percent of maximum amplitude. The receiver controls are adjusted for normal operation and so that standard video output voltage is obtained for an input signal level of -50 dB ( mW ). Where the receiver uses separate colour difference signal drive to the display tube, the following method is used. An oscilloscope is connected to the electrode of the blue gun to which the colour difference signal is applied. With the receiver adjusted for normal -operation and standard input conditions as described above, the level -of the colour difference component corresponding to the blue bar is noted as the reference level. The level of the chrominance signal component, including the reference burst, at the coder is then adjusted in steps both above and below the nominal level, the luminance signal component being kept constant. The corresponding levels of the blue bar colour difference component are plotted. An example of such a graph is shown in Fig. 6.
Relative to reference level of colour difference signal dB

drive to the picture tube, the following method is used. With the receiver set for normal operation as above, an oscilloscope is connected to the picture tube electrode to which the blue primary colour signal is applied. The chrominance signal component is switched off at the coder and the level -of the blue bar tluminance component remaining is noted as zero chrominance signal level. The chrominance component is then switched on at the coder and the level of the blue bard noted as the reference level. The level of the chrominance signal, including the reference burst, is varied at the coder in steps, the luminance signal remaining constant and the corresponding levels of the bluebar are plotted. An example of such a graph is shown in Fig. 6. The measurements shall be repeated for some other recommended values of input signal level. 12. COMPOSITE LUMINANCE AND CHROMlNANCE AUTOMATIC GAIN CONTROL DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTfC ( NOT APPLICABLE TO MONOCHROME TV RECEIVERS ) 12.1 Definition - The composite luminance and chrominance automatic gain control dynamic characteristic relates the output level of a primary colour channel ~ofa television receiver to the input level of a colour television signal when that input level is varying cyclically or is subject to a transient change. This measurement applies to colour systems employing both amplitude and frequency modulation of the chrominance sub-carrier. 12.2 Method of Measurement - A television signal in accordance with the standards of the television system is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through an attenuator, the* attenuation of which is controllable by a lowfrequency signal. Any necessary matching networks are included between the signal generator and the controllable attenuator, and between the controllable attenuator and the receiver. The relative levels of the vision and sound carriers are adjusted to the ratio specified by the appropriate standards. The picture carrier is modulated with a monochrome test pattern video signal having parts corresponding to 100 percent modulation. The corresponding sound carrier is 30 percent modulated with a suitable audio-frequency tone, for instance 1 kHz.

-40

-30

-20

-10

0

+lO

+20

dB

Burst amplitude relative to nominal

FIG. 6

EXAMPLE OFCHROMINANCB AUTOMATIC GAIN CONTROLCHARACTERISTIC

Where the receiver uses primary colour signal 9

Thesensitivity, contrast and volume controls are so adjusted that standard video output voltage is obtained for a vision input signal level of - 50dB ( mW ) and that the sound output power equals one half of the maximum useful output power.

Is : 4545( Pati 5 ) - 1983 The monochrome test pattern modulation is removed and the output of the appropriate colour system coder -substituted. The input signal to the coder is a 75 percent maximum level red pedestal signal. A low-frequency sinusoidal controlling signal is applied to the terminals of the controllable attenuator such that the signal level applied to the receiver varies by f3 dB in power. The frequency of the sinusoid is varied from a very low frequency so that the response time of the automatic gain control circuits does not influence the results, for instance 0`1 kHz, up to a frequency where the control circuitry does not influence the variations of video output voltage. The peak-to-peak variations of the primary colour output voltage excursions, between black level and maximum level corresponding to the variations of input signal level are measured over the defined range of frequencies. If overloading, distortion or cross-modulation occurs at certain frequencies, the effects shall be noted in the results and, if necessary, the range of variation of input signal level reduced, this level being shown in the results. The measurements shall be repeated with the receiver adjusted in the same way for some other recommended values of the mean input signal level. If the receiver has a local-distant switch or a sensitivity control, measurements shall be made over a range of settings. The measurements shall be repeated with a low-frequency squarewave controlling the attenuator and the video output voltage excursions between black level and maximum level measured as a function of the time following the squarewave transition. .The frequency of the squarewave shall be sufficiently low for the response time of the automatic gain control circuits to be fully displayed. If at any point anomalous operation of the colour decoder circuits occurs it shall be noted in the results. 12.3 Graphic Representation - The results are plotted for sinusoidal variations on graphs showing the relative amplitude of the red primary colour signal on the picture tube electrodes as a function of frequency of variation of the input signal level. An example of such a graphis shown in Fig. 7. Results for squarewave variation and the input signal level are plotted on graphs showing the relative amplitude of the red primary colour signal at the picture tube electrodes as a function of time following the squarewave transition. An example of such a graph is shown in Fig. 8. It may be convenient to plot the results of the measurements of the luminance channel of a colour receiver as defined in 10 eon the same graph as that showing the overall automatic gain control dynamic characteristic. Variation of red primary
colour signal

dn

1

10

100

Hz

Frequency of input signal level variation FIG. 7 EXAMPLEOF COMPOSITE LUMINANCE AND CHROMINANCEAUTOMATIC GAIN CONTROL DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTIC
Red colour difference signal output level relative to steady state input signal condition

dB

IO

20

30

40

60

60

70

Ins

Time from change in input signal level

FIG. 8 EXAMPLEOF COMPOSITELUMINANCE AND
CHROMINANCEAUTOMATIC GAIN CONTROL DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTIC TRANSIENT RESPONSE

13. COLOUR KmXLLING ( NOT APPLICABLE TO MONOCHROME TV RECEIVERS ) 13.1 Definition - The figure of merit of the colour killer circuit defines the level of colour 10

synchronizing or reference signal at which the chrominance signal decoding circuits are activated or de-activated. 13.2 Method of Measurement - A television signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver at a vision carrier input signal level of -50 dB ( mW >. The vision carrier is modulated with a test pattern video signal. The receiver is adjusted for normal operation, and the level of the chtominance signal, including the reference burst at the coder, is reduced stepwise, the luminance signal remaining constant. The level of chrominance signal at which the colour killer operates is noted. Starting from substantially zero chrominance level, the chrominance signal, including the reference burst at the coder, is then increased stepwise, the luminance signal remaining constant, and the level noted at which the chrominance decoding circuits become active. These measurements shall be repeated for some other recommended values of input signal level. 14. COLOUR KILLER RESPONSE TIME (NOT APPLICABLE TO MONOCHROME TV RECEIVERS ) 14.1 Definition - The colour killer response time is the respective time taken for the colour killer to disable and restore operation of the decoding circuits in response to the removal and application of the chrominance signal. 14.2 Method of Measurement - A television signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver at a vision carrier input signal-level of -50 dB ( mW ). A vision carrier is modulated with a test pattern video signal and the receiver adjusted for normal operation. A double beam long persistence storage type oscilloscope is arranged to display both the video signal applied to the signal generator modulator and one of the primary colour signals or colour difference signals at the terminals of the picture tube. The chrominance signal, including the reference burst at the colour system coder, is switched off and the time taken for the output from the decoder to decay substantially to zero is noted. This observation may require care since-on removal of the chrominance signal including the reference burst, the output from the decoding section of the receiver may consist of noise and/ or spuriously demodulated luminance components and it is the time of effective suppression of these that is to be observed. The chrominance signal, including the reference burst is now restored on the colour system coder, and the time to achieve substantially normal The two output from the decoder is measured. periods measured are the disabling and enabling response times and are expressed in milliseconds.

is.

MAXIMUM USABLE SINGLE SIGNAL LEVEL

INPUT

15.1 Definition - The maximum usable single input signal level is the highest level of input signal for which the receiver can give acceptable performance under conditions as specified in 15.2. 15.2 Method of Measurement - A television signal of convenient level with test pattern modulation is applied to the receiver input terminals. The receiver is tuned and adjusted for optimum results. The input signal level is gradually increased and the receiver sensitivity controls and local-distant switch are adjusted to maintain optimum performance. The highest input signal level for which the performance remain acceptable is then noted. The measurements shall be repeated in order to find the maximum input signal level which will not cause the receiver to fail to operate normally when manipulating the channel selector ( for example, lock-out by blocking of the AGC ). The maximum input level which w-ill not cause the receiver to fail to operate normally when switched on with this signal impressed shall also be ascertained. The lowest value of maximum usable input signal level is recorded together with the conditions and decription of the effect which causes the performance to be unacceptable. The measurements shall be repeated for a representative number of channels in all of the bands for which the receiver is intended. 16. MAXIMUM USABLE MULTIPLE SIGNAL LEVEL IPNUT

16.1 Definition - The maximum usuable multiple input signal level is the highest level of input signal on a selected channel for -which the receiver can give acceptable performance, under conditions as specified in 16.2, when accompanied by either or both adjacent channel signals at a level 6 dB higher than that of the selected signal. 16.2 Method of Measurement - A television signal of convenient level with test pattern modulation is applied to the receiver input terminals. The receiver is tuned and adjusted for optimum results. The lower adjacent channel signal is then simultaneously applied at a level 6 dB higher than the signal on the selected channel. The level of both signals is -gradually increased and the receiver sensitivity controls and local-distant switch are adjusted to maintain optimum performance. The highest input signal level for which the performance remains acceptable is then noted.

The measurements are then repeated first for the upper adjacent channel and then both adjacent channels. The measurements shall also be carried out in order to find the maximum input signal level which will not cause the receiver to fall to operate normally when manipulating the channel selector. The maximum input level which will not cause the receiver to fail to operate normally when switched on with the signals impressed shall also be ascertained. The adjacent channel signals are also modufated with a test pattern that can be distinguished from the modulation of the signals to which the

receiver is tuned. The lowest value of maximum usable input signal level is recorded together with the conditions and a description of the ef@ct which causes the performance to be unacceptable. The measurements shall be repeated for a representative number of channels in all bands for which the receiver is intended. NOTE- Filters shall be included in the signal
generators providing the adjacent channel signais in order that signal modulated components in the selecte& $annel are suppressed by a factor of at least .

12

