Arda Ah IS 1747 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ASA, dee da Bk ma — 
fatsrts 


(FART FRAT ) 


Nitrogen, Compressed Gas and 
Liquid — Specification 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 71.100.20 
© BIS 2023 
anc gier Sat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAA, 9 gert MTE pt AMT, ag Tee - 110002 
— MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2023 Price Group 9 


Industrial Gases Sectional Committee, CHD 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Industrial Gases Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Bureau of Indian Standards had published two separate standards for nitrogen, namely: 


a) IS 1747 : 1960 Specification for nitrogen, technical; and 
b) IS 3551 : 1965 Specification for pure nitrogen (dry). 


In the first revision of IS 1747, in 1972, the technical committee had decided to amalgamate the two standards 
by incorporating pure nitrogen grade in this standard and subseguently, withdrawing of IS 3551 : 1965. 


In this revision, liguid nitrogen has also been included in the scope of the standard. The technical committee felt 
that, nowadays, the technical and pure grades have not much relevance therefore technical and pure nitrogen 
grades have been removed and four grades of nitrogen have been specified on the basis of purity of nitrogen. 
Latest methods for determination of impurities in nitrogen have been incorporated. 


The composition of the committee responsible for formulation of this standard is listed in Annex H. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular reguirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 “Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
NITROGEN, COMPRESSED GAS AND LIOUID — 
SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the reguirements and the 
methods of sampling and test for nitrogen gas and 
liguid. Liguid is converted to gas and analyzed. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this Indian Standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this Indian Standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of the standards listed 
below: 


IS No. Title 

IS 323 : Rectified spirit for industrial use 

2009 — Specification (second revision) 

IS 1070 : Reagent grade water — 

1992 Specification (third revision) 

IS 4905 : Random sampling and 

2015 randomization procedures (first 
revision) 


IS 7062 : Glossary of terms used in gas 
1973 industry 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 7062 shall apply. 


4 GRADES 
There shall be four grades of nitrogen, namely: 


a) N 2.5 grade — 99.5 % pure (only gas); 

b) N 4.5 grade — 99.995 % pure (liquid 
and gas); 

c) N 5.0 grade — 99.999 % pure (liquid 
and gas); and 

d) N 5.5 grade — 99.999 5 % pure (liquid 
and gas). 


5 REOUIREMENTS 


5.1 The material shall be compressed gas or liguid 
after vaporization. 


5.2 The material shall comply with the reguirements 
prescribed in Table 1 when tested in accordance 
with the corresponding methods prescribed in 
column. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


Table 1 Reguirement for Nitrogen, Compressed Gas and Liguid 


(Clause 5.2) 
SI No. Characteristic Reguirement Method of 
Test, Ref to 
Annex 
N 2.5 grade N4.5grade N 5.0 grade N 5.5 grade 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Nitrogen purity, percent, Min 99.5 99.995 99.999 99.999 5 see NOTE 1 
ii) Oxygen, ppm by volume, Max 5 000 10 2 1 A 
iii) Hydrogen, ppm by volume, Max — 5 1 0.2 B 
iv) Carbon Dioxide, ppm by — 5 1 0.5 C 
volume, Max 
v) Hydrocarbon as Methane, ppm = 5 1 0.5 D 
by volume, Max 
vi) Carbon Monoxide, ppm by — 5 1 1 E 
volume, Max 
vii) Moisture, ppm by volume, Max — 14 2 1 F 


NOTE — For calculating percentage of Nitrogen purity, 
below formula is to be used 


Nitrogen purity — 100 — sum of percentage of all impurities 
listed in Table 1. 


6 PACKING AND MARKING 


6.1 The gas shall be supplied compressed in vacuum 
insulated cylinders or liguid nitrogen tanks. The 
design of cylinders or liguid nitrogen tanks, the 
maximum pressure of nitrogen in them, and packing, 
marking, painting, labeling and transport of 
cylinders tanks shall be in conformity with the 
SMPV Rules, 2016 and Gas Cylinder Rules, 2016 of 
the Government of India, with modifications as may 
be ordered from time to time by Petroleum and 
Explosive Safety Organization (PESO) or any other 
authority duly constituted by the Government of 
India. 


6.2 The guantity of nitrogen gas packed in a gas 
cylinder shall be measured at 27 °C and 760 mm of 
Hg and shall be expressed in cubic meter. 


6.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the reguirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


7 SAMPLING 


The method of drawing representative samples for 
both compressed nitrogen and liguid nitrogen, 
number of tests to be performed and the criteria for 
conformity of the material to the reguirements of 
this specification shall be as prescribed in Annex G. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
[Table 1, SI No. (ii)] 
DETERMINATION OF OXYGEN 


A-1 OUALITY OF REAGENTS 


Unless specified otherwise, AR grade chemicals and 
distilled water (see IS 1070) shall be employed in 
the tests. 


A-2 DETERMINATION OF OXYGEN FOR 
GRADES 4.5, 5.0 AND 5.5 


A-2.1 General 


Four methods for the determination of oxygen in 
pure grade nitrogen are described. Either of these 
may be used for general routine purposes, but in case 
of a dispute Method 2 shall be used. 


A-2.2 Method 1 — Chemical Method 
A-2.2.1 Principle 


A sample of gas is bubbled through an alkaline 
solution of pyrocatechol in complete absence of 
oxygen. The colour developed in the solution due to 
the reaction of pyrocatechol with the oxygen in the 
sample of gas is matched with the colour slides in 
the standard disc. 


A-2.2.2 Description of Apparatus 


The assembly of apparatus shall be as illustrated in 
Fig. 1. 


A-2.2.3 Standard Discs — Available from the 
suppliers of scientific apparatus. 


A-2.2.4 Reagents 
A-2.2.4.1 Pyrocatechol solution 


Bubble oxygen-free nitrogen (from tested certified 
cylinders) for half an hour through 1 000 ml of water 
contained in bottle D. Divide the water into two 
portions, one of 900 ml in bottle D and the other of 
100 ml in a small conical flask. Keep both the 
portions bubbling with oxygen-free nitrogen. To the 
900 ml of water in bottle D, add 7 g of pyrocatechol, 
maintaining the nitrogen bubbling. To the 100 ml of 
water in the conical flask add 6 g of ferrous 
ammonium sulphate, 1 g of zinc and 2 ml of 
concentrated sulphuric acid, still maintaining the 
nitrogen bubbling, and warm the solution gently so 
that a brisk evolution of hydrogen occurs. When 
most of the zinc has dissolved, add the solution 
quickly to the solution in bottle D, transferring the 
remaining zinc as well. Replace bottle D quickly in 
the set through the coupling M where this solution 
as well as that in bottle E is kept bubbling through 
with oxygen-free nitrogen continuously to prevent 
the entry of atmospheric oxygen. After leaving the 
reagents, the nitrogen will escape through K at 
atmospheric pressure. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


GAS SAMPLE d A 


— 


COTTON 


PYROCATECHOL 


GOH SOLUTION 


A 


COTTON 
WOOL 


FIG. 1 APPARATUS FOR THE DETERMINATION OF OXYGEN IN NITROGEN 


A-2.2.4.2 Sodium hydroxide solution 


Take 500 ml of water in a beaker and bubble, fairly 
vigorously, oxygen-free nitrogen through it. Add 
250 g of sodium hydroxide in small portions to the 
water while nitrogen is bubbled through. When the 
solution is cool, pour it into bottle E and attach to the 
set through the coupling M. 


A-2.2.5 Procedure 


A-2.2.5.1 Turn taps Q and N off so that the liquid 
does not rise into C. Turn K so that nitrogen bubbles 
through mercury and a pressure is obtained in D and 
E. Pour water into S with tap R, open the atmosphere 
until water level is just below tap R. Fill to half 
bubbler G with water. Fill the bubbler L to a height 
of 62 mm with mercury. 


A-2.2.5.2 Run mercury into reservoir T and raise T 
until the mercury readies the fixed mark at F. (This 
height of mercury gives a speed of approximately 
15 ml/min). Connect the cylinder or gas supply to 
be tested to A by means of a flow regulating valve 
and glass or copper tubing, any junctions being 
made with rubber pressure tubing and as short as 
possible. Turn B so that the gas from the cylinder 


passes tothe atmosphere and open carefully the 
cylinder valve and the flow regulating valves. 
When the connections have been thoroughly blown 
out with gas, reduce the rate of flow to about 
2.5 litre/h and turn B so that the gas passes into C 
through the sintered disc. 


A-2.2.5.3 Open the tap P and allow the gas to pass 
to the atmosphere through tap R. There should 
always be a slight excess of gas bubbling through 
the mercury in F. Allow the gas to pass until C is 
thoroughly washed out. By turning caps N and O, 
force sodium hydroxide solution into C to the 1 ml 
mark. Turn the tap N to connect C to the 
pyrocatechol reservoir and force the solution into C 
to the 10 ml mark. Shut taps O and N, If the solution 
in C is slightly coloured, it is ready for test, but if it 
is substantially coloured, run it carefully to a 
waste-bottle by closing tap P, and opening tap O to 
waste. Refill C to the 10 ml mark as indicated 
above. If the solution is still appreciably coloured, 
the process shall be repeated until an almost 
colourless solution is obtained. Match the colour of 
the solution in C as guickly as possible with a 
suitable standard, on a colour disc using a matching 


plate and turn tap R immediately so that the gas 
passes into the measuring burette H. When 100 ml 
or 200 ml of the gas have passed in, rematch C 
against suitable standard. 


A-2.2.5.4 If the gas contains appreciable guantities 
of oxygen, it may only be necessary to use 100 ml 
of gas to obtain a suitable colour change. 


NOTES 


1 The set does not function satisfactorily with oxygen 
concentrations above 0.005 percent. 


2 The rate of flow should be approximately 15 ml/min, and 
this should be checked during a test by noting the time for 
200 ml of gas to collect in H. If there is any appreciable 
deviation from this rate, mercury in F should be raised or 
lowered until the correct speed is obtained. 


3 The set will function satisfactorily at a temperature 15 °C 
to 20 9C. Above this temperature the 'blanks' are likely to be 
high. 


4 If after a test the increase in colour of the solution in C is 
slight, a further test may be carried out using the same 
solution. 


5 After shutting off P, refilling H with water, and turning B 
to connect the supply to the atmosphere, the test cylinder is 
replaced by another cylinder and the procedure given in 
A- 2.2.5 repeated. 


6 When the set is not in use, C shall always be empty and 
isolated from the atmosphere and the gas pressure in D and 
E released by turning K so that the nitrogen bubbles through 
the reagents direct to the atmosphere. 


A-2.2.6 Calculation 
Oxygen, percent by volume = = x 100 


where 


y = figure on colour standard after passing the 
gas sample; 

x = figure on colour standard before passing the 
gas sample; and 

v = volume of gas passed, that is, 100 ml or 200 
ml. 


NOTE — A figure '8' on colour standard denotes 0.000 8 ml 
of oxygen. Thus, if 100 ml test gas causes a change from 
figure '8' to figure '12', then volume of oxygen = 0.001 2 — 
0.000 8 = 0.000 4 ml. Therefore, percentage of oxygen in 
gas 


= 2004 100 = 0.000 4. 


100 


A-2.3 Method 2 — Electrochemical Method 
A-2.3.1 General 


The procedure to be followed for determination of 
oxygen content shall depend on the type of analyser 
used. Manufacturer's instructions in this regard shall 
be followed. The method involving the use of Hersh 
Oxygen meter is described here. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


A-2.3.2 Principle 


The oxygen in the test gas reacts with the silver 
cathode in the galvanic cell contained in the 
apparatus to produce hydroxyl ions which oxidize 
metallic cadmium to cadmium hydroxide. This 
generates a current which flows in the external 
circuit consisting of a galvanometer connected 
across the electrodes. The magnitude of the current 
is a measure of the amount of oxygen in the gas. 


A-2.3.3 Apparatus — Hersch Oxygen Meter, or one 
of eguivalent accuracy. 


A-2.3.3.1 The apparatus consists of the following 
principal components: 


a) A flow regulating valve; 


b) Calibrating unit — consisting of a purifier 
containing manganous oxide which 
eliminates all oxygen in the test gas and a 
calibrator which adds a small 
predetermined amount of oxygen to the test 
gas, generated electrolytically by a 
controlled amount of current supplied by a 
voltage stabilized rectifier unit; and 


c) Cell assembly — consisting of a silver- 
cadmium galvanic cell containing 32 % 
potassium hydroxide solution as 
electrolyte. 


A-2.3.3.2 Calibration of the apparatus 


The procedures for calibration are briefly described 
below. Detailed instructions of the manufacturer 
shall be followed: 


a) Calibration for 0 ppm to 10 ppm by volume 
range: 

1) Turn the sensitivity knob fully 
clockwise before calibration. See that 
the flow selector valve is at ‘calibrate’ 
and the flow is adjusted to the 
appropriate setting for the gas being 
tested. Note the galvanometer reading 
obtained (cell zero blank). 

2) Turn the current control knob 
clockwise until the milliammeter reads 
‘2’, this represents an oxygen input of 
2 ppm by volume at the 0 to 10 range 
setting. 

3) The galvanometer pointer will start 
moving almost immediately and after 
a minute or two will settle down at a 
new reading. The difference between 
this reading and the cell zero blank 
represents the instrument's response at 
maximum sensitivity to a change in 
oxygen concentration of 2 ppm by 
volume. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


4) To adjust so that a change of 2 ppm 
response of two divisions on the 
galvanometer is registered, the 
sensitivity control of the 'meter XI' 
shall be operated to bring the 
galvanometer to a new reading 
calculated as under: 


New reading 


Reading at maximum sensitivity X 2 
~ Reading at maximum sensitivity — Zero blank 


Example: 
i) Assuming zero blank before adjustment = 
0.5 
ii) Reading at 2 ppm before adjustment = 4.5 
iii) Adjust reading at 2 ppm to aan — 2.25 


5) The zero blank reading at the reduced 
sensitivity will be 0.25 ppm. 

6) The instrument is now calibrated at a 
sensitivity of “one division eguals 
1 ppm’ and the zero blank of 0.25 
divisions will necessitate a deduction 
of 0.25 ppm from test readings. 

7) When calibration is completed, make 
sure that the calibrating current is 
turned back to zero. 


b) Calibration for 0 ppm to100 ppm by volume 
range 


1) For use with gas where the oxygen 
concentration is over 10 ppm, set the 
range switch, at “meter x 10’. The 
figures on the calibrating current 
ammeter will now represent 20 ppm, 
40 ppm, 60 ppm, 80 ppm and 100 ppm. 

2) As the response of the instrument is 
not completely linear over this range, 
the calibration shall be carried out by 
plotting a curve showing galvanometer 
readings against oxygen input. Plot 
four or five points, including zero '02'. 
The oxygen concentration of the gas, 
as shown by the galvanometer reading 
on 'Test' shall then be determined by 
reference to this curve. 

3) The cell zero blank and the instrument 
leak figure shall normally be ignored 
when using this range. 


A-2.3.4 Procedure 


Pass the test gas through the instrument at a flow rate 
of 22.5 l/h with the flow selector valve at purge for 
15 min. An inlet gas pressure of at least 
28.44 kg/cm? is necessary. If the pressure of the gas 
is lower than this value, compress the test gas by a 


booster pump so that pressure is raised to this value 
or even higher. 


Having calibrated the instrument with a traceable 
calibration standard gas as per the manufacturer's 
instruction, turn the flow selector valve to test and 
readjust the flow, if necessary. After about four 
minutes, read the scale. 


A-2.3.5 Calculation and Report 


The oxygen content as parts per million by volume 
is given directly by the linear scale of the instrument 
in the case of oxygen content being in the range of 
0 ppm to 10 ppm. If the oxygen content is above this 
range, it shall be obtained by reference to the curve 
prepared as in A-2.3.3.2 (b). From this value, deduct 
the 'zero blank' figure and the leak figure which is 
the leading obtained by using an oxygen free gas 
such as oxygen-free hydrogen. Report the oxygen 
content as percent by volume. 


A-2.4 Zirconia Based Oxygen Analyser 


Oxygen analyser based on zirconium oxide sensing 
element measures oxygen concentration in nearly all 
non combustible gases and gas mixtures in all 
proportions. It combines the advances of 
microprocessor technology with trusted cell design. 
This uses a stabilized Zirconia oxide tube, which 
when hot, acts as an oxygen concentration cell 
providing an emf proportional to oxygen according 
to the Nernst eguation. 


The procedure to be followed for determination of 
oxygen content shall depend on the type of analyser 
used. Manufacturer's instruction in this regard shall 
be followed. 


A-2.5 Gas Chromatograph 


A-2.5.1 Chromatography is a process of separation 
achieved by means of partition between stationary 
phase and a moving phase. A suitable synthetic 
Zeolite and suitable detector preferably Discharge 
Ionization Detector (DID) of High Freguency 
Discharge Detector (HFD) are used in the 
chromatograph. It should be capable of analyzing 
various impurities including oxygen in ppm. 


A-2.5.2 Procedure 


Calibrate the gas chromatograph with calibration 
gas of known composition by measuring the areas 
under various peaks of the chromatogram, following 
the instruction of the manufacturer. Carry out the 
test as per the instruction of manufacturer and 
compute the concentration of various impurities by 
comparing the peaks or the areas under peak with 
that of calibration gas. Carrier gas used should be 
ultra-high purity as the results obtained are relative 
to the impurities in carrier gas and are not absolute 
values. Hence zero impurity carrier gas should be 
used. 


A-3 DETERMINATION OF OXYGEN (FOR 
N 2.5 GRADE) 


A-3.1 Apparatus 


The assembly of apparatus shall be as shown in Fig. 
2 


A-3.2 Reagents 
A-3.2.1 Pyrogallol Solution 


Dissolve 350 g of pyrogallol in 1 000 ml of water. 
Keep the stock solution in amber coloured bottles. 


A-3.2.2 Potassium Hydroxide Solution 


Dissolve 1 000 g of potassium hydroxide in 1 000 
ml of water. 


NOTE — Alkali purified by alcohol should not be used 
since solutions evolve carbon monoxide. 


a 
RUBBER BAG COSTAINND. 
MTHOGEM TECHNOL AL 
4 
E GP U 
TO C 
INLET a b INLET A b 


POSITION 1 OF F 


POSITION 2 OF F 


IS 1747 : 2023 


A-3.3 Procedure 


A-3.3.1 Pour 140 ml of pyrogallol solution and 
100 ml of potassium hydroxide solution into 
woulfe's bottle A through its opening J. Immediately 
after introducing the solutions, close the opening 
with rubber stopper and shake the bottle to mix the 
solutions. Having charged bottle A with the 
solutions, fill measuring burette C with water by 
raising leveling bottle D, closing one way tap G and 
turning three way tap F, to position 2. When the 
water in the burette reaches the zero mark, turn three 
way tap F to position 1 and replace bottle D in set. 


A-33.1.1 The burette C shall be capable of 
measuring to an accuracy of 0.05 ml. 


WATER Lët mm 
JACKET 


mATUR JACET 


WV 


INiET a b 


POSITION 3 OF F 


FIG. 2 ASSEMBLY OF APPARATUS FOR THE DETERMINATION OF OXYGEN AND OTHER ACTIVE CONTAMINANTS 


IS 1747 : 2023 


A-3.3.2 Open one-way tap G and lower bottle D to 
draw the liguid into absorption pipette B from bottle 
A. When burette C becomes full gas, close one-way 
tap G and turn three-way tap F to position 2 and raise 
bottle D until burette C is full of water again. Turn 
three-way tap F to position 1 and repeat the 
foregoing operations until the level of the solution 
reaches mark L. Perfect control of the level may be 
obtained by raising or lowering bottle D slowly. 


A-3.3.3 Close tap G and finally expel any gas from 
burette C and turn tap F to position /. 


A-3.3.4 Connect the supply of gas to inlet of a three- 
way tap F, the tap being in position. 2, purge the inlet 
tube with the sample and then turn tap F to position 
2. Bring the level of water in bottle D in line with 
graduation mark 100 on burette C. Turn tap F to 
position 3 and raise water bottle D to expel all the 
gas to atmosphere. Again, turn tap F to position 2 
and lower water bottle D in line with graduation 
mark 100 on burette C. Repeat this process of 
purging burette C and the manifold connections up 
to G and F once again. 


A-3.3.5 Turn tap F to position 1 again. Allow water 
to drain down the sides of burette C and read the 


volume keeping water level same in burette C and 
bottle D. Open tap G and raise bottle D until burette 
C is just full of water. Close tap G, replace bottle D 
in set and leave gas to be tested in absorption pipette 
B for a few minutes so that oxygen and other active 
contaminants are absorbed from it. 


A-3.3.6 Open tap G and lower bottle D until the level 
of the solution again reaches mark L. To ensure 
complete absorption, raise the bottle again until 
burette C is full of water, close tap G, replace bottle 
D in set for another few minutes. Open tap G, and 
lower bottle D until the level of the solution again 
reaches mark L. Close tap G and finally allow water 
to drain in the burette C and read the volume of gas, 
keeping the water level same in C and D. 


A-3.3.7 Repeat the steps outlined in A-3.3.5 and 
A-3.3.6 until two consecutive readings agree. 
A-3.4 Calculation 


v-v 
v 


Oxygen, percent by volume = x 100 


where 
V = Initial volume of gas (see A-3.3.5), and 


Vı = volume of gas after absorption (see 
A-3.3.7). 


ANNEX B 
[Table 1, Sl No. (iii)] 


DETERMINATION OF HYDROGEN 


B-1 DETERMINATION OF HYDROGEN FOR 
GRADES 4.5, 5.0 AND 5.5 


B-1.1 General 


Two methods for the determination of hydrogen in 
pure grade nitrogen are described. Either of these 
may be used for general routine purposes, but in case 
of a dispute Method 1 shall be used. 


B-2 METHOD 1 
B-2.1 Principle 


The sample of gas is passed through a heated tube 
containing palladium chloride. The hydrogen in the 
gas reacts with palladium chloride to produce 
hydrochloric acid gas which is bubbled through 
water set at pH 9 to which an indicator is added. The 
time in minutes for successive changes of pH to 8.5, 
8.0 and 7.0 will, by reference to the calibration chart, 


give the hydrogen concentration for a test gas 
flow of 5 letre/h. 


B-2.2 Apparatus 


The assembly of apparatus shall be as shown in Fig. 
3. 


B-2.2.1 The test gas enters the apparatus at A. At 
stopcock B, the gas may be led either to bubbler C, 
which is merely a visual gas flow indicator, or on to 
stopcock D through which the gas passes through 
the bypass tube to stopcock E From E the gas passes 
through the drying tube G filled with activated 
alumina, the oxygen removing tube H filled with 
manganous oxide to the palladium chloride tube J, 
and then to the bubbler K, which contains indicator 
solution from reservoir N. The gas finally passes 
through a spray tap L containing glass wool to 
flowmeter M, and then to atmosphere. 


GE? 
ECK 


(kk? 


£ 


HG. 3 LAYOUT OF MODIFIED COLORIMETRIC HYDROGEN TESTING SET 


B-2.2.2 There are three furnaces or heaters in the set, 


each controlled by a suitable electrical device. They 
are as follows: 


a) Heater F at 250 °C is used to heat a copper 
oxide tube to obtain a hydrogen-free gas 
stream for blanking the set (to show that the 
set does not register hydrogen when none is 
present); 


b) Heater round the palladium chloride tube J; 
and 


c) Heater R which is used for regeneration of 
alumina and manganous oxide tubes. 


B-2.2.3 The indicator solution stored in N is 
rendered free from carbon dioxide by passing 
nitrogen in at $, through P (which is packed with 
soda asbestos or soda lime) and then through the 
indicator solution in N. Carbon dioxide trap 7 also 
contains soda asbestos or soda lime. Mercury tube Q 
is a safety device so that if nitrogen is turned on 
while X is shut or if P becomes blocked, there is an 
exit for the gas. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


B-2.3 Preparation of Apparatus 


Switch on all heaters and adjust voltage regulators 
to the following temperature: 


a) Palladium chloride heater: 190 °C to 200 °C; 
b) Copper oxide heater F: 240 °C to 260 °C; and 
c) Regenerator heater R: 250 °C to 280 °C. 


B-2.3.1 It may take some hours to find the correct 
setting for each. When these readings have been 
found they should be carefully noted. A further 
setting of 480 °C to 500 °C is required for the 
regenerator heater. 


Care should be taken that this does not exceed 
500 °C for the regenerator heater, otherwise 
softening of the glass of the manganous oxide tube 
may occur. These figures once found need only be 
checked at intervals of several weeks. The dial 
controlling the palladium chloride set temperature 
should not be altered once bet at 180 °C to 200 °C. 
The set should be switched off by a wall switch. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


B-2.3.2 Connect alumina tube G and manganous 
oxide tube H to the apparatus using red rubber 
pressure tubing and turn stopcock U so that the 
stopcock bore is in position 1 (Fig. 3), and both 
stopcocks on palladium chloride tube J are shut. 


B-2.3.3 Shut stopcock X, and pour 500 ml of water 
into reservoir N and add 6 ml of universal indicator. 
Connect a nitrogen supply to A and turn on slowly. 
When the nitrogen starts to bubble through the 
mercury in O, open stopcock X and remove T, and 
continue passage of nitrogen until the solution is 
yellow-green in colour, that is, pH is 7. When this 
point is reached, add 0.1 N barium hydroxide 
solution drop by drop to the reservoir until the 
solution is a blue colour, matching the solution pH 9 
in a 10 ml test tube. 


B-2.3.4 A cylinder of known hydrogen 
concentration is necessary. This cylinder should also 
contain a small amount of oxygen, and may be 
prepared by sucking a measured amount of 
hydrogen and oxygen into a evacuated cylinder of 
known capacity and filling with oxygen free argon 
or nitrogen. 


B-2.4 Reagents 
B-2.4.1 Activated Alumina — 2 ml to 1 mm size. 
B-2.4.1.1 Preparation of alumina for use 


Insert alumina tube in the regenerator heater and 
pass dry nitrogen or argon through it at 50 litres per 
hour for 2 h. Remove alumina tube, from both ends 
with rubber tubing and glass plugs, and leave to 
cool. Treat spare tube in the same way. 


B-2.4.2 Manganous Oxide — Granular, 850 micron 
to 425 micron. 


B-2.4.2.1 Preparation of manganous oxide for use 


Adjust regenerator heater R at 480 °C to 500 °C. 
Insert manganous oxide tube and pass a stream of 
hydrogen at about 20 litres per hour for 4 h to 5 h. 
The heater is then turned off and oxygen-free 
nitrogen or argon passed through the tube at about 3 
litres per hour while it cools. When removing after 
cooling, both ends arc sealed quickly with rubber 
tubing and glass plugs as the oxide now absorbs 
oxvgen rapidly from the atmosphere and become 
useless. The regenerated manganous oxide in the 
tube should be grey-green in colour and when only 
18 mm to 25 mm of the grey-green zone is left, the 
tube should be regenerated. The spare tube should 
be treated in the same way. 


B-2.4.3 Soda Asbestos — 10 micron to 1.14 mm 
size. 


B-2.4.4 Palladium Chloride 


The material needs treatment to obtain the correct 
granular size, as fine powder obstructs the gas flow. 


B-2.4.4.1 Dissolve palladium chloride in 
concentrated nitric acid and evaporate to dryness. 
Dissolve the residue in concentrated hydrochloric 
acid and evaporate to dryness again. Repeat with 
hydrochloric acid and then break up the residue into 
granular particles of size about 1.5 mm to 3 mm. The 
tube supplied should last for months, but as a 
precaution there should be a few spares. A fresh 
tube, when first used will give copious amounts of 
hydrogen chloride vapour before settling down to a 
satisfactory 'check' and 'blank'. 


B-2.4.5 Universal Indicator 
B-2.5 Procedure 


Switch on the wall switch (this will switch on 
palladium chloride heater) and adjust copper oxide 
heater dial for 250 9C. After one hour connect check 
cylinder to inlet at A and by turning B, pass gas 
through bubbler C. Adjust gas flow visually to about 
5 litres per hour. Turn stopcocks D and E to 
positions 1 and 2, respectively, and then turn B so 
that the gas passes through D, E G and U and out 
through bubbler V. This operation purges the oxygen 
from the alumina tube. This oxygen would 
considerably shorten the life of the manganous oxide 
tube. After 5 minutes, open both taps on palladium 
chloride tube J, and turn stopcock U through 90? 
anti-clockwise to position 3, so that the gas is now 
passing through G, H, J, K, L and M to atmosphere. 
This rate of flow should be adjusted to 5 litres per 
hour. (The upper mark on the flowmeter indicates 5 
litres per hour for argon and the lower mark for 
nitrogen.) 


Admit 10 ml of indicator solution to bubbler K 
slowly by means of stopcock W. If the solution is 
admitted too rapidly some of it may be forced up the 
gas tube which should not occur. The colour of the 
solution will probably turn to red-orange or green. 
Let the gas pass for 15 minutes to 20 minutes. 
Discharge the liguid and recharge several times, if 
necessary, until a good match with the pH 9 colour 
is obtained. Start stopwatch and note the time in 
minutes for colour change to pH 7. By reference to 
the calibration chart, the hydrogen content of the 
mixture may be obtained. If the colour change is 
slow, the time may be taken for pH 8 or 8 5. The 
hydrogen content obtained for the check cylinder 
should be within 2 ppm of the known figure. A low 
figure is usually explained by in complete removal 
of oxygen and a high figure by a high rate of gas 
flow. 


When a reasonable figure has been obtained, the 
copper oxide furnace should be switched into the 
circuit by turning stopcock D through 90° anti- 
clockwise to position 3, and stopcock E through 90° 
anticlockwise to position 4. (It is advisable when 
first using the copper oxide tube to blow the gas for 
ten minutes through V to atmosphere. While doing 


this, the stopcocks on the palladium chloride tube J 
should be shut.) A result of 1 ppm hydrogen or less 
should now be obtained. 


Repeat the procedure given in A-3.3 with the sample 
introduced at inlet A. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


B-3 METHOD 2 — BY 
CHROMATOGRAPHY (GC-MS) 


GAS 


Same a prescribed in A-2.5. 


ANNEX C 
[Table 1, SI No. (iv)] 


DETERMINATION OF CARBON DIOXIDE 


C1 DETERMINATION OF CARBON 
DIOXIDE FOR GRADES 4.5, 5.0 AND 5.5 


C-1.1 General 


Four methods for the determination of carbon 
dioxide in pure grade nitrogen are described. Either 
of these may be used for general routine purposes, 
but in case of a dispute chemical method shall be 
used. 


C-2 CHEMICAL METHOD 
C-2.1 Principle 


A known volume of the gas is passed through baryta 
solution, and the amount of carbon dioxide absorbed 
is estimated from the amount of baryta solution 
neutralized. 


C-2.2 Apparatus 


The apparatus consists of two spiral absorbers, R1 
and R2 placed in series, R2 being provided with 
soda lime tube as shown in Fig. 4. 


C-2.3 Reagents 
C-2.3.1 Standard Hydrochloric Acid — 0.02 N. 
C-2.3.2 Phenolphthalein Indicator 


Dissolve 0.50 g of phenolphthalein in 100 ml of 
rectified spirit (see IS 323). 


C-2.3.3 Barium Hydroxide Solution 


Dissolve about 4 g of barium hydroxide in 2 000 ml 
of water in a large flask. Close the flask and shake 
until the crystals have completely disappeared and a 
light, insoluble powder of barium carbonate 
remains. Allow the solution to stand for two days, 
until the barium carbonate has completely settled; 
siphon it into a bottle through which a current of air 


(free from carbon dioxide) has been passed for 2 h 
previously. Connect this bottle with a soda lime tube 
and with a burette as shown in Fig. 5. 


C-2.4 Procedure 


C-2.4.1 Take 25 ml of baryta solution in each 
absorber, R1 and R2, and add water to about half 
their height. Pass the gas through the spiral 
absorbers at the rate of about 5 litres per hour. 
Measure the rate of flow of the gas by a suitable 
device and record the temperature and atmospheric 
pressure at regular intervals. Pass 50 litres of gas, 
keeping the temperature and pressure of the gas 
constant. Titrate individually the baryta solution in 
both the absorbers with standard hydrochloric acid 
using phenolphthalein indicator and find out the 
total volume of standard hydrochloric acid used in 
the two titrations. 


C-2.4.2 Carry out a blank titration with an egual 
volume of baryta solution used in the two absorbers. 


C-2.5 Calculation 


Carbon dioxide, ppm by volume 


_ 623.97 (V,— Va)(273 + t)N 
~ P 


where 


Vi = volume of standard hydrochloric acid used 
for the blank titration of baryta solution, in 
ml. 

V2 = volume of standard hydrochloric acid used 
for baryta solution after absorbing carbon 
dioxide, in ml. 

t = average temperature, in °C. 

N =normality of standard hydrochloric acid. 

p = average pressure, in mm Hg. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


BOTTLE INTERNALLY 


COATED WITH PARZFF IN 


B em LONG VP 


FIG. 5 BOTTLE FOR STORING BARIUM HYDROXIDE SOLUTION 


C-3 GAS CHROMATOGRAM 


C-3.1 Chromatography is a process of separation 
achieved by means of partition between stationary 
phase and a moving phase. A suitable synthetic 
zeolite and suitable detector are used in the 
chromatograph. It should be capable of analyzing 
various impurities including CO» in ppm. 


C-3.2 Procedure 


Calibrate the gas chromatograph with calibration 
gas of known composition by measuring the areas 
under various peaks of the chromatogram, following 
the instruction of the manufacturer. Carry out the 
test as per the instruction of manufacturer and 
compute the concentration of various impurities by 
comparing the peaks or the areas under peak with 
that of calibration gas. Carrier gas used should be of 
ultra-high purity as the results obtained are relative 
to the impurities in carrier gas and are not absolute 
values. Hence, zero impurity carrier gas should be 
used. 


C-4 ELECTROCHEMICAL METHOD 


When a gas containing carbon dioxide passes 
through a reactive liguid, the electrical conductivity 
of the liguid changes depending on the carbon 
dioxide content. The measurement of the change in 


electrical conductivity gives direct measurement of 
the carbon dioxide content. The procedure to be 
followed shall depend upon the type of apparatus 
used. The instrument manufacturer instruction in 
this regard shall be followed. 


C-5 INFRARED ANALYSER 


Infrared analyzers are used for determining 
impurities of hetero atomic gases. Hetero atomic 
gases absorb energy at characteristic wavelength 
when subjected to infrared radiations. 


The measuring effect divided from absorption of 
infrared radiation is due to the gas being measured. 
The gas-specific wavelength of the absorption bands 
characterize the type of gas while the strength of the 
absorption gives a measure of the concentration of 
the component measured. Due to a rotational 
chopper wheel, the radiation intensities coming from 
measuring and reference side of the analysis cell 
produce periodically changing signals with detector. 


The detector signal amplitude thus alternates 
between concentration dependent and concentration 
independent values. The difference between the two 
is a reliable measure of the absorbing gas 
component. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
[Table 1, Sl No. (v)] 


DETERMINATION OF OTHER CARBON COMPOUNDS 


D-1 DETERMINATION OF OTHER CARBON 
COMPOUNDS FOR GRADES 4.5, 5.0 AND 5.5 


D-1.1 General 


Two methods for the determination of other Carbon 
Compounds in pure grade nitrogen are described. 
Either of these may be used for general routine 
purposes, but in case of a dispute Method 1 shall be 
used. 


D-2 METHOD 1 
D-2.1 Principle 


A sample of the gas is passed over activated copper 
oxide catalyst at 600 °C and the amount of carbon 
dioxide produced by the oxidation of hydrocarbons 
is titrated with standard barium hydroxide solution. 


D-2.2 Apparatus 


The apparatus is the same as that used for the 
determination of carbon dioxide (C-2.2) with an 
additional furnace placed before the absorbers. This 
furnace holds the tube containing the activated 
catalyst. 


D-2.3 Reagents 
D-2.3.1 Activated Copper Oxide (Arneil) Catalyst 
This special catalyst is prepared as follows: 


Grind together 99 percent by weight of copper oxide 
with one percent of ferric oxide. When the mixture 
is well ground and intimately mixed, add to eighty 
parts by weight of the mixture twenty parts of finely 
ground kaolin, mix the whole well to a stiff paste 
with water and sgueeze it through a tube to form 
threads. Dry the threads, break them to convenient 
length, and fire them at a temperature not exceeding 
600 °C. Pack them into the reaction tubes so that the 
whole tube is full of catalyst. To regenerate the 
catalyst, circulate air through them at their working 
temperatures, higher temperatures shall not be used. 


D-2.3.2 Standard Barium Hydroxide Solution — 
0.05 N. 


D-2.3.3 Standard Hydrochloric Acid — 0.002 N. 
D-2.4 Procedure 


D-2.4.1 Pass the gas sample through the soda 
asbestos tube on the inlet side at the rate of 3 litres 
to 5 litres per hour to absorb the free carbon dioxide 
from the sample. The gas then passes through the 
tube containing the catalyst which is heated to 


600 9C in an electric furnace. The combustion 
products then pass into the spiral bubblers in series 
each containing standard barium hydroxide solution. 
Measure the volume of the gas passed with a suitable 
meter placed in series. The actual gas sample that 
has to be passed through the apparatus depends upon 
the amount of carbonaceous compounds present in 
the original sample. Generally, for an accurate 
estimation, 50 litres of the gas are reguired. When 
the reguired volume of the gas sample has been 
passed, titrate the excess barium hydroxide solution 
in the bubbler for removing free carbon dioxide with 
standard hydrochloric acid and calculate the amount 
of free carbon dioxide. Titrate the excess barium 
hydroxide in the bubblers for absorbing the 
combustion products with standard hydrochloric 
acid. The carbonaceous matter shall be expressed as 
carbon dioxide. 


D-2.4.2 Carry out a blank titration on 25 ml of the 
standard barium hydroxide solution. 


D-2.5 Calculation 


Other carbon compounds (excluding free carbon 


dioxide) expressed as carbon dioxide, parts per 
311.98 (Vi —V2)(273-Ft)N 


million by volume = 
V XP 


where 


Vi = volume of standard hydrochloric acid used 
for the blank titration of baryta solution, in 
ml. 


V> = volume of standard hydrochloric acid used 
for baryta solution after absorbing carbon 
dioxide, in ml. 


t = average temperature in °C. 

N = normality of the standard hydrochloric acid. 
V = volume of gas passed, in 1, and 

p = average pressure, in mm of mercury. 


NOTES 


1 When the apparatus is first assembled, pass pure 
oxygen through the catalyst tube at 600 °C until a 
satisfactory blank of few parts per million is obtained. 


2 The apparatus should be checked occasionally with 
pure nitrogen containing a known amount of methane. 


D-3 METHOD 2 — GAS CHROMATOGRAM 
METHOD 


As prescribed in C-3. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
[Table 1, SI No. (vi)] 


DETERMINATION OF CARBON MONOXIDE 


E-1 DETERMINATION OF CARBON 
MONOXIDE FOR GRADES 4.5, 5.0 AND 5.5 


E-1.1 General 


Four methods for the determination of carbon 
monoxide in pure grade nitrogen are described. 
Either of these may be used for general routine 
purposes, but in case of a dispute chemical method 
shall be used. 


E-2 CHEMICAL METHOD 
E-2.1 Principle 


Carbon monoxide, if present in the test gas, reacts 
with palladium sulphite adsorbed on silica gel in the 
indicator tube and produces a blue-grey colour. 


E-2.2 Apparatus 
E-2.2.1 Indicator Tubes 


These tubes are obtainable from suppliers of 
scientific apparatus. 


E-2.2.2 The assembly of the apparatus consists of an 
inlet for the gas through a T-piece to a test-tube, then 
to a bubbler containing water which is connected to 
the indicator tube. The outlet of the indicator tube is 
connected to another bubbler containing water and 
then the gas escapes to atmosphere. 


E-2.3 Procedure 


E-2.3.1 Pour water in the first bubbler so that bottom 
of the glass tube dipping in it is covered by 75 mm 
of water. Introduce sufficient water in to the two 
bubblers so that the bottoms of the inlet tubes are 
covered by 12 mm of water. 


E-2.3.2 Connect the cylinder to be tested to T-piece 
with a piece of rubber tubing and adjust the gas flow 
so that the gas is bubbling freely up through the 
water in the test-tube. Observe that the gas is 
flowing through bubblers at equal rates. 
Immediately before the test, remove the indicator 
tube from the sealed envelope and connect between 
two bubblers. Allow gas to flow through the 
apparatus for 4 min. Compare the colour of the 
granules in the indicator tube with those in a sealed 
unused indicator lube. Absence of a brown ring or 
change of colour of the granules in the indicator tube 
indicates absence of carbon monoxide in the gas 
sample. 


E-3 GAS CHROMA TOGRAM 

As prescribed in C-3. 

E-4 ELECTRO CHEMICAL METHOD 
As prescribed in C-4. 

E-5 INFRA RED ANALYSER 

As prescribed in C-5. 


ANNEX F 


[Table 1, SI No. (vii)] 


DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE 


F-1 DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE FOR 
GRADES 4.5, 5.0 AND 5.5 


F-1.1 General 


Four methods for the determination of moisture in 
pure grade nitrogen are described. Either of these 
may be used for general routine purposes, but in case 
of a dispute Dew Formation Method shall be used. 


F-2 DEW FORMATION METHOD 
F-2.1 Principle 


Nitrogen at a fixed pressure of 21.0 kg/cm? is passed 
over a polished surface which is maintained at a 
desired temperature. When the dew point is reached, 
a film of moisture or ice will be formed on the 
polished surface which sets as an opague screen and 
a definite image of the lighted filament which is 


focused on the surface becomes visible in the 
viewing device. The temperature at which a film of 
moisture is just formed (the dew point) under the 
experimental conditions is a measure of the moisture 
content. 


F-2.2 Apparatus — Air Ministry hygrometer or a 
similar one of eguivalent accuracy. 


F-2.2.1 The essential features of the instrument are 
an electric supply system, an optical system and a 
liguid oxygen supply system. The assembly of the 
Air Ministry Hygrometer is illustrated in Fig. 6. 


F-2.2.2 The manufacturer's instructions for handling 
the instrument shall be closely followed 
Hygrometers having a built in photoelectric device 
to indicate the formation of a film of moisture may 
also be conveniently used. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


TEST GAS NLET 


6A 


CYLINDER PRESSURE GAUGE | Cc 
TEST PRESSURE GAUGE 
LIQUID PRESSURE x) 
N INLET ——— 
UNION COUPLI 
| FLOWMETER- 
e — 
19mm DEEP 
TEST GAS AT 260 kg/cm? PRESSURE 
7 
EJ Agen? 
D 4 POLISHED SURFACE — fn AT 
GLASS WINDOW 
@ Dua 
? — RUBBER TUBING 
A 
6% SAFETY VALVE 
s all 


HR TEST GAS INLET 


6B 


FIG. 6 AIR MINISTRY HYGROMETER 


IS 1747 : 2023 


F-2.3 Procedure 
F-2.3.1 Conditioning of the Optical System 


F-2.3.1.1 Remove the rubber bung from the orifice 
on top of apparatus and insert the unsharpened end 
of a lead pencil, 10 cm long, until the bottom of 
mercury chamber is reached. Release pressure on 
pencil and if the chamber contains any mercury, the 
pencil will rise and float on the surface of the liguid. 
The vertical movement of the pencil should be 
approximately 18 mm. If it is less than this, mercury 
should be added until the necessary height is 
obtained. 


F-2.3.1.2 When the correct amount of mercury has 
been added, insert the thermometer and metal case 
through the rubber bung supplied (with central hole) 
until the thermometer bulb rests in the mercury on 
the bottom of the compartment. The bulb should 
project below the sheath supplied with the 
thermometer. When these instructions have been 
complied with, make sure that all the three panel 
valves A, B and C in Fig. 6A, are shut and connect a 
750 litres tested and certified cylinder to high 
pressure inlet on the left hand side of the set by 
means of the long adaptor supplied with the set and 
high pressure connecting tube. 


F-2.3.1.3 Open the cylinder valve fully with care 
and remedy the leaky joints. Open valve A slowly 
and adjust, if necessary, regulator D so that a 
pressure of 21.0 kg/cm? is indicated on test pressure 
gauge. The cylinder pressure will now be indicated 
on the cylinder pressure gauge. If the apparatus is in 
a satisfactory condition, no leaks will be observed, 
but attention should be given to some of the joints 
and to the safety valve at the back of the set which 
may have to be adjusted until it just functions at 120 
atm. The safety valve on the pressure regulator may 
also reguire adjustment so that it does not blow 
below a pressure of 21.0 kg/cm?. Shut A and slowly 
open B until pressure in the apparatus falls to 
atmospheric, carefully noting that rate of flow as 
shown by flowmeter does not exceed 15 lpm 
Following these adjustments, it is necessary to purge 
the set free from moisture. Close the cylinder valve 
and slowly open A to vent the pressure in the 
connection. 


F-2.3.1.4 Then fully open both A and B very 
carefully, open the cylinder valve sufficiently to 
cause the flowmeter pointer to move 6 mm to 12 mm 
from its zero position. If gross contamination is 
absent the set is conditioned in a few min. 


F-2.3.1.5 The valve of a cylinder to be tested should 
be momentarily opened and then closed to blow out 
any moist air in the neck before coupling the 
cylinder to the high pressure connecting tube. Open 
valves A and fully and repeat the moisture purging 
operation described in F-2.3.1.1. Screw the adaptor 
into a 10 litres liquid oxygen vessel, making gas 


tight joint with the rubber washer supplied. Connect 
the liquid outlet tube (that is the tube reaching into 
the liquid in vessel) by rubber tubing to the liquid 
inlet valve on set using the adaptor supplied. This 
connection should be as short as possible and lagged 
with asbestos rope. The gas inlet of the adaptor on 
the liquid oxygen vessel should be connected by the 
special safety rubber tubing to a 2.8 m? oxygen 
cylinder by means of a low pressure regulator set to 
a pressure of 0.70 kg/cm?. When the valve on the 
regulator on oxygen gas cylinder is opened slightly, 
gas passes from this cylinder and the pressure of the 
gas on the liguid oxygen in the vessel forces the 
liguid oxygen through the cooling coil in the 
apparatus when valve C (Fig. 6B) is opened. Open 
valve C fully so that the temperature falls to 27 °C. 
This may be done in approximately 5 min. Valve C 
is then checked to maintain the temperature while A 
is closed momentarily to allow the cylinder valve to 
be opened more fully. A is then progressively 
opened until the flowmeter registers slightly more 
than the test rate of 15 litres (about 5 mm beyond the 
mark), then slowly close B until the test pressure 
gauge to the right registers 21.0 kg/cm’, and the 
cylinder pressure gauge rises but does not exceed 30 
atm. If these figures are not attained simultaneously, 
valves A and B are suitably adjusted. It is possible 
that regulator D may reguire re-adjustment to attain 
the 21.0 kg/cm? test pressure. It should be turned 
clockwise to increase the pressure. View the image 
of the lamp filament through the sight box. Allow 
the temperature to rise or go down by adjusting the 
valve C. As soon as an image becomes brighter than 
a faint image, the temperature shall be noted. Repeat 
by raising the temperature and then cooling again 
slowly. 


Note the temperature of return of the bright image. 
Approach the same dew point from cooler side also 
and note the temperature at which a bright image 
becomes faint. 


F-2.4 Calculation and Report 


From the chart supplied, calculate the moisture 
content corresponding to the dew-point obtained by 
averaging all readings Report the moisture content 
in grams per cubic meter. 


F-3 COMPRESSION METHOD 
F-3.1 Principle 


A gas at atmospheric pressure is compressed and the 
pressure suddenly released, to cool the gas to the 
lower temperature. When the compression and 
expansion take place under adiabatic conditions, that 
is, without gain or loss of the original heat, the lower 
temperature upon expansion may be calculated by 
formula, provided the temperature and pressure 
before expansion are known. 


F-3.2 Apparatus 
F-3.2.1 Adiabatic Dew-Point Meter 
It consists essentially of the following components: 


a) A sensitive thermometer; 

b) Observation window; 

c) Pressure ratio gauge — It gives direct reading 
of the ratio of pressure of atmosphere and 
observation chamber; 

d) Double acting type pump — It keeps dry gas 
on both sides of the piston; 

e) Operating valve — When depressed, it allows 
the gas sample to expand rapidly and 
switches on the lamp simultaneously, 
illuminating the mist chamber; and 

f) Purging valve — It blows out all the air out of 


the apparatus before the test. 


F-3.2.2 Dew-Point Calculator 


A disc type calculator which converts the pressure 
ratios to dew-points on celsius scale. 


F-3.3 Procedure 


Connect the source of gas or air to the inlet on the 
front panel of the dew-point meter and open the 
purging valve. Draw the gas through the instrument 
by means of its hand pump until the air originally 
present in it is purged. Close the purging valve and 
draw a sample of the gas into the instrument and 
compress the pump to a pressure above that of 
atmosphere. A pressure ratio gauge indicates the 
amount of compression and the temperature of the 
gas is read from the thermometer on the panel. Then 
release the pressure suddenly by depressing guickly 
the operating valve and watch the observation 


IS 1747 : 2023 


window of the expansion chamber for the 
appearance of mist. To enable the mist to be seen 
clearly a lamp below the chamber lights up 
simultaneously with the depression of the valve. If 
no mist appears repeat the test at slightly higher 
compression until mist is seen. Note the pressure 
ratio at this point. Repeat the test. 


F-3.4 Calculation and Report 


Average the readings and calculate the dew-point 
from the dew-point calculator. The moisture content 
is calculated from a standard chart. 


F-4 ELECTROLYTIC HYGROMETER 


The instrument is based on the absorption and 
electrolysis of the water vapour present in the 
sample gas. The electrolysis current gives a direct 
measurement of the water vapour present in the gas 
flowing through the instrument at a steady rate. The 
procedure to be followed for determining the 
moisture content shall depend on the type of 
apparatus to be used. The manufacturer instructions 
in this regards shall be followed. 


F-5 CAPACITANCE HYGROMETER 


The instrument is based on the change of 
capacitance of the sensor when a sample gas 
containing water vapour passes through it. The 
change in capacitance gives a direct measurement of 
water vapour present in the gas. The procedure to be 
followed for determining the moisture content shall 
depend on the type of apparatus to be used. The 
manufacturer instructions in this regards shall be 
followed. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


ANNEX G 
(Clause 7) 


SAMPLING OF NITROGEN 


G-1 SCALE OF SAMPLING 
G-1.1 Lot 


In any consignment, all cylinders prepared and 
filled/charged together during one work-shift from 
one charging manifold from one source shall be 
grouped together to constitute a lot/batch. In case of 
liquid nitrogen, every tanker/liquid cylinder will be 
a batch. 


G-1.2 The number (n) of cylinders to be selected 
from each lot/batch shall depend on the lot size (N) 
and shall be obtained from col 2 of Table 2 for the 
corresponding lot size in col 1. 


Table 2 Number of Cylinders to be Selected 
(Clause G-1.2) 


SI No. Lot Size Sample Size 

N n 

(1) (2) (3) 

i) Up to 25 3 

ii) 26 to 50 5 

iii) 51 to 100 8 

iv) 101 to 150 15 

v) 151 to 300 20 

vi) 301 and above 25 


These cylinders shall be selected at random. To 
ensure the randomness of selection, a random 
number table as agreed to between the purchaser and 
the supplier shall be used (see also IS 4905). In case 
such a table is not available, the following procedure 
shall be adopted: 


Starting from any cylinder in the lot, count them as 
1, 2, 3...etc, up to r and so on in one order, where r 
is the integral part of N/n. Every r™ cylinder thus 
counted shall be withdrawn. 


G-2 TEST SAMPLES 


One sample of gas shall be drawn from each cylinder 
selected as in G-1.2 and shall be the individual test 
sample from each cylinder. 


G-3 NUMBER OF TESTS 


All the individual test samples from each lot 
prepared as in G-2 shall be tested separately for all 
the requirements given in Table 1. 


G-4 CRITERION FOR CONFORMITY 


A lot shall be declared as conforming to the 
requirements of this specification if all the 
individual test results satisfy the relevant 
requirements given in Table 1. 


IS 1747 : 2023 


ANNEX H 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
INDUSTRIAL GASES SECTIONAL COMMETTEE, CHD 06 


Organization 


CSIR - National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


Air Liguide, New Delhi 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New 
Delhi 


Automobile Research Association of India, Pune 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 
Department of Electronics, New Delhi 


Department of Promotion for Industry and Internal Trade, 
New Delhi 


Directorate General Ouality Assurance, Kanpur 


Efftectech Gases, Mumbai 
Esteem Gases 


Inox Air Products, Gujarat 
Indian Oil Corporation(R&D), Faridabad 


Linde India Ltd., Kolkata 
Mohan Meakin Limited, Ghaziabad 


National Fertilizers Limited, Panipat 


National Physical Laboratory, Delhi 


Petroleum and Safety Explosives Organization, Nagpur 
Praxair India Private Limited, Bangalore 

Reliance Industries Limited, Surat 

SICGIL India Limited, Chennai 

Steel Authority of India Limited, Bhilai 


Vanaz Engineers Limited, Pune 


Representative(s) 


DR CHHEMENDRA SHARMA (Chairperson) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI NAVNEET KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


DR S. S. THIPSE 


DRD. K. DAS 
DR AMRIT PRAKASH (Alternate) 
SHRI S K SHARMA 


DR U. C. PANDEY 


SHRI SHAISH KUMAR 
SHRI N. C. TIWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI B. B. SAHO 
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI PADMAKAR TILLU 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 


SHRI ARABINDA ADHIKARI 

SHRI R. L. PARTANI (Alternate) 
DR A. S. SARPAL 

DR S. K. RAY (Alternate) 
SHRI PRASENJIT CHAKRABARTI 


DR E. K. JAYANARAYANAN 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR SINGH 
SHRI T. L. SINGH (Alternate) 
DR SHANKAR G. AGGARWAL 


SHRI SRINIVASA RAO KETA 

DR JEEVRATHINAM D. (Alternate) 
SHRI ARINDAM DAS 

MS ALKA PANDYA (Alternate) 
SHRI SHASHANK GOEL 

SHRI KAMAL J PARIKH (Alternate) 

SHRI RUGSHAD DADABHOY 

SHRI S. MANOJ KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI AJAY KUMAR 

SHRI MADAN KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI S. J. VISPUTE 

SHRI A. S. LATKE (Alternate) 


IS 1747 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 
Welding Research Institute, Trichy DR B. SHANMUGARAJAN 
K. GANESH KUMAR (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST “F'/SENIOR DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL 
(Ex-officio)] 
Member Secretary 
BUNTY MUDI 


SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(CHEMICAL), BIS 


20 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enguiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 06 (18840). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headguarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central ` : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern ` : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


