**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10686 (1983) : Mechanical Multi-disc Clutches (Wet Type) 
[PGD 31: Bolts, Nuts and Fasteners Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621838 227 



IS : 10686- 1983 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 




SPECIFICATION FOR 

MECHANICAL MULTI-DISC CLUTCHES 

( WET TYPE ) 



1. Scope — Covers the general requirements of the multi-disc ( wet type ) clutches of metallic friction 
inter-face used in power transmission of machinery. 

2. Nomenclature — The nomenclature of certain essential parts shall be as given in Fig. 1 and 2. 

OUTER CLUTCH PLATES INNER CLUTCH PLATES 

RELEASE SPRING / / ADJU STING DISC 

NUT(ADJUSTING) 



PRESSURE PLATE 



LEVER 




SHIFTER 

PULLEY 

(SLIDER) 



CLUTCH 
PROPER 



FIG. 1 MECHANICAL MULTI-DISC CLUTCHES, SINGLE ACTING 

3. Terminology 

3.1 Clutch Friction Inter-Faces —The clutch friction elements like internal and external clutch plates. 

3.2 Slider — A ring collar which is used to shift and operate the clutches. 

3.3 Adjusting Nut — A ring nut provided on the clutch to adjust normal pressure between clutch plates. 

3.4 Lever— A pivoted lever used to transmit force from the slider to the clutch plates. 

3.5 Hub — The body of clutch on which inner clutch plates, levers, adjusting nut and sliders are 
mounted. Hub also receives one of the drive or driven shaft of the machinery. 



Adopted 25 October 1983 



March 1984 t ISI 



Gr 2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 10686-1983 



PRESSURE 
PLATE 



OUTER CLUTCH PLATES ]NNER CLUTCH PLATES 

ADJUSTING DISC 

NUT (ADJUSTING) 
LEVER 



SHIFTER PULLEY(SLIDER) 



RELEASE 
SPRING 




{/////, '"<"< , < ;/ / i////f Z Z 







FIG. 2 MECHANICAL MULTI-DISC CLUTCHES, DOUBLE ACTING 

3.6 Outer Housing — An element which will engage the outer clutch plates and drive or driven shaft. 

3.7 Static Friction Torque — A maximum torque that is transmissible from the driving side to the driven 
side, when the clutch is completely engaged. 

3.8 Dynamic Friction Torque — A torque that is transmissible from the driving side to the driven side, in 
a slipping state at certain relative velocity, when the clutch is engaged. 

3.9 Drag Torque — A torque that is transmissible from the driving side to the driven side, when the clutch 
runs idle. 

3.10 Thrust ( Engaging) Force — A force to move the shifter pulley in axial direction to give surface 
pressures on the inner and outer discs. 

4. Types — Clutch is classified in following two basic types. 

4.1 Single Acting — A single acting clutch implies a single clutch unit which shall be used to engage or 
disengage only one drive. 

4.2 Double Acting — A double acting clutch implies two clutch units so designed as to engage either to 
one or other drive by means of common operation. The double acting clutch may also have a neutral 
position where both the drives are disengaged simultaneously. This latter requirement shall be agreed 
upon between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

5. Material — The type of material to be used for the clutch shall be decided by the manufacturer 
in agreement with the purchaser so as to withstand the service conditions and for reasonably long service 
life. One of the pair of the clutch plate may be made, if required, from phosphor — bronze while the other 
shall be made of steel. In the absence of such requirements, the manufacturer, at his discretion, may 
use steel as material for both the pairs of the plates. 

6. Dimensions and Tolerances — The dimensions and the tolerances of individual parts of the clutch 
and the unit as a whole shall be to the discretion of the manufacturer and shall be so selected as to give 
satisfactory performance. The bore in the clutch hub may be a nominal pilot bore without the keyway. 
However, the bore shall be concentric with the other part of the clutch so that it may be used as a 
reference bore at the time of opening it out to the matching dimension needed at the time of assembly 
of the clutch to the mating component of the drive. 

7. General Design — Clutch shall be of multi-disc design where friction element shall consist of number 
of pairs of inner and outer clutch plates. The inner clutch plates shall have internal lugs or spline to 



IS : 10686 - 1983 

engage in hub of the clutch. The outer plate of the pair shall have either external lugs or suitable 
involute teeth to engage with the outer housing. Design of the outer housing of the clutch does not 
form the scope of this standard as it depends upon the specific requirement of the application. The 
clutch shall be engaged by shifting a slider which will apply pressure on the clutch plates through 
a set of levers. The pressure on the plates shall create sufficient frictional force to engage the clutch 
without slip. 

7.1 Typicai designs of the dutches are shown in the Fig. i and 2 for illustrative purposes. 

8, Workmanship and Finish — The clutch shall be free from external flaws, cracks, rust and other 

defects and shall be well finished. 

9. Methods of Testing — Shali be as given in Appendix A. 

io s Marking —The type, name of the manufacturer or trade-mark ( if any), serial number of the unit 
shall be suitably indicated on the visible part of the clutch. 

10.1 ISI Certification Marking — Details available with the Indian Standards institution. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 9 ) 

METHODS OF TESTING OF MULTI-DISC CLUTCHES (WET TYPE) 

A-1. Static Torque Test — Install the clutch between the drive and the driven shaft. Apply the 
brake on the driven shaft so that it is effectively locked. Fix lever of sufficient length on the driven 
shaft. Apply torque on the driven shaft by applying force on the lever. Measure the force required to 
make the clutch just slip. Force multiplied by the distance between the point of application of force to 
the centre of the shaft is mechanical static friction torque of the clutch. 

A-2. Dynamic Torque Test — Install the clutch between drive and driven shaft. Engage the clutch. 
Rotate the driven shaft at the rate between 100-200 rev/min by means of a pony brake arrangement or 
dynamometer load the drive shaft of the clutch. Increase the loading on the pony brake or the 
dynamometer till the driven shaft continuously slips. Torque indicated on the pony-brake or 
dynamometer is the dynamic friction torque. 

A«3. Engaging Force — Measure the maximum force required to shift the slider so as to engage the 
clutch to transmit the rated torque. 

A-4- Drag Torque Test— install the clutch between the drive and driven shaft and disengage the 
clutch. Apply few drops of lubricating oil as specified by the manufacturer, rotate the drive part of the 
c j u tch at 1 000 rev/min and lock the driven part of the clutch by means of loaded brake lever arm applied 
on the driven part ( arrangement similar to that for static torque test) (see A-1 ). The load on the arm 
should be reduced in stages till the arm is just about to rotate. Torque shall be determined by knowing 
the force applied multiplied by the iever arm distance. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The mechanical multi-disc clutches ( wet type ) are used in machine tools and many other 
machines as power transmission device. Their use is increasing with the expansion of industrialization 
in the country and sophistication of machinery and machine tools It is, therefore, felt that a suitable 
standard need be formulated to take care of the standardization and quality of the product. 

This standard covers only multi-disc ( wet type ) clutch with a metallic friction inter-face. It does 
not cover non-metallic organic friction inter-faces. The construction of the clutch is based on mufti- 
discs as friction elements and are operated in presence of light lubricating oil. Therefore, the standard 
does not cover dry type of clutches. 

In formulating this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from JIS B 1401-1976 
1 Mechanical muhiple disc clutches ( wet type) 1 published by Japanese Industrial Standards Committee, 

3 



Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi, India 



