**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11539 (1986) : Method of vertical load test for glass 
containers [CHD 10: Glassware] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621 798-146/-147[ 666-17]: 620-17 18:11539-1989 




Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

METHOD OF 
VERTICAL LOAD TEST FOR GLASS CONTAINERS 



CD 



1. Scope — Specifies method for determination of resistance of glass containers to external force in 
tfie direction of the axis. The pass tests are intended especially for containers the resistance of which 
is specified. 

2« SamplinQ 

2>1 The test shall be performed on a predetermined number of containers. 

2.2 The containers used for the test shall not have been subjected to any other mechanical or thermal 
test which could affect their resistance to vertical load. 

3, Apparatus — The apparatus shall consist of the following. 

3.1 Press, or other suitable equipment, with the following characteristics. 

3.1.1 The apparatus shall be capable of developing the necessary force and indicating this force by 
means of a pointer or recording device to an accuracy of at least 2*5 percent. 

3.1.2 The apparatus shall consist of two horizontal flat steel pressure plates. The upper plate shall 
be self-aligning and the lower one shall be provided with centering marks on its surface. 

3.1.3 The apparatus shall be equipped with a protective cover, or each type of test container shall be 
be provided with a sufficiently firm cylinderical cover suitable for its height which isslightly lower than 
the height of the test sample, 

3.2 Pads consisting of cardboard or several sheets of paper, to prevent glass-to-metal contact under 
load. 

4. Procedure 

4.1 The temperature of the sample shall not differ by more than 5" C from the ambient. 

4.2 Cushion the container using pad (see 3.2). 

4.3 Place closures on the test containers, if this is specified for the test. 

4.4 Th9 lower plate of the press ( see Z-A ) shall be clean, especially of glass particles. Position the 
base pad ( see 3.2), with the test container placed on it, in the centre of the lower plate. The centre 
line of the container shall be in line with that of the apparatus. 

4.5 Secure the container using the protective cover and, at the same time, place the corresponding 
closure on the sealing surface of the container finish. The test container shall be covered with a pad 
similar to the pad situated under it unless a closure is used. 

Note 1 — The use ol the corresponding closures is suitable, especiaMy v«'hen meta! closures with a sealing 
layer are used. In these cases, screw and bayonet closures shall be locked manually. 

Note 2 — Where either paper or a closure is used, new upper and lower pads shall always be used for 
testing each container. 

4.6 The approach speed or the average rate of increase in the force should be constant and shall be 
reported. 

4.7 The following procedures are carried out according to the type and the purpose of the test. 

4.7.1 Pass resf- Increase the force applied to the specified valve. When the specified value is 
achieved, the plates shall be withdrawn. After testing a predetermined number of the container, the 
test is complete. 

4.7.2 Total Progressive Test — Increase the force applied progressively until the container breaks. 
The test shall be applied to all containers in the test series. 



Adopted 2 January 1986 



O June 1986, ISI 



Gr 1 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH 2AFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 11539 -198C 

5. Test Report — The test report shall include the following: 

a) Reference to this standard; 

b) Description and the capacity of the apparatus, and the test conditions according to 4.4; 

c) Description and the number of containers in the sample tested and the sampling method; 

d) Mention of the upper and lower pads applied or closure, if used; 

e) The approach speed or the average rate of increase in the force; and 

f) Results according to the type and the purpose of the test: 

1) For the pass test, in accordance with 4.7,1: 
i) the force achieved ( loading ), and 

ii) the number of containers which failed the test. 

2) For the total progressive test, in accordance with 4.7.2: 

i) force, expressed in kilonewtons, needed to break each container; 
ii) mean value of these values, x; and 
iii) standard deviation, s. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

Glass bottles normally carried in crates or cartons are subjected to axial compressive forces 
during stacking and transportation. The bottles also experience pressure at the time of capping and it 
has been found that the bottles sometimes break, in case they are not properly shaped. If a bottle is 
not properly shaped then some parts of the bottle surface are severely stretched which leads to 
breakage due to tension anywhere reaches the limiting value. In order that the breakage of bottle, 
does not occur during capping in service due to non-axial loading, the test has been devised. No 
specific values have been specified in the standard and the same will be specified in the product 
specification. 

The standard is based on ISO 8113-1985 'Glass containers — Resistance to vertical load — Test 
method*, issued by International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ). 



Printed at Arcee Prftss, Now D«lhl, IndiQ 



