IS 15399:2003

Indian Standard HARDWARE FOR COMPUTERS IN THE SAFETY SYSTEM OF NUCLEAR AND RADIATION FACILITIES

ICS 27.120.20

0 BIS 2003

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

(Ictober

2003

Price Group 7

Nuclear Instrumentation

Sectional Committee,

LTD 26

FOREWORD This Inclian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, atler the draft finalized by the Nuclear instrumentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. Computer systems are extensively used for on line monitoring of the reactor core against blockage of coolant flow, on line power regulation, fuel handling operation, supervision of process parameters against safety thresholds, event sequence analysis, measurement of radiation level, etc. This standard gives the principles for the utilization of digital systems hardware for systems important to safety. This includes multiprocessor distributed systems and large-scale central processor systems constructed from off-the-shelf items or from newly developed hardware. [t lays down requirements specific to the hardware of digital systems. For specific requirements for computer software and common areas of hardware and software, IS 15398 :2003 `Software for computers in the safety systems of nuclear and radiation facilities' is applicable. For modules used in the design of a specific safety system application, relevant and auditable operating experience from nuclear or other applications as described in combination with quality assurance programmed of high reliability may be an acceptable method of qualification. This standard may also be useful as a guide for other computer systems requiring real time applications. This standard is based on IEC 987 (1989) `Programmed digital computers stations' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation important to safety for nuclear power

of this standard is given in Annex E.

IS 15399:2003

Indian Standard HARDWARE FOR COMPUTERS IN THE SAFETY SYSTEM OF NUCLEAR AND RADIATION FACILITIES
1 SCOPE
1.1 This standard is applicable to computer systems hardware for systems important to safety used in nuclear Facilities. It is, therefore, applicable to safety systems and in general to safety-related systems. b) Sof~are-- A basic part of a programme. leads

3.5 Design -- The theoretical work which towards a system requirements specification.

1.2 The requirements specified are applicable but not restricted to the following items of such systems, down to the component level:
a) External power supplies to the computer system; b) Internal architecture; c) Input/Output equipment means; and interfaces;

3.6 Development -- The experimental test demonstration work which is intended to prove the success of any parts of the design whose performance cannot be ensured by theoretical work alone. 3.7 Diversity-- The existence of different means of performing a required function (for example, other physical principles, other ways of solving the same task). 3.8 Guaranteed Power Supply -- A power supply for the computer system which is designed to be able to provide satisfactory electrical supplies normally, during loss of electrical generator on the station, and during loss of connection of the station to the electrical distribution network or grid which it serves. 3.9 Integration Tests -- Tests performed during the hardware/software integration process prior to computer system validation to verifi compatibility of the software and the computer system hardware. 3.10 Maintainability -- The probability that a given active maintenance action to an item under given conditions of use can be carried out within a stated time interval when the maintenance is performed under stated conditions and using stated procedures and resources. 3.11 Maintenance -- The combination of all technical and administrative actions, including supervision actions, intended to retain an item in, or restore it to, a state in which it can perform a required fimction. 3.12 Module -- Any assembly of interconnected components which constitutes an identifiable device, instrument or piece of equipment. A module can be removed as a unit and replaced with a spare. It has definable performance characteristics which permit it to be tested as a unit. A module could be a card, a draw out circuit breaker or any other sub-assembly of a larger device, provided it meets the requirements of this definition. 3.13 Qualified Life -- The period of time for which satisfacto~ performance can be verified for a specified set of operating conditions. 3.14 Redundancy -- The provision elements of alternative

d) Data transmission

e) Storage devices; and o Test devices to prove continued correct operation as far as any Failure of these devices leads to failure of the computer system. 2 REFERENCES The standards given in Annex A are necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS the following

3.0 For the purpose of this standard, definitions shall apply:

3.1 Availability -� The ability of an item to be in a
state to perform a required function under given conditions at a given instant of time or over a given time interval, assuming that the required external resources are provided. 3.2 Computer-- A programmable timctional unit that consists of one or more associated processing units and peripheral equipment, that is controlled by internally stored programmed and that can perform substantial computation, including numerous arithmetic operations or logic operations, without human intervention during a run. 3.3 Computer System -- A system consisting of one or more computers (comprising hardware as well as software) collectively forming a functional unit of an instrumentation and control system. 3.4 Component a) Hardware -- Items from which the system is assembled (for example, integrated circuits, resistors, capacitors, wires, connectors, transistors, switches, etc.) 1

(identical

or diverse)

so that any one can

1S 15399:2003
perform the required function regardless of the state of operation or failure of any other. 3.15 Reliability -- The probability that a failure which causes deviation from the required output by more than specified tolerances, in a specific environment, does n-et occur during a specified exposure period. 3.16 Single Failure -- A random failure, which results in the loss of capability of a component to perform its intended safety function. Consequential failures resutting from a single random occurrence are considered to be part of the single failure. 3.16."1 Single Failure Criterion -- A criterion applied to a system such that it is capable of performing its safety task in the presence of any single failure. 3.17 Software -- Programmed, procedures, rules and any associated documentation pertaining to the operation of a computer system. 3.18 Sub-system -- A division of a system that in itself has the characteristics of a system. 3.19 System -- A set of interconnected elements constituted to achieve a given objective by performing a specified function. 3.20 Validation -- The test and evaluation of the integrated computer system (hardware and software) to ensure compliance with the functional, performance and interface requirements. 3.21 Verification -- The process of determining whether or not the product of each phase of the digital computer system development process fulfills all the requirements imposed by the previous phase. presence of a limited number of hardware or software faults. 3.28 Graceful Degradation -- Stepwise reduction of system functions in response to detected failures while essential functions are maintained. 3.29 Initialize-- To set counters, switches, addresses, or contents of storage devices to zero or other starting values at the beginning of, or at prescribed points in the operation of a computer programme. 3.30 Procedure--A portion of a computer programme which is named and which performs a specific task. 3.31 Software -- Programmed, procedures, rules and any associated documentation pertaining to the operation of a computer system. 3.32 Software Life Cycle -- The period of time that starts when a software product is conceived and ends when the product is no longer available for use. The software life cycle typically includes a requirements phase, design phase, implementation phase, test.phase, installation and check-out phase, operation and maintenance phase. 3.33 Software Modification -- Changes of already agreed documents leading to a change to the executable code or its data. 3.34 Software Modularity -- The sofiware attribute that provides a structure of highly independent computer programme units that are discrete and identifiable with respect to translating, testing and combining with other units. 4 PROJECT 4.1 General 4.1.1 Any project will normally be divided up into a number of phases. Each phase is to some extent selfcontained but will depend on other phases and will, in its turn, be depended on by others. These phases are informally recognizable by the specif]c activities pertinent to them. For applications important to safety, these phases shall be formalized and none of the identified phases shall be omitted. Some hardware and software phases may be performed simultaneously. Formalized procedures shall be defined to regulate the feedback between phases. 4.1.2 Project management documentation shall be provided to define the project sub-division so that the project can be run in a controlled manner with evolutions recorded and monitored. A quality assurance plan shall be applied. 4.2 Project Sub-division The following general factors determine the activities in implementing a project: a) The whole system life cycle (see Annex B) shall be considered. 2 STRUCTURE

Application Programme-- A computer 3.22 programme that performs a task related to the process being controlled rather than the functioning of the computer itself.
3.23 Code Compaction -- The purposeful reduction in memory size required for a computer programme by the elimination of redundant or extraneous instructions.

Programmed A set of ordered 3.24 Computer instructions and data that specify operations in a form suitable for execution by a digital computer.
3.25 Data -- A representation instructions in a formalized communication, interpretation computer. of facts, concepts or manner suitable for or processing by a

3.26 Defence in Depth -- Provision of multiple levels of protection for ensuring safety of workers, the public or the environment. 3.27 Fault Tolerance -- The built-in capability of a system to provide continued correct execution in the

IS 15399:2003
b) Each phase of the system life cycle shall be divided into elementary tasks with a well defined activity for each of them. c) Hardware products to be introduced into a phase shall be checked, verified and tested as appropriate before incorporation. d) Adequate means (spare parts, devices for test or maintenance) and accommodation (laboratories, workshops, space, etc) shall be provided to carry out the tasks of each phase. e) Each phase shall include appropriate documents. generation of the e) Document control;

f) Control of purchase material and services; d Identification and control of material;
h) Inspection; j) Control of test equipment; k) Control of handling/storage/shipping; m) Inspection and testing status; n) Monitoring actions; of non-conformance and corrective

P) Production of quality assurance records; q) Audits; and r) Environmental 5 HARDWARE qualification conformance.

f) Each phase shall be terminated `by verification (see 7). g) Every verification step shall result in a report on the analysis performed, the conclusions reached and any necessary changes decided. This report shall be included in the documentation. h) The time schedule of the project shall be laid down with regard to: I ) facilitating feedback between hardware and software phases; 2) providing sufficient time for documentation, testing, verification, maintenance and quality assurance; and of

REQUIREMENTS

5.1 General 5.1.1 The hardware requirements shall be derived from the requirements of the systems important to safety and form part of the computer system specification. The computer system specification is a ~escription of the combined hardware/software system and states the objectives and functions assigned to the computer system.
5.1.2 The hardware requirements shall be described in the hardware requirements specification,

3) giving a means for the recognition difficulties which arise unexpectedly.

5.1.3 The hardware requirements specification of the hardware documentation (see 14.2).

is part

4.3'* Quality Assurance 4.3.1 A hardware quality assurance plan shall exist as a part of the quality assurance plan for the computer system. It should include requirements for hardware which already has undergone a quality assurance procedure as well as for new hardware. The hardware quality assurance plan is closely connected to the licensing procedures. All activities during the computer lifetime executed by the plant operator, owner, contractors and sub-contractors shall be included.
This includes the following phases:

5.1.4 Hardware requirements shall be presented according to a standard whose formality shall not preclude readability.
5.1.5 The requirements shall be unambiguous, verifiable and achievable. testable,

5.1.6 The hardware requirements specification shall be structured to give as an introduction, an overview of hardware requirements with a list of reference documents and the edition to be used and to identify the hardware functions important to safety. 5.1.7 The hardware functional and performance requirements, the reliability, the environmental and documentation requirements form the hardware requirements.

a) Design and development, b) Procurement, c) Manufacturing, and commissioning, and

d) Construction e) Operation

and maintenance.

4.3.2 The quality assurance plan shall describe the organization, management and execution of quality assurance orientated activities including: a) Specifications c) Procurement control; control; procedures, drawings; 3 b) Design and design changes control; d) Control of instructions,

5.1.8 The hardware facilities for programme and data loading and checking as well as verification during start up and normal operation do not form an intrinsic part of the computer system required for continuous operation. The reliability requirements of 5.2 for these facilities may be different from those of the computer system. 5.1.9 The hardware requirements for computer systems include requirements which are applicable to hardware in general and requirements which are applicable to computer system hardware only.

IS 15399:2003 5.1.10 Thehardware requirements describe theproduct, not the project. The hardware requirements shall describe what has to be done and not how it has to be done. That is, the functions to be performed are described, rather than the means of implementation.
5.2 Functional and Performance include but are not restricted to the definition OE a) Data acquisition rate;

b) Data handling capability; c) Computation . d) Computation and data transmission and conversion speed;

Requirements

accuracy;

e) Noise rejection;

5.2.1 The hardware

functional and performance requirements are derived from the functional and performance requirements of the systems important to safety. They shall be the result of a first design phase at system level allowing: a) Definition of the overall architecture of the computer system and its division into subsystems which fulfil the necessary functions; Definition of the structural sub-systems; and distribution of the require-

f) Response time; and g) Irrationality check for input signal.

The performance requirements for the design of subsystems shall be selected on the basis of the levels mentioned in 5.2.5. 5.2.7 The hardware functional and performance requirements and mutual constraints between hardware and software shall be checked for feasibility and for the allowance of installed spare capacity, at an early phase of the project, to avoid the need for later changes. 5.3 Reliability Requirements

b)

c) Assignment of hardware performance ments to these sub-systems.

5.2.2 The hardware functional and performance requirements, combined with the software requirements, shall be checked for compliance with the requirements for the systems important to safety. 5.2.3 AI I parts of the system, down to the component level, which contain built-in programmed shall be identified and the functions and programmed of those parts shall be appropriately specified in accordance with 7 of IS 15398. 5.2.4 The hardware functional requirements shall include, but are not restricted to, the definition ofi a ) Purpose of the computer each sub-system; system hardware and

5.3.1 The hardware reliability requirements represent an expansion of the reliability requirements of the systems important to safety. They shall include a description of the types of failure which have to be tolerated without loss or with a defined and limited loss of function. In this context, the term reliability is applied to the safety of the plant and its operational availability.
5.3.2 No single random hardware failure shall prevent directly or indirectly the safety actions of the safety systems. 5.3.3 To support the system level safety analysis, an analysis of failures shall be made during design. Proper consideration for the potentiaI for common-mode or common cause failures shall be included in this analysis. 5.3.3.1 Reliability and safety assessment shall begin as soon as the design starts. The methods which can be used for this purpose are: a) Fault-tree analysis, which is concerned with the identification and analysis of conditions and factors which cause or contribute to the occurrence of a defined undesirable event. b) Failure mode effects analysis, which identities failures which have significant consequences affecting the system performance, for example, reliability, safety, availability [see "IS 11137 (Part 2)]. 5.3.3.2 It is-noted that a safety analysis at the system level (hardware and software) can be done through an extension of the fault-tree analysis method. Special consideration shall be given to the effects of safety analysis document shall be generated for peer review: a) Failure in memories; 4

b) Structure of the computer system hardware; c) Number and type of sensors and actuators to be connected to the computer system; d) Characteristics of signals, such as, range, type, details needed for conversion from electrical range to physical range; and e) Number and type of devices for the man/machine interface, such as, displays, printers and keyboards. 5.2.5 The hardware functional requirements shall clearly define the level at which a sub-system is to be integrated into the system. This definition shall identify for the sub-system, the relevant cabinet, frame, printed circuit board and integrated circuits. The design requirements will be selected on the basis of these levels (SW 6). Each component or sub-system delivered by a supplier and which is to be integrated into the system shall be accompanied by a complete specification. 5.2.6 The hardware performance requirements shall

IS 15399:2003
b) Power failure and subsequent adaptation procedure; re-start and and specify the requirements for methods or provisions by which the appropriate maintenance activities and targets are achieved. These methods may include in-service accessibility, modularity, fault traceability to replaceable units, fault indicators, logging and evaluation of operation and fault history. The hardware maintainability requirements shall be defined using as a background the reliability requirements of the nuclear power station. 5.4 Environmental

c) Failures of sub-systems which share a bus or other resources with other sub-system and defined actions during such occurrences; d) Electromagnet ic interference;

e) Nuclear radiation; and f) Deviation from specified ambient condition. Any changes shown to be necessary fornuclear shall be implemented. safety

s.3.4 Strategies and provisions to assure reliability over the whole lifetime of the computer system shall be defined. These measures shall be laid down as maintenance requirements, which form part of the reliability requirements. They shall include requirements a) Maintenance b) Replacement components; c) Revalidation; . d) Facilitating actions; of sub-systems, and backfitting. modules and for:

Requirements

5.4.1 The hardware environmental

requirements shall include location, climatic, seismic, chemical, electrical and radiation conditions where the computer system is operated. Special consideration shall be given to the environment before and during installation and startup. 5.4.2 The electrical environment in which the computer is located maybe affected by-a wide variety of electrical interference sources, for example, switchgear, contractors, relays, walkie-talkies, electrostatic discharges, lightning, earth faults. 5.4.3 The degree of immunity to magnetic, electrical and electromagnetic interference shall be specified and tested according to suitable Indian Standards chosen from IS 14700 series. 5.4.4 The test severity levels for sub-systems shall be selected in accordance with the most realistic installation and environmental conditions. 5.4.5 The hardware requirements shall include any environmental conditions imposed on the choice of part types, special materials to be used or particular types of production processes and testing strategies. 5.5 Documentation

5.3.s In order to meet the reliability requirements, the computer system shall supervise itself by software means. For self-supervision, see 5.7 and A-2.8 of IS 15398 are applicable. Failures which cannot be made self-annunciating by these tests s!lall be identified and methods specified by which the failures will be detected. Hardware features necessary to support the design and performance of self-check may include: a) Error detection/correction c) Instruction devices for memories;

Requirements

b) Error detection devices for busses; repetition on wror detection; with protection of parts level in d) Runtime supervision; e) Memory management of the memory; 5.5.1 The hardware documentation requirements are part of the documentation requirements of the computer systems. They shall define the documentation to be produced with the product and shall include agreed procedures: a) to identify parts of the documentation itself and ensure that the documentation is kept up to date; b) to identifi signals and components of the system; c) for the description safety; of functions important to

on the component 9 Redundancy connection with voting logic; and g) Provision for access control to system.

5.3.6 The required reliability of the system and the sub-systems shall be clas~ified according to its importance to safety. S.3.7 The system shall be designed to allow maintenance activities to be carried out at ease or without affecting the operation of other healthy systems. The hardware requirements should give figures for the major maintenance parameters (such as, mean time to repair, maintainability, and mean time to revalidate) 5

d) for the description of functions in the operators' manuals and in the maintenance manuals; e) to describe contents and boundaries of functional units (modules); f) to modify documentation; and g) to carry out routine and preventive maintenance check lists.

IS 15399:2003 5.5.1.1 The computer system configuration shall be described using as a background, the reliability I-cquirements of the system and the environment, since reliability properties and system configuration are closely connected. 5.5.1.2 The interface between the computer system and any other systems either within or outside the nuclear plant, wherever a direct connection exists or is planned, shall be identified and documented, indicating the specific interfaces and related hardware requirements. 5.5. I.3 The constraints which the hardware and software impose on each other shall be described. 5.5.1.4 The constraints on the hardware of any special operating conditions shall be described (see 5.7 and A-2.7 oflS 15398). 5.5.1.5 System acceptance to user shall be prepared. 6 DESIGN 6.1 General documents for transferring qualified (see Annex B of IS 15398) and that its scope conforms to the design requirements. NOTE-- Inthis context, built-in programmedare the computer
programmed that are an inherent part of the computer equipment for the operation of the computer or for generic application functions, while application programmed are computer programmed that are unique to tbe specific application. Built-in programmed, together with application programmed, form the whole set of computer programmed.

6.2 Design Activities 6.2.1 All the characteristics of the performance of the system which are defined in the hardware requirements shall be analysed and stated in the design documentation and evidence shall be made available to show that the design has at least the performance characteristics listed. Such characteristics include accuracy, time response, cycle time environmental conditions, electrical supply requirements and characteristics of input signal, such as, range, noise, type, etc. 6.2.2 Anything affecting the compliance with the hardware requirements shall be brought to the attention of those responsible for the hardware requirements. 6.2.3 The designers shall carry out and record such tests as are necessary to show that the required performance has been achieved. For further testing of the integrated system, 8.5 of IS 15398 is applicable. 6.2.4 The designers shall specify the maintenance activities needed to meet the performance and reliability requirements. This may cover operational tests, calibration, repair, replacement periodicity and procedures. 6.2.5 Evidence shall be made available to show that the specified qualified life will be achieved. 6.3 Reliability Criteria Estimates shall be made of the reliability of sub-systems, modules and components which may affect nuclear safety and shall be compared with the corresponding hardware reliability requirements to identify and correct deficiencies. 6.3.1 Redundancy and diversity should be used to meet the required reliability. Fault tolerant units at the lowest level possible should be preferred. 6.3.2 When redundancy or diversity is used, the design shall provide adequate independence of systems and sub-system and shall aim to achieve least common mode failures. For example, power supplies should be from different sources and physical separation should guard against the effects of fire. A policy of obtaining components from more than one supplier may be applied. 6.3.3 6 The design shall provide facilities which make

AND DEVELOPMENT

6.1.1 This clause is applicable to system, sub-system and module levels as appropriate. Design and development are interactive with one another and shall conform to the hardware requirements specification.
6.1.2 Design and development starts ffom the hardware requirements specification, goes through stages of different levels of detail and ends with a definition of a product which has been shown to meet the hardware requirements specification. During each stage, the activities follow the same framework (see Annex B). 6.1.3 The more general level of design activity is the preliminary design, which consists of the analysis of different design alternatives in order to define the hardware system architecture in terms of sub-systems and modules. 6.1.4 Preliminary design is followed by one or more detailed design levels. The detailed design activity expands the preliminary design to contain more detailed descriptions on thesub-system, module and component levels to the extent that the design description is sufficiently complete to be implemented. 6.1.5 It is usual to build a set of prototype hardware, not only to demonstrate successful interaction between modules, but also to enable both hardware and software to be operated together in order to demonstrate their compatibility. 6.1.6 In some cases, off-the-shelf available equipment (for example, hardware with b.uih-in programmed and implementation tools) may exist for the development and design of the system or parts of it. In this case, evidence shall be provided that this equipment is

,

IS 15399:2003 maintenance easy as far as is compatible with reliability goals. For example, fault annunciation, fault diagnostic features, simple module replacement and in-the-field testing capabilities should be provided. 6.4 Interfaces The detailed design documentation of each level includes the detailed design of the components defined at that level and the hardware requirements for components of lower level. Documents for manufacturing, installation, commissioning, maintenance and operation shall be available at the end of detailed design. They need not include all manufacturing instructions but they shall include all manufacturing, maintenance and operating information which is important to meeting the hardware requirements specification. 6.8.1 Preliminary Description

6.4.1 No systems of lower safety relevance shall be allowed to influence the performance of a system of higher safety relevance. It shall be demonstrated in particular that no hardware and no software failure of the system of lower safety relevance can, for example, destroy data or increase cycle times of the system of higher safety relevance.
6.4.2 The design should be made to be compatible with other systems used on the same plant. The system shall also be protected against damage or malfunction as a result of failure in the systems or features of the systems with which it shares an interface. This applies also to the user interface. 6.5 Modification The design shall be capable of being modified to meet changed functional requirements within the spare capacity specified, according to national regulations or company practice, or to overcome design faults (See 12). 6.6 Power Failure The computer system shall be made as insensitive as possible to the consequences of short-term power failures of the guaranteed power supply. Means shall be provided for operators and maintenance staff to be made aware of such power failures. Non-volatile, nonerasable or read-only memories are preferred as is automatic programme reloading where appropriate. Design should ensure that safety critical thresholds, processing routines, passwords, major keywords, etc., are not affected during power failures. 6.7 Component

The preliminary description defines the hardware architecture, that is the structure and relationship between the parts of the system. It includes the general layout of hardware with block diagrams of sub-systems and modules of lower level. It includes also hardware requirements for the detailed design, such as: a) Number and types of central processor units and other processors; b) Number, types and capacities of memories; c) Number and types of interfaces; and d) Number and types of data links and busses. 6.8.2 Final Description At the conclusion of the design and development of the hardware system, a final description shall be available that conveys both the design details down to the lower level and the requirements, design principles, capabilities, limitations and other characteristics of the hardware. The corresponding documents shall include: of the and

a) An overview defining the boundaries hardware to be described in detail. to the system b) Cross-reference software descriptions. design

Selecticm

The characteristics of the components used in the design which are important to its function shall be specified. The components shall be available to an appropriate quality standard. Components should be chosen from a Iist of preferred components. The quality of new components or new assembly techniques to be used shall be investigated and proven by following applicable/relevant qualified test methods. 6.8 Design Documentation The hardware design documentation describes the hardware system and the method by which the implementation will meet the hardware requirements specification. The hardware description, including preliminary and final description shall be produced by the designers. Standardized forms of documentation and automated design tools should be preferred. 7

of the system in terms of c) The sub-division physical sub-systems. Each sub-system is described in terms of its major modules and components. d) The sub-system and module structure (block diagrams, circuit diagrams at gate level). interfaces. Interfaces are e) The sub-system described as appropriate in logical, physical electrical or other terms. f) The computer system interfaces, interfaces with any other systems either within or outside the nuclear plant, wherever a direct connection exists or is planned, shall be identified showing the specific interfaces and related hardware requirements. layout. A description g) The physical diagrams of the physical layout equipment should be provided. with of the

IS 15399:2003 h) Qualification data (see 8). shall determine verification. the need for additional

j) The approach to reliability and safety. This should describe how the requirements for system reliability and fail-safe properties are fulfilled by the hardware. 7 VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION

7.2 -Independence of Verification Individuals verification involved in verification individuals or groups who perform the design shall be independent from those who are the design activity. Persons involved with may be from the same organization as the responsible for the design:

The design and development process shall include formal checks that the hardware at each phase of design and development meets the requirements imposed by the previous phase. In order to ensure maximum efficiency, verification shall be applied from the beginning of the hardware development programme and not during the testing phase alone. The amount of verification performed will depend upon the importance of the system to plant safety and the effects of system failure. For example, hardware used in safety systems should have a more stringent verification programme than that used in safety-related systems. The hardware verification phase starts with verification of the hardware design requirements against the system performance requirements and ends when the appl icat ion software is integrated with the hardware. For verification requirements for the hardware/sof,ware integration phase of system development, see 8.5 of 1S 15398. The design of hardware modules may also be subjected to formal verification process by soft simulation technique using tools like multisun, P-spice and HDL modules etc. 7.1 Verification

a) The skills of verification personnel shall be similar to the skills of the people who carried out the design. b) Communications between the design and verification personnel shall be formally documented to allow traceability of the verification activities. c) The persons responsible for verification shall determine and document the level of verification to be performed. 7.3 Methods Critical reviews, audits, analysis, tests or a combination of these methods may be used to provide design verification. The basis for the choice of verification method to be used shall be documented with enough detail to allow auditing by personnel who are not directly involved in the design or verification activities. a) The choice of verification consider the following: method should

1) The safety-related classification of the system (safety system or safety-related system); 2) Reviews and tests performed as part of the normal design and quality control processes with documentation available to support verification;

Plan

A formal verification plan shall be prepared by the verification personnel to document the approach used to verify the hardware design and to control the verification process. The plan shall be prepared prior to initiating verification actions. The plan should document the verification organization structure, verification methods to be used, level of verification to be performed, schedules and other significant project activities related to verification. a) Verification should be performed in parallel with the design process in order that errors may be detected and corrected as soon as possible. b) Formal verification actions shall not take place until the design or part of it is released for verification by the design personnel. Once released for verification, the design and related documentation shall be maintained under formal change control. This should be compatible with 8 and 9 of IS 15398. c) After release for verification, all changes to the design shall be submitted to the verification personnel for review. The verification personnel 8

3) Previous verification activities performed on similar hardware or systems; 4) System size, maturity and complexity; and

5) Data which may be available from other sources such as quality assurance or environmental qualification processes. b) Verification personnel shall choose the test tools and instruments to be used in the verification programme. Appropriate tools and methods shall be provided for the testing of subsystems and electronic components to ensure that they can be thoroughly tested. Automatic test tools should be used to provide for reproducibility and documentation of tast results, and to reduce the probability of human errors during the test. c) Test instruments or test tools used in the verification or testing process shall be calibrated and appropriately validated. A record

IS 15399:2003 shall be made to show that valid calibrations are in effect at the same time as the device is used. 7.4 Documentation All verification activities shall be formally documented with sufficient detail to allow auditing by persons not directly involved in the development and verification program me. This includes documentation of the verification programme plan, requirements, test procedures, test results, results of a review of design changes and any discrepancies which are discovered during the hardware verification process. a ) Test procedures should be clearly written, provide step-by-step instructions for hardware verification and should contain detailed information of the test set-up. b) Test procedures shall contain unambiguous pass/ fail criteria. c) Test procedures be documented documentation. 7.5 Discrepancies Discrepancies found during the verification process shall be formally documented and transmitted to the design personnel for resolution. The response of the design personnel shall be formally documented to provide a traceable path to assure that all discrepancies are responded to and all deficiencies are corrected. 7.6 Changes and Modifications implemented by software shall and integrated in the test ) MANUFACTURE rhe sub-systems, modules and components to be used n the computer system include off-the-shelf products md dedicated hardware products built in accordance with the final documents. 4.2 of IS 15398 is applicable :0 quality assurance for both classes. 10 INSTALLATION AND COMMISSIONING

10.1 Packing, handling, transport, storage and unpacking shall be such as to prevent any damage to the system.
10.2 Before-the system is unpacked and installed, the environment in which the system is to be installed shall be verified to conform to the hardware environmental requirements of 5.4. 10.3 Adequate procedures and information shall be available to enable the system to be installed, cabled and wired in accordance with the design requirements, in particular with regard to the earthing requirements, identification of items of equipment shall form part of this information. For this purpose, a quality plan shall be applied. The system shall be installed, cabled, tested and set to work in accordance with defined procedures.

10.4 The proper working of the system at site shall be checked by planned and specified commissioning tests. A commissioning test plan, consisting of acceptance criteria, test cases and test environments, shall be established.
For each sub-system, tests shall be carried demonstrate its correct function. out to

Once successfully completed, verification is not required to be repeated as long as the computer system requirements are not changed. For changes to the verified design 7.1 (c) is applicable. Modified parts should be identified in accordance with the specified quality control procedures. 7.7 Installation Verification shall be in

a) Any defect due to design errors or any change to improve the system performance shall be recorded, A formal procedure according to 11, shall be used to control the necessary changes. b) Any defect due to manufacturing errors shall be recorded. Defective parts shall be replaced only by new parts which have undergone factory testing. The manufacturing process and the factory testing shall be investigated and changed, if necessary to avoid further delivery of defective parts. c) Any defect due to errors in installation, cabling or wiring shall be corrected and recorded.

Verification of correct system installation accordance with 10. 7.8 Validation

Testing shall be performed to validate the software and hardware as a system which complies with the requirements of the systems important to safety to be satisfied by the computer system. For this validation, 9 of IS 15398 is applicable. 8 QUALIFICATI"ON The computer system hardware shall be qualified according to a suitable national or international standard. Qualification may be achieved at a number of phases during development. An outline of qualification is given in Annex C. 9

10.5 The immunity of the computel system to electromagnetic interference shatl be tested in the final in-stalled conditions.
The tests shall be performed in accordance with suitable Indian Standards chosen from IS 14700 series. The severity level of electromagnetic interference shall be chosen such that it conforms to the worst conditions to whichthe system may be subjected.

IS 15399:2003 10.6 On the completion of installation and commissionin~, it is necessary to carry out the process of acceptance before the system is transferred to the user. 11 MAINTENANCE [Hardware maintenance comprises: within specified intervals maintenance instructions. e) Only spares qualified according used. according to

to 7 shall be

o Replacement
11.2 Failure

parts in general as well as modified replacement parts s~all be identifiable above component level. Data

a ) Tests, checks and calibration which may be either periodic within specified maximum intervals or after replacement, exchange, overhaul and repair (revalidation); b) Maintenance, such as, is required to maintain the computer hardware in good working order, replacement ofexpendables and the preventative exchange and overhaul of equipment, sub-units, parts and components; and c) Repairs, the restoration of the operability failed equipment, sub-units and parts. 11.1 Maintenance of

Consideration Shall be given-to the derivation of failure data statistics from the equipment repair records. Failure data acquisition during equipment operation constitutes a major source of information which can be used to improve: a) Component reliability data knowledge by taking into account real operating environment conditions; b) Equipment reliability evaluations by determining actual field failure data and by observing availability in operating conditions; and c) Maintenance policy through better spare parts optimization, preventative maintenance schedules and maintenance personnel requirements. Accordingly, field failure data should be logged in a failure data bank using information available from maintenance reports. The maintenance reports shall contain:

Requirements

shall be specified and a ) A formal procedure applied to control the execution and the documentation of maintenance (see Annex D). This shall take into account: 1) Organizational maintenance operation; and preparations if the activities affect plant

2) Operational preparations of the systems important to safety and of p!ant components. b) Maintenance shall be undertaken by qualified and authorized personnel only. It shall be recorded according to a specified procedure. The procedure shall make provision for personal certification by an authorized person that each task has been completed satisfactorily. Other relevant information, such as, time and date, replacements fitted, etc, shall also be recorded. National or customer authorization documentation practice should be followed. c) Maintenance work shall be subject to audits.

a) Equipment identification; b) Description of fault; c) Reference to eventual problem report; d) Date of intervention; e) Intervention duration;

f) Failure component identification with eventual primary failed component (origin of a cascade of component failures); !3) Component h) Component age; localization; and

d) Satisfactory operation in service depends upon the application of controls to ensure that parts are replaced after a period of time not longer than the qualified life and that the replacement parts are of a quality appropriate to their duty. The suppliers of components, modules, subsystems and the systems in total shall be shown to intend to continue to provide such replacement. Spare parts shall be kept in a store whose atmosphere is controlled with regard to temperature, hum idity, gases and particles. The store shall be constructed in such a way that the effects of tire on the spare parts are minimized. The shelf life of spare parts shall be controlled

j) Failure circumstances

and failure effects.

NOTE-- Suitable standards chosen from 1S7354 series and IS 9692 series may be used to provide a methodology for
reliability measurements.

11.3 Maintenance Documentation
Instructions for maintenance shall be provided in written form by means of procedures, manuals, handbooks, etc. Maintenance documents shall describe maintenance policy for the type of hardware components which are checked and when they are re-checked or substituted [see 1I. I(e)].

10

IS 15399:2003
Maintenance documents shall describe the way in which failure of each specific module of the system is made apparent and diagnosed. Maintenance that is: documents shall describe repair policy, acceptance shall follow a formal procedure. Depending on the kid of modification, it may be necessary to return to the detail design phase or even to the system level. 13 OPERATION 13.1 `In addition to the requirements of 11.of IS 15398, the following requirements are applicable to the operation of the computer system. A method of controlling the authorization of manuals, procedures and personnel shall be applied in accordance with national regulations and practice. 13.2 Operating procedures shall include activities to be followed in circumstances not explicitly provided for in order to bring these situations to the attention of an authorized person or group.of persons to determine what is to be done. 13.3 Any decision to deviate from an authorized procedure shall be made only by an authorized person or group of persons, and shall be comprehensively documented. 13.4 The requirements operating procedures. of 11.3 shall apply to the

a) the methods of repair or substitution of different sub-systems, modules and components; b) the restrictions to which the system is subjected during repair time (for example, the system or parts of the system which shall be switched off); and c) the extent to which the system revalidated after a repair. shall be

In addition to the procedures for scheduled periodic maintenance, procedures shall be provided to be used for cases where anomalous system behaviour leads to suspicion of failure or design error. 12 MODIFICATION Hardware modification may be required to correct defective performance or to cater to new or revised performance requirements. Any change necessary to fulfil additional or changed requirements shall be brought to the attention of those responsible for the hardware requirements. 12.1 Hardware changes made during design shall be controlled by a formal procedure. The procedure should be compatible with the procedure used to control software changes and should ensure that the modified parts are identified in accordance with the specified quality control procedure.

12.2 A formal procedure shall be used to control design and hardware changes to the original approved design or test intent. The procedure should be compatible with 8 and 10 of IS 15398 as well as with the procedure used to control software design changes. 12.3 The effect of the modification on the software shall be examined according to 10.3.3 of IS !5398.
12,4 The changed hardware shall be shown to meet the hardware/software integration requirements specification clause. 12.5 The changed hardware shall be shown to meet the hardware requirements as per 5. 12.6 For the verification of changed hardware, 7.1(c) and 7.4 are applicable. In cases where the verification personnel for the original design are not available, the requirements of 7.2 with regard to the verification personnel shall be met accordingly. 12.7 Modifications after commissioning and

13.5 All persons classed as authorized persons shall be properly trained before authorization and a formal certification system applied. A system of periodic retraining and re-certification may be provided if it is possible for the original certification to be in doubt, for example, following a temporary assignment to a different kind of work or major changes to the installed equipment. The term authorized persons is used in this connection to describe all who are specifically authorized to carry out particular duties in relation to the plant. It includes operating staff, maintenance and repair personnel. 14 DOCUIWENTATION The hardware documentation is part of the documentation of the computer system and shall be controlled by quality assurance procedures.
F..,,

1he naraware aocumentatlon snail cover au aspects from requirements (see 5.5) through design (see 6.8), verification (see 7.4), maintenance (see 11.3) and operation (see 13).

,.

.

. .

.

,.

. .

All significant procedures and instructions shall be defined in formal documents. Procedures and instructions are classed as significant if their incorrect execution can cause the system to fail to meet its hardware requirements specification. A list of all applicable procedures and instruction documents together with the latest state of amendment of each shall be available to all operators and maintenance staff.

IS 15399:2003 14.1 Documentation Presentation
to specified procedures (including responsibilities, file copy, distribution to and updating work copy, etc). c) AH significant documents should carry a formal certification of their state of amendment and the status of their authorization. This information shall be given either on the front cover or on the first page. d) Controls shall be exercised over changes to the system documents to ensure that: 1) Necessary amendments are made to the copies used by design, installation, commissioning, operating and maintenance staff, and 2) Amendments which do not apply to the particular set of equipment are not inserted. Automatic tools may be used in this context.

The significant documentation shall be structured, cross-referenced and iridexed. Documents shall be worded unambiguously and use the smallest vocabulary consistent with clear understanding. 14.2 Documentation Control

The hardware requirements documentation shall be updated and re-issued when necessary throughout the project in order to encompass new or changed information which may appear at any stage in the project or as a result of feedback compatibility checks between hardware and software: a) Specified procedures for amending documents; tion shall be used and be part of the project operation and maintenance procedures. b) The documentation shall be handled according

ANNEX

A

(Clause 2)
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS
[S No. 1s 7354 (Part 1): 1975 (Part 2) :1984 (Part 3): 1984 Title Guide on reliability of electronic and electrical items: Preliminary tions Reliability management reliability considera(Part 6): 1983 and maintainability @rst revision) (Part 7): 1984 IS No. (Part 4): 1987 (Part 5): 1985 Title Test and diagnostic Maintainability design phase Maintainability procedures

studies during the verification

Presentation of reliability data on electronic and electrical components (or parts) (first revision) Collection of reliability, availability and maintainability data from field performance Inclusion of lot-by-lot and periodic inspection procedures in specifications for electronic and electrical components (or parts) (first revision) Inclusion of reliability clauses into specifications for components (or parts) (first revision) Guide on equipment: Introduction maintainability to maintainability in of

and Collection, analysis presentation of data related to maintainability Maintenance and support planning, General maintenance Section 1

(Part 8/See 1): 1988 (Part 8/See 2): 1988 (Part 8/See 3): 1988 (Part 8/See 4): 1988

(Part 4):

974

(Part 5):

975

Maintenance and maintenance support planning, Section Maintenance support analysis Maintenance and maintenance support planning, Section Maintenance planning analysis

2

3

(Part 6): 1983

1S 9692 (Part 1): 1980 (Part 2): 1980 (Part 3): 1981

Maintenance and maintenance support planning, Section 4 Maintenance support resources requirements Analysis techniques for system reliability : Part 2 Procedure for failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) and failure mode, effects and criticality analysis (FMECA)

Is 11137 (Part 2): 1984

Maintainability requirements specifications and contracts Maintainability programme *

IS 15399:2003
I,T No, Is 14700 (Part I/See I) : ~ooo (Part 3/See 2) : I 999 Electromagnetic (EMC): Title compatibility IS No. (Part 4/See 8): 1999 Title Testing measurement and techniques, Section 8 Power frequency magnetic field immunity test Testing ud measurement techniques, Section 9 Pulse magnetic field immunity test

General, Section 1 Application and interpretation of fundamental definitions and terms Limits, Section 2 Limits for harmonic current emissions (equipment input currents 16A per phase) Limits, Section 3 Limitations of voltage fluctuations and flicker in low voltage supply systems for equipment with rated current 5 16A Testing techniques, immunity publication measurement and Section 1 Overview of tests--Basic EMC

(Part 4/See 9): 1999

measurement and (Part 4/See 12) : Testing techniques, Section 12 Oscillatory 1999 waves immunity test and measurement (Part 4/See 15) : Testing techniques, Section 15 Flickermeter 2001 and design functional specification and measurement (Part 4/See 16) : Testing techniques, Section 16 Test for 2001 immunity to be conducted common mode disturbances in the frequency range O Hz to 150 kHz (Part 6/See 3): 2002 Generic standards, Section 3 Emission standards for residential, commercial and light industrial environment Software for computers irl the safety systems of nuclear and radiation facilities

(Part 3/See 3): 1999

(Part 4/See 1): 1999

and measurement (Part 41Sec 2) : Testing techniques, Section 2 Electrostatic 1999 discharge immunity test -- Basic EMC publication (Part 4/See 4) : I 999 measurement and Testing techniques, Section 4 Electrical fast transient /burst immunity test

IS 15398:2003

ANNEX

B

(Clauses 4.2 and 6.1.2)
OVERVIEW OF SYSTEM LIFE CYCLE

vEl+
Computer systems specification Hardware requirements ` specification Preliminary * hardware design Final > hardware design and prototype Prototype system test

Hardware
definition

k!!Eu.1

~

4
System manufacture

Operation and maintenance definition

+
NOTE -- in the interest of clarity, the feedback paths have not been shown.

13

IS 15399:2003

ANNEX

C

(Ckzuse 8)
OUTLINE OF QUALIFICATION

Systemdesign complete 4 no I

I
yes

I

A F

I

I

1

New design, prototype, production

yes

b
I
no

+

4--no

~

4

no

ob
I
yes
no Tests on site OK ? Function, comparison yes

6
Qualified? Type teats and supplementary analysis
q

yes

Restricteduse or utilization, test frequency, on-going qualification

Manufacture

+

*

Commissioningtest OK `7 I

Amendment

~

L

14

ANNEX (clause
11

D .1)

EXAMPLE OF MAINTENANCE PROCEDURE

Input from Operating

Activi@ ,

Staf

Input from Maintenance Stafl
"'"'"" e

lmii-

`"""""" e

""""'"

e

""~"'''""""""'"r"""""
""""""""""""""""'"'"""""''""'""""'"" I initiation wor~
" ..,,.

c=

Timetable, safety measures
+
I

` c Timetable, safety measures, material, spare parts provision
1

Additional safety measures Additional safety measures

"""'""""'""""'""""'"e
`"'" c= Additional safety measures

""'"'"""'"'"""
................ ~erification, validation! ....................................

E@

1

15

IS 15399:2003

ANNEX
COMMITTEE Nuclear Instrumentation
Orgarrization

E

(Foreword,)
COMPOSITION Sectional Committee, LTD 26

Representative(s)

Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai Atomic Minemls Division, Hyderabad [?lmbhaAtomic Research Centre, Mumbai

('cntre ti~rAdvanced Technology, Indore Electronics Corporation of India Ltmited, Hyderabad Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur Indian Plasma Research Institute, Gandhinagar Ministry of Defence (DRDO), New Delhi Nuclear Power Corporation, Mumbai Nuclear Science Centre, New Delhi I'LA Electro Appliances Ltd, Mumbai Saha institute ot'Noclear Physics, Kolkata Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre, Kolkata 111S Directorate General

SHRJ P. SWAMJNATHAN (Chairnran) (Alternate) Stuo S. A, V. SATHVAMURTHY Sttlu p. R. KtCtSHNAMORTHV Smu P. HAJICA (Alternate) R. SREEHARt SrrR1 DRS. K. KATARJA Smu DEBASHtS DAS(Alternate 1) (Alternate11) Smo P. K. MUKHOPADHVAY Smu B. J. VAIDYA SW A. G. BHOJALE (Alierrra[e) DRM. S. R. Mtmv PROF S. Qorwsm PKOF P. Murwm (Alterrru(e) DRANORAG SHYAM SsuuG. C. BHOLA StrruS. RAMAKR3SHNAN SHroR. Y. Am (Alternate) DRR. K. BHOWMJK SscwN. R, SHAH (Ahermrte) SHRI K. K. M. NAIR DRSUVENDU BOSE (Alternate) DRPRATAP BHATTACHARYA SHP.J N. K. MUKHOPADHYAY SW VIJAI, Director & Head (LTD) [Representing Director General (E._@lcio)]
Member Secretary

Smt PRAVEEN KUMAR
Deputy Director (LTD), BIS

16

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of IndianStandard Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BiS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review of Indian Standards
Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards shou Id ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and' Standards: Monthly Additions'.

This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. LTD 26 (1999). Amendments Issued Since Publication
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 23230131,23233375,2323 9402
Regional Offices:

Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices)
Telephone

Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 603843 { 609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

