HARÄT AAF IS 17080 (Part 1) : 2019 
Indian Standard 


CHAM feta URI UA Oh SUH 
ATT 1 Wearaeh ta aaa 


Automatic Gravimetric Filling 


Instruments 
Part 1 Terminology and Definitions 


ICS 01.040.17; 17.100 


© BIS 2019 


weds Ae Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR UI, 9 TEE STH HM, ay Reef 110002 


A et Y MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2019 Price Group 2 


Weights and Measures Sectional Committee, PGD 26 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the 
Weights and Measures Sectional Committee and approval of the Production and General Engineering Division 
Council. 


In the formulation of this Indian Standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the standards of 
“The Legal Metrology (General) Rules, 2011, Seventh schedule heading — The automatic gravimetric filling 
instruments Part 1’. 


This Indian Standard is published in two parts. The other part in this series is: 


Part 2 Metrological and technical requirements 


IS 17080 (Part 1) : 2019 


Indian Standards 


AUTOMATIC GRAVIMETRIC FILLING 
INSTRUMENTS 


PART 1 TERMINOLOGY AND DEFINITIONS 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) covers the terminology 
and definitions for automatic gravimetric filling 
instruments, the requirements for the same dealt by Part 
2 of this standard. 


2 GENERAL DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply: 


2.1 Weighing Instrument — Measuring instrument 
that serves to determine the mass of a load by using the 
action of gravity on that load. According to its method 
of operation, a weighing instrument is classified as 
automatic or non-automatic. 


2.2 Automatic Weighing Instrument — An 
instrument which weighs without the intervention of 
an operator and follows a predetermined programmed 
of automatic process characteristic of the instrument. 


2.3 Automatic Gravimetric Filling Instrument — 
An instrument which fills containers with predetermined 
and virtually constant mass of product from bulk by 
automatic weighing, and which comprises essentially 
an automatic feeding device or devices associated with 
one or more weighing units and the appropriate control 
and discharge devices. 


2.3.1 Associative (Selective Combination) Weigher — 
Automatic gravimetric filling instrument comprising 
one or more weighing units and which computes an 
appropriate combination of the loads and combines 
them for subsequent discharge as a fill. 


2.3.2 Cumulative Weigher — Automatic gravimetric 
filling instrument with one weighing unit with the 
facility to effect the fill by more than one weighing 
cycle. 


2.3.3 Subtractive Weigher — Automatic gravimetric 
filling instrument for which the fill is determined by 
controlling the output feed from the weigh hopper. 


2.4 Fill — One or more loads discharged into a single 
container to make up the predetermined mass. 


2.5 Electronic Instrument — An instrument equipped 
with electronic devices. 


2.6 Control Instrument — A weighing instrument 
used to determine the mass of the test fills delivered by 
the filling instrument. 


3 CONSTRUCTION 


In this standard, the term device is applied to any part 
which uses any means to perform one or more specific 
functions. 


a) Principal parts, and 

b) Weighing units. 
A device which provides information on the 
mass of the load to be measured. The device may 


consist of all or parts of non-automatic weighing 

instruments. 

1) Local receptor — Part of measurement 
intended to receive the load. 


2) Feeding device — Device which provides 
the supply of the product from bulk to the 
weighing unit. It may operate in one or more 
stages. 


3) Control devices . 
4) Other devices: 


i) Feed control device — Device which 
regulates the rate of the feed of the feeding 
device. 


11) Fill setting device — Device which allows 
the setting of the pre-set value. 


iii) Final feed cut off device — Device which 
controls the cut off the final feed so that 
the average mass of the fills corresponding 
to the pre-set value. The device may 
include an adjustable compensation for 
the material in flight. 

iv) Correction device — Device, which 
automatically corrects the setting of the 
filling instrument. 


3.1 Electronic Parts 


3.1.1 Electronic Device 


A device comprising electronic assemblies and 
performing a specific function. Electronic devices are 
usually manufactured as separate units and capable of 
being independently tested. 


IS 17080 (Part 1) : 2019 


3.1.2 Electronic Sub-assembly 

A part of an electronic device employing electronic 
components and having a recognizable function of its 
own. 

3.1.3 Electronic Components 


The smallest physical entity that uses the electron 
or hole conduction in semi-conductors gases or in 
vacuum. 


3.2 Indicating Device 


The part of a measuring instrument that displays an 
indication. 


NOTES: 


1 For a weighing instrument, the indicating device is a set of 
components, which displays the value, in units of mass, of the 
result of a weighing operation. 


2 For filling instrument the indicating device may indicate 
either the mass of the load or difference between the mass and 
the preset value. 


3.3 Ancillary Devices 


3.3.1 Zero Setting Device 

A device for setting the indicating device to zero when 
the load receptor is empty. 

3.3.1.1 Non automatic zero setting device 

A device for setting the indicating device to zero by an 
operator. 

3.3.1.2 Semi-automatic zero setting device 

A device for setting the indicting device to zero 
automatically following a manual command. 

3.3.1.3 Automatic zero setting device 

A device for setting the indicating device to zero 
automatically without the intervention of an operator. 
3.3.2 Tare Device 


A device for setting the indication to zero when a load 
is on the load receptor: 


a) Without altering the weighing range for net loads 
(additive tare device); or 


b) Reducing the weighing range for net loads 
(subtractive tare device). 


4 METROLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS 


4.1 Scale Interval (d) 


The expressed in units of mass, of the difference 
between: 


a) the values corresponding to two consecutive 
scales mark for analogue indication; and 


b) two consecutive indicated values for digital 
indication. 


4.2 Reference Particle Mass of a Product 

Mass equal to the mean of ten of the largest elementary 
particles or pieces of the product taken from one or 
more loads. 

4.3 Pre-set Value 


Value, expressed in units of mass, preset by the operator 
by means of the fill setting device, in order to define the 
nominal value of the fills. 

4.4 Static Set Point 


Value of the test weights or masses, which, in static 
test, balance the value, selected on the indication of the 
fill setting device. 
4.5 Weighing Cycle 
The sequence of the operation which includes: 

a) Delivery of the material to the load receptor; 

b) A weighing operation; and 

c) The discharge of a single discrete load. 
4.6 Final Feed Time 
Time taken to complete the last stage of delivery of the 
product to a load receptor. 
4.7 Minimum Capacity (Min) 
Smallest discrete load that can be weighed automatically 
on a load receptor 
4.8 Maximum Capacity (Max) 
The largest discrete load that can be weighed 
automatically on a load receptor 
4.9 Warm up Time 


The time between the moment power is applied to an 
instrument and the moment at which the instrument is 
capable of complying with the requirements. 


4.10 Average Number of Loads per Fills 


Half the sum of the maximum and minimum number 
of loads per fill that can be set by the operator or, in 
cases where the number of loads per fill is not directly 
determined by the operator, either the means of the 
actual number of loads per fill (if known) in a period of 
normal operation, or the optimum number of loads per 
fill as may be specified by the manufacturer for the type 
of product which is to be weighed. 


4.11 Rated Minimum Fill 


The rated value of the fill below which the weighing 
results may be subject to errors outside the limits 
specified in this part. 


4.12 Minimum Discharge 


The smallest load that can be discharged by a subtractive 
weigher. 


5 INDICATIONS AND ERRORS 


5.1 Method of Indication 


5.1.1 Analogue Indication 

An indication allowing the evaluation of equilibrium 
position to a fraction of the scale interval. 

5.1.2 Digital Indication 


An indication in which the scale mark comprises 
a sequence of an aligned figure that do not permit 
interpolation to fraction of a scale interval. 


5.2 Errors 
5.2.1 Error of Indication 


The indication of an instrument 
(conventional) true value of the mass. 


minus the 


5.2.2 Intrinsic Error 


The error of an instrument under reference conditions. 


5.2.3 Initial Intrinsic Error 


The intrinsic error of an instrument as determined prior 
to performance and span stability tests. 


5.2.4 Fault 


The difference between the error of indication of an 
instrument and the intrinsic error. 


NOTE — Principally, a fault is the result of an undesired 
change of data contained in an electronic instrument. 


5.2.5 Significant Fault 


A fault greater than 0.25 of the maximum permissible 
deviation of each fill [as specified in sub-paragraph (2) 
of para 2] for an in-service verification, for a fill equal 
to the rated minimum fill. 
NOTE — The following are not considered to be significant 
faults even when they exceed the value defined above. 


a) Faults arising from simultaneous 
independent causes in the instrument. 


and mutually 


b) Faults implying the impossibility to perform any stage of 
operation. 

c) Faults being so series that they are bound to be noticed by 
an operator. 


d) Transitory faults being momentary variations in the 
indication or operation which cannot affect the final 
results of the automatic cycles. 


5.2.6 Span Stability 


The capability of an instrument to maintain the 
difference between the indication of weight at 
maximum capacity and the indication at zero within 
specified limits over a period of use. 


IS 17080 (Part 1) : 2019 


5.3 Reference Value for Accuracy Class 


The value of accuracy class determined by static testing 
of the weighing unit during influence quantity testing at 
pattern approval stage. The reference value for accuracy 
class in equal to the best accuracy class for which the 
Instrument may be verified for operational use. 


6 INFLUENCES 
CONDITIONS 


AND REFERENCE 
6.1 Influence Quantity 

A quantity, which is not the subject of the measurement 
by which, influences the value of measured or the 
indication of the instrument. 

6.1.1 Influence Factor 

An influence quantity having a value within the 
specified rated operating conditions of the instrument. 
6.1.2 Disturbance 


An influence quantity having a value within the limits 
specified in the part but outside the rated operating 
conditions of the instrument. 

6.2 Rated Operation Conditions 


Conditions of use, giving the ranges of the measured 
and the influence quantities for which the metrological 
characteristics are intended to lie within the maximum 
permissible deviation specified. 

6.2.1 Reference Conditions 


A set of specified values of influence factors fixed 
to ensure valid inter-comparison of the results of 
measurements. 


7 TESTS 


7.1 Material Test 

A test carried out off a complete instrument using the 
type of material, which it is intended to weigh. 

7.2 Simulation Test 

A test carried out on a complete instrument or a part 
of an instrument in which any part of the weighing 
operation is simulated. 

7.3 Performance Test 

A test to verify whether the equipment under test (EUT) 
is able to accomplish its intended. 

7.4 Span Stability Test 


A test to verify that the EUT is capable of maintaining 
its performance characteristics over period of use. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PGD 26 (1113). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


