**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 6611 (1988): Symbols for rubbers and latices [PCD 13: 
Rubber and Rubber Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Tift ^FTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS ■ Mil * ltd 

Indian Standard (n-m™-**) 

SYMBOLS FOR RUBBERS AND LATICES 

( First Revision ) 



USO G7a 4 031:003-62 



®Cto*4*P IS89 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK. BHAVAN. i BAHADUR SHAW ZAtAK MARO 
^£W DE.LHI 1 1 0002 

Gr 3 .Waj 1909 



IS i 6611 - 1988 

Indian Standard 
SYMBOLS FOR RUBBERS AND LATICES 

( First Revision ) 



0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
on 23 December 1988, after the draft finalized 
by the Rubber Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related 
Products Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was originally published 
in 1972. In this revision, some new symbols 
have been added and all symbols prescribed in 
this standard, have been updated inaccordance 
with the latest international practice. 

0.3 The object of this standard is to provide 
standardized symbols for basic rubbers both in 
dry and latex forms for use in industry, trade 



and government. These symbols have been 
accepted at the international level. It is not 
intended to conflict with but rather to act as a 
supplement to existing trade names and trade- 
marks. 

0.4 Technical papers or presentations, the name 
of the polymer should be used, if possible. 
The symbols can follow the chemical name for 
use in later references. 

0.5 This standard is based on ISO/DIS 1629- 

1985 'Rubbers and latices — Nomenclature* 
issued by the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard gives a general classification 
for the basic rubbers both in dry and latex 
form, based on the chemical composition of the 
polymer chain. 

2. CLASSIFICATION 

2.1 Rubbers, in both dry and latex forms, are 
classified and coded on the basis of the chemical 
composition of polymer chain in the following 
manner: 

M — Rubbers having a saturated chain of 
the polymethylene type 

N — Rubbers having nitrogen in the poly- 
mer chain 

O — Rubbers having oxygen in the polymer 
chain 

R — Rubbers having an unsaturated carbon 
chain, for example, natural rubber 
and synthetic rubbers derived at least 
partly from diolefins 

Q, — Rubbers having silicon and oxygen in 
the polymer chain 

T — Rubbers having sulphur in the 
polymer chain 

U — Rubbers having carbon, oxygen and 
nitrogen in the polymer chain 

Z — Rubbers having phosphorus and 
nitrogen in the polymer chain 



3. GROUP DESIGNATIONS 

3.1 The 'M' group includes rubbers having a 
saturated chain of the polymethylene type. 
The following classification is used: 

ACM — Copolymer of ethylacrylate or 
other acrylates and a small amount 
of a monomer which facilitates 
vulcanization 

ANM — Ethylacrylate or other acrylate 
and acrylonitrile copolymer 

CM — Chloropolyethylene 

GFM — Polychlorotrifluoroethylene 

CSM — Chlorosulfonylpolyethylene 

EAM — Ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymer 

EPDM — Terpolymer of ethylene, propy- 
lene, and a diene with the residual 
unsaturated portion of the diene 
in the side chain 

EPM — Ethylene-propylene copolymer 

FPM — Rubbers having fluoro and 
fluoroalkyl or fluoroalkoxy sub- 
stituent groups on the polymer 
chain 

IM — Polyisobutene 

3.2 The 'O* group includes rubbers having 
oxygen in the polymer chain. The following 
classification is used: 

CO — Polychloromethyloxiran ( epichloro- 
hydrin elastomer ) 



IS: 6611 -1988 



EGO — Ethylene oxide ( oxiran ) and 
chloromethyloxiran ( epichlorohy- 
drin copolymer ) 

GPO — Copolymer of propylene oxide and 
allyl glycidyl ether 

3.3 The 'R' group, in both dry and latex forms, 
is defined by inserting, before the word 'rubber' 
the name of the monomer or monomers from 
which the rubber was prepared ( except for 
natural rubber). The letter immediately 
preceding the letter 'R' signifies the diolefin 
from which the rubber was prepared ( except 
for natural rubber). Any letter or letters 
preceding the diolefin letter signifies the 
comonomer or comonomers. The following 
classification is used: 

ABR — Acrylate-butadiene rubbers 

BR — Butadiene rubbers 

GR — Ghloroprene rubbers 

IIR — Isobutene-isoprene rubbers 

IR — Isoprene rubbers, synthetic 

NBR — Acrylonitrile-butadiene rubbers 

NCR — Acrylonitrile-chloroprene rubbers 

NR — Isoprene rubbers natural 

PBR — Vinylpyridine-butadiene rubbers 

SBR — Styrene-butadiene rubbers 

SCR — Styrene-chloroprene rubbers 

SIR — Styrene-isoprene rubbers 

NIR — Acrylonitrile-isoprene rubbers 

PSBR — Vinylpyridine-styrene-butadiene 
rubbers 

Note — Carboxylic rubbers are identified by the 
prefix letter 'X'. 

3.3.1 Rubbers having substitute carboxylic 
acid groups ( COOH ) on the polymer chain are 
classified as follows: 

XBR — Garboxylic-butadiene 

XCR — Carboxylic-chioroprene 

XNBR — Carboxylic-acrylonitrile-butadiene 

XSBR — Carboxylic-styrene-butadiene 

3.3.2 Rubbers containing halogen on the 
Polymer chains are classified as follows: 

BUR — Bromo-isobutene-isoprene 
CUR — Chloro-isobutene-isoprene 

3.4 The '0,' group, in both dry and latex forms, 
is defined by inserting the name of the substi- 
tuent group on the polymer chain prior to 



silicone designation. The following classifica- 
tion is used: 

FMQ, — Silicone rubbers having both 
methyl and fluorine substituent 
groups on the polymer chain 

FVMQ — Silicone rubbers having methyl, 
vinyl and fluorine substituent 
groups on the polymer chain 

MQ, — Silicone rubbers having only 
methyl substituent groups on the 
polymer chain, such as dimethyl 
polysiloxane 

PMQ, — Silicone rubbers having both 
methyl and phenyl substituent 
groups on the polymer chain 

PVMQ, — Silicone rubbers having methyl, 
vinyl and phenyl substituent 
groups on the polymer chain 

VMQ, — Silicone rubbers having both 
methyl and vinyl substituent 
groups on the polymer chain 

Note — Insert initial for substituent group (s) on 
polymer chain to the left of the code letter for rubber 
with silicone and oxygen in the backbone ( Q) in des- 
cending order of percent present, namely, largest 
nearest. 

3.5 The 'U' group includes rubbers having 
carbon, oxygen and nitrogen in the polymer 
chain. The following classification is used: 

AFMU — Terpolymer of tetrafluoroethy- 
lene-trifluoronitrosomethane and 
nitroso-perfluorobutyric-acid 

AU — Polyester urethane 

EU — Polyether urethane 

3.6 The C T' group includes rubbers having 
carbon, oxygen and sulphur in the polymer 
chain. The following classification is used: 

OT ■ — A rubber having either a — CH 3 
-OH 2 -O — CH 3 -O - CH 2 

— CPU group or occasionally an R 
group, where R is an aliphatic 
hydrocarbon, not usually — CH 2 

— CH 2 — , between the polysulfide 
linkages in the polymer chain 

EOT — A rubber having either a — CH 2 
-CH 2 -O -CH 2 -O ~CH 2 

— GH 2 group and R groups which 
are usually —CH 2 — CH 2 — but 
occasionally other aliphatic groups 
between the polysulphide linkages 
in the polymer chain 

3.7 The 'Z' group includes rubbers having 
phosphorus and nitrogen in the polymer chain. 



IS: 6611 -1988 



The following classification is used: 

FZ — A rubber having a — P=N — chain 
and having fluoroalkoxy groups 
attached to the phosphorus atoms in 
the chain 

PZ — A rubber having a — P — N — chain and 
having aryloxy ( phenoxy and sub- 
stituted phenoxy ) groups attached to 
the phosphorus atoms in the chain 

4. THERMOPLASTIC RUBBERS 

4.1 Designations of rubbers in 3 shall be pre- 
ceded by the letter Y if the rubbers consist 
essentially of polymers having a block, graft, 
segmented or other structure that imparts 



rubber-like properties at room temperature 
whilst the rubber is in the unvulcanized state. 
For example: 

YSBR — A block copolymer of styrene 
and butadiene 

YXSBR — A block copolymer of styrene 
and butadiene containing car- 
boxylic acid groups on the 
polymer chain 

4,2 The designation Y shall not be assigned 
to materials whose rubber-like properties in the 
unchanged state rely on blending of polymers 
or on any other compounding techniques. In 
such cases, each component of the material shall 
be included in the designation. 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



fimSqunrirrr. 

M»ib M»YM* 9 Bthadur Ebab Z»f»r Mpry, JVEW DELHI 110003 

TclpphuncBi 3 31 01 3I P 3 3] 13 75 Tdegnnn Miu*kia.iiiib* 

( CuUtebuti CD all 1 iHi C-st . 

Rjgumtl Op, 

Cent nt : Man* Bta vmi, 9 BaJ»<! i» Sh* b Z» for Mm «, NEW IJELH I 1 10OQ2 { J J j ™ ^ 

•EaitLi i. : 1/14 CI T ScLtbie VI I M. V.I P. Riud, Manikiufo, CALCUTTA 70' 36 24 $9 
Northern : SCO 445-44<\ Settee 3i-C, CHANDIGARH 15003G 



Sapihara : C.1.T, Cnmpiw, [V Crn^ Raad, MADRAS 600 1 S3 

tW«iLem ( M.tunkifoya. tS Ml PC, M-n- I. A*dfa*ri ( B«4I !, BQMUAY 400093 

0f*ikA Ojfcf 

'Puthp&k 1 , Nuriiiu-Lilllid Shaikh Mwrg iir, AHM.i I iA I! AD 39QOOI 

■ I'tdiiya Induitrial Aft*, hi LiangyJeri-Tuinkur Roid, 1). I ) 14. Ji utiUO.'iA 

tiugairi CorapJci, Jth FLuur, Dli.iJbh.id.L Raw!. f«fv* BHOPAL 462003 

Ptai Kb. 62/83, Lvwb EUri, BHUHANESHWAR 751002 

S3/5 WardN -uaJ, Sell Bp'Lii! ■ AHATI 781003 

t.C, L.N. '.I J|'U Man- '" NbuipaJk Suujun Roml ), HYDERABAD 50D001 

I Sudlmtri M- VIPL1R3Q2005 

l'. S*wVod*T» Naj5.ii, KANPUR 2Wfl 
Ipnm lerlmtri^L E=nln b PATNA 600013 
T. G So. 1 4; 1 4^' rtl iv P I >R U M - 

ImptitiiH Ojj : ii Sal c- Puidt >L 

Puifap&ojaJi, -A Wm! High Coon Read, Shank* r Nagar 

Squat. 

I J '2 Shavaji ^ iig.il . I' ■ ' ■ E 4 L LOOS 



I a 16 +L 

f 4124 44 

i 41 H 
L 41 39 

ti 34 Qfi 









i Micfc, FXl 
cnbori, Uriah 1U*!, lUiu^m * ■WMaT 



2 fi? 46 
. 2 63 4M 

56 

£67 16 

23 U 
J & 34 71 
I 6 sift 32 
f 21 66 76 

623 05 
J 6 



2 5J 71 

3 24 35 

-ii Chi 

in Li U 

39 TI 



w^pnpq 






