( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 4111( Part 1) - 1986

lndian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FO;: ANCILLARY STRUCTURES IN SEWERAGE SYSTEM
PART 1 ( MANHOLES

First Revision )
Sectional Committee,
BDC 24
Representing Water Supply and-sewage Disposal Undertaking, New Delhi

Water Supply and Sanitation
Chairman
SHRI J. D' CRUZ

Members CHIEF ENGINEER ( CIVIL I ) ( Alternare to Shri J. D' Cruz ) ADVISER ( PHE ) Ministry of Works and Housing DEPUTY ADVISER ( PHE ) (Afternate ) SHRI M. S. ASNANI Public Works Department, Delhi Administration, New Delhi SHRI P. C. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) SHRI AVDESH &MAR Tata Consulting Engineers, Bangalore SHRI S. CHA~DRA ( Alternote ) SHRI N. S. BHAIRAVAN Public Health Engineering Department, Government of Kerala, Trivandrum SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER( Alternate ) CHIEF ENGINEER ( CONSTRUCTION ) Uttar Pradesh Jal Nigam, Lucknow SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER ( Alternate ) Public Works Department ( Public Health SHRI 1. CHANDRA Branch ). Government of Haryana. Chandigarh SHRI K. K. GANDHI ( AIternare ) Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI R. C. P. CHOUDHARY SHRI H. V. KAO ( Alternate )
SHRI S. K. DASGUPTA Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority, SHRI S. R. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) In. personal .

Calcutta

SHRI S. G. DEOLALIKAR

capacity (Fiat No. 403, Savitri) Cinema Commercial Complex, New Delhi

( Conrinued on page 2 ) 0 Copyright 1986 JNDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XlV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission bfthe publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under %he said Act.

,353 : 4111 (Part 1 ) - 1986
l<Continued from page 1 ) Members
PROP J. M. DAVE
`SHRI DEVENDRA

Representing Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta In personal capacity ( 16-A Maya Mahal, 17th Road, Khar, Bombay ) Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, Bombay Health Department, Madhva Pradesh. ,~~~. Bhooal Government of

SINGH

HYDRAULICENGINEER

SHRI

CHIEF ENGINEER ( SEWERAGE PROJECTS) ( Alternate ) Public R. A. KHANNA

SHRI D. K. MITRA ( Alternate I ) SHRI I. S. BAWEJA( Alternate II ) National Environmental Engineering Research `SHRI S. R. KSHIRSAGAR Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur DR P. V. R. C. PANICKER( AIternate ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay `SHRI M. Y. MADAN SARI C. E. S. RAO ( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Government of SHRI S. L. MAINI Punjab, Patiala
`MANAGING DIRECTOR SHRI R. NATARAJAN SHRI SUBHASHVERMA ( Alternate ) All PROF K. J. NATH SHRI D. GUIN ( Alternate ) SHRI A. PONNAMBALAM Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Chandigarh Hindustan Dorr-Oliver Ltd, Bombay India Institute Health, Calcutta of Hygiene Board,

and

Public Board,

Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage

Ministry of Railways SHRI RANJ~~ SINGH National Buildings Organization, New Delhi DR A. V. R. RAO SHRI 0. P. RATRA ( Afternate 1 Indian Water Works Association, Bombay SECRETARY Institution of Public Health Engineers India, SECRETARYGENERAL Calcutta SHRI R. N. BANERJEE ( Alternate ) L. R. Sehgal and Co, New Delhi SHRI L. R. SEHGAL Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee SHRI S. K. SHARMA SUPERINTENDING SURVEYOR OF Central Public Works Department, New Delhi WORKS ( NDZ ) SURVEYOROF WORKS-I ( NDZ ) ( Alternate ) Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board, `SHRIB. N. THYAGARAJA

PROF Y. N. RAMACHANDRA RAO MAJ B. S. PARMAR ( Afternate )

Madras Ministry of Defence

( Army Headquarters

)

Banaalore

SHRI H. S. PUTTAKEMPANNA ( Alternate )Madras Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewer&RI V. VARADARAJAN age Board, Madras SHRI S. DAIVAMANI ( AIternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member ) SHRI G. RAMAN,

Director

(Civ Engg )
SHRI A. K. AVASTHY Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Secretary

( Contirtued on page 20 )

2

IS : 4111( Part 1) - 1986

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR ANCILLARY STRUCTURES IN SEWERAGE SYSTEM
PART 1 ( MANHOLES

First Revision)
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision > was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 13 January 1986, after the draft finalized by the Water Supply and Sanitation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Manholes form one of the essential ancillary structures in any sewerage system. They are generally provided at every change of alignment or gradient of sewers at every junction of two or more sewers, at head of all sewers or branches, wherever there is a change in size of sewer and at regular intervals in the sewerage system. They are used for inspection, cleaning and repairing of sewers and other maintenance operations. This standard was first published in 1967 with a view to giving guidance on proper design and construction of manholes. Salient changes made in this revision are:

a>Spacing

and sizes of manholes have been modified and given in detail; b) Arch type and circular manholes have been covered in detail; d Guidance for design of manholes has been elaborated; 4 Brickwork construction and plastering have been modified and given in detail; details of channels and benching inside the e) Construction manhole have been covered in detail; f> Guidance for fixing rungs and manhole covers and frames have been included; and 22)When two sewers meet at a different level, the guidance for providing drop manholes has been given in detail. 3

IS : 4111 ( Part 1) - 1986 0.3 The other parts in series are:

a) IS : 4111 ( Part 2 )-1985 Code of practice for ancillary structures in sewerage system: Part 2 Flushing tanks (Jirst vision ). b) IS : 4111 ( Part 3 )-1985 Code of practice for ancillary structures in sewerage system : Part 3 Inverted syphon (first revision ). c) IS : 4111 ( Part 4 )-I968 Code of practice for ancillary structures in sewerage system: Part 4 Pumping stations and pumping mains ( rising mains >. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers types of manholes, design considerations manholes and their construction and safety requirements.

for

1.2 This standard applies to manholes built for public sewers and does not cover manholes built specifically for building drainage ( see IS : 1742-1983t ). 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions apply. 2.1 Access Shaft - The vertical passage to the manhole chamber the manhole cover. shall from

2.2 Benching - Sloping surfaces having slope in transverse direction constructed on either side of channels at the base of manholes or inspection chamber for the purpose of confining the flow of sewage, avoiding the accumulation of deposits and providing a safe working platform. 2.3 Channel - The open waterway through which sewage, storm or other liquid wastes flow at the invert of a manhole. 2.4 Deep Manho!e - A manhole of depth greater than 1'65 m. water

2.5 Depth of Manl ole -The vertical distance from the top of the manhole cover to the outgoing invert of the main drain channel.
*Rules for roundiiig off rumerical values ( revised J. jCode of practix for building drainage ( secsrzdrevision
).

4

IS : 4111 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 2.6 Invert - The lowest point of the interior of a sewer or drain at any cross-section. In a manhole chamber, the lowest point of channel in the floor of the chamber which carries the flow of sewage through the manhole.

2.7 Manhole - An opening by which a man may enter or leave a drain, a sewer or other closed structure for inspection, cleaning and other maintenance operations, fitted with a suitable cover. 2.8 Manhole Chamber - Any chamber constructed on a drain or sewer so as to provide access for inspection, testing or the clearance of obstruction. 2.9 Soffit - The highest point culvert at any cross-section.
3. DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

of the internal

surface

of a sewer or

3.1 Design considerations

are broadly based on three spacings of manholes, access shaft and their sizes.

items, namely,

3.2 Spacing of Manholes
3.2.1 General - Manholes should be built at every change of alignment, gradient or diameter, at the head of all sewers and branches, at every junction of two or more sewers. On sewers which are to be cleaned manually which cannot be entered for cleaning or inspection the maximum distance between manholes should be 30 m.

3.2.2 The spacing of manholes on large sewers above 900 mm diameter is governed by the following for the sewers to be cleaned manually: a) The distance which silt or other obstruction may have to be conveyed along the sewer to the nearest manhole for removal; b) The distance through, materials for repairs may be conveyed through the sewer; and c) Ventilation requirements for men working in the sewer. 3.2.2.1 The spacing of manholes above 90 to 150 m may be allowed on straight runs for sewers of diameter above 900 to 1 500 mm and above 150 to 200 m the spacing of manholes may be on straight runs for sewers of 1'5 to 2'0 m dia, which may further be increased up to 300 m A spacing allowance of 100 m per 1 m for sewers of over 2 m diameter. dia of sewer is a general rule in case of very large sewers. 3.2.3 Sewers which are to be cleaned with mechanical devices, the spacing of manhole will depend upon the type of equipment to be used for cleaning sew ers.
5

IS : 4111 ( Part 1) - 1986 3.3 Sizes of Manholes 3.3.1 Manholes shall be of such size as will allow necessary cleaning and inspection of manholes. These may be rectangular, arch type or circular in plan.

3.3.2 Rectangular Manholes - The minimum internal rectangular manholes between brick faces shall be as follows:

sizes

of

a) For depths less than 0'90 m, 900 x 800 mm as shown in Fig. 1; and
CI COVER

i -_ 4m
h-B
I=----

SECTION

BB

If

I

_I___

1 1I

I

-_ __

I
I

I

I

'

I_

------

FIG.

1

TYPICAL ILLUSTRATIONOF RECTANGULAR MANHOLE FOR DEPTHS LESS THAN 0'90

m ( SIZE 900 X 800 mm ) 6

IS : 4111( Part 1) - 1986 b) For depths from 0'90 m and up to 2'5 m, 1200 X 903 mm as shown in Fig. 2.
v

Cl

COVER

SECTION

AA

SECTION

BB

L' ---_--__-

1

-J PLAN

B

FIG. 2 TYPICALILLUSTRATIONOFRECTANGULAR MANHOLE FOR DEPTHS FROM 0'90 m UP TO 2'5 m ( SIZE 1 200 x 900 mm )

7

IS : 4111 ( Part 1) - 1986 3.3.3 Arch Type Manholes - For depths of 2'5 m and above, arch type manholes will be provided and the internal sizes of chambers between brick fzces shall be 1400 X 900 mm as shown in Fig. 3.

SECTION

tr

AA

'

1:4:8

AND BENCHING cc 1:2:L

L-1 -----w---J w
PLAN TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION

FIG. 3

OF ARCHED TYPE MANHOLE

8

IS : 4111(

Part 1) - 1986

The width of manhole chamber shall be suitably increased more than 900 mm on bends, junctions or pipes with diameter greater than 450 mm so that the benching width on either side of channel is minimum 200 mm. 3.3.4 Circular Manholes-The circular manholes may be constructed as alternative to rectangular and arch type manholes. Circular manholes are much stronger than rectangular and arch type manholes and thus these are preferred over rectangular (ordinary ) as well as arch type of manholes. The circular manholes can be provided for all depths starting from 0'9 m. Circular manholes are straight down in lower portion and slanting in top portion so as to narrow down the top opening equal to internal dia of manhole cover. Depending upon the depth of manhole, the diameter of manhole changes. The internal diameter of circular manholes may be kept as following for varying depths: a) b) c) d) For For For For depths depths depths depths above above above above 0'90 m and up to 1'65 m 1'65 m and up to 2'30 m 2 30 m and up to 9'0 m 9'0 m and up to 14'0 m of circular manholes 900 1 200 1 500 1 800 mm mm mm mm diameter diameter diameter diameter

Some typical Fig. 4.

designs

have been shown in

3.3.5 If the iewer is constructed in a tunnel, the manhole should be located at the access or working shafts and the manhole chamber may be constructed of a size to suit the working shaft or vice-versa. 3.4 Access Shafts for Large Sewers - Access shaft shall be circular shape and shall have a minimum internal dia of 750 mm; where depth of the shaft exceeds 3 m suitable dimensions shall be provided facilitate cleaning and maintenance. 3.4.1 Access shaft where built of brickwork should be corbelled three sides to reduce it to the size of the opening in the cover frame, to provide easy access on the fourth side to step irons or ladder. determining sizes, regard should be paid to the dimensions of maintenance equipment likely to be used in the sewers. in the to on and In the

3.5 Where the diameter of the sewer is increased, the crown of the entering and leaving pipes shall be fixed at the same level and necessary In exceptional slope is given in the invert of the manhole chamber. cases and where unavoidable, the crown of entering sewer may be fixed at lower level but in suchcases too the peak flow level of the two sewer shall be kept the same.
9

IS :4111(Partl) -1986 r-c1FRAME
AND COVER

RICK MASONRY CEMENT MORT

SECTION

BB

PLAN (#900 SECTION AA
-SOLING DRY BR GROUTING WITH CEMENT CONCRETE

&651200)

A-

Q
c __ / \ / \

1

\

I

\

:.I:

\

I

-A

\

\

0

I

1'

--_d'

__^_

(~1500
FIG. 4

PLAN 5 1800)
All dimensions in millimetres. TYPICAL ILLUSTRATIONOF CIRCULAR MANHOLES

10

IS : 4111 ( Part 1) - 1986 3.6 When smaller sewer joins the main sewer, the invert of smaller sewer at its junction with main shall be at least Q the diameter of the main above the invert of the main. 3.7 The branch sewer shall deliver sewage in the manhole in the direction of main flow and the junction should be made with care so that flow in main is not impeded. 3.8 No drain from house fittings, for example, gully trap or soil pipe, etc, to manhole shall normally exceed a length of 6 m unless it is unavoidable. 3.9 When manholes are constructed on footpath, these shall be provided with covers of medium duty casting and when built with the width of road under vehicular traffic, these shall be provided with cover of heavy duty casting. 4. CONSTRUCTION 4.1 Excavation - The manhole shall be excavated true to dimensions and levels as shown on the plan. The excavation of deep manholes shall be accompanied with safety measures like timbering, staging, etc ( see IS : 3764- 1966* 1. In areas where necessary, appropriate measures for dewatering should be made. 4.2 Bed Concrete - The manhole shall generally be built on a bed of concrete 1: 4 : 8 ( 1 cement: 4 coarse sand: 8 graded stone aggregate 40 mm nominal size ) unless it is otherwise required by the local bodies, etc. Generally the thickness of bed concrete shall be 225 mm for manholes of depth less than 2'30 m and 300 mm for depths of 2'30m and above, unless otherwise specified on account of specific considerations. This may, however, be designed to carry safely the weight of walls, cover, the wheel loads, impact of traffic which are transmitted through cover and shaft walls and also for water pressure, if any. In case of weak soil, special foundation as suitable shall be provided. 4.3 The construction of manholes may either be done in brickwork reinforced cement concrete work. or

4.4 Brickwork - The thickness of walls shall be designed depending upon its shape and size and taking into account all loads coming over Generally the brickwork it including earth pressure and water pressure. shall be with first class bricks in cement mortar 1:5 ( I cement: 5 coarse sand ). All brickwork in manhole chambers and shafts shall be carefully built in English Bond, the jointing faces of each brick being well buttered
*Safety code for excavation work.

11

1s : 4111 ( Part 1 ) - 1986

with cement mortar before laying, so as to ensure a full joint. The construction of walls in brickwork shall be done in accordance with IS : 2212-1962*. For arched type of manholes, the brick masonry in arches and arching over pipes shall be in cement mortar 1:3 ( 1 cement: 3 coarse sand ). The thickness of wall shall in no case be less than one brick length. Generally the wall shall be built of one brick length thickness for depth less than 2'25 m. The thickness of wall for depths from 2'25 to 3'0 m is kept one and half brick length; for depth from 3'0 to 5'0 m, two brick length; for depths 5'0 to 9'0 m, two and half brick length and beyond 9'0 m depth it may be 3 brick length. Where subsoil water condition exists, a richer mix may be used for masonry. 4.5 Plastering - The walls of manholes shall be plastered both inside and outside with cement mortar 1:3 ( 1 cement: 3 coarse sand ) and finished smooth with a coat of neat cement. Where subsoil water condition exists, a richer mix may be used and it shall further be waterproofed with addition of approved waterproofing compound in a quantity as per manufacturers specifications.
NOTE - Proper construction should be ensured to prevent moisture All manholes shall be constructed so as to be water tight under test.

penetration.

4.6 A cement concrete collar of 75 mm minimum thickness using 13 mm I:1633 ( or Grade M 20 ) aggregates and cement concrete of proportion should be provided over the sewer where it passes through manhole walls, and a brick relieving arch ( see IS : 2212-1962* ) should be turned over the sewer pipe. 4.7 Channels and Benching - These shall be semi-circular in bottom half and of diameter equal to sewer. Above the horizontal diameter, sides shall be extended vertically 50 mm above the crown of sewer pipe and the top edge shall be suitably rounded off. The branch channels shall also be similarly constructed with respect to the benching but at fall, if required their junction with main channel, an appropriate suitably rounded off in direction of flow in the main channel, shall be given. The channels and benching shall be done in cement concrete 1:2:4 ( 1 cement: 2 coarse sand: 4 graded stone aggregate 20 mm nominal size ) and rendered smooth with neat cement. The rendered surface shall have The depth of a hard impervious finish obtained by using a steel trowel. channels and benching shall be as given in Table 1.
*Code of practice for brickwork.

12

IS : 4111( Part 1 ) - 1986
TABLE SIZE OFDRAIN 1 DEPTH OF CHANNELS AND BENCHING DEPTH BENCHING ATSIDEWALLS ABOVE BED

TOP OFCHANNEL
ATTHE CENTRE ABTVE BED COKKETE

(1)

100 150 200 250 300 350 400
450

(2) 150 200 250 300 350 400 450
500

CONCRETE (3) 200 300 350 400 450 500
550 600

Rungs shall be provided in all manholes over 0'8 m in depth and shall preferably be of cast iron and of suitable dimensions ( see IS : 5455-1969* ). These rungs may be set staggered in two vertical runs, which may be 300 mm apart horizontally as well as vertically and shall project a minimum of 100 mm beyond the finished surface of the manhole wall. The top rung shall be 450 mm below the manhole cover and Footrests shall the lowest not more than 300 mm above the benching. be painted with coal tar, the portion embedded in masonry on cement concrete block being painted with thick cement slurry before fixing. 4.9 Manhole Covers and Frames - The size of manhole covers shall be such that there shall be clear opening of not less than 560 mm diameter for manholes exceeding 0'9 m depth. When cast iron manhole covers and frames are used they shall conform to IS : 1726 ( Parts 1 to 7 )-1974-r. The frames of manhole shall be firmly embedded to concrete alignment After completion of and level in plain concrete on the top of masonry. the work, manhole covers shall be sealed by means of thick grease. 4.10 Reinforced Cement Concrete Manholes - Where sewers are to be laid in high sub-soil water conditions, manholes may be constructed in reinforced cement concrete of Grade M 20 or 1: 1 f : 3 mix ( see IS:4561978$). The manholes in this type of construction shall be preferably
*Specification for cast iron steps for manholes.

4.8 Ron& -

$pecitication for cast iron manhole covers and frames: Part 1 General requirements ( second revision ). Part 2 Specific requirements of HD circular type ( second revision ). Part 3 Specific requirements for HD double triangular type ( secoud revision ). Part 4 Specific requirements for MD circular type ( second rrvisiotr ). Part 5 Specific requirements for MD rectangular type ( second revision ). Part 6 Specific requirements for LD rectangular type. Part 7 Specific requirements fcr LD square type. $Code of practice ior plain and reinforced ccncrete ( third revision ).

13

IS : 4111 ( Part

1 )- 1986
as

circular type. The base and wall shall be designed for the factors mentioned in 4.4.

4.10.1 Walls may be constructed of brick masonry above the sub-soil water level. A typical illustration of a reinforced cement concrete manhole with brick masonry above the sub-soil water level is shown in Fig. 5. 5. WORKMANSHIP 5.1 Where practicable, the channel shall be made of the same material as the sewer. Where this is not practicable, concrete ( of proportion 1:2:4 ) rendered smooth or plastered shall be used. Where there is no change of diameter, the invert shall be laid at the same gradient as the sewer. 5.2 The benching should have a fall towards the invert of about 1 in 12 for pipes up to 450 mm in diameter and should rise vertically from the springing to at least the height of the soffit of the sewer. 5.3 If a manhole is in agricultural land not likely to be developed the chamber walls ( in shallow manholes ) or shaft walls ( in deep manholes ) should, if possible, be built up to about 600 mm above natural ground surface and mound is made on all sides with earth. 5.4 In the case of a deep manhole the access shaft should be brought up to a suitable level to allow manhole cover and frame to be bedded on the top, the cover being at road level. The manhole frame should not be embedded in the RCC slab to facilitate replacement and adjustment where The reduction from the dimensions of the chamber to those necessary. of the shaft may be done in various ways: a) By means of a concrete slab suitably reinforced to carry the weight of the ground above and all probable superimposed loads. The slab should not be less that 150 mm thick. Precast slabs of various types may also be used; b) A brick arch turned over the chamber in one direction, and the brickwork corbelled inwards, or a concrete lintel in the other; c) In large manholes, brick arches at different levels and in both directions to effect the reduction in size; and d) A shallow manhole should be covered by a slab similar to that described in (a) above. Where necessary, the cover frame should be bedded on brickwork, corbelled over to suit the size of cover frame to be used. ( The adjustment to correct road level may be made in the brickwork.) 5.5 All corners shdll be rounded off to a 75 mm radius with cement plaster ( using one part of cement and three parts of sand, and finished smooth with a coat of neat cement >, 13 mm thick and all rendered internal surfaces shall have a hard impervious finish obtained by using steel trowel. 14

IS : 4111( 6. SAFETY 6.1 In deep MEASURES

Part 1) - 1986

manholes enlarged rest chambers should be made at about 6 m intervals, each provided with a landing platform in the form of a grating incorporating a hinged trap-door immediately under the ladder. 6.2 All manholes on sewers of 1 m diameter and over should be provided with provision for fixing safety chains (galvanized wrought-iron closelink, 6 or 10 mm ) for placing across the mouth of the sewer on the downstream side when men are at work, and galvanized pipe hand-rail, ( nominal 38 mm bore ) should be provided on the edges of all benchings, platforms, etc, to prevent possibility of a man falling into the sewer. 6.3 If ground conditions are such as to give rise to excessive risk of settlement and consequential damage to the manhole or sewer a concrete slab shall be provided at the top of the shaft to receive the cover frame. This should be independent of the shaft in order to avoid transmitting traffic shocks to the manhole. Any subsidence of the backfilling on which the slab rests, shall be brought to the required road level without disturbing or damaging the pipe or the shaft. 6.4 No manhole shall be permitted therein. inside a building or in any passage, for

6.5 In cascades and ramps, hand-rails and chains should be provided the safety of workmen. 7. TYPES OF MANHOLES

7.1 Straight-Through Manholes - The simplest type of manhole is that built on a straight run of sewer with no side junctions. 7.1.1 Where there is a c!range in the size of sewer, the soffit or crown level of the two sewers should be the same, except where special conditions require otherwise. 7.2 Junction Manholes - A manhole should be built at every junction of two or more sewers, and the curved portions of the inverts of tributary sewers should be formed within the manhole. To achieve this with the best economy of space, the chamber may be built of a shape other than rectangular. The soffit of the smaller sewer at a junction should be not lower than that of the larger, in order to avoid the surcharging of the former when the latter is running full, and the hydraulic design usually assumes such a condition. 7.2.1 The gradient of the smaller sewer may be steepened from the previous manhole sufficiently to reduce the difference of invert level at the point of junction to a convenient amount. 15

IS : 4111 ( Part 1) - 1986 7.3 Side-Entrance Manholes - In large sewers, or where it is difficult .to obtain direct vertical access to the sewer from ground level, owing to the existing services; gas, water, etc, the access shaft should be constructed in the nearest convenient position off the line of sewer, and connected to the manhole chamber by a lateral passage. 7.3.1 In tunnelled sewers the shaft and lateral access heading may be used as a working shaft, the tunnel being broken out from the end of the heading; or alternatively the shaft and heading may be constructed ,after the main tunnel is complete, provision having been made for breaking in from the access heading to build the chamber. 7.3.2 The floor of the side-entrance .passage, which should fall at about 1 in 30 towards the sewer, should enter the chamber not lower than the soffit level of the sewer. In large sewer where the floor of the side-entrance passage is above the soffit either steps or a ladder ( which should be protected either by a removable handrail or by safety chains ) should be provided to reach the benching. 7.4 Drop Manholes - When a sewer connects with another sewer, where the difference in level between water lines ( peak flow levels ) of main line and the invert level of branch line is more that 600 mm or a drop of more than 600 mm is required to be given in the same sewer line and it is uneconomical or impractical to arrange the connection within 600 mm, a drop connection shall be provided for which a manhole may be built incorporating a vertical or nearly vertical drop pipe from the higher sewer to the lower one. This pipe may be either outside the shaft and encased in concrete or supported on brackets inside the shaft, which should be suitably enlarged. If the drop pipe is outside the shaft, a continuation of the sewer should be built through the shaft wall to form a rodding and inspection eye, which should be provided with a half blank flange. If the drop pipe is inside the shaft it should be in cast iron and it would be advantageous to provide adequate means for rodding and a water cushion of 150 mm depth should also be provided. The diameter of the back drop should be at least as large as that of the incoming pipe. A typical illustration of a drop manhole is shown in Fig. 6. 7.4.1 The drop pipe should terminate at its lower end with a plain or duck-foot band turned so as to discharge its flow at 45 degrees or less to the direction of the flow in the main sewer, and the pipe unless of cast iron should be surrounded with 150 mm of concrete. 7.4.2 In the case of sewers over 450 mm in diameter the drop in level may be accomplished by one of the following methods: a) A cascade - This is a steep ramp composed of steps over which the flow is broken up and retarded. A pipe connecting the two levels is often concreted under the steps to allow small flows to pass without trickling over the steps. The cascade steps may be 16

IS : 4111 ( Part 1) - 1986
AST 1 BRICKWORK IN EMENT M.ORTAR IRON FRAME ANIJ

CE-MENT PLASTER 13 mm min.

REINFORCEMENT

CEMENT ONCRETE

B-Thickness All dimensions FIG.

of wall in millimetres.

5

TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION OF RCC MANHOLE ( CONCRETENOT SHOWN ) 17

E3 : 4111( Part 1) - 1986

SECTIONAL

PLAN

ZZ

SECTION
FIG. 6

XX
All dimensions

SECTION
in millimetres.

YY

TYPICALILLUSTRATION OF DROP MANHOLE

18

IS:4111(Part l)- 1986
made of heavy duty bricks of Class I quality ( see IS : 2180-1985 *), cement concrete with granolithic finish, or dressed granite; b) A ramp - A ramp may be formed by increasing the grade of the last length of the upper sewer to about 45 degrees or by constructing a steeply graded channel or culvert leading from the high level to the low level sewer. In order to break up the flow down the ramp and minimize the turbulence in the main sewer, the floor of a culvert ramp should be obstructed by raised transverse ribs of either brick or concrete at 1'15 m intervals, and a stilling pool provided at the bottom of the ramp; and c) By drops in previous successive manholes - Instead of providing the total drop required at the junction manhole the same may be achieved by giving smaller drops in successive manholes preceding the junction manhole. Thus, for example, if a total drop of 2'4 m is required to be given, 0'6 m drops may be given in each of the previous three manholes and the last 0'6 m drop may be given at the junction manhole. 7.5 Scraper ( Service ) Type Manhole - All sewers above 450 mm in diameter should have one manhole at intervals of 110 to 120 m of scraper type. This manhole should have a clear opening of 1 200 X 900 mm at the top to facilitate lowering of buckets.

*Specification

for heavy duty burnt clay building

bricks ( second revision ).

19

IS : 4111 ( Part 1) - 1986
( Continued from page 2 )

Drainage Subcommittee,
Convener
SHRI P. G. JOSHI

BDC 24 : 2
Representing of Greater Bombay,

Muni;?;\a!orporation

Members ENGINEER CHIEF DEPUTY ( SEWERAGE) ( Alternate to Shri P. G. Joshi ) Delhi Municipal Corporation, Delhi ADDITIONALCHIEF ENGINEER ( WATER ) DEPUTY DRAINAGE ENGINEER ( Alternate ) Ministry of Works and Housing DEPUTY ADVISER ( PHE ) Public Works Department, Government of CHIEF ENGINEER Punjab, Patiala In personal capacity ( 16-A Maya Mahal) 17th SHRI DEVENDRA SINGH Road, Khar, Bombay ) Public Health Engineering Department GovernSHRI K. GOVINDAN NAIR ment of Kerala, Trivandrum Tami~~;l~sWater Supply and Drainage Board, SHRI A. PONNAMBALAM SCIENTIST National Environmental Engineering, Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur SHRI A. W. DESHPANDE( AIternate ) Cent~~~r;illiog Research Institute SHRI S. K. SHARMA Research ( CSIR ),

20

