( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS I 9385 ( Part III ) - 19id

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR HIGH VOLTAGE FUSES
PART III APPLICATION GUIDE HIGH VOLTAGE FUSES FOR

High VoItage Switchgear and Controlgear Committee, ETDC 58
Choirman Srrrtr 1-I. M. Par Members The Ahmedabad Zzrprcrenting Electricity

Sectional

Co Ltd, Bombay

SIIRI B. S. REUBEN ( Alfcmats to Shri H. M. Pai ) Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Bombay SHHI M. M. BES~RE Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd, Calcutta SllRI K. K. Bosu: Saar T. K. GHOSE ( Alternafc ) Tata Hydra-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. CHAN~RA~OULI MRS C. BALIGA ( Alfern& ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi CHIEF ESGINEER SURVXYOR OF b$'ORKS 111 ( AifWZ&) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi DEPUTY CHIEF EN(:IN~E~ ( PS ) DIRECTOR ( Alfcrnotc ) General of Supplies & Disposals, Directorate SI~RI K. L. GARG New Delhi Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SRRI B. N. Gaosn SHRI G. P. MITTAL ( Altrrnatc 1 SHRI A. RAJA RAO ( Alfcrnate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI D. P. GUPTh New Delhi Kirloskar-Asea Limited, Bangalore SHI~IJAYANT IN. GURJAX NGEF Limited, Rangalore Srrnr H. V. J. IYENQAR SHHI C. S. N. RAJU ( Altnnafc ) Aluminium Industries Limited, Kundara SHRI P. M. JOSEPEL Snnr C. M. A. NAYAR ( Alternate) Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras SHRI I. C. I;UPPUSAMY SIRI S. PANNI~SHLVAN ( Aflcrnnfc ) Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. S. MANY SARI K. S. MADRAVAN ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SARIS. K. MUTCHERJE,: SHRI P.C. PRADHAN ( Alternate) ( Confinurd on page 2 ) @ CopVrirhr 1980 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This oublication is protected under the Zndion &&rig& Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

( Contiaurd from pop Mmbn

1)
Reprrrrnfing

Mysorc Electrical Industries Ltd, Bangalore Snar B. S. NARASIMHAN Central Power Raearcb Institute, Bangalore SESX V. R. NARA~INRAN SHRX ANANTHA KILWXNAN (Allarnofc ) Jyoti Limited, Vadodara SH~I J. S. NEGI SHEI R. M. NANAVATI ( Altern& ) Association, Manufacturers' Indi~mb~xtrical Ds C. M. PHADXE

SRRI J. N. CUBJAR ( Almafa ) SHBI A. S. PINTO S&r S. K. BASU ( Altnaatr ) Saar S. P. RANADE SEXI S. R. POTNIS ( Altrrnarr ) - SHRI P. K. SAXENA SRRI G. L. DUA ( Abrrnute ) Snsl A. P. SHENOY

Delhi Electric

Supply ._ . Undertaking. -. New Delhi

Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay Rural Ejectrification Corporation Ltd, New Delhi

Bombay Electric Supply and Transport Undertaking, Bombay SEBI Y. K. PALVANKAB ( Ahmatr ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o$icio Mambrr ) SHBI S. P. SACHDRV, Director ( Elec tech )

Assistant

SHRI K. GAN-H Director ( Elcc tech ), ISI

2

IS : 9385 ( Part

III )- 1980

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR HIGH VOLTAGE FUSES
PART III APPLICATION GUIDE HIGH VOLTAGE FUSES

FOR

,o.

FOREWOR,D

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part III ) was.* adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 16 January 1980, after the draft finalized by the High Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional Committee had been approved' by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 The explusion, find their while the up to 132 three classes of high voltage fuses in general use are, the These liquid and high rupturing capacity cartridge types. most common application on distribution systems up to 33 kV liquid and cartridge type fuses are available for use on systems kV, largely for protectmg voltage transformers.

013 This standard ( Part III ) guide forms a part of a series of s&dards Requirements and tests for current limiting fuses on high voltage fuses. and expulsion and similar fuses are covered in detail in the preceding parts of this standard. 0.4 The object of this guide is to present standard guidelines on the application, operation and maintenance as an aid in obtaining satisfactory performance with high voltage current limiting and expulsion and similar types of fuses. 0.4.1 Details of selection, installation and maintenance of low voltage fuses for voltages not exceeding 650 V are covered in a separate Indian Standard. 0.5 A fuse in an electric circuit stands guard at all times to protect the circuit in which it has been placed, and the connected equipment(s) from damage within the limits of its rating. The guarantee to its, adequate performance depends not only upon the accuracy with which it was manufactured, but also on the correctness of the application and It is realized hence the attention it receives after it had been installed. that proper application guidelines are necessary for the choice and installation of the types of fuses available as also the specifi@tions for their technical requirements. This Indian Standard ( Part III ), shall be used in conjunction with the other parts of this standard. 3

18t9385

( P8rt In) -1980
ruIes `shall .be of fuses near

0.6 It is also recommended that the prescribed safety observed at ail times, when handling or maintenance energized equipment or conductors.

0.7 In the preparation of this guide, considerable assistance has been derived from the following publications issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission: IEC Pub 282 - High voltage fuses: 282-l ( 1974 ) - Current limiting fuses and similar fuses 282-2 ( 1970 ) - Expulsion 0.8 In order to facilitate comparison with the international standards and for ease of reference, the committee has decided to add in the form of an Appendix, the major differences between this Indian Standard and This standard ( Part III ) the corresponding IEC Publication(s). corresponds appreciably with the IEC Publications referred to in 0.7 and there are no major deviations.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard and maintenance a) Current b) Expulsion (Part III ) covers guidelines on application, of high voltage fuses of the following types: limiting fuses, and fuses. to the and similar operation

1.1.1 Fuses for which this guide is intended shall conform provisions laid down in Part I and Part II of this standard. 2. APPLICATION 2.0 General -The general guidelines specified in this guide types of high voltage fuses unless otherwise stared. 2.1 Mounting - Fuses shall be installed in accordance facturer's instructions. For multipole arrangement of distance berween poles is not fixed by the construction, be mounted with clearances not less than those manufacturer. apply

to all

with the manufuses, when the the poles should specified by the

It shall also be noted that owing to external'phenomena the performance of these fuse-links may be significantly affected, and hence the safety clearances indicated by the manufacturer shall be adopted. 2.2 Selection of the fiated Current of the Fuse Link - The rated current of a fuse-link is usually higher than the normal service current. Guidelines for selection are usually provided by the manufacturer. 4

IS I 9385 ( Part III ) - 1980 If the current rating of the fuse-link is less than that of the fusebasi the effective current rating of the fuse is that of the fuse-link. The rated current of the fuse-link to the following paramrters: + shall be selected with due regard

a! normal

b) 4

and possible overload currents of the,circuit, including sustained harmonics; transient phenomena in the circuit related to switching such equipment as transformers, motors or capacitors; with other protective devices, if any; and conditions enclosure of the fuse or other variation in the cooling which may affect the temperature of the fuse-link.

co-ordination c>

The rated current is defined with reference to the temperature-rise of a fuse-link tests singly in free air. When fuses are used in an enclosure, the current rating may have to be reduced in order that the temperaturerise requirements may still be met, and consequently the fuse-links may have many different current ratings dependent on the type of enclosure. For the short pre-arcing times, generally used in predicting discrimination, the time/current characteristics are not significantly changed by mounting the fuse in such an enclosure. However, a useful guide for any necessary derating for current limiting fuses can be obtained by consideration ofthe results of the powerdissipation tests specified in 7.1.2 of Part I of this standard. the fuse-link may have special contacts for In sonic instances, mounting of three-fuse-links in a particular enclosure ( for example that of a switch-filse or fused circuit-breaker ). In such cases, special tests may he made in the particular enclosure and the current rating for application of the fuse-link inside the enclosure will be given. Nor E - Fuse-link9 that arc loaded with a current exceeding the rated current for a time longer than that altociatvd with the minimum breaking current may be subject to deterioration that might influence the characteristics and the breaking capabihty. 2.3 Selection
2.3.1 Selection of Rated Voltage Voltage of the Fuse-Link of Current-Limiting Fuse -

of Rated
of the

The rated voltage following : -

fuse-link

should

be selected

with regard

to the

if used on a three-phase earthed system, the voltage rating of the fuse-link should be equal to the highest line-to-line voltage; if used on a single-phase system, the voltage rating of the fuse-link should be at least equal to 1 I5 percent of the highest singlephase circuit voltage; 5

IS :9385 ( Part III ) - 1980 if used on a three-phase unearthed system, the possible occurrence of one double earth fault with one fault on the supply side and one fault on the load side of the fuse, should be considered, as well as the possibility of interruption of capacitive currents in the case of single phase-to-earth ,fault. Tests with regard to these conditions are not specified in the relevant parts.

2.3.2 Selection of Rated shall be done as follows:

Voltage of Expulsion

and Similar Fuses -

This

4 b)

The rated voltage of the fuse-carrier should be selected with due regard to circuit conditions related to voltages at the place where the fuse is to be installed, and The rated voltage highest line-to-line phase system. of the fuse-base service voltage should not be less than the of the multi-phase or singledoes _ . not tiarhover in Part II

of the dielectric withstand tests NOTE 1 - Successful completion insure that fuses Drovidlng au isolating distance, when open, will always to earth instead of across the isolating distance. NOTE 2 - Selection of a higher insulation of this standard 1s permissible. level than those specified

2.4

Selection

of Class

of Fuse

2.4.1 Current Limiting Fuses - According to the type of application fuses are referred to as general purpose fuses or back-up fuses, according to whether they are applied as the sole over-current protection, or used in connection with other over-current devices. 2.4.1.1 General purpose fuse - In order current protection, a fuse used as a general to break any value of current, up to its rated cause it to melt, but for practical purposes any current value that cause the fuse to melt to provide complete overpurpose fuse should be able breaking current that may this is interpreted to mean in at least 1 h.

Currents in the range between the rated curient and the one-hour melting current,. for which tests are not included in this standard are expected to occur only in special cases (,for example single-phase-toearth faults on unearthed systems ).

2.4.1.2 Back-up $UCS - Back-up fuses are for use where currents between the rated current and the rated minimum breaking current are interrupted by some other directly associated device or are not likely to be encountered.
It is essential to ensure current results in difficulties that the circuit tiith the fuse. 6 is opened before the flow of

c

IS89385 ( PartIII)

-1980

For fuse-combinations, proper co+rdination between the back-up fuse and the mechanical switching device shall be made to ensure correct operation of the combination over the whole range of currents. This co-ordination shall take into consideration the tripping process of the mechanical switching device either by means of strikers and over-current protective devices or by strikers only.
fault in the current

NOTE-

back-up ponding

that it&rinc5ple require a general purpose fuse, a range below the minimum breaking current is extremely rare: a fuse mav therefore he successfully used even if the pre-arcing time corresto the mhtimum breaking currrnt is considerably ICJJ than I h.

For manv applications

2.4.2

Expulsion and Similar Fuses -

This shall be done as follows:

a) Class 1 : These fuses are generally applicable to the protection of large transformer banks, voltage transformers and power-factor correction capacitor banks on important systems. Thry may be used indoors when they include provision for reduction of emission of gases. applicable to the protection b) Class 2 : These fuses are generally of small transformers and small power-factor correction capacitor banks, or for sectionalizing the circuit on outdoor open wire power distribution systems.
NOTE- The values of natural frequencies and amplitude factor may exceed the values r;pecitied for instance when fuses are located in the vicinity of a large transformer bank and whrn the conditions of no parallel loads may exist; such appliution conditions should be referred to the manufacturer.

2.5 Selection of Insulation

Levels

2.5.0 The choice of insulation level shall be made by considering the degree of exposure to lighting and switching over-voltages, the type of system neutral earthing and, where applicable, the type of over-voltage protective device. 2.5.1 Equipment designed according to List 1 of Table this standard is suitable for the following installations: a) In systems lines: 1) and industrial installations not connected 1 of Part I of to overhead

where the system neutral is earthed either solidly or through an impedance which is low compared with that of an arcsuppression coil. Surge protective devices, such as diverters, are generally not required; and where the system neutral is earthed through an arc-suppression coil and adequate over-voltage protection is provided in special systems, for example, an extensive cable network, where surge diverters capable of discharging the cable capacitance may be required. 7

2)

SS : 9385 ( Part III ) - 1999 b) In systems and industrial installations connected to dverhead lines through transforniers and where cables or additional capacitors of at least 0'05 PF per phase are connected between the transformer lower-voltage terminals and earth, on the transformer side of the fuses atid.as close as possible to the transformer terminals. This covers the cases: where the system neutral is earthed either solidly or through an impedance which is low compared with that of an arcprotection by means of surgr suppression coil. Over-voltage diverters may be des?able; and

2)

where the system neutral is earthed through an arc-suppression coil and where adequate over-voltage protection by surge diverters is provided.

c) In systems and industrial installations connected directly to overhead lines : is earthed .solidly or through an 1) where the system netural impedance which is low compared with .that of an arcsuppression coil and where adequate `over-voitage protection by spark gaps or surge diverters is provided depending on the probability of over-voltage amplitude and frequency; and 2) where the system neutral is earthed through an arc-suppression coil and where adequate over-voltage protection by surge diverters is provided. In all other cases, or where a very high degree of security is required, equipment designed according to List 2 shall be used ( see Table 1 of Part I of this.standard ). For voltages higher than 72'5 kV it is recommended to draw guidance from IS : 2165 ( Parts I to III )-1973* for choice between the alternatives `full insulation' and `reduced insulation' for the same rated voltage. 3. OPERATION 3.1 Special care shall be taken to see that the fuse-link is securely locked in the service position. While replacing fuse-links, it is advisable to remove and to insert fuse-links off-load ( seealso 0.6 ). It is also advisable to replace all three fuse-links when the fuse-link on one or two phases of a three phase circuit has operated, unless it is definitely known that over-current has passed through the unmelted fuse-links.
*Insulation co-ordination: Part I Definitions and basic principles (first reoision ). Part II For highest voltages for equipment of 100 kV and above (Jjrst rruision ). Part III For highest voltages for equipment abave 1 kV and less than 100 kV (jirrt rcoision ).

8

