INATA Ah IS 5282 (Part 3) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


SIE SIEGEL PUE 
HU SITEATT 19001 HT Frerkur 
ATT 3 URAL THAN Tah 
( 9807 JAGET ) 


Determination of Particle Size 
Distribution by Gravitational 
Liquid Sedimentation Methods 


Part 3 X-Ray Gravitational Technique 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 19.120 


© BIS 2023 


ARA HAR ST 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WH, 9 FT Me TH AM, 98 Recht - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


A 


A AS Y 


August 2023 Price Group 6 


Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee, CED 55 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 3) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 


Gravitational sedimentation particle size analysis methods are based on the settling velocity, under a gravitational 
field of particles in a liquid. This method is widely used for determining size distribution of many particulate 
materials. Typically, the gravitational methods apply to samples in the 0.5 um to 100 um size range and where 
the sedimentation condition for a Reynolds number < 0.25 is satisfied. 


The choice of the most suitable method for determination of size distribution depends upon factors like: 


a) the purpose for which the analysis is required; 

b) the size range and density of particles; 

c) the important properties of powder; 

d) the amount available for test; and 

e) the method by which the gross sample has been collected. 


Due to the inherent characteristics of the different materials and the factor stated above, it is not possible to apply 
a single method of size analysis. This standard recommend procedures that may be applied in the majority of 
cases. The purpose of this standard is to provide uniformity in procedure for any gravitational method selected to 
facilitate comparisons of size analysis data. 


This standard was first published in 1969 with the title “Liquid sedimentation methods for determination of 
particle size of powders”. In this revision, to incorporate the latest advancement in gravitational liquid 
sedimentation methods for determining size distribution of particulate materials, the gravitational liquid 
sedimentation method has been grouped into four parts. 


This standard (Part 3) describes a method for the determination of the particle size distribution of a powder 
dispersed in a liquid using gravity sedimentation. The measurement of the concentration of solids settling in a 
liquid suspension is achieved by monitoring the incremental signal absorption from a beam of X-rays. The other 
parts in the series are: 


Part 1 General principles and guidelines 
Part 2 Fixed pipette method 
Part 4 Balance method 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the 
standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this 
country. This has been met by deriving assistance from the following publications: 


ISO 13317 (Part 1) Determination of particle size distribution by gravitational liquid sedimentation 
methods — Part 1: General principles and guidelines 


ISO 13317 (Part 2) Determination of particle size distribution by gravitational liquid sedimentation 
methods — Part 2: Fixed pipette method 


ISO 13317 (Part 3) Determination of particle size distribution by gravitational liquid sedimentation 
methods — Part 3: X-ray gravitational technique 


ISO 13317 (Part 3) Determination of particle size distribution by gravitational liquid sedimentation 
methods — Part 4: Balance method 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision). The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5282 (Part 3) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


DETERMINATION OF PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTION BY 
GRAVITATIONAL LIQUID SEDIMENTATION METHODS 


PART 3 X-RAY GRAVITATIONAL TECHNIQUE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 3) covers X-ray 
gravitational technique for the determination of the 
particle size distribution of a powder dispersed in a 
liquid using gravity sedimentation. The 
measurement of the concentration of solids settling 
in a liquid suspension is achieved by monitoring 
the incremental signal absorption from a beam of 
X-rays. 


1.2 The methods of determining the particle size 
distribution described in this standard are applicable 
to powders which can be dispersed in liquids or 
powders which are present in slurry form. The 
typical particle size range for analysis is from about 
0.5 um to about 100 um. The method is used for 
materials containing particles of the same chemical 
composition which produce adequate X-ray opacity. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the edition indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of the standard: 


IS No. Title 
IS 4124 : 1981 Glossary of terms relating to 
powders (first revision) 
IS 5282 (Part 1) Determination of particle size 
: 2023 distribution by gravitational 
liquid sedimentation methods: 
Part 1 General principles and 
guidelines (first revision) 
IS 8883 Methods of sampling chemical 
and chemical product: 
(Part 1): 2005 General requirements and 
precautions (first revision) 


(Part 2) Sampling equipment, 
(Sec 1): 1978 For solids 
(Sec 2): 1978 For liquids 
(Sec 3): 1978 For gases 
IS 18100: 2022 Sample preparation — 


Dispersing procedures for 
powders in liquids 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 4124 and IS 5282 (Part 1), and the 
following shall apply. 


4SAMPLING 


The sampling shall be done as the method given in 
IS 5282 (Part 1). 


5 PRINCIPLE 


The concentration of dispersed sample is measured 
by attenuation of an X-ray beam. A stable, narrow, 
collimated beam of X-rays passes through a 
suspension of the sample: it is detected at a known 
height from the top of the sample cell. The sample 
cell is completely filled with sample suspension for 
the duration of the analysis. The settling height, h, 
at which the particle concentration, C, is 
determined, may be reduced during the analysis for 
the purpose of obtaining a more rapid analysis than 
would be possible if all measurements were made 
at the same value of, h. The cumulative mass 
percent of sample present at a given sedimentation 
height is continuously determined. The X-ray 
signal attenuation at the known height is compared 
to the attenuation with suspending liquid and also 
to the attenuation with the homogeneously 
dispersed sample present in the liquid. The 
attenuation of the emergent X-ray beam is 
proportional to the mass of powder in the beam, 
and is expressed by the following formula: 


I= ly exp (-BC) ee (1) 
or 
C = (-1/B) In (1/10) ike (2) 
The X-ray density,D, is expressed as follows: 
D = —BClge 00 (3) 
also 
D=1lg8(1/D Es (4) 
thus 
D = —BClge = lg 06/7) a (5) 


IS 5282 (Part 3) : 2023 


The Stokes diameter xs, corresponding to the 
X-ray density at settling height h and time t, is 
given by 

me (6) 


Xs = |. 
St — Leps- ppgt 


The X-ray density D is proportional to the 
concentration C, and thus mass, of sample in the 
beam. A plot of the X-ray density D, taken as a 
function of time t and h, versus 


/18nh/(0, — pogt 


provides the cumulative mass distribution versus 
equivalent spherical diameter. 


where 
I = Attenuation of emergent X-ray beam 
through suspension at settling height 
h, at time t; 
Io = Attenuation of emergent X-ray beam 
passing through the suspending fluid; 
B = Function of atomic number of sample 
elements in beam; 
C = Concentration of sample in beam; 


D = X-ray density [1816 Up/D)]; 


Xst = Stokes equivalent spherical diameter in 


m or um; 
h = Sedimentation height in m; and 
t = Sedimentation time in s; 


n = Suspending liquid viscosity in Pa-s or 
mPa: s; 
Ps = Sample density [effective particle 


density] in km. m”?; 


이 = Liquid density in km. m”?; and 
g = Acceleration due to gravity in m.s”?. 
6 APPARATUS 


6.1 Main Apparatus 


The main apparatus (see Fig. 1) typically consists 
of a temperature-controlled analysis compartment 
and mixing chamber; a plumbing system for 
circulation of suspending liquid or sample 
suspension; an X-ray source/detector system and a 
control module for apparatus control, data 
acquisition and reduction. The sedimentation cell 
within the  temperature-regulated analysis 
compartment may be repositioned throughout the 
analysis relative to the signal source and detector 
to reduce analysis time. Alternative designs, such 
as one in which the X-ray source and detector move 
while the sedimentation cell remains stationary, 
may also be used. 


The use of a magnetic stirrer should be avoided if 
magnetically susceptible particles are to be tested. 
The dispersion may then be maintained by means 
of a mechanical stirrer. 


6.2 Ancillary Apparatus 


Ultrasonic bath, probe or high-speed mechanical 
stirrer capable of 500 revolutions to 
1 000 revolutions per minute. 


DATA REPORTING FUNCTION 


IS 5282 (Part 3) : 2023 


10 100 
PARTICLE DIAMETER 


DISPERSED SAMPLE 
OR PURE LIQUID 


X-RAY DETECTOR 
X-RAY INTENSITY 
TO CONCENTRATION 


FIG. 1 SCHEMATIC OF TYPICAL APPARATUS USING THE X-RAY GRAVITATIONAL TECHNIQUE 


7 SAMPLE PREPARATION 


A representative sample for analysis shall be taken 
according to IS 8883 or any other suitable method. 
It shall be dispersed as per IS 18100 ‘Sample 
preparation — Dispersing procedures for powders in 
liquid’ in a suspending medium of adequate 
viscosity and X-ray transparency. The use of 
dispersing agents and ultrasonics or mechanical 
stirring to aid dispersion will be recorded. 
Typically 50 ml of dispersed sample is required for 
the analysis. The sample concentration will be 
prepared in accordance with the instructions 
supplied with sample. Higher sample 
concentrations may be required with powders 
having a low X-ray absorptivity coefficient. 
Knowledge of the exact sample concentration is 
not required, but the influence of concentration 
should be checked. The minimum concentration 
of suspension compatible with the measuring 
method is preferred [see IS 5282 (Part 1)]. The 
required sample concentration will typically produce a 


reduction in the beam signal of 10 percent to 
30 percent relative to the signal observed with the 
suspending liquid. The sample may be dispersed in 
either an aqueous or an organic medium. Any 
liquid compatible with sample cell materials and 
having low absorptivity for X-rays may be used. 
Typical liquids are water, glycols, kerosene, 
mineral oils, alcohols and mineral spirits. It is 
recommended that the viscosity of the suspending 
medium should have a value such that the largest 
particle to be measured has a Reynolds number of 
< 0.25 [see IS 5282 (Part 1)]. Any temperature 
change of the suspension should be minimized 
during a measurement (see 8.3). 


The viscosity and density of the suspending liquid 
at the temperature of the analysis will be reported. 
The effective particle density of the sample is also 
reported. The suspending liquid, including 
dispersants at the analysis concentration, may be 
used as the displacement fluid to experimentally 
determine the effective particle density. 


IS 5282 (Part 3) : 2023 


8 PROCEDURE 
8.1 General 


Refer IS 5282 (Part 1) for guidance on restrictions 
of upper size limit and lower size limit, and on test 
conditions. The validity of the measurement will 
be dependent on the Stokes equation applying to 
creeping flow for the suspension under study. The 
lower size limitation will in part be a function of 
the ability of the system to minimize thermal 
convection and mechanical effects. Additionally, 
for the fine size fraction, Brownian motion effects 
may contribute to the vertical spread of particles of 
the same size originating from the same initial 
settling height. 


8.2 Base-Line Determination 


Determine the attenuation of the X-ray signal with 
only suspending liquid in the sample cell (zero 
percent solids). Where possible, a base-line scan 
of the entire measuring portion of the cell is 
advised for subsequent correction of the 
corresponding sample suspension data. The base- 
line scan of the entire measuring portion of the cell 
is recommended as this will provide optimum 
correction for variability in the cell window 
thickness, or non-parallel alignment of the cell 
windows. 


8.3 Temperature Equilibration 


Place the dispersed sample suspension in the 
mixing chamber, and circulate the suspension 
through the sample cell for typically 60 s to 90 s. 
Confirmation is obtained that the analysis 
compartment is operating within the specified 
temperature band, preferably within + 1 K of the 
temperature set point. 


8.4 Bubble Elimination 


Check for the presence of air bubbles in the sample 
cell either manually or automatically. If bubbles 
are detected, remove them by manual or automatic 
operation. If air bubbles are detected, make a 
further check prior to commencing the analysis. 
Repeat the bubble detection and elimination steps 
until confirmation is obtained that no bubbles are 
detected. 


8.5 Concentration Setting 


Whilst the suspension continues to circulate 
through the sample cell, determine the 
concentration setting, according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Depending on the 
apparatus, this will typically require either a 
manual setting of the 100 percent point on the 
sample-recording graph paper or the automatic 


detection and storage of the signal for subsequent 
computation. A scan of the entire measuring 
portion of the cell for the 100 percent concentration 
setting may be performed; this will provide 
optimum correction for variability in cell window 
thickness, or non-parallel alignment of the 
windows, when applied in combination with a 
similar base-line scan. 


8.6 Measurement 


Initiate the analysis by cessation of pumping of the 
dispersed sample through the sample cell. Elapsed 
sedimentation times and the corresponding sample 
concentrations, at known sedimentation heights, 
are automatically recorded. The cumulative signal 
obtained as the analysis progresses permits 
termination of the analysis prior to achieving a 
base-line corresponding to a zero concentration of 
detected sample. Registration of the complete 
cumulative size distribution is preferred for the 
better detection of anomalies. However, for routine 
procedures, termination of the measurement prior 
to reaching the base-line is permitted. The 
requirements for an abbreviated analysis will 
depend on the sample diameters of interest to the 
operator. When the measurement is completed, a 
repeat analysis may be performed, following 
adequate redispersion of the sample sediment in the 
sample cell. 


8.7 Cleaning of Instruments 


Thoroughly rinse the sample vessel, measurement 
cell and associated tubing with the suspending 
liquid following the final repeat analysis. Run a 
new base-line scan to determine if any sample 
remains from the previous analysis. 


9 TESTS IN DUPLICATE, VALIDATION 
AND VERIFICATION 


9.1 General 


The X-ray gravitational technique is based on first 
principles and does not require calibration by the 
operator. Correct instrument operation may 
however be confirmed by a validation procedure. 


9.2 Tests in Duplicate 


Carry out tests in duplicate on representative 
analysis samples taken from the same laboratory 
sample. The results for duplicate analyses should 
normally differ by less than 2 percent for the 
proportions of mass at the same Stokes diameter. 
This figure would be expected to hold for the 
certified reference materials referred to in 9.3. 
Note that a wider tolerance may be required for 
other sample types with more narrow distributions. 


9.3 Validation 


The total measurement procedure should be 
considered, including sampling, sample dispersion, 
sample transport through the measuring zone, and 
the measurement itself. It is essential that the total 
operational procedure be adequately described in 
detail. Primary validation can be made with 
acceptable reference materials certified by a 
standard gravity sedimentation technique. It is 
recommended to use certified reference materials 
for validation. A record of all validation activities 
shall be maintained. 


The response of a sedimentation instrument is 
considered to meet this standard if the mean values 
of X19, Xsq and 266, coming from at least three 
independent measurements, are within the range of 
the certified values that is. the mean values together 
with their standard deviation. Mixtures by mass of 
two or more certified reference materials, having 
the same properties, can be applied to test the 
accuracy of the reported fractional quantities, the 
size resolution and the sensitivity for fines or coarse 
material. Representative sampling is of particular 
concern in the case of a test of mixed reference 
materials where fractional quantities can be very 
small. 


The precise position of the sample cell relative to 
the X-ray beam is critical for an accurate 
measurement. Where possible, the correct 
positioning at the start of the analysis is confirmed 
by monitoring the height from the initial analysis 
position to that point at which intersection of the 
finely collimated X-ray beam occurs with the top 
inner edge of the metal cell (hence referred to as an 
‘X-ray beam-split test”). Where applicable, an 
X-ray beam-split test may be performed as part of 
each validation test measurement, to corroborate 
precise positioning of the movable parts of the 
measurement system. This test verifies or 
establishes the travel of the moving parts from their 
initial position, for a given number of repositioning 
steps. 


9.4 Verification 


The checking at regular intervals of both operator 
procedure and instrument performance is essential 
to verify the test results. 


Whilst the X-ray gravitational technique does not 
require calibration, it is recommended that an 
X-ray beam-split test, when applicable, be 
performed regularly to corroborate precise 
positioning of the movable parts of the 
measurement system. Where practical, it is 
recommended that the beam-split test be 
incorporated as part of each test measurement. 
This test verifies or establishes the travel of 


IS 5282 (Part 3) : 2023 


the moving parts from their initial position, for a 
given number of repositioning steps. 


It is recommended that both the operator procedure 
and instrument performance be verified by the 
regular use of certified reference materials. Product 
samples of typical composition and particle size 
distribution for a specified class of products may be 
used, provided that their particle size distribution 
has been proven to be stable over time. The results 
should comply with previously determined data 
with the same precision and bias as those for the 
certified reference materials; otherwise a re-run of 
certified reference materials is indicated to verify 
instrument performance. 


10 CALCULATION OF RESULTS 


10.1 Calculation of Particle Size 


Use equation (6) to calculate the equivalent Stokes 
diameter for the height and time at which each 
measurement of X-ray density is recorded. Present 
the result as percentage oversize or undersize. 


10.2 Calculation of Cumulative Distribution by 
Mass 


Use equation (4) to compute X-ray density, which 
represents the cumulative distribution by mass 
below the equivalent Stokes diameter 
corresponding to the time and height of the 
measurement. 


11 REPORTING OF RESULTS 


Results are typically tabulated (see Table 1) as the 
cumulative percentage by mass (reported to the 
nearest 0.1 percent) at a near logarithmic series of 
diameters or plotted (Fig. 1) as cumulative mass 
percent versus diameter (on an exponential 
logarithmic scale). In the case of a plot, the 
diameters will be placed on the abscissa and the 
cumulative mass on the ordinate. A work out 
example is given in Annex A. 


The report shall state the following: 


a) Instrument type used; 

b) Sample density; 

c) Suspending liquid; 

d) Density of suspending liquid at the 
analysis temperature; 

e) Viscosity of suspending liquid at the 
analysis temperature; 

f) Temperature of the suspension during 
analysis; 

g) Dispersing agent and concentration of 
agent used; 

h) Method of dispersion, including 
dispersing time; and 

j) Any other information which could have 
an influence on the results. 


IS 5282 (Part 3) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 11) 
EXAMPLE 
SI No. Sample Quartz 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Sample density 2 642 kg.sm” 
11) Suspending liquid De-ionized water. 
iii) Liquid density 994 kg.m”? 
1v) Liquid viscosity 0.727 mPa.s 
v) Analysis temperature 307.85 K 
vi) Dispersing agent 0.1 percent weight per volume, tetrasodium 


pyrophosphate decahydrate 


vii) Dispersion method Ultrasonic probe, 1 min 


Table 1 Particle Size Distribution of Quartz 
(Clause 11) 


SI No. Diameter Cumulative mass Distribution % 
um 

a) (2) 6) 
i) 50.0 99.6 

ii) 40.0 99.1 

iii) 30.0 99.2 

iv) 25.0 99.2 

v) 20.0 99.0 

vi) 15.0 98.4 

vii) 10.0 95.5 

viii) 8.0 92.7 

ix) 6.0 86.5 

x) 5.0 80.4 

xi) 4.0 70.3 

xii) 3.0 53.8 

xiii) 2.0 29.0 

xiv) 1.5 14.9 

xv) 1.0 3.9 

xvi) 0.8 1.2 


Mass median diameter: 2.8 um 
Mass modal diameter: 2.7 um 


IS 5282 (Part 3) : 2023 


SSVW Ad % 


100 


10 


0.1 


FIG.2 PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTION OF QUARTZ 


IS 5282 (Part 3) : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee, CED 55 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (90, Savita Vihar, Vikas Marg, 


Delhi - 110092) 


AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 


Associated Soapstone Distributing Co Pvt Ltd, Jaipur 


Cement Corporation of India Limited, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


Haver Standard India Pvt Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur 


Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, New Delhi 

Industrial Wire Netting Company, New Delhi 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of Ministry of Defence, 


New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Faridabad 


National Mineral Development Corporation Limited, 
Hyderabad 
National Test House, Kolkata 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Kolkata 


Ultratech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


DRR. P. SINGHAL (Chairperson) 
SHRI ROHITASH BARUA 
SHRI MADAN KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIKRAM GOLCHA 
SHRI DILIP JHA (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SARASWATHI DEVI 
SHRI ANURAG KUMAR SAINI (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAYAK RAI 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARDEEP SINGH 
SHRI B. K. MUNZNI (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SHARMA 
DR PRADEEP KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR SANJAY YADAV 
DR NITA DILAWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVEN H. SHAH 
SHRI VIKRAM D. SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. G. RAUT 
SHRI V. A. SONTAKKEY (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI KESHAV GUPTA 
SHRI SANJAY GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. JAIN 
SHRI SOMESH KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI SURESH KUMAR 


SHRI G. J. NAIDU (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. SHARMA 
SHRI G. V. RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK SHARMA 
SHRIMATI MAYMOLE BOBEN (Alternate) 


SHRI BIPIN KUMAR GIRI 
SHRI SIBABRATA BASAK (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRAN K. P. 
SHRI DEVENDRA PANDEY (Alternate) 


IS 5282 (Part 3) : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


In Personal Capacity (B-129, F-2, Ramprastha Colony, | SHRI VIRENDRA BABU 
Ghaziabad - 201011) 


In Personal Capacity (Indian Institute of Technology, PROF B. PITCHUMANI 
Hauz Khas, New Delhi - 110016) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
DR MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 55 (18398). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


