**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 1200-28 (1992) : Methods of building and civil 
engineering works^ Part 28: Sound insulation works [CED 44: 
Methods of Measurement of Works of Civil Engineering] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 1200( Part 28) : 1992 
^Rcft^ ^V^ (Reaffirmed 2002) 

/w^/flAi Standard 

METHOD OF BUILDING AND CIVIL 
ENGINEERING WORKS 

PART 28 SOUND INSULATION WORK 



UDC 6900312: 699-844 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 
March 1992 Price Group 1 



Method of Measurement of Works of Civil Engineering ( Excluding River Valley Projects ), CED 44 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Method of Measurement of Works of Civil Engineering ( Excluding River Valley Projects ) 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

Measurement occupies a very important place in the planning and execution of any civil engineering 
work from the time of first estimates to the final completion and settlement of pavements of projects. 
Methods followed for measurement are not uniform and considerable difference exist between 
practices followed by different construction agencies and also between various Central and State 
Government Departments and their undertakings. While it is recognized that each system of 
measurement has to be specifically related to administrative and financial organizations within a 
department responsible for the work, a unification of the various systems at technical levels has been 
accepted as very desirable, specially as it permits a wider range of operation for civil engineering 
contractors and eliminates ambiguities and misunderstandings arising out of inadequate under- 
standing of various systems followed. 

Since different trades are not related to one another, the Sectional Committee decided that for each 
separate standards shall be issued as different parts as it would be helpful to users in using the 
specific standard. This Part 28 covers method of measurement of sound insulation on work applicable 
to building as well as to civil engineering work. 

Sound insulation work is required to be done in some of the insulation buildings. The method of 
measurement of insulation varies from organization to organization. The technical committee responsi- 
ble for formulation of this standard has, after considering practices being followed by some of the 
major organizations, decided to prepare this standard which adopts simplest type of measurement. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a measurement, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2 : 1960 *Rules for rounding off numerical values { revised )\ The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



IS 1200 ( Part 28 ) : 1992 



Indian Standard 

METHOD OF BUILDING AND CIVIL 
ENGINEERING WORKS 

PART 28 SOUND INSULATION WORK 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 28 ) covers the method 
of measurement of sound insulation for building 
and other civil engineering works. 

2 GENERAL RULES 
2.1 Clubbing of Items 

Items may be clubbed together. 

3 BILL OF QUANTITIES 

3.1 Items of work shall fully describe materials 
and workmanship and accurately represent the 
work to be executed. 

4 SOUND INSULATION TREATMENT 

4.1 Work of sound insulation shall be treated 
according to the material used and each classi- 
fication shall be measured separately. The follow- 
ing particulars shall be given for each work: 

a) Specification of the material used; 

b) Number of coats and thickness of each 
coat; 

c) Nature of surface treatment; 

d) Nature of base; and 

e) Curved work, conical work, special work 
and elliptical work stating the radius. 

5 METHOD OF MEASUREMENT 

5.1 All works shall be measured, net, in decimal 
system, as fixed in its place as given below: 

a) Each dimensions shall be measured to the 
nearest O'Ol m, where any dimensions is 
more than 25 metre it shall be measured 
nearest to O'l m, and 

b) Areas shall be calculated to the nearest 
0-01 m^. 

5.2 Celling Work/False Ceiling Work 

It shall be measured on the basis of finished work. 



5.3 Flooring Work 

It shall be measured on the basis of finished 
work. 

5.4 Work in Walls 

Actual finished area shall be measured. 

5.5 Work in Curved Walls 

It shall be measured separately on the basis of 
finished surface measurement. 

5.6 Work in Curved Celling 

It shall be measured separately on the basis of 
finished surface measurement. 

5.7 Work in Roof 

It shall be measured on the basis of finished work. 

5.8 Sound insulation work in isolated widths ( as 
in bands, corners, window cills, door and window 
jambs, sunk panels, etc ) and in rounded angles 
shall be measured separately. 

6 GENERAL RULES 

6.1 Description shall include rises and other 
roundings and shapes. 

6.2 Work in repairs shall be so described stating 
thickness of dubbing, if any. 

6.3 Sound insulation work on ceilings, walls and 
floor shall be measured separately. 

7 METHOD OF MEASUREMENT 

7.1 Work in isolating area not exceeding 1 m^ 
each shall be so described stating the nature 
thereof. 

7.2 Curved work, conical work and spherical work 
shall be described separately stating the radius. 

7.3 Opening dia 0*3 m^ or less shall not be ded- 
ucted for the purpose of measurement. 

7.4 Sound insulation work at a height greater than 
1 m above ground/datum level shall be measured 
separately in stages of 5 m height in case there is 
no floor in between. If there is a floor at a height 
not exceeding 5 m, then it shall be measured 
separately for each storey. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products 
covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with 
the requirements of that standard under a v^ell defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked 
products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safe- 
guard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard, Mark may be granted 
to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of allits publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), 
BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession 
of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS gwmg 
the following reference: 

Doc : No. CED 44 ( 4879 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manalcsanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg j 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 ( 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I. P. Road. Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446. Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C.I.T Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 235 02 16 

Western : Manakalaya. E9 MIDC, Marol, Andhcri ( East ) 632 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 

HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. SRINAGAR. 
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Primed at ProgressiTe Printers, Shahdara. I>elhi, India 



