IS 12955( Part 1 ) : 1990
( Reaffirmed 2001 )

CODEOFPRACTICEFOR IWSZ~'UDETERMTNATION OF ROCK MASS DEFORMABILITYUSINGA FLEXIBLE DILATOMETER
PART 1 WITH VOLUME CHANGE

UDC

624.12 1.54

@ BIS 1990

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI I10002

September 1990

Price Group

3

Rock

Mechanics

Sectional

Committee,

CED

48

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee Council. of Indian Standards had been approved on 24 April 1990, after the draft by the Civil Engineering Division

Deformability of rock mass near exposed surface can be determined by many methods such as uniaxial jacking test, radial jacking test, flat jack test, etc. On the other hand borehole instruments like dilatometer can be used to produce a log of deformability variations with depth. In this they are superior to other Dilatorneters are particularly valuable for methods which are designed only for near-surface application. the rapid index logging of drillholes in fragile, clayey or closely jointed rocks that yield poor core recovery and inadequate specimens for laboratory testing. The deformability values obtained by dilatometer logging give a very useful record of variations in rock quality and a useful comparison of relative deformabilities in adjacent rock strata, The volume of rock stressed by a dilatometer is quite small, usually less than one third of a cubic metre Correlation of the dilatometer and often too small for direct application of the results to design problems. modulus with that obtained, for example, by plate jacking, radial jacking or flat jack methods allows an are also needed to take into extrapolation of the dilatometer test results to the large scale. Adjustments account the fact that a dilatometer test carried out in a vertical hole gives information on horizontal deformability, whereas it is vertical deformability that is often more relevant, for example to foundations. Both the types of dilatometers referred to in this standard are flexible in that they apply a uniformly distributed pressure to the drillhole wall through a flexible membrane, and in this, they differ from `rigid' dilatometers such as the goodman jack which has semi-cylindrical loading platens of steel and therefore, directional pressure application. The two methods given here relate to two type of `flexible' dilatometers. The first covered in Part 1 measures the drillhole volume change from which radial displacements must be calculated, whereas the second covered in Part 2 measures the radial displacements directly using displacement transducers. Only the direct measuring type can be used to determine anisotropy of deformability as a function of radial direction within the drillhole: volume change types give an average value for the deformability modulus. The present standard is limited principal use of the dilatometer. to describing the measurement of rock mass deformability, which is the

IS 12955( Part 1 ) I 1990

Indian Standard

CODEOFPRACTICEFOR LWUTTU DETERMINATIONOF ROCKMASS DEFORMABILITYUSING A FLEXIBLE DILATOMETER
PART 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the method for determination of deformation modulus of rock in-situ using an expanding probe ( dilatometer ) to exert pressure on the walls of a drillhole. The resulting diametral hole expansion (dilation ) is determined from measurements of the volumetric expansion of the probe. Deformability characteristics of the rock mass at the dilatometer location may be calculated from the relation between pressure and dilation.
2 REFERENCE

1 WITH

VOLUME CHANGE
4.3 Drill cores shall be fully logged to record recovery and the characteristics of the rock `and jointing. Rock cores shall be available on site for inspection by the testing crew, if required. 5 TEST EQUIPMENT

5.1 Equipment the Test Hole

for

Drilling

and Preparing

5.1.1 A drill or boring machine
hole of the required depth of investigation. to give a smooth-walled machine shall be used.

to produce a test diameter, to the required A rotary diamond coring drillhole at the section the wall of

2.1 The Indian
necessary adjust 3. LOCATION

Standards listed to this standard.

in Annex

A are

OF TEST SITE

5.1.2 Casing as necessary to support the hole outside its test sections.

and depth shall be selected taking into account the anticipated rock quality variations and depths of weathering, and the requirements of the designs of structures for which the test data are to be used. 3.2 Within each drillhole the tests may be spaced either at equal intervals or at specified locations in' preselected geological formations or beds. Generally a log of deformability should be taken at regular interval along the length of the test hole pertinent to design. For example a 1, 2 or 5 m test interval may be specified depending on test hole lengths and required resolution. 4 PREPARATION

3.1 Drill hole locations

5.1.3 Equipment and materials for grouting and redrilling the test sections within ,the hole ( when required, see 3.2 ). 5.1.4 A dummy probe ( a cylinder of the same size as the probe ) to check that the hole is clear for insertion of dilatometer. 5.2 Calibration Equipment

One or more calibration cylinders of known elastic properties with internal diameter equal to that of the test hole, and with length similar to the active length of the probe. 5.3

OF TEST SITE

The Dilatometer

Probe

4.1 The test holes shall be drilled with the utmost care to preserve their stability, bearing in mind that rock fragments inadvertently wedged between the probe and the drillhole wall can trap the dilatometer permanently. The hole diameter shall be 0.5 - 3.0 mm larger than the deflated diameter of the probe.
4.2 For checking of the drillhole, use of a TV camera may be considered to avoid damage to the flexible membrane that might be caused by open fissures or voids. When the drillhole require support, this may be achieved by casing down to the uppermost test section and/or by cementing.

5.3.1 A dilatometer

probe or cell ( see Fig. 1 and 2 ) which includes a high pressure flexible membrane mounted on a core, such that the membrane may be inflated to press against the drillhole wall. The membrane must be strong enough not to be damaged when inserted into and withdrawn from the drillhole, yet flexible enough to transmit not less than 90 percent of the designed hydraulic pressure, when applied. 5.3.2 A means of inserting, raising and lowering the probe in the hole and of measuring its position to within &5 cm such as drill rods, special installing rods and cables.

1

-IS 12955 ( Part 1 ) : 1990
PRESSURE TRANSDUCER 1 /-

PRESSURE READOUT

ll

PISTON

PUMP

DILATOMETER

PROBE

ACTUATOR

FIG. 1

COMPONENTS AND

TYPICAL FLEXIBLE DILATOMETER SYSTEM
CENTRAL SHAFTJ / ti'"c"o~"E$S;E

RETAINING REMOVABLE CAP

NUT END

19 mm FOR

PIPE THREAD INSERTING

Fra. 5.4 -Hydraulic Probe

2

CROSS-SECTIONOF TYPICAL FLEXIBLE DILATOMETER SYSTEM to Pressurize the NOTE - For measurements in hard rocks a pressure range of at least 20 MPa is recommended. Pressurizing, fluids that have been used include glycerine, ethylene glycol, water, or hydraulic oil. 5.5.2 A pressure measuring system such as a Bourdon gauge or electrical transducer, with range as required -and with reading sensitivity better than &2 percent of the range employed in the test. 6 TEST PROCEDURE

System

5.4.1 A pump and tubing system capable of filling, inflating and deflating the probe and of applying and maintaining the required range of pressures. 5.4.2 A hand-operated screw pump ( or `pressure generator' ) is usually employed because it serves the two-fold purpose of applying pressure and measuring volume displacements of the fluid. Piston movement is actuated by turning the wheel of the pump. 5.4.3 If volume measurements are made outside the drillhole, the hydraulic system must be of rigid construction to minimize errors in determining dilation and to facilitate cyclic loading and stress relaxation testing. Alternatively, the expansion of hydraulic lines is immaterial and can be ignored if volumetric expansion is monitored directly within the probe. 5.4.4 Testing in large drillholes using a large diameter probe may call for the use of two pumps, a high displacement one for filling the system and applying initial pressure, in addition to the screw pump for pressurization. 5.5 Measuring Systems

6.1 Calibration 6.1.1 The purpose of calibration is to determine the system stiffness M, the value of which is required to allow calculation of the volume change of the test section from the measured volume change of the probe and the hydraulic system combined. 6.1.2 The complete dilatometer equipment shall be thoroughly checked and calibrated before each test series, also at least weekly during a test programme and after major repairs such as membrane replacement. The temperature at the time of calibration shall be recorded and the calibration repeated if this changes by more than 5�C from that of the borehole. 6.1.3 The probe, pump and hydraulic system to be used in the field shall be connected and filled with hydraulic fluid and checked for leaks. Any entrapped air shall be removed by thorough bleeding.

5.5.1 A volume measuring system, accurate to f 1 percent of the cell volume, to determine the amount of hydraulic fluid injected into or extracted from the cell. Volume is usually measured as the number of turns or part turns of the screw pump. 2

IS 12955 ( Part 1 ) : 1990 6.1.4 With the probe in the calibration cylinder, pressure shall be increased incrementally through the range to be used in testing, taking at least five readings of pressure ( MPa ) and corresponding volume ( pump turns ). [ A pressure-volume curve shall be plotted and its slope M, (MPa per turn), the overall stiffness of the system plus calibration cylinder measured therefrom. ] Ms is to be calculated from M, as described in 6.1.3. ,6.1.5 The probe shall be inflated in air ( without confinement ) to determine the membrane rigidity correction factor m ( MPa per turn ), obtained as the slope of the unconfined pressure dilation curve. 6.2 Testing 6.2.1 Having checked clearance of the hole using the dummy probe, the probe shall be inserted and lowered or raised to the required test location. The location shall be measured with an accuracy of f5 cm and recorded. 6.2.2 The probe shall be expanded under a pressure just enough to ensure permanent contact with no sliding. At no stage of testing, the pressure on the borehole walls shall be allowed to go below the seating pressure. 6.2.3 Pressure shall be increased in not less than five approximately equal increments to the maximum value, which shall be as high as required from design consideration ( i. e. upto l-5 times the design pressure ) but not greater than the safe operating pressure of the test equipment, taking into consideration the smoothness and diameter of drillhole at the test depth. The rate of loading shall be maintained constant as far as possible. 6.2.4 At each increment the pressure is to be maintained constant while taking readings of pressure ( MPa ) and corresponding volume ( pump turns ). Dilation ( if any ) is to be recorded versus time to give an indication whether the rock behaviour is time dependent. Alternatively, the same may be achieved by maintaining the volume of the probe constant ( without pumping ) and recording the drop in pressure with time. 6.2.5 At the maximum test pressure, the applied pressure is to be maintained constant during at least 10 minutes or longer if specified. Readings of dilation versus time at constant pressure are again to be tabulated to determine creep rates. 6.2.6 Dilation and pressure readings may then be taken during unloading, if specified. Three cycles of loading and unloading are required in most applications. 3 6.2.7 A pressure-volume curve is to be plotted and its slope MT ( MPa per turn ), the overall stiffness of system plus rock, determined ( see Fig. 3 ). 6.2.8 Pressure is then to be released and the probe relocated for the next test.

50

-

;; a

co .

z

z 20 z 2 cn g 30 a
0 W 3 ii a 10 -

0

0 DILATION

10

20 (NUMBER

30 OF PUMP

Lc) TURNS. n I

FIG. 3

PRESSURE-DILATION GRAPHS FROM A CSM DILATOMETER TEST

7 ANALYSIS

OF THE TEST DATA Calibration Constant

7.1 Calculation~f

7.1.1 The shear modulus G, of a calibration cylinder material having Young's modulus E, and Poisson's Ratio r, is given by:
G

c=

EC
Z(lfY,)

(MPa)
cylinder

7.X.2 The stiffness M, of the calibration is calculated as: M, = 1+&(1--2r,)

4

7rLas

1 - B,

( MPa per turn ) where Cc= pump constant ( fluid volume displaced per turn of pump wheel ),

3

L a length of cell membrane (m), a= the inside radius and b the outside
radius of the calibration metres), and ( a/b )s.

cylinder (in

B 0=

IS 12955 ( Part

1 ) t 1990
system is where YE the Poisson's known or estimated. 7.4 Calculations for Ratio for the rock is either

7.1.3 The stiffness MB of the hydraulic
calculated as:

Me =
where M, calibration in 6.1.4.

M"LM& c

m

(MPa

per turn)

Non-Linear

Behaviour

is the stiffness of the system plus as described cylinder, measured for Pressure and Volume

7.2 Corrections Losses 7.2.1

7.4.1 If the drillhole is located in closely jointed rock, the measured pressure-volume relation may become non-linear when the applied pressure exceeds about twice the average ground stress. In that case and assuming zero tensile strength for the rock mass, Gd can be calculated from:

Pressure Losses those read on the pressure are only equal to those actmembrane is very flexible or small. Usually the observed correction for membrane nm (MPa)

Observed pressure ( gauge or transducer ) ing on the rock if the the dilations are very pressure will require rigidity as follows: Pi eorr -

G = f'icorr ~
a

71

La=
C

Ancorr

(l--2%)

I,

W Pa)
values. where Picorr and Ancorr are the corrected for applied pressure and number of turns ( 6.2 ) and PO is the average ground stress around the drillhole ( MPa ), to be estimated or measured independently. 7.4.2 Alternatively one can obtain a versus dilation curve by plotting Pi,,,, ordinate and V, on the abscissa, where V, = a ( n Pi/M, ) (ms) in the same. test. pressure on the,

Pi -

where Pi,,,, is the corrected pressure, n is the total number of turns needed to attain Pi and m (MPa/turn) is the membrane rigidity correction factor ( see 6.1.5 ). 7.2.2 Volume Losses

These occur as a result of probe seating and inflation of the loading system. Using measurements defined in Fig. 3, the net corrected number .of turns An,,,, is calculated from:

The curve can be used subsequently manner as in a Monard pressuremeter 8 REPORTING

An corr
7.3 Calculation of Rock

=

f2 -

%eat

-

Pi/M,

(turns) Parameters in rock

OF RESULTS
are to be reported for the site

of Linear

-Elastic

8.1 The following
as a whole:

7.3.1 The stiffness is calculated as:

MR for the test section (MPa

4
per turn) Gd for a

Details of drilling including drilling method and equipment used.

agency,

b)

7.3.2 The dilatometric shear modulus drillhole test section is calculated as: Gd = MB F (MPa)

A map of drillhole locations and tabulation of hole lengths, diameters, inclinations and directions. logs of the drill core showing locations of cased and cemented sections if any; groundwater levels, rock types and characteristics, locations of test sections.

Cl Geotechnical

where L and a are the length and diameter of drillhole test section and CE is the pump constant ( see 7.1.2 ), 7.3.3 The dilatometer Gd = dilatometric shear modulus Gd test in a rock cylinder is calculated IWE 77

4
4

for as:

Characteristics of all discontinuities within each test section and 0.5 m above and below [see IS 11315 ( Part 1 to 11 ) : 19851. Details of the method and equipment for calibration and testing, stating departures from the procedures given in this standard. results of calibration. are to be reported for each

La2
u

C
but

1+B,(l-22%)
1 B,

. (MPa)
with B referring to

1

with notation as before, the tested rock cylinder.

f 1 Full
8.2 The test:

7.3.4 The dilatometric modulus of elasticity Ed for a test in either a drillhole or in a rock cylinder may then be obtained from: Ed 2 ( 1 + 2% ) Gd (MPa) 4

following

a) Tabulated test readings including both raw and corrected value with depths of measurements and graphs.

IS 12955 ( Part

1 ) t 1990

b)

Derived values of deformability parameters methods and together with details of assumptions used in their derivation. Deformability parameters tabulated and shown graphically as a function of applied pressure.

c) Logs of deformability variation as a function of depth ( or distance from the drillhole collar in the case of a non-vertical hole ).

ANNEX

A

( Clause 2.1 )
LIST OF REFERRED IS "MO. 11315 ( Part 1 ) : 1987 11315 ( Part 2 ) : 1987 I!315 ( Part 3 ) : 1987 Method for the quantitative Part 1 Orientation Method for the quantitative Part 2 Spacing Method for the quantitative Part 3 Persistence Method for the quantitative Part 4 Roughness Method for the quantitative Part 5 Wall strength Method for the quantitative Part 6 Aperture Method for the quantitative Part 7 Filling Method for the quantitative Part 8 Seepage Method for the quantitative Part 9 Number of sets Method for the quantitative Part 10 Block size INDIAN STANDARDS
Title

description

of discontinuities

in rock mass: in rock mass: in rock mass: in rock mass: in rock mass: in rock mass: in rock mass: in rock mass: in rock mass:

description of discontinuities description of discontinuities description of discontinuities

11315 ( Part 4 ) : 1987 11315 ( Part 5 ) : 1987 11315 ( Part 6 ) : 1987 11315 ( Part 7 ) : 1987 11315 ( Part 8 ) : 1987 11315 ( Part 9 ) : 1987 11315 ( Part 10 ) : 1987 11315 ( Part 11 ) : 1985

description of discontinuities description of discontinuities description of discontinuities description of discontinuities

description of discontinuities

description of discontinuities in rock mass:

Method for the quantitative description of discontinuities in rock mass: Part 11 Core recovery and rock quality

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau

of Indian

Standarda

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No without the prior permission in writing of BIS. imnlementing the standard, of necessary details, En'quiries rerating to copyright be addressed to
Revision of Indian Standards

part of these publications may be reproduced in any form This does not preclude the free use, in the course of such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. the Director ( Publications ), BIS.

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the latest amendments or edition. following reference: Dot : No. CED 48 ( 4657 )

Amendments

Issued

Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters :

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices :

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : 1 14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola d ALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 600113

2 1843 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol. Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY. 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. HYDERABAD. BANGALORE. FAR IDABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at New India Printing Prem. Khvris. Indls

