IS 13360 (Part 1 l/&c
IS0 8295 : 1995 v7?mm

1) : 1999

.

Indian Standard METHODS OF TESTING
Determination of Coefficients of Friction

PLASTI~CS Se&on

PART 11 SPECIAL PROPERTIES 1 Film and Sheeting -

ICS 83.140.10;19

0 BIS 1999

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
NEW

INDIAN
DELHI 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR

February 1999

Price Group

4

Methods of Test for Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 23

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part I l/Set 1) which is identical with IS0 8295 : 1995 `Plastics - Film and sheeting - Determination of the coefficients of friction' issued by the international Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Methods of Test for Plastics Sectional Committee and approval of the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. The,text of IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, -however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attehtion is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words`lnternationai read as `Indian Standard'. Standard appear-referring to this standard, they should be

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice
is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. in this adopted standard reference appears to one international Standard for which Indian Standard also exists. The corresponding Indian Standard which is to be substituted in its place is listed below along with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated: international Standard Corresponding Indian Standard IS 196 : 1966 Atmospheric conditions for testing ( revised) Degree of Equivalence Technically Equivalent with minor deviations

IS0 291 : 1997 Plastics Standard atmospheres for conditioning and testing

For tropical countries like India, the standard temperature and the relative humidity shall be taken as 27 f 2OCand 65 f 5 percent respectively. in reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with~iS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)`.

IS 13360 (Part ll/Sec 1 ) : 1999 IS0 6295 : 1995

Indian Standard PLASTICS METHODS OF TESTING
Determination of Coefficients of Friction

PART 11 SPECIAL PROPERTIES Section 1 Film and Sheeting -

1

Scope

1.1 This International Standard specifies a method for determining the coefficients of starting and sliding friction of plastic film and sheeting when sliding over itself or other substances. The method is intended to be used for non-sticky plastic film and sheeting (in the following text, referred to simply as "film") of up to approximately 0.5 mm thickness.
This test method serves primarily for quality control. It does not give a comprehensive assessment of the machinability on packaging or processing machines since other effects, e.g. electrostatic charges, air cushion, local rise of temperature and abrasion are, as a rule, involved. The static frictional force increases as a rule, with the time the surfaces are in contact. Therefore, to get comparable results, this time span is specified. 1.4 Slip properties are sometimes generated by additives in the plastic material. The additives have varying degrees of compatibility with the film matrix. They may bloom or exude to the surface and change the slip properties. Since these effects are timedependent, measurements on such films have to be related to the age of the film.

cent edition ~of the standard indicated below. Members of IEC and IS0 maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. IS0 291:1977, Plastics conditioning and testing. Standard atmospheres for

3

Definitions
Standard, the

1.2

For the purposes of this International following definitions apply.

3.1

friction: The resistance that two surfaces lying in contact with each other build up against sliding. A distinction is made between static friction and dynamic friction. 3.1.1 static friction: Friction which has to be overvalue" at the onset of sliding

1.3

come as a "threshold motion.

3.1.2

dynamic friction: Friction which ing a sliding motion at a given speed.

persists dur-

3.2 frictional force: The force necessary to overcome friction. A distinction is made between the static frictional force F, and the dynamic frictional force FD. 3.3 normal force, Fp: The force acting perpendicular to the surfaces in contact.

2

Normative

reference
3.4 coefficient of friction: The ratio of the frictional force to the normal force, acting perpendicular to the two surfaces in contact. 3.4.1

The following standard contains provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International Standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most re-

static coefficient of friction: ccs =7
FS P

1

IS 13360 (-Part tl/Sec IS0 6295 : 1995 3.4.2

1) : 1999

dynamic coefficient of friction: FD PD = 7
P

NOTES

Figure 1 shows an example of apparatus in which the table is moved horizontally. The vertical motion of a tensile tester may also be utilized; in this case, the test table is fixed to the crosshead of the machine and the force is deflected to the horizontal direction by a pulley. The force is recorded by a chart recorder or an equivalent electrical data-processing unit.

1 The coefficient tween 0.2 and 1.

of friction

of films usually ranges be-

2 Ideally, the coefficient of friction is a characteristic independent of the test equipment and the test conditions. Since films generally do not behave ideally, all test parameters are specified in this International Standard.

5.2 The test device shall comply with the following conditions.

4

Principle
5.2.1 The surface of the test table shall be flat and smooth, and made of a non-ferromagnetic metal.

The surfaces to be tested are placed together in plane contact and under uniform contact pressure. The force needed to displace the surfaces relative to each other is recorded.

5

Apparatus

5.1 The test device may be constructed in different ways. In general, it consists of a horizontal test table, a sled, and a driving mechanism to produce a relative motion between the sled and the test table, regardless of which is the moving part.

5.2.2 The normal force shall be generated by a sled with a square-shaped contact base of 40 cm2 (edge length 63 mm). To ensure uniform pressure distribution, the base of the sled shall be covered with an elastic material, for example felt. The structure of this covering material shall be fine enough to avoid embossing thin films. The total mass of the sled shall be 200 g f 2 g (exerting a normal force of I,96 N -fi 0,02 N).

G

AH

B

6

Sled Test specimens Moving table Load cell Reinforcement plate Spring Double-faced adhesive tape Felt

Figure 1 -

Example of moving-table

apparatus for determination

of coefficients

of friction

IS 13360 ( Part 1 l/Set IS0 6295 : 1995

1) : $999

5.2.3 The motion that induces the friction process shall be free of vibrations and shall normally have a speed of 100 mm/min + IO mm/min. In the case of specialist films or where difficulties are encountered, a speed of 500 mm/min + 10 mm/min may be used. This shall be reported in clause 11, item f). 5.2.4 The force-measuring system, including the recording instrument, shall not exceed an error of +_ 2 %. Its transition time rss % shall not exceed 0,5 s. The pulling direction shall be in straight alignment with the frictional plane.
If the used, force-measuring the transition system of a tensile tester is time raa o/0 shall be particularly systems of these machines

Unless otherwise specified, the long axis, and thus the test direction, shall be parallel to the machine direction of the film. When different frictional properties are expected for the two surfaces, front (II and back (21, the two surfaces shall be identified and tested l/l, 2/2 and/or l/2 as agreed between the interested parties. Extreme care shall be taken in handling the samples and specimens. The test surfaces shall be kept free of dust, fingerprints or any foreign matter that might change the surface characteristics.
NOTES 4 Testing of three pairs of test specimens represents a minimum for estimating the statistical tolerance interval. Depending on the intended precision and the homogeneity of the material under test, the number of specimens tested may have to be increased. IS0 2602: 1980. Statistical interpretation of test results - Estimation of the mean - Confidence interval, gives guidance in this respect. 5 To avoid contamination of the surfaces, several test specimens may be cut simultaneously and separated immediately before testing.

checked, as the indicating are often rather inert. 5.2.5 For the measurement

of the static friction,

the

friction drag of the force-measuring system shall be adjusted to 2 N/cm + 1 N/cm. This may be accom-

plished by using a suitable spring. For the measurement of the dynamic friction in the case of slipstick behaviour, this spring shall be replaced by a rigid connection.
NOTE 3 The inertia of the mass of the sled induces an additional force at the start of the sled movement; thus the coefficient of fnction differs from its true value by an amount A given by

7

Conditioning

Unless otherwise specified, specimens shall be conditioned for at least 16 h in standard atmosphere 23/50 as defined in IS0 291 prior to testing.

-

A=$
where
V

J&
is the speed of the sled relative ( = 100 mm/min); is the mass of the sled f= 200 g); is the acceleration to the table

8

Procedure

m g

The following directions refer to an apparatus designed in accordance with figure 1. If another equivalent apparatus is used, the appropriate procedure shall be followed. The testing shall be carried out in the same atmosphere as used for conditioning. 8.1

due

to

gravity

(= 9 810 mm/s2);
D is the friction drag (2 N/cm = 2 x lo5 g/s.`).

Measurement

of film against film

Under these conditions, the overshoot of the coefficient of friction is 0,905. In the worst case, this means that, at a low coefficient of friction of 0.2, the overshoot equals an error of 2,5 %.

6

Test specimens

For each measurement, two test specimens measuring about 80~mm x 200 mm are needed. At least three such pairs of test specimens taken from points uniformly distributed over the width of the sample, or the circumference in the case of tubular film, shall be tested.

8.1.1 Fix the right-hand end of the first test specimen on the test table with double-faced adhesive tape (or by a suitable clamp) so that the length axis of the test specimen coincides with that of the table. Reinforce the left-hand end of the second test specimen by attaching a small plate to it with double-faced adhesive tape. The mass of this plate shall not exceed 5 g. Connect this plate via a spring (see 5.2.5) to the load cell. Lay the second test specimen on the first and place the sled on top, gently and without shock, in the middle of the second test specimen (for films producing high blocking or other than frictional forces, the contact area, i.e. the size of the upper test specimen, shall be reduced as closely as possible to the 3

IS0

IS 13360 (Part ll/Sec
6295:lQQS

1) : 1999

area of the sled). Before starting the test, the apparatus shall be free of stress. After 15 s, start the motion of the test table and start up the recording instrument. The first force peak is caused by static friction.

calculated, but not the static coefficient 8.1.2). The static coefficient equation P's= 7 where
FS
FS P

of friction (see

of friction

~1~is given

by the

8.1.2

After the first peak, oscillations in the force may sometimes occur. In this case, the oscillating part of the graph cannot be used to determine the dynamic coefficient of friction. The dynamic coefficient shall be determined by a separate measurement in which slipstick behaviour is eliminated by replacing
the spring This type with a rigid connection. cannot

is the static frictional newtons;

force, expressed

in

be used to determine the static coefficient of friction because of the inertia error (see note 3 in 5.2.5).
of determination NOTE 6 The load cell may also be attached directly to the sled. In this case, the second test specimen is fastened to the front edge of the sled with double-faced adhesive tape. However, this procedure is not advisable for stiff films since the bending moment may cause an unequal pressure distribution.

FP

is the normal force exerted of the sled, expressed (= 1,96 N).

by the mass in newtons

9.2

Dynamic coefficient

of friction

The frictional force acting during the sliding motion often differs from the constant value which would exist in an ideal situation due to secondary effects related to increasing path length. The dynamic frictional force FD is the average force over the first 6 cm ~of movement after the start of relative movement between the surfaces in contact, neglecting the static force peak Fs. The dynamic coefficient of friction po is calculateti from the dynamic frictional force using the equation
FD PO = F
UP

8.2

Measurement of film in contact with metal or another material

If the frictional behaviour of a film in contact with a metal surface or the surface of another material is to be determined, the lower test specimen (see figure 1) shall be replaced by a specimen of the material in question. Otherwise, the same procedure shall be used. The coefficients of friction determined in this way are dependent on the type of material as well as on its surface finish. If subsequent measurements test specimen of a material, abrasion may have occurred, surface properties. Also, the slip or antislip agent shall be are made on the same it should be noted that which will change the possibility of transfer of considered.

where

FD
FP

is the dynamic in newtons;

frictional

force, expressed

is the normal force exerted of the sled, expressed (= 1,96 N).

by the mass in newtons

10 9 9.1 Expression of results of friction

Precision

Static coefficient

The force increases linearly to a maximum which represents the static frictional force Fs. I\lleasurements made at a high friction drag (i.e. without a spring) permit the dynamic coefficient of friction to be

The dispersion of the coefficients of friction of several plastics has been investigated in a preliminary interlaboratory trial intended, first and foremost, to assess an alternative test speed, and also to provide preliminary precision data (see annex A). When further repeatability and reproducibility data are obtained, they will be added at the following revision.

IS 13360 (Part ll/Sec 1) : 1999 IS0 6295 : 1995

11

Test report
particulars:

d)

the individual and average values and, if required, the standard deviation and the number of tests for II 2) the static coefficient of friction, of friction;

The test report shall include the following a) b) a reference to this International

Standard;

the dynamic coefficient

all information necessary for identification of the plastic film sample, and, if known, the approximate age of the film; which of the two surfaces was tested;

e) if measurements

were made with the film in contact with other materials, an exact description of these surfaces; any deviations from this International Standard.

c)

f)

IS 13360 (Part ll/Sec 1) : 1999
IS0 8295 : 1995

Annex A (informative) Preliminary precision data
A preliminary

inter-labaratory trial was carried out in 1993 to verify whether a test speed of 500 mm[min can be used instead of 100 mm/min for plastics having a high coefficient of friction which may cause insufficient precision of the results. The trial was conducted not only to assess the alternative test speed, but also to acquire preliminary precision data. The precision data obtained show that a test speed of 100 mm/min is suitable for ail the materials tested in the trial. The trial was organized and the results analysed in accordance w&h IS0 5725-1, IS0 5725-2 and IS0 5725-3" and involved four laboratories (in China,
France, Japan and the UK) and four samples of which both the internal and external surfaces were tested. Although the number of participating laboratories did I not satisfy the requirements of IS0 5725, tables A.1

and A.2 have been ~prepared from selected data as usefu! examples, pending a full-scale precision trial to be conducted before the next revision. The data are arranged in order of magnitude and classified by coefficient of dynamic and coefiicient of SadtiC triction. To make it easier to compare the standard deviations between the levels, with no regard to the absolute values, the coefficients of variation have been caiculated and included in parentheses in tables A.`1 and

A.2.

coefficient of variation (%)

=

standard deviatron ---.average caefficient of fraction
by Grubb's test

x

106

No outiiers

were

detected

Table A.1 -

Precision of dynamic coefficient of friction
Reproducibility standard deviation, s,

Plastics (Nominal thickness in pm), swfacehwface

laboratory standard

i/l
I/E

friction between friction between

internal surface and internal surface; internal surface and external surface.

1I IS0 5725-l :1994, Accuracy (trueness and precision) of measurement
definitions.

methods and results -

Part 1: General principles and

IS0 5725-2:1994, Accuracy (trueness and precision) of measurement methods and results determination of repeatability and reproducibility of a standard measurement method. IS0 5725-311994 Accuracy (trueness and precision) of measurement of the precision of a standard measurement method. methods and results -

Part 2: Basic method

for the

Part 3: lnfermediate

measures

6

IS 133601(Part11/Sec1):1999 ?SQ 8295:lQQ5

Tabie

A.2 -

Precision

of static

coefficient

of friction

I
Average coefficient Reproducihiiity-withinS.&oratory standard deviation, sRW Fhproducibility standard deviation, s,

.- fricticn ~Z~~.MPZXI internal surface and external surface. I-.B_ --YY..".-r; k_

I/!

friction btitween internal surface and internal surface;

`9~: dynamic and static data were taneousli/ !i7 ?he same test Wi?.
`%o

obtained

simui-

tii)

Static electricity

in;e:-Gibentory trial was carrEed out not only to oot.3r-1 precision data Wt a!su to improve the test method. "rPtiz data oI~ta:r~+~d and many o! the observal\ons xxx? cx_iLrq rhs `.est .vere of considerable -I-.

It was reported that, in some specimens, static charge l*as observed during testing, which made it difficult to handle the specimens properly. The effect of static charge should be investigated, but it is suggested in any case that the static charge should be eirminated before testing. (iii) Measurement of frictional force

(ii

ctifyi*$p?

i;f

sarT:i;:e

The avcrcu~e re,Jr?cio:~ibiiity-within-laboratory standard de:*i,?tro~`,s,rc_ QMF?~ In the tables are nearly the same as the re~>ro:i!~::Idilrty standard deviations "a, and in son!c insta~css .~a is less than sR,.,. These data are unusual bec3~ec sRvJ is usually approximately onethird of sa. The data suggest either that the measure Mets can fi:rctuate greatly due to the various factors encountered, or that the specimens tested were not identical. The samples were distributed from a single source and were identical but, judging from the reports of the state of the samples received and tested by some laboratories, it is doubtful that the specimens used in each lahrjratory were strictly identical. Some samples were reported to have had surfaces which were not flat, or even creased. These samples should not, of course, have been used for testing. The condition of the sample should therefore be described in much more detail in the test report.

The recorded plots of the static frictional force varied fram lab to iab. Some were rather flat while some showed curves which rose as the test proceeded. It is possible that the operators have interpreted these plots differently, thus giving values which vary more ,widely than expected. The system of measuring, recording and calculating the average frictional force should therefore be investigated in detail in order to reduce the variation in the data. iiv) Sled material and weight of sled

These two factors affect the actual contact area between the surfaces of specimens. Stiff films tend to have a smaller contact area, and hence the pressure is less uniform, when the sled is not heavy enough. This aspect may well be worth studying. This International Standard requires that the sled be covered with an elastic material. The sled and the elastic material used shoutd be defined as specifically as possible in order to keep the pressure uniform and obtain more reproducible results.

IS 13360 (Part ll/Sec IS0 6295 : 1995

1) : 1999

(VI

The spring

NOTES 7 Reproducibility is the precision under conditions in which the test results are obtained using the same method and identical test material but in different laboratories with different operators using different equipment, and are expressed in terms of the reproducibility standard deviation. 8 Reproducibility-within-laboratory is the precision under conditions in which the test results are obtained in the same iaboratory using the same method and identical test material, but the operator, the equipment and/or the time of measurement may be different.

The spring, intended ti control the initial speed of the sled to give even acceleration, could not be used in the case of high-friction film such as PE-LLD, because no spring was availabk? wkh met ?he requirements of the standard. The sled was therefore connected
directly pended to the load cell., and; the value obtained deon the appar;atus u,sed, different apparatus

giving a different initial acceleration. The values of the dynamic coefficient of friction obtained are only relative values.

8

