WATT AAP IS 17913 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


ant thy — dar artery 


Yoga Centre — Service 
Requirements 


ICS 03.180; 11.020.99 


© BIS 2022 


URd ATP SRI 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM Aaa, 9 TS LTE AH AMT, AS feet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


O Tunes Y 


August 2022 Price Group 4 


Health, Fitness and Sports Services Sectional Committee, SSD 05 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Health, Fitness 
and Sports Services Sectional Committee had been approved by the Service Sector Division Council. 


Yoga is a system of holistic living, having the roots in Indian tradition and culture. It was evolved thousands of 
years back by the Rishis (Sages). Although, Yoga is a spiritual tradition, the techniques of Yoga are being widely 
used for meeting the changing healthcare needs and wellness of mankind in present scenario. Therefore, Yoga has 
attracted global attention in recent years. The awareness about yogic practices is increasing among people from 
different walks of life, not only for promotion of health and wellness but also for the management of various 
diseases and disorders. 


Many Yoga experts and medical professionals have been advocating yogic lifestyle for the prevention and 
management of stress induced, psychosomatic and lifestyle related disorders. It is felt that the Yoga facility should 
be propagated at a mass level adhering to the classical knowledge, so that people can derive maximum benefits. 
There are several Yoga centres functioning in the country at their own styles and patterns. With the increasing 
popularity of Yoga learning among the people, it is felt to formulate an Indian Standard for Yoga centres which 
forms the benchmark for services being provided. 


In the formulation of this Indian Standard for Yoga centre, considerable assistance has been derived from the 
guidelines for accreditation/recognition of Yoga institution published by the Yoga Certification Board (YCB), 
Ministry of Ayush, Government of India. 


While deciding on the requirements for minimum qualification and experience for Yoga wellness instructor, 
reference has been derived from existing guidelines for Yoga professionals set up by YCB and Level 5 
qualifications of Yoga wellness trainer set up under National Skills Qualifications Framework. 


For better appreciation of the contents of this standard, a reference may be made to IS 17874 (Part 1) : 2022 
‘Glossary of Yoga terminology: Part 1 Standardized commonly used terms related to Yoga’. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 
2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17913 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
YOGA CENTRE — SERVICE REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the service requirements for 
operations, benchmarking and infrastructure including 
minimum qualification for Yoga wellness instructor 
and staff of Yoga centre. 


NOTES 


1 Yoga centre does not include universities, 
institutes/colleges and Yoga training centres involved in 
conducting courses like certificate, diploma, graduate and 
post-graduate courses in Yoga. The standard also excludes 
the Yoga centre providing Yoga therapy. 


2 This standard covers requirements of services provided 
by Yoga centre used by general public only for practicing 
Yoga for promotion of health and wellness. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Basic Yoga Practices — The Yoga practices 
which are commonly practiced by a healthy person for 
promotion of health and wellness. 


NOTE — For information on basic Yoga practices, refer 
Annex A. 


2.2 Complaint — Expression of dissatisfaction made 
to a Yoga centre related to, its service, or the 
complaints-handling process itself, where a response 
or resolution is explicitly and implicitly expected. 


2.3 Document — Information and the medium on 
which it is contained stating results achieved or 
providing evidence of activities performed. 


2.4 Feedback — Opinions, comments and 
expressions of interest of a Yoga aspirant/Yoga 
Sadhak on services or a complaint handling process. 


2.5 Improvement — Activity to enhance the 
performance. 


2.6 Infrastructure — System of facilities, equipment 
and services required for the smooth and effective 
operation of a Yoga centre. 


2.7 Interested Party — Person or organization that 
can affect, be affected by, or perceive itself to be 
affected by a decision or activity. 


2.8 Learning — Acquiring knowledge, behaviour, 
skills, values, preferences or understanding. 


2.9 Management — Person or group of people who 
directs and controls Yoga centre at the highest level. 


2.10 Objective — The set goals of the Yoga centre, 
which are to be achieved. 


2.11 Procedure — The specified way to carry out an 
activity or a process. It can be a standard operational 
procedure. 


2.12 Record — Document stating results achieved or 
providing evidence of activities provided. 


2.13 Requirement — Need or expectations that is 
stated, generally implied or obligatory. 


2.14 Review — Determination of the suitability, 
adequacy or effectiveness of an object to achieve 
established objectives. 


2.15 Risk — Effect of uncertainty. 


2.16 Service — The result of at least one activity, 
necessarily performed between the Yoga centre and 
the Yoga aspirant/Yoga Sadhak. 


2.17 Traditional Yoga Practices — A system of 
knowledge derived from the Yogic texts and handed 
down by a lineage of teachers. 


2.18 Work Environment — Set of conditions under 
which work is performed. 


2.19 Yoga — The word Yoga has been derived from 
Sanskrit root (Dhatu) *Yuj” which means to ‘join’, to 
‘unite’ or to ‘yoke’ to get cognitively absorbed 
(Samadhi). According to Maharishi Patañjali, Yoga is 
the control of the modifications (Vrtti) of the mind 
stuff (Citta). As per Yogic scriptures the practice of 
Yoga leads to the union of an individual consciousness 
with that of the universal consciousness. 


2.20 Yoga Aspirant — A person who is seeking 
knowledge and skill on Yoga. 


2.21 Yoga Centre — A centre which conducts Yoga 
classes of basic Yoga practices for the promotion of 
health and wellness based on traditional Yoga 
practices. 


2.22 Yoga Sadhak — A person who has gained the 
knowledge and skill on Yoga and practicing regularly. 


2.23 Yoga Wellness Instructor — A professionally 
qualified and trained individual competent to train the 
Yoga aspirant in Yoga äsanas, pranayama, meditation, 
relaxation techniques and other relevant Yoga 
practices. 


IS 17913 : 2022 
3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


3.1 The compliance to the following general 
requirements applicable to Yoga centre shall be 
ensured: 


a) Registration of the premises under Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 or Trusts Act, 1882 or 
Central/State legislative acts or any other 
legal entity established under prevalent law; 

b) Design of Yoga programmes for conducting 
Yoga classes in order to foster excellence; 

c) Establishment of a framework for continuous 
improvement and providing an opportunity 
to benchmark with other Yoga centres in 
India and abroad; 

d) Availability of required facilities and 
equipment for quality service delivery; and 

e) All externally sourced services are provided 
in a way that it meets requirements of this 
standard including the needs of Yoga 
aspirant/Yoga Sadhak and the objectives of 
Yoga centre. 


4 MANAGEMENT 


4.1 The management of the Yoga centre shall 
appoint/designate head of Yoga centre responsible to 
implement statutory and regulatory requirements 
including administrative decisions. The designated 
person may assign the responsibilities of different 
activities to relevant staff members of the centre, as 
appropriate. The records pertaining to such activities 
should be maintained and readily available. 


4.2 The Yoga centre shall establish objectives for 
important processes which shall be measurable and 
achievable. The objectives shall be reviewed by the 
management at regular intervals, preferably every six 
months. 


4.3 The management of Yoga centre shall demonstrate 
leadership and ensure the compliance of the following: 


a) Objectives established as set under 4.2 for the 
important activities; 

b) Key factors of different activities are 
identified for improvement; 

c) The responsibilities and authorities for 
relevant roles are assigned, communicated 
and understood within the centre; 

d) Statutory requirements are identified and 
met; 

e) Adequate manpower is provided and are 
competent on the basis of appropriate 
education, training and experience; 

f) Feedback from the Yoga aspirants/Yoga 
Sadhaks are obtained; 

g) Monitor Yoga aspirants/Yoga Sadhaks 
perceptions of the degree to which their 
needs and expectations have been fulfilled; 
and 

h) Complaint handling procedure is established. 


5 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO 
SERVICES 


5.1 The specific requirements of services provided by 
Yoga centre may be divided into following service 
parameters: 


a) Conducting Yoga classes for health and 
wellness; 

b) Physical environment and safety; and 

c) Resources. 


5.1.1 Conducting Yoga Classes for Health and 
Wellness 


The health and wellness of Yoga aspirants/Yoga 
Sadhaks shall be promoted and achieved at the 
optimum level by the Yoga centre. The compliance of 
the following requirements related to conducting 
Yoga classes for health and wellness shall be ensured: 


a) Education and skill of Yoga wellness 
instructor and staff — Yoga wellness 
instructor and staff shall have appropriate 
knowledge and skills to perform their roles 
effectively. The minimum requirements of 
qualification and experience of Yoga 
wellness instructor and staff as per 5.1.3.1 
shall be met; 

b) Behavioural management — The Yoga 
wellness instructor and staff shall identify the 
Yoga aspirants/Yoga Sadhaks with 
aggressive behaviour and the efforts shall be 
made to effectively manage their behaviour 
issues; and 

c) Satisfaction — The feedback to evaluate 
level of satisfaction shall be obtained from 
Yoga aspirants/Yoga Sadhaks by Yoga 
centre. 


5.1.2 Physical Environment and Safety 


Yoga centre shall ensure to provide a safe and 
comfortable environment for conducting Yoga classes 
for Yoga aspirants/Yoga Sadhaks. The compliance of 
following requirements related to physical 
environment and safety shall be ensured: 


a) Living environment — The living 
environment of Yoga centre shall be a safe, 
adequately ventilated, free from air/noise 
pollution and shall be consistently 
maintained during learning/practicing Yoga; 

b) Fire, security and other emergencies — 
Yoga centre shall ensure that all needed 
infrastructure for fire, security and other 
emergencies is available as per requirements. 
The staff shall be adequately trained to deal 
and respond in such situations; 

c) Infection control — Yoga centre shall ensure 
that the work area is sanitized properly at 
least on daily basis and the related records 
shall be retained for one year. The 
compliance to the guidelines issued by the 


Government from time to time in this regard 
shall also be ensured; 

d) First aid — Yoga centre shall be equipped 
with a first aid kit to manage minor medical 
exigencies. The staff shall be adequately 
trained for administration of first aid 
measures; 

e) Potential risks — The potential risks and 
hazards in the Yoga centre shall be identified, 
documented and action plan to mitigate such 
exigencies shall be prepared and available; 


IS 17913 : 2022 


f) Emergency contact — Emergency contact 
numbers of nearby police station, ambulance, 
fire services, hospitals, etc, shall be readily 
available at the reception counter or any other 
prominent place in the Yoga centre. 

5.1.3 Resources 


5.1.3.1 Requirements of Yoga wellness instructor and 


staff 


The minimum requirements of Yoga wellness 
instructor and staff shall be as given in Table 1. 


and 
Table 1 Minimum Requirements of Yoga Wellness Instructor and Staff 
(Clause 5.1.3.1) 
SI No. Job Role Name Minimum Number of Minimum Educational Qualification and 
Personnel Experience 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Yoga Wellness 2 a) Pass in 10 + 2 in any stream. 

Instructor b)Certified course in Yoga of not less than 400 
learning hours from government 
recognized/accredited institution. 

c) 12 months of experience in the field of Yoga. 
11) Staff 1 10th standard pass 


NOTE — Preferably one male and one female may be employed as a Yoga wellness instructor. 


5.1.3.2 Requirements of infrastructure, facilities and 
equipment 


The compliance to the following requirements related 
to infrastructure, facilities and equipment shall be 
ensured: 


a) Yoga hall — Minimum one hall for 
demonstration/practice of Yoga with 
minimum space of 2.60 m? per Yoga 
aspirant/Yoga Sadhak shall be available 
while performing Yoga; 

b) Facilities and equipment — Adequate 
number of required equipment like Yoga 
mats, Yoga props, and facilities like internet, 
public address system, computer, printer, etc, 
may be available; 

c) Washroom — Separate washroom(s) for 
male and female with proper sanitization 
shall be provided. Washrooms shall be 
cleaned at least twice a day and records shall 
be maintained, which shall be retained for a 
period of at least one month; 

d) Other facilities — In addition, the following 
facilities shall be ensured: 

i) Drinking water facility; 
ii) Proper lighting in Yoga centre; and 
111) Changing room(s). 

e) Meditation hall (optional) — Meditation hall 

may preferably be available; and 


D Satkarma (optional) — The following 
facilities may be available to perform 
Satkarma: 

i) Hygienic space (preferably an open 
space); 

11) Steel/porcelain sink with hot and cold- 
water facility; and 

iii) Other requirements essential to conduct 
the Satkarma sessions. 


5.1.3.3 The equipment used in the Yoga centre should 
comply with relevant Indian Standards wherever 
available. Yoga wellness instructor and Yoga 
aspirant/Yoga Sadhak shall perform yogic practices in 
appropriate attire preferably of cotton. 


6 OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
6.1 Communication Process 


6.1.1 Information about the timings, programmes, 
facilities, fee, contact details, etc, for the Yoga 
aspirant/Yoga Sadhak shall be displayed at prominent 
places in the Yoga centre. 


6.1.2 The details as mentioned in 6.1.1 may also be 
available in form of brochure. 


6.1.3 There should be designated personnel 
responsible for hosting and updating the information, 
as appropriate, on website of the Yoga centre and 
updating brochure on timely basis. 


IS 17913 : 2022 


6.2 Admission Process 


6.2.1 Self-declaration of current health status of the 
Yoga aspirant/Yoga Sadhak shall be obtained by the 
Yoga centre at the time of admission. 


6.2.2 Yoga programmes, details being offered by 
Yoga centre shall be documented and available in 
public domain. 


6.2.3 The Yoga aspirant/Yoga Sadhak shall be 
informed about the terms and conditions of 
programme, well in advance which shall be accepted 
at the time of admission and records shall be retained 
for at least one year. 


6.2.4 The receipt of payments shall be issued to the 
Yoga aspirant/Yoga Sadhak. 


6.3 Feedback Process 


6.3.1 The Yoga centre shall have a well-established 
system for getting feedback from the Yoga 
aspirant/Yoga Sadhak. The feedback obtained shall be 
maintained as document and readily available. 


6.3.2 The feedback format shall be prepared which 
shall cover all services being provided by the Yoga 
centre including aspects of objectives set by the 
management so that analysis of feedback is done to 
improve the services and activities. 


6.3.3 The feedback shall be obtained by using means 
of email, website, computer application of Yoga 
centre, text message or written. 


6.4 Complaint Handling Procedure 


6.4.1 The Yoga centre shall have established 
procedure to handle complaints by any person 
including Yoga aspirant/Yoga Sadhak and its well- 
defined redressal mechanism shall be in place. 


6.4.2 The management shall designate an employee of 
Yoga centre for the purpose of handling and redressal 
of complaints. The redressal of complaint shall 
preferably be done within a month of receipt of 
complaint. 


6.4.3 The complaint may be lodged by any means of 
print or electronic media such as: 


a) website or application of the Yoga centre; 
b) telephone; 

c) e-mail or text message; and 

d) written or verbal by visit to the Yoga centre. 


6.4.4 The Yoga centre shall maintain records of 
complaints. All the pending complaints and their 
redressals shall be reviewed every month by 
designated person mentioned in the procedure for 
handling and redressal of complaints. 


6.5 Work Plan 


6.5.1 The Yoga centre shall have a work plan for 
delivery of programme. 


6.5.2 A time table for each programme shall be 
prepared and shared with the Yoga aspirant/ Yoga 
Sadhak in advance. The records of time table shall also 
be maintained. 


6.5.3 The attendance of all Yoga aspirants/Yoga 
Sadhaks shall be taken and the records shall be 
maintained for a period of minimum one year. 


6.6 Finance Resources and Documentation 


The Yoga centre shall have a plan to ensure financial 
stability and continuity to run the centre. The records 
of the financial resources shall be maintained. 


7 REVIEW AND IMPROVEMENT 
7.1 Review 


The management shall review the activities of Yoga 
centre, at planned intervals, preferably every six 
months to ensure suitability, adequacy, effectiveness 
and improvement of current processes and activities. 
The management review shall be planned and carried 
out by the management or person designated by the 
management, for example CEO, along with the 
activity heads taking the following into consideration: 


a) The status of actions from previous reviews; 

b) Satisfaction level and feedback from relevant 
interested parties; 

c) The extent to which objectives have been 
met; 

d) Non-conformities and corrective actions; 

e) The adequacy of resources; 

f) Opportunities for improvement; and 

g) Complaints. 


7.2 Improvement 


The management, after the review, shall take decisions 
and actions to improve the performance of Yoga 
centre and enhance level of satisfaction among Yoga 
aspirant/Yoga Sadhak, which shall include the 
following: 


a) Identifying future needs and expectations of 
Yoga aspirants/Yoga Sadhak; 

b) Correcting, preventing or reducing undesired 
results; and 

c) Improving the performance of the Yoga 
centre. 


7.3 Records 


The Yoga centre shall retain documented information 
as evidence of the result of review and decision taken 
for improvement. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2.1) 
(Informative) 


IS 17913 : 2022 


BASIC YOGA PRACTICES 


The list of basic Yoga practices is given below: 


a) YOGIC SUKSMA VYAYAMA KRIYA 


1) Griva Shakti Vikasaka-1; 

2) Griva Shakti Vikasaka-2; 

3) Griva Shakti Vikasaka-3; 

4) Bhuja Valli Shakti Vikasaka; 

5) Purna Bhuja Shakti Vikasaka; 

6) Vaksha Sthala Shakti Vikasaka-1; 
7) Vaksha Sthala Shakti Vikasaka -2; 
8) Jangha Shakti Vikasaka-1; and 

9) Pindali Shakti Vikasaka. 


b) YOGIC STHULA VYAYAMA KRIYA 


1) Hrd Gati; and 
2) Sarvanga Pushti. 


c) SURYA NAMASKARA 


d) YOGASANAS 

1) Standing Posture 
i) Tadasana; 
ii) Vrkšāsana; 
111) Hastottanasana; 
iv) Päda-Hastäsana; 
v) Kati Cakrasana; 
vi) Ardha Cakrasana; and 
vii) Trikonasana. 

2) Sitting Posture 
i) Dandasana; 
ii) Sukhäsana; 
iii) Padmäsana; 
iv) Vajrasana; 
v) Bhadrāsana; 
vi) Uttana Mandükäsana; 
vii) Vakrasana; 
viii) Ustrasana; 
ix) Sasänkäsana; 
x) Paschimottanāsana; 
xi) Purvottanāsana; and 
xli) Gomukhāsana. 

3) Prone Postures 
i)  Makarāsana; 
ii) Bhujangásana; 
iii) Salabhäsana; and 
iv) Dhanuräsana. 

4) Supine Postures 
i) Uttana Pādāsana; 


ii) Ardha Haläsana; 

iii) Pawanamuktasana; 

iv) Setubandhäsana; 

v) Sarala Matsyāsana; and 
vi) Savāsana. 


e) BREATHING PRACTICES 
1) Abdominal Breathing; 
2) Thoracic Breathing; 
3) Clavicular Breathing; and 
4) Yogic Deep Breathing. 


f) PRANAYAMA 
1) Nädisodhana / Anuloma Viloma 
Pranayama; 
2) Ujjayi Pranayama; 
3) Sitalt Pranayama; and 
4) Bhrāmarī Pranayama. 


g) MUDRA 
1) Cif Mudra; 
2) Jnäna Mudra; 
3) Sanamukhi Mudra; 
4) Yoga Mudra; 
5) Vipareeta karani Mudra; and 
6) Simha Mudra. 


h) BANDHA 
1) Jalandhara Bandha. 
2) Mila Bandha 
3) Uddiyana Bandha 


j) SATKARMA 
1) Neti; 
2) Dhautī; 
3) Kapālabhātī; and 
4) Trātaka. 


k) PRACTICES LEADING TO DHYANA 


(MEDITATION) 

m) RECITATION OF PRANAVA 
n) CHANTING OF HYMNS 

p) PRANA DHARANA 

g) ANTARMOUNA 


IS 17913 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Health, Fitness and Sports Services Sectional Committee, SSD 05 


Organization 
Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai 


Athletics Federation of India, New Delhi 


All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 
New Delhi 

CSIR- Human Resource Development Centre, 
Ghaziabad 

Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Health Services, 
New Delhi 

Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 
New Delhi 

Dr Lal Path Labs, New Delhi 

Employees State Insurance Corporation, New 
Delhi 

Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce 
and Industry, New Delhi 


Fitness and Sports Sciences Association, 
Gurugram 
Healthcare Sector Skill Council, New Delhi 


Heartfulness Institute, Gurugram 


HSCC (India) Limited, Noida 
Indian Medical Association, New Delhi 


Indian Council of Medical Research, 
New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Health Management and 
Research, Jaipur 

Indian Olympic Association, New Delhi 

Kalam Institute of Health Technology, 
Vishakhapatnam 

Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan, New Delhi 

Lakshmibai National College of Physical 
Education, Thiruvananthapuram 


Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi 


Ministry of Ayush, New Delhi 
Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship, New Delhi 

National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and 
Healthcare Providers, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
PROF HARSHAD THAKUR (Chairman) 


SHRI SANDEEP MEHTA 
SHRI GOPAL KRISHNAN (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


DR SHOBHNA CHOUDHARY 


SHRI ANUPAM KAUL 

Ms MANDAKINI PAWAR 
DR VINEET JAIN 

DR AJAY GUPTA (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


DR SEEMA KOCHHAR 
DR DEEPAK SAXENA 


DR AMIT BHALLA 

SHRI RAJNEESH PATHAK (Alternate I) 

SHRI SAMIKSHAN MAJUMDAR (Alternate ID) 
SHRI GURNIT SINGH DUA 


SHRI SATESH KUMAR SETHURAMAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUSH JAIN 

MS ANSHU VERMA (Alternate) 
SHRI ANUJ SETYA 

DR RAHUL MEHROTRA (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
DR J. A. JAYLAL 

DRR. V. ASOKAN (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI DILIP KUMAR CHEKURI 
SHRI AMIT SHARMA (Alternate) 
SHRI BINU ASHOKAN 
DR USHA S. NAIR 
DR PRADIP DUTTA (Alternate 1) 
DR S. JAYARAMAN (Alternate II) 
DR DHANANJAYA SABAT 
DR VEDPAL YADAV (Alternate) 
DR PRADEEP DUA 
DR ISHWARA N. ACHARYA 
DR GURU DEO (Alternate 1) 
SHRIMATI HIMANI SHOKHAND (Alternate II) 
SHRI SIDDHARTHA SANKAR BANERJEE 


DR ATUL MOHAN KOCHHAR 
DR PUNAM BAJAJ (Alternate) 


Organization 


Netaji Subhash National Institute of Sports, 
New Delhi 

National Skill Development Corporation, New 
Delhi 

Physical Education Foundation of India, 
New Delhi 

Public Health Foundation of India, Gurugram 


Patanjali Yogpeeth, Haridwar 

Railway Board, Ministry of Railways, New 
Delhi 

Sequoia Fitness and Sports Technology Private 
Limited, Gurugram 

Services Export Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Sports Authority of India, New Delhi 


School of Planning and Architecture, 
New Delhi 

UL India Private Limited, Bengaluru 

Voluntary Organisation in Interest of 
Consumer Education, New Delhi 

Yoga Certification Board, New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 17913 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


DR ANIRBAN MALLICK 
DR JAHNAVI DANDE (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI TARUN KUMAR 

DR SHARAD KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI SANDEEP BHALLA 

MS SHIFALIKA GOENKA (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SUJIT PANIGRAHI 


SHRI CHANDRANSHU AWASTHI 

SHRI MAYANK SHARMA (Alternate I) 

SHRI RAJESH KUMAR (Alternate II) 
COL RAJ SINGH BISHNOI 

Ms RACHNA GOVIL (Alternate I) 

DR G. KISHORE (Alternate II) 

MS LALITA SHARMA (Alternate III) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI V. MANJUNATH 
REPRESENTATIVE 


DR ISHWAR V. BASAVARADDI 

MS SOBIKA RAO (Alternate) 
SHRIS. K. KANOGIA, SCIENTIST E/DIRECTOR AND HEAD 
(SSD-II) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENEAL (Ex- 


Officio) 


Member Secretary 
SHRI DHARAMSOTH SANTHOSH 
SCIENTIST C/ DEPUTY DIRECTOR (SERVICE SECTOR DEPARTMENT-II), BIS 


Working group for drafting standard on Yoga Centre — Service Requirements, SSD 05/WG 02 


Organization 


Yoga Certification Board, New Delhi 
Heartfulness Institute, New Delhi 
Ministry of Ayush, New Delhi 


Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga, 
New Delhi 


Services Export Promotion Council, New Delhi 
Bureau of Indian Standards 


Representative(s) 


DR ISHWAR V. BASAVARADDI (Convenor) 
DR RAHUL MEHROTRA 
DR PRADEEP DUA 


DR ISHWARA N. ACHARYA 

DR GURU DEO (Alternate I) 

SHRIMATI HIMANI SHOKHAND (Alternate II) 
SHRI CHANDRANSHU AWASTHI 
SHRIS. K. KANOGIA 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: SSD-II 05 (17440). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri ļ 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


