**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11512 (1985) : Faller Screws for Jute Drawing Frames [TXD 
14: Machinery for Fabric Manufacture] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^^PTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS: 11512 - 1985 

(Reaffirmed 2012) 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
FALLER SCREWS FOR JUTE DRAWING FRAMES 



UDC 677*051-188-9 : 62r882'2 




© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Or 2 June 1966 



IS t 11512 - 1985 



Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
FALLER SCREWS FOR JUTE DRAWING FRAMES 



Jute Mill Accessories and Jute Machinery Spare Parts 
Sectional Committee, TDG 17 



Representing 
Lagan Jute Machinery Go Ltd, Calcutta 



Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 



Chairman 
ShriR. C.Pani 

Members 

Shri P. K. Bose ( Alternate to 
Shri R. C. Pani ) 
Dr Akash Chandra 

Shri P. G. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Bankrjee Britannia Engineering Co Ltd, Titagarh 

Shri R. P. Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. R. Basit Office of the Jute Commissioner, Calcutta 

Shri G. C. Chatterjee Braithwaite & Co limited, Calcutta 

Shri H. N. Ghosh Indian Jute Mills Association, Calcutta 

Shri R. N. Thakar ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Goyal Association of Merchants & Manufacturers of 

Textile Stores & Machinery ( India ) , Bombay 
ShriX). Gupta Jute Manufacturers Development Council, 

Calcutta and New Central Jute Mills Co Ltd, 
Calcutta 
Shri T. K. Roychowdhury ( Alternate ) 



Shri D. S. Jain 

Shri S. K. Ghosh ( Alternate) 
Shri K. M. Modi 

Shri G. D. Joshi ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. C. Mohunta 
Shri Sita Ram Poddar 
Dr S. R. Ranganathan 

Shri D. P. Khatita ( Alternate) 
Represen t ative 

Representative 

Representative 



Shalimar Group Private Ltd, Howrah 

Indian Pin Manufacturing Co, Calcutta 

Birla Jute & Industries Ltd, Birlapur 
Hindustan Bobbin Industries, Calcutta 
Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, 
Calcutta 

Textile Machinery Manufacturers Association 

{ India), Bombay 
Swadeshi Jute Machinery Corporation Ltd, 

Calcutta 
Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11512 - 1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Shbi S. M. Tiwabi 

Shbi R. I. Midha, 

Director ( Tex ) 



Representing 

Thomas Duff & Go { Irujia ) Ltd, Calcutta 
Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member) 

Secretary 
Shbi P. Bhatnagab 
Aisistant Director ( Tex ), ISI 



Jute Mill Accessories and Jute Machinery Spare 
Parts Subcommittee, TDC 17:2 



Convener 
Shbi D. P. Khatua 



Indian Jute Industries* Research Association, 
Calcutta 



Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 



Members 

Shbi S. K. Neooi ( Alternate to 
ShriD. P. Khatua) 
Dr Abash Chandra 

Shbi P. G. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. K. Banebjee Britannia Engineering Co Ltd, Titagarh 

Shbi R. P. Chattekjee ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. N. Biswas Guest, Keen, Williams Ltd, Howrah 

Shbi I, Chakbababti ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Chaudhttbi India Machinery Co Ltd, Howrah 

Shbi P. L. Das Gupta ( Alternate) 



Shbi Asit Chatterjee 

Shbi Aloke Roy ( Alternate ) 
Shbi D. K. Dutta 

Shri K. K. Das ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. K. Dhtta 

Shbi G. Mitra ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. K. Gupta 
Shri D. Gupta 

ShriD. S.Jain 

Shri S. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Pani 

Shri P. K. Bose ( Alternate ) 
Representative 



Industrial Engineers India, Panihati, Dist 24 
Parganas 

Office of The Jute Commissioner, Calcutta 

Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta 

New Central Jute Mills Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Jute Manufacturers Development Council, 

Calcutta 
Shalimar Group Private Ltd, Howrah 



Lagan Jute Machinery Co Ltd, Calcutta 



Swadeshi Jute Machinery Corporation 

Calcutta 
^lachinecare & Consultants, Calcutta 
Utex Industries, Calcutta 
Shbi P. K. Chattebjee (Alternate) 
Shbi R. N. Thakar Indian Jute Mills Association, Calcutta 



Ltd, 



Repbesentative 

Shbi R. K. Sanganaria 



18 i 11312 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
FALLER SCREWS FOR JUTE DRAWING FRAMES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 10 December 1985, after the draft finalized by the Jute 
Mill Accessories and Jute Machinery Spare Part Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 

0,2 Faller screws are used in the jute drawing frames. This standard 
has been published in order to provide guidance to the manufacturers so 
that faller screws of acceptable quality are available to the jute industry. 
This would ensure higher productivity due to better interchangeability 
and smooth working. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements of faller screws for use in 
drawing frames in a jute mill. 

2. MANUFACTURE 

2.1 Material — Faller screws shall be manufactured from suitable steel 
so as to obtain the specified hardness. Steel having designation 
14C 14S 14 as per IS : 1570 ( Part 3 )-1979t is suitable for this purpose. 

2.2 Finish — Faller screws shall be case-hardened and ground finished. 



"Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised), 

tSchedules for wrought steels for general engineering purposes; Part 3 Carbon and 
carbon manganese free cutting steels {first revision ). 



IS : 11512 - 1985 

3. REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 Dimension 

3.1.1 Nominal dimensions of the screws shall be as agreed to between 
the manufacturer and the purchaser or in the absence of any agreement 
those shall be as declared by the manufacturer. 

3.1.2 Tolerances — The dimensional requirements of the faller screws 
( see Fig. 1 ) shall be subject to the following tolerances: 

Overall length ( A ), mm ± 0'25 

Thread length ( B ) , mm ± 0*25 

Outside diameter ( ^ D t ), mm ' — O'lO 

Core diameter ( <f>D 2 ), mm ___ q.j« 

End diameter for spur gear ( <f>D z ), mm __ q.q5q 

Lead angle, minutes ± 0° — 15' — 0* ■ 

3.2 Hardness — Faller screws shall have hardness of 58 to 62 HRG 
with minimum case depth of 1 mm. 

3.2.1 Hardness shall be determined as per IS : 1586-1968*. 

3.2.2 Case depth shall be determined as per IS : 64 16- 197 If. 

4. MARKING 

4.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the buyer and the manufacturer 
each faller screw shall be legibly marked with the manufacturers' name 
or trade-mark. 

4.1.1 The faller screws may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the pro- 
ducer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Detaih of conditions under which a licence 
for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



♦Methods for Rockwell hardness test ( B and C scales ) for steel ( first revision ). 
f Methods for measuring case depth of steel. 



TOP FALLER SCREW RH 




GO 



top faller screw lh 
Fig. 1 Faixer Screw for Jute Drawing Frame 



M 
i 

S 



IS : 11512 - 1985 

5. SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

5.1 Lot — In a consignment, all the faller screws of the same type and 
manufactured under the same conditions shall constitute a lot. 

5.1.1 For conformance of this specification, the sample shall be drawn 
from the lot and it shall be in accordance with Table 1. 

TABLE 1 NUMBER OF FALLER SCREWS TO BE 
SELECTED FOR SAMPLING 

(Clauses 5.1.1 and 5.2.2 ) 

Lot Size Sample Acceptance 

Size Nxjmbeb 

(1) (2) (3) 

Up to 150 8 1 

151 to 300 13 2 

301 to 500 20 3 

501 to 1000 32 5 

1 001 and above 50 7 



5.2 Number of Tests 

5.2.1 All the faller screws selected in the sample shall be tested for 
the requirements given in 3.1.2. 

5.2.2 For hardness and case depth, three faller screws shall be selected 
from the sample already selected as given in col 2 of Table 1 and tested. 

5.3 Criteria for Conformity 

5.3.1 Whenever a faller screw fails to meet any of the dimensional 
requirements given in 3.1.2 it shall be declared as defective. The lot 
shall be declared as conforming to the requirements of this clause if the 
number of defective faller screws does not exceed the corresponding 
acceptance number given in col 3 of Table 1. 

5.3.2 For hardness and case depth, all the three faller screws shall pass 
the test. 

5.3.3 The lot shall be declared as conforming to the requirements of 
this standard if 5.3.1 and 5.3.2 are satisfied. 

6. PACKING 

6.1 Faller screws shall be packed in such a way so as to ensure complete 
protection from rust. 



