**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 2320 (1963) : Methods of Measurements for Amplitude 
Modulated Radio Frequency Signal Generators (30 kc/s to 30 
Mc/s) [LITD 8: Electronic Measuring Instruments, Systems 
and Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■k^v / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 2320 -1963 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS FOR 

AMPLITUDE MODULATED RADIO 

FREQUENCY SIGNAL GENERATORS 

(30 kc/s TO 30 Mc/s) 



Second Reprint APRIL 1995 
( Incorporating Amendment* No. 1 Sl 2 ) 

UDC 621.391.81:621.317.3 



© Copyright 1975 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DKLHI1 10002 

Gr 6 May 1963 



IS : 2320 • 1963 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS FOR 

AMPLITUDE MODULATED RADIO 

FREQUENCY SIGNAL GENERATORS 

( 30 kc/s TO 30 Mc/s ) 

Electronic Equipment Sectional Committee, ETDC 24 

Chairman Representing 

Shri S. Thiiiuuenkatachabi Directorate General of All India Radio ( Ministry 

of Information & Iiroadcasting ) 

Members 

Research Ekoineer ( Alternate to 
Shri S. Thiruvenkatachari ) 
Snm H. K. L. Arora All India Radio Merchants* Association, Bombay 

Shri V. J. Bhatt ( Alternate ) 
Shbi D. N. Chaudiiuri ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Nagrswaran ( Alternate ) 
Dr. Sahoj Datta Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( Ministry 

of Transport & Communications ) 
Shri S. R. Nirody ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. N. Deobhakta Development Wing ( Ministry of Commerce & 

Industry ) 
Shri A. N. Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. V. Gadadhar Wirolcsa Advisor to tho Government of India 

( Ministry of Transport & Communications ) 
Shbi V. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shbi H, Jooa Rao State Broadcasting Department, Andhra Pradesh 

Shri M. V. Joshi National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New 

Delhi 
Shri S. T. Kaoali Bharat Electronics Ltd., Bangalore 

Shri S. Kelkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. S. Mundkur ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. N. Kekre Directorate of Co-ordination (Police Wireless) 

( Ministry of Homo Affairs ) 
Wo Cdr G. S. Malhan Directorate of Technical Development and Pro- 

duction ( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ) 
Shri II. S. Bhattacharya ( Alternate) 
Lt-Col M. L. Midha Chief Inspectorate of Electronics (Ministry of 

Defence ), Bangalore 
Shri H. J. Mirchandani Indian Telephone Industries Ltd., Bangalore 

Shri A. Mitra Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 

( Inspection Wing) ( Ministry of Works, Hous- 
ing <k Supply ) 

{Continued on page 2 ) 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC, 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 2320 - 1963 



( Continued from pagt 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi M. V. Nam joshi All India Instrument Manufacturers* and Dealers' 

Association, Bombay 
Shbi N. Bajlasundaram ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. V. Pai Overseas Communication Service, Government of 

India 
8hbi G._D. Gokabn ( Alternate ) 

Safety for Electronic Equipment Subcommittee, 

ETDC 24 : 3, ISI 
Telecommunication Research Centre, Posts & 
Telegraphs Department ( Ministry of Trans- 
port St Communications ) 
Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 
Naval Headquarters 



Shbi T. V. Ramamurti 
Shbi R. Seshasaybb 



Shbi M. V. Skankar 
Capt B. R. Sinoh 

Cdb K. K. Batta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. K. Vaishampayan 



Shbi Y. S. Vbnkateswaban, 
Deputy Director ( Electro* 
technical ) 



Radio Manufacturers* Association of India, 

Calcutta 
Director, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Secretaries 

Shbi S. Sbinivasan 

Assistant Director ( Electrotechnical ) 

Shbi N. Sbinivasan 

Extra Assistant Director ( Electrotechnical ) 

Electronic Measuring Equipment Subcommittee, ETDC 24 i 
Convener 

Eastern Electronics, Faridabad ( Punjab ) 



Shbi N. Balasundabak 

Members 
Shbi M. K. Basu 

Maj L. G. Hannubkab 
Shbi M. V. Joshi 



Shbi S. S. 
Db. G. K. 



Madan 
Mbhta 



Shbi N. Ganbsan a Alternate ) 
Col K. K. Mxhta 

Shbi J. S. Monoa 
Shbi R. S. Mundkub 
Shbi C S. Ranoan 

Shbi K. L. Rao 

Shbi R. Seshasaybb 



Secretariat of Radio and Cable Board ( Ministry 
of Transport A Communications ) 

Electrical and Electronic Test Measuring Instru- 
ments Standardization Panel ( Ministry of 
Defence ) 

National Physical Laboratory (CSIR)', New 
Delhi 

Philij* ( India ) Ltd., Calcutta 

Associated Instrument Manufacturers ( India ) 
Private Ltd., New Delhi 

Chief Inspectorate of Electronics (Ministry of 
Defence ), Bangalore 

Radiola Corporation, New Delhi 

Bharat Electronics Ltd., Bangalore 

National Aeronautical Laboratory (CSIR), 
Bangalore 

Directorate General of All India Radio ( Ministry 
of Information & Broadcasting ) 

Telecommunication Research Centre, Posts & 
Telegraphs Department (Ministry of Trans- 
port & Communications ) 



CONTENTS 

0. Foreword ... 

1. Scope 

2. Terminology 

3. General Conditions for Measurements 

4. Frequency Measurements ... 

5. Output Measurements 

6. Modulation Measurements 

7. Distortion Measurements 

8. Measurement of Unwanted Modulation 

9. Measurement of Leakage 

10. Output Impedance 

11. Microphony 

12. Safety 
Appendix A Alternate Methods for Measurement of Fre 

ftUENCY 

Appendix B Alternate Methods for Measurement of Out* 
put Voltage ... 

Appendix C Alternate Method for Measurement of Modu 

LATION ... ... ••• 



IS: 2320 


'1963 




Paob 


... 


4 


... 


5 


• •• 


6 


... 


7 


... 


9 


... 


10 


... 


12 


... 


14 


... 


IS 


• • • 


IS 


• •• 


16 


... 


16 


... 


16 


if Fre* 


17 


f Out* 


18 


Modu* 
... 


22 



IS: 2320- 1963 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS FOR 

AMPLITUDE MODULATED RADIO 

FREQUENCY SIGNAL GENERATORS 

( 30 kc/s TO 30 Mc/s ) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 14 January 1963, after the draft finalized by the Electronic 
Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotech- 
nical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard prescribes the conditions and detailed procedures for 
the tests to be conducted on all classes of amplitude modulated 
( sinusoidal modulation ) radio frequency signal generators covering a 
frequency range of 30 kc/s to 30 Mc/s to determine their performance 
characteristics. However, the methods of measurements included in 
this standard, may be adopted for frequency ranges higher than 30 Mc/s 
with suitable instruments and accessories. 

0.2*1 The tests prescribed in this standard apply only to complete 
signal generators; separate consideration for the component parts has 
not been given in this standard. 

0.3 This standard covers methods of measurements primarily for the 
measurement of frequency, output and modulation of signal generators 
as well as other characteristics such as residual output voltage, carrier 
level shift due to modulation, distortion, unwanted modulation and 
leakage. 

0.4 This standard lays down a single method of measurement for each 
characteristic so as to achieve the required degree of precision. It is, 
however, not intended to exclude other alternative methods of measure* 
ment for which necessary measuring equipment may be available and 
which are of equal or greater precision than the method prescribed in this 
standard. Such alternate methods, wherever necessary, have been given 
in Appendices A, B and C. 

0.5 Though the methods specified in this standard for measurement of 
leakage are quite adequate, the Sectional Committee responsible for the 
preparation of this standard has taken up the examination of the method 



IS:2320-1963 

given in IEC Publication 106 Measurement of Radiation from Radio 
Receivers, with a view to adopting the same later on. 

0.6 The requirements of various classes of signal.generators are proposed 
to be covered ^n a series of standards, the first among them being 
IS : 2321-1963 Requirements for General Purpose Amplitude Modu- 
lated Radio Frequency Signal Generators ( 30 kc/s to 30 Mc/s )• 

0*7 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived 
from the following: 

Document 13G ( Secretariat ) 7 IEC Recommendations for 
Specification of the Radio Frequency Signal Generators. 
International Electro technical Commission. 

Document 13C (Secretariat) 8 IEC Recommendations for 
Amplitude Modulated Radio Frequency Signal Genera- 
tors. International Electrotechnical Commission, 

NFC 42-600 : 19S7 Measuring Instruments Hioh Frequency 
Generators, Modulation of Amplitude. I' Association 
Francaise de Normalisation. 

United Kingdom. Ministry of Supply. Report No. REMC/24/ 
FR Issue 2, January 19S8. Joint Service Standards and Re- 
commendations for Signal Generator Calibration, issued by 
Radio and Electronic Measurements Committee. 

0.8 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this 
standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, 
it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2*1960 Rules for Rounding Off 
Numerical Values ( Revised ). 

0.9 This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical requirements 
relating to measurements on signal generators, and it does not include 
all the necessary provisions of a contract. 



1. SCOPE 

14 This standard lays down the conditions and detailed procedures for 
the tests to be conducted on all classes of amplitude modulated ( sinu- 
soidal modulation ) radio frequency signal generators in the frequency 
range of 30 kc/s to 30 Mc/s to determine their performance character* 
istics. 

Ll.l These tests apply to complete signal generators only and not to 
component parts thereof. 



IS: 2320- 1963 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard the following definitions and 
explanation of terms shall apply. 

2.1 General 

2.1.1 Magnitude of Sinusoidal Voltages and Currents — Shall mean RMS 
values, unless otherwise specified. 

2.1.2 Mains Operation — Operation of the instrument from a power 
source with an operating voltage over 24 V, not solely used to supply 
power to the instrument. 

2*2 Signal Generator — Source of radio frequency energy of accurately 
known characteristics and capable of modulation. 

2.2.1 Amplitude Modulated Signal Generator — A signal generator, the 
output of which is amplitude modulated. 

13 Frequency 

2.3.1 Frequency Drift — The variation in the frequency at the output of 
the signal generator after the end of the warm-up period, for a specified 
period of time, under constant operating conditions. 

132 Frequency Band — Part of the entire frequency range within which 
continuous variation of frequencies is provided. 

133 Frequency Range — The frequencies covered by a signal generator 
continuously in which the signals produced meet all the requirements 
specified in this standard. 

2.4 Output Voltage — The RMS value of the open-circuit voltage at the 
output terminals of a signal generator. This shall be expressed in 
microvolts or in millivolts. 

2.4.1 Residual Output Voltage — The output voltage of the generator 
with all output controls turned to minimum position. 

13 Modulation — The process in which any essential characteristics of a 
carrier wave is varied in accordance with a characteristic of another 
wave ( modulating wave ). 

Noro— Wherever mochil*tk«» is mentioned in this tUadftid It aheold he taken 
to refer to tinuaoidtl modnletion only. 

13.1 Amplitude Modulation (AM)— The type of modulation in which 
the amplitude of a carrier is varied in accordance with the amplitude of 
the modulating wave. 



IS: 2320 -1963 

2.5.2 Degree of Modulation ( of an Amplitude Modulated Wave ) —The 
ratio of the difference of the maximum and minimum amplitudes of the 
wave to the sum of these amplitudes. 

2.5.3 Depth of Modulation — Degree of modulation expressed as a 
percentage. 

2.5.4 Carrier Level Shift — The fall in the mean carrier level of R.F. 
signal due to modulation applied. 

2.5.5 Unwanted Amplitude Modulation — The amplitude modulation 
due to the noise and hum picked up by the oscillator circuit is termed 
as unwanted amplitude modulation. This is also known as carrier 
noise and the depth of this unwanted modulation is referred as 
noise level. 

2.5.6 Unwanted Frequency Modulation — The unwanted change in the 
mean carrier frequency due to the application of amplitude modul- 
ation. 

2.6 Distortion ( Wave-Form ) — The unwanted change in wave-form 
which can occur between two points in a transmission system. 

2.6.1 Distortion Factor — Ratio of RMS voltage of all harmonics 
combined to the total RMS voltage. 

2.6.2 Percentage Distortion — Distortion factor expressed as a per- 
centage. 

2.6.3 Carrier Distortion — Distortion of the wave-shape of the carrier 
signal. The effect of carrier distortion is the production of harmonics. 

2.6*4 Envelope Distortion — Change in the sinusoidal wave-shape of the 
envelope of the modulated wave. 

3. GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MEASUREMENTS 

3.0 Unless otherwise specified, measurements shall be made under 
normal measuring conditions as specified in 3.1 to 3.7. 

3.1 Normal Supply Voltage — Rated voltage shall be applied to the 
generator. 

3X1 In case of AC mains operation, the voltage shall be applied at 
the rated frequency. 

3.1.2 The harmonic content of AC mains supply voltage shall not 
exceed 5*0 percent. 

3*1.3 The operating mains voltage applied to the generator shall be 
held constant within ±2'0 percent of the rated value during the 
measurement of the characteristics. 



IS: 2320 -1963 

3.1.4 In case of battery operation, primary or secondary batteries of 
the type and rated voltage as specified by the manufacturer, shall be 
used. 

3.2 Modulation Frequency — For modulation measurements, the signal 
shall be modulated either internally or externally by a sinusoidal 
modulation frequency of 400 c/s or 1 000 c/s. The specific frequency 
chosen shall be stated in the test report. 

3.3 Termination — The signal generator shall be suitably terminated 
with the specified load, wherever necessary. 

3.4 Standard Atmospheric Conditions for Tests 

3.4.1 Unless otherwise specified, all tests shall be carried out under 
the following atmospheric conditions: 

Temperature Between 15°G and 35°C. 

Relative humidity Between 45 percent and 75 percent. 

Atmospheric pressure Between 860 mbar and 1 060 mbar. 

3.4.1.1 Where the conditions mentioned above have a significant 
influence, these shall be kept substantially constant during the tests. 

3.4.2 If the temperature limits as given in 3.4.1 are too wide for 
certain tests, these tests shall be conducted/repeated in case 
of doubt, at a temperature of 27°C ± 1°C and relative humidity of 
65 percent ±2 percent. 

3.4.3 The instrument shall be protected from draughts and direct 
radiations. 

3.5 Measurements 

3.5.1 Measurements shall be made at least at one point, preferably 
middle, on each band. 

3.5.2 All measurements shall be made after the initial warm-up 
period specified by the manufacturer. 

3.6 Accuracy of Test Instruments — The test instruments employed to 
carry out measurements in accordance with this standard shall have an 
accuracy of at least one order higher than the instrument under test. 

3.7 The test report should clearly indicate the following: 

a) Rated supply voltage, 

b) Atmospheric conditions under which tests are carried out, and 

c) Modulation frequency. 

8 



IS: 2320 -1963 



4. FREQUENCY MEASUREMENTS 

4.1 Frequency Calibration Error — The error in calibration of the fre- 
quency dial readings of a signal generator shall be checked at least at 
three points on each band, the position being taken at the beginning, 
middle and end of each band. The frequency of the signal generator 
shall be measured using a crystal driven harmonic generator as describ- 
ed in 4.1.1. The measurements shall be done at 27°C ± 1°C. 

4.1.1 Measurement Using a Crystal Driven Harmonic Generator 

4.1.1.1 The signal generator output shall be made to beat with 
one of the harmonic signals of the crystal driven harmonic generator 
and the low frequency of the beat output signal shall be interpolated 
with an audio frequency generator. 

4.1.1.2 The measuring accuracy is better than 001 percent at all 
those frequencies corresponding to the harmonics of the crystal cali- 
brator since the crystal oscillator frequency is normally accurate to 
better than few parts in 10 s . 

4.1.1.3 A schematic diagram of the set-up is given in Fig. 1. 



SIGNAL 
GENERATOR 
UNDER TEST 






















RECEIVER 




ZERO BEAT 
INDICATOR 




AF SIGNAL 
GENERATOR 










CRYSTAL 
DRIVEN 
HARMONIC 
GENERATOR 























Note — Zero bent indicator includes a cathode ray oscilloscope. 

Fio. 1 Schematic Diaoram for Checkino Frequency Calibration 
Error Using Crystal Driven Harmonic Generator 

4.1.1.4 Alternate methods for the measurement of frequency are 
&i\cn in Appendix A. 

4.2 Frequency Drift 

4.2.1 i he frequency drift is calculated by measuring the frequency of 
the signal generator at specified intervals of time over a specified period 
by the method specified in 4.1.1. 

Note — The intervals and total period of time ouould be specified in the relevant 
requirement standard. 



IS:2320-1963 

4JL2 The supply voltage shall be kept constant within l'O percent 
and the ambient temperature at 27°C ± 1°C. 

4.3 Frequency Change Dae to Temperature — The measurements specified 
in 4.1.1 shall be repeated at different ambient temperatures at steps of 
10 deg C over the range of specified operating temperature range. 
From these measurements the frequency change with temperature at 
various temperature steps shall be computed. 

4.4 Frequency Change One to AC Mains Voltage Variation — In case of AC 
operated signal generator, the mains voltage shall be varied from 220 V 
to 260 V in steps of 10 V. After maintaining the voltage at each step at 
least for one minute, the frequency of the signal generator shall be 
measured by the method specified in 4.1.1. The change in frequency 
due to mains voltage variation shall be computed from these measure- 
ments. 

4.5 Frequency Change Due to Load — The frequency of the generator 
shall be measured by the method specified in 4.1.1 with and without 
the rated output load connected to the generator, and with output 
setting at maximum. The change in frequency due to load shall be 
computed from these measurements. 

4.6 Frequency Change Due to Modulation Applied — The frequency of 
the generator shall be measured by the method specified in 4.1.1 with 
and without modulation ( to maximum possible depth ) applied. The 
change in frequency due to modulation applied shall be computed from 
these measurements. 

5. OUTPUT MEASUREMENTS 
5.1 Measurement of Output Voltage 

5.1.1 The signal generator shall be terminated by the specified load 
impedance and the highest R.F. voltage reference level shall first be 
established by measuring the output voltage by a suitable thermocouple 
millivoltmeter or a crystal millivoltmeter. 

5.1.2 Having thus established the reference R.F. voltage, the accuracy 
of the calibration of the output markings shall be checked, using the 
set up consisting of the signal generator in series with a standard 
attenuator ( see Fig. 2 ). 

5.1.2.1 With the set up, readings corresponding to the change of 
position of output control of the signal generator shall be obtained in 
terms of change of position, of the external calibrated attenuator as 
follows: 

Turn the output control to the reference voltage. Introduce 
known attenuation with the help of the standard attenuator so 

10 



18:2320-1963 



TCRMMATMG 
RESISTOR 




HATCHING 
PAD 



STAN0AR0 
ATTENUATOR 



HIGH IMPEOANCE 
OUTPUT INOICATOR 



Notb — The matching pad need be provided only in oases where the attenuator 
impedance is not the tame at the load impedanoe of the signal generator. 



Fio. 2 



Sst Up fob th« Measubvment or Output Voltaob 
Using a Standard Attbnuatob 



that the output of the standard attenuator is not greater than 
the minimum calibrated output of the signal generator and note 
the deflection ( D x ) on the output indicator. Cutout the standard 
attenuator and adjust the output control so as to bring the 
deflection on the output indicator to D v The output control 
marking shall be noted as against the attenuator marking of the 
standards attenuator. This process shall be repeated for various 
standard attenuator settings and output control markings. 

5.1.3 The calibration of output control markings maybe graphically 
represented so as to give a calibration chart of the output voltage of the 
signal generator. 

5.1.4 This method is applicable for calibration at all levels of output 
voltage. 

5.1.4.1 Alternate methods for measuring output voltage above 
20 mV ( bolometer method ) and below 1 mV ( substitution method ) are 
described in Appendix B. 

5.2 Measurement of Residual Output Voltage — The voltage at the out- 
put terminals of the signal generator with all output controls of the 
signal generator adjusted to the minimum position shall be measured in 
accordance with the method specified in 5.1. The value measured 
corresponds to the residual output voltage of the signal generator. 

53 Output Voltage Variation Due to Temperature — The measurements 
specified in 5.1 shall be repeated at different ambient temperatures at 
steps of 10 deg C over the specified temperature range. From these 
measurements, the output voltage variation with temperature shall be 
computed. 

5.4 Output Voltage Variation Due to AC Mains Voltage Variation ~ In 

case of AC operated signal generator, the mains voltage shall be varied 
from 220 V to 260 V in steps of 10 V, The output voltage shall be 

11 



IS:2320-1963 

measured as specified in $.1, after maintaining the voltage at each step 
for one minute at least. The change in output voltage due to mains 
voltage variation shall be computed from these measurements. 

6. MODULATION MEASUREMENTS 

6.1 Measurement of Degree of Modulation Using Linear Diode Detector 

6.1.1 The circuit arrangement is shown in Fig. 3. 

6.1.2 The modulation signal shall be rectified by a linear diode detec- 
tor (D ) having distortion less than 10 percent. The average value of 
the rectified voltage read by the DC millivoltmeter ( V x ) shall give the 
carrier amplitude. The audio frequency voltage developed at the out- 
put of the detector ( rectified component of the envelope of the modulated 
wave ) shall be measured by a calibrated AC voltmeter ( K 9 ). 




D — Linear diode detector 
C x = R.F. by pas* condenser ( — lOOpF ) 
C, =■= AF coupling condenser ( — 0*5/iF ) 
R =s Diode load resistor ( ~ 1 to 5 K £i ) 
RFC « Radio frequency choke ( — 2*5 mH ) 
V x » DC millivoltmeter 
\\ « Calibrated AC voltmeter 

Xote — Provi^Rii of a power amplifier ahead of diode would improve the 
sensitivity of the set up. 

Fio. 3 Schematic Diagram ioh Measurement op Degree 
of Modulation Using Linear Diodk Detector 

6.1.2.1 The degree of modulation is given by the ratio of the AC 
voltage ( peak ) ( V t ) to the carrier amplitude ( V x ). 

6.1.3 This method assumes that the modulated envelope has distortion 
less than one percent. 

6.1.4 Alternate method of measurement of modulation is given in 
Appendix C. 

12 



IS: 2320- 1963 

6.2 Method of Measurement of Carrier Level Shift 

6*2.1 The circuit arrangement for measuring the carrier level shift is 
given in Fig. 4. 

c 2 t, 

4i — —yinnn^- 



SIGNAL 




D ■■ Diode ( 6AL5 or similar ) 

C t «■ Suitable tuning condenser 

C t — R.F. coupling condenser ( about 50 pF ) 

C, « R.F. by-pass condensers ( about 100 pF ) 

j?i « Cathode resistance ( about 200 ohms ) 

R % - Plate losd ( about 47 K Q ) 

A, « Fine control ( about 100 K Q ) 

A« as Coarse oontrol ( about 25 K Q ) 

V « DC voltmeter ( millivolts/microvolts range ) 

S = Switch 

B » Battery 15 V 

L % = R.F. choke ( about 2*5 mH ) 



Fio. 4 



Schematic Diagram for Measurement of 
Carrier Level Shift 



6.2.2 The unmodulated signal is tuned in and the voltmeter is balanc- 
ed out by the potentiometer /? 3 and R v The carrier is then modulated 
at various degrees and the voltage ( V m ) read on the voltmeter. With 
the modulation removed but without disturbing the potentiometer and 
with the switch 'S* open, the mean carrier voltage ( V e ) is read on the 
voltmeter. The ratio of V m to V € expressed in percentage gives the 
carrier level shift at various degrees of modulation. 

Note 1 — Voltage measurement across R x in made as this will not affect the 
operating conditions of the detector. 

Note 2 — As V m will be a small fraction of V % and as V e is of the order of a few 
millivolts, the meter shall be capable of reading millivolts and microvolts. 

Note 3 — As the rectified voltage gets reduced with the carrier level shift, the 
deflection of the voltmeter may be in the opposite direction. A meter with centre 
sero is therefore preferred. Otherwise a double-pole double-throw switch will have 
to be used for changing the polarity of the meter. 

13 



IS:2320-1963 

6.3 Variation of Degree of Modulation Due to Temperature — The measure- 
ment described in 6.1 shall be repeated at different ambient temperatures 
at steps of 10 deg C over the specified temperature range. The varia- 
tion of degree of modulation with temperature shall be computed from 
these measurements. 

6.4 Variation of Degree of Modulation Due to AC Mains Voltage Varia- 
tion — In case of AC operated signal generator, the mains voltage shall 
be varied from 220 V to 260 V in steps of 10 V. The degree of modu- 
lation shall be measured as specified in 6.1 after maintaining the voltage 
at each step for one minute at least. The change in degree of modu- 
lation due to mains voltage variation shall be computed from these 
measurements. 

7. DISTORTION MEASUREMENTS 

7.1 Measurement of Carrier Distortion — The unmodulated signal shall 
be fed to a heterodyne voltmeter or a calibrated radio receiver which 
shall be tuned to the fundamental as well as harmonics, and the out- 
put voltage at each of the frequencies shall be measured. The total 
sum of the harmonic voltages ( without fundamental ) and the total 
output voltage ( fundamental + harmonics ) shall be computed. Dis- 
tortion factor shall be calculated from these values by the formula: 

Distortion factor, K « ^' t +£»,+ £». 

\/E\ + E* % + E\+...E\ 

where 

E u E v £ 3 , E n are the voltages at fundamental frequency, 

second harmonic, etc. 

7.2 Measurement of Envelope Distortion — The modulated signal output 
of the generator shall be applied to a linear diode detector with mini- 
mum distortion and the distortion of the detected audio signal shall 
be measured by a distortion factor meter. 

7.2.1 Description of Distortion Factor Meter — Distortion factor meter 
is an electronic device with which the amplitude distortion of an audio 
frequency signal can be measured quantitatively. It is basically a high 
gain amplifier with a filter network that balances to a sharp null at 
different frequencies, a calibrated attenuator to adjust the sensitivity 
and an electronic voltmeter. The measurement is effected by suppres- 
sing the fundamental component with a bridge type highly selective 
filter network and then comparing the amplitude of the residue with 
that of the total input. The null frequency is continuously variable in 
audio range. The distortion products are indicated directly on the 
panel meter. Distortion as low as one percent may be measured by this 
instrument. 

14 



IS: 2320 -1963 

8- MEASUREMENT OF UNWANTED MODULATION 

8.1 Measurement of Unwanted Frequency Modulation — Under considera- 
tion. 

&2 Measurement of Unwanted Amplitude Modulation ( or Carrier Noise ) — 

The measurement of depth of unwanted amplitude modulation shall be 
carried out in the same manner as described in 6.1, using a linear diode 
detector. 

9. MEASUREMENT OF LEAKAGE 

9.1 Radiation Leakage 

9.1.1 The generator may radiate sufficient power to rause interference 
with the measurements. The radiation may be due to insufficient shield- 
ing of the generator. 

9*1.2 This radiation leakage shall be measured with a calibrated 
radio receiver and a loop aerial system. A schematic diagram of the 
set up is shown in Fig. 5. 



SIGNAL 
GENERATOR 



LftUTPiJ 



-1 METRE— 




CALIBRATED 

RAOIO 

RECEIVER 



OUTPUT 
INOICATOR 



=© 



OUTPUT TERMINAL 

Fio. 5 Schematic Diaoham fob Measurement of 
Radiation Leakage 

9.13 The voltage induced in the loop aerial due to radiation is given 
by the equation: 

«, 2ntNA 



where 

E «* induced voltage in the loop antenna, 

t « field strength in volts per metre, 
N mm number of turns in the loop, 
A ■» area of loop ( in square metres ), and 

X « wave length of measuring frequency ( in metre ). 

9.1.4 The centre of the loop aerial shall be kept one metre away 
from the generator outlet terminated by iti rated impedance. The 



15 



IS:2320-19«3 

loop aerial shall be connected to a radio receiver whose output it cali- 
brated in terms of aerial input. The receiver shall be tuned to the 
signal generator frequency and the receiver output is measured at 
various positions of the generator under test, the loop aerial being 
turned to the position of maximum reception.. The level of radiation 
shall be computed using the equation given in 9.1.3. 

Nora — The measurement of radiation leakage should be carried out taking oare 
to avoid external interference. 

9.1.5 In measuring the radiation leakage from the signal generator care 
should be taken to ensure that the terminations and connecting leads 
or cables do not contribute to the measured radiation picked up by the 
receiver. 

9.2 Supply Lead Leakage 

9.2.1 The R.F. power leakage in a signal generator may be through 
the power supply leads. 

9.2.2 The supply lead leakage shall be measured with a calibrated 
radio receiver. 

9.2.2.1 A schematic set up is shown in Fig. 6. 



SIGNAL 
GENERATOR 




POWER SUPPLY LEADS 



±C 



CALIBRATED 

RA0K) 

RECEIVER 



OUTPUT 
INDICATOR 

=0 



Fio. 6 Schematic Diagram fob Measurement of 
Supply Lead Leakage 

9.2.2.2 A calibrated radio receiver shall be connected to the power 
supply input terminals of the signal generator through a pair of coup- 
ling condensers and the supply lead leakage is measured directly. 

10. MEASUREMENT OF NOMINAL SOURCE IMPEDANCE 

10*1 The output voltage of the signal generator shall be measured with an 
electronic voltmeter on open circuit. The output shall then be terminated 
by a variable resistance of negligible reactance. The terminating resistance 
shall be adjusted till the output voltage is equal to half the value on open 
circuit. The value of the resistance shall be a measure of the modulus of 
the source impedance. The measurement should be repeated as a function 
of frequency over the specified frequency range. 



16 



IS: 2320 -1963 

APPENDIX A 

( Clauses 0.4 and 4.1.1.4 ) 

ALTERNATE METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT 
OF FREQUENCY 

A-l. MEASUREMENT USING ELECTRONIC FREQUENCY 
COUNTER 

A-l.l The signal generator shall be terminated by its rated output 
impedance; the output from signal generator shall be fed to the input 
of electronic frequency counter and the frequency read out directly. 

A-l.l. 1 The measuring accuracy of the counter is better than 
001 percent ± 1 c/s. 

A-1.2 A suitable frequency converter may be used when the frequency 
to be measured is above the range of the main counter. 

A-1.3 Description of Electronic Frequency Counter — The electronic 
frequency counter is an instrument designed for measurement of the 
number of events or vibrations of an oscillator per unit time. This 
instrument directly counts the number in cycles per second and dis- 
plays them on a digital type indicator. The principle of operation 
is that an initial measurement of the number of vibrations is carried 
out over a fixed period of one second or a decimal multiple of it and 
the resultant is appropriately displayed on a series of decade scaler 
units. 

A-l .3.1 The unknown frequency is normally applied through a wide 
band squaring amplifier to a fast electronic gate controlled by a preci- 
sion time base generator. When the gate is opened, the signal under 
measurement is fed to a series of digital type decade counters which 
record each cycle of the operating frequency. When the gate closes, 
after a fixed unit of time, the counting is stopped and the total count is 
displayed. The display is kept on for a short time to enable the read- 
out till the time base generator resets the counting circuits to zero and 
opens the gate again for the next measurement. 

A-l .3.2 The range of instrument is normally to 10 Mc/s. For the 
measurement of frequencies above 10 Mc/s, a suitable frequency con- 
verter may be utilized with the main counter unit. 

A-l.3.3 The electronic frequency counter is a simple and reliable 
method of measuring the frequency of oscillator with high precision 
and exceptional speed. The accuracy of the instrument is ±2 parts 
per million plus one count; the former figure stands for the accuracy 
of the crystal used and the latter is the inherent tolerance which occurs 

17 



IS: 2320 -1963 

due to the possible random phasing of the measured frequency with 
respect to the arbitrary gate time. 

A-2. MEASUREMENT USING HETERODYNE FREQUENCY METER 

A-2.1 The simplest method of frequency calibration is by using a 
heterodyne frequency meter. The output of the signal generator is 
caused to beat with the fundamental or harmonic of a variable 
frequency oscillator for zero beat and the exact frequency determined. 

A-2.2 Description of Heterodyne Frequency Meter — The heterodyne 
frequency meter is a calibrated stable variable frequency oscillator 
coupled with a detector and an amplifier. The variable frequency 
oscillator normally maintains its calibration to better than 0*1 per- 
cent over long periods. 



APPENDIX B 

(Clauses 0.4 and 5.1 .4.1) 

ALTERNATE METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT OF 
OUTPUT VOLTAGE 

B-l. BOLOMETER METHOD 

B*l.l General — Bolometer bridge method described is capable of 
measuring R.F. voltages above 20 mV and up to 700 Mc/s with an 
accuracy of one percent or better. Radio frequency voltages lower than 
20 mV may also be measured by this method, however, with the 
sacrifice of accuracy in measurements, 

B-l. 1.1 Principle — The basic principle in measuring R.F. voltage 
by a bolometer bridge consists briefly of balancing a DC Wheatstone 
bridge having a bolometer in one of its arms and of rebalancing it 
again after part of the DC voltage is substituted by R.F. voltage required 
to be measured. The difference in the DC voltage gives a precise indi- 
cation of R.F. voltage applied as the resistance of the bolometer 
element employed depends only on the total power dissipation in it 
irrespective of its nature whether it is DC or AC. 

B-1.2 Bolometer Bridge 

B-l.2.1 A schematic of a typical bolometer bridge incorporating two 
thermistor elements of equal resistances is given in Fig. 7. 

18 



IS: 2320. 1963 



R Ti -Rt, 







flq. 7 bolombtbr bbidob fob thb measurement of 
Output Voltage 



R-1.3 Procedure — The bridge is first balanced without R.F. energy 
applied across the thermistor terminals and with no resistance in series 
with the battery. The power consumed in the thermistor arm will 
then be Fb*/8/?i»i> where Vo is the battery voltage and Rt x is the 
resistance of individual thermistor element. The R.F, voltage to be 
measured is then applied symmetrically across the thermistors as shown 
in the figure, simultaneously reducing the battery voltage by introduc- 
ing the series resistance R. Balance is restored by adjusting the value 
of J?. Voltage drop ( Vr ) across the series resistance is measured. The 
thermistor bridge is now supplied by the following two sources: 

a) R.F. voltage to be measured, and 

b) Reduced battery voltage ( V — Vr ). 

The reduction in the battery power is compensated by the R.F. 
power suppli ed. If V is the u nknown R.F. voltage then it can be shown 
that V - \ y/V*(lVo-V*). 

19 



18:2320-19(3 

IH.4 Factor* Limiting the Performance of the Bridge 

B-1*4J The upper limit of the voltage range is limited by thermistor 
characteristics in a given mount. Voltages as high as 10 V can be 
measured by choice of thermistors and mounts. 

B-1.4«2 The lower limit of the voltage range is dependent on the 
following factors: 

a) Sensitivity of the thermistors and of the bridge, 

b) Ease with which low values of Vr can be adjusted and 
measured, 

c) Stability and accuracy of Vo, 

d) Thermal voltages and incidental voltage drops in circuit leads 
and connections, and 

e) Ambient temperatures. 

Note — To minimize errors due to ambient temperature variations, the mea- 
surements should be made in an air-conditioned room. The errors contributed by 
thermal voltages and incidental voltage drops in circuit leads and connections 
as well as due to ambient temperature variations of 0*5 deg C are negligible in 
comparison to other errors. 

B-l.4.2.1 The total error in measurements contributed by all fac- 
tors assuming that all individual errors are cumulative, does not exceed 
0*8 percent. An extension of measurement range below 20 mV with- 
out sacrificing accuracy will require first improvement of stability of 
battery voltage as well as improvement in measurement of voltage 
across the resistance in series with the battery. 

B-1.5 A typical set up is described in " A Bolometer Bridge for Stand- 
ardising R.F. Voltmeter " by Selby, M. C, and Behrent, L. F., pub- 
lished in the Journal of Research of National Bureau of Standards, 
USA, Vol 44, January 1950. 

B-2. SUBSTITUTION METHOD 

B-2,1 When the level of output voltage is less than one millivolt, a 
substitution method using a standard signal generator and a calibrated 
radio receiver shall be employed as described in B-l.1.1 to B-l.1.4. 

B-2.1.1 The signal of a known amplitude and frequency from a 
standard signal generator shall be fed to a radio receiver tuned to 
the generator ( standard ) frequency and the output voltage across 
the second detector of the receiver with AVC line disconnected, shall 
be measured with the output indicator. This indicator shall thus be 
calibrated in terms of the various output settings of the standard signal 
generator. 

20 



18:2320-1963 

B-2.1.2 The signal generator under test, adjusted to the same 
frequency, shall then be substituted in place of the standard signal gene- 
rator. The output settings of the generator shall be checked with 
respect to the readings obtained on the calibrated radio receiver. 

Note — The measurement of output voltage of the signal generator under 
test shall be repeated to ensure that no drift has occurred in the receiver. 

B-2.1.3 In these measurements care should be taken to see that the 
loading due to the receiver input impedance will be such that the 
effective output of the signal generator is not altered by more 
than l'O percent. 

B-2.1.4 The standard signal generator shall have the same output 
impedance as the signal generator under test. Alternatively, suitable 
matching networks shall be interposed between the receiver and the 
signal generator for purposes of matching. 

B-2.1.5 A schematic diagram of the set up is shown in Fig. 8. 



SIGNAL 
GENERATOR 
UNDER TEST 



1 



STANOARO 

SIGNAL 

GENERATOR 



CALIBRATED 

RAOK) 

RECEIVER 



OUTPUT 
INOICATOR 



-© 



Fig. 8 Schematic Diagram fob Measurement of Output Voltaok 
by Substitution Method 



B-3L2 Description of Standard Sigaal Generator — A standard signal 
generator is an oscillator calibrated to provide output signals of pre- 
cisely known frequency and voltage. It consists of a radio frequency 
oscillator of good inherent stability, a buffer amplifier, a modulator 
and a calibrated attenuator. The output signal has good wave-form 
and negligible noise or hum. The signal amplitude is continuously 
variable and is read with a calibrated electronic voltmeter. The instru- 
ment is capable of being modulated up to 100 percent with low inciden- 
tal frequency modulation. An internal crystal calibrator is incorpo- 
rated within the instrument for the frequency calibration checking. 



21 



IS: 2320- 1963 

APPENDIX C 

( Clauses 0.4 and 6.1.4 ) 

ALTERNATE METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT 
OF MODULATION 

C-l. MEASUREMENT OF DEGREE OF MODULATION USING 
CATHODE RAY OSCILLOSCOPE 

C-l.l The modulated signal is fed to the vertical plates of a cathode 
ray oscilloscope, the time base of which is adjusted to synchronize 
with the modulating signal so that a steady pattern consisting of at 
least two cycles of the modulated wave-form appears on the screen. 

C-1.2 The extent of modulation is examined visually and the crest and 
trough heights are measured with a transparent scale. 

C-1.3 The degree of modulation is computed from the equation: 



Degree of modulation, m = 



where 



•+5 



mtn 



£ W0T = peak to peak amplitude of the crest ( see Fig. 9 ), and 
E min = peak to peak amplitude of the trough ( see Fig* 9 ). 



T 

E MJN 

i 



* 



m 



tor 



mw* "m 




Fio. 9 Modulated Wave as Observed on A Cathode Ray 
Oscilloscope 

C-l .4 Description of Cathode Ray Oscilloscope — The cathode ray 
oscilloscope is an instrument designed for the analysis of electrical 
circuits by a study of the wave-forms of voltages and currents at various 
points, within the limits of its frequency response characteristics. 
The basic elements of an oscilloscope are a cathode ray tube, vertical 
and horizontal amplifiers, a saw tooth sweep generator and the requi- 
site power supplies. The instrument may be employed to observe the 
sinusoidal wave-form of audio and radio frequency signals by feeding 
the input signals to the vertical amplifiers and a saw tooth shaped 
signal of frequency equivalent to a sub-harmonic of the input frequency 
to the horizontal plates. Lissajous patterns may also be observed 
on the screen when two signals whose frequencies are in an integral 
ratio, are fed to the vertical and horizontal plates respectively. 



22 




BUREAU OP INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 1 10002 
Telephones: 331 01 31. 331 13 75 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

(Common to all Office*) 
Regional Officer. Telephone 

Central Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, (331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 j 331 13 75 

•Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, 36 24 99 

Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700064 
Northern : SCO 445*446, Sector 35-C, 
CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 

fWestern : Manakalaya. E9 MIDC. Marol. Andheri ( East ), 6 32 92 95 
/BOMBAY 400093 

Branch Offices: 

'Pushpak'. Nurmohemed Shaikh Marg. Khanpur, ( 2 63 48 

AHMADABAD 380001 } 2 63 49 

iPeenya Industrial Area 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road (38 49 55 

BANGALORE 660068 (38 49 66 

GangotrifComplex, 5th Floor. Bhadbhada Road. T. T. Nagar, 6 67 16 

BHOPAL/462003 

Plot No. 82/83. Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 761002 6 36 27 

63/6. Ward No. 29. R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 3 31 77 

GUWAHATI 781003 

6-8-66CL. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ). 23 10 83 

HYDERABAD 600001 

R14YudhiSterMarg. C Scheme. JAIPUR 302005 { J gj 32 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208006 ||] |J J® 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 80001 3 6 23 06 

T.C. No. 14/1421. University P.O.. Palayam / 6 21 04 

TRIVANDRUM 695036 \6 21 17 

Impaction Offices ( With Sale Point ): 

Pushpanjali. First Floor, 206-A West High Court Road, 2 61 71 

Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 
Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1 332 Shivaii Nagar, 6 24 36 

PUNE 41 1006 



•Salts Office in Calcutta ia at 6 Chowrlngneo Approaeh. f*. O. Prtncep 27 68 00 
•treat. Calcutta 700072 

fSelea Office in Bombay ia at Novelty Chamber* Grant Road, 89 662S 
Bombay 400007 

fSalee Otfica in Bangalore is at Unity Building. Matatfmharaja Square. 22 38 71 
Bangalore 660002 

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



