Waa HAR IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 
Indian Standard 


qT 4 det he t A ay al Waa Pan 
( Ve Yaa ) 


Fresh Concrete — Methods of 
Sampling, Testing and Analysis 
Part 4 Determination of Air Content of Fresh Concrete 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.30 


© BIS 2018 


ada AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© AM AA, 9 ae VHC APM, As feeet-110002 
wi MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2018 Price Group 7 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


Testing plays an important role in controlling the quality of cement concrete work. Systematic testing of the raw 
materials, the fresh concrete and the hardened concrete, is an inseparable part of any quality control programme 
for concrete. This helps to achieve a higher efficiency of the materials used and greater assurance of the performance 
of the concrete, in regard to workability, strength and durability. The test methods used should be simple, direct 
and convenient to apply. This standard was formulated with this objective in view. 


This standard was first published in 1959. In this revision, it was decided to review and update the various existing 
test methods of fresh concrete taking into consideration the latest international practices and developments in this 
field in the country, and also introduced certain new test methods, wherever required. In the process, the various 
existing test methods covered in IS 1199: 1959 ‘Methods of sampling and analysis of concrete’, have been 
revised. The revision of the standard is being brought out taking into consideration primarily the corresponding 
ISO Standards, while also examining the other best practices world over and in the country. In addition, test 
methods for determination of properties of new types of concrete like self compacting concrete have been included, 
covering tests such as consistency, viscosity, passing ability and segregation resistance. Also, for better understanding 
and implementation, some of the other test methods which were spread over in other Indian Standards have been 
brought together under the fold of IS 1199 as its various parts, such as the setting time of concrete by penetration 
method and, water soluble and acid soluble chlorides in mortar and concrete. This is with a view to making the 
standard complete in all respects, and rendering it a comprehensive source of provisions for testing of concrete 
and reference in other Indian Standards. 


In this revision, IS 1199 has been split in to nine parts. The other parts in the series are: 
Part 1 Sampling of fresh concrete 
Part 2 Determination of consistency of fresh concrete 
Part 3 Determination of density of fresh concrete 
Part 5 Making and curing of test specimens 
Part 6 Tests on fresh self compacting concrete 
Part 7 Determination of setting time of concrete by penetration resistance 
Part 8 Determination of water soluble and acid soluble chlorides in mortar and concrete 
Part9 Analysis of freshly mixed concrete 
This standard (Part 4) covers the procedures for determination of air content of fresh concrete. 


These test methods shall be applicable as and when published in place of the corresponding provisions given in 
IS 1199 : 1959. IS 1199 : 1959 shall be superseded after the publication of all the parts of the standard. 


This revision of the standard has been taken up to incorporate the modifications found necessary in the light of 
experience gained in its use and also to bring it in line with the latest development on the subject. Significant 
provisions in this revision are highlighted below: 


a) Procedures for determination of air content of fresh concrete have been aligned with the international 
practices. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


FRESH CONCRETE — METHODS OF SAMPLING 
TESTING AND ANALYSIS 
PART 4 DETERMINATION OF AIR CONTENT OF FRESH CONCRETE 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 4) specifies procedures for 
determination of air content of fresh concrete. It 
specifies the following test methods: 


a) Pressure gauge method, and 
b) Water column method. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 4845, IS 6461 (Parts 1 to 12) and the following 
shall apply. 


3.1 Fresh Concrete — Concrete which is fully mixed 
and still in conditions that is capable of being compacted 
by chosen method. 


4 GENERAL, SAMPLING AND FILLING THE 
CONTAINER AND COMPACTING THE 
CONCRETE 


Clauses 4.1 to 4.3 and 4.6 to 4.7 are applicable to both 
the methods described at 4.4 and 4.5, for the 
determination of air content. 


4.1 General 


The methods described in this clause are considered 
adequate for all ordinary types of concrete and mortar, 
except for concretes or mortar made with highly porous 
aggregates, where the aggregate correction factor 
cannot be determined accurately by the technique found 
satisfactory for the usual types of relatively dense natural 
aggregates. 


4.2 Sampling 


Obtain the sample of fresh concrete in accordance with 
IS 1199 (Part 1). 


NOTES 


1 When carrying out this test, prevent skin contact with fresh 
concrete by wearing suitable protective clothing, gloves and 
footwear. If wet cement or concrete enters the eye, immediately 
wash it out thoroughly with clean water and seek medical 
treatment without delay. Wash fresh concrete off the skin 
immediately. 


2 The use of vibrating equipment, such as vibrating tables, can 
cause damage to joints and loss of sensation due to nerve damage. 
Moulds, etc, shall be clamped to the table and not held in 
position using one’s hand while they are being vibrated. 
4.3 Filling the Container and Compacting the 
Concrete 


4.3.1 Means of Compaction 


The means for compacting the concrete in the container 
shall be one of the following: 


a) Internal vibrator, with a minimum frequency 
of 120 Hz (7 200 cycles per minute). The 
diameter of the vibrating head shall not exceed 
one-quarter of the smallest dimension of the 
container. The vibrator shall meet the 
requirements of IS 2505. 

b) Vibrating table, with a minimum frequency of 
50 Hz (3 000 cycles per minute). The vibrating 
table shall meet the requirements of IS 2514. 

c) Compacting rod, of circular cross-section. 
Straight, made of steel, having a diameter of 
16 + 1 mm, a length of 600 + 5 mm and shall 
have rounded ends. 


d) Compacting bar, of square or round cross- 
section with mass greater than 1.8 kg for hand 
compacting. 


4.3.2 Filling the Container 


Using the scoop, place the concrete in the container in 
such a way as to remove as much entrapped air as 
possible. Place the concrete in three layers, approximately 
equal in depth. Compact the concrete immediately after 
placing it in the container, in such a way as to produce 
full compaction of the concrete, with neither excessive 
segregation nor laitance. Compact each layer by using 
one of the methods described in 4.3.3. 


The quantity of material used in the final layer shall be 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


sufficient to fill the container without having to remove 
excess material. A small quantity of additional concrete 
may be added, if necessary and further compacted in 
order to fill the container. 


NOTE — Full compaction is achieved using mechanical 
vibration when there is no further appearance of large air 
bubbles on the surface of the concrete and the surface becomes 
relatively smooth with a glazed appearance, without excessive 
segregation. 


4.3.3 Compacting the Concrete 


Compact the concrete by one of the methods described 
below. 


4.3.3.1 Mechanical vibration 
4.3.3.1.1 Compacting with internal vibrator 


Apply the vibration for the minimum duration necessary 
to achieve full compaction of the concrete. Avoid over 
vibration, which may cause loss of entrained air. Care 
should be taken not to damage the container. The use 
of a filling frame is recommended. 


Ensure that the vibrator is kept vertical and not allowed 
to touch the bottom or sides of the container. 


NOTE — Laboratory tests have shown that when using an 
internal vibrator, great care is needed, if loss of entrained air is 
to be avoided. 


4.3.3.1.2 Compacting with vibrating table 


Apply the vibration for the minimum duration necessary 
to achieve full compaction of the concrete. The 
container should be attached firmly to the table. Avoid 
over-vibration, which may cause loss of entrained air. 


4.3.3.2 Hand compaction with compacting rod or bar 


Distribute the strokes of the compacting rod or bar ina 
uniform manner over the cross-section of the mould. 
Ensure that the compacting rod or bar does not forcibly 
strike the bottom of the container when compacting 
the first layer, nor penetrate significantly any previous 
layers. Subject the concrete to at least 25 strokes per 
layer. In order to remove pockets of entrapped air but 
not the entrained air, after compaction of each layer, 
tap the sides of the container smartly with the mallet 
until large bubbles of air cease to appear on the surface 
and depressions left by the compacting rod or bar are 
removed. 


4.4 Pressure Gauge Method 
4.4.1 Principle 


Aknown volume of air at a known pressure is merged 
in a sealed air chamber with the unknown volume of 
air in the concrete sample. The dial on the pressure 
gauge is calibrated in terms of percentage of air for the 
resultant pressure. 


4.4.2 Apparatus 


The apparatus may be calibrated as per procedure in 
Annex B. At the time of the test, the apparatus shall be 
in calibration. It is recommended that the apparatus be 
calibrated at a frequency dependent on the use but at 
least once per year. 


4.4.2.1 Pressure gauge method apparatus shall consists 
of the following items: 


a) Container, a flanged cylindrical vessel, of steel 
or other hard metal, not readily attacked by 
cement paste, having minimum capacity of at 
least 0.005 m? (5 litre) and ratio of diameter 
to height of not less than 0.75 and not more 
than 1.25. The outer rim and the interior 
surfaces of the vessel shall be machined to a 
smooth finish. The container shall be 
watertight. The container and the cover 
assembly shall be suitable for an operating 
pressure of approximately 0.2 MPa. 


NOTE — The capacity of 0.005 m? for the container 
is usually recommended for msa up to 40 mm. For 
concrete with higher msa, wet sieving of concrete 
through a 40 mm IS Sieve shall be carried out as per 
Annex B of IS 1199 (Part 5). Wet-sieving of concrete 
causes the loss of a small amount of air due to 
additional handling. The air content of the wet-sieved 
fraction of concrete is greater than that of the total 
concrete because the larger size aggregate, which is 
removed, does not contain air. 


b) Cover assembly, consisting of a flanged rigid 
cover, of steel or any other hard material not 
readily attacked by cement paste. The outer 
rim and lower surface of the flange as well 
as the interior surfaces shall be machined to 
a smooth finish. The cover shall have 
provision for being clamped to the container 
to make a pressure seal without entrapping 
air at the joint between flanges of the cover 
and the container. 

c) Pressure gauge, fitted to cover assembly, 
calibrated to indicate air content from 0 to 
at least 8 percent and preferably 10 percent. 


The scale of the gauge shall be graduated as 

follows: 

1) Not more than 0.1 percent for the range 
(0 to 3) percent. 

2) Not more than 0.2 percent for the range 
(3 to 6) percent. 

3) Not more than 0.5 percent or the range 
(6 to 10) percent. 


d) Air pump, a pressure pump which may be built 
into the cover. 


4.4.2.2 Scoop, approximately 100 mm wide. 


4.4.2.3 Sampling tray, of minimum dimensions 
900 mm x 900 mm, 50 mm deep, of rigid construction 
shall be made from a non-absorbent material not readily 
attacked by cement paste. 


4.4.2.4 Shovel, with a square mouth. 


4.4.2.5 Syringe, rubber, suitable for injecting water into 
the container either through valve A or valve B 
(see Fig. 1). 


4.4.2.6 Mallet, soft faced with a mass of approximately 
250 g. 


4.4.3 Procedure 


Thoroughly clean the flanges of the container and cover 
assembly. Clamp the cover assembly in place and ensure 
that there is a good seal between the cover and the 
container. Close the main air valve and open valve A 
and valve B (see Fig. 1). Using a rubber syringe, inject 
water through either valve A or valve B until the water 
emerges from the other valve. Lightly tap the apparatus 
with the mallet until all entrapped air is expelled. 


1 Pump 
2 Valve B 
3 Valve A 
4 
5 


Extension tubing for calibration checks 9 


Main air valve 


LD 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


Ensure that the air bleeder valve on the air chamber 
is closed and pump air into the air chamber until the 
hand on the pressure gauge is on the initial pressure 
line. After allowing a few seconds for the compressed 
air to cool to the ambient temperature, stabilize the 
hand on the pressure gauge at the initial pressure line 
by further pumping in or bleeding off air as necessary. 
During this process lightly tap the gauge, close both 
valve A and valve B and then open main air valve. 
Tap the sides of the container sharply. Lightly tap the 
pressure gauge to stabilize it, then read and record 
the value indicated in the pressure gauge, which is 
apparent percentage of air, C}. Open valves A and B 
in order to release the pressure before the cover 
assembly is removed. 


4.5 Water-Column Method 
4.5.1 Principle 


Water is introduced to a predetermined height above a 
sample of compacted concrete of known volume in a 
sealed container and a predetermined air pressure is 
applied over the water. The reduction in volume of the 
air in the concrete sample is measured by observing the 


Næ 


6 Pressure gauge 
7 Air-bleeder valve 
8 Air-chamber 


Clamping device 


10 Container 


Fic. 1 APPARATUS FOR DETERMINING AIR CONTENT BY PRESSURE GAUGE METHOD 


3 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


amount by which the water level is lowered, the water 
column being calibrated in terms of percentage of air in 
the concrete sample. 


4.5.2 Apparatus 
4.5.2.1 General 


The apparatus shall be in calibration at the time of the 
test, using the procedure in Annex C. If the apparatus 
has been moved to a location that differs in elevation 
by more than 200 m from the location at which it was 
last calibrated, it shall be recalibrated (see Annex C). 


It is recommended that the apparatus be calibrated at a 
frequency dependent upon use, but at least once per 
year. 


4.5.2.2 Water-column method apparatus, which shall 
consist of the following items (see Fig. 2): 


a) Container, a flanged cylindrical vessel, of steel 
or other hard metal, not readily attacked by 
cement paste, having a nominal capacity of at 
least 5 litre and a ratio of diameter to height 
of not less than 0.75 nor more than 1.25. The 
outer rim and upper surface of the flange and 
the interior surfaces of the vessel shall be 
machined to a smooth finish. The container 
shall be watertight. The container and the 
cover assembly shall be suitable for an 
operating pressure of approximately 0.1 MPa 
and be sufficiently rigid to limit the pressure 


b) 


c) 


d) 


© 


KEY 
1 Non-return valve 6 Clamp 
2 Air vent or valve 7 Concrete 
3 Bleed valve 8 Air pump 
4 Mark 9 Pressure-lowered level 
5 


h, Reading at pressure P 
C, when container holds concrete 


C, (Air content of concrete) 


expansion constant, that is, to not more than 
0.1 percent air content. 


Cover assembly, a flanged rigid conical cover, 
fitted with a stand pipe. The cover shall be of 
steel or other hard metal not readily attacked 
by cement paste and shall have interior surfaces 
inclined at not less than 10° from the surface 
of the flange. The outer rim and lower surface 
of the flange and the sloping interior face shall 
be machined to a smooth finish. The cover shall 
have provision for being clamped to the 
container to make a pressure seal without 
entrapping air at the joint between the flanges 
of the cover and the container. 

Standpipe, consisting of a graduated glass tube 
of uniform bore or a metal tube of uniform 
bore with a glass gauge attached. 


The graduated scale shall indicate air content 
of 0 to at least 8 percent and preferably 10 
percent. The scale shall be graduated with 
divisions every 0.1 percent air content, the 
divisions being not less than 2 mm apart. 
NOTE — A scale in which 25 mm represents | percent 
of air content is convenient. 

Cover, the cover shall be fitted with a suitable 
device for venting of the air chamber, a non- 
return air-inlet valve and a small valve for 
bleeding off water. 


The applied pressure shall be indicated by a 


© 


h, Reading at zero pressure after the pressure has been released 
h 


;- h, = G (Aggregate correction factor) when the container holds only aggregate and water 


Fic. 2 APPARATUS FOR DETERMINING AIR CONTENT BY WATER-COLUMN METHOD 


4 


pressure gauge connected to the air chamber 
above the water column. The gauge shall be 
graduated with divisions every 0.005 MPa, the 
divisions being not less than 2 mm apart. The 
gauge shall have a full-scale reading of 0.2 MPa. 

e) Deflecting plate or spray tube, a thin non- 
corrodible disc of not less than 100 mm 
diameter to minimize disturbance of the 
concrete when water is added to the apparatus. 
Alternatively, a brass spray tube of appropriate 
diameter that may be an integral part of the 
cover assembly or provided separately may be 
used. The spray tube shall be constructed so 
that when water is added to the container, it is 
sprayed onto the walls of the cover in such a 
manner as to flow down the sides causing 
minimum disturbance to the concrete. 

f) Air (pressure) pump, with a lead facilitating 
connection to the non-return air-inlet valve on 
the cover assembly. 


4.5.2.3 Scoop, approximately 100 mm wide. 


4.5.2.4 Remixing tray, of rigid construction, made from 
a non-absorbent material not readily attacked by cement 
paste. 


It shall be of appropriate dimensions such that the 
concrete can be thoroughly remixed using a square- 
mouthed shovel. 


4.5.2.5 Shovel, with a square blade. 


4.5.2.6 Container, fitted with a spout, having a capacity 
of 2 litre to 5 litre, to fill the apparatus with water. 


4.5.2.7 Mallet, soft-faced, with a mass of approximately 
250 g. 


4.5.3 Filling the Container and Compacting the 
Concrete 


Fill the container and compact the concrete as described 
in 4,3. 


4.5.4 Procedure 


Thoroughly clean the flanges of the container and cover 
assembly. In the absence of the spray tube, place the 
deflecting plate, centrally on the concrete and press it 
into contact. Clamp the cover assembly in place, and 
ensure that there is good pressure seal between the 
cover and the container. Fill the apparatus with water 
and tap lightly with the mallet to remove air adhering 
to the interior surfaces of the cover. Bring the level of 
water in the standpipe to zero by bleeding through the 
small valve with the air vent open. Close the air vent 
and apply the operating pressure, P, by means of the air 
pump. Record the reading on the gauge tube, /,, and 
release the pressure. Read the gauge tube again and if 
the reading A, is 0.2 percent air content or less, record 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


the value (h; — /,) as the apparent air content, C}, to 
the nearest 0.1 percent air by volume. If h, is greater 
than 0.2 percent air content, apply the operating 
pressure, P, again, giving a gauge tube reading h, anda 
final reading /, after release of the pressure. If (h,—h,) 
is 0.1 percent air content or less, record the value 
(h, —h,) as the apparent air content. If (,—/,) is greater 
than 0.1 percent air content, it is possible that leakage 
is occurring and the test shall be disregarded. 


4.6 Calculation and Expression of Results 


4.6.1 Air Content of the Sample Tested 


Calculate the air content, C., of the concrete in the 
container from following equation: 


C= CG 
where 
C, = apparent air content, expressed to the 
nearest 0.1 percent of the sample tested, and 
G = aggregate correction factor, expressed to the 


nearest 0.1 percent. 


The aggregate correction factor shall be determined as 
described in Annex D (for pressure gauge method) and 
Annex E (for water column method). Express the air 
content as a percentage to the nearest 0.1 percent. 


4.7 Test Report 
The test report shall include the following: 


a) Identification of the test sample; 

b) Location of performance of test; 

c) Time and date of performance of test; 

d) Temperature of the remixed sample (optional); 

e) Observations on condition of test sample 
(optional); 

f) Consistence of the concrete; 

g) Method of compaction: 

1) for mechanical compaction, the duration, 
2) for hand compaction, the number of 
strokes; 

h) Identification of person carrying out the test 
or part of the test; 

j) Any deviation from standard test method; 

k) Declaration by the person carrying out the test 
that it was carried out in accordance with this 
standard, except as noted in (j). 

m) Aggregate correction factor 
appropriate); 

n) Identification of test method and procedure 
used, that is, pressure-gauge method or water- 
column method; 

p) Information relevant to the specific test, like 
altitude; 

q) Measured apparent air content; and 

r) Calculated air content (C,) of the concrete. 


(where 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


IS No. 
1199 


(Part 1) : 2018 
(Part 5) : 2018 
(Part 6) : 2018 


2505 : 1992 


2514 : 1963 
4845 : 1968 


6461 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 
Fresh concrete — Methods of 
sampling, testing and analysis: 
Sampling of fresh concrete (first 
revision) 
Making and curing of test 
specimens (first revision) 
Tests on fresh self compacting 
concrete (first revision) 
Concrete vibrators — Immersion 
type — General requirements 
(third revision) 
Specification for 
vibrating tables 
Definitions and terminology 
relating to hydraulic cement 
Glossary of terms relating to 
cement concrete: 


concrete 


IS No. 
(Part 1) : 1972 
(Part 2) : 1972 


(Part 3): 
(Part 4) : 
(Part 5): 
(Part 6) : 
(Part 7): 


1972 
1972 
1972 
1972 
1973 


(Part 8) : 1973 
(Part 9) : 1973 
(Part 10) : 1973 
(Part 11) : 1973 
(Part 12) : 1973 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.4.2) 


Title 
Concrete aggregates 
Materials (Other than cement and 
aggregate) 
Concrete reinforcement 
Types of concrete 
Formwork for concrete 
Equipment, tools and plant 
Mixing, laying, compaction, 
curing and other construction 
aspects 
Properties of concrete 
Structural aspects 
Tests and testing apparatus 
Prestressed concrete 
Miscellaneous 


CALIBRATION OF APPARATUS FOR PRESSURE GAUGE METHOD 


B-1 The calibration test detailed shall be made as 
frequently as necessary to check the accuracy of the 
graduations indicating air content on the dial of the 
pressure gauge. Recalibration of the apparatus is not 
required with changes in elevation at which it is used 
or with changes in atmospheric pressure. 


B-2 APPARATUS 
The apparatus for calibration shall be as follows: 


a) Calibration cylinder — It shall be made of 
brass or other non-corrodible metal, which 
may be integral with the cover assembly. The 
calibration cylinder shall consist of cylindrical 
measure having an internal volume equal to 
approximately 3 to 6 percent of the volume of 
the measuring bowl. 


b) Transparent plate — It shall be rigid and 
transparent with a minimum thickness of 
5 mm, suitable for use as a closure for the 
container. 


c) Balances — These shall be capable of 
weighing up to | kg to an accuracy of + 0.5 g, 
over the range used in the test and up to 20 kg 
to an accuracy of + 5 g over the range used in 
the test. 


B-3 CHECKING THE CAPACITY OF THE 
CONTAINER 


The capacity of the container is found by determining 
the mass of water, My con » required to fill it. Smear a 
thin film of grease on the flange of the container to 
make a watertight joint between the transparent plate 
and the top of the container. Fill the container with water 


at ambient temperature and place the transparent plate 
over it to eliminate any convex meniscus. Wipe away 
surplus water and determine the mass of the container 
filled with water by weighing on the balance. 


B-4 CHECKING AIR CONTENT GRADUATIONS 
ON THE PRESSURE GAUGE 


Screw the extension tubing (see Fig. 1) into the threaded 
hole beneath valve A on the underside of the cover 
assembly and clamp the cover assembly into place, 
taking care to ensure that there is a good pressure seal 
between cover and container. Close main air valve and 
open valves A and B. Add water through valve A until 
all trapped air has been expelled through valve B. Pump 
air into the air chamber until the pressure reaches the 
indicated initial pressure line. After allowing a few 
seconds for the compressed air to cool to ambient 
temperature, stabilize the indicator on the pressure 
gauge at the initial pressure line by further pumping in 
or bleeding off air as necessary. During this process 
lightly tap the gauge and close valve B. 


Remove the water from the apparatus to the calibration 
cylinder in just sufficient quantity to fill it completely 
or up to a predetermined line marked on it, then 
determine the mass, m of water displaced by 
weighing on the balance. 


w, dis? 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


Depending upon the particular apparatus design, control 
the flow of water either by opening valve A and using 
the main air valve to control the flow, or by opening 
the main air valve and using valve A to control the flow. 
Then release the pressure in the container by opening 
valve B (If the apparatus employs an auxiliary tube for 
filling the calibration cylinder, open valve A so that the 
tube is drained back into the container, or alternatively, 
if the calibration is an integral part of the cover assembly, 
close valve A immediately after filling the calibration 
vessel and leave it closed until the test has been 
completed.). The volume of air in the container is now 
equal to the volume of the displaced water; close all 
valves, pump air into the air chamber until the pressure 
reaches the initial pressure line, and then open the main 
air valve. The air content indicated by the pressure gauge 
corresponds to the percentage of air, C,, determined to 
be in the container, where, 


Cy = My, aig/Mycon * 100 percent 


w,dis w,con 


If two or more determinations show the same variation 
from the correct air content, reset the hand on the 
pressure gauge to the correct air content and repeat 
the test until the gauge reading corresponds to the 
calibrated air content within 0.1 percent air content. 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.5.2.1) 
CALIBRATION OF APPARATUS — WATER-COLUMN METHOD 


C-1 GENERAL 


The calibration tests described in C-3, C-4, C-5 
and C-6 shall be made at the time of the initial 
calibration of the apparatus and at any time when it is 
necessary to check whether the capacity of the 
calibration cylinder or container may have changed. 
The calibration test described in C-7 and C-8 shall be 
made as frequently as necessary to check the pressure 
gauge in order to ensure that the proper gauge pressure, 
P, is being used. Recalibration of the apparatus shall 
also be required when the location at which it is to be 
used varies in elevation by more than 200 m from that 
at which it was last calibrated. 


C-2 APPARATUS 
The apparatus shall be as follows: 


a) Calibration cylinder, hollow, made of brass 
or other strong non-corroding metal, having 
a capacity of approximately 0.3 litre. The rim 
of the cylinder shall be machined to a smooth 
plane surface at right angles to the axis of the 
cylinder. 

b) Support, for the calibration cylinder, made of 
non-corroding material and which allows free 
flow of water into and out of the cylinder in 
the inverted position. 

c) Spring, non-corroding coil, spring or 
equivalent for retaining the calibration cylinder 
in place. 

d) Transparent plates, two rigid plates with a 
minimum thickness of 5 mm, one suitable for 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


use as a closure for the calibration cylinder 
and one as a closure for the container. 


e) Balances, capable of weighing up to | kg to 
an accuracy of + 0.5 g, over the range used in 
the test and up to 20 kg to an accuracy of + 
5 g over the range used in the test. 


C-3 CAPACITY OF THE CALIBRATION 
CYLINDER 


Using the 1kg balance, determine the capacity of the 
calibration cylinder by measuring the mass of water 
required to fill it. For this purpose, fill the weighed 
cylinder with water at temperature of 27 + 2°C and 
carefully cover it with the previously weighed 
transparent plate, ensuring that no air bubbles are 
trapped under the plate and that surplus water is wiped 
away before weighing the assembly. By repeating this 
procedure, make a total of three weighings of the 
covered cylinder filled with water. Calculate the average 
mass, My cyp Of water contained in the full cylinder and 
record it to the nearest 0.5 g. 


C-4 CAPACITY OF THE CONTAINER 


Using the 20 kg balance, determine the capacity of the 
container by measuring the mass of water required to fill 
it. For this purpose, smear a thin film of grease on the 
flange of the container, and, after weighing together with 
the transparent plate, fill with water at temperature of 
27 + 2°C, and make a watertight joint by sliding the 
transparent plate over the top of the container, ensuring 
that no air bubbles are trapped under the plate and that 
surplus water is wiped away before weighing the 
assembly. By repeating this procedure, make a total of 
three weighings of the covered container filled with water. 
Calculate the average mass, Mw cons of water contained in 
the full container and record it to the nearest 5 g. 


C-5 PRESSURE EXPANSION CONSTANT 


The pressure expansion constant, e, is determined by 
filling the apparatus with water, making sure that all 
entrapped air has been removed and that the water level 
is exactly on the zero mark, and applying an air pressure 
of 100 kPa. The reading of water column (in percent 
air content) will be the pressure expansion constant, e, 
for the apparatus. 


Strictly speaking, the air pressure applied during this 
procedure should be the required operating pressure, 
P, determined as in C-7. However, as the value of e is 
needed to determine P by way of the calibration constant 
K, a logically closed cycle of operations exists. In 
practice, the change in e due to a change in P is small 
enough to be ignored. As P is commonly about 100 kPa, 
this value is prescribed to overcome the problem. Its 
use will lead to a value of e that is sufficiently accurate 
for the test. 


C-6 CALIBRATION CONSTANT 


The calibration constant, K, is the reading needed on 
the air content scale during the routine calibration 
procedure to obtain the gauge pressure required to make 
the graduations on the air content scale correspond 
directly to the percentage of air introduced into the 
container by the calibration cylinder when the container 
is full of water. 


The constant, K, is generally calculated in accordance 
with equation given below: 


K=0.98x R+e 
where 
e = pressure expansion constant (see C-5); and 
R = capacity of the calibration cylinder expressed 
relative to the capacity of the container and 
is calculated as follows 


(see C-3 and C-4): 


My cyl 
— ——x100 
R= m 


w,con 


NOTE — The factor 0.98 is used to correct for the reduction in 
the volume of air in the calibration vessel when it is compressed 
by a depth of water equal to the depth of the container. This 
factor is approximately 0.98 for a 200 mm deep container at sea 
level. Its value decreases to approximately 0.975 at 1 500 m 
above sea level and 0.970 at 4 000 m above sea level. The value 
of the constant will decrease by about 0.01 for each 100 mm 
increase in bowl depth. Hence the term 0.98 x R represents the 
effective volume of the calibration vessel, expressed as a 
percentage of the container under normal operating conditions. 


C-7 REQUIRED OPERATING PRESSURE 


Place the calibration cylinder support centrally on the 
bottom of the clean container and place the cylinder on 
the support with its open end downward. Place the coil 
spring on the cylinder and clamp the cover assembly 
carefully in place. 


Fill the apparatus with water at ambient temperature to 
a level above the zero mark on the air content scale. 
Close the air vent and pump air into the apparatus 
approximately to the operating pressure (about 
100 kPa). Lightly tap the sides and cover with the mallet 
to remove as much entrapped air as possible adhering 
to the interior surfaces of the apparatus and gradually 
reduce the pressure by opening the vent. Bring the water 
level exactly to the zero mark by bleeding water through 
the small valve in the conical cover and close the air 
vent. Apply pressure by means of the pump until the 
reading of the water level equals the calibration 
constant, K (see C-6). Record the pressure, P, indicated 
on the pressure gauge. Gradually release the pressure 
by opening the vent until zero pressure is indicated. If 
the water level returns to a reading less than 0.05 percent 
air content, take the pressure, P, as the operating 


pressure. If the water level fails to return to a reading 
below 0.05 percent air content, check the apparatus for 
leakage and repeat the procedure. 


C-8 ALTERNATIVE OPERATING PRESSURE 


The range of air contents that can be measured with a 
particular apparatus can be extended by determining 
an appropriate alternative operating pressure. For 
example, if the range is to be doubled, the alternative 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


operating pressure, P,, is that for which the apparatus 
indicates half of the calibration reading, K (see C-6). 


Exact calibration requires the determination of the 
pressure expansion constant, e (see C-5), for the 
reduced operating pressure but, since the change in the 
pressure expansion constant can normally be 
disregarded, the alternative operating pressure can be 
determined during the determination of the normal 
operating pressure (see C-7). 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 4.6.1) 
AGGREGATE CORRECTION FACTOR FOR PRESSURE GAUGE METHOD 


D-1 GENERAL 


The aggregate correction factor will vary with different 
aggregates and although ordinarily it will remain 
reasonably constant for a particular aggregate, an 
occasional check shall be carried out. The aggregate 
correction factor can be determined only by a test, as it is 
not directly related to the water absorption of the particles. 


D-2 AGGREGATE SAMPLE SIZE 


Determine the aggregate correction factor by applying 
the operating pressure on a combined sample of the 
coarse and fine aggregates in the approximate amounts, 
proportions and moisture conditions that exist in the 
concrete sample. Obtain the sample of aggregate either 
by washing the cement through a 150 um sieve from 
the concrete sample tested or by using a combined 
sample of fine and coarse aggregate similar to that used 
in the concrete. In the latter case calculate the masses, 
m, and m, of fine and coarse aggregate, respectively, 
to be used from equations given below: 


me = V, Pafe 
m, = V, Pifo 
where 
fand f, = proportions, of the fine and the coarse 
aggregate, respectively in fractions by 


mass of the total concrete mix 
(aggregates, cement and water); 


Ve = capacity, of the container determined as 
specified in B-3, in m°, and 
Pk = density of concrete to be tested, 


determined in accordance with IS 1199 
(Part 3) or calculated from the known 


proportions and densities ofthe materials 
and the nominal air content, in kg/m’. 


D-3 FILLING THE CONTAINER 


Partially fill the container of the apparatus with water, 
then introduce the combined sample of aggregate in small 
scoopfuls. This shall be done in such a manner as to entrap 
as little air as possible. If necessary, add additional water 
to inundate all of the aggregate. After the addition of 
each scoopful, remove any foam promptly, then stir the 
aggregate with the compacting bar and tap the container 
with the mallet to release any entrapped air. 


D-4 DETERMINATION OF AGGREGATE 
CORRECTION FACTOR 


When all the aggregate has been placed in the container 
and inundated for at least 5 min, wipe clean the flanges 
of the container and the cover assembly thoroughly and 
clamp the cover assembly into position, so that a pressure 
tight seal is obtained. Close the main valve and open 
valves A and C Using the rubber syringe, inject water 
through either valve A or valve B until water emerges 
from the other valve. Tap the apparatus lightly with the 
mallet until all entrapped air is expelled from this same 
valve. Remove a volume of water from the container 
approximately equivalent to the volume of air that would 
be contained in a typical concrete sample of a size equal 
to the volume of the container. Remove the water in the 
apparatus in the manner described in B-4 for the 
calibration test. Complete the test using the procedure 
described in 4.4.3. The aggregate correction factor, G, 
expressed as a percentage of the capacity of the container, 
is equal to the reading on the air content scale minus the 
volume of water removed from the container. 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 4.6.1) 
AGGREGATE CORRECTION FACTOR FOR WATER COLUMN METHOD 


E-1 GENERAL 


The aggregate correction factor will vary with different 
aggregates and, although it will remain reasonably 
constant for a particular aggregate, an occasional check 
shall be carried out. The aggregate correction factor 
can be determined only by a test, as it is not directly 
related to the water absorption of the particles. 


E-2 AGGREGATE SAMPLE SIZE 


Determine the aggregate correction factor by applying 
the operating pressure on a combined sample of the 
coarse and fine aggregates in the approximate amounts, 
proportions and moisture conditions that exist in the 
concrete sample. Obtain the sample of aggregate either 
by washing the cement through a 150 um sieve from 
the concrete sample tested or by using a combined 
sample of fine and coarse aggregate similar to that used 
in the concrete. In the latter case calculate the masses, 
m, and m, of fine and coarse aggregate, respectively, 
to be used from equations given below: 


Me = V, Pafe 
M, = V, Pie 


where 


fand f, = proportions, of the fine and the coarse 
aggregate, respectively in fractions by 
mass of the total concrete mix 
(aggregates, cement and water); 


y, = capacity, of the container determined as 
specified in B-3, in m’, and 


Pà = density of concrete to be tested, 
determined in accordance with IS 1199 
(Part 3) or calculated from the known 


proportions and densities ofthe materials 
and the nominal air content, in kg/m’. 


E-3 FILLING THE CONTAINER 


Partially fill the container of the apparatus with water, 
then introduce the combined sample of aggregate in 
small scoopfuls. This shall be done in such a manner as 
to entrap as little air as possible. If necessary, add 
additional water to inundate all of the aggregate. After 
the addition of each scoopful, remove any foam 
promptly, then stir the aggregate with the compacting 
bar and tap the container with the mallet to release any 
entrapped air. 


E-4 DETERMINATION OF AGGREGATE 
CORRECTION FACTOR 


When all the aggregate has been placed in the container 
and inundated for at least 5 min, wipe clean the flanges 
on the container and clamp the cover in position. Fill 
the apparatus with water and tap lightly with the mallet 
to remove air adhering to the interior surfaces of the 
apparatus. Bring the level of the water in the standpipe 
to zero but bleeding through the small valve with the 
air vent open. Close the air vent and apply the operating 
pressure, P, by means of the air pump. 


Record the reading of the gauge tube as /,, release the 
pressure and take a further reading, /,. Repeat the entire 
procedure once, obtaining a second pair of readings, 
h, and h,. Take the average value of (A,—/,) and 
(h,—h,) as the aggregate correction factor, G, unless 
the two value of (h, — h,) and (h,—h,) differ by more 
than 0.1 percent air content, in which case carry out 
further determinations until consistent results are 
obtained. 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


ANNEX F 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (144, Summer Breeze, Kuravankonam, 
Kowdiar, Thiruvananthapuram 695 003) 

ACC Ltd, Mumbai 

Ambuja Cements Limited, Ahmedabad 

Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 

Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 

Cement Manufacturers’ Association, Noida 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 

Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Conmat Technolgies Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 

Construction Chemical Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai 

Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 

Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science 
and Technology, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, Mumbai 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, New Delhi 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


11 


Representative(s) 


Suri Jose Kurian (Chairman) 


Suri S. A. KHADILKAR 
SHRI RAMAN SADANAND PARULEKAR (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. Desar 
Dr BIBEKANANDA MOHAPATRA (Alternate) 


Suri L. R. BIsHNo! 
Suri Sourav AcHarYa (Alternate) 


SHRI SUSHANTA KUMAR Basu 
Suri D. R. SEKoR (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 
Suri C. N. Jua (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH BHARGAVA 
Dr S. K. Hanpoo (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
Suri RAJESH Kaare (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. SINGH 
Suri SUBHASH GURRAM (Alternate) 


SHRI J. B. SENGUPTA 
Suri Satish PANDEY (Alternate) 


Dr K. RAMANJANEYULU 
Dre P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Suri N. Siva Kumar (Alternate) 


Director (CMDD) (N&W) 
Deputy Director (CMDD) (NW&S) (Alternate) 


DR A. K. CHATTERJEE 
Suri SuBRATO CHowbuury (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR SURLAKER 
Suri NiLoTPoL Kar (Alternate) 


SHRI LAXMAN SINGH 
SHRI Vay SHANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDER MOHAN 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
Suri ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


Suri V. N. HEGGADE 
Suri S. C. Upapuyay (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
Dr Cuetan HAzaree (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK BANSAL 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
Suri GANESH JUNEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK NAIK 
SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Pror Devpas MENON 
Dr Manu SANTHANAM (Alternate) 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 


Institute for Solid Waste Research and Ecological Balance, 
Visakhapatnam 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 
Army HQ, New Delhi 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, New Delhi 
National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 
National Test House, Kolkata 

Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 

Nuvoco Vistas Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


OCL India Limited, New Delhi 
Public Works Department, Govt of Tamil Nadu, Chennai 


The India Cements Limited, Chennai 


The Indian Hume Pipe Company Limited, Mumbai 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 

The Ramco Cements Limited, Chennai 

Ultra Tech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer Education, 
New Delhi 


In personal capacity [B-806, Oberoi Exquisite, Oberoi Garden 
City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai] 


In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Road, Nagpur) 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-1, 402, White House Apartments, 
R. T. Nagar, Bengaluru) 


Representative(s) 


Pror V. K. Gupta 
Dr BHUPINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
Director (Alternate) 


Dr N. BHANUMATHIDAS 
Suri N. Kaupas (Alternate) 


May Gen S. K. SRIVASTAV 
Suri Man SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI A. P. PATHAK 
Suri A. K. Panpey (Alternate) 


SHRI V. V. ARORA 
Dr S. Harsu (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIR SINGH 
Surimati S. A. Kausuit (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri RaGuurati Roy (Alternate) 


SHRI PRANAV DESAI 
Suri RAVINDRA KHAMPARIA (Alternate) 


Dr S. C. AHLUWALIA 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


Dr D. VENKATESWARAN 


Suri P. R. BHAT 
Suri S. J. SHAH (Alternate) 


Dr H. C. VISVESVARAYA 
Suri S. H. Jain (Alternate) 


Sarı Barası K. Moortuy 
Suri ANIL Kumar Pirar (Alternate) 


SHRI SURYA VALLURI 
Dr M. R. Kataat (Alternate) 


Suri M. A. U. KHAN 
Suri B. Muxuopapuyay (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. JAIN 


Suri L. K. JAN 
Suri R. C. Wason 


Suri S. A. REDDI 


BIS Directorate General Suri SANJAY PANT, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Surimati Divya S. 
Scientist ‘B?’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


Concrete Sub-committee, CED 2:2 


Organization Representative(s) 
In Personal Capacity, (144, Summer Breeze, Kuravankonam, Suri Jose Kurian (Convener) 
Kowdiar, Thiruvananthapuram 695 003) 
ACC Limited, Mumbai Suri Avuit CHauBey (Alternate) 
Ambuja Cement Limited, Ahmedabad Suri J. P. DESAI 


Dr BIBEKANANDA Monapatra (Alternate) 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), Bengaluru Suri AvINASH D. SHIRODE 
Suri K. K. Mecuasnyam (Alternate) 


12 


Organization 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Bureau of Design for Hydel and Irrigation Project, Bhopal 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Civil-Aid Technoclinic Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers Pvt Ltd, Ghaizabad 
CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

CSIR — Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 

CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 

Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science 
and Technology, New Delhi 

Elkem South Asia Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 

Hindustan Constrution Company Ltd, Mumbai 

Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 

Indian Institute of Structural Engineering, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Society of Structural Engineers, Mumbai 
Irrigation and Power Research Institute, Amritsar 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, ECC Division, Chennai 
Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 
Army HQ, New Delhi 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 
National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, Haryana 


National Council for Cement & Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Institute of Technology, Warangal 


13 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


Representative(s) 
Suri L. R. BIsHNOI 
SHRI SOURAV ACHARYA (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 
Suri PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. KHARE 
Suri BuAGwati Prasap Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
Suri RasesH Kuare (Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. SUDARSHAN 
Suri R. NAGENDRA (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


Dr RasesH DEOLIA 
Suri H. C. Arora (Alternate) 


SHRI J. B. SENGUPTA 
Suri Satısu PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR 
Suri M. Rasa (Alternate) 


Dr B. H. BHARATH KUMAR 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDER MOHAN 


SHRI BRAJESH MALVIYA 
SHRI SURENDRA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH MOKAL 
SHRI SUDEESH RAJENDRAN (Alternate) 


Dr CHETAN HAZARE 
Suri AvINASH Harpe (Alternate) 


Suri K. C. TAYADE 
SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 


Suri D. S. Josui 
SHRI HEMANT VADALKAR (Alternate) 


Dr B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr SHASHANK Biısnnol (Alternate) 


DR SUDHIR MISHRA 
Dr Manu SANTHANAM 
Dr ASHOK Kumar JAIN 


Suri D. S. Josui 
SHRI HEMANT VADALKAR (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (RESEARCH) 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Dr B. SIVARAM SARMA 
Suri S. Manonar (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. SRIVASTAV 
Suri Man Sincu (Alternate) 


SHRI A. P. PATHAK 
Suri A. K. Panpey (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. YADAV 
Suri Pawan Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI V. V. ARORA 
SHRI S. SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dr C. B. KAmeswara Rao 
Dr D Rama Sesuu (Alternate) 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


Organization 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


Pidilite Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Ready Mixed Concrete Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai 


Research, Design & Standards Organization (Ministry of Railways), 
Lucknow 


Shapoorji Pallonji and Company Private Limited, Mumbai 
Tandon Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 

Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 

Ultra Tech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 

Water Resource Department, Govt of Madhya Pradesh, Mumbai 


In personal capacity (452 Sector 14, Sonipat, Haryana) 
In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Road, Nagpur) 


In personal capacity [B-806, Oberoi Exquisite, Oberoi Garden 
City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai] 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-1, 402, White House Apartments, 
R.T. Nagar, Bengaluru) 


In personal capacity (M1 F1 VGN Minerva Apartments, 
Guruswamy Road, Nolambur, Chennai) 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri N. M. Rao (Alternate) 


Dr Suuna NAIK 


SHRI VIJAYKUMAR R. KULKARNI 
Suri ANIL KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Jomt Director (B&S)/CB-I 
Jont Director (B&S)/CB-II (Alternate) 


Suri GIRISH BONDE 
Suri D. N. VisHwanatH (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
Suri Vinay Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI S. N. DIWAKAR 
Suri Manos Kumar De (Alternate) 


Dr V. RAMACHANDRA 
Dr A. K. Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. KHARE 
Suri B. P. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. JAN 
Suri L. K. Jain 
Suri A. K. JAN 


Suri R. C. Wason 


Suri S. A. REDDI 


Dr C. RAJKUMAR 


Panel for Revision of Indian Standards on Test Methods for Concrete, CED 2:2/P7 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi 110064) 


ACC Limited, Mumbai 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Civil-Aid Technoclinic Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 


Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 


Hydraulic & Engineering Instrument, New Delhi 
Indian Concrete Institute, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


14 


Representative(s) 


Suri R. C. Wason (Convener) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Dr V. M. SHARMA 


SHRI AJAY PRAKASH MATHUR 
Suri RasesH Kure (Alternate) 


Suri U. S. VIDYARTHI 


Dr R. NAGENDRA 
Suri SUNIL V. Sonnan (Alternate) 


Dr A. K. PANDEY 
Suri S. K. Sincu (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DR P. SRINIVASAN 
Dr S. BHASKAR (Alternate) 


Dr CHETAN HAZAREE 
Suri AvINASH HARDE (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI ASHOK Kumar TIWARI 


Dr RADHAKRISHNA PILLAI 
Dr Ravinpra Gettu (Alternate) 


Dr SHASHANK BISHNOI 
Dr S. Gupta (Alternate) 


IS 1199 (Part 4) : 2018 


Organization Representative(s) 


Larsen & Toubro Ltd, ECC Division, Chennai Suri B. StvARAMA SARMA 
Suri S. MANouar (Alternate) 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh Suri V. V. ARORA 

Suri S. C. SHARMA (Alternate) 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 

Suri A. K. Lanaria (Alternate) 
RDC Concrete (India) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai SHRI K. TAGORE 


Suri V. MEIKANDA Moortuy (Alternate) 


Ready Mixed Concrete Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai SHRI VIJAYKUMAR R. KULKARNI 
Suri JEAN PHILIPPE THIERRY (Alternate) 


In personal capacity (50 Mangla Apartments Kalkaji, New Delhi) Dr S. C. Marti 
In personal capacity (Type IV/17, Presidents Estate, New Delhi) Suri K. H. BABU 


15 


(Continued from second cover) 


b) Two test methods for air content determination are covered, namely, pressure gauge method and water 
column method. The water column has the same principle as the pressure method in IS 1199 : 1959. 


c) Details on filling the containers and compacting the concrete have been elaborated. 


d) Calibration of apparatus and aggregate correction factors have been given in annexure for both the test 
methods. 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance was also derived from ISO 1920-2 : 2016 ‘Testing of concrete — 
Part 2: Properties of fresh concrete’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex F 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value observed or 
calculated is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised)’. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 02 (10891). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


