IS15449(Part 2):2004

mm Rrq RFT-al r?

m

`b

Indian Standard HOUSEHOLD ZIG-ZAG SEWING MACHINE HEAD
PART 2 ACCURACY REQUIREMENTS

Ics 61.080

0 BIS 2004

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

.4ugust 2004

Price Group 4

Sewing Machines Sectional Committee, ME 29

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Sewing Machines Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This standard has been formulated to facilitate standardization and with a view to establish quality and accuracy requirements of zig-zag sewing machine head for household purpose. In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IS 7491:1989 `Household sewing machine head -- Accuracy requirements (first revision)'. The standard on household zig-zag sewing machine head is being brought in four parts. This standard covers the accuracy requirements of household zig-zag sewing machine head, the other parts in the series are: Part 1 Part 3 Part 4 General requirements Sewing requirements Durability requirements

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value Should be the same as that of the specified value in thk standard.

IS 15449 (Part 2) :2004

Indian Standard HOUSEHOLD

ZIG-ZAG SEWING MACHINE HEAD
PART 2 ACCURACY REQUIREMENTS

1 SCOPE

2 ACCURACY

REQUIREMENT

This standard (Part 2) covers the accuracy requirements for zig-zag sewing machine head for household purpose.

2.1 Functional Dimensions Clearance and heights at various points on the machine shall be as follows:

SI
No.

Item

Measuring Condition

Measuring Direction

Ref to Fig.

Stanalwd Assembly Dimension mm

i)

Feed dog

Height of the feed dog teeth above needle/throat plate Clearance between heel of shuttle and corresponding tip of shuttle driver Clearance between needle
and corresponding face to

A feed dog raised to its highest position Shuttle heel at bottom most position

1

1.2, Max

ii)

Shuttle and shuttle driver

2

0.25, A4in 0.55, Max

iii)

Needle
shuttle

and

Needle at bottom most
position

3

0, Min 0.05, Max 5.0, Min

shuttle iv) Presser foot Gap between presser foot and needle/throat plate Presser foot in lifted condition 4

v)

Bight (Zig-zag)

Distance between two extreme needle positions when needle vibration adjustment is at its maximum Clearance between disc follower pin and the highest point of disc No. 1

Zig-zag bight knob at its maximum position

5A 5B

5.0') , Max

vi)

Disc followe+)

Needle bar at its bottom most position

6

0.25, Mix

`Optional requirementsdepending upon the design specificationsof the sewing machine,

IS 15449 (Part 2) :2004 2.2 Assembly Clearance

The assembly clearances on the machine at various points shall meet the following requirements: sl
No. Item Measuring Condition Measuring Direction Indicator Position Ref to Fig. Maximum Assembly Clearance

mm i) Needle bar Needle bar at lower most position a) In the direction of motion b) At right angle to the direction of motion a) In the direction of motion. b) At right angle to the direction of motion a) Along the axis of shuttle pin a) Top of needle bar the b) Near bottom of needle bar a) Around thread hole b) Around thread hole a) Tip of shuttle pin 7A 7B 0.35 0.20

ii)

Thread take up lever

Thread take up lever at top, intermediate and bottom positions

8A 8B

0.65 0.75

I
iii) Shuttle a) Tip of shuttle pin at top most/bottom most position of needle bar b) Difference between two indicator readings when needle bar is at its highest and lowest position . At different fly wheel positions (tuim fly wheel by hand). Axial pushlpull to be given a) Rotate fly wheel to measure wobb~mg b) Rotate fly wheel to measure eccentricity

9

0.20

b) Along the axis of shuttle pin

b) Tip of shuttle pin

0.08

iv)

Arm shatt

Axial direction

Face of rim of fly wheel

10

0.10

v)

Fly wheel

Axial direction Radial direction

a) Face of rim of fly wheel b) Any point on the periphery of rim of fly wheel

1IA llB

0.25 0.30

vi)

Feed section

At the highest position of feed - dog - above needle plate

In the direction 01 Front edge of the feed dog motion

12

0.35

3 METHOD OF TESTS The method for carrying out various accuracy tests are given in Annex A.

2

IS 15449 (Part 2): 2004

ANNEX A (Clause 3)
METHOD OF TESTS

A-1 FEED DOG HEIGHT

For measurement of feed dog height, the flywheel shall be rotated so as to bring the feed dog to its highest position above the needle plate. The dial indicator shall be so set as to accommodate both the top of the feed dog as well as the needle plate surface within its range. At this position, two readings shall be taken, one at the top of feed dog and the other at the needle plate surface. The difference between these two observations shall indicate the maximum height of the feed dog above the needle plate (see Fig. 1).

--

FIG. 2 SHUTTLES ANDSHUTTLE DRIVERCLEARANCE

L!EQLPLATE
FIG. 1 FEEDDOG HEIGHT A-2 SHUTTLES CLEARANCE AND SHUTTLE DRIVER

RIM FACE

For measurement of the clearance, between shuttle and shuttle driver the machine shall be held in the inclined position. The fly wheel shall be rotated while observing the relative position of the shuttle and its driver till the shuttle heel comes to the bottom most position. At this stage, the measurement for clearance between the heel of the shuttle and the corresponding tip of the shuttle driver shall be made by using a feeler gauge. This clearance indicates the clearance existing between the shuttle and shuttle driver (see Fig. 2). A-3 NEEDLE AND SHUTTLE For measurement of the clearance, between needle and the corresponding face of shuttle, the machine shall be held in the inclined position. The flywheel shall be rotated while observing the relative position of the needle and the corresponding face of shuttle, till needle comes to the bottom most position. At this stage, the measurement for clearance between the needle and the corresponding face of the shuttle shall be made by using a feeler gauge. This indicates the clearance existing between the needle and the corresponding face of shuttle (see Fig. 3).
FIG. 3 NEEDLE ANDSHUTTLE CLEARANCE A-4 PRESSER FOOT GAP

For measurement of the presser foot gap, the presser foot shall be lifted to its highest position. The gap between the bottom face of presser foot and the surface of needle plate shall be measured with a suitable gauge. This gap indicates the maximum clearance available between the presser foot and the needle plate of a sewing machine (see Fig. 4).

3

IS 15449 (Part 2) :2004

is=q

ii L

A-5.2 The flywheel shall be rotated to take the two penetrations on a piece of paper (instead of cloth), placed between the needle plate and presser foot. The paper shall be taken out from the machine and the distance between the two penetrations measured with the help of a scale. This measurement shall be the bight of the zig-zag sewing machine (see Fig. 5B). A-6 DISC FOLLOWER For measurement of the clearance, between disc follower pin and the highest point of disc No. 1, rotate the section of panel upwards as shown in Fig. 6. The fly wheel shall be rotated, while observing the relative position of the disc follower pin and the disc No. 1, till the needle bar comes to its bottom mosthop most position. At this stage, the measurement for clearance shall be made by using a feeler gauge. This measurement shall indicate the clearance existing between the disc follower pin and the highest point of disc No. 1 (see Fig. 6). A-7 NEEDLE BAR A-7.1 With the bight knob at straight stitch position, move the needle bar to its lowest position and place
n

PLATE

FIG. 4 PRESSURE FOOTGAP A-5 ZIG-ZAG BIGHT A-5.1 For measurement of the zig-zag bight width or the distance between two needle penetrations (in the needle plate) on the left and right sides respectively, the zig-zag bight knob shall be set at its maximum position. The feed regulator (FR) thumbscrew shall be set at zero position or the feed throw out (FTO) knob shall be adjusted to feed drop position (see Fig. 5A).

. + 6
q

w

GQT1l-1
u
FIG. 5A ZIG-ZAGBIGHTWIDTH 5 mm

T

M!M!!!L
FIG. 5B ZIG-ZAGBIGHT

4

IS 15449 (Part 2): 2004

T
!

L-J
FIG. 6 DISC FOLLOWER

the dial indicator on the top of the needle bar using an extension piece, if necessary. Apply light hand pressure at the bottom of the needle bar to push it up and note the indicator reading. Similarly, pull the needle bar down with the same pressure and take the second indicator reading. The difference between the two readings shall indicate the assembly clearance for needle bar in the direction of motion (see Fig. 7A).
A-7.2 With the needle bar to its lowest position and bight knob at straight stitch position places the indicator near its lower tip by the side of the needle bar. Apply sideward light hand pressure forward and backward. Take one reading of the indicator at each of these two positions. The difference between the two readings

shall indicate the assembly clearance for needle bar in the direction of right angle to that of the motion (see Fig. 7B). A-8 THREAD TAKE UP LEVER Bring the thread take up lever at its ;op/ intermediate/bottom position. Place the indicator above the lever around the thread hole. Pull the lever down with very light hand pressure and note the indicator reading. Similarly, push the lever up with the same pressure and observe the second reading. The difference between the two readings will indicate the clearance in the direction of motion for thread take up lever at its given position (see Fig. 8A).
A-8.1

I

J

=1
LIGHT PRESSURE FIG. 7A ASSEMBLY CLEARANCE FORNEEDLE BAR IN THEDIRECTION OFMOTION LIGHT PRESSURE FIG. 7B ASSEMBLY CLEARANCE FORNEEDLEBAR IN THEDIRECTION OFRIGHTANGLETOTHEMOTION

5

IS 15449 (Part 2) :2004

A v
t LIGHT PRESSURE --

FIG.9

SHUTTLE

FxG.8A THREAD TAKEUP LEVER
A-8.2 For the clearance in the right angle direction, place the indicator on the sidewall near the thread hole of the take up lever. Apply very light pressure on the tip of the lever forward and backward and take one reading of the indicator at each of these two positions. The difference between the two readings shall indicate the assembly clearance for thread take up lever in the direction of right angle to that of the motion (see Fig. 8B).

hand pressure and pull and push the flywheel in the axial direction of the arm shaft. Take one reading of the indicator at each of these two positions. The difference between the two readings shall indicate the clearance for the arm shaft in the axial direction (see Fig. 10).

rP=M PRESSURE

LIGHT PRESSURE ~

\ ] C
i -.+.,_. --- --------i I ---

FIG. 10 ARMSHAFTCLEARANCE A-II FLY WHEEL A-11.l For determinationof the wobbling of the flywheel, bring the indicator in contact with the side face of the rim of the fly wheel. Rotate the flywheel by at least one revolution and note thq total difference in indicator reading. This reading will indicate the wobbling of the flywheel in the axial direction (se-eFig. 11A). A-1 1.2 For determination of the eccentricity of the

FIG. 8B THREAD TAKEUP LEVER(RIGHTANGLE) A-9 SHUTTLE

Set the indicator on the top of shuttle pin in the axial direction. Hold the pin and apply very light axial pull and push and take one reading of the indicator at each of these two positions. The difference between the two readings indicates the assembly clearance for the shuttle in the axial direction. An indicator attachment may be necessary for this measurement (see Fig. 9).
A-1 O ARM SHAFT

flywheel, bring the indicator in Contact with the circumference of the flywheel. Rotate the flywheel by at least one revolution and note the total difference in indicator reading. This reading will indicate the eccentricity of the flywheel in the radial direction (see Fig. 1lB).
A-12 FEED DOG SECTION

Place the indicator in contact with the side face of the rim of flywheel at any convenient point. Apply medium 6

For measurement of the feed dog section, the flywheel

IS 15449 (Part 2) :2004

[ --.

""l

I FIG. 11A FLYWHEEL (WOBBLING) (ECCENTRICITY) FIG. 11B FLYWHEEL

shall be rotated so as to bring the feed dog to its highest position above the needle plate. The dial indicator shall be set on the front edge of the feed dog, The maximum

feed amount shall be measured with dial indicator in the direction of motion (see Fig. 12).

~DIRECTION

OF MOTION

FIG. 12 FEEDDOG SECTION

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by refen-ing to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. ME 29 (0642).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 23378626,23379120 { 603843 { 609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Pmted at Prabhat Offset Press, h'ew Delhl-2

