IS 2212 : 1991
( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Stan&d BRICK WORKS-CODE OF PRACTICE ( First Revision )
First ReprintOCI'OBER1998 UDC 693-22006-76

Q BIS 1991

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO
NEW DELHI lMNlO2 octokr 1991

Building Construction

Practices Sectional Committee,

CED 13

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. This standard was first published in 1962. In been modified to bring it in line with IS 1077 Further the materials to be used for mortar of practice for preparation and use of masonry this revision types of bricks mentioned in the Table 1 have : 1991 `Common burnt clay building bricks (jiiiir revision )`. have been modified on the basis of IS 2250 : 1981 `Code mortwa ( jirst rmision )`.

Figures showing a typical arrangement of cut-brick in a corner has been modified to show the normal practice adopted by Central Public Works Department and other organizations. The provisions of this standard do not limit its application to cases where only modular bricks are used; on the other hand, they can be applied with equal advantage to traditional bricks constructions as well as special size brick constructions. It is considered that this unified approach in the standard will be particularly advantageous during the period of transition from traditional brick construction to modular brick construction resulting in significant saving in bricks, mortar and labour. it may be noted that the requirements bearing directly QII the dimensions of bricks have been so worded as to be applicable both to modular and traditional bricks. For example, when the requirements for thickness of wall is stated as `one brick' this will mean 20 cm nominal thickness in case of modular brick and 9 ineh nominal thickness in the case of traditional brick of size 9 in x 44 in x 3 in. This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical all the necessary provisions of a contract, provision relating to brickwork and it does not cover covering masonry. Other standards

This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards codes of practice in the series cover stone masonry and concrete block masonry.

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

Indian Standard
BRICK WORKS - CODE OF PRACTICE
( First Revision)
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the construction of brick masonry in general and the erection of brick walls in particular. in this standard. Use of unburnt bricks ( kacMu bricks ) and use of mud mortar arc not'rpccifically covered in thii standard.

Footings - A projecting
H6dV-

course or courses formed at the base of a wall to spread the load. A brick laid with its length across the into which

wall. The leaving of reccsscs future work can be bonded.

Ind6ntingJamb opening.

1.2 Only masonry with clay bricks is dealt with

The part of the wall at the side of an A junction of bricks. Horizontal joint in brickwork or

Joint masonry.

B6d Joint The Indian Standards listed in Anncz necessary adjucts to this zuuxhud. 3 TERMINOLOGY 3iO For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply. 3.1 General A are

CrossJoint -

A joint mal to the wall face.

other than a bed point nor-

Jointing - The operation of finishing joints as the masonry work proceeds ( s6# ah 6.5.2 ).
JKominal

Bsam Fiui?lg - The filJing of the gap between the
ceiling level and the wall bearing level excluding portions occupied by beams, r&em, etc.

- The arrangement of the bricks in succcsBOnd sive courses tie the brickwork together both longitudinally and transversely; ,the arrangement is usually daigncd to ensure that no vertical joint of one coume is ezactly over the one in the nezt course above or below it, and there is the greatest possible amount of lap,
applied over or the geometrical form given to a part structure to enable it to shed rain-water.
coping O? w6Oth6TiUg The cover

of wall that is stated in the cztimatcs for calculation of quantities. It iz a gCCtitiOd dimension, which is neither the actual thicknas of wall czeluding rurfacc finishes like pla&cr, rtndwing, ctc, nor necessarily the overall thickness including such iinishcs. The following example will illustrate this point: Actual %&Jl

Thicktussof a Wall - Thir ia the thickness

TtiknatJ
For traditional brick of 9 in length ( with allowance of f: in for mortar joint ): One-brick wall 1i-brick wall P-brick wall For modular brick ( with allowance of 1 cm for mortar joint ): One-brick wall Ii-brick wall 2-brick wall 9 in 134 in 18 in

Thieknus

84 to 8f in 13 to 134 in 17) to 173 in

of

Corba -

A cantilcvcr awailtoformabearing.

projecting

from the face of feature projcctbed mortar.

Co&6 COWS6 -

Horizontal ornamental ing from the face of a wall. A layer of bricks including

'

Damp-proof~urs6 -

A layer of impervious material laid or inserted in a structure to arrest the permeation of dampness.
E&OT6666nC6~- A powdery encrustment of salts left by evaporation. This may be visible on the aurfacc or may bc below surface. In the latter case, this is termed as crypto-florescence.

20 cm 30 cm 4Ocm

19 cm 29 cm 39 cm

Parapet -

A solid or pierced guard wall for flat terrace of a balcony ( or a bridge ) or a curb wall at the lower part of a pitched roof, which is cxposed to atmosphere on face, back and top.

Prrpsnd -

An alignment of cross joints whicn can be checked with a plumb line.

1

IS 2212 I 199k Pointing - The operation of finishing joints subs+ quent to the completion of masonry .( see also 6.5.3 ). Pro& - A guide accurately. used for setting out brickwork

Quoin - An external corner in brickwork; the term may also denote the masonry unit based to form the quoin. Racking Back - Stepping of the unfinished the wall masonry. end of
1A Squint

Rrvcal - The visible part of each side of a recess or opening of a wall. Slef&er Wall - A dwarf wall usually honeycombed to carry a plate or sleeper supporting a joisted floor. Squint - A brick of special obligue quoin ( see Fig. 1A ), Stretcher - A brick laid direction of wall. shape used at an

with

its

length

in the
1B Bevelled Closer

Tuothing - Bricks left projecting courses to bond with future work. 3.2 Materials

in

alternate

Bat - Any portion of a brick, cut or broken across its length usually known according to its fraction from the whole size, for example, l/2-bats, 3/4 bats, etc. Closet - Part of a brick either manufactured or cut from a whole brick and used to maintain bond.
1C King Closer

Bevelled Closer King Closer Queen Closer -

Illustrated in Fig. 1B. in Fig. 1C. in Fig. 1 D.

Illustrated Illustrated

Facing Bricks - Bricks which, being exposed to view as in the case of unplastered surfaces, are required to have pleasing appearance, sufficient resistance to penetrations by rain and greater durability than common bricks. Flashing - A sheet of impervious material fixed to a structure so as to cover an intersection or joint where water will otherwise leak through. lemplet - A pattern of sheet metal used as aguide for setting out specific section and shape,

1D Queen Closer

Length of modular brick W = Width of modular brick H = Height of modular brick
L -

FIG. 1 DIFFBRJZNT TYPES OF PART-BRICKS

2

IS 2212 I 1991 Temjhte or Bad Block - A block of stone or concrete bedded on a wall to distribute the pressure from a concentrated load. 3.3 Tools
and Accessories

hearths, flues and work.

chimneys

in the

brick-

3.3.1 Tools required for brick masonry work, such as plumb line, rules, straight edges, trowels, etc, are described in IS 1630 : 1984. 3.3.2 Scafolding and Staging

4.2 All information as in 4.1 shall be made available to those who are responsible for the masonry work. Necessary drawings and instructions for planning the work shall be furnished. 4.3 Arrangements shall also be made for the proper exchange of information between those engaged in masonry work and all those whose work will affect or will be affected. 5 MATERIALS 5.1 Bricks 5.1.1 Unless specified otherwise, burnt-clay bricks used shall conform to IS 1077 : 1991. Heavy duty brick as per IS 2180 : 1991 shall be used when the building is subjected to very heavy loading. 5.2 Mortar8 Mortars for masonry shall be prep&red in accordance with IS 2250 : 1981. The ingredients used in mortar shall conform to the requirements specified in 5.2.1 to 5.2.6, 5.2.1 Cement Cement used for brick masonry shall conform to IS 269 : 1976 or IS 455 : 1976 or IS 1489 : 1976 or IS 3466 : 1968 or IS 8041 : 1978 or IS 8043 : 1978. 5.2.2 Lime masonry shall conform to

These are temporary frame works commonly of bamboo, timber or tubular /steel, having verticals, horizontals `and diagonal braces secured or leashed together with nails, ropes or other types of fasteners, such as clamps. These are used for supporting `ramps and working platforms from which the construction work at higher levels is carried out. Scaffoldings are of two types, namely, single and double scaffolding. Single scaffolding consists of a row of verticals connected to walls by horizontals sup rted on and tied to the structure. Double sea tF" olding consists of two rows of verticals secured or leashed together with horizontal and diagonal bracings, forming essentially a structure independent of the building. It may, however, be also connected $0 the structure at convenient points for the sake of better stability. 3.3.3 Storey Rods

These are battens of wood running one or'more floor heights and having permanent markings corresponding to the location of brick courses at various heights and of all openings, sills, lintels, sun-shades and similar features occurring in the floors. 4 NECESSARY INFORMATION

4.1 For efficient planning, design and execution of the work, detailed information with ragard to the following shall be furnished to those responsible for the work:

Lime used for brick IS 712 : 1984.

4 4

Layout plans showing structure;

the orientation

of the

Dimensioned details of the structure with details of sections ( to a suitably large scale that is l/20 or 1 cm = 20 cm ), levels of foundations, finished ground levels, clear floor to floor heights of rooms, sizes of openings, etc. Type and class of brickwork, types of bond and final finish for the brickwork; the mixes of mortar to be used, etc; full size.details of architectural features, mouldings and other special work. Location and other details of openings, chases, embedmdnts of service lines, such as for water supply, `cirainage, electrical installatiods, etc; and location and details of

NOTE - Hydraulic and remi-hydraulic limes corresponding to Claaa A. B and E of IS 712 : 1984 are ;onve&ntly availabie for use in masonry mortars, whereas fat limea, corresponding to Clau C and D will require mixing of burnt clay poazolana and other pozzolanic material, Clalls C and D limer may also be used with addition of cement and pozzolanic material. Quick lime &all never,' be 4 for, $vctural purpose. It mmt be slacked first. Slacking at rite shall be done in accordance with IS 1635 : 1975.

5.2.3

Lime Potzolana h&ture masonry

4

Lime pozzolana mixture used for brick shall conform to IS 4098 : 1983. 5.2.4 Pozrolana 5.2.4.1 Calcined IS 1344: 1981. 5.2.4.2 clay pozzolana shall

4

conform

to

Fly ash shall conform

to IS 3812 : 1981.

2

is 2212 I 1991 5.23 Pin8 Aggrega& Sand rhall conform to IS 2116 : 1980. 5.2.6 d) 0th~ suitable metal 6Grcement, such u galvanized hoop iron 6 DESIGN 6.1 Selection
There

shall be made of rtructural steel conforming to IS 226 : 1975

Water

Water used for making masonry mortar8 shall be clean and free from injurious quantities of deleterious matcriah. Potable water ir generally conridmd satirfactory for use in masonry mortar, For further requirements regarding limits of deletcriour materiala permitkd in water, reference may be made to IS 456 : 1978. 5.3 M~torhla for Damp-proof Couner roof cottr~s ahal1 be specified Standards or other rquirementr rtated below: Materiala for damp

CONSIDBMTIONS of Bricka

6.1-l For use in various situationa of brick. masonry, the brick shall be selected in accordance with Table 1. 6.13 When the requirementa for strength of masonry predominate in the particular rituation of use, the brickr shall be of such grade ( SM IS 1877 : 1991 aa to give the nquired strength for masonry an d shall be selected in accordance with their relevant provisions of IS 1905 : 1987. 6.2 &laction of Mortars shall con-

to conform to one o F the relevant Indian

4

Bituminour felts for waterproofing and dampproofiing Bituminona compound8 for waterpmoting p*parer

Conforming to IS 1322 : 1982 Conforming to IS 1580 : 1969 Conforrmxlgto u.1.1

6.24 Mortars used for brick masonry form generally to IS 2256 : 1981.

cl

Mortar or concrete for UC in damp proof course rlab Stone daWT-%f for

6.2.2 The selection of mortar will alno be gover-, ned by the strength required for masonry and reference may be made in IS 1905 : 1987 for knowing the suitability of combination of various types of mortars and grad- of bricks for different strengths required for the masonry. 6.3 Types of Bonds aad Their Saltability

4

. zEhrnhg

to

5.4 MUerial#

forFl8ahin# 8nd Weatbtring

These shall be specified to conform to one of the relevant Indian Standards stated below: a) Lad Flashbg Conforming to IS 405 Part 2 ) :1977 and the L `cknerr shall be bctween 1.6 and 2 mm,

6.3.1 The primary object of bond is to give strength to ma,xnuy, but it may also be employed to create artistic effects when the brickwork ia cxpoaed to view. The types of bonds generally in use, their characteristics and situations of USC are described in Table 2. 63.2 In brickwork the cross joints in any course shall not be nearer than a quarter of' brick length from those in the course below or above it. 6.3 Thicknesm of Joint

b). Bihmimw Falts

~x&rming

to IS 1322 :

5.5 Motd

Reid-omt

Metal, reinforcement for use in brick masonry rhall be tpcciiied to conform to one of the rclevant Indian Standarda stated below: a) Mild steel or medium tensile steel bars Conforming to IS 432 (Part I&and 2):1982 to IS 1566 :

6.4.1 No bed joint shall be thicker than 12 mm. Further the thickness of the bed joints shall be tuch that four coursat and three joints taken consecutively shall measure aa follows: a) In the case of traditional bricks b) In the case of modular bricks conforming to IS 1077 : 1991 6.5 Finishing of Joints Equal to four times the actual thickness of the brick plus 3 cm Equal to 39 cm

b) Steel fabric or Conforming hard-drawn steel 1982 wiri: c) Expauded metal ~gm$orming

to IS 412 :

6.5.1 The face jolts of brickwork may be finished by `jointing' or by `pointing'.

IS 2212I 1991 Tablo1 S&ctioaofBdldingEaickm ( ti'hnua6.1.1 )

Clam 12'5 common bricka Briclu ,haR be free from (*1077:1991) minor defect8 ruch an chipa at the edge of corners. Colour and texture may also be specified ifw, required 2. 8) Subiect to *em he8w

loding

-

-

IIe8-u~ duty ( u) IS 2190 : do

b) Requiring 8 high rub-

tance to W8wr penetmtion below

3.

8) Plinths and foundations
d8mz. ps! zEzlFan?E chance of continu81 wetting in foundation8

Cl12'5 orc;kur corn anon IS 1077 : 1991 )

7.5 ( SCI

b) Plinth and foundatiam behw coune- m#$zEzz table at 8 hiih level

do

The bricka shall be free from eilloretcence. They shall 81~0not have any ralt content which will affect the mortar of the muonry, The bricks may preferably be the denest available with the minimum water 8korption The b&L &all preferably be of uniform colour The exposed joints shall be pointed with 8 dense water tight mormr For ritu8tionr expooed to severe weather ( MT Table S ) only Class 12'5 common bricks shall be used u in4(8). Clw S-5 common brick, alro may be connidered for UM, provided they ratisfy the mqulrementa for tirength ( UI IS 1077 : 1991 ) For wallr which are liable to be frequently in contact with water ruch u in bathrooms, only Clus 7.5 or better bricks shall be used A deme water-tight mortar rhall be ured for the masonry. Parapet1 rhall preferably be finished on all rider with 8 watertight plutCr

8) External walls, neither
plutered nor rendered on the outer face

Clam 12'5 common kicks (su IS 1077 : 1991 )

b) External waib iiniahed Clan 7'5 or better quality
on both facea with 8 common bricks water-tight plarter or 1077 : 1991 ) rendering ( su

IS

Internal walk

Clam 7'5 common bricks ( SW IS 1077 : 1991')

6.

Free standing walls, p8r8pea

Cl-

(WI IS 1077: 1991)

12'5 common bricks

5

is22l2: 1991
Table 2 Common Types of Bonds for Brickw<itk ( Claws 63.1 ) and

Sitndonm of Their

Use

2. (1)
1.

Types

ot Bond

c%amct*tia
(3)

BitEdon
(4)

or Use

Remark
(5) Leu efficient hondr may alro be succenfully used for obtaining strength provided the mortar is strong

(2)
English -Bond

subThe briclc in the facing are The bond.`contributeI stantially td the strength IsId in alternate courses of brickwork, and may be ofbeaden and stretchers particularly suitable for ( SM Fig. 2 ). The header commenced wall1 carrying heavy coucxe is with a quoin header load8 followed by a queen clomr and continued with ruccutive headen. The stretcher course ir formed of c&etchers having a minimum tap of onequarter their length aver the header Bond The courses both in the facing and in the backing are formed with alteroating stretcher1 and headen. In order to obtain the lap ( which ir equal to one-quarter the length of the brickr,) a queen Closer is introduced next to the quoio header in qlterrute courws, the intervening onea commencing with a stretcher and every header will obtain a location that is central with respect to the stretcher above or below ( JMFig. 3 ) This f+ciiitates, the facing of tbe wall to bc in Flemish bond and the becking in English bond. Thia will entail use of snap headers ( SICFig. 4 ) The appearance on the face may be considered M more uniform than in Englbh bond. Requirer less number of facin bricks than English borJ and hence may be ewnomica1 where brickwork ia faced with Ipecial facing brick1 and exposed to view

2.

Double

Flemish

Though conridered inferior in strength than English bond, this bond may be ruitable for Gngle-brick thick wdls in normal house construction provided a Itrong mortar, such 88 cement mortar, is used

3.

Single Flemish

Bond

This attempta to combiie partially the better appearance of Flemish bond, with the better rtrength of English bond. However, increue in strength over Double Flemish bond is doubtful One-brick thick walls are eaaier to construct with these bonds than with pure Flemish or English bondr and save facing bricks conniderably in the c-e of exposed work

4.

Garden

Wall Bond

English garden wall bond ( ste Fig, 5 ) conaiatr of a header course with the necessary queen closer next to quoin header to three or sometimer even five stretcher course8 running in series with overlap of half-brick between stretcher over stretcher Flemish bond of alternate rourles compored of one header to even three sometimes five stretchera in rerier throughout the length of the couraea

( ste Fig. 6 ) consists

garden

wall

5.

American known Bond )

Bondtiia& as

Co;;FieLdz number courses of

fz%&

`,,oL

For general

use

stretcher

Commonly adopted in America. The number of stretcher courses may vary from five to Seven

( Continurd)

6

I8 2312 ::I991 Table 2 ( Co&rd

)
8itEdoB

moo of
(1)
6,

Road

c&roete8i8tic8
(3)

Of the (4)

Rework8

(2)
Strrtcber Bond

(5)

thick In tbio bond ( ru Fig. 8 ) Used in i-brick ie8vea of c8vity mllr oil th8 cowI*, are Itretchar COUTWO 8ad the ovriog ir wurlly b8lf b&k md Ir obt8iaed by commondog e8ch &ornate OOWMwith l halfbat Wirb eli&t modifhtion at tbr Quoia tbo OVerl8P mrybo v8riod to*or* b&k 8od the bond i8 tbea kmwa `lfekieg Strrtchar Bad'

7.

Reader Bead

of tbia bond Uaed for w8llr curved on The foe ( ICIPig. YJ ) h8a 811 the p18o for better 8lignCourMa 88 b88dera only ment; 8nd preferably in 8od the ovsrl8p. whit b is found8tion footinga of half the width of the brick brick masonry for better is oborined by introductransverse didbution ing 8 threeqwrter b8t in arch 8itern8te course 8t quoina

NOTES 1 Seval other rpeci81 bon& 8re 8180 in vogue, ruch u Monk Bond, Dutch Bond, Englirh Cram Bond 8nd mixed bond8 of v8riour typa which give different utistic egectr so far 8s appeuance ir concerned. 2 The boa& dewribed above h8vr been developed lugely M 8 result ofthe traditional 9 in x 44 in x 3 in bricks, but 811h8ve ken found to be suitrble for modular briclrr of rise 20 cm x 10 cm x 10 cm. In the course of use of mod&r bricb mor8 bonb m8y be evolved for giving improved function81 chu8cteristic.r to the m8sonry.

`SE `0'

FIG.

2 ENGLISH BOND

IS 2212 t 1991

Fro. 3 DOUBLBFLBMISEBOER)

FIG. 4 SINGLE FL~MISEI BOND

FIQ. 5 EN~LXSEGARDENWALL km

Fxa. 6 FLBMISHGARDEN WALL BOND

9

IS 2212 : MB1

FIQ. 7 Amcm r SLATE

BOND TO JAM6

CLOSURE

PLAN I I I

OF I

COURSE I

`B' I I

I
PLAN

I

I

I
`A'

1

OF COURSE

ELEVATION
NOTE Urn of Stretcher bond in cavity well comtructioo is illurtreted here.

FIG. 8 STRBTC~ BR BOND
10

PLAN OF COURSE'A'

ELEVATION Fxa. 9 HBADBR BOND 6.32 In jointing, either the face joints of the mortar ahall be worked out while atill green to give a finished surface flush with the face of the brickwork, or the joints shall be squarely raked out to a depth of 10 mm while the mortar is still greenforr uent plastering. The facea of brickwork shall ubYl be caned with wire brush so as to remove any splashes of mortar during the course of raishmg the brickwork. 6.5.3 In pointing, the joints shall be squarely raked out to a de th of 15 mm while the mortar is still green an x the raked joints ahall be well brushed to remove dust and loose particle and well wetted, and shall be later completely refilled with mortar to give the required finish. Some such finishes are `flush', `weathered', (tucked', `ruled', etc ( se6 Fig. 10 ).
NOTE - Pointing will offer facilitiw for introducing in the face joints a mortar specially prepared with regard to composition, colour, etc.
FLUSH JOINT

WEATHERED JOINT

KEYED JOINT

TUCKED JOINT

6.6 StmeturaI

ticm of Brickwork

and Functlonol

CharacteriaRULED JOINT

6.6.1 &ruetural Stability and Strength

Reference may be made to IS 1904 : 1986 and IS 1905 : 1987 for design with regard to structural stability. 6.6.2 Resistance to Moisture Penetration
6.6.2.1 Rain water penetrates solid brickwork either through cracks or through the body of the

bricks or mortar. Unrendred walls permit more
11

FIG. 10 DIFFBRBNT TYPESOFPOMINQ FINISHES FORBRICKWORK

I8 2212 t 1991 water to pass through than rendered walls, and therefore shall not be relied on to give protection from rain except under sheltered or moderate conditions. 6.6.2.2 Resistance to rain penetration will be incrased by rendering which prevents the access of water through the joints of brickwork except in small quantities passed through by capillary action. Rendered walls are, therefore, suitable for severe conditions provided other requirements, such as sufficient thickness, use of satisfactory materials,, and workmanship are also satisfied. 6.6-2-g A cavity wall will provide a perfect barrier to rain penetration. Even when the outer part of the wall gets wet, the inner one will remain absolutely dry. 6.6.2.4 Table 3 indicates the suitability of various walls under different conditions of exposure. Table 3 Suitability of Walls for Variow Expomarem ( ClaurG6.6.2.4 ) 6.6.3 Thermal ,!3resm The coefficients linear expansion of bricks vary from 5 x 10-s to 11 x 10-s per degree Centigrade. Variations of temperature tend to produce linear changes in walls which, when restrained, may lead to internal stress resulting in cracks especially when the walls exceed 30 m ( 100 feet ). The effects of these stresses shall be taken into consideration for .a proper design. 6.6.4 Control of Shrinkage Cracking

6.6.4.1 When bricks having a drying shrinkage of not more than 0.02 percent are used, fine hair cracks appear in the joints. These may usually be ignored. With bricks of higher shrinkage values, major cracks may appear through the brickwork. Tn confine cracks to the joints and to dissipate these into a large number of fine joints, it is desirable that the mortar used shall be weaker than the bricks. 6.6.4.2 Cracking due to shrinkage normally will occur at openings or other points where the vertical or horizontal section of a wall changes. A long wall with a few openings will tend to show wider cracks above and below the openings than a similar wall with many openings. Metal reinforcement may be embedded in brickwork at points where cracking is likely to occur. 6.6.5 Themal Insulation

Ii - Recommended N - Not Recommended
81 No. Constrmction --d'---~ Exposure

Sheltered Moderate Severe (2)
thick wall

6.6.5.1 For requirements of thermal insulation in walls, reference may be made to IS 3792 : 1978. The thermal transmittance ( U-value ) of l-brick (200 mm ) thick wall with 15 mm plaster on both sides will be about 19 5 K cal/mshdeg C ( or 0.4 Btu/ft*hdeg F ). 6.6.6 Fire Resistance

(1)

(3)
N R
R

(4)
N N
R

(5)
N N
N

1. Unrendred &brick
2.
3.

Unrendred l-brick thick solid wall
Unreodered If-brick

thick solid wall 4. 5. Rendered solid wall Cavity wall or rendered one-brick thick solid wall R R R R N R

For requirements regarding resistance to reference may be made to IS 1642 : 1988. 6.6.7 kuzd Innrlation

fire,

NOTE - Exposure condition8 to wind and rain may be broadly divided into rheltered, moderate and Ievere locationr.
Shclfnud Conditions are, for example, regions of low rainfall ( below 750 mm per annum ) and where brickwork is protected by the proximity of buildings of rimilar

Requ&ments for insuh%iOn against airborne sound are laid down in IS 1.950 : 1962 and reference may be made to that standard in this connection. 6.6.8 Dnrabilitp of brickwork arises due to following

Deterioration causes:

or greater heights. Brickwork in the lower two rtoreyr of building8 of ruch location8 will fall in this group. Ma&r&r Cmditions are obtained where the exposure is neither sheltered nor severe.
S-n Cm&ions are obtained where the bric_l_work is exposed to a moderate gale accompanied by ap@@tent rain. Brickwork that projects well above *a 8UrroUnding buildings will, especially, be r~f~ely exposed.

4

Disintegration due to soluble salts present in the brickwork or when the brickwork is in contact with subsoil water containing soluble salts ( see Note 1 ); Disintegration due to impurides present in the bricks which! under certatn conditions are liable to Qsrupt the brickwork ( JC~ Note 2 );

W

12

IS 2212 t 1991 c) Disintegration Note 3 ); and d) Corrosion brickwork.
NOTES 1 When a wall is subiectcd to continued wetting or alternate drying and wetting, the soluble salts therein, mostly sulphates of alkalia prerent in the bricks get dissolved and interact with- certaio components of cement or hydraulic lime in the mortar and rendering, resulting in the formation of new compounds with increased volume and consequent cracks in the bricks or in the mortar. Under similar circumstances disintegration also occurs due to the crystallization of certain salts like magnesium sulphate just inside thesurface pores of the bricks giving rise to severe surface decay. 2 Nodules of quick lime in the bricks when they get hydrated due to soaking in water during construction or subsequent dampness expand in volume setting up disruptive effect on the bricks. 3 When the brickwork is saturated with water and exposed to freezing conditions, the expansion of water rryc;;ing the freezing has a disruptive effect on the

due

to

frost in

action

( see

of iron

or steel

reinforced

6.8.1.3 The damp-proof course shall occupy the full wit&of the wall just below it, and shall be provided even under door openings. 6.8.2 Damp-proof course may be horizontal or vertical and will be required at one or all of the locations as below: a) Below the lowest floor level to prevent of water from the soil; b) Above ground level to prevent rising up the wall; and entry

water from

c) At openings, parapets, etc, to prevent access of rain-water into the structure. 6.8.3 Where the lowest floor of a structure is below the finished ground level, a -horizontal damp-proof course through the body of the wall, below the level of the underside of the floor will be required. This will have to be connected in the external walls through a vertical damp-proof course to the horizontal damp-proof course above ground level. This, in effect, seals the basement from ingress of water. 6.8.4 All walls in a building shall be provided with a damp-proof course which is at least 15 cm above the finished ground or plinth protection level and preferably immediately below the underside of the ground floor. The damp-proof course shall run without a break throughout the length of the wall, even under door or other openings. 6.8.5 Damp-proof courses shall be provided on the jambs and at the top of openings where such openings occur in cavity falls. The damp-proof course in the jambs shall be vertical and shall be provided at the junction of the internal and external parts of the cavity wall so as to prevent ingress of dampness from the external part of the wall to the internal leaf ( SGC Fig. 11 ). A flexible dampproof course ( se6 Fig. 12 ) shall be provided at the top to protect the lintel head from the water which flows down through the cavity above and to drain it off outside through weep holes. 6.8.6 In parapets, where the coping is of an impervious material like stone or dense concrete, no damp roof course may be necessary across the Wall. tv here the coping is of a previous nature, it may be necessary to interpose a flexible damp proof course about 15 to 20 cm above the finished roof level and carry it down the inside face of the wall to the lower face of the drip course. Dampproofing of parapets in the case of cavity walls construction is illustrated in Fig. 13. 6.8.7 Damp-proofing features is illustrated 6.9 Cavity Wall details under in Fig. 14. architectural

6.7

Footinga

For construction of foundation footings in brickwork reference may be made to IS 1080 : 1985. e6.8 DsmpProof Courses

56.8.1 The function of a damp-proof course is to prevent the passage of water from an external source into a structure or from one part of a structure to another. Damp-proof courses may consist of flexible material like tar or bitumen felts, or of a layer of dense concrete or slates or cuddappah stone slabs. 6.8.1.1 Dampproofing with a layer of concrete shall conform to the following requirements:

4

Size of stone to be used

aggregate

10 mm nominal size ( see IS 383 : 1970 ) 1:2:4 Not less than 4 cm

b) Mix of concrete 4 Thickness of concrete
layer

4

The concrete layer shall be provided with a waterproofing treatment which may be either a surface treatment or with integral waterproofing compounds

treatment of concrete damp proof course, it is found by experience that painting, with hot bitumen at the rate of 1'7 kg/l00 m* is rtisfactory.

NOTE - For surface

8.8.1.2 Slates and cudda#ah stone slabs used for damp-proofing shall be not less than 40 mm thick, 13

6.9.1 The outer and inner leaves of a cavity wall may be of the same material or of different materials, such as brickwork and concrete, etc. The

.. IS 2212I ls!u
FLEXl6LE DAMP-PROOF COURSE OVER SUPPORT~SEE flc.rt~)

10 cm +

INSIDE

I

Mlrd

SUPPORT

OF APPROPRIATE LENGTH

I

I

FLEXIBLE VERTICAL DAMP-PROOF COURSE

FRAME TO OPENING

OUTSIDE
1lA

PLAN
Details with Frame foi Opening on Outside FLEXl8LE DAMP-PROOF COURSE OVER SUPPORT (SEE FIG.128) SUPPORT OF APPROPRIATE LENGTH

INSIDE

I

SLATE DAMP PROOF COURSE

FRAME

TO OPENING

OUTSIDE

PLAN
11B Details with Fiame for Op8ning on Inside

FIG. 11DETAILS OF DAMP-PROOF COURSSS AT JAMBFOROPENIIWS IN CAVITYWALL

thicker leaf shall be arranged on the inside and the cavity or apace between the two leaves of the wall #hall be between 4 cm to 8 cm.
6.9.2 The function of the wall ties is to bind together the outer and inner leaves of a cavity wall. This shall be spaced not more than four bricklengths apart horizontally and not more than 5 brick-heights vertically, and staggered. Additional ties shall be used near openings. There shall, at least, be 5 ties per square metre surface area of the wall. 6.9.3 Ties may be of mild steel, flat iron or round bars, suitably twisted at their mid-point or sloped towards the exterior side ao as to prevent water from flowing along it from outer to inner leaf.

Ties shall be given a bituminous or other coat before, insertion to protect them from corrosion. 6.10 Beof Ploor~ and Roofs 6.10.1 Timber Floor and Roofs It is not desirable to embed any structural timber in brickwork as it is liable to be affected by dry rot. Timber wall pIates shall be protected with preservative if they have to be embedded in wall. The ends of timbers joists shall preferably rest on corbels or brackets but when built into a wall they shall be treated with preservative, and in addition, space shall be left around them for free circulation of air. The ends of beams carrying heavy loads, and of trusses shall be supported on templates of concrete or stone to distribute the load over a greater area of brick wall. 14

FLEXIBLE DAMP PROOF COURSE

SECTION
12A Head of Opening with Frame on Outside

INSIDE

FLEXIBLE DAMPPROOF COURSE

SUPPORT OPENI

SECTION
126 Head of Opening with Frame on Inside

AT LINTEL HEAD LRVRL FIG. 12 DBTAILSOF DAMP-PROOFING FOR OPR#INGSIN CAVITY WULS

DAMP PROOF COURSE FOP *IGH

18A Details where Parapet Is also of Cavity Constructlon

133 Detail8 wheie Parapet is of Solld Construction

FIG. 13

DRTMLS OF DAMPPROO~G

IN PARAPBT OWR CAWY CONSTRUCTION 15

6.10.3.2 Where the bottom of the slab does not coincide with the level of a brick course, the level shaIl not be made up with cut bricks but the thickness of the slab at bearing shall be increased so that the bearing is directly on the brick course immediately below its level. 6.10.3.3 Ends of RCC beams shall generally be placed on template of plain or reinforced cement concrete or stone. .Fl EXIBLE DAMP PROOF COURSE 6.10.3.4 The ends of RCC slabs may bear on a .layer of cement mortar ( 1 : 4 mix ) 12 to 20 mm thick. Its top surface shall be white-washed or otherwise suitably treated so as to minimize the friction to movement of the concrete slab over the bearing. 6.11 Brickwork Round Openings - Solid Wall 6.1Ll Openings shall be of such a size and so spaced in walls as to reduce cutting of bricks to the minimum. The width of openings shall, as far as possible, be a multiple of the width of a brick. 6.11.2 In external walls, it is desirable to rebate the sills, jambs and heads of openings so as to form a barrier for rain-water. The still shall be sloped slightly so as to allow rain-water to drain off. 6.12 Parapets and Copings

14A

Plinth

6.12.1 The thickness of parapets shall be such that their base covers the junction of roof slab and wall which shall be further effectively treated against possible leakage of rain-water as per IS 2115 : 1980. 6.12.2 Copings may be of atone, concrete, brick or terracotta and throated on the underside of the projection. The top of the coping shall be slightly sloped so as to allow rain-water to drain off ( seu 6.8.6 and Fig. 13 ). 6.13 Arckitectural Features
148 String Course Solid or Cavity

Wall

FIG. 14 DETAILS OF DAMP-PROOFING IN ARCHITECTURAL PROJEC~ON 6.10.2 Steel Beams

6.13.1 All projecting architectural features, such as plinth projections, string courses or cornices, shall be effectively bonded by tailing into the brickwork to ensure stability. Such architectural features shall be set straight and true with the finished joints as far as possible. 6.13.2 When such features are not to be plastered over, they shall be built with brick which have high durability, resistance to abrasion and moisture penetration. Bricks specially made to required shape for this purpose shall be used, if possible otherwise, selected bricks rubbed and ground to correct shape and size may be used. 6.13.3 Sun shades and such projecting features which depend on the men of brick masonry over them for their stability shall be kept supported till such time the brick masonry above is built and. hardened sufliciently.

The ends of steel beams embedded in masonry shall be built-in with space all round for repainting or shall be protected with a thick bituminous coat or shall be encased in rich concrete of mix 1 : 2 : 4. The ends shall generally be supported on templates of plain or reinforced cement concrete of mix 1 : 2 : 4, or stone.

6.10.3

RCC Floors and Roofs

6.10.3.1 Reinforced cement concrete floor and roof slabs resting on the wall shall have a width of bearing not less than the effective depth of slab subject to a minimum of 10 cm.

IS 2212 I 1991 7 STORAGE MATERIALS 7.1 Bricks .Bricks shall not be dumped at side. They shall be stacked in regular tiers even as they are unloaded, to minimiae breakages and defacement of bricks. The supply of bricks shall be so arranged that, as far as possible, at least two days' requirements of bricks are available at site at any time. Bricks selected for different situations the work shall be stacked separately. `7.2 Cement Cement shall be stored above ground level in perfectly dry and watertight sheds. Genient shall be stacked not more than eight bags high. The bags shall be stacked in a manner to facilitate removal and use in the order in which they are received. 1.3 Lime of use in AND HANDLING OF 8.3 The setting out of walls shall be facilitated by permanent rows of pillars, parallel to and at a fixed distance beyond the periphery of the building. The pillar shall be located at the junctions of cross walls with the periphery of the building. The pillars shall be located at the junctions of cross walls with the peripheral lines of pillars. The centrelines of the cross walls shall be extended to and permanently erected on the plastered tops of the corresponding sets of pillars. The datum lines parallel to and at the known fixed distance from the centre lines of the external walls, shall also be permanently marked on the corresponding rows of pillars to serve as checks on the accuracy of the work as it proceeds. The tops of these pillars shall be at the same level and preferably at the plinth or floor level. The pillars shall be of size not less than 30 cm square and shall be bedded sufficiently deep into ground so that they are not easily disturbed. 8.4 Site Bench Marks Before commencing bench marks located site and preferable Marks, shall be put setting out of height building operation, permanent at convenient points on the linked with G. T. S. Bench up so as to facilitate accurate from a tlxed da&m.

-Quick lime shall, as far as possible, be slaked soon alter it is received. Storage of unslaked fat or semi-hydraulic lime is not desirable as the lime deteriorates by absorption of moisture from the atmosphere and also is likely to cause fires. Slaked hydraulic way as cement conditions. 7.4 Mortars lime shall be stored in the same as it sets quickly under damp

8.5 The judicious use of storey rods may ensure accuracy m setting out and facility for checking the work as it proceeds. 9 SCAFFOLDING 9.1 Single scaffolding shall not be used on important works, since subsequent filling up of the putlog holes and rendering of their surface would give an unsightly appearance, Another disadvantage with single scaffolding is that workmen arc apt to support them on window and similar spoiling the frames and openings, thereby shutters. 9.1.1 Where single scaffolding is adopted, the lacing of the poles, which are to rest on the g ricks ork under construction, shall be so adjusted as to affect only one of the headers at the point of support in the various courses. \

7.4.1 The problem of storage of mortar does not arise in the case of cement and cement-lime mortar or lime mortars with hydrulic limes, as these have to be used immediately. Lime mortars using semi-hydraulic limes which sometimes require to be used after a day or two after their grinding, shall be prevented from drying out by protective covering and by occasional sprinkling of water. 7.4.2 Mortars shall be well mixed and shall be transported from the mixing platform to the site of work in such a manner as to prevent formation of laitance or segregation. 8 SETTING OUT

9.2 Scaffolding shall be designed to withstand all -8.1 Generally the site shall be deared of grass roots, tree stumps, etc, before the building lines are the dead, live and impact loads which are likely to come on them. They shall also be so designed set out. In case of sloping terrain care shall be as to ensure the fety of the workmen using them taken to ensure that the dimensions on Ian are and shall confor in all respects to the requireset out correctly in one or more horizont ap planes. ments of the r levant building regulations on .8.2 The building lines shall be set out with steel safety, health an f we&e and also the local buildtapes. Setting out of angles shall be with theodoing bye-laws. ,lite in case of important and intricate structures where the lengthr of arms exceed 16 m. In other 10 SOAKING OF BRICKS cases they may be. set out by meazurement of sides In rectangular or square setting out, diago10.1 Bricks shall be soaked in water before use for nals shall be checked to enzure accuracy. a period that is sufficient for the water to just 17

1s 2212t 1991 penetrate the whole depth of the bricks ( see Notes ). Wetting the bricks assists in removing the the dirt, sand and dust from them. Further, it prevents the suction of water from the wet mortar, as otherwise the mortar is likely to dry out soon and crumble before attaining any strength. The bricks shall not be too wet at the time of use, as they are likely to slip on the mortar bed and there will be difficulty in ensuring plumbness of the wall. Moreover, proper adhesion of bricks to mortar will not be possible if the bricks are too wet. NOTES 1 The period of soaking may be easily found at site by a field test in which the brick MOsoaked in watrr for different periods and tben broken to find the exteat of water penetration. The least period that corresponds to complete soaking will be the one to be allowed for in the construction work.
2 If the brick8 are soaked for the required time in water that is frequently changed, the soluble mltr in the brick will be leached out, and subsequent effloreacence will be reduced.

11.1.3 The courses shall be aligned and care shall. be taken to keep the perpends. 11.1.4 The brickwork shall be built in uniform layers; corners and other advanced work shall be racked back. No part of a wall during its construction shall rise more than one metre above the general construction level, to avoid unequal settlement and alao improper jointing. 11.1.5 The face joints shall be finished either by joi;;i;,or by pointing as specified, in accordance. . .

70 70 60 -fFIG. 15 A TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT OF CUTBRKXCS IN A CORNER

10.2 When bricks are soaked they shall be removed from the tank sufficiently early so that at the time of laying they are skin-dry. Such soaked bricks shall be stacked on a clean place, where they are not again spoiled by dirt, earth, etc. 11 LAYING 11.1 General 11.1.1 Brick shall be laid on a full bed of mortar. When laying, the bricks shall be slightly pressed so that the mortar gets into all the pores of the brick surface to ensure proper adhesion. Cross joints and wall joints shall be properly flushed and packed with mortar so that no hollow spaces are left. Properly filled joints ensure maximum strength and resistance to penetration of moisture which takes place mainly through joints. In the case of thick walls ( two-brick thick and over ), the joints shall be grouted at every course in addition to bedding and flushing with mortar. The course at the top of the plinth and sills at the top of the wall just below the roof slab or floor slab and at the top of the parapet, shall be laid with bricks on edge ( applicable only in the case of traditional bricks ); and at corners and deadends the bricks shall be properly radiated and keyed into position by using cut-bricks ( also known as `punjo' bricks or `marucona~' ). Typical shape and arrangement of these bricks are shown in Fig. 15. 11.1.2 Bricks with 20 mm deep frog shall be used frog-down. Bricks with 10 mm deep frog shall be used either frog-up or frog-down. 18 OF BRICKWORK

11.1.6 Toothing may be done where future extention is contemplated but shall not be used as an alternative to racking back. 11.2 Wails 11.2.1 All quoins shall be accurately constructed and the height of the courses checked with storey rods as the work proceeds. In general, quoinbricks shall be headers and stretchers in alternate courses, the bond being established by placing a quoin closer next to the queen header. 11.2.2 Acute and obtuse quoins shall be bonded, where practicable, in the same way as square quoins. Obtuse quoins shall be formed with squints showing a three-quarter brick on one face and a quarter brick on the other. 11.3 Plasters These shall be set out as to avoid broken bond. 1 I .4 Openings 11.4.1 The depth of reveals and rebates shall, where practicable, conform to standard brick sizes in order to avoid cutting of bricks and thereby weakening the work. 11.4.2 The arrangement of bond at quoins jambs of openings shall be symmetrical. at

IS 2212 t 1991 11.5 Partitionr For half-brick partitions to be keyed into main walls, indents shall be 1eR in the latter. Il.6 Arches 11.8.2 In thi cast of round bars used as reinforcement, the diameter shall not exceed 8 mm. Flat bars and similar reinforcement shall not have a thickness exceeding 8 mm. 11.8.3 The thickness of reinforced brick wall shall be not less than 100 mm. 11.8.4 The crushing strength of the bricks used.in reinforced brick masonry shall be not less than 7.5 N/mm*. 1 I .8.5 The mortar used for reinforced brickwork shall generally be rich, dense, cement mortar of mix about 1 : 4. Lime mortars shall not be used. 11.8.6 The inlaid steel reinforcement shall be corn letely embedded in mortar. Overlaps in the rein F orcement, if any, shall not be less than 300 mm. 11.8.6.1 The mortar covering in the direction of joints shall be not less than 15 mm. 11.8.6.2 The mortar interposed between the reinforcement bars and the brick shall be not less than 5 mm thick. 11.8.7 In the case where the reinforcements cross inside a joint, the diameter of the reinforcement shall not exceed 5 mm, unless specially shaped bricks are used to permit larger reinforcement. 11.9 Protection Against Damage

Arches shall be turned with ordinary bricks over timber centres, generally in rings of half-brick length. For face work, the bri&s shall.be either specially manufactured bricks or ordinary bricks cut and rubbed to shape in order to obtaih uniform radial joints. 11.6-l Flat arches may be used for the sake of but for purposq. of carrying loads appearance, of the wall above they shall be used in co&~tion with relieving arches, or with lintels placed b&&d. 11.6.2 In the construction ofa flat arch, though the extrados is perfectly level; the intrados is given a slight camber to allow for any slight settlement .or to correct the apparent sagging of a horizontal line, the usual allowance being about 1 mm rise .at the ccntre for every 100 mm of span. 11.6.3 Large arches in masonry shall be constructed in accordance with IS 2118 : 1980. 11.7 Fixing of Framea 11.7.1 Where door or window frames of timber -are f&cd in the openings, the 6xing shall be done ,gencrally with hold-fasts of adequate size and strength securely embedded in the l+kwork or in chases later filled up by cement .mortar or concrete. Hold-fasts shall be fixed in the brickwork for a sufficient length and then burned up at end into a cross joint, thus avoiding indiscriminate cutting of bricks Iron hold-fasts shall be given a .protective coat of bitumen to avoid rusting. Woodwork faces in contact with brickwork shall be treated with wood preservative to prevent attack from insects and termites. 11.7.2 Fixing of steel doors and windows shall be done in accordance with IS 108l : -1960. 11.7.3 Fixmg of timber doo& a& tiindows shall be done in aixordance ~itbIS.9913~ 1968. Y1.7.4 Thb frames shall prefaa& b& fixed simultaneously as the masonry work `proceeda* as,this construction will tnsure ,proper bond without gaps between the masonry and thl frames. 1 I .8 Reinforced Brickwork

11.9.1 Care shall be taken during construction that edges of jambs, sills, heads, etc, are not damaged. 11.9.2 In inclemerlr weather, newly built work shall be covered with gunny bags or tarpaulin so as to prevent the mortar from being washed away. 11.10 curing In hot and dry weather, the mortar is likely to dry up before it has attained its final set and may crumble. This shall be prevented by keeping the brickwork constantly wet for at least seven days, Cxcept in the case of brickwork with mud mortar for which no such curing is required. 11.11 Provision for Service Instillations

11.8.1 Reinforcement in hrilf-brick partition walls may be in the form of mild steel flats or hoop iron, expanded mesh, or mild steel bars or fabric. `These are generally used in every third or fourth courses +f the brickwork They shall be securely anchored at their ends where the partitions bond.

To facilitate taking service lines `iater without inordinate .cutting ,?f completed work, sleeves and chases +a11 be provided during the cpnstruction itself. Scich sleeves shall slope down outwards in external walls so that their surface cannot form channels for t$eeasy passage of water inside. 11.12 Cavity Walls

11.12.1 As the main object of providing a continuous cavity in an external wall is to prevent r&n penetrating to the. inner face, care shall be

W

IS 2212-t 1991
exercised during construction that the cavity is continuous and free from obstruction. As far as possible, mortar droppings shall be prevented from falling down the cavity by the use of laths or by haybands which shall be drawn up the cavity as the work proceeds. Any mortar which may unavoidably fall on the wall-ties be removed daily and temporary openinga 8hall be provided to permit the daily removal of mortar droppings from the bottom of the cavity. 11.12.2 Special precautionr a8 laid down in IS 1649 : 1962 shall be taken in building flues adjacent to cavities. 11.1!2.3 Bond only stretcher bond shall be used, unless purposemade snap headera tie available. When header bricks are cut and u8ed, they are either likely to protrude into the cavity and form ledges for mortar droppings to collect or they may be so short as to weaken the 8tructure. 11.12.4 The outer and inner leaves shall be tied by means of wall ties. The wall ties shall preferably be bedded with a riight fall towards the exterior part of the wall. 11.12.5 At the base of the cavity wall, the foundations and basement shall be solidly constructed up to 300 mm above the ground level. The air cavity shall begin not less than 200 mm below the upper floor surface of the ground floor and the cavity shall be continued without interruption up to the roof. 11.12.6 In order provided the cave `area of Vbntilorion to keep the. cavity dry, air slot8 8hall be above the ground floor level and below level of the roof to extent of 500 mm8 vents to every 20 m8 area of the wall. windows and doors ), they a water-tight membrane. shall be separated by

11.12.8.1 Above the lintels of door8 and windows, damp-proof membrane shall be inserted slopping downwards and outwards. 11.12.8.2 At solid jambs a vertical damp-proof coune shall be inserted between the outer and inner parts of the wall. 12 INSPECTION 12.1 General The object of inspection of brick masonry work is to ensure it8 satisfactory performance and al80 toascertain whether all the recommended practice of workmanship is adopted at every stage. As thecorrect strength of masonry cannot be ascertained without destruction, a close supervision duringthe course of construction is necessary to ensure. satisfactory performance. The strength of brickwork depends on the strength of individual brick, rtrength of mortar, bond and workmanship. 12.2 Inspection

In building hollow walls of half-brick thickness,

ofMaterials

In caoc of large works, samples of bricks, sands, ~urkAi, lime, cement, etc, which go to form the brickwork, shall be periodically tested in a laboratory to make 8ure that they conform to the rc uirements stated in 5. Simple field tests may 8u5ticc in the ca8e of small/work8. 12.3 IamPection of Workm8aship

A close rupervision while the work is in progress will ensure a better quality work with the materials available for use. The following shall be observed at the time of inspection: a) All loore materi& dirt and ret lump8 of mortar which may be lying over the surface over which brickwork i8 to be freshly started, shall be removed with a wire brush. b) All the brick8 shall be thoroughly soaked in clean water immediately before use. c) The s&ace over which the brickwork is tobe started shall be slightly wetted. d) Thi fint coume itself shall be made horizontal by providing enough mortar in the bed joint to till up any undulations in the bed course. e) Plastic mortar results in thorough bedding of the brick and more complete filling of the joints which enrure greater strength. Care 8hall be taken to see that the required quantity of water is added to the mortar at the mixing platform itself and not over the course8.

11.12.7 The following precaution8 rhall be observed at the top of the cavity:

4 Parapts -

If the top of a hollow wall ends with a parapet, the cavity 8hall be carried up to the full height of the wall or 8topped at the roof-fleshing level.

b) Eaves -

If a roof project8 over the top of the wall, the cavity shall be closed at the top.

cl Party Walls -

In a hollow party wall, the top of a cavity shall be closed just above the uppermost ceiling level and the courses over shall be continued in solid brickwork. A sound-insulating material shall be interposed between the hollow wall and the solid brickwork.

11.12.8 At the points where the two leaves of the hollow wall come into contact ( for example, at

IS 2212 8 1991

f)

All the joints shall, as far as possible, be thin and the speci6cations mentioned in 6.4 in this regard shall be strictly adha red to. Care shall be taken to see that there is no through joints and the lap is not less than half the width of the brick, and that all the vertical joints are properly filled with mortar. verticality of the walls and horixontality of the courses shall be checked very often with plumb bob and spirit level respectively.

8)

built of bricks with low sulphate content. Brickwork exposed to sea spray shall be made with dense bricks and cement mortar. Brickwork in exposed situations shall not be given a rich cement rendering ( say richer than 1 : 4 cement : sand mix ) as the latter, due to shrinkage cracks, may admit penetration of water into the body of the wall, and at the same time, prevent its ready evaporation due to its close texture. 13.2.2 Sulphate attacks in their initial stages may be remedied by rectifying the possible sources of water seepage into the body of brickwork and by scraping the affected mortar and rcjointing and rendering. In more advanced stages, the only remedy is to pull down the affected parts and reconstruct them. 13.2.3 The primary precaution to be taken to prevent sulphate attacks is to adopt constructional details and choose materials that will ensure complete preventation of entry of water into the brickwork. Some important constructional wet conditions are stated below: details to avoid

h) The

3

No portion of the work shall be left more than 1 m lower than the other. Where the masonry of one part has to be delayed the work shall be `raked back' suitably at an angle not exceeding 45' according to bond and not toothed. Where plastering is required to be done all the vertical as well as horizontal joints shall be raked to a depth of about 10 mm while the mortar is wet, and this will ensure satisfactory adhesion between the plaster aud brickwork, and Care shall be taken to ensure that the brick work is kept wet for seven days commencing from 24 hours after the course is laid.

k)

4

d

Dampproof courses shall be provided under all jointed members covering the horizontal or sloping faces of brickwork including copings, sills, chimney caps. All projecting features formed with joined units, such a cornices and string courses, ahall be covered with properly designed flashings, and where necessary, cover flashings shall be provided at the wall face. Cement fillets and cement renderings used as a protection to horizontal surfaces are unlikely to be satisfactory; both are liable to develop shrinkage cracks which let in water. Parapet. faces by the rate result in walls shall not be sealed on both impervious rendering; this reduces of evaporation and may ultimately a wet-condition of the brickwork.

W

13 MAlNTENANCE 13.1 Where proper materials and workmanship are used, brickwork will need little maintenance. If, however, defects occur, they may be due to the following causes: a) Sulphate attack on mortars and renderings, b) Use of unsound materials, c) Corrosion of embedded iron or steel, d) Crystallization of salts from the bricks, and e) Defects due to shrinkage on drying. 13.2 $IlJphotc be Attack on Mortar and Render-

4

4

13.2.1 Sulphates present in br&kwork react in the presence of water with alumma contents of the cement and hydraulic limes in the mortar and rendering, forming other salts with considerable increase in volume, and consquently chip and spall the bricks, produce cracks in the joints and renderings, and disintegrate the mortar. Water is, therefore, essential for thii defect, and it may arise in exposed situations in brickwork. Parapets, boundary walls, chimney walls, etc, shall be built with bricks of low sulphate content.. Similarly, brickwork in situations where wet conditions are to be expected, such as below damp-proof course, in man holes, in retaining walls# etc, shall .also be 21

On walls faced with external renderings, all damp-proof courses shall extend through the facing and turn down to form protectective drips. Where flashings are used above roof level in coojunction with damp-proof courses, they shall be inserted immediately below the dampproof courses. walls shall be effectively drained by weep `holes above all damp-proof courses that bridge the cavity.

e)

f 1 Cavity I31The

use of dense stones or bricks as a facing to porous brickwork in solid walls may lead to prolonged dampness of the wall. Water entering through the ahriakage cracks may

IS 2212I .l!J91 not evaporate su5ciently the dense facing. `13.3 Use of Unsound Materials 13.3.1 Bricks containing burnt nodules8 of quicklime, and mortar containing unslaked particles of lime are often responsible for cracks in bricks, and for pittings displacement cracks, etc, in mortars; when coming in contact with water, the quicklime gets hydrated and expands in volume and causes such defects. 13.3.2 The remedy lies in ensuring that all lime is properly slaked before mixing into mortar, and in choosing bricks burnt from the proper soil. Constructional details designed for excluc&ng moisture from such walls ( SM 13.2 ) will also stop this trouble. 13.4 Corrosion of Embedded Iron and Steel Iron and steel corrode in contact with atmospheric moisture, where such moisture is laden with acids sulphates and chloride salts in solution. In coastal areas such corrosion occurs rapidly. Iron embedded in brickwork is corroded `for the same reason .when such sale are released, in solution from the bricks .themselv& when-damp. While undergoing cowsion, the iron expands considerably and tends to disrupt the brickwork. Prevention of such corrosion may be achieved by giving an encasement of 15 to 25 mm of dtnse cement mortar ( 1:4 mix or richer) around all embedded steel sections. Iron and steel memb& partially embedded in brickwork tend to corrode at the point of their entry into the brickwork,aod to prevent this, they shall be given a bituminous protective coating at that place. 13.5 Crystallisation of Salts rapidly through 13.5.3 Continued effloreescence would indicate that water from leaks or .similar sources is finding its way into the brickwork through previous channels. In these cases, entry of water shall be located and stopped, 13.5.4 Some of the salts, like magnesium sulphate have a disintegration effect on the brick face, and cause it to crumble to dust. Chemical analysis of the surface scrapings will indicate the nature of the salts and if they are of the harmful type special care shall be taken to seal off the entry of. water into the brickwork. 13.6 Defects Due to Shrinkage or Drying

Brickwork generally swells, with absorption ofwater and whar~the water evaporates, it shrinks and in so doing develops vertical cracks, and when the mortar of the brickwork is lean, the cracks are distributed over a large nymber of joints so that they are not significantly visible. However, when the mortar is rich, the resulting cracks are few but wider, occurring at the weakest point in the brick or mortar. These cracks have no adverse effect on the structural strength of the work and.may be easily rectified. These do not recur after the first season of drying out provided the walls are generally water-tight. 14 REPAIRING BRICKWORK

13.5.1 When bricks containing soluble salts are used in construction, these salts are dissolved out, if water passes into the brickwork and are deposited in the form of fine crystals on the face of the brickwork. This is known as efflorescence. 13.5.2 Effloreseence will be a common phenomenon with new construction since the water used in the construction invariably leaves the salts dissolved from the brickwork on the face. When the structure dries up, this efflorescence shall be scrubbed out dry with brushes. They shall not be washed as the solution will again be absorbed into the brickwork. Cleaning with acids shall not be done as new salts are formed thereby.
carbonate into almost insoluble chalk, the surface may be wetted to orevent undue &sorotion ad then scrubbed down wiih a solution of oni put of co&merckl hydrochloric ( muriatic ) acid in 20 parts of water and subsequently washed dowxito remove- all traces of acid, care having been t&en previously to protect any metal `or other work likely to be damaged by the acid.

14.1 Defects and cracking in brickwork may -be due to one or several causes mentioned in clause 13.1 and to execute effective repairs, it is necessary to know the cause of damage. The effect of defect in a wall must be judged in relation to the building as a whole and the general soundness of its construction and the particular function of the wall is called upon to serve. The nature of repairs mainly depends on whether it is structural damage or surface cracking only. At times evenwide ctacks may not seriously affect the stability of the structure provided the brickwork is not distorted or is not much out of plumb. 14.2 Before deciding the course of treatment t@ be adopted to following factors shall be considered: a) The type of foundation is constructed; on which the wall:

b) The position and bonding of cross wallsand other connecting structural members; c) Whether the wall is true to plumb; d) Whether floors, roofs, upper walls, etc, are liable to exert thrust or restraint to further movement; and e) The aesthetic effect of the crack over the building as a whole.

composed mainly of lime and the lime has had time to

NOTE -

In some

cases,

when

the

e5orescence

is

IS 2212 r.1991 14.3 Treatment of Structural Damage 14.3.1 Where walls become unsafe due to diffb rential movements resulting from seasonal fluctuations in the moisture content of subsoil or due to the presence of filled materials below the foundations, the work may require special measure such as providing reinforced concrete band at plinth level, lintel level, top level, etc, and lowering ground-water table. 14.3.2 For damages other in 14.3.1 one of the following adopted: than mentioned treatments may be patched surface will match with the surrounding surface. In repairing cracks with mortar it is important to secure satisfactory adhesion between the masonry of the existing work and the new bricks and also not to use toq strong a mortar mix Otherv.ise shrinkage of the new rich mortar may cause a fresh crack to develop. To promote adhesion, the brickwork shall be wetted before the mortar is filled in. 14.3.3.2 If a number of cracks have appeared in a single wall and the cracks cross each other these cracks can not be effectively repaired. The walls in such cases have no strength and it is advisable to dismantle the entire wall and reconstruct the same, supporting the structure above in a suitable marmer. In case the diagonal cracks have occurred in a localised place of the wall, the brickwork at the damaged place and around shall be dismantled and rebuilt. While dismantling such portions, care shall be taken to relieve the load on the wall by providing props at suitable places. The props or supports for the structure above the work under repair shall not be removed till the rebuilt masonry has attained enough strength. 14.3.3.3 Where the cracks are likely to continue to widen for sometime after initial development ( such as in the case of cracks due to ground movement in shrinkable clay sub-soil ) it would be advisable not to repair the cracks with mortar. If filling is found necessary to prevent the penetration of moisture or rain, an oil based mastic shall be applied by caulking or by a gun. 14.3.3.4 Surface cracks

To provide tie rods passing through the floor or at roof level anchoring the damaged wall to another wall or structural member that is sound or has tendency to niove in the opposite direction. To build buttresses, keyed into the damaged wall so as to give thrust against the wall in the required direction. It shall be ensured that the buttresses rest on firm soil without giving way to settlements or movements. In case the wall is noticed to be out of plumb, the damaged or bulged portion of the wall shall be dismantled and rebuilt with mortar of the same proportion aa the adjoining portion. 14.3.3 Tmtmmt of Crab ACTOSS Walls

14.3.3.1 These cracks are more or less diagonal cracks and either follow the vertical and horizontal joints alternately or pass straight down through alternate vertical joints and thi intervening bricks and mortar beds. In these cases one of the following methods may be adopted:

4

If the cracks are of such nature that they are likely to encourage the penetration of rain if they are not repaired, it is necessary to cut out and replace the cracked bricks. be stitched by inserting bond stone or prccast reinforced concrete blocks at suitable intervals. The cracks shall then be grduted. Sufficient care has to be taken in preparing the precast concrete blocks so that the

b) If the cracks arc wide, the two portions can

Where the mortar in the joints has become damaged without dislocatiag the brickwork, which may be due to initial usage of poor mortar, improper filling or action of frost or fire or unknown elements of nature, the joints shall be raked thoroughly to a depth oi at least 20 mm and the raked joints caulked with mortar and the brickwork pointed. Care shall be taken to avoid the usage of a strong mortar for caulking purposes. The patch work shall be properly cured ( S86 11.10).

23

18 2212: 1991
ANNEX

.'

;h
STANDARDS lifts Bitumen compounds for waterproofing and caulking purposes ( jirst revision ) Mason's tools for plaster work and pointing work ( jrst revision ) Code of practice for field slaking of building lime and preparation of' putty (jut rdoision ) . Qode of practice for fire safety of buildings ( general ) : Materials and detaib of construction (jrst feoision ) Code of practice design and construction of flues and chimneys for domestic heating appliances (&St revision ) Code of practice for design and construction of foundations in soils: General requirement ( third rem'sion) Code of practice for structural use of unreinforced masonry ( third revision ) Code of practice for sound insulation of non-industrial buildings Code of practice for flat-roof finish, mud phusJta ( second reuision ) Sand for masonry mortars (&t revision ) Code of actice for construction of jack-ar CF type of building Aoor or roof (jifd r&on ) Heavy duty burnt clay building bricks ( third m&ion ) Code of ractice for preparation and use o P masonry mortars (first revision ) Masonry cement ( second revision ) Guide for heat insulation of nonindustrial buildings (Jirst revision ) Fly ash for use as pozzolana and admixture ( JirJt recision ) Lime-pozzolana mixture ( first revision ) Code of practice for selection installation and maintenance of timber doors and windows Rapid hardening Portland cement ( jirst revision ) Hydrophobic Portland cement (Jkst revision )

( Clause 2 )
LIST OF REFERRED IS No.
226 : 1975 269 : 1976 383 : 1970 Tide Structural steel ( standard quality ) ( jiih revision ) Ordinary and low heat Portland cement ( third reuision ) Coarse and fine aggregates from natural sources for concrete ( second f&on ) Lead sheet and strip : Part II For chemical purposes other than ( second revision ) Expanded metal steel sheets for general putposer ( second retion ) Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement : Part 1 Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars ( third revision ) Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement : Part 2 Hard drawn steel wire ( third revision ) Portland slag cement ( third rtiion ) Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third raGion ) Building limes ( third revision ) Common burnt clay building bricks (Jifth revision ) Code of practice for design and construction of shalJow foundations in soils ( other than raft, ring and shell ) ( second mision ) Code of practice for fixing glazing of metal ( steel and miniurn doors, windows ventilators ) and aluand INDIAN

IS No. 1580 : 1969

1630 : 1984 1635 : 1975

405 (P";9'721' : 412 : 1975 432 ( Part8; ) :

1642 : 1988

1649 : 1962

1904 : 1986

432 (Py;A):

1905 : 1987

455 : 1976 456 : 1978 712 : 1984 1077 : 1991 1080 : 1985

1950 : 1962 2115 : 1980 2116: 1980

2118 : 1980

2180 : 1988 2250 : 1981

1081 : 1960

1212 : 1978

Methods for testing tar and bituminous materials : Determination of loss on heating (jrst reuision ) Bitumen felts for water-proofing and damp-proo6ng ( third revision ) CaJcined revision ) cJay pozzoJana cement ( second ( second

3466 : 1988 3792 : 1978 3812 : 1981 4098 : 1983 4913 : 1968

1322 : 1982 1344 : 1981 1489 : 1976 1566 : 1982

Portland-pozzolana m&ion )

8041 : 1978 8013 : 1978

Hard-drawn steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement ( second revision ) 24

Bureau of Indian Staudrrdr

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau oflndiun StundurdsAct, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality cert&cation of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standardsiare also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reafftrmed when such review indicates that no changes are need&, if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. CED 13 ( 4782 ).
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amund No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 323 76 17 323 3841 337 84 99,337 85 61 337 86 26, 337 86 62 60 38 43 I 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 2351519,2352315 832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 Regional Cl&es: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/l4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

BHUBANESHWAR. BHOPAL. Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed rt Now India Print& Press, Khurja, India

