IS 5229 : 1998 (Reaffirmed 2002)

AERIAL ROPEWAYS FOR TRANSPORTATION OF PASSENGERS - CONTINUOUS MOVEMENT MONOCABLE WITH AUTOMATIC GRIPS - CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
( First Revision )

ICS

93.100

0 BIS 1998

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

January

1998

Price Group

5

Continuous Bulk Conveying, tee, HMD 6

Elevating,

Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment

Sectional Commit-

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This standard was first published in 1969. This revision has been undertaken -4.2.8 and also to update the standards referred in the standard. to incorporate modifications in

An aerial ropeway is a special form of railway in which the traffic carrying unit is a steel wire rope whereas in the railway line, the path of the traffic is formed by rails laid along the ground. A ropeway uses a tensioned wire rope supported above the ground. Aerial ropeways are particularly useful in regions where the facility of surmounting natural barriers gives them a great advantage over railways or roads, both of which may need heavy civil engineering work to secure easy gradients. Aerial ropeways are inexpensive to maintain; their power demand is modest and they are not seriously affected by adverse climatic conditions. There are two main types of aerial ropeways: monocable and bicable. The choice of a particular type depends upon the length and topography of the route, the type and intensity of the traffic, and in many cases, the relative inaccessibility of the site. The monocable ropeway consists of an endless loop of rope which is maintained in continuous circulation by a grooved driving sheave at one end of the rope and kept under tension by a sheave suitably tensioned at the other end. Tension is necessary not only to keep the rope clear off the ground when it is carrying traffic, but also to prevent it from slipping on the driving sheave. Between the two ends of the route, rope is supported on pulleys carried on trestles. These are positioned so as to ease gradients and also to maintain ground clearance where the profile is regular. In the type of monocable ropeways covered by this code, there is a continuous-movement carrying-hauling (transport) rope to which vehicles are automatically coupled when the vehicle leaves the station and gets detached on arrival. A list of related standards has been given in Annex A for information.

IS 5229 : 1998

Indian Standard

AERIALROPEWAYSFORTRANSPORTATION OFPASSENGERS -CONTINUC'JS MOVEMENTMONOCABLEWITH AUTOMATIC GRIPS-CODEOFPRACTICE FORDESIGNANDCONSTRUCTION
(First Revision)
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the construction and design of continuous movement monocable ropeways in which the vehicles are automatically coupled to the rope on leaving the station and get automatically detached on arrival at the station meant for the transportation of passengers. 1.1.1 Nothing in this standard is intended to contravene any provisions of the statutory regulations wherever they are in force. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards lis<ed in Annex necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions in addition to those given in IS 7649 shall apply. 3.1 Line It is route alignment terminals. 3.2 Inspecting of the ropeways between two A are 4.2 Route and Profile of the Ropeway 4.2.1 As a rule, the axis ~of the line in its plan position shall be straight. However, horizontal deflections of the path of the travel may be permitted as regards supporting trestles provided that the minimum load on the roller train satisfies the requirements of 4.51, but with a minimum load of 2 kN, and that the angle of deflection does not exceed 30 minutes (0.9 percent) per trestle. This effect shall not be cumulative. 4.2.2 The profile of the terrain chosen for constructing the installation and that of the line shall be as regular as possible. Such profile shall allow, in the event of rescue of passengers, their unloading by normal means in order to ensure their safe descent to earth as well as easy access by foot to the departure station for the passengers getting down to earth. 4.2.3 The maximum slope of the loaded rope (that is, the total load is uniformly distributed along the rope itself) shall not exceed 100 percent. 4.2.4 The free passage of the vehicles on the trestles of the line shall be ensured even when they are inclined at 12' towards the inside or the ~outside 1 4 GENERAL DESIGN of Installations 4.1 Rules for the Construction

4.1.1 Each part of the ropeway equipment shall be correctly designed and constructed. The quality of the materials to be used for its construction shall be carefully chosen. of the statutory 4.1.2 On the request supervising authorities or of the purchaser, a certificate of a recognized testing laboratory shall be supplied by the constructor as regards the characteristics of all material used and essential to the safety of the installation.

Authority

Duly authorized representative of the purchaser or any other competent authority recognized by the statutory regulations to inspect the aerial ropeway installation and determine its acceptability for operation. 3.3 Ropeway The system of overhead ropes on which carriers are used for the purpose of carriage of passengers, animals or goods and includes trestles, ropes, carriers, stations, offices, machinery and other works used for the purpose of or in connection with such aerial ropeway.

IS5229:1998
of the line. There shall be a clearance of at least 0.5 m between all mountings and supports when the vehicle is swung by 12' in the case of open vehicles. In the case of the closed vehicle, the clearance shall be as agreed to between the ropeway promoter and the inspecting authority. 4.2.5 In order to ensure the free movement of passengers and personnel in the station, the side clearance between the space occupied by the vehicle and fixed obstacles belonging to the installation shall be not less than 0.40 m measured towards the interior of the line and lm measured towards the outside. If the vehicles are not guided, these values shall be maintained even when the vehicle is inclined transversely at 12'. 4.2.6 Along the line, the distance between the two paths of travel of the carrying-hauling rope, shall be such as to ensure a clearance of at least 1 m between vehicles swung by 12' towards one another. Such clearance is required for spans having a length of not more than 200 m. As for longer spans, the clearance shall be increased by 0.20 m for each additional 100 m or fraction thereof. 4.2.7 A minimum clearance of 30 cm between the space occupied by a loaded vehicle, swung longitudinally by 15', and obstacles lying on the vertical longitudinal plane, shall be ensured either along the line or in the stations. 4.2.8 In closed vehicle installations, the height above ground shall not be greater than 25 m. However, this limit may be increased in small stretches not exceeding 10 percent ofactual or slope length of the ropeway provided that the passenger safety is not compromised, but in no case shall the height above ground be greater than 40 m and in the case of accidental stoppage of the system, the rescue personnel shall be able to reach the vehicles and get the passengers to safety without being helped by the passengers (see Fig. 1). 4.2.8.1 For systems where the vehicles are open (chair lifts, cabin lifts, etc), the requirements of 3.2.8 of IS 5228 shall be applicable. 4.2.8.2 In a closed vehicle installation, the height above ground may be more than 40 m if such length does not exceed 20 percent of the total system length provided a suitably designed and approved rescue cable pathway below the closed vehicle is provided. This 20 percent would be in addition to the relaxation given in 4.2.8 for height above ground being between 25 m and 40 m in small streches. For guidance refer to Fig. 1 and 4.6.3. 4.2.9 The minimum vertical clearance between the space occupied by a vehicle and the terrain lying below with obstacles existing over it, such as trees, rocks, snow drifts, etc, referred to the lowest outline of the vehicle shape and determined taking into account the most unfavourable conditions or assuming a conventional increase of 20 percent of the amount of static sag due to possible swing on account of braking and starting, shall be not less than 2.50 m. Such limit, however. may be reduced~to 1.50 m in case of places inaccessible or forbidden to public. The minimum clearances are normally not available at entry and exit points of the vehicles from the stations. Such places shall be cordoned off by fencing. 4.2.9.1 As communication regards crossings with other paths or with serial conductors, a

TRESTLE

TRESTLE

TRESTLE

c

CL<

20X

OF

ROPEWAY

LENGTH

.

FIG. 1 SCHEMATICDIAGRAM OF RESCUECABLE PATHWAY

2

IS 5229 : 1998 minimum clearance shall exist in order to take into account requirements of 4.7. 4.3 Maximum Speed and Minimum Between Vehicles Spacing and each of the grips shall be capable of transmitting 100 percent of the load. 4.5 Rope Guiding 4.5.1 The load exerted by the carrying-hauling rope on each supporting roller shall be not less than 350 N. However, the total load on each supporting roller train shall benot less than the value in N equal to the length in metres of the spans adjoining the trestle under consideration and in no case less than 1.4 kN. This minimum load shall be respected under even the most unfavourable load conditions of the line and considering also effects due to starting and braking and wind loads. 4.5.1.1 When a trestle of the supporting type has its top under the straight line which links the top of the adjoining trestles, the load exerted by the rope shall satisfy not only the minimum values far each roller and roller train mentioned in the previous paragraph, but shall be of such amount to ensure that in the most unfavourable load conditions and considering also the effects due to starting and braking, the rope does not come off the rollers even when there is an increase of tension equal to 30 percent. 4.5.2 The roller train shall be provided with devices which may enable the carrying-hauling rope to recover its normal position should it come off the rollers. Such devices shall, at the same time, cause the interruption of the safety and signalling c~ircuit with the consequent immediate stopping of the motion of the system. The above devices may be omitted when the depth of the groove of the roller is more than 1.2 times that of the diameter of the rope. 4.5.2.1 The roller train shall also be provided with guiding devices which can prevent the rope from coming off towards the interior of the line. Such devices shall be preferably installed near the rollers &rated at the end of the roller train. maximum load exerted by the 4.5.3 The carrying-hauling rope on the rollers shall not be more than 2 kN per roller having the groove without soft material lining. When the groove has lining, the allowable load may be higher (for instance, as regards rubber of good quality, such load may reach the value of 4 x d x D, expressed in N, when d is the diameter of the rope and D the diameter of the roller, both are expressed in cm). The angle of deflection of the rope on each roller shall be not more than 2"30' for rollers without lining and 4"30' for rollers having soft material lining. 4.5.3.1 All rollers shall on rolling bearings preferably sealed be mounted for life.

4.3.1 The maximum speed adopted for the system shall be consistent with safe working of all mechanical elements and shall not induce abnormal loads in the carrying-hauling rope or any other part of the system. In no case shall the maximum speed exceed the values given below: 1) 2) System with closed gondolas having locked doors Chairlift and system with open gondolas with adequate protection Others 6m/s
5tdS

3)

3mls

4.3.2 The variation of the speed of the vehicles during acceleration or deceleration, shall be not such as to give rise to any signs of discomfort in the passengers. 4.3.3 In case the stations are not provided with mechanism for regulating the release of vehicles on the line as per designed interval, it shall be ensured that under no circumstances, the distance separating two successive vehicles shall be at least I m considering 1.5' lateral swing of two vehicles towards each other under the conditions of emergency stopping. 4.4 Capacity of Vehicles

4.4.1 The calculation of the various components shall be done, taking into account the weight of 80 kg per passenger. For installations situated in areas not subject to adverse climatic conditions, the weights may be reduced to 70 kg per person subject to an agreement between the ropeway promoter and the inspecting authority. 4.4.2 The vehicles may be of the following types:

4 b)

c>
4

chairs with one seat or more seats for passangers not exceeding four, open cabins with roof and railing and meant for 1 to 6passengers semi enclosed cabins with roof, railing and sides not fully covered and meant for 1 to 6 passangers, and closed cabins with small windows with a capacity of 1 to 6 passengers.

4.4.3 Vehicles with a capacity of more than 2 passengers shall be fixed to the supporting-hauling rope by means of a double grip when the greatest slope of the loaded cable is greater than 40 percent

3

IS 5229 : 1998 Alternatively suitable arrangements lubricating the bearings.. shall be made for route of the ropeway shall be adequately marked, taking into account any restriction imposed by the authority havingjurisdiction over the airports. 4.8.2 The areas exposed to the dangers of natural forces ( avalanches, landslides, rock falls, storms, earthquakes, etc) shall be avoided as far as possible. 4.8.3 When the dangers indicated in 4.8.2 exist, suitable protection devices shall be provided. 4.9 Wind Action 4.9.1 Under normal conditions, it is necessary to take into account the wind action, considering the following values of pressure: a) Installation not in service : p =I .2 kPa b) Installation in service : p = 0.3 kPa (for inclination of vehicles, see 4.2.6) 4.9.2 In areas subjected to storms and where the wind velocity exceeds frequently 150 km/h, it is necessary to assume the pressure of the wind as maximum value ascertained in the area under consideration. 4.9.3 In the calculation of wind action on the cables, the surface area to be considered shall be the diametral surface of the cable multiplied by the factor C, = 1.1. 4.9.4 The uplift caused by the breeze/wind on the wire rope and the carrier shall be considered if the conditions specified in 4.51 are satisfied. 5 WIRE ROPES 5.1 General 5.1.1 As far as possible, all wire ropes shall be in single piece and of non-rotating construction. 51.2 Before the wire ropes are put into service, they shall be checked by suitable non-destructive means, like magneto-inductive test, to ensure that no rope with broken wires is put into service. 51.3 The lubricants incorporated in the wire rope during manufacture or use shall not exert any corrosive action on the material of the rope. The lubrication of the wire rope shall be done in conformity with a good established practice and according to particular requirements. 5.1.4 Care shall be taken to avoid any twisting or kinking of the rope while unreeling the rope in service. 5.2 Carrying-Hauling ( Transport ) Wire Rope

4.54 The stability of the carrying-hauling rope on the roller train shall be ensured even when the vehicles are disconnected from the wire rope. 4.6 Rescue of Passengers Along the Line

4.6.1 When designing an installation, suitable means for rescue shall be provided (ladders, capstans, etc), to facilitate the rescue of passengers who might remain trapped along the line on account of unforeseen stopping of the installation, in a reasonably short time and in the easiest and safest manner. The use of such equipment shall not require the help of the passengers. 46.2 The chosen rescue equipment shall be such that the rescue operation can be carried out in a perfect manner even at the most critical points of theroute over water spread, rigged terrain, high elevation above ground, etc. 4.6.3 When the vertical clearance between the ground and the bottom of the loaded vehicle exceeds 40 m and a cable pathway below the vehicle is not provided in accordance with 4.2.8.2, a suitable rescue system with a rescue cabin shall be provided to bring the passengers to a safer place by transporting to a nearby trestle or station. 4.7 Crossings 4.7.1 The crossing of routes, railways, waterways or other ropeways shall be avoided as far as possible. When it is not possible, the clearances shall be determined in such a manner that there is no danger for any vehicle using the various ways enumerated. 4.7.2 The crossings and paralleling with railways, highways, ropeways or overhead electrical lines shall be so done that no mutual discomfort results either in course of normal operation or rescue operation or during installation operations. Wherever the local conditions are favourable and the characteristics of the electri,cal line permit it, the overhead electrical lines shall be replaced by underground cables in consistancy with prevalent statutory regulations. 4.7.3 Long paralleling with electrical overhead lines or contact lines shall be avoided as far as possible. The distance of separation shall be determined in such a way that the safety of both the installations is assured. Any phenomenon of induction shall not in any way affect the continuity or integrity of the telephonic or safety systems on either of the installations. 4.8 Dangerous Areas

5.2.1 The wire rope conforming to IS 10891 (Part 1) shall be of stranded construction with a fibre core. The fibre core shall conform to IS 1804. 5.2.2 The nominal breaking strength of the wire rope at the time of putting into service shall be not less than five times the maximum axial tension met with in 4

4.8.1 In the proximity of airports or in areas where aeroplanesfly atlow altitudeorland frequently, the

IS 5229 : 1998 service, calculated for the most unfavourable conditions which may occur by the combination of the following factors: ensured that the total weight of the vehicle carrying its full complement of passengers shall not exceed one-tenth of the minimum tension of the carrying-hauling ropes. 5.5.1.1 As regards transverse loads transmitted by the line rollers on the carrying-hauling rope, the requirement of 4.5.3 shall also be satisfied. 5.5.2 Sheaves

a> Counterweight;
b) Components cl 4
of the ropeway and that of the loaded vehicles considered conventionally as uniformly distributed along~the rope; The frictional resistance in the tensioning device; and Resistance to motion exerted by the line rollers ( in the case of rollers having their grooves lined with soft material, this value can be assumed to be 2.5 percent of the load on the rolls). Adequate amount of tension to limit the sag in the wire rope caused by its self weight and load supported by it. or Regulating Ropes

5.5.2.1 The diameter of the driving or return sheaves shall be not less than 80 times that of the wire rope and 800 times that of the outer wires of the wire rope. 5.5.2.2 The deflection sheaves of the tensioning or regulating ropes of the stranded type shall have a diameter of not less than 40 times that of the tensioning rope and 600 times that of the diameter of the outer wires. Such sheaves shall be lined either with leather, wood or any other soft material. 5.5.2.3 The sheaves on which the tensioning or regulating ropes are normally stationary during the operation and the drums on which the regulating ropes are wound, shall have a diameter of not less than 20 times that of the rope. 5.6 Splices and Rope Termination 5.6.1 All splices shall personnel. The length of I 300 times that of the between two continuous 3 600 times the diameter be made by experienced a splice shall be not less than rope diameter. The distance splices shall be not less than of the rope.

e)

5.3 Tensioning

5.3.1 The tensioning or regulating ropes shall be of round strand, ordinary lay type. Ropes of the Lang's lay type may be used only when the rotation of either the counterweights or the coupling to the carrying-hauling rope is prevented. 5.3.2 The nominal breaking strength of the tensioning or regulating ropes xshall be at least 5.5 times the maximum axial load in the rope during operation. 5.4 Telephonic and Signal Cables

5.4.1 The telephonic and signal cables shall be of the stranded type and protected against corrosion. 5.4.2 The nominal breaking strength of the cables shall not be less than 3.3 times the maximum axial load met with in service. 5.4.3 Care shall be taken to ensure that the telephonic and signal cables do not come into contact either with the vehicles or with the carrying-hauling rope even under the worst conditions of weather. Therefore, when these cables are connected with line trestles, the height of the support shall be so chosen as to avoid any interference between the cables and vehicles or carrying-hauling ropes which can affect the safety and regularity of operation. 5.5 Loads and Pulley Diameter 5.5.1 Transverse Loads

5.6.1.1 Only one spliced joint along a closed loop formed by the carrying-hauling rope is desirable. However if the length of the ropeway exceeds 1 km, two splice joints may be permitted but under no circumstances, that is, even after repair of the rope after an accident, the total number of splice joints in the closed loop of the rope shall not exceed four splice joints. 5.6.2 Rope socketing shall be done with the utmost care. Only organizations which can prove their experience as regards the proper making of rope sockets shall be entrusted with this operation unless the ropeway promoters themselves have well-trained and experienced personnel for carrying out this operation. 5.7 Testing and Acceptance The ropes used shall conform Standards. 5.8 Replacement of Ropes of Ropes to the relevant Indian

In case of the vehicle with only one grip for attaching to the carrying-hauling rope, the weight supported by the grip shall not exceed one-twentieth of the minimum tension of the rope calculated for the most unfavourable conditions of load but with the installation under normal conditions of operation. When there are two grips for each vehicle, it shall be 5

5.8.1 Generally a rope should be withdrawn from service when it is considered that: a) the loss of strength in the rope due to wear or corrosion or both is approaching one-sixth of the original strength;

IS 5229 : 1998

b) the loss of strength in the rope due to fatigue,
surface embrittlement or cracked and broken wires of any kind is approaching one-tenth of the original strength; the outer wires have lost about one-third of their depth as a result of any kind of deterioration; the outer wires are becoming loose and displaced for any reason; the rope has become kinked, distorted or damaged and the damaged piece cannot be removed; examination of the rope leaves any doubt as to its safety for any reason what-so-ever; and number of wires rupture in the rope exceed the limit specified in 8.1.6 of IS 3973.

variation of the speed in the most unfavourable conditions, shall not exceed 4 percent in case of an electrical motor and 5 percent in case of non-electrical drive. 6.2.2.1 In case the main motor is not of the electrical type and the installation is self-acting, a suitable dissipating device shall be provided to absorb the excess energy. 6.2.2.2 Starting under the most unfavourable conditions of load shall be guaranteed whatever the type of drive used. 6.2.2.3 When the main prime mover is not in action, the normal transportation of passengers is forbidden. 6.2.2.4 In case the installation is of the self-acting type, the continuous braking shall be ensured, the driver himself shall exert the braking action. 6.2.2.5 For the purpose of inspection installation, a uniform speed not exceeding shall be maintained. of the 0.6 m/s

c>
4

e>

58.2 Considering the condition of rope, the rope shall be discarded from service in accordance with the recommendation of 8 of IS 3973. 6 STATIONS 6.1 General 6.1.1 According to the climate of the area where the ropeway is situated, suitable shelters for passengers and personnel shall be provided. In every case, stations shall be provided with water-closet. 6.1.2 The station machinery, such as mechanical parts of the driving gear, electrical equipment, ropes and vehicles shall not be a source of danger to the passengers and ropeway personnel. The passenger entrance shall not cross the path of the travel of the vehicles without ensuring proper safety to avoid any possible accident to the passengers. 6.1.3 The whole of the driving gear and of the return or deflection devices shall be protected against bad weather. Moreover, care shall be taken to prevent the entrance to the machine room of unauthorized persons to avoid any possible accident to them. 6.1.4 The ropeway operator shall be located where he will have the best possible view of the route. The controls and communicating devices shall be within his reach without him having to leave his position. 6.1.5 Fire hazard shall be reduced as possible. A sufficient number of extinguishers guaranteed to function effectively shall be kept ready in case of need and installed in places which are readily accessible. 6.2 Driving and Braking

6.2.3 Working of the main motor shall be stopped automatically when any brake is on or when any safety device operates. 6.2.4 Rope Adhesion on the Driving Sheave

6.2.4.1 The friction coefficient between the rope and the surface of the groove of the driving sheave is as follows: a) Grooves with leather lining = 0.15 b) Grooves with rubber lining or with similar = 0.25 material having a high friction coefficient. 6.2.4.2 Grooves with a special material lining to

A higher coefficient experience.

may be permitted

according

6.2.4.3 The contact angle of the rope on the driving sheave shall be such as to ensure that even under the most unfavourable combination of circumstances, the required power is transmitted to the rope. 6.2.5 As far as possible, chains or belts shall be not used for power transmission. However in the case of small powers, the use of V-belts is permitted provided at least four are used simultaneously for transmitting the power. 6.2.6 Two different friction brakes shall be used to cause both the normal stopping and emergency one. One of these brakes is called `service brake' and the other `emergency, brake'. Each of such brakes shall be able to ensure the safe stopping of thesystem's motion under most unfavourable conditions of loading. In. any case, the nominal average deceleration shall not exceed 0.5 m/s2. 6

6.2.1 The driving gear shall be provided with an emergency motor fed by auxiliary power or an I.C. -engine which can ensure areduced operation as needed even when there is something wrong with the main motor or even in case of power failure. 6.2.2 The speed of travel shall be maintained constant irrespective of any load conditions. In practice, the

IS 5229 : 1998 6.2.6.1 In order to avoid any sudden braking with consequent violent swinging of the vehicles, the average declaration during emergency braking shall that the not exceed 0.5 mis2. It is recommended braking effort shall be automatically proportional to the load conditions of the line or applied gradually. 6.2.6.2 The `emergency brake' shall act directly on the driving sheave; its braking effort shall~be actuated by a counterweight or springs and its operation shall be carried out in a manner that its regular working can be automatically and constantly checked. This brake shall act automatically when the speed of the carrying-hauling rope exceeds the permitted value by 15 percent. It shall also be capable of normal operation. 6.2.6.3 The `service brake' besides ensuring the holding of the driving gear when the installation is stopped shall work when the feeding power fails or when the value of the absorbed current is too high. Moreover, it shall also work automatically when the remote controls installed in the station are in action or when any safety device is operated (see 6.2 ). 6.2.6.4 The safety factor of all parts forming brakes shall not be less than 5. the out in order to ensure uniform tension among such ropes. distribution of the

6.3.5 The foundations either of tensioning devices or those of the anchorage shall have a safety factor of 1.5 in respect of shifting and overturning. Such safety is to be calculated on the basis of a conventional assumption that these foundations are free, that is, there is no lateral movement of the earth. 6.4 Other Requirements 6.4.1 As regards the free travel of the vehicles in stations, the provisions of 4.2.5 shall be applied. 6.4.2 In stations, the correct coupling of each vehicle to the carrying-hauling rope shall be ensured by a device combining two distinct systems of control. For example, one will control geometrically the correct positions of the group and the other will check that the coupling obtained has sufficient resistance to sliding. When these controls ensure the stoppage of the system without retaining the vehicles, the line shall have at the exit of the station, a route in counterslope, or at least horizontal, and length greater than the distance of braking in the most unfavourable load conditions. The device shall ensure that the resistance to sliding is not less than 1.2 times that of the component of the vehicle's weight measured along the wire rope axis on the maximum slope. 6.4.3 Care shall be taken to avoid the grip on splice as far as possible. 6.4.4 When the grip is gripped on to the carrying-hauling rope, the speed of the vehicle shall not differ by more than 20 percent that of the wire rope. 6.4.5 A suitable device should be provided at the station which at the entrance of the vehicle in the station, automatically stops the movement of the system if the portion of decoupling is not functioning properly. Care shall be taken to ensure that the wire rope is not subjected to dangerous loads because of these devices. 6.4.6 Care shall be taken to ensure that there is no reversal of the vehicle after decoupling. The minimum required spacing between the~vehicles shall always be ensured. Vehicles containing passengers shall not be allowed to pass on points whose position is not maintained by a mechanical block, such as a bolt. 6.4.7 The drive and return sheaves on which the ropes are wound shall be either cast or fabricated construction. They shall be mounted on rolling bearings. 6.4.8 The stations shall be provided with a place for garaging the reserve vehicles ready for putting on line. In addition, suitable devices shall be provided as a part

6.2.7 A suitable automatic device which prevents the reverse motion of the system in normal service, shall be installed. The reversal in, the direction of the movement shall not be possible except by intentional manipulation. This device as well as the safety brake are not obligatory when the installation is not selfacting even in case of a breakage of any element of transmission as also when one part of the rope is completely loaded and the other has no vehicle attached to it. 6.3 Rope Tensioning and Anchorage Devices

6.3.1 The spaces in which the counterweights travel (in pit or construction above the ground) shall be protected from water, snow, ice and from any other material. It shall be ensured that the above elements do not accumulate inside these spaces. These spaces shall be provided with guardrails in order to prevent the entrance of unauthorized persons. 6.3.2 The mobility of the counterweights ensured at all times. shall be

6.3.3 The travel of the counterweight shall be determined taking into account the maximum variation which may be due to the sag of each span, the surrounding temperature of the zone where the installation lies (minimum variation to be considered is 60 deg) and the elastic stretch of the rope. 6.3.4 Where several tensioning ropes are laid in parallel, all the necessary precautions shall be carried

7

IS 5229 : 1998 of the station structure itself for maintaining the tackle for easy manoeuvring of wire ropes and other mechanical and electrical elements of the station. 6.4.9 All suitable equipment for the inspection of the power elements shall be provided, at least in one of the stations. 7 TRESTLES 7.1 Loads In designing trestles, the following loads shall be considered: 4 The weight of the trestle and the pressure exerted by the ropes. b) The whole of the stresses due to friction which occur during the motion of the carryinghauling rope. These stresses can be determined with a sufficient margin of safety as 2.5 percent of the load on the rollers. of vehicles travelling with cl Weight maximum load (considered conventionally static). 4 Load due to wind and load of snow or ice (for wind action on the ropes, see 4.9.3). Load imposed by communication cable if provided. rope are not displaced by more than 20 percent of the wire rope diameter. 7.3 Construction 7.3.1 The number of trestles, their position, their height and their construction are determined by the requirements of the -route and the layout. Wooden trestles or trestles which are guyed, shall not be used. 7.3.2 In case the trestles have metallic framework, the thickness of the open profile shall not be less than 5 mm, while in the case of closed profile, it shall not be less than 2.5 mm. The interior of the latter shall be adequately protected against corrosion. 7.3.3 The anchorage of the trestles on the concrete foundations or on the rock shall be carefully made. The anchor bolts of concrete foundations shall just be above the ground. 8 VEHICLES 8.1 Safety Factor For all the components constituting the vehicle, the safety factor shall be at least 5 under the static conditions. This safety factor may have to be increased suitably to take into account the dynamic conditions to assure the desired degree of safety. 8.2 Construction 8.2.1 The vehicles shall be provided with devices which prevent the falling overboard of passengers. The chairs especially, shall be provided with closing bars and footrests. In the case of cabins provided with windows, they shall be suitably protected. 8.2.2 The hangers shall be of sufficient length as to guarantee conformity to the requirements of 4.2.4 to 4.2.6 and also ensure that roller guides, etc, are always outside the reach of the hand of the passengers. 8.2.3 The tubes used in the hangers shall be seamless and their interior shall be protected against corrosion. 8.3 Couplings/Grips 8.3.1 The form of the grip and the profile of the grooves of the roller shall be adapted to one another, taking into account specially the maximum lateral swing permitted for the vehicles. 8.3.2 If only one grip is used for attaching the vehicle to the carrying-hauling rope, it shall be capable of offering resistance to sliding at least equal to twice the component of the loaded vehicle weighed along the axis of the wire rope and the maximum slope and in no case, this resistance to sliding be less than that of the loaded vehicle. In case of vehicle with double grip, it 8

e>

7.1.1 The requirements of 4.9 regarding the wind action on trestles shall be supplemented by the requirements due to particular characteristic conditions of each installation (zones exposed to storm, snow, etc). It shall be useful to take into account the requirements of wind action on similar equipment like electric transmissi,on, traverse hoists, etc. 7.2 Safety 7.2.1 The metal parts of the trestle shall have a safety factor defined as the ratio of strength of the metal to the stress under most unfavourable conditions of not less than 3 when the installation is in service and 2.2 when the installation is not in operation. 7.2.2 Under the most unfavourable conditions of loading, whether in service or not, the trestles shall have a minimum safety factor of 1.5 times to overturning displacement or subsidence. Such calculations shall take into account the lateral movement of the earth except in the case of compact terrain. 7.2.3 The elastic deformation of the trestles, in particular those due to torsion which happens during normal conditions of operation, shall not be such as to endanger the safety of the guides and the stability of the ropes. The maximum angle of deformation due~to torsion shall be limited in such a manner that the ends of the shoes for supporting the carrying-hauling

IS 5229 : 1998 shall be ensured that when the action of the one grip accidentally becomes deficient, the other ensures the safety factor of at least 1.5 times that of the slide. The required resistance to sliding shah be maintained even under the supposition that the diameter of the rope is conventionally reduced by one-tenth of the nominal diameter. 8.4 In order to distinguish they shall be successively the vehicles numbered. on the line, hook up with the public network, wherever the latter exists. 9.2 All safety devices along the length of the line and in stations shall be incorporated in a continuous circuit energized permanently so that when any one device fails or the signal line fails, the system automatically comes to a halt. 9.3 All the metallic portions of the installation, with theexception of signal cables, shall be directly earthed. 9.4 All the elements of the installation suitably protected against lightening. shall, be

9 COMMUNICATIONS, SAFETY CIRCUIT AND EARTHING OF METALLIC PARTS 9.1 The stations shall be linked to each other by telephone. At least, one of the stations shall have a

ANNEX A (Foreword, and Clause 2)
INDIAN STANDARDS
IS No.

ON WIRE ROPES AND WIRE PRODUCTS IS No. (Part 2) : 1974 3973 : 1984 Socketing revision) Title with white metal (first

Title Fibre cores for steel wire ropes (second revision) Galvanized steel wire strand for signalling purposes Cfirst revision) Thimbles for wire ropes (first revision) Buldog grips Specification (second revision) Glossary of terms relating to wire ropes (first revision) Drop forged sockets for wire ropes for general engineering purposes (first revision) Rigging screws and stretching screws (first revision) Locked coil winding ropes (first revision) Recommendations for socketing of wire ropes: Socketing with zinc (first revision)

1804 : 1982 2265 : 1978 2315 : 1978 2361 : 1994 2363 : 1981 2485 : 1979

Code of practice of selection, installation and maintenance of wire ropes (first revision ) Code of practice forconstruction of continuous movement monocable ropeways with fixed grips intended for transportation of passengers Methods for splicing of wire ropes: Hand splicing of wire ropes legs Wire rope sling ferrule-secured eye terminal of terms Glossary connection with aerial and cableways with

5228 : 1969

m5245 (Part 1) : 1969 (Part 2) : 197 1

3121 : 1981 3626 : 1978 3937 (Part 1) : 1974

7649 ' 1975

used in ropeways

10891 (PM 1) : 1984

wire ropes for aerial Steel ropeways: Part 1 Haulage ropes

Bureau of Indian Standards B1S is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 01 grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the, need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also that reviewed periodically; a standard alon, 0 with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. HMD 06 ( 0281 ).

of Irtdiatz Stardards
marking and quality

Act,

19X6 to promote

certification

of goods

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 Telephones : 323 01 3 1, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 Regional Central Offices : Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone I 323 76 17 323 38 41

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110 002

Eastern

: l/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700 054 : SC0 335336, Sector 34-A. CHANDIGARH 160 022

3378499,3378561 337 56 26,337 91 20 60 38 43 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 235 15 19,23523 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 8327891,8327892

Northern

Southern

: C. I. T. Campus,

IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600 113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, MUMBAI 400 093

Marol,

Andheri

(East) I

Branches

BANALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. : AHMADABAD. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printograph, New Delhi-5 (INDIA)

