IS 12763 : 1989 IEC Pub 891 ( 1987 )

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

PROCEDURES ,FOR TEMPERATURE AND IRRADIANCE CORRECTIONS TO MEASURED I-V CHARACTERISTICS OF CRYSTALLINE SILICON PHOTOVOLTAIC DEVICES
UDC 621-383.5 : 621*31739

@ BIS 1990

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

MANAK BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

March 1990

PriceGroup

IS 12763 : 1989 IEC Pub 891 ( 1987)

Indian Standard PROCEDURES FOR TEMPERATURE AND IRRADIANCE CORRECTIONS TO MEASURED I-V CHARACTERISTICS OF CRYSTALLINE SILICON PHOTOVOLTAIC DEVICES
NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard, which is identical with IEC Pub 891 (1987) Procedures for temperature and irradiance corrections to measured I-V characteristics of crystalline silicon photovoltaic devices', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 20 November 1989 on the recommendation of the Solar Photovoltaic Energy Systems Sectional Committee (ETDC 68) and approval of the Electrotechnical Division Council. Considerable progress has been made by the concerned agencies in this country in harnessing solar energy for the betterment of rural life. Solar photovoltaics power technology particularly, has considerable scope in areas where transport of electrical energy by conventional means is not cost effective. Production and development of PV systems in stand-alone or grid connected modes has been gradually on the increase, thereby necessitating the need for national standards that would guide the technical and quality parameters of components and sub-systems. There is also a need to prepare standards on methods of evaluation of PV system parameters and associated characteristics that would enable purchasers to assess the degree of performance that could be expected out of a design. This Indian Standard is one amongst the first series of standards finalized by the Solar Photovoltaic Energy Systems Sectional Committee. The text of IEC standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they should be read

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in lndian Standards, the current practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. CROSS REFERENCE In this Indian Standard, the following International Standard is referred to. Read in its place the following:
International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Correspondence Identical '

IEC Pub 27 Letter symbols to be used in electrical technology

IS 3722 Letter symbols and signs used in electrical technology

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS 12763 : 1989 IEC Pub 891 ( 1987 )

This standard gives procedures that should be followed for temperature and it-radiance corrections to the measured I-V characteristics of crystalline silicon photovoltaic devices only.

1. S&M? This standard describes the procedures for temperature and it-radiance corrections to the measured I-V characteristics of crystalline silicon photovoltaic devices. It includes procedures for the determination of temperature coefficients, internal series resistance and curve correction factor. These procedures are applicable over an n-radiance range of + 30% ofthe level at which the measurements were made.

Notes 1. -

These procedures are limited to linear devices. The photovoltaic devices include a single solar cell, a sub-assembly of solar cells, or a flat module. A different set of values apply for each type of device. Although the determination of temperature coefficients for a module (or sub-assembly ofcells) may be calculated from single cell measurements, it should be noted that the internal series resistance and curve correction factor should be separately measured for a module or subassembly of cell?, The term "test specimen" is used to denote any of these devices.

2. -

3. -

2.

Correction procedures The measured current-voltage characteristic shall be corrected to Standard Test Conditions or other selected temperature and it-radiance values by applying the following equations:

I2 =I, + Isc

I-F--l I
MR

+a(T2-

T,)

V2= VI ~ R, (1, - 1,) ~ Klz (T2 - T,) + /3 (T2 where
I,* I2r 4c I MR I SR *I T2 a VI v* :

T,)

are coordinates of points on the measured characteristics are coordinates of the corresponding points on the corrected characteristic is the measured short-circuit current of the test specimen is the measured short-circuit current of the reference device is the short-circuit current of the reference device at the standard or other desired irradiance is the measured temperature of the test specimen is the standard or other desired temperature

and /_I are the current and voltage temperature coefficients of the test specimen in the standard or other destred irradiance and within the temperature range of interest (4 is negative) is the internal series resistance of the test specimen is a curve correction factor

RS K

IS 12763 : 1989 IEC Pub 891 ( 1987)
Nofes I. 2. The units of all parameters of the preceding equations should be consistent. The general recommendations given in I E C Publication 27: Letter Symbols to be Used in Electrical Technology, are applicable, except where this publication gives different recommendations, in which case the latter should be followed. In I E C Publication 27, Vis recommended only as a reserve symbol. For the purpose of this standard the letter Vis recommended as an alternate chief symbol for voltage and derived quantities because many countries use it in the field of photovoltaic devices and generally in the field of electronics.

3. -

3.

Determination of temperature coefficients

The temperature coefficients of current (a) and voltage (j3)vary with irradiance and to a lesser extent, with temperature. The coefficients are best measured in simulated sunlight as specified in I E C Publication XXX (under consideration), using a minimum of two representative solar cells of the same area and configuration as those in the relevant module.

Notes I. 2. -

Any mismatch between the cells in a module could adversely affect the accuracy ofcorrections made to the I-V characteristics of the module. The use ofa pulsed simulator is preferred since it creates little additional heat that could affect the cell during the measurement.

The procedure is as follows:
3.1 3.2

Attach a suitable temperature sensor to the test cell so that the temperature can be measured to an accuracy of + 0.5 *C. Mount the test cell with good thermal contact to a temperature-controlled block and use the attached sensor to provide the control signal. the test plane. The normal of the test cell and the reference solar cell shall be parallel within t- 5 0, to the centre-line of the beam.

3.3. Mount the test cell as near as possible to a suitable reference solar cell with their active surfaces in

3.4 3.5

Set the irradiance at the test plane so that the reference solar cell (at 25 -t 5 OC)produces its calibrated short-circuit current at the desired level. With the test cell stabilized at or near the minimum temperature of interest, measure its shortcircuit current (Is,) and open-circuit voltage (Vo,).
Nofe. At sub-ambient temperature, precautions may be necessary to prevent condensation on the active surfaces ofthe test cell and reference solarcell. This precaution could be accomplished by passing dry nitrogen gas over the active surfaces or by enclosing the cells in a vacuum chamber.

3.6

Stabilize the test cell at a temperature approximately 10 OCabove the previous level and repeat Is, and Voc measurements. Repeat this procedure at approximately 10 OC increments up to the maximum temperature of interest. Repeat the steps in Sub-clauses 3.1 to 3.6 on each of the other test cells. Plot the values of Zscand V, as a function of temperature and construct a least squares fit curve through each set of data. From the slopes ofthe currem and the voltage curves and at a point midway between the minimum and maximum temperature of interest, calculate a, and &, the temperature coefficients for single
cells.

3.7 3.8 3.9

IS 12763 : 1989 IEC Pub 891 ( 1987 ) 3.10

For a module or other assembly of cells, calculate the temperature coefficients as follows:

where nP is the number of cells in parallel and n, the, number in series

4. Determination of .internal series resistance Rs may be determined in simulated sunlight by the following procedure: (see Figure 1, page 14). 4.1 Trace the current-voltage characteristic of the test specimen at room temperature and at two different irradiances (magnitudes need not be known). During the two measurements the cell temperature shall not differ by more than 2 *C. 4.2 Choose a point P on the higher characteristic, at a voltage slightly higher than VP_. Measure AZ, the difference between the current at this point and Zsc,. 4.3 Determme the point Q on the lower curve at which the current is equal to Zscz- Ly. 4.4 Measure the voltage displacement A V between points P and Q. 4.5 Calculate R,, from :
Rs, =
where I,, and Ix2 are the two short-circuit currents

AV kc, - k,

4.6 Repeat steps in Sub-clauses 4.3 to 4.5, using a characteristic taken at a third irradiance level and the same cell temperature, in combination with each of the first two curves to determine the R,, and R,, values.
Rs is the mean of the three calculated values : Rs,, R,, and Rs,.

5. Determination of curve correction factor K may be determined in simulated sunlight by the following procedure: 5.1 Trace the current-voltage characteristic of the test specimen at an n-radiance within -t 30% of the selected level and at three different temperatures ( T3, T, and Ts) over an interest range of at least 30 *c.
Note.- When measuring the characteristics of a module, precautions should be taken (for instance by enclosing the module

in a temperature controlled chamber with a transparent window) to ensure uniformity of the cell temperature within + 2 Oc of the intended level.

5.2 Using an assumed value of K (say 1.25 x 10-3 R/*C which is typical for a crystalline silicon cell) transpose the characteristic measured at temperature T3 to temperature T4 by applying the following equations:

where :

V,= V3 -

UtV,

-

T3)+P(T4

-

T3)

I,, V3 are coordinates of points on the Tr temperature characteristic
14, V, are coordinates of the corresponding points on the 7" temperature characteristic

IS 12763 : 1989 IEC Pub 891 ( 1987 ) 5.3 If the transposed T4 temperature characteristic does not coincide to the desired accuracy with that obtained by measurement, repeat step in Sub-clause 5.2 by inserting different values for K, until the transposed T4 temperature characteristic and the measured characteristic coincide. When the proper value of K has been determined, transpose the T3 and T, characteristics sequentially to match the characteristic at temperature T5. If the transposed and corresponding measured characteristics do not coincide, repeat the transposition using a slightly different value of K until the value for a correct fit is determined in each case. Use the mean of the three values of K thus determined.

5.4

5.5

IS 12763:1989 IEC Pub 891 ( 1987 )

kc

2

T
`a ----

,---------------e-e

_------

C

V

FIG. 1. - Determination

of Rp

7

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing th$ standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. ETDC 68 (3188) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text A&ted

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters
:

STANDARDS Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all 05ces) Tolophono 331 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62 2 18 43 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional O&es
:

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 11~1 Eastern : I/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM.

Printedat CentralElectric Press. Delhi, India

