атт Ah IS 18149 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


чааччте атаба т чеч — 
еутічезт 


Transportation of Dangerous Goods 
— Guidelines 


ICS 13.300, 55.020, 03.220 


© BIS 2023 


unde нч э 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
COP ЧИШ WIS чач, 9 IER BS sit AMT, Ag Reet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in  www.standardsbis.in 


February 2023 Price Group 13 


Transport Services Sectional Committee, SSD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Transport 
Services Sectional Committee had been approved by the Service Sector Division Council. 


Dangerous goods are substances and articles that have explosive, flammable, toxic, infectious or corrosive 
properties and pose a risk to public safety, property and the environment. The transportation of these goods 
involves the implementation of adequate measures to ensure their transit in total security and safety. 
Transportation may be by land, sea, waterways, rail or even by air. 


The sensitivity and risk factors involved in transporting hazardous goods required specific precautions to be taken. 
These include meticulous packaging and conditioning, specific handling operations during transportation and 
training and development for persons engaged in transportation and handling of this category of goods. 


The transportation of dangerous goods is controlled and governed by various regulatory regimes, operating at both 
the national and international levels. While formulating this standard, assistance has been taken from Central 
Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 (CMVR) and International documents including UN Model Regulations - 
Recommendations for Transportation of Dangerous Goods (twenty second edition). The UN Model Regulations 
are given legal entity by the provision of a series of international modal agreements and national legislation for 
the transport of dangerous goods. 


These international agreements include: 


a) the European Agreement Concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Road (ADR); 

b) the Regulations Concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Rail (RID); 

c) the International Civil Aviation Organization's Technical Instructions for the Safe Transport of 
Dangerous Goods by Air (ICAO ТІ); and 

d) the International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code (IMDG). 


This standard is formulated to provide guidelines for all the stakeholders including good vehicle owners/transport 
agencies, contractors, consignors, consignees, operators and drivers carrying dangerous goods/substances for the 
safe transportation of dangerous goods. The standard broadly covers guidelines on classification, packaging, 
labelling and marking, transportation, documentation, role of stakeholders, training, emergency action and 
provisions for segregation. 


The composition of the committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 18149: 2023 


Indian Standard 
TRANSPORTATION OF DANGEROUS GOODS — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard provides guidelines on packaging, 
labeling, handling and transport operations for safe 
transportation of dangerous goods based on their 
classification which include explosives, gases, 
flammable liquids, flammable solids, oxidizing 
substances and organic peroxides, poisonous and 
infectious substances, radioactive substances, 
corrosive substances and other miscellaneous 
dangerous substances, in order to prevent harm to 
human, animals, property and the environment. 


NOTE — These guidelines are not applicable for the 
dangerous goods forbidden for transportation by law. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

IS 1446 : 2002 Classification of dangerous 
goods 

IS 11466 (Part 2) Guidelines for packing, 

: 1985 stowage and securing of 


cargo inside the freight 
containers: Part 2 dangerous 
goods 


IS 16833: 2018 Automotive tracking device 


(ATD) and integrated systems 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions should apply. 


3.1 Bulk Container — A containment system 
(including any liner or coating) intended for the 
transport of solid substances which are in direct 
contact with the containment system. Packaging, 
intermediate bulk containers (IBCs), large 
packaging and portable tanks are not included. 


NOTE — A bulk container is: 

a) of a permanent character and accordingly strong 

enough to be suitable for repeated use; 

b) specially designed to facilitate the transport of goods 
by one or more means of transport without 
intermediate reloading; 

c) fitted with devices permitting its ready handling; and 

d) of a capacity of not less than 1.0 m°. 


3.2 Cargo Transport Unit — A road transport tank 
or freight vehicle, a railway transport tank or freight 
wagon, a multimodal freight container or portable 
tank, or a multiple-element gas container (MEGC). 


3.3 Carrier — Any person, organization or 
government undertaking the transport of dangerous 
goods by any means of transport. 


3.4 Classification — Categorization of dangerous 
goods in either of the hazard class or its division. 


3.5 Combination Packaging — A combination of 
packaging for transport purposes, consisting of one 
or more inner packaging secured in an outer 
packaging. 


3.6 Composite Packaging — А packaging 
consisting of an outer packaging and an inner 
receptacle so constructed that the inner receptacle 
and the outer packaging form an integral packaging. 
Once assembled it remains thereafter an integrated 
single unit; it is filled, stored, transported and 
emptied as such. 


3.7 Competent Authority — Any person or 
organization that has the legally delegated or 
invested authority, capacity, or power to perform a 
designated function. 


3.8 Consignee — Any person, organization or 
government which is entitled to take delivery of a 
consignment. 


3.9 Consignment — Any package or packages, or 
load of dangerous substances (solid, liquid or gas) 
or goods, presented by а  consignor for 
transportation. 


3.10 Consignor — Any person, organization or 
government who prepares a consignment for 
transport. 


3.11 Corrosive Substance — Substances which by 
chemical action will cause severe damage when in 
contact with living tissue or in the case of leakage 
will materially damage or even destroy other goods 
or the means of transport, they may also cause other 
hazards. 


3.12 Crate — An outer packaging with incomplete 
surfaces. 


3.13 Cylinder — А transportable pressure 
receptacle of a water capacity not exceeding 150 
litres. 


3.14 Dangerous Goods — Articles or substances 
which are capable of posing a hazard to health, 


IS 18149: 2023 


safety, property or the environment and which are 
classified according to the details given in Table 1. 


NOTE — The material includes article, substance, mixtures 
and preparations. The classification of dangerous goods is 
covered under 5.1. 


3.15 Drum — A flat-ended or convex-ended 
cylindrical packaging made of metal, fibreboard, 
plastics, plywood or other suitable materials. This 
also includes packaging of other shapes, for example 
round taper-necked packaging, or pail-shaped 
packaging. 


NOTE — Wooden barrels or jerricans are not covered by 
this definition. 


3.16 Explosive Article — Ап article containing 
one or more explosive substances. 


3.17 Explosive Substance — А solid or liquid 
substance (or a mixture of substances) which in itself 
is capable of producing gas by chemical reaction at 
such a temperature, pressure and at such a speed as 
to cause damage to the surroundings. 


3.18 Filler — The participant (individual or 
business) who is responsible for filling tanks or 
containers (for carriage in bulk) with dangerous 
goods prior to transportation. 


3.19 Flammable Gas — А gas having flammable 
range with air at 20 °С and standard pressure of 
101.3 kPa. 


3.20 Flammable Liquids — Liquids, or mixtures 
of liquids, or liquids containing solids in solution or 
suspension (for example, paints, varnishes, lacquers, 
etc., but not including substances otherwise 
classified on account of their dangerous 
characteristics) which gives off a flammable vapour 
at temperatures of not more than 60.5 °C. 


3.21 Flammable Solids — Solids which under 
conditions encountered in transport, are readily 
combustible or may cause or contribute to fire 
through friction. 


3.22 Freight Container — Article of transport 
equipment which is: 


a) of a permanent character and accordingly 
strong enough to be suitable for repeated 
use; 

b) specially designed to facilitate the carriage 
of goods by one or more modes of transport, 
without intermediate reloading; 


c) fitted with devices permitting its ready 
handling, particularly its transfer from one 
mode of transport to another; 


d) so designed as to be easy to fill and empty; 
and 


e) having an internal volume of at least 1 m?. 


3.23 Freight Forwarder — А person or 
organization who offers the service of arranging the 
transport of cargo. 


3.24 Gas — A gas is a substance which: 


a) at 50 °С has a vapour pressure greater than 
300 kPa; or 


b) is completely gaseous at 20 °C at a standard 
pressure of 101.3 kPa. 


NOTE — For the transport condition, a gas is 
described according to its physical state as follows: 


a) Compressed gas — A gas (other than in 
solution) which when packaged under pressure 
for transport is entirely gaseous at 20 °С; 

b) Liquefied gas — A gas which when packaged for 
transport is partially liquid at 20 °С; 

C) Refrigerated liquefied gas — A gas which is 
liquefied by refrigeration and maintained at or 
near its boiling point at atmospheric pressure; 


d) Gas in Solution — Compressed gas which when 
packaged for transport is dissolved in a solvent: 
and 


€) Adsorbed gas — A gas which when packaged 
for transport is adsorbed onto a solid porous 
material resulting in an internal receptacle 
pressure of less than 101.3 kPa at 20 °С and less 
than 300 kPa at 50 °С. 


3.25 Infectious Substances — Substances known 
or reasonably expected to contain pathogens. 


NOTE — Pathogens are defined as micro-organisms 
(including bacteria, viruses, rickettsiae, parasites, fungi) 
or recombinant micro-organisms (hybrid or mutant), that 
are known or reasonably expected to cause infectious 
disease in animals or humans. 


3.26 Inner Packaging — A packaging for which an 
outer packaging is required for transport. 


3.27 Inner Receptacle — А receptacle which 
requires an outer packaging in order to perform its 
containment function. 


3.28 Intermediate Bulk Container (IBC) — Any 
rigid or flexible portable packaging that: 


a) has a capacity of: 


1) not more than 3.0 m? for solids and 
liquids of packing groups II and III; 


2) not more than 1.5 m? for solids of 
packing group I when packed in 
flexible, rigid plastics, composite, 
fiberboard and wooden IBCs; 


3) not more than 3.0 m? for solids of 
packing group I when packed in metal 
IBCs; and 


4) not more than 3.0 m? for radioactive 
material of Class 7; 


b) is designed for mechanical handling; and 


C) is resistant to the stresses produced in 
handling and transport, as determined by 
the tests. 


3.29 Intermediate Packaging — A packaging 
placed between inner packaging, or articles, and an 
outer packaging. 


3.30 Large Packaging — A packaging consisting 
of an outer packaging which contains articles or 
inner packaging and which: 


a) is designed for mechanical handling; and 


b) exceeds 400 kg net mass or 0.45 m? capacity 
but has a volume of not more than 3 m3. 


3.31 Large Salvage Packaging — А special 
packaging which is designed for mechanical 
handling and exceeds 400 kg net mass or 0.45 n? 
capacity. 


NOTE — This special packaging has a volume of not more 
than 3 m3; into which damaged, defective, leaking or non- 
conforming dangerous goods packages, or dangerous goods 
that have spilled or leaked are placed for purposes of 
transport for recovery or disposal. 


3.32 Loader — The participant (individual or 
business) who is responsible for loading dangerous 
goods onto a vehicle prior to transportation. 


3.33 Organic Peroxides — Substance which 
contain the bivalent O-O structure and may be 
considered derivatives of hydrogen peroxide, where 
one or both of the hydrogen atoms have been 
replaced by organic radicals. This also includes 
organic peroxides formulations (mixtures). 


NOTE — Organic peroxides are thermally unstable 
substances, which may undergo exothermic  self- 
accelerating decomposition. In addition, they may have one 
or more of the following properties: 


1 Be liable to explosive decomposition; 

2 Burn rapidly; 

3 Be sensitive to impact or friction; 

4 React dangerously with other substances; and 
5 Cause damage to the eyes. 


3.34 Outer Packaging — The outer protection of a 
composite or combination packaging together with 
any absorbent materials, cushioning and any other 
components necessary to contain and protect inner 
receptacles or inner packaging. 


3.35 Overpack — An enclosure used by a single 
consignor to contain one or more packages and to 
form one unit for convenience of handling and 
stowage during transport. 


3.36 Oxidizing Substances — Substance which, 
while in themselves not necessarily combustible, 


IS 18149 : 2023 


may generally cause, or contribute to the combustion 
of other material by yielding oxygen. 


3.37 Package — The complete product of the 
packing operation, consisting of the packaging and 
its contents prepared for transport. 


3.38 Packaging — One or more receptacles and 
any other components or materials necessary for the 
receptacles to perform their containment and other 
safety functions. 


3.39 Portable Tank — Tanks that are used for the 
transportation and storage of dangerous liquids such 
as chemicals, oil and gas and drilling fluids, waste 
materials and aviation fuel. 


NOTE — These tanks are inside a frame, protecting it from 
damage during shipping and handling. 


3.40 Radioactive Material — Any material 
containing radio nuclide where both the activity 
concentration and the total activity in the 
consignment exceed the values specified, depending 
on the type of material, by the Atomic Energy 
Commission of India. 


3.41 Receptacle — А containment vessel for 
receiving and holding substances or articles, 
including any means of closing. 


3.42 Salvage Packaging — А special packaging 
into which damaged, defective, leaking or non- 
conforming dangerous goods packages, or 
dangerous goods that have spilled or leaked, are 
placed for purposes of transport for recovery or 
disposal. 


3.43 Security — Measures or precautions to be 
taken to minimize theft or misuse of dangerous 
goods that may endanger persons or property. 


3.44 Shipment — The specific movement of a 
consignment from origin to destination. 


3.45 Tank — А portable tank including a tank 
container, a road tank-vehicle, a rail tank-wagon or 
a receptacle to contain solids, liquids, or gases, 
having a capacity of not less than 0.45 m? when used 
for the transport of gases. 


3.46 Toxic Substances — Substances liable either 
to cause death or serious injury or to harm human 
health if swallowed or inhaled or by skin contact. 


3.47 Unloader — The participant (individual or 
business) who is responsible for the removal of 
dangerous goods from a vehicle, or the unloading 
or discharge of dangerous goods from a tank, 
container or vehicle. 


IS 18149: 2023 


4 STATUTORY AND 
REQUIREMENTS 


REGULATORY 


The stakeholders involved in transportation of 
dangerous goods including consignor, consignee, 
carrier agency shall ensure compliance to statutory 
and regulatory requirements and guidelines 
applicable at National and International levels 
including Annex A. 


5 CLASSIFICATION — CLASSES, DIVISIONS 
AND PACKING GROUPS 


5.1 Substances (including mixtures and solutions) 
and articles subject to this standard shall be assigned 
to one of the nine classes according to the hazard or 
the most predominant of the hazards they present. 
Some of the classes are further subdivided into 
divisions. The classes and their divisions are given 
in Table 1. 


IS 18149: 2023 


Table 1 Classification of Dangerous Goods 
(Clause 5.1) 


SI No. Class Division Substance 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Class 1 - Explosives 1.1 Substances and articles which have a mass explosion 
hazard 
1.2 Substances and articles which have a projection hazard 
but not a mass explosion hazard 
1.3 Substances and articles which have a fire hazard and 
either a minor blast hazard or a minor projection 
hazard or both, but not a mass explosion hazard 
1.4 Substances and articles which present no significant 
hazard 
1.5 Very insensitive substances which have a mass 
explosion hazard 
1.6 Extremely insensitive articles which do not have a 
mass explosion hazard 
ii) Class 2 - Gases, compressed, 2.1 Flammable gases 
liquefied, dissolved under 22 Non-fl bl . 
pressure or deeply refrigerated Е ont ammapie TIODSUOXIE Bases 
2.3 Toxic gases 
iii) Class 3 - Flammable liquids - Flammable liquids 
iv) Class 4 - Flammable solids; 4.1 Flammable solids, self-reactive substances, solid 
substances liable to desensitized explosives and polymerizing substances 
spontaneous combustion; 
substances which, on contact 4.2 Substances liable to spontaneous combustion 
with water, emit flammable 4.3 Substances which in contact with water emit 
gases flammable gases 
v) Class 5 - Oxidizing substances — 5.1 Oxidizing substances 
d i id 
леин ршн 5.2 Organic peroxides 
vi) Class 6 - Toxic and infectious 6.1 Toxic substances 
bst 
ае 6.2 Infectious substances 
vii) Class 7 - Radioactive material - - 
уш) Class 8 - Corrosive substances - - 
ix) Class 9 - Miscellaneous - - 
dangerous substances and 
articles, including 
environmentally hazardous 
substances 
NOTES 


1 The numerical order of the classes and divisions is not that of the degree of danger. 

2 Refer IS 1446 for further detailed classification of dangerous goods. 

3 The Dangerous Goods list does not include goods which are so dangerous that their transport, except with special authorization, is 
prohibited. Also, such goods are not listed because the transport of some goods may be prohibited for some modes of transport and 
allowed in others and, in addition, because it would be impossible to draw up an exhaustive list. 

4 For precedence of hazard characteristics, refer 2.0.3 of UN Model Regulations on dangerous goods. 


IS 18149 : 2023 


5.2 For packing purposes, substances should be 
assigned to the following three packing groups in 
accordance with the degree of danger they present: 


a) Packing Group I — Substances presenting 
high danger; 

b) Packing Group II — Substances presenting 
medium danger; and 


c) Packing Group III — Substances presenting 
low danger. 


NOTE — For further details on packing group, Chapter 3.2 
of UN Model Regulations may be referred. 


5.3 Placards and UN Numbers 


5.3.1 Each dangerous goods class should be 
represented by a placard, that is a distinctive and 
specific class label in the shape of a diamond. 


5.32 Depending on its properties, each type of 
dangerous goods shall be assigned a number known 
as its UN number. The UN number should be 
available on the label, transport document and safety 
data sheet. 


6 PACKING AND TANK PROVISIONS 


6.1 Dangerous goods should be packed in good 
quality packaging, including IBCs and large 
packaging, which should be strong enough to 
withstand the shocks encountered during loadings, 
unloading and transportation, including 
transshipment between cargo transport units and 
warehouses. 


6.2 For the construction and testing of packaging, 
intermediate bulk containers (IBCs), large 
packaging, portable tanks, multiple-element gas 
containers (MEGCS) and bulk containers, the 
compliance to Chapter 6 of UN Model Regulations 
on the transport of dangerous goods should be 
ensured. 


6.3 In order to prevent any loss of contents or 
damage to dangerous goods during transportation 
due to vibration or changes in environmental 
conditions, the packaging, including IBCs and large 
packaging, should be constructed in accordance with 
the information provided by the manufacturer. 


6.4 No dangerous residue should adhere to the 
outside of packages, IBCs and large packaging 
during transport. 


6.5 The packaging or parts of packaging, including 
IBCs and large packaging, which are in direct 
contact with dangerous goods should not: 


a) be significantly weakened and affected by 
the dangerous goods; 


b) cause a dangerous effect, for example 
catalyzing a reaction or reacting with the 
dangerous goods; and 


c) allow permeation of the dangerous goods 
that may pose a danger under normal 
conditions of transport. 


6.6 When filling packaging, including IBCs and 
large packaging, with liquids, sufficient outage 
should be left to ensure that neither leakage nor 
permanent distortion of the packaging occurs as a 
result of an expansion of the liquid caused by 
temperature—fluctuations likely to occur during 
transport. Unless specific requirements аге 
prescribed, liquid should not be completely filled in 
packaging at a temperature of 55 °C. However, 
sufficient outage should be left in an IBC to ensure 
that at the mean bulk temperature of 50 °C, it is not 
filled to more than 98 percent of its water capacity. 


6.7 For air transport, packaging intended to contain 
liquids should also be capable of withstanding a 
pressure differential without leakage as specified in 
the International Civil Aviation Organization’s 
Technical Instructions for the Safe Transport of 
Dangerous Goods by Air (ICAO TI) and The 
Aircraft (Carriage of Dangerous Goods) Rules, 
2003 of Director General of Civil Aviation. 


6.8 Inner packaging inside an outer packaging 
should be done in such a way that, under normal 
conditions of transport, it should not break, puncture 
or leak contents into the outer packaging. Inner 
packaging containing liquids should be packed with 
their closures facing upward. Inner packaging that 
are liable to break or be punctured easily, such as 
those made of glass, porcelain or stoneware or of 
certain plastics materials, etc., should be secured in 
outer packaging with suitable cushioning material. 
Any leakage of the contents should not substantially 
impair the protective properties of the cushioning 
material or of the outer packaging. 


6.9 Where an outer packaging of a combination 
packaging ог a large packaging is successfully tested 
with different types of inner packaging, a variety of 
such different inner packaging may also be 
assembled, if appropriate, in this outer packaging or 
large packaging. In addition, and to ensure that an 
equivalent level of performance is maintained, the 
following variations in inner packaging should be 
allowed without further testing of the package: 


a) Inner packaging of equivalent or smaller 
size may be used provided: 


1) the inner packaging is of similar design 
to the tested inner packaging (for 
example shape-round, rectangular, etc); 


2) the construction of material of the inner 
packaging (glass, plastics, metal, etc) 
should resist impact and stacking forces 
equal to or greater than that of the 
originally tested inner packaging; 

3 


— 


the inner packaging has the same or 
smaller openings and the closure is of 
similar design (for example screw cap, 
friction lid, etc); 

4 


— 


sufficient additional cushioning 
material should be used to take up void 
spaces and to prevent significant 
movement of the inner packaging; and 


5 


wm 


inner packaging should be oriented 
within the outer packaging in the same 
manner as in the tested package. 


b) A lesser number of the tested inner 
packaging, or of the alternative types of 
inner packaging identified in 6.9 a), should 
be used provided sufficient cushioning is 
added to fill the void space(s) and to 
prevent significant movement of the inner 
packaging. 


6.10 Use of supplementary packaging within an 
outer packaging (for example an intermediate 
packaging or a receptacle inside a required inner 
packaging) additional to what is required by the 
packing instructions may be permitted provided all 
relevant requirements are met, and if appropriate, 
suitable cushioning may be used to prevent 
movement within the packaging. 


6.11 Dangerous goods should not be packed 
together in the same outer packaging or in large 
packaging, if they react dangerously with each other 
and cause: 


a) combustion and/or evolution of considerable 
heat; 

b) evolution of flammable, toxic or asphyxiant 
gases; 

c) the formation of corrosive substances; and 

d) the formation of unstable substances. 


6.12 The consignor should ensure that the closures 
should be of appropriate design to prevent loss of 
liquid during the transport. The packaging 
containing wetted or diluted substances should be 
such that the percentage of liquid (water, solvent or 
phlegmatizer) should not fall below the prescribed 
limits given by the manufacturer or any other 
relevant concerned authority during the transport. 


6.13 Where two or more closure systems are fitted 
in series on an IBC then the closure system nearest 
to the substance being carried should be closed first. 


6.14 Where pressure may develop in a package by 
the emission of gas from the contents (as a result of 
temperature increase or other causes), the packaging 
or IBC should be fitted with a vent provided that the 


IS 18149 : 2023 


gas emitted should not cause danger on account of 
its toxicity, its flammability or the quantity released. 


6.15 Liquids should only be filled into inner 
packaging which have an appropriate resistance to 
internal pressure that may be developed under 
normal conditions of transport. 


6.16 Venting of the package should not be permitted 
if the dangerous goods have to be trans-shipped for 
air transport. 


6.17 Packaging, including IBCs, used for solids 
which may become liquid at temperatures likely to 
be encountered during transport should also be 
capable of containing the substance in the liquid 
state. 


6.18 Packaging, including IBCs, used for powdery 
or granular substances should be sift proof or should 
be provided with a liner. 


6.19 For plastic drums and jerrycans/carboys, rigid 
plastics IBCs and composite IBCs with plastics 
inner receptacles should be used, unless otherwise 
approved by the competent authority. The period of 
use permitted for the transport of dangerous 
substances should be five years from the date of 
manufacture of the receptacles, except where a 
shorter period of use is prescribed because of the 
nature of the substance to be transported. 


NOTE — For composite IBCs the period of use refers to the 
date of manufacture of the inner receptacle. 


6.20 For explosives, self-reactive substances and 
organic peroxides, the packaging, including IBCs 
and large packaging, used for goods of Class 1, self- 
reactive substances of Division 4.1 and organic 
peroxides of Division 5.2 should comply with the 
provisions for the medium danger group (Packing 
Group II). 


6.21 Damaged, defective, leaking ог  non- 
conforming packages of dangerous goods that have 
spilled or leaked should be transported in salvage 
packaging and large salvage packaging. 


6.22 Appropriate measures should be taken to 
prevent excessive movement of the damaged or 
leaking packages within a salvage packaging. When 
the salvage packaging contains liquids, sufficient 
inert absorbent material should be added to 
eliminate the presence of free liquid. 


6.23 Appropriate measures should be taken to 
ensure that there is no dangerous build-up of 
pressure. 


NOTES 

1 Refer IS 11466 (Part 2) for additional guidelines for 
packing, stowage and securing cargo inside freight 
containers. 

2 In addition to above, refer UN Model Regulations - 
Recommendations on Transport of Dangerous Goods for 
packaging instructions. 


IS 18149: 2023 


6.24 For the purposes of the transport of: 


a) substances of Class 1 and Classes 3 to 9, a 
multimodal portable tank should be used 
which includes a shell fitted with service 
equipment апа structural equipment 
necessary for the transport of dangerous 
substances; 


b) non-refrigerated, liquefied gases of Class 2, 
a multimodal tank having a capacity of 
more than 450 litres should be used which 
includes a shell fitted with service 
equipment and structural equipment 
necessary for the transport of gases; and 


c) refrigerated liquefied gases, a thermally 
insulated tank should be used having a 
capacity of more than 450 litres fitted with 
service equipment — and structural 
equipment necessary for the transport of 
refrigerated liquefied gases. 


NOTE — The portable tank should be capable of 
being loaded and discharged without the need of 
removal of its structural equipment. It should possess 
stabilizing members external to the shell, and should 
be capable of being lifted when full. It should be 
designed primarily to be loaded on to a vehicle or 
vessel and is equipped with skids, mountings or 
accessories to facilitate mechanical handling. 


7 LABELLING AND MARKING 
7.1 Labeling and Marking on Packages 


7.1.1 Unless provided in this standard, the proper 
shipping name for the dangerous goods and the 
corresponding UN number preceded by the letters 
‘UN’, should be displayed on each package. The UN 
number and the letters ‘UN’ should be at least 12 
mm high, except for packages of 30 litres capacity 
or less or of 30 kg maximum net mass and for 
cylinders of 60 litres water capacity or less when 
they should be at least 6 mm in height and except for 
packages of 5 litres capacity or less or of 5 kg 
maximum net mass when they should be of an 
appropriate size. In the case of unpackaged articles, 
the mark should be displayed on the article, on its 
cradle or on its handling, storage or launching 
device. 


7.1.2 Salvage packaging including large salvage 
packaging and salvage pressure receptacles should 
additionally be marked with the word 'SALVAGE'. 
The lettering of the ‘SALVAGE’ mark should be at 
least 12 mm high. 


7.1.3 Intermediate bulk containers of more than 450 
litres capacity and large packaging should be 
marked on two opposing sides. 


7.1.4 The markings as mentioned in 7.1.1 should be: 


a) in English and readily visible and legible; 


b) able to withstand open weather exposure 
without а substantial reduction in 
effectiveness; 


с 


wm 


displayed on a background of contrasting 
colour on the external surface of the 
package; and 


d 


М7 


be located away from any other marking 
(such as advertising) that could 
substantially reduce their effectiveness and 
visibility. 

7.1.5 The label on the packages should contain the 
following information: 


a) The trade name as well as technical 
/chemical name; 


b) The name and the address, including 
telephone number of the manufacturer, the 
importer or the distributor; 


c) The chemical name of the substance (in the 
case of a preparation, the chemical names of 
the hazardous components); 


d) Primary and subsidiary class label; 
e) Risk phrases (R-phrases); 
f) Safety phrases (S-phrases); and 


g) The quantity of the contents of the package 
or container. 


NOTE — Refer Annex B for the diagrammatic 
representation of the labels. 


7.1.6 For receptacles of capacity 20 litres or more, a 
diamond shaped label of at least 100 mm x 100 mm 
in the form of a square set at an angle of 45 and the 
minimum width of the line inside the edge forming 
the diamond should be 2 mm denoting primary 
transport hazard class assigned should be affixed on 
the receptacles. In the case of being a secondary 
hazard, then the transport hazard diamond label 
should be affixed adjacent to the primary hazard, 
placard based on the markings as appearing on the 
packaging in visual proximity to the primary hazard 
label. However, for receptacles with capacity less 
than 20 litres, a smaller but clearly legible label 
should be affixed. 


7.1.7 Special Marking Provisions for Radioactive 
Material 


Each package should be legibly and durably marked 
on the outside of the packaging with an 
identification of either the consignor or consignee, 


or both. Each over pack should be legibly and 
durably marked on the outside of the over pack with 
an identification of either the consignor or 
consignee, or both unless these marks of all 
packages within the over pack are clearly visible. 
Each package of gross mass exceeding 50 kg should 
have its permissible gross mass legibly and durably 
marked on the outside of the packaging. 


IS 18149 : 2023 


7.1.8 Special Marking Provisions for 
Environmentally Hazardous Substances 


Unless otherwise specified in this standard, 
packages containing environmentally hazardous 
substances should be durably marked with the 
environmentally hazardous substance mark. The 
environmentally hazardous substance mark should 
be located adjacent to the markings given in 7.1.1 
and should meet the requirements given in 7.1.3 and 
7.1.4. The environmentally hazardous substance 
mark should be as shown in Fig. 1. 


ЕС. 1 ENVIRONMENTALLY HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE MARK 


7.2 Placarding of Cargo Transport Units and 
Bulk Containers 


7.2.1 In order to provide a warning that the contents 
of the unit are dangerous goods and present hazards, 
placards should be affixed to the exterior surface of 
cargo transport units and bulk containers. 


7.2.2 The followings should be ensured while 
affixing placards: 


a) Placards should correspond to the primary 
hazard of the goods contained in the cargo 
transport unit and bulk container; 

b) Placards should be displayed on a 
background of contrasting colour, or should 
have either a dotted or solid outer boundary 
line; 

c) All placards should withstand the rigors of 

the journey; 

The size of diamond placard should be at 

least 250 mm x 250 mm denoting the 

assigned primary transport hazard class. The 
line inside the edge should be parallel and 


d 


wm 


12.5 mm (except for Class 7) from the 
outside of that line to the edge of the placard. 
For Class 7, the line inside the edge should 
be parallel and 5 mm from the outside of that 
line to the edge of the placard. see Fig. 2 and 
Fig. 3; 

In case of a secondary hazard, the transport 

hazard diamond placard should be affixed 

adjacent to and in visual proximity to the 
primary hazard placard; 

f) In the case of a vehicle without sides, the 
placards may be affixed directly on the 
cargo-carrying unit provided that they are 
readily visible; 

g) For physically large tanks or freight 
containers, the placards on the tanks or 
freight containers should be sufficed; and 

h) In the case of vehicles having insufficient 
area to affix larger placards, the dimensions 
of the placard as described in Fig. 2 and Fig. 
3 may be reduced to 100 mm. Any placards 
which do not relate to the contents should be 
removed. 


е 


wm 


IS 18149 : 2023 


FIG. 2 PLACARD (EXCEPT FOR CLASS 7) 


7.3 Markings of Cargo Transport Units and Bulk 
Containers 


7.3.1 Proper Shipping Name 


The proper shipping name of the contents of 
consignment of dangerous goods should be: 


a) durably marked on at least both sides of tank 
cargo transport units and bulk containers 
containing dangerous goods; and 


b) displayed in characters not less than 65 mm 
high and should be of contrasting colour 
with the background. 


7.3.2. Display of UN Numbers 


7.3.2.1 UN Number should be displayed on 
consignments of: 


a) solids, liquids or gases transported in tank 
cargo transport units, including each 
compartment of a multi-compartment tank 
cargo transport unit; 


b 


wm 


packaged dangerous goods of a single 
commodity which constitute a full load for 
the cargo transport unit; and 


FIG. 3 PLACARD FOR RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL OF CLASS 7 


c) solid dangerous goods in bulk containers. 


7.3.2.2 The UN Number for the goods should be 
displayed in black digits not less than 65 mm high, 


either: 


a) 


b) 


с) 


* location of class or division number 
* * location of UN Number 


against a white background in the area 
below the pictorial symbol and above the 
class number and the compatibility group 
letter in a manner that does not obscure or 
detract from the other required label 
elements; 

on an orange rectangular panel not less than 
120 mm high and 300 mm wide, with a 10 
mm black border, to be placed immediately 
adjacent to each placard. See Fig. 4; and 


for portable tanks with a capacity of not 
more than 3 000 litres and with an 
available surface area insufficient to affix 
the prescribed placards, the UN number 
may be displayed on an orange rectangular 
panel of appropriately reduced size on the 
external surface of the tank in characters 
not less than 25 mm high. 


FIG. 4 EXAMPLE OF DISPLAY OF UN NUMBERS 


7.3.3 Elevated Temperature Substances 


Cargo transport units containing a substance that is 
in a liquid state at a temperature equal to or 
exceeding 100 °С or in a solid state at a temperature 


IS 18149 : 2023 


equal to or exceeding 240 °С should bear on each 
side and on each end the mark as shown in the 
Fig. 5. The triangular shaped mark should have 
sides of at least 250 mm and should be shown in 
red. 


€ Minimum dimension 250 mm ў» 


FIG. 5 MARKING FOR TRANSPORT AT ELEVATED TEMPERATURE 


In addition to the elevated temperature mark, the 
maximum temperature of the substance expected to 
be reached during transport should be durably 
marked on both sides of the portable tank or 
insulation jacket, immediately adjacent to the 
elevated temperature mark, in characters at least 
100 mm high. For portable tanks with a capacity of 
not more than 3 000 litres and with an available 
surface area insufficient to affix the prescribed 
marks, the minimum dimensions of the sides may be 
reduced to 100 mm. 


7.3.4 Environmentally Hazardous Substances Mark 


A cargo transport unit or bulk container containing 
environmentally hazardous substances should 
clearly display the environmentally hazardous 
substance mark having minimum dimensions 
250 mm x 250 mm on at least two opposing sides of 
the unit or bulk container and in any case in such a 
position as may be seen by all those involved in the 
loading or unloading processes. For portable tanks 
with a capacity of not more than 3 000 litres and with 
an available surface area insufficient to affix the 
prescribed marks, the minimum dimensions may be 
reduced to 100 mm x 100 mm. 


7.3.5 Emergency Information Panel 


7.3.5.1 Every goods carriage used for transporting 
any dangerous goods should be legibly and 
conspicuously marked with an emergency 
information panel at three places so that the 
emergency information panel faces to each side of 
the carriage and to its rear and such panel should 
contain the following information: 


11 


a) The correct technical name of the 
dangerous goods in letters not less than 
50 mm high; 

b) The United Nations class number for the 
dangerous goods as given in 5 in numerals 
not less than 100 mm high; 


c) The class label of the dangerous or 
hazardous goods of the size of not less than 
250 mm square; and 


d) The name and telephone number of the 
emergency services to be contacted in the 
event of fire or any other accident in letters 
and numerals that are not less than 50 mm 
high and the name and telephone number of 
the consignor of the dangerous goods or of 
some other person from whom expert 
information and advice can be obtained 
concerning the measures that should be 
taken in the event of an emergency 
involving such goods. 


7.3.5.2 The information contained in 7.3.5.1 
should also be displayed on the vehicle by means of 
a sticker relating to the particular dangerous or 
hazardous goods carried in that particular trip. 


7.3.5.3 Every class label and emergency 
information panel should be marked on the goods 
carriage and should be kept free and clean from 
obstructions at all times. 


NOTE — Refer Annex C for representation of Emergency 
Information Panel. 


IS 18149: 2023 


8 DOCUMENTATION 
8.1 General 


The consignor should provide requisite information 
and documentation to the carrier about dangerous 
goods to be transported, including any additional 
information and documentation as specified in this 
standard. The information may be provided in a 
dangerous goods transport document preferably in 
the format given in Annex D or in any other format 
agreed between consignor and carrier. In case 
dangerous goods are being transported in the same 
vehicle with non-dangerous goods, the information 
of dangerous goods should preferably be provided 
separately. It should be ensured that dangerous 
goods transport document should be easy to identify, 
legible and durable. The use of electronic data 
processing (EDP) and electronic data interchange 
(EDI) transmission techniques as an alternative to 
paper documentation may be preferred. 


8.2 Declaration of Dangerous Goods 


The following information should be provided by 
the consignor/shipper in the documented form: 


a) Dangerous goods description including UN 
number, proper shipping name, primary 
hazard class, subsidiary hazard class and the 
packing group of substance or article 
(for example PG-II for Packing Group П) 
for each dangerous substance, material or 
article offered for transport; 


b 


— 


Name and address of the consignor and the 
consignee with contact numbers; 


c) Total quantity of dangerous goods; 
d 


М7 


The temperature of good/substance at which 
it is being transported (in case the 
temperature is 100 °С or more, such 
consignment should be marked with Hot or 
Molten as the case may be); 


e) For dangerous goods are transported in 
salvage packaging including large salvage 
packaging or salvage pressure receptacles, 


the words ‘SALVAGE PACKAGING’ or 
‘SALVAGE PRESSURE RECEPTACLE’ 
should be included; 


f) In case of self-reactive substances, organic 
peroxides and polymerizing substances 
which may require temperature control 
during transportation, the control and 
emergency temperatures should be indicated 
such as ‘Control temperature: .... °C 
Emergency temperature: .... °C’; 


— 


Restrictions on the mode of transport or 
conveyance and any necessary routing 
instructions; 


g 


h 


— 


Details of the emergency arrangements 
appropriate to the consignment; and 


j Actual holding time, where applicable, for 


example portable tanks carrying refrigerated 
liquefied gases. 


NOTES 


1 The format given in Annex D may be used for declaration 
of dangerous goods by the Shipper/Consignor/Sender. 


2 For any mis-declared or undeclared dangerous goods, 
the provisions specific to different mode of transport under 
10 should be followed. 


8.3 Emergency Response Information 


While transporting the dangerous goods, the 
following should be ensured by the carrier: 


a) The emergency response telephone number 
should be readily available; and 


b) The following information for emergency 
response should be available with the carrier 
in a separate document maintained with the 
other transport documents: 


1) Description of the dangerous articles; 
2) Immediate hazards to health; 


3) Immediate methods for handling small 
or large fires and spills or leaks; and 


4) Preliminary first aid measures. 


8.4 Retention of Records 


IS 18149 : 2023 


The following records and documents should be retained as documented information: 


Document 


Participant Responsible 


Retention Period 


Transport Documents 
Emergency response information 
Training Record 


Annual report (DGSA) 
Vehicle Certification 
Tanks Certification 


Carrier 


Consignor and carrier 


Consignee, consignor and carrier 
Consignor, consignee and carrier 


Consignor/ consignee/carrier 


Carrier/consignee/consignor 


Three months 


Period of use 

Duration of employment plus 
one year 

Five years 

Period of use 

Period of use 


9 PROVISIONS FOR TRANSPORTATION 
9.1 General Provisions 


Dangerous goods should not be offered for transport 
unless: 


a) Goods have been properly classified, 
packed, marked, labelled and described and 
certified on a dangerous goods transport 
document; 

b) Goods are in a fit condition for transport as 
required by this standard, and no dangerous 
residue of the dangerous goods adheres to 
the outside of the package; 

c) Cargo transport units 
appropriately marked, 
placarded; and 

d) Cargo transport units are in a fit condition 
for movement and transportation. 


been 
and 


have 
labelled 


9.1.1 Carrier should not accept dangerous goods 
for transport unless: 


a) a copy of the dangerous goods transport 


document and other documented 
information as prescribed in 8 are provided; 
or 


b) the information applicable to the dangerous 
goods is provided in electronic form. 


9.1.2 The information and documents applicable to 
the dangerous goods should accompany the 
dangerous goods during transportation to the final 
destination and should be provided to the consignee 
when the dangerous goods are delivered. 


9.1.3 When the information applicable to the 
dangerous goods is given to the carrier in electronic 
form, it should be available to the carrier at all times 
during transport to the final destination. The 
information should be made available to the 
authorities without delay and as a paper document, 
if demanded. 


9.1.4 The dangerous goods should not be 
transported unless cargo transport units are: 
a) appropriately marked, labelled апа 
placarded; and 
b) in a condition to transport in accordance 


with this standard. 


9.1.5 Packages containing dangerous goods should 
only be loaded in cargo transport units that are strong 
enough to withstand the shocks encountered during 
transport. The cargo transport unit should be 
constructed in such a way as to prevent the loss of 
contents and should be fitted with devices to 
facilitate securing and handling of dangerous goods. 


9.1.6 The interior and exterior of a cargo transport 
unit should be inspected prior to loading to ensure 
that there is no damage that could affect its integrity 
or that of the packages to be loaded in it. 


9.1.7 Cargo transport units should be loaded in a 
way such that incompatible dangerous goods are not 
placed together. Specific loading instructions such 
as orientation arrows direction of the goods, goods 
that are not to be double stacked, goods to be kept 
dry or other temperature control requirements 
should be met. The dangerous goods in liquid form 
should be loaded below dry dangerous goods 
whenever possible. 


9.1.8 The packages containing dangerous goods 
and unpackaged dangerous articles should be 
secured by suitable means capable of restraining the 
goods (such as fastening straps, sliding slat boards, 
adjustable brackets) in the cargo transport unit in a 
manner to prevent any movement during transport 
which would change the orientation of the packages 
or cause damage. When dangerous goods are 
transported with other goods like heavy machinery 
or crates, all goods should be securely fixed or 
packed in the cargo transport units so as to prevent 
the release of dangerous goods. The movement of 


IS 18149: 2023 


packages may also be prevented by filling any voids 
by the use of dunnage or by blocking and bracing. 
Where restraints such as banding or straps are used, 
these should not be over-tightened to cause damage 
or deformation of the package. 


9.1.9 Packages should not be stacked unless 
designed for that purpose. Where different design 
types of packages that have been designed for 
stacking are to be loaded together, consideration 
should be given to their compatibility for stacking 
with each other. Where necessary, stacked packages 
should be prevented from damaging the package 
below by the use of load-bearing devices. 


9.1.10 During loading and unloading, attention 
should be given to the handling of packages, so that 
accidental damage through dragging or mishandling 
the packages may be avoided. In case the package is 
found to be damaged, it should not be transported 
and may be moved to a safe place. 


9.2 Segregation of Dangerous Goods 


9.2.1 The segregation provisions for each particular 
mode of transport should be based on the following 
principles: 


a) Incompatible dangerous goods should be 
segregated from one another so as to 
effectively minimize hazards in the event of 
accidental leakage or spillage or any other 
accident; 

b) Whenever dangerous goods are stowed 
together, the most stringent segregation 
provisions for any of the goods should be 
applied; and 

с) In case, the packages required to bear a 
subsidiary hazard label, the segregation 
appropriate to the subsidiary hazard should 
be applied when itis more stringent than that 
required by the primary hazard. 


9.2.2 Incompatible dangerous goods should be 
segregated and loaded on carrier in such a way that 
any possible contact of such goods is avoided during 
transportation. For the purposes of segregation, two 
substances or articles are considered mutually 
incompatible when their stowing together may result 
in undue hazards in the case of leakage, spillage, or 
any other accident. In this regard, detailed 
segregation requirements for substances and articles 
of Class 1 are provided in 11.1. 


9.2.3 As the extent of the hazard due to 
incompatible dangerous goods may vary, the 
segregation arrangements required should also vary 
as appropriate. In some instances, such segregation 
may be obtained by intervening spaces between such 


dangerous goods by filling the spaces with cargo 
compatible with the dangerous substances or 
articles. 


9.2.4 An over pack should not contain dangerous 
goods which react dangerously with one another. 


9.3 Reporting of Accidents ог Incidents 
Involving Dangerous Goods in Transport 


9.3.1 Any incidents or accidents involving 
transportation of dangerous goods should 
immediately be reported to the nearest local 
authorities as well as concerned person notified in 
the emergency response documents to deal with 
such situations. In case of transportation of 
dangerous goods at International level, the 
compliance of prevailing law of the country, where 
the incident or accidents has occurred, should be 
ensured. 


9.3.2 Information reported should include at least 
the description of the goods as provided in 8.2, 
description of the accident/incident, date and 
location, estimated loss of dangerous goods, 
containment information (packaging or tank type, 
identification marks, capacity and quantity) and 
cause and type of any packaging/tank failure that 
resulted in a release/damage of dangerous goods. 


9.3.3 Certain types of dangerous goods, as 
determined by the competent authority ог 
established under applicable International law, may 
be excepted from these guidelines for reporting of 
accidents or incidents. 


NOTE — For reporting of accidents or incidents involving 
dangerous goods related to different mode of transport, the 
specific guidelines as per 10 should be followed. 


10 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR 
DIFFERENT MODE OF TRANSPORTATION 


10.1 Transportation by Road 


In addition to other relevant and applicable 
requirements given in this standard, the compliance 
of Carriage by Road Act, 2007 and the Central 
Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 shall be ensured for 
transportation of dangerous goods by road. 


10.2 Transportation by Sea 


In addition to other relevant and applicable 
requirements given in this standard, the compliance 
of International Maritime Dangerous Goods 
(IMDG) code shall be ensured for transportation of 
dangerous goods by sea. 


10.3 Transportation by Rail 


In addition to other relevant and applicable 
requirements covered їп this standard, the 
compliance of Red Tariff Rules (RED TARIFF 
No. 20) of the Ministry of Railways shall be ensured 
for transportation of dangerous goods by rail. 


10.4 Transportation by Air 


In addition to other relevant 
requirements covered іп this standard, the 
compliance of International Civil Aviation 
Organization’s Technical Instructions for the Safe 
Transport of Dangerous Goods by Air (ICAO TI) 
and The Aircraft (Carriage of Dangerous Goods) 
Rules, 2003 shall be ensured for transportation of 
dangerous goods by air. 


and applicable 


10.5 Transportation by Inland Waterways 


In addition to other relevant and applicable 
requirements covered їп this standard, the 


IS 18149 : 2023 


compliance of International Carriage of Dangerous 
Goods by Inland Waterways (ADN) shall be 
ensured for transportation of dangerous goods by 
inland waterways. 


NOTE — For approvals and permissions, the provisions 
applicable for different mode of transportation of dangerous 
goods as covered under 10 should be followed. 


11 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL MODES 
OF TRANSPORTATION 


11.1 Transport of Explosives 


Considering the practicability and economical 
transportation of explosive (Class 1 goods or 
substances), a mix of such goods of Class 1 of 
relevant compatibility groups may be transported 
provided safety is not compromised at any level 
during handling and transportation of explosives. 


IS 18149: 2023 


11.1.1 Compatibility Classification Codes 


(Description of Substance or Article to be Classified) (Compatibility (Classification 
Group) Code) 
Primary explosive substance A 1.1A 
Article containing a primary explosive substance and not B 1.1B 
containing two or more effective protective features. 1.2B 
Some articles, such as detonators for blasting, detonator 1.4B 


assemblies for blasting and primers, cap-type, are 
included, even though they do not contain primary 


explosives 
Propellant explosive substance or other deflagrating C 1.1C 
explosive substance or article containing such explosive 1.2C 
substance 1.3C 
1.4C 
Secondary detonating explosive substance or black D 1.1D 
powder or article containing a secondary detonating 1.2D 
explosive substance, in each case without means of 1.4D 
initiation and without a propelling charge, or article 1.5D 
containing a primary explosive substance and containing 
two or more effective protective features 
Article containing a secondary detonating explosive E 1.1E 
substance, without means of initiation, with a propelling 1.2E 
charge (other than one containing a flammable liquid or 1.4E 
gel or hypergolic liquids) 
Article containing a secondary detonating explosive F ].1F 
substance with its own means of initiation, with a 1.2F 
propelling charge (other than one containing a flammable 1.3F 
liquid or gel or hypergolic liquids) or without a propelling 1.4F 
charge 
Pyrotechnic substance, or article containing a pyrotechnic G 1.1G 
substance, or article containing both an explosive 1.2G 
substance and an illuminating, incendiary, tear- or 1.3G 
smoke-producing substance (other than a water-activated 1.4G 
article or one containing white phosphorus, phosphides, a 
pyrophoric substance, a flammable liquid or gel, or 
hypergolic liquids) 
Article containing both an explosive substance and white H 1.2H 
phosphorus 1.3H 
Article containing both an explosive substance and a | Ј | 1.17] 
flammable liquid or gel 1.2J 
1.3J 
Article containing both an explosive substance and a K 1.2K 
toxic chemical agent 1.3K 
Explosive substance or article containing an explosive L 1.1L 
substance and presenting a special hazard (for example 1.2L 
due to water-activation or presence of hypergolic liquids, 1.3L 


IS 18149 : 2023 


(Concluded) 

(Description of Substance or Article to be Classified) (Compatibility (Classification 

Group) Code) 
phosphides or a pyrophoric substance) and needing 
isolation of each type 
Articles predominantly containing extremely insensitive N 1.6N 
substances 
Substance or article so packed or designed that any S 1.45 


hazardous effects arising from accidental functioning are 
confined within the package unless the package has been 
degraded by fire, in which case all blast or projection 
effects are limited to the extent that they do not 
significantly hinder or prohibit firefighting or other 
emergency response efforts in the immediate vicinity of 
the package 


NOTES 


1 Articles of compatibility groups D and E may be fitted or packed together with their own means of initiation provided that such 
means have at least two effective protective features designed to prevent an explosion in the event of accidental functioning of the 
means of initiation. Such articles and packages should be assigned to compatibility groups D or E. 


2 Articles of compatibility groups D and E may be packed together with their own means of initiation, which do not have two 
effective protective features when, in the opinion of the competent authority, the accidental functioning of the means of initiation 
does not cause the explosion of an article under normal conditions of transport. Such packages should be assigned to compatibility 
groups D or E. 


11.1.2 Classification of Explosives with Compatibility Group 


Hazard Compatibility Group 

Division A B C D E F G H J K L N S 
1.1 LIA | LIB |1.1C (11р | LIE | 11F {116 1.1J 1.1L 

1.2 12B |12С |1.2D |12Е |1.2F |1.2G |12Н |12J|12K | 1.2L 

1.3 1.3C 1.3F |1.3G |13Н |1.3J | 1.3K | 1.3L 

1.4 14B |14С |14D |14Е | 14F |14С 1.4S 
1.5 1.5D 

1.6 1.6N 


17 


IS 18149 : 2023 


11.1.3 Provisions of Transportation for 
Compatibility Groups A to K and N 


Goods in Compatibility Groups A to K and N may 
be transported in accordance with the following 
provisions: 


a) Packages bearing the same compatibility 
group letter and the same division number 
may be transported together; 

Goods of the same compatibility group but 
different divisions may be transported 
together provided that the whole is treated as 
belonging to the division having the smaller 
number. However, when goods of Division 
1.5, Compatibility Group D, are transported 
together with goods of Division 1.2, 
Compatibility Group D, and the total of the 
consignment should be treated as Division 
1.1, Compatibility Group D, for the 
purposes of transport; and 

Packages bearing different compatibility 
group letters should not in general be 
transported together (regardless of the 
division number) except in the case of 
compatibility group letters C, D, E and S. 


b 


— 


С 


ми 


NOTE — Other combinations of compatibility groups А to 
K and N may be permitted under provisions applicable to 
the individual mode of transport. 


11.1.4 Provisions of Transportation 
Compatibility Groups C, D and E 


for 


Goods in compatibility groups C, D and E are 
permitted to be carried together in the same unit load 
or cargo transport unit provided the overall 
classification code should be determined in 
accordance with the classification procedures given 
in UN Model Regulations on the transportation of 
dangerous goods. The appropriate division should 
be determined in accordance with 11.1.3 b). Any 
combination of articles in compatibility groups C, D 
and E should be assigned to compatibility group E. 
Any combination of substances in compatibility 
groups C and D should be assigned to the most 
appropriate of the compatibility groups shown in 
11.1.2, taking cognizance of the predominant 
characteristics of the combined load. 


11.1.5 Provisions of 
Compatibility Groups S 


Transportation 


for 


Goods in Compatibility Group S may be transported 
with goods in all compatibility groups other than A 
and L. 


11.1.6 Provisions of 
Compatibility Groups L 


Transportation 


for 


Goods in Compatibility Group L should not be 
transported with goods in other compatibility 


groups. Furthermore, goods in compatibility group 
L should only be transported with the same type of 
goods within compatibility group L. 


11.1.7 Provisions of 
Compatibility Groups N 


Transportation for 


Goods of Compatibility Group N should not in 
general (see 11.1.3 b)) be transported with goods in 
other compatibility groups except S. However, if 
these goods are transported together with goods of 
compatibility groups C, D and E the goods of 
compatibility group N should be considered as 
goods having compatibility group D 
(see also 11.1.4). 


11.1.8 Provisions of Mixed Transport of Goods of 
Class 1 with Dangerous Goods of other Classes 


For mixed transport of goods of Class 1 with 
dangerous goods of other classes the following 
provisions should be ensured: 


a) Except where otherwise specially provided 
for in this standard, goods of Class 1 should 
not be transported together in freight 
containers, vehicles or wagons with 
dangerous goods of other classes; 

Goods in Division 1.4, compatibility group 
S, may be transported together with 
dangerous goods of other classes; 


b 


wm 


c) Basting explosives (except UN 0083 
Explosive, blasting, type C) may be 
transported together with ammonium 
nitrate (UN Nos. 1942 and 2067), 


ammonium nitrate emulsion or suspension 
or gel (UN 3375) and alkali metal nitrates 
(for example UN 1486) and alkaline earth 
metal nitrates (for example UN 1454) 
provided the aggregate is treated as blasting 
explosives under Class 1 for the purposes 
of placarding, segregation, stowage and 
maximum permissible load; 
NOTE — Alkali metal nitrates include caesium nitrate 
(UN 1451), lithium nitrate (UN 2722), potassium nitrate 
(UN 1486), rubidium nitrate (UN 1477) and sodium nitrate 
(UN 1498). Alkaline earth metal nitrates include barium 
nitrate (UN 1446), beryllium nitrate (UN 2464), calcium 
nitrate (UN 1454), magnesium nitrate (UN 1474) and 
strontium nitrate (UN 1507). 

d) Life-saving appliances (UN Nos. 3072 and 
2990) containing Class 1 goods as 
equipment may be transported together 
with the same dangerous goods as 
contained in the appliances; and 
Air bag inflators, or air bag modules, or 
seat-belt pretensioners, of Division 1.4, 
compatibility group G, (UN 0503) may be 
transported with air bag inflators or air bag 
modules or seat-belt pretensioners of Class 
9 (UN 3268). 


е 


— 


11.2 Transport of Gases 


Aerosols transported for the purposes of 
reprocessing or disposal should only be transported 
in well-ventilated cargo transport units other than 
closed freight containers. 


11.3 Transport of Self-Reactive Substances 


11.3.1 All  self-reactive substances, organic 
peroxides and polymerizing substances should be 
protected from direct sunlight and all sources of 
heat, and placed in adequately ventilated areas. 


11.3.2 Where a number of packages are assembled 
in a freight container, closed road vehicle or unit 
load, the total quantity of substance, the type and 
number of packages and the stacking arrangement 
should not create an explosion hazard. 
and Infectious 


11.4 Transport of Toxic 


Substances 
11.4.1 Toxic Substances 


11.4.1.1 Segregation from foodstuffs 


The substances marked as or known to be toxic 
(packing groups I, II and III) should not be carried 
in the same railway wagon, lorry, hold of a ship, 
compartment of an aircraft or other cargo transport 
unit with substances marked as or known to be 
foodstuffs, feeds or other edible substances intended 
for consumption by humans or animals. The 
relaxation of this position may be allowed for 
substances of packing groups II and III provided the 
competent authority is satisfied that the packing and 
segregation аге adequate to prevent Ше 
contamination of foodstuffs, feeds or other edible 
substances intended for consumption by humans or 
animals. 


11.4.1.2 Decontamination of cargo transport units 


A railway wagon, lorry, cargo space of a ship, 
compartment of an aircraft or other cargo transport 
unit which has been used to carry substances marked 
as or known to be toxic (packing groups I, II and IIT) 
should, before  re-use, be inspected for 
contamination. A railway wagon, lorry, hold of a 
ship, compartment of an aircraft or other cargo 
transport unit which has been contaminated should 
not be returned to service until such contamination 
has been removed. 


11.4.2 Infectious Substances 
11.4.2.1 Responsibility of carrier 


The carriers and their staff responsible for 
transportation of dangerous goods should fully 


IS 18149 : 2023 


understand all applicable regulations for the 
packing, labelling, transport and documentation of 
consignments of infectious substances. The carrier 
should accept and expedite the transport of 
consignments conforming to the rules in force. If the 
carrier finds any error in the labelling or 
documentation, it should be immediately notified to 
the consignor or consignee so that the appropriate 
corrective measures should be taken. 


11.4.2.2 Actions to be taken in the event of damage 
or leakage 


The person responsible for the carriage of packages 
containing infectious substances who becomes 
aware of damage to or leakage from such packages 
should: 


a) avoid handling the package or keep handling 
to a minimum; 

inspect adjacent packages for contamination 
and put aside any that may have been 
contaminated; 

inform the appropriate public health 
authority or veterinary authority, and 
provide information on any other countries 
of transit where persons may have been 
exposed to danger; and 

d) notify the consignor and/or the consignee. 


b 


— 


с 


— 


11.4.2.3 Decontamination of cargo transport units 


A railway wagon, road vehicle, cargo space of a 
ship, compartment of an aircraft or other cargo 
transport unit which has been used to transport 
infectious substances should be inspected for release 
of the substance before re-use. If the infectious 
substances were released during transport, the cargo 
transport unit should be decontaminated before it is 
re-used. Decontamination should be achieved by 
any means which effectively inactivates the released 
infectious substance. 


11.5 Transport of Radioactive Material 


The compliance of requirements for the safe 
transport of radioactive material as prescribed in 
AERB Safety Code No. AERB/NRF-TS/SC-1 (Rev.1) 
issued by Atomic Energy Regulatory Board shall be 
ensured. 


11.6 Transport of Portable Tanks 


Portable tanks should only be transported on 
vehicles whose fastenings are capable, in conditions 
of maximum permissible loading of the portable 
tanks. 


12 TRAINING 


12.1 The persons engaged in the transport of 
dangerous goods should be trained in the contents of 


IS 18149: 2023 


dangerous goods requirements commensurate with 
their responsibilities. 


12.2 The training 
individuals who, 


should be imparted to the 


a) classify dangerous goods; 

b) pack dangerous goods; 

c) mark and label dangerous goods; 

d) prepare transport documents for dangerous 


goods; 

e) offer or accept dangerous goods for 
transport; 

f) carry or handle dangerous goods in 
transport; 

g) load or unload packages of dangerous 
goods; and 

h) directly involved in the transport of 


dangerous goods including driver, crew 
members and as determined by the 
competent authority. 


12.3 The training to individuals should include the 


following aspects: 


The following 
should be 


a) General Awareness — 
general awareness training 
provided: 


1) Each person should be trained in order 
to be familiar with the general 
provisions of dangerous goods transport 
requirements; and 


2 


МУ 


Training should include а description of 
the classes of dangerous goods; 
labelling, marking, placarding, 
packaging, segregation, handling and 
compatibility requirements; a 
description of the purpose and content 


of the dangerous goods transport 
document; and а description of 
available emergency response 
documents; 


b) Function-Specific Training — Each person 
involved in dangerous goods transport 
should be trained for the specific function 
requirements that person performs; 


с) Safety Training — Commensurate with the 
risk of exposure in the event of a release and 
the functions performed, each person should 
be trained for the followings: 


1) Methods and procedures to avoid 
accidents such as proper use of 
package-handling equipment апа 
appropriate methods of stowage of 
dangerous goods; 

2) Competency to act on available 
emergency response information; 


20 


3) Preventing exposure to hazards and 
general dangers presented by the 
various classes of dangerous goods 
including the use of personal protective 
clothing and equipment; and 

4) Immediate procedures in the event of an 
unintentional release of dangerous 
goods, including emergency response 
procedures and personal protection 
procedures should be followed. 


d) Minimum Qualification of Road Driver — In 
addition to valid driving license to drive a 
transport vehicle, the driver should read and 
write one Indian language as well as 
English. Also, the driver should have a 
certificate having successfully passed 3 days 
course in transportation of dangerous goods 
from the institute/training centre recognized 
by the state government/MoRTH. The 
curriculum of such training courses should 
be in line with curriculum given in CMVR. 
Thereafter, license holder should get the 
license endorsed at Regional Transport 
Office (RTO) for driving a vehicle carrying 
dangerous goods. 


12.4 Training to Individuals for Different Modes 
of Transport 


For any specific requirements related to training 
applicable to different mode of transport, the 
provisions given under 10 should be followed. 


12.5 Records of Training 


The records of training should be kept by the 
employer and made available to the employee or the 
competent authority, upon request. These records 
should be kept by the employer for a period of time 
established by the competent authority. 


13 SECURITY AND SAFETY PROVISIONS 


АП persons engaged in the transport of dangerous 
goods should comply with the following security 
and safety provisions for the transport of dangerous 
goods commensurate with their responsibilities: 


a) Each crew member involved in transporting 
dangerous goods should carry documents such 
as photo identification issued by Ше 
government, driving license, medical/fitness 
certificate (vision and general health) and other 
relevant documents depending on mode of 
transport; 

b) Anemergency escape mask should be available 
with each crew member of the vehicle carrying 
goods with Division 2.3 or Division 6.1; 


d) 


е) 


g 


h) 


A shovel, a drain seal and a compatible 
collecting container should be available in the 
vehicle carrying solids and liquids of Class 3, 
Division 4.1, Division 4.3, Class 8 and Class 9 
only; 

The crew should carry a first aid kit and any 
other safety items identified in risk assessment 
(for example chemical spill kit, chemical over 
suit, protective overalls, safety boots, hard hat 
etc); 

Each member of the crew should carry a torch, 
a pair of protective gloves, safety glasses, eye 
wash and a warning vest along with two self- 
standing warning signs for the vehicle; 
Consignors should only offer dangerous goods 
to carriers that have been appropriately 
identified; 

Transit sites, such as airside warehouses, 
marshalling yards and other temporary storage 
areas should be properly secured, well-lit and, 
where possible, not be accessible to the general 
public; and 

The consignment should be halted as soon as 
possible, if during the journey, an infringement 
occurs which could jeopardize the safety of the 
operation, bearing in mind the requirements of 
traffic safety, safe immobilization of the 
consignment and public safety. The transport 
operation should only be continued once the 
consignment complies with applicable laws and 
guidelines given in this standard. 


14 ROLE OF PARTICIPANTS/STAKEHOLDERS 


14.1 Consignor/Shipper 


The consignor/shipper should have a place of 
business in the state. If no person in the state satisfies 
this requirement, the consignee of the goods should 
assume the duties of the consignor. When the 
consignor acts on behalf of a third party, the latter 
should inform the consignor in writing that 
dangerous goods are involved and provide all the 
information and documents needed to perform the 
consignor's obligations. 


The consignor/shipper should in particular: 


a) ascertain that the dangerous goods are 
classified and authorized for carriage in 
accordance with provisions given in this 
standard; 

b) furnish the carrier with information and 
data and, if necessary, the required 
transport. documents including TREM 
card, Safety Data Sheet (SDS) and 
accompanying documents (authorizations, 
approvals, notifications, certificates, etc). 
The consignor should ensure that a carrier 
is informed in advance of the nature of the 
dangerous goods to be picked up and, when 


21 


с) 


d) 


е) 


g 


h) 


aD) 


k) 


m) 


IS 18149 : 2023 


a driver arrives on site, ensure that all 
necessary documentation is provided; 

use only packaging, large packaging, 
intermediate bulk containers (IBCs) and 
tanks (tank-vehicles, demountable tanks, 
battery-vehicles, MEGCs, portable tanks 
and tank containers) approved for and 
suited to the carriage of the substances 
concerned and bearing the markings 
prescribed in 7. The tanks shall be 
approved by PESO/any other government 
agency, where required, to meet the 
regulatory requirements; 

comply with the provisions on the means 
of dispatch and on forwarding restrictions 
as prescribed in 9; 

comply with security and safety measures 
as prescribed in 13; 

ensure that the driver(s) involved in 
transportation of dangerous goods carrying 
an appropriate driver training certificate 
and photo identity. Also ensure that vehicle 
is equipped with first-aid, safety equipment 
and antidotes as may be necessary; 

to make transport agency aware of the risks 
involved in transportation of dangerous 
goods to health or safety of any person; 
ensure emergency procedures are in place 
as prescribed in 18; 

ensure all persons involved іп 
transportation of dangerous goods are 
appropriately trained in advance as 
prescribed in 12; 

ensure that the carrier should be fitted with 
Automatic Vehicle Location Tracking 
(AVL) System with an integrated 
emergency system preferably conforming 
to IS 16833; and 

consignor in consultation with consignee 
and carrier should prepare route map for 
transportation of dangerous goods and 
same may be monitored by 
consignor/consignee. The carrier should be 
responsible to follow the decided route map 
and any deviation, if any should be brought 
to the knowledge of consignor/consignee 
along with the justification. 


14.2 Carrier 


The carrier should ensure that: 


a) 


b) 


the goods carriage has a valid registration 
to carry the said goods and the said carriage 
is safe for the transport of the said goods; 
the vehicle is equipped with necessary first- 
aid, safety equipment including fire 
extinguishers, toolbox апа antidotes as 
may be necessary to contain any accident; 


IS 18149: 2023 


c) the driver of the goods carriage carrying d) Keep written emergency instructions 
dangerous goods holds and carry a valid readily available in the vehicle; 
driving licence; e) All safety equipment and PPE should be 

d) the dangerous goods to be carried are available in the vehicle and in case of any 
authorized for carriage in accordance with deficiency or missing items, inform the 
this standard; carrier immediately; 

e) all information prescribed in 8.2 provided f) The vehicle is properly plated, placarded, 
by the consignor before carriage is marked and is kept clean. The plates, 
complete and accurate in all respects and placards and other mark which are not 
correspond to the classification of such required should be removed or covered; 
goods as specified in 5; g) The damaged or leaking packages should 

f) a monitoring/audit procedure is carried out not be loaded; 
to assess the transport vehicle for defects, h) Apart from members of the vehicle crew, 
leakages, cracks, missing equipment, etc. no passengers should be carried in transport 
and to check whether the date of the next units carrying dangerous goods; 
test/maintenance for the transport vehicle j) Not to open a package containing 
has not expired; dangerous goods during transit; 

g) the vehicle is not overloaded; k) Any torch or lighting apparatus used should 

h) the danger labels and markings for the not exhibit any metal surface liable to 
vehicle have been affixed as per 7; produce sparks; 

j) security and safety measures are in place as m) No smoking should be done during 
prescribed in 13; handling operations in the vicinity of the 

k) emergency procedures are in place as vehicle and inside the vehicle; 
prescribed in 18; n) The engine should be shut off during 

m) both driver and crew are suitably trained in loading and unloading operations, except 
advance of any work involving dangerous where it has to be used to drive the pumps 
goods as per 12; or other appliances and the laws of the 

n) drivers should also hold an appropriate country in which the vehicle is operating 
driver training certificate; permit such use; 

p) the laid down route plan for each trip p) No vehicles carrying dangerous goods 
should be followed by the driver unless should be parked Without the parking 
directed or permitted by the police/local brakes being ар plied and that trailers 
authorities and also fix a time table for each without braking devices are restrained from 
trip to the destination should be laid down moving by applying at least one-wheel 
and followed; and chock; : T . 

q) CMVR and/or state government q) If responsible for tank filling or emptying, 
notifications are followed on the restriction ensure compliance of 14.5; 
of working hours of drivers in case of r) The occurrence of an accident should be 
transportation by road. reported immediately to the nearest police 

station/local authorities, concerned person 
14.3 Driver and Vehicle Crew notified in the emergency response 
documents and also the owner of the goods 
In addition to compliance of the provisions given carriage or the transporter; 
under Motor Vehicle Driving Regulations 2017, s) Adhere to the supervision provisions of the 
drivers and/or crew members should ensure the vehicle; and 
followings in particular: t) Special care needs to be taken while 
travelling with dangerous goods by 

a) Carry their driver training certificate, valid maintaining safer speeds and safer gaps 
driving licence and photo identity card as (both front and back) with other vehicles on 
relevant; the road. A marking on the back of the 

b) Read and understood transport vehicle mentioning ‘Danger-Maintain at 
documentation provided in advance of any least 30 m distance’ is desirable. 
transport operation. If an issue does arise 
with the documentation, the crew members 14.4 Packer 
should raise and rectify any matter prior to 
the start of the journey; The packer should ensure: 

c) All documents related to transportation of 


dangerous goods including TREM card 


a) compliance of the provisions concerning 


packing, or mixed packing as prescribed in 


should be kept in the driver’s cabin and 
6; and 


available at all times during the trip; 


22 


b) compliance of the provisions concerning 


marking and labelling of the packages as 
prescribed in 7 while preparing packages for 
carriage. 


NOTE — These provisions may vary and inputs may be 
taken from DGSA, if required. 


14.5 Filler 


The filler in particular should ensure that: 


a) prior to the filling of tanks, the equipment is 


b) 


с 


) 


d) 


e 


) 


= 
— 


k 


— 


in a satisfactory technical condition; 

the date of the next test for the transport 
vehicle is not expired; 

only authorized tanks are filled with the 
dangerous goods for carriage; 

not more than the maximum permissible 
degree of filing or the maximum 
permissible mass of contents per litre of 
capacity for the substance while filling the 
tank; 

no dangerous residues of the filling 
substance adhere to the outside of tanks 
filled or emptied; 

closing devices are leak-proof after filling 
the tank; 

no dangerous residue of the filling substance 
adheres to the outside of the tank; 

the placards and labels are affixed on the 
tanks, containers and vehicle in accordance 
with this standard; 

the compliance of relevant provisions of this 
standard while filling vehicles or containers 
with dangerous goods are followed; and 
there is a good electrical connection to the 
earth prior to the emptying or filling 
operation as may be appropriate (for 
example flammable liquids). 


14.6 Loader 


The loader should ensure the following: 


a) Handover the dangerous goods to the carrier 


b 


с 


— 


ми 


only if they are authorized for carriage in 
accordance with provisions given in this 
standard; 

When handing over the dangerous goods to 
the carrier check the packaging for any 
damage. The loader should not hand over a 
package if its packaging is damaged, 
especially if it is not leak-proof and there are 
leakages or the possibility of leakages of the 
dangerous substance, until the damage has 
been repaired; 

While loading dangerous goods in a vehicle, 
or a large or small container, ensure 
compliance of the special requirements 


23 


d 


e 


wm 


М7 


IS 18149 : 2023 


concerning loading and handling 
mentioned in this standard; 
Compliance of the provisions concerning 
danger markings after loading dangerous 
goods into a container as prescribed in 7; and 
To comply with the prohibitions on mixed 
loading, taking into account the dangerous 
goods already loaded in the vehicle. In 
addition, also ensure the compliance of the 
requirements concerning the separation of 
foodstuffs, other articles of consumption or 
animal feedstuffs. 


as 


14.7 Tanker Operator 


The operator of the tank-container/portable tank 
should be responsible for all related operations and 


ensure: 


a) compliance with 


b 


с 


ми 


wm 


the requirements for 
construction, equipment, tests and markings 
as given in this standard; 

that the maintenance of shells and their 
equipment is carried out in such a way that 
under normal operating conditions, the tank 
container/portable tank satisfies the 
requirements of this standard until the next 
inspection; and 

to have an exceptional check made when the 
safety of the shell or its equipment is liable 
to be impaired by a repair, an alteration or an 
accident. 


14.8 Unloader 


The unloader should in particular ensure the 


following: 


a) Ascertain 


b 


С 


а 


ми 


ме 


wm 


that the correct goods are 
unloaded by comparing the relevant 
information on the transport document with 
the information on the package, container, 
tank, MEMU, MEGC or vehicle; 

Before and during unloading, should verify 
whether the packaging, the tank, the vehicle 
or the container is damaged to an extent 
which would endanger the unloading 
operation. In such case of damage, the 
unloading should not be carried out until 
appropriate measures have been taken; 
Immediately following the unloading of the 
tank, vehicle or container: 

1) remove any dangerous residues which 
have adhered to the outside of the tank, 
vehicle or container during the process 
of unloading; and 

2) ensure the closure of valves 
inspection openings; 

The containers once completely unloaded, 
cleaning, decontamination and removal of 


and 


IS 18149: 2023 


danger markings display on vehicle are 
carried-out; and 

e) In case the unloader makes use of the 
services of other participants (cleaner, 
decontamination facility etc), the 
appropriate measures should be taken to 
ensure the compliance of this standard. 


14.9 Consignee (Customer or Recipient) 


The consignee who takes charge of the dangerous 
goods when delivered should ensure the following: 


a) Not to defer acceptance of the goods without 
compelling reasons and should verify the 
compliance of this standard after unloading; 

b) In the case of an infringement of the 
requirements of this standard, the consignee 
may immediately inform the consignor or 
carrier and return the container to the carrier, 
if needed, and only after the infringement 
has been remedied, the container should be 
accepted; and 

If the consignee makes use of the services of 

other participants (unloader, cleaner, 

decontamination facility etc), the 
appropriate measures should be taken to 
ensure compliance of this standard. 


с 


ми 


14.10 Dangerous Goods Safety Advisor - DGSA 


The consignor, consignee or carrier responsible for 
packing, handling, loading,  unloading and 
transportation of dangerous goods on regular basis 
should preferably appoint at least one Dangerous 
Goods Safety Advisor (DGSA). A formally 
appointed DGSA may be an employee, the head of 


the business or an external consultant. DGSA 
should be а certified/trained person апа 
successfully pass specified — exam(s) as 


recommended by the competent authority. 


The main responsibilities of a DGSA are as 
follows: 


a) Ensuring compliance of rules апа 

regulations pertaining to the packaging, 

transportation and storage of dangerous 

goods; 

Advising on the potential security aspects 

and risk involved of transport of each 

consignment; 

с) Advising on the selection of carriage for 

dangerous goods; 

Investigating, preparing and compiling 

reports on any accidents or emergencies; 

e) Prepare and submit an annual report to 
management of transport agency or a local 
public authority, as appropriate, on the 


b 


— 


d 


М7 


24 


activities in the carriage of dangerous goods 
including incidents of accidents апа 
emergencies. The records of reports should 
be retained for five years and made available 
to the authorities on demand; and 

f) Periodic review of training mechanism and 
behavioral aspects of carrier crew. 


15 NON-COMPLIANCE 


15.1 In the case of non-compliance of any provision 
of this standard, potential non-conformity should be 
informed to the consignor, consignee or carrier 
responsible for packing, handling, loading, 
unloading and transportation of dangerous goods. 


15.2 The consignor, 
appropriate, should: 


consignee ог carrier as 


a) take immediate steps to mitigate the 
consequences of the non-compliance; 

b) investigate the non-compliance and its 
causes, circumstances and consequences; 

c) take appropriate steps to identify the causes 
of non-compliance and take corrective 
actions as well as preventive actions to 
avoid recurrence of the non-compliance; 
and 

d) communicate the investigation report to the 
management and relevant authorities, as 
appropriate, which includes the causes of 
the non-compliance and the corrective or 
preventive actions taken or to be taken. 


15.3 The communication of the non-compliance to 
the consignor and relevant competent authorities 
should be made as soon as practicable and it should 
be immediate whenever an emergency exposure 
situation has developed or is developing. 


16 USE OF GPS AND IT 


Trucks carrying Dangerous Goods should be 
equipped with a GPS device for visibility and real 
time monitoring of the cargo to ensure the following: 


a) Route guidance and avoidance of 
congested areas; 

b) Immediate assistance in case of accidents; 

c) RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) 
chips would help to save time/delays at 
tolls and checkpoints; 

d) Assessment of risks in case of traversing 
through tunnels or over-bridges; and 

e) Assistance in loading pattern of the vehicle 


(as prevalent on ships). 


17 CERTIFICATION AND INSPECTION 


Certification and Inspections should be a regular 
feature in the movement of dangerous goods. 


17.1 Certification 


The following certifications should be ensured by 
the carrier agency: 


a) Vehicle and carriage fitness; 

b) Medical fitness certificate of drivers and 
crew members handling dangerous goods; 

c) Proper loading inspection; and 

d) Mandatory equipment. 


17.2 Inspection and Role of Local Authorities 


The local authorities, such as police, fire service 
department, state PWD, highway toll plaza, should 
ensure the followings, as relevant, for the safe 
movement of dangerous goods: 


a) Provide adequate infrastructure in terms of 
proper wide roads and lights in order to 
avoid accidents; 

The highway patrol should ensure the 
smooth flow of traffic on the highways and 
highway rescue squads need to be set up at 
critical locations for rendering prompt 
response in case of accidents; 

c) Local police should be aware of the 
provisions for transportation of dangerous 
goods under the CMVR and verify the 
compliance; 

Continuous monitoring of movement of 
transportation of dangerous goods. A 
dedicated consignment tracking system 
should preferably be made by the local 
authorities which should be linked to fire, 
police and emergency control rooms 
including medical services; and 


b 


— 


d 


М7 


25 


IS 18149 : 2023 


e) The RTO should carry out the verification of 
the consignment and the carrier to ensure 
compliance of the provisions given in this 
standard. 


18 EMERGENCY ACTION 


18.1 All employers including consignee, consignor 
and transport agency are responsible to carry out a 
risk assessment and prepare emergency action 
procedure to minimize and control hazards. 


18.2 АП the participants engaged in different 
operations of transportation of dangerous goods 
including driver and other crew members should be 
provided training, all relevant documents, and 
procedures relevant to operations and supervision to 
act on emergency action procedure. 


18.3 All the participants engaged in various 
processes including packaging, labeling, handling 
and transport of dangerous goods should have 
documented procedures, as appropriate, to deal with 
the situations such as: 


a) chemical spills; 

b) fire explosion; 

с) road traffic incidents involving dangerous 
goods; 

d) personal and/or 
contamination; and 

е) security incidents/loss of dangerous goods. 


environmental 


To deal with such accidents, the driver as well as the 
transport agency should notify the emergency 
services, of any immediate risk to public safety, 
property or the environment. 


NOTE — Compliance of act/rules/notifications issued 
by government and relevant to transportation of all the 
classes of dangerous goods should be ensured. 


IS 18149: 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4) 


ACTS, RULES AND REGULATIONS 


SINo. . Act/Rules/Notification 


1. Carriage by Road Act, 2007 

2. Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 

3. Explosive Rules, 2008 

4. Petroleum Rules, 2002 

5. Manufacture, Storage and Import of Hazardous Chemical Rules, 1989 as amended 

6. The Factories Act, 1948 

T. The Chemical Accidents (Emergency, Planning, Preparedness and Response) Rules 1996, Ministry 


of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 


8. The Aircraft (Carriage of Dangerous Goods) Rules, 2003 


26 


IS 18149 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 7.1) 
LABELS FOR PACKAGES 
B-1 LABELS/TRANSPORT PICTOGRAM 
Label Division or Symbol and Symbol Colour Background | Figure in Bottom Corner Specimen Note 
Model No. Category (and Figure Colour) Labels 
Class 1: Explosive Substances or 
Articles 
1 Divisions Exploding bomb: black Orange 1 -** Place for division — to be left blank if 
11, (black) explosive is the subsidiary hazard 
r8 -* Place for compatibility group — to be left 
blank if explosive is the subsidiary hazard 

1.4 Division 1.4 1.4: black Orange 1 * Place for compatibility group 
Numerals should be about 30 mm in (black) 
height andbe about 5 mm thick (for a 
label measuring 100 mm x 100 mm) 

1.5 Division 1.5 1.5: black Orange 1 * Place for compatibility group 
Numerals should be about 30 mm in (black) 
height andbe about 5 mm thick (for a 
label measuring 100 mm x 100 mm) 

1.6 Division 1.6 1.6: black Orange 1 * Place for compatibility group 
Numerals should be about 30 mm in (black) 
height andbe about 5 mm thick (for a 
label measuring 100 mm x 100 mm) 


27 


IS 18149: 2023 


(Continued) 
Label Model Division or Category Symbol and Symbol Background Figure in Bottom Corner Specimen labels Note 
No. Colour (and Figure 
Colour) 
Class 2: Gases 
2.1 Division 2.1: Flame: black or white Red 2 - 
Flammable (black or white) 
gases 
2.2 Division 2.2: Gas cylinder: black Green 2 - 
Non-flammable, non-toxic orwhite (black or white) 
gases 
2:3 Division Skull and White 2 - 
2.3: Toxic crossbones :black (black) 
gases 


28 


(Continued) 


IS 18149 : 2023 


Label Model Division or Category Symbol and Background | Figure in Bottom Specimen Labels Note 
No. Symbol Colour Corner (and Figure 
Colour) 
Class 3: Flammable Liquids 
3 - Flame: black or Red 3 - 
white (black or white) 
Class 4: Flammable Solids; Substances Liable to Spontaneous Combustion; 
Substances which, in Contact with Water, Emit Flammable Gases 

4.1 Division 4.1: Flame: black White with 7 4 - 

Flammable solids, self- vertical red (black) 

reactive substances, stripes 
polymerizing substances 
andsolid desensitized 
explosives 

4.2 Division 4.2: Flame: black Upper 4 - 

Substances liable to half (black) 

spontaneous combustion white, 
lowerhalf 
red 
4.3 Division 4.3: Flame: black or Blue 4 - 
Substances which, in contact white (black or white) 


with water emit flammable 
gases 


29 


IS 18149: 2023 


(Continued) 
Label Model Division or Category | Symbol and Symbol Background Figure in Bottom Specimen Labels Note 
No. Colour Corner (and 
Figure Colour) 
Class 5: Oxidizing Substances and Organic Peroxides 
5.1 Division 5.1: Flame over circle: Yellow 5.1 - 
Oxidizing black (black) 
substances 
5.2 Division 5.2: Flame: black or white | Upper half red, 5.2 - 
Organic lower half (black) 
peroxides yellow 
Class 6: Toxic Substances and Infectious Substances 
6.1 Division 6.1: Skull and crossbones: White 6 - 
Toxic black (black) 
substances 
6.2 Division 6.2: Three crescents White 6 The lower half of the label may 
Infectious superimposed on (black) bear the inscriptions: 
substances acircle: black “INFECTIOUS 


SUBSTANCE” and 

“In the case of damage or 
leakage immediately — notify 
Public Health Authority” in 
black colour 


30 


(Continued) 


IS 18149 : 2023 


Label model 
No. 


Division or 
Category 


Symbol and 
Symbol 
Colour 


Background 


Figure in Bottom 
Corner (and Figure 
Colour) 


Specimen Labels 


Note 


Class 7: Radioactive 


Material 


7А 


Category І 
-WHITE 


Trefoil: black 


White 


7 
(black) 


NNRADIOACTIVE 1.7/7 
CONTENTS Ф 
NN activity 9 
N 
A / 
МАА 


Text (mandatory) black in lower half of 
label: “RADIOACTIVE” 

“CONTENTS ...” 

“ACTIVITY ...” 

One red vertical bar should follow the 
word:“RADIOACTIVE” 


7B 


Category II 
-YELLOW 


Trefoil: black 


Upper half yellow 
with whiteborder, 
lower half white 


7 
(black) 


Text (mandatory) black in lower half of 
label:XRADIOACTIVE" 

“CONTENTS ..." 

"ACTIVITY ..." 

In a black outlined box: 

"TRANSPORT 

INDEX”; 

Two red vertical bars should follow the 
word: *RADIOACTIVE" 


7C 


Category III 
-YELLOW 


Trefoil: black 


Upper half yellow 
with whiteborder, 
lower half white 


7 
(black) 


Text (mandatory) black in lower half of 
label: “RADIOACTIVE” 

“CONTENTS ..." 

“ACTIVITY ...” 

In a black outlined box: 

"TRANSPORT 

INDEX". 

Three red vertical bars should follow the 
word: *RADIOACTIVE" 


7E 


Fissile material 


White 


7 
(black) 


Text (mandatory): black in upper half of label: 
“FISSILE”; 

In a black outlined box in the lower half of label: 
“CRITICALITY SAFETY INDEX” 


IS 18149: 2023 


(Continued) 
Label Division or Symbol and Symbol Colour Background Figure in Bottom Specimen Labels Note 
Model No. Category Corner (and 
Figure Colour) 
Class 8: Corrosive substances 
8 - Liquids, spilling from two glass vessels Upper half white, lower half 8 - 
andattacking a hand and a metal: black black with white border (white) 
Class 9: Miscellaneous Dangerous Substances and Articles, Including Environmentally Hazardous Substances 
9 - 7 vertical stripes in upper half: White 9 underlined - 
black (black) 

9A - 7 vertical stripes in upper White 9 underlined - 


half:black; 
battery group, one broken and 
emittingflame in lower half: 
black 


(black) 


32 


IS 18149 : 2023 


B-2 TYPICAL LABEL WITH DETAILS 


See Fig. 6. 
Orientation label Primary class О Standardized UN certification 
(optional) label (according to standard) 
(2) Shipping name б) UN number © Subsidiary class label 


FIG. 6 DANGEROUS GOODS PACKAGE WITH LABELS 


33 


IS 18149: 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 7.3) 


EMERGENCY INFORMATION PANEL 


C-1 EMERGENCY INFORMATION PANELS POSITION 


See Fig. 7. 


Emergency Information Panels 


Back Side 


Tanker 


Emergency Information Panels 


FIG. 7 PLACES FOR FIXING EMERGENCY INFORMATION PANELS ON VEHICLES 


34 


IS 18149 : 2023 


C-2 EMERGENCY INFORMATION PANEL DIMENSIONS 


See Fig. 8. 


FIG. 8 PANEL DIMENSIONS (АП dimensions in mm) 


35 


IS 18149 : 2023 


C-3 TYPICAL EXAMPLES SHOWING EMERGENCY INFORMATION PANEL 


See Fig. 9 and Fig. 10. 


HYDROGEN PEROXIDE, 
AQUEOUS SOLUTION 


b CORROSIVE 


IN EMERGENCY DIAL 
PO LICE or Name of Consignor 
FIRE BRIGADE 


FIG. 9 SINGLE SUB RISK 


IN EMERGENCY DIAL 
or Name of Consignor Name of Consignor 
A. 200 mm square Primary Hazard Label B. 50 mm square Sub-Risk Labels 
trimmed to fit permitted to overlap borders 


Fic. 10 Two SUB RISK 


NOTE — For labels/transport pictogram, additional provisions applicable for different mode of transportation of dangerous goods as 
per 10 should be followed 


36 


IS 18149: 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 8.2) 


DANGEROUS GOODS DECLARATION FORM 


1 Shipper/Consignor/Sender 


2 Transport document number 


3 Page No. of 4 Shipper's Reference 


5 Freight Forwarder’s 
Reference 


6 Consignee 


7 Carrier (to be completed by the carrier) 


SHIPPER'S DECLARATION 


I hereby declare that the contents of this consignment are 
fully and accurately described below by the Proper 
Shipping Name, and are classified, packaged, marked and 
labelled/placarded and are in all respects in proper 
condition for transport according to the applicable 
international and national governmental regulations. 


8 This Shipment is within the Limitations Prescribed 


for: 


(Delete non-Applicable) 


Passenger and Cargo 


Cargo Aircraft Only 


Aircraft 
10 Goods Carriage 11 Place of loading 
12 Place of discharge 13 Destination 


9 Additional Handling Information 


14 Shipping Marks Number and kind of Packages, 


Description of Goods 


Gross Mass (kg) Net Mass (kg) Cube (m?) 


37 


15 18149: 2023 


15 Container Identification | 16. Seal Number(s) 
Number / Vehicle 


Registration no. 


17 Container/Vehicle | 18 Tare Mass 19 Total 
size and type (kg) Gross Mass 
(including 

tare) (kg) 


CONTAINER/VEHICLE PACKING 
CERTIFICATE 


I hereby declare that the goods described above have 
been packed/loaded into the container/vehicle identified 
above in accordance with the applicable provisions ** 


MUST BE COMPLETED AND SIGNED FOR ALL 
CONTAINER/VEHICLE LOADS BY PERSON 
RESPONSIBLE FOR PACKING / LOADING 


21 RECEIVING ORGANISATION RECEIPT 


Received the above number of 
packages/containers/trailers in apparent good order and 
condition, unless stated hereon: 


RECEIVING ORGANISATION REMARKS: 


20 Name of Company 


Haulier's Name 22 Name of company (of 


shipper preparing this note) 


Name/status of declarant 


Vehicle Registration No. | Name/status of declarant 


Place and Date 


Signature and Date Place and date 


Signature of declarant 


Driver’s Signature Signature of Declarant 


38 


АММЕХ Е 


IS 18149: 2023 


(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Transport Services Sectional Committee, SSD 01 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Agri Value Chain Services Private Limited, Chennai 


Air Passengers Association of India, Chennai 


АП India Transporter's Welfare Association, New Delhi 


Asian Institute of Transport Development, New Delhi 


Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India, 
New Delhi 


Association of State Road Transport Undertakings, New Delhi 


Bureau of Civil Aviation Security, New Delhi 
Bus and Car Operators Confederation of India, Chennai 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Carrier Transicold India, Mumbai 


Clariant Chemicals India Limited, Mumbai 


Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune 


Container Corporation of India, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


DG Shipping, Mumbai 
Domestic Air Cargo Agents Association, Navi Mumbai 


Dredging Corporation of India Limited, Vizag 


Federation of Cold Storage Associations of India, Lucknow 


Federation of Freight Forwarders' Associations in India, Mumbai 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, 
New Delhi 


39 


Representative(s) 
PROF GEETAM TIWARI (Chairperson) 
SHRI R. SIVAKUMAR 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI PRADEEP SINGAL 
SHRIMAHENDRA ARYA (Alternate I) 
SHRIJ. P. SINGLA (Alternate II) 


SHRI RAGHU DAYAL 
SHRI B. N. PURI (Alternate) 


SHRIRAJKIRAN JAYARAM KANAGALA 
SHRID. S. RAJORA (Alternate I) 
SHRI KAUSHAL LAL GUPTA (Alternate ЇЇ) 


SHRIR. К. К. KISHORE 
SHRI PRAFUL MATH (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI А. AFZAL 


DR ERRAMPALLI MADHU 
DR MINAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PANKAJ MEHTA 
SHRI AKSHAY M. RAJAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI JOSHUA R. D'SOUZA (Alternate II) 


SHRIMATI TEJESHRI PINGALE 


SHRI К. V. К. K. PRASAD 
SHRI RAJKUMAR MALAJURE (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI NITIN VYAS 
SHRI A. M. VISVANATHAN (Alternate) 


CAPT RAJENDRA POSWAL 
REPRESENTATIVE 


PROFG. Y. V. VICTOR 
CAPT S. V. PRASAD (Alternate I) 
SHRI T. V. SURESH KUMAR (Alternate П) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI ALAN JOSE 
SHRI SHANKAR SHINDE (Alternate) 


SHRI SACHIN HARITASH 


IS 18149 : 2023 
Organization 


Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 


Human Qind Design Foundation, New Delhi 


Indian Federation for Road Safety, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad, Ahmedabad 


Indian Institute of Management, Bengaluru 


Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 


Indian Ports Association, New Delhi 


Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Limited, 


New Delhi 


Indian Railways Institute of Logistics and 
Materials Management, New Delhi 


Indian Railways Institute of Transport Management, 
Lucknow 
Indian Road Congress, New Delhi 


Indian Road Transport & Development Association 
(IRTDA), Mumbai 


Infrastructure Industry and Logistics Federation of India, 
New Delhi 


Inland Waterways Authority of India, Noida 


Logistics Sector Skill Council, Chennai 


Ministry of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 


Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Department of 
Commerce, New Delhi 


Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, New Delhi 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, New Delhi 


Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, 
New Delhi 


40 


Representative(s) 
SHRISANJAY HARLAKA 
MS RUCHI VARMA 


SHRI VINOD KUMAR KANUMALA 
SHRI DHEERENDRA SAMINENI (Alternate I) 
SHRI BODE SAI DEEPAK (Alternate IT) 


PROF NITIN SETH 
PROF DEEPANKAR SINHA (Alternate) 


PROF DEBJIT ROY 
PROF SANDIP CHAKRABARTI (Alternate) 


DR ADITYA GUPTA 


DR BABU RAO GUDURI 
SHRI SUBODH K. JUIKAR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI HARENDRA SINGH 
SHRI KAMAL KATHIAT (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI ASHOK GOYAL 
SHRI ABHISHEK GUPTA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI A. K. BANSAL 
SHRIL. K. RAJAK (Alternate I) 
SHRI K. К. SAHOO (Alternate IT) 
SHRI SURENDER SINGH (Alternate IIT) 
SHRI ARVIND KUMAR (Alternate IV) 


CAPT T. S. RAMANUJAM 
SHRIRAVIKANTH Y AMARTHY (Alternate I) 
SHRIRAMESH VENKAT (Alternate II) 
SHRIRAGHUL К. (Alternate III) 


MS BHAWNA SINGH 
SHRI BLALAJI SRINIVASAN (Alternate I) 


DR SURENDRA KUMAR AHIRWAR 
SHRI ANANT SWARUP (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Organization 


National Center for Cold Chain Development, New Delhi 


National Institute of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai 


Nayara Energy Limited, Mumbai 


Packaging Industry Association of India, Mumbai 


Prasanna Purple Mobility Solutions Private Limited, Pune 


PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited, Gurugram 


Research Designs and Standards Organization 
(RDSO), Lucknow 


S G Architects, New Delhi 
Samarthyam — National Centre for Accessible 
Environments, New Delhi 


Services Export Promotion Council, New Delhi 


TRAX - Road Safety NGO of India, New Delhi 


The Chartered Institute of Logistics and Transport India, 
New Delhi 


Transmitr Sewa Foundation, Navi Mumbai 
Transport Corporation of India Limited, Gurugram 


XLRI - Xavier School of Management, Jamshedpur 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 18149 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI BRAJENDRA SINGH 
SHRI ANGSHUMAN SIDDHANTA(Alternate) 
DR VIVEK KHANZODE 
PROF RAVINDRA GOKHALE (Alternate I) 
PROF RAKESH RAUT (Alternate II) 


SHRI SESHKUMAR IYER 
SHRI BALVINDER SINGH BHATTI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI PRASANNA PATWARDHAN 
SHRI H. N. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI J ATIN LOHMORH 
SHRI KARUN JALALI (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. SINGH 
SHRI GAURAV KUMAR SINGH (Alternate I) 
SHRI MOHIT VERMA (Alternate II) 


DR SANDEEP GANDHI 


SHRIMATI ANJILEE AGARWAL 
SHRI DEBABRATA CHAKRAVARTI (Alternate IY) 
SHRIMATI NIDHI MADAN (Alternate II) 


DR ABHAY SINHA 
MS ALPA ANTANI (Alternate) 


SHRI ANURAG KULSHRESTHA 
SHRIMATI RAJNI GANDHI (Alternate I) 
SHRI NISHANT AGRAWAL (Alternate II) 


SHRI VINOD ASTHANA 
SHRI RAJIV KUMR KOCHHAR (Alternate I) 
DR VENI MATHUR (Alternate ЇЇ) 


SHRI MOHAN SUBRAMANIAM 
REPRESENTATIVE 


DR T.A.S. VJAYARAGHAVAN 
SHRI ABHISHEK CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. KANOGIA, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (SERVICE SECTOR) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SHIVAM SONI 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(SERVICE SECTOR), BIS 


IS 18149: 2023 


Panel for drafting standard on Transportation of Dangerous Goods - SSD 01/P1 


Organization 
CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Agri Value Chain Services Private Limited, Chennai 


АП India Transporter's Welfare Association, New Delhi 


Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India, 
New Delhi 


Association of State Road Transport Undertakings, 
New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, 
New Delhi 


Indian Road Congress , New Delhi 


Infrastructure Industry and Logistics Federation of India, 
New Delhi 


Indian Road Transport & Development Association 
(IRTDA), Mumbai 


Logistics Sector Skill Council, Chennai 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, New Delhi 


National Center for Cold Chain Development, New Delhi 


Samarthyam - National Centre for Accessible Environments, 
New Delhi 


The Chartered Institute of Logistics and Transport India, 
New Delhi 


XLRI - Xavier School of Management, Jamshedpur 


42 


Representative(s) 
DR ERRAMPALLI MADHU (Convener) 
DR MINAL (Alternate) 


SHRI R. SIVAKUMAR 


SHRI PRADEEP SINGAL 
SHRI MAHENDRA ARYA (Alternate I) 
SHRI J. P. SINGLA (Alternate II ) 


SHRI RAJKIRAN JAYARAM KANAGALA 
SHRI D. S. RAJORA (Alternate I) 
SHRI KAUSHAL LAL GUPTA (Alternate ЇЇ) 


SHRIR. К. К. KISHORE 
SHRI PRAFUL MATH (Alternate) 


SHRI NITIN VYAS 
SHRI A. M. VISVANATHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SACHIN HARITASH 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI ASHOK GOYAL 
SHRI ABHISHEK GUPTA (Alternate) 


CAPT T.S. RAMANUJAM 
SHRIRAVIKANTH Y AMARTHY (Alternate I) 
SHRIRAMESH VENKAT (Alternate II) 
SHRIRAGHUL К. (Alternate III) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI BRAJENDRA SINGH 
SHRI ANGSHUMAN SIDDHANTA (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI ANJILEE AGARWAL 


SHRI DEBABRATA CHAKRAVARTI (Alternate I) 


SHRIMATI NIDHI MADAN (Alternate IT) 


SHRI VINOD ASTHANA 
SHRI RAJIV KUMR KOCHHAR (Alternate I) 
DR VENIMATHUR (Alternate ЇЇ) 


DR T.A.S. VJAYARAGHAVAN 
SHRI ABHISHEK CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: SSD 01 (18008). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


