IS 15339:2003 W7-m

T-kMf RGid
Indian Standard
PUBLIC LIBRARY -- GUIDELINES

ICS 01.140.20

0 BIS 2003

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 .hdy 2003
Price Group 10

Documentation and Information Sectional Committee, MSD 5

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Documentation and Information Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council, Standard is a term used for the development and strengthening of any service. So, every effort has to be taken for effective library service pooling all human energies. To meet this end, standards are necessary at all points. Definitely, the standards will promote for economy in human effort, efficient utility of the existing finances, and improve the services. This will also reduce the barriers in free flow of information. The guidelines will facilitate the functioning of the standards in the procedure of its implementation. and the guidelines should be revised at least once in ten years. Standards

IS 15339:2003

Indian Standard
PUBLIC LIBRARY -- GUIDELINES
1 SCOPE

This standard provides guidelines provided by public library.
2 REFERENCES

for services

microfilm or video, audio cassette or a photograph; b) every sheet of music, atlas, map, chart or plan separately printed or lithographed; and c) news papers, periodicals materials. and other such

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the below. standards given ` IS No. Title

3.5 City Librarian -- The librarian appointed to be in-charge `of city public library and other libraries under the dcmtrol of city library authority. 3.6 City Librarian Authority -- Library authority constituted for a city. 3.7 Community Information Services -- A service which assists individuals or groups to solve their day-to-day problems to the possible extent of providing relevant information. 3.8 Competent Authority -- Any person, officer or any authority authorized by Government by notification to perform the functions of the ~ompetent authority under the Act for such area or for such purposes as may be specified in the notification. 3.9 Current Awareness Service -- Notifying the latest information to the users in the form of bulletins or in magnetic tapes. 3.10 Data Bank -- A place where information is collected and stored properly. 3.11 District Librarian -- The librarian appointed to be in-charge of district public library and other libraries under the control of District Library Authorities. 3.12 District Library Authority -- A library authority constituted for a revenue district. 3.13 Library -- An institution of books meant for use. It should be located in a building and manned by qualified staff. Books and periodicals including newspaper shall be kept in sufficient number. There should be provision for lending, consultation and a children's section. 3.14 Microform -- A generic term indicating any form ofmicrore cord, such as, microfilm, microfiche, etc, whether on a flat or roll film, photo paper, etc. 3.15 Mobile Library -- A libraryon a vehicle,covering several service points in a period. 3.16 Professional
1 Librarian -- A person qualified

1553:1989

Design of library buildings -- Recommendations relating to its elements ( second primary
revision )

1829

Specification for library furniture and fittings:

( Part IJ :1978 Timber (Part 2): 1993 Steel (first revision ) 1883:1983 Specification for metal shelving racks ( adjustable type") ( third
revision ) Code of practice for library lighting

2672:1966 4116:1988

Specification for wooden shelving cabinets ( adjustable types) ( second
revision )

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 3.1 Academic Library -- A library maintained by a research institution, university, college or school. 3.2 Aided Library -- A library declared by the Government to be eligible for aid either from the Government or from any fund. 3.3 Book Deposit Centre -- A place where few books are kept and returned at certain intervals to the neighboring library.
3.4 Book -- Any volume, part or division of a volume:

a)

be it a printed book or manuscript or a

IS 15339:2003 by education, training, study and experience of practical library work in a position requiring knowledge of books and of library aims and techniques attained through graduation from a library school accredited by a university or Government. 3.17 Public Library -- A public library is defined as: a) Any library established or maintained by city/ district library authorities including the branches, the mobile libraries, village libraries, and book deposit centres of such a library; Any library established, maintained and managed by the Government and declared open to the public; Any library established or maintained by a local body or cooperative society or religious endowment or registered body and declared open to the public; Any library declared to be eligible for grant in-aid and receiving aid from the Government or from the library fund; or Raja Rammohan Roy Library Foundation; and Any other library notified by the Government as a public library for the purposes of this Act. for education, information and culture. Its objectives are as follows: a) It shall foster universal education, as a continuing and life long process among the individual and the groups including neoIiterates and illiterates; [t shall act as a centre, where the record of human thoughts and his creative imagination are freely available; It shall act as a cultural centre for the promotion and enjoyment of arts; It shall act as a centre of recreation and relaxation by reading; [t shall provide suitable information particularly on the topics of day-to-day need and of all sciences; It shall help for positive utilization of leisure;

b)

c) d) e)

b)

c)

f)

d)

@ It shall have access to citizens in a community, including less privileged, disadvantages, handicapped, and the people of backward areas and tribals; h) j) k) It shall make special provision for improving the talents of neo-literates and children; It shall be established under clear mandate of law, with a state-wise equitable coverage; It shall be absolutely free for rendering services like lending, consultation and supply of general community information. However, specialized services like photocopying, etc, may be charged nominally;

e)

3.18 Public Library System -- A library system consisting of a state public library, regional public libraries, district public libraries, divisional public libraries, block libraries, village libraries, book deposit centres, mobile libraries and other connections and subsidiaries as may grow up in connection with it. 3.19 Reading Room -- A place where newspapers and periodicals are kept for general reading. 3.20 Reference and Research Library -- A library containing reference books, periodicals volumes and other reading materials which may not be normally lent out and which has research facilities. 3.21 Resource Centre -- A collection of books or non-book materials of all kinds which are relevant sources of information and instruction to a public or an academic library. 3.22 Service Point -- A unit, where the public have access to use it. 4 STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC LIBRARY 4.1 Objectives

m) It shall provide books, periodicals, newspapers and other printed materials and the collections shall include a wide range of appropriate media like videos, CD-ROMs, etc; n) It shall be supported by state and central agencies like Raja Rammohan Roy Library Foundation; It shall have linkage with the educational, social and cultural institutions of the areas; It shall utilize the support of all government agencies and voluntary organizations serving for the cause of public; It shall service for the development of complete man, with universal outlook and brotherhood; It shall ultimately help to live with peaceful co-existence; and It shall be an essential institution in the developed and developing community and in the most under-developed and backward areas.

P) q)

r)

s) t)

A public library is a social institution meant for overall development of ail people. It is a basic instrument in promoting peace, understanding and is a vital source 2

IS 15339:2003 5 GOVERNANCE 5.1 Governance As per the Constitution of India, the libraries form thepart ofastate subject. So, the state government or its local body or corporate body or voluntary organization shall maintain the library. Mere administrative orders cannot workout for effective library service. Statutory obligation isessential for systematic governance of the libraries. So, all the states and union territories should pass Library Acts in their respective jurisdiction. 5.2 Components of Library Act
5.2.1 Comprehensive Preamble

OF LIBRARIES

5.2.7 Accountability

and Audit

Every District Library Authority or State Library Authority shall have a provision for maintenance of accounts. The accounts of the authority shall be open to the public inspection, and shall be subject to audit, disallowance, and surcharge and shall be dealt with in all other respects in such a manner, as may be prescribed. 5.2.8 Report and Returns Every authority must be obliged to submit such reports and returns and furnish such information to the director or any person authorized by him on his behalf prescribed in the Act. 5.2.9 Inspection All the institutions managed by the authority shall be subject to inspection by an ofllcer, for the purpose of satisfying himself that the provisions of the Act and Rules, and the bye-laws made thereunder are carried out. 5.2.10 Press and Registration
of Books Act

The preamble should clearly spell out the objectives of library legislation and therefore, should be precise and explicit. 5.2.2 State Library Authority In every act, there should be a provision for a State Library Authority, It should be clearly spelt out in the Act that the Minister for Education/Libraries shall be the State Library Authority. 5.2.3 State Library Council There should be a State Library Council, to advise the Government on all matters concerning the Act. The chairman of the council should be an elected person from the non-official members of the council. 5.2.4 Directorate There should be a provision in the Act for an independent Directorate of Public Libraries, headed by a professional who can think and plan for the betterment of the profession in a broader perspective. 5.2.5 State Library System The public library system should be comprehensive for providing library service both in the urban and the rural areas. An effective system should have a state public library at the apex level. Regional libraries are necessary, if the conditions warrant the same. Establishment of a district public library is essential at the district level. Provision should be there to start as many branches as possible. There should also be a provision to start reference and research libraries, mobile libraries and book deposit centres. 5.2.6 Financial
Resources

The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867, is a Central Act. While applying it to a state, a provision shall be made in the Public Libraries Act for implementation of the Act. The Public Libraries Act should specify the number of copies to be sent to the Registrar of the Books and the mode of disposal of these books received under the provision of the Act. 5.3 Model Act A Model Public Libraries Act is given in Annex A for guidance. This can be modified as per the local needs. 6 PREMISES AND EQUIPMENT 6.0 A public library should simply be eye catching, with architectural design to attract the public to utilize the resources frequently. It should have invities features.
6.1 Physical Facilities 6.1.1 All the public libraries should be located in a suitable premises to discharge the function efficiently.

"

6.1.2 The building of a library should be designed as per IS 1553 and 1S2672. 6.1.3 The premises should be planned in such away that it should primarily be aesthetic, functional, flexible and capable of extension. Modular construction is preferred. 3

Systematic generation of funds on a sound legal basis helps the perennial growth of libraries. Provision from state educational budget or levying library cess, with a matching grant from the State Government are the sources for raising financial resourci%.

IS 15339:2003

6.1.4 The building should relocated inthe heartof the city, town or village and should be situated at some distance from the noisy roads. 6.1.5 For the non-air conditioned buildings, the ceiling should be more than 10.6 ft in height. 6.1.6 Ample scope should be given to natural lighting and fresh air particularly in reading rooms. 6.1.7 The flooring should be noise proof, preferably covered with carpet or matting. 6.1.8 The floor capacities mentioned below: a) b) c) d) are worked out as

b) Newspapers, newsletters and periodicals; c) d) e) Music; Maps, charts, globe, illustrations, etc; and Dolls, paintings, art collection, etc.

7.3 Core Collection
7,3,1 A public library should have a core collection

of balanced stock of reading materials. To start with, it should possess at least 1 000 items of the core collection in the following area: a) b) c) Classics of the native regional language, Classics of the other language, and Material on the local area -- at least up to district level.

40 books in 1 m shelf area, 2.33 m2per reader, 5 m2 per administrative staff member, and 9 m2per technical staff member.

6.1.9 While planning the building, future need for 20 years shall be taken into consideration. 6.2 Furniture and Fittings
6.2.1

7.4 Reference books, such as, language dictionaries, multilingual dictionaries, encyclopedias, year books, directories, atlases, maps -- at least one item in the local language. Besides these items, every library should possess the quick reference items, such as: a) b) c) d) e) t) g) Bus time-table, Telephone directory, Railway time-table, Local directory, Calendar with astronomical positions, Tourist guides, and Distance maps.

The libraries should follow IS 1829( Part 1 ), IS 1829( Part2 ), IS 1883 andIS4116 for its furniture and fittings.

6.2.2 It is not desirable that each library system should have its own specifications and designs in respect of buildings, furniture and fittings. The State Library Authority should see that these standards are implemented. 7 READING MATERIALS 7.1 General Every library system should have a policy for the selection, acquisition and maintenance of reading materials and as well as audio-visual materials, which should be approved by the State Library Authority.
7.1.1

7.5 Books for children preferably illustrated books, folklore, brain-in games books. 7.6 Audio-Visual
Material

7.6.1 The public library should acquire a good collection of audio-visual materials including T.V., video cassettes, audio cassettes, gramophone records, slides, films and magnetic tapes in sufficient number.

7.1.2 The materials of the library should have factual accuracy, good exposition, sincerity in attempt and in a popular form, and should be of high standard. 7.1.3 The type $etting, paper, printing and binding should be quite conducive to the readers. 7.1.4 The material should always be selective and the materials of crime, crude, sex and obscene shall be avoided as far as possible. If by chance acquired, they should be kept under special care of the librarian. 7.2 A modern public library should acquire a balanced stock of the following types of reading material: a) Books, booklets, pamphlets, including Braille books: 4

7.6.2 Microforms -- such as, microfilms, microfiches, microcards. 7.6.3 This should be supplemented annually and out of date material shall be withdrawn to keep the collection up to date. 7.7 Newspapers and Periodicals
7.7.1 The public library should acquire newspapers,

at least one local newspaper and subject periodicals in proportionate ratio as per the local requirement. 7.7.2 It is also recommended to get at least one broad sheet to cater to the needs of neo-literates. 7.7.3 Periodicals of permanent value shall be acquired and got them bound ( volume wise ).

IS 15339:2003 7.8 Ratio of Reading Materials 7.8.1 Thepublic libraries should acquire atleast one book per literate in the collection and it should be supplemented annually as per the local need and demand. 7.8.2 Children up to the age group of 14 constitute about 30-40 percent in India. So, there should be at least 20 percent children's books in the book stock. 7.8.3 Similarly, there should be at least 50 percent periodicals including newspapers in a public library serving to a reading population of 3000. This figure should be raised proportionately keeping in view of the local need and demand and the available financial resources. 7.9 Withdrawal of the Reading Material 7.9.1 The reading material shall be withdrawn, when it was torned or soiled by excess usage or outdated and found no need to keep it in the stock. Rare books to be withdrawn from the stock should be thoroughly scrutinized by subject experts and the management. 7.9.2 The material withdrawn from the stock shall be replaced by latest editions. 7.9.3 Among the withdrawn material at least one sound copy shall be kept in a dormitory. 7.10
LOSS

library. However, nomembership isnecessary to use thelibrary in the premises. Itisdesirable that each member should produce the identity card before he enters the library. 8.4 Library Material to be Issued All books kept in the general collection can be borrowed. Reference books, rare and valuable books, thesis maps, microforms, films, etc, will not be issued. Bound of loose back volumes of periodicals may be loaned out for overnight references to the teaching staff only. Books which are temporarily in great demand may be issued for a shorter period or may be declared as reference books. Current journals will not be issued. New books added to the library and exhibited will be issued only after a week from the date of the exhibit. 8,5 Issue System 8.5.1 Members shall see that books have been properly issued against their names and check the library tickets before leaving the counter. 8.5.2 Borrowers have to check the book before it is issued and ifa book is damaged it should be brought to the notice of the staff, otherwise the member shal I be held responsible for any damage discovered while returning the book. 8.5.3 Books can be renewed, provided no other member, has demanded the book. 8.5.4 Borrower ticket are not transferable. Borrowers will be responsible for all the books issued on their tickets. 8,5.5 If a book is not returned by the members, an over-due charge shall be invited. 8,5.6 A member against whom any amount is overdue or other charges are outstanding for a specified period will not be allowed to borrow until he has paid the amount due. 8.6 Loss of Borrower's
Ticket

of Books

7.10.1 Adequate security arrangements should be made to prevent the loss of books to the possible extent. Librarians should not be penalized for loss of books unless gross negligence is proved. 8 RULES FOR LIBRARY
SERVICE

Each public library should have a set of rules of service, serving the community more effectively. 8.1 Name of the Library The library shall have a name which should be prominently displayed. 8.2 Working Days and Hours of the Library The library will remain open throughout the year except on the national holidays or any other day notified in advance. The issue counter will close half an hour before the closure of the library. 8.3 Membership All the inhabitants of a community can enroll as a member by paying a caution money. He will be given one borrower's ticket to that effect. This is necessary to borrow the reading materials from the 5

If a member losses any ticket, the fact-should be immediately reported failing which, the member will be responsible for any book issued on the lost ticket. A duplicate ticket will be issued on payment. 8.7 Loss or Damage of Books Members are responsible for the safe custody and return of the books in time. Damage or loss of books shall be immediately reported to the librarian. Members are liable to replace the damage or lost books or pay the cost of the books. If a rare or out of print book is lost and a copy of it cannot be procured the member shall make the payment as fixed by the librarian.

IS 15339:2003 8.8 Useofthe Library 8.8.1 Members are free to browse the books in the library and such books taken out of the shelves should be left on the tables. They should not mark, underline, or write in the library books. Strict silence should be maintained. Smoking, eating, sleeping is strictly prohibited in the Library. Any one who violates the Rules and Regulations of the library would be liable to lose the privilege of membership. 8.8.2 These rules should be approved by the management of the library. The management reserves right to add, delete, alter or modify any of the above rules when found necessary. 9 LIBRARY SERVICES 9.1 Target Groups Human beings of all walks of life irrespective of any consideration shall become the target group of public libraries, in rendering suitable service to them. They can be categorized as follows. 9.1.1 By,4ge a) c) Children, Adults, and b) c) d) d) e) t) House bound readers, Neo-literates, and Uneducated.

9.1.5 By Physical Illness a) b) Mental Iy retarded, and Physically handicapped.

9.2 Minimum Facilities A public library should provide the folIowing minimum facilities, however small unit it may be, in whichever backward area it is serving: a) Reading room to read newspapers, periodicals and books; Lending facility to loan books for some reading; Children's section to create reading habits in tiny tots; and Service points should work at least 6 h in a day at convenient times to the users.

9.3 Services for Special Groups These groups constitute the following categories of people, such as: 9.3.1 Disadvantaged
People

b) Youth, d) Aged above 70. 9. [.2 By Education a) b) c) d) e) t) Pre-primary school, Primary school, Secondary school, Senior Secondary school, Degree college, and Postgraduate centre and university.

Such as patients in hospitals, prisoners, persons kept in correctional institutions. 9.3.2 Less Privileged
People

Such as people recognized as minorities in the state, people living in the slum areas, and most backward areas, tribals etc. 9.3.3 Physically
and Mentally Handicapped

9.1.3 By Profession a) c) d) e) ~ g) h) j) Teacher, Business man, Industrialist, Scientist, Handicrafts man, Skilled worker, House wife, and Unemployed.

Such as blind, deaf, dumb and mentally retarded. 9.3.4 Old Age People Who cannot move outside the house, or staying in old age homes. 9.3.5 House Wives Who are not accustomed to come to the library. 9.4 Service for Illiterates 9.4.1 Public libraries should rendered specialized service to the illiterates with a specially trained personnel and if possible with a separate budget provision. It shall be obligatory on the library system to render possible library service for creating social awareness in the illiterates by arranging exhibitions, film shows, wall posters and so on. This should lead them to become literates.

b) Agriculturist,

9.1.4 By Special Group a) b) c) Patients, Prisoners, Travelers,

IS 15339:2003

9.4.2 The public library system should explore the possibility to open separate sections exclusively in the institutions meant for the above groups 9.4.3 Special category of reading materials may be selected for each group or groups, large print books are desirable. 9.4.4 Home lending of books, cassettes, etc, should be arranged for the groups who can not walk or come to the library. The library must go to them. 9.4.5 Braille books and talking books should be made available to the blind individually or through organizations, 9.4.6 Video cassettes should be made available to the deaf people in the library premises or with a door deliver facility. 9.4.7 Publishers should be encouraged or supported to publish books specially written for minorities, tribals and people who live in hill areas. Books written in local dialect, and printed in bold script should be given high priority. 9.4.8 Broad sheets as designed by National Institute of Adult Education should be adopted locally wherever possible and feasible. 9.5 Children's
Section

to develop their home library. 9.6 Community Information Service ( CIS ) The community information service should be recognized as a focal points of the public library system. It is an essential area of a functional public library service. It shall be an integrated part in the working of the system. 9.6.1 The State Library Authority ( SLA ) shall take the responsibility to develop an information bank in co-operation with the Government departments, statutory organizations, co-operations, corporations and other institutions, for implementing the community information service in the state. 9.6.2 The State Library Authority should take into consideration, the information available through GISTNIC terminal as state and district level informatics centres. 9.6.3 The libraries at blocidmandal and village levels should develop information bank of the locality keeping in view of the need of the clientele. 9.6.4 The libraries should develop community information files, manually till it is mechanized or computerized. 9.6.5 The thrust areas of community information services are given below: a) Geographical features of the locality. Here locality is confined to a block/mandal to a lower level, that is, to a village, hamlet or settlement. Men and women whose services are recognized by the Government and public. Educational studies. institutions and the areas of offices

Every public library, without even a single exception, shall maintain a children's section for developing, creating talents, and mental development in children. 9.5.1 The environment of the children's section should be made good and decorated well so that it looks like a children's play house. 9.5.2 Properly selected children's books and other reading materials, audio-visual material shall be kept in the section. 9.5.3 Photographs, paintings, maps, attractive toys, puppets, brain-in-games materials should find a place in this section. 9.5.4 Story telling, reading of books, book talks, competitions, indoor games, quiz should be organized frequently for encouraging creative talents in children. 9.5.5 Innovations, discoveries, some of the world's great events must find a place in this section, through books, illustrations, wall paintings, etc. Local great events and great people must find a suitable place in it. 9.5.6 The collections should be developed in close relation to the curriculum of the schools and the culture of the locality. 9.5.7 The children should be taught and encouraged 7

b) c) d) e)

Government or Quasi-Government and their services to the public.

Public services like bus, transport, postal, telegram, telephone, telex, courier and their areas of services. Private services like tourists information, tenant houses information, security services, hospitals, public health centres and their areas of services.

f)

@ Information about agriculture including farming methods, high yielding varieties of seeds, insecticides, pesticides, fertilizers, marketing and so on. h) j) Village handicrafts and industries, its financial resources, technical know-how. Daily necessities � availability places of food grains, provisions, garments, etc.

IS 15339:2003 k) Sources of finances like banking, credit societies, government subsidies, etc. of state library services for appointment of the staff in the public libraries. 10.1.2 Personnel working in public libraries working with the grant-in-aid of the Government or any other agency should be covered in the above mentioned facilities. 10.1.3 There should be three categories of posts in the library system: a) b) c) Professional, Semi-professional, and Non-professionals

m) Sources for redressal of grievances like village courts, civil courts, consumer courts, lokayukt, lok-adalt, police stations and so on. n) Social welfare schemes of the Government and voluntary organizations.

For the time being the community information service can be organized manually, but later a methodology should be worked out to link it with the national information services likeNICNET, NISSAT,INDONET, ~FLIBET, etc, terminals with the facilitiesof live access to data base shall be arranged in public libraries in the second phase. 9.7 Mobile Service The mobile library service is an essential item of the public library system. This should be started when there is no feasibility or viability to open a public library. 9.7.1 It should serve in an area where there is no public library service. 9.7.2 There should be at least one mobile van in a revenue division. 9.7.3 Besides books, this should contain audio-visual equipment, such as, T.V. , V,C.P., slide projector, etc. 9.7.4 It should accommodate and carry a minimum of 1 500-2000 books. This book stock should be changed frequently. 9.7.5 It should cover at least 3 to 5 service points a day in two shifts. 9.8 Cultural Centre A public library shall be a centre of cultural activities in a community.
9.8.1 It shall encourage the local talent by sponsoring

The professional must be a graduate with a degree in library and information science. The semi-professional must be with intermediate (+2) and with certificate in library service, recognized by a State Government or University.
10.2 Staff Pattern

In a library system a staff pattern should be followed to do justice to the objectives of the public library. There should beat least one professional at each point of the library. He should be supported by semiprofessional and other staff as per the norms of the However, a staff pattern State Government. recommended for the libraries at all levels is given below:
10.2.1 State Public Library

a) b) c) d) e) o g) h) J]
10.2.2

Librarian, Deputy Librarian ( Administration), Deputy Librarian ( Services), Assistant Librarian ( Services), Assistant Librarian ( Lending), Assistant Librarian ( Legal Deposit), Assistant Librarian (Community Information Services ), Assistant Librarian ( Adult Education), and Assistant Librarian (Training and Extension Wing ).
Regional Public Library

their programmed 9.8.2 H shall make arrangements for cultural activities of outside groups for mutual understanding and integration. 9.8.3 It should collect and preserve the local folk. lore and other forms of performing arts. 10 HUMAN RESOURCES 10.1 Qualified Staff The library system should have qualified, efficient and adequate staff for rendering service effectively. Care should be taken for selecting the personnel. The profession should be make lucrative for attracting better people. 10.1.1 The State Government should constitute a cadre
8

a) b) c) d) e)
10.2,3 a)

Librarian, Deputy Librarian ( Technical), Assistant Librarian ( Services), Assistant Librarian ( Bibliographies), Assistant Librarian ( Extension Wing).
District Public Library

. and

Librarian,

IS 15339:2003 b) c) d) Deputy Librarian ( Technical), Assistant Librarian ( Services ), and Assistant Librarian ( Reference).
Public Library

publicity and public relations, mobile library services. for promoting public m) Organizations UNESCO, IFLA and nonlibraries. governmental agencies. n) Library associations libraries in India. promoting public

10.2.4 Block/A4andal a) b) Librarian, and Attendant.

P) User education. 11 REVIEW OF SERVICES
11.1 Register of Libraries and Librarians 11.1.1 Each library system shall maintain a register of libraries and librarians and update it once a year. The register of libraries shall contain the following for each library:

10.3 Code of Ethics

There should be a code of ethics that shall be applied to all cadres of the staff to boost up morale in them. 10.3.1 This shall be prepared in consultation with the professional organizations and implemented by the management. 10.3.2 Code of ethics prepared by JOCLOT may be taken into consideration. 10.3.3 There should be appreciation when the employee has done a creditable work and should have a provision for disciplinary action when he could not discharge the duties satisfactorily. 10.4 Budget Provision The minimum ratio of expenditure on staff to other expenditure shall be 50:40 percent. 10.5 Training There should be separate in-house or a separate course designed for the personnel working in public libraries. An elective paper to be introduced at library level is given below. 10.5.1 Public Library System a) Concept of public library manifesto,

a) b) c) d) e) o

Name of the library and address, Year of establishment, Registration No. and date, Management, Assets of the library, Reading materials, Services available,

g) Number of registered borrowers enrolled-in a year, and the total number of borrowers, h) Number of visitors in a year, J] Number of books lent out in a-year, k) Number of books consulted in a year, m) De~ailsof professional and non-professional staff and their contribution to the library, n) Budget provisions, and P) Specialities and other details if any. 11.1.2 The register of librarians should contain the following details: a) b) c) d) e) o g) h) j) Name of the librarian and address, Date of birth, Academic and professional qualification, Designation and grade, Period of service, Books and papers published, Awards, if any, Seminars and workshops participated, and Any other details.

b) Nature and characteristics of public libraries. Role of public libraries. c) d) e) 9 g) h) J] k) History of public libraries with special reference to India. Role of Union and State Governments in library organization. Public library legislation; critical study of Library Acts in India. National and state library system. Development plans and programmed. National library policy. Role of public library in literacy and mass education. Resource sharing. co-operation. Library extension Networking activities. library Library 9

NOTE -- Librarianhere applies to all the professionals and semi-professionals.

11.2 Administrative

Report

11.2.1 The administrative report is an essential feature

IS 15339:2003 ofapublic institution. [tshall beprepared annually. It should throw much light on the growth and development of the library in a year. It should contain the following details: a) b) c) d) e) 9 g) h) j) Name of the library and address, Brief history, Assets of the library, Reading materials available, Library services, Library personnel, Cultural activities conducted, Library finances, and Highlights of the year. e) 11.3 Measuring Performance
11.3.1 The services of a system should be constantly evaluated. While measuring the performance the following items should be covered:

a) b) c) d)

Objectives of the library, Facilities available, Utility of the services, The reasons for the successor failure on the part of resources, staff and the clientele, and Comparison with similar systems.

The evaluation should be an integrate part of the management processes. However, it is desirable to get the services evaluated by an outside agency at least once in five years.

ANNEX A ( Clause 5.3 )
MODEL PUBLIC LIBRARIES ACT
CHAPTER 1

A-3 COMMENCEMENT It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification appoint and they may appoint different dates for different provisions and for different areas.
CHAPTER 2

PRELIMINARIES A-1 PREAMBLE

An Act to provide for the establishment and operation of an integrated, comprehensive and efficient rural and urban public library service and recognition of right to learn including the access to information educational and cultural resources in the State for the socio-economic aspirations of the people and matters connected herewith. Be it enacted by the legislature of the . .. .. ......... .. . State .. . . .. . ... inthe .. . . .. . .. ... year of the Republic of India as follows: A-2 PRELIMINARIES A-2.1 This Act may be called ... . .. Public Libraries Act, 111.... A-2.2 It shall extend to the whole of the State of .. . .. ... . A-2.3 It shall apply to all public libraries establishment, or maintained and administered by Government and City/District library authorities ( hereafter called as library authorities ). A-2.4 It shall apply to all public libraries filly or partly financed by the Government and the library authorities. A-2.5 It shall also apply to academic libraries located in universities, colleges and schools in some areas as may be prescribed.
10

TERMINOLOGY A-4 As referred under 3 of this standard. CHAPTER STATE LIBRARY 3 AUTHORITY

A-5 MINISTER AUTHORITY

AS STATE LIBRARY

The minister for libraries shall be the state library authority charged with the duty of implementing the Act. A-5.1 The minister for libraries shall exercise a general responsibility for overviewing the function of the public library system in the state. He shall establish, maintain and develop, an integrated comprehensive and efficient library service in the state. A-5.2 He shall promote the public library services in the state. A-5.3 He shall sanction the opening of new libraries and also taking over of private libraries.

IS 15339:2003
A-5.4 He shall develop infrastructural facilities such

d
h)

State librarian of the state public library; Two persons co-opted by the state library council at its meeting for their special knowledge of libraries; One person nominated by the Raja Rammohan Roy Library Foundation; Director of the Department of Information and Public Relations;

as buildings, furniture and equipment to all public libraries working under the state public libraries system. A-5.5 He shall also specify, lay down and publish the standards of library service, and see that these standards are strictly observed and that he shall keep the standards under continuous review. A-5.6 He shall arrange subsidy paid to the authors in respect of books lend out for home reading from the public libraries and exercise control over the public lending right of books and protect the authors from exploitation. A-5.7 He shall appoint and control the staff which may be necessary for efficient performance of duties and functions under the Act and the Rules made thereunder. A-6 CORPORATE BODY

j) k)

m) Three members nominated by Government from among the chairman of the City/District library authority; and n) Director of public libraries shall be the member secretary of the council.

A-9 FUNCTION OF THE COUNCIL A-9. 1 It shall exercise leadership in library matters throughout the state. A-9.2 It shall bring administration nearer to the people. It shall shape the library planning and policy, make provision for the specific knowledge and training of staff in those major areas of interest, which are primarily concerned with the success of the movement in the state. A-9.3 It shall be advisory in nature, and a source of expert opinion for the development of library service so as to advise and guide progress of libraries in the state. A-9.4 It shall bring matters of importance on public library service to the notice of the minister, and also advice on any matter referred by the minister. A-9.5 It shall make recommendations regarding the development, co-operation and co-ordination of library service in the state. A-9.6 [t shall initiate any proposal or approve any plan regarding the libraries. A-9.7 It shall guide and direct the improvement of the library services and the implementation of the Act. A-9.8 All the reports required to be placed on the table of the legislature, must be considered first by the council. A-9.9 It shall report to the Government, every year its findings, regarding the working of the Public Libraries Act and the achievement of standards. A-10 CO-OPTION OF MEMBERS IN DEFAULT OF ELE(XION If any of the bodies referred to in Section 8 and its sub-divisions do not, by such period as may be prescribed co-opt a person to be a member of the state library council to the vacancy, a person qualified for 11

The state library authority shall be a body corporate, having perpetual succession on common seal with power subject to the provisions of this Act, and rules made hereunder, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to enter into contracts and shall by the said name sue and be sued. A-7 GENERAL CONTROL AND SUPERVISION He shall have general control and supervision of all types of state owned and state assisted libraries in the State.
CHAPTER STATE LIBRARY 4 COUNCIL

A-8 CONSTITUTION

OF THE COUNCIL

As soon as may be, after the commencement of this Act, the Government shall, by notification, constitute for the purpose of the Act, a Council called ... ... State Library Council. The council shall consist ofi a) Chairman elected by the council at its first meeting after its formation from amongst the non-official members of the council; Two members elected by the legislative assembly and one from the council of the state (if there is a council ); The Secretary to Government -- Finance; The Secretary to Government -- Education; One person nominated by Government from amongst the recognize library associations; One librarian nominated by the Government from among the university librarians in the state;

b)

c) d) e)

9

IS 15339:2003 election thereto and the person so co-opted shall be deemed to be a member of the council as if he had been duly elected by the said body.
A-n VACANCIES

A-15 MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL A-1 5.1 The state libraries council shall meet at least four times in a year or dates fixed by the chairman. One of such meetings shall be the annual meeting.
A-1 5.2 The chairman may also, whenever he thinks fit, convene a special meeting of the council for the transaction of urgent business.

Any vacancies occurring in the office ofa nominated or elected member of the council before the expiration of his term shall be filled by nomination or election as the case may be and the persons so nominated, or elected shall hold office for the residue of the term of his predecessor. A-12 TERM OF OFFICE A-12.1 Every member of the council other than an ex-officio member, shall hold office for a period of three years from the date of his election or nomination as the case may be. A-12.2 Provided that such term of a member nominated or elected shall come to an end as soon as the member ceases to be a member of the body from which he was nominated or elected. A-12.3 An outgoing member shall be eligible for reelection or re-nomination, as the case maybe for one more term only. A-13 DISABILITIES MEMBER FOR CONTINUING AS

A-15.3 Subject to prescribed conditions, special meetings shall be convened by the chairman to discuss matters of urgent importance upon a requisition by members of the council. A-1 5.4 One-third of the total number of members of the council shall be the quorum for a meeting of the state library council. A-15.5 The chairman, if present, shall preside over every meeting of the council, In the absence of the chairman, the members present at the meeting shall choose one from among themselves to preside.
A-16 PROCEDURE OF THE COUNCIL

The State Library Council shall transact business in such manner and in accordnce with such procedure as may be prescribed. A-17 ACTION OF THE COUNCIL
BE INVALIDATED No act of the State Library Council shall be deemed

NOT TO

If any member other than an ex-ofjcio member of the State Library Council during the period for which he has been nominated or elected: a) Absents himself without excuse sufficient in the opinion of the council, from three consecutive meetings of the council; or In the case of a member elected by any body ceases to be a member of the body concerned, his office in the council shall become vacant.

to be invalidated by reason only on the existence of any vacancy in or any defect in the constitution of that council.
CHAPTER DEPARTMENT OF 5 LIBRARIES

b)

PUBLIC

A-18 SEPARATE DEPARTMENT

A-1 4 DISQUALIFICATIONS

A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as and for being a member of the State Library Council: a) If he has been sentenced by a criminal court for an offence involving moral turpitude and punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding three months, such sentence, not having been subsequently reversed, quashed or remitted unless he has, by order, which the Government is hereby empowered to make in this behalf, been relieved from the disqualification arising on account of such sentence; If he is an undischarged insolvent; and If he has unsound mind and stands so declared by competent court. 12

A-1 8.1 For the purpose of this Act, a Department of Public Libraries shall be constituted by the State Government with a Director of Public Libraries as its head and other professionals as officers -- as the State Government may think fit. A-18.2 The State Government shall appoint officers having the prescribed professional qualification and practice on the library profession. A-19 FUNCTIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT The Department of Public Libraries under the Director of Public Libraries shall: a) b) Supervise the public libraries and regional public libraries and its branches; Supervise, direct, control and deal with all matters relating to local library authorities and other public libraries;

b) c)

IS 15339:2003

c)

Promote the establishment of public library service so as to achieve the purpose of this Act; Prepare short-term and long-term plans and also supervise the implementation of the approved plan; Ensure proper utilization and control of the library fund and also manpower, at state and district.tevel. Centralize al}impersonal technical work such as acquisition, classification and cataloging, and co-ordinate the selection, service and maintenance of reading and kindred materials in the public, academic, departmental libraries of the state, according to the agreed conditions; for the state;

u)

Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as are imposed or conferred by this Act or the Rules made thereunder.
CHAPTER PUBLIC LIBRARY 6 SYSTEM

d)

e)

A-20 PYRAMIDICAL

STRUCTURE

9

The structural set-up of the state library system shall be as follows: a) b) c) d) e) f) State public library, Regional public libraries, City public libraries, District public libraries, Divisional public libraries, Mobile libraries,

g) Recognize the library associations working
h) Carry out such of the recommendations of the State Library Council as have been approved by the state library authority. Declare in accordance with the rules made under this Act, what libraries are eligible for aid from the Government. Organize national library week, seminars, conferences and book exhibitions, etc;

@ Block public libraries, h) Village public libraries, j) k) Book deposit centres, and Public libraries located in educational institutions, hospitals and prisons, the libraries under gram panchayats, municipalities, temples, and voluntary organizations and any other library in a village or town or city recognized by the Government as public library. OF THE LINK

j)

k)

m) Maintain a register of libraries and librarians in the state; n) Fix minimum standards of library service by various libraries under the department and assist the libraries in maintaining the standards, prepare standard designs for library buildings, equipment, timiture, fittings etc;

A-21 MAINTENANCE

A-21.1 An integrated link from the state public library to the village libraries shall be maintained for organization of the library service in the state. A-21.2 The activities of the libraries in the state shall be coordinated. A-21.3 There shall be active co-operation of the libraries in different managements, provided they are state owned or state assisted libraries.
CHAPTER STATE PUBLIC 7 LIBRARY

P) Fix the boundaries of operation of all public libraries and of different libraries in the state. q) Submit to Government every year through the State Library Council, a descriptive and critical report on working of public libraries in the state and give publicity for the progress of libraries in the state including the findings of the inspection and audit parties; Supervise, direct and deal with all matters relating to the press and registration of Books Acl, 1867(Central Act 25 of 1867)and maintain and manage the state copyright library; Assist the state library authority and carry on the correspondence and exercise the powers assigned to him by it in the discharge of its duties and the exercise of its powers in regard to this Act; Provide an infrastructure for community information service in the state; and 13

r)

A-22 APEX LIBRARY

s)

There shall be a state public library located in the state capital, as a reservoir of books and other materials for the proper functioning of the state public library system. A-23 STATE LIBRARIAN A-23.1 A wholetime off]cer having the prescribed professional qualifications to practice the library

t)

IS 15339:2003 profession shall be appointed by the State Government as the state librarian. A-23.2 Thestate librarian shall beassisted bytechnical and non-technical staff inrunning the library. A-23.3 The status ofa state librarian shall be that of Joint Director of the Department. A-24 FUNCTIONS LIBRARY OF THE STATE PUBLIC
CHAPTER REGIONAL A-26 REGIONAL PUBLIC 8 LIBRARIES

LIBRARIES

There shall be regional public libraries in the state, covering different regions in the state. They shall be wholly financed by the State Government. A-27 REG1ONAL LIBRARIAN
A-27. 1 A whole time officer having the prescribed

The functions of the State Public Library shall be as follows: a) b) c) It shall function as a reference and research library; Provide leadership in all activities in the field of libraries; Organize a survey and research unit and continuously carry on survey and research on different aspects of the library work; Provide documentation and information services to all and in particular to the legislative houses and other departments of the State Government; Maintain and manage the state dormitory library made of at least one sound copy each of the books weeded out by any library in the state on account of its having become outmoded in content and presentation, in order to meet the demand, at any time from any person engaged in antiquarian or bibliographical research; Perform such other functions as are entrusted to it by the State Library Council or the Government; Prepare annual report on the functioning of the library; Its powers and functions should be such as are conferred on it by Rules made under the Act by Government, keeping in view the character of the state public and regional public libraries.

professional qualifications shall be appointed by Government as regional librarian. A-27.2 He shall be assisted by the technical and nontechnical staff in running the library. A-27.3 The status of a regional librarian shall be that of a Deputy Director. A-28 FUNCTIONS OF THE REGIONAL PUBLIC
LIBRARY

d)

a) b) c) d)

Function as reference and research library of the region; Participate in adult education activities; Organize inter-library co-operation including inter-library loan; Set standards for the library authority and their branches, book deposit centres and Mobile Library Services; Compile bibliography for the region as well as preparation of Union Catalogue for the region; Inspect and supervise library authority in the region and provide them technical advice and assistance; Serve as an essential link between the state public library on the one hand and the library authorities in their region on the other; Plan the development of library service in the region and implement the same in a phased manner; Collect manuscripts of the region and transfer them to the state oriental manuscripts library through the Director; and Prepare and submit annual reports on the working of the libraries.
CHAPTER 9 AUTHORITY

e)

e)

o

o

g) h)

g)

h)

A-25 WINGS OF THE STATE PUBLIC LIBRARY
A-25.1 Administrative A-25.2 A-25.3 Service Wing State Bureau of Technical Service Information Services Wing

J

k)

A-25.4 Community

CITY/DISTRICT

LIBRARY

A-25.5 Adult Education A-25.6 Training and Extension A-25.7 Legal Deposit Wing

A-29 CONSTITUTION AUTHORITY

OF LIBRARY

A-29. 1 For the purpose of organizing and adminis-

14

IS 15339:2003

trating the public libraries in the state, there shall be constituted a library authority, one for city and one for each district. A-29.2 Every library authority shall by the name of the area for which it is constituted will be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to control may be by the same name sue and be sued. A-30 COMPOSITION AUTHORITY OF CITY LIBRARY

amongst the councillors of each municipal council in the district. d) e) One librarian of any degree college nominated by the Government. District, adult education ofllcer or his nominee not below the rank of gazetted inspector of the district concerned. One member elected by the presidents of the governing bodies of aided public libraries in the district. Two persons nominated by the Government, who have rendered eminent service to the cause of libraries or adult education. One person nominated by the Government from among the recognized library associations working in the district concerned. The district public relation officer. The district librarian, district public library who shall be the ex-officio secretary of the library authority and of each of the committee and sub-committees of the said authority.

o

g)

The city library authority shall consist ofi a) Two persons from the city nominated by the Government who have rendered eminent service to the cause of public libraries of whom one shall be a lady. Two members elected from among themselves by the presidents of the general bodies of the aided public libraries in the city. Three members elected by the Councillors of the Municipal Corporation of . .. . from among themselves. One member nominated by the Government from among the members of the recognized library associations working in the city. One librarian of a degree college within the city area nominated by the Government. The district educational officer. The Deputy Director, Department of Information and Public Relations or Culture. The executive engineer, roads and buildings. The librarian of the city public library who shall be the member-secretary of the city. h)

b)

j) k)

c)

d)

A-33 ELECTION OF THE CHAIRMAN AND VICE-CHAIRMAN Every library authority shall elect one of its members to be its chairman and vice-chairman in the first meeting from amongst non-official members. A-34 NOMINATION OF MEMBERS IN DEFAULT OF ELECTION If any of the bodies referred to in Section 29 or 31 does not, by such periods as may be prescribed, elect or nominate a person to be a member of the city library authority or the district library authority, as the case may be, the Government shall, by notification nominate to the vacancy a person qualified for election thereto; and the person so nominated shall be deemed to be a member of the authority as if he has been duly elected by the said body. A-35 VACANCIES In the event of a vacancy arising out of death, resigmtkn, disability or otherwise, before the expiry of the term of oftlce of any library authority, other than an ex-officio member, the vacancy shall be filled by election or nomination as the case maybe, of another person in the manner provided in Sections 29 to 31 as the case may be and the person so elected or nominated to fill the `vacancy shall hold office only so long as the member in whose place he is elected or nominated would have held office if the vacancy had not occurred. A-36 TERM OF OFFICE A-36. 1 Same as otherwise provided in this Act the

e) o g) h) j)

A-31 ELECTION OF THE CHAIRMAN AND VICE-CHAIRMAN City library authority shall elect one of its members to be its chairman, and vice-chairman in its fust meeting from amongst non-official members. A-32 COMPOSITION OF THE DISTRICT LIBRARY AUTHORITY The library authority for each district shall consist of the following members: a) Two presidents of panchayat samiti or equivalent body nominated by Government.

b) One person nominated by the Government from amongst the sarpanchas of the gram panchayats of each revenue division in the district. c) One person elected by the council from

IS 15339:2003 term of office of any member of any library authority other than ex-officio members, shall be for a period of three years commencing from the date on which the first meeting after the election of chairman of the library. A-36.2 An outgoing member of any library authority shall be eligible for re-election or re-nomination for more than one term. A-36.3 An out going member of any library authority shall continue in office until the election or nomination of his successor. A-37 DISABILITIES MEMBER FOR CONTINUING AS 1) is of unsound mind and stands declared by a competent court; 2) 3) is a deaf, mute or is suffering horn leprosy; and applied to be adjudicated as an insolvent or is an undischarged insolvent.

A-39 MEETING OF THE LIBRARY AUTHORITY A-39.1 Every library authority shall meet at least four times in a year or dates to be fixed by the chairman of "thelibrary authority. A-39.2 The chairman may also, whenever he thinks tkconvene a special meeting of the library authority for the transaction of urgent business. A-39.3 Subject to prescribed conditions, special meetings shall be convened by the chairman to discuss matters of urgent importance upon a requisition by the majority of the members of the library authority. A-39.4 A library authority shall transact business in such manner and in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed. A-40 POWERS AND DUTIES OF CHAIRMAN AND VICE-CHAIRMAN The chairman of a library authority shall: a) b) Preside over the meetings of the library authority. Watch over the financial and executive administration of the library authority and exercise general supervision and control. In the absence of the chairman, the vicechairman present at the meeting shall preside over the said meeting. In the absence of the chairman and vicechairrnan, the members present at the meeting shall choose one from among themselves, to preside over the said meeting. The vice-chairman shall also exercise such powers and perform such duties of the chairman as the chairman may from time to time delegate to him. The chairman and members shall be paid compensatory allowance and provided comforts at part with the chairman and members of the zilla parishad.
OF THE

/

A member, other than an ex-officio member, of any Library Authority, shall be deemed to have vacated his office during the period for which he has been nominated or elected, if a) A member elected by any body referred to in Section 29 and Section 31 as the case may be, ceases to be a member of the body concerned, or

b) Absent himself, without excuse sufficient in the opinion of the library authority for three consecutive meetings of the library authority. c) When a person ceases to be a member under Sections 29 and31 the secretary shall at once intimate the fact in writing to such person and report the same to the library authority in its next meetings. Where such person applied for restoration of membership to the library authority on or before the date of its next meeting or within fifteendaysof the receipt of such information, the library authority may at the next meeting after the receipt of the application or suo moto restore him as member thereof. Provided that a member shall not be so restored more than twice during his term of office.

c)

d)

A-38 DISQUALIFICATION A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as a member of the Library Authority, it a) He has been sentenced by a criminal court for an offence involving moral turpitude and punishable with imprisonment for a period of mere than three months, for any offence involving moral delinquency, such sentence not having been restored of the offence pardoned and a period for such sentence; Provided that the Government may direct that such sentence shall not operate as a disqualification, if he:
16

e)

o

A-41 POWERS AND FUNCTIONS LIBRARY AUTHORITIES

b)

A-41.1 lt shall be the duty of every library authority to provide library services to the persons residing in the area within its jurisdiction.

IS 15339:2003
A-41.2 The library authority shall in city establish a city public library and other public libraries and in every district establish a district public library and at least one public library for a population cluster of 5000-25000 and a mobile library for each revenue division, subject to financial position of the city/district library authority.

a)

The executive committee shall be responsible for the executive functions of the library authority. The book selection committee will select books and periodicals for the libraries. The lands and building committee for examining the proposal for acquisition, sale or gift of land needs for the library authority and examine and pass the proposals for repairs, betterment of the existing buildings or construction of new buildings.

b) c)

A-41.3 Provide such libraries with books, periodicals, newspapers, maps works and specimen of art and science, films, cinema projectors, recorders, gramophone records and the like. A-41.4 Shift the library from one village to another village or close any public library or discontinue and to any other public library the payment of which is regulated by the rules made under this Act. However, it can shift a library from one building to another in the same town or village without permission of the director. A-41.5 Accept any gift or endowment for any purpose connected with its activities. A-41.6 Provide for lectures and conduct other activities connected with public library service including adult education. A-41.7 With the consent of the management and the previous sanction of the Government or an officer authorized by the Government in his behalf, acquire any library on such conditions as may be approved by the Government or an officer authorized by the Government in his behalf. A-41.8 Distribute grants for aided public libraries and adult education centres. A-4 1.9 Organize or participate in conference for the discussion of matters relating to the development of public libraries and the library service. A-41.1O With the sanction of the Government do any other thing that may be conducive to the furtherance of the purpose of this Act. A-41.11 Exercise such other powers and perform such duties as may be conferred or imposed by or under this Act. A-42 TO APPOINT SUB-COMMITTEES A-42. 1 A library authority may appoint a committee and delegate to such committee any of its powers or functions under this Act, except the power to levy library cess, to borrow money, to dispose of immovable property and to pass the budget, accounts and the audit and annual reports. A-42.2 A library authority may also constitute the following committees: 17 g)

Id) The grant-in-aid committee will recommend the quanturh of grant to be released to aided libraries. e) The appointment committee will consider the appointment of the staff required for the library authority. The finance committee shall scrutinize proposals for increase of revenue, examine the receipts and expenditure statements, consider all new propositions affecting finance and shall generally supervise the revenue and expenditure of the library authority. Staff welfare committee will redress the grievances of the staff working in the library authority.

o

A-42.3 The chairman of the library authority shall be the ex-officio chairman of all the-committees. A-42.4 The secretary of the library authority shall be the member secretary of the committees. A-42.5 The members of any committee shall not exceed five including chairman and secretary. A-43 LIBRARY ADVISORY COMMITTEE For the purpose of advising on local requirements relating to library service of each public library, the library advisory committee is to be constituted. A-43. 1 The librarian shall be the convener of the committee. A-43.2 One member of the library authority representing the area which the public library service or the municipal council or other municipal corporation or the panchayat having jurisdiction over the area, nominated by the library authority concerned shall be the president of the committee. A-43.3 One teacher of educational institutions, and two borrowers of the library will be nominated by the city/district library authority as the case may be. A-44 TERM OF OFFICE The nominated members of the library advisory

IS 15339:2003 committee shall hold office for a period of three years. A-45 VESTING OF PROPERTIES AUTHORITIES IN LIBRARY To co-operate with the help the subscription libraries in the district in accordance with the instructions of the director; To co-operate with other institutions and groups especially the social education institutions and workers, in promoting library mindedness among the people; To arrange conferences, camps and seminars of librarians, and other library workers in the district, and To provide refresher courses for workers in the district library system. A-49 SECTIONS OF THE CITY/DISTRICT LIBRARY
AND

A-45.1 All the property acquired or held in any area by the library authority for the purpose of any public library shall vest in the library authority of that area. A-45.2 Any immovable property required by the library authority shalI be deemed to be land needed for a public purpose with the meaning of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 ( Central Act of 1894 ) and may be acquired under this Act.
CHAPTER 10

CITY/DISTRICT PUBLIC LIBRARY ITS BRANCHES A-46 CITY/DISTRICT

The city/district public library shall have the following sections: a) b) c) d) e) Lending section, Reference section, Newspapers and periodicals section, Children and women section, Processing section, Administrative section, Adult education section, and Cultural activities and extension programmed section
CHAPTER STATE A-50 PURPOSE PLANNING 11 BOARD

UNITS

There shall be a city public library for the city and district public library in each district headquarters, as a reservoir of books and other materials for the public library system under the control of city/district library authority as the case may be. It will open the branches wherever possible as per its rules.
A-47 CITY/DISTRICT LIBRARIAN

o a
h)

A-47.1 A wholetime officer having the prescribed professional qualifications shall be appointed by the State Government as the city/district librarian.

A-47.2 He shall be assisted by the technical and nontechnical staff in running the library. A-47.3 The status of a city/district librarian should be that of assistant director. A-48 FUNCTIONS A-48.1 The functions of a district public library shall be as follows: a) b) To provide reference and bibliographical service in the district; To give special reference serviceto the members of the municipal council/corporation of the towrdcity, in which it is situated; To give special service to student-groups, study circles and other educational groups; To extend library-service in the urban and rural areas by setting up branch libraries, mobile libraries and deposit centres and to extend similar service in the district through the various block libraries and other library units; To feed block libraries with supply of suitable books; 18

OF THE BOARD

For the purpose of advising and guiding the library system in preparing the plans and schemes, the Government shall constitute a state planning board. A-51 HEAD OF THE PLANNING It will be headed by an officer not below the rank of a deputy director. A-52 NORMS OF PLANNING The state planning board shall prepare the norms for the district, region and state plans and they shall be approved .by the Government. A-53 SUBMISSION OF PLANS

c) d)

e)

A-53.1 The city/district library authority, at least once in five years wherever, it considers necessary to do so, prepare a scheme for establishing libraries and for spreading library service within its areas in such form and manner as maybe prescribed. It will submit the plan to the regional librarian.

IS 15339:2003
A-53.2 The regional librarians, adding the plan of his library consolidate the plan of the region and submit it to the state librarian.

places, and shall observe such rules and procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER STATE A-57 LIBRARY 12 SERVICE

A-53.3 The state librarian in-turn adding the plan of his library consolidate the plan of the state and submit to state planning board. A-53.4 Keeping in view the existing library service provided by all kinds of libraries make the plan for covering the remaining area by providing different kinds of library services. A-53.5 The state planning board may sanction it with such alteration, if any, as it may think fit after giving the library authority or region an opportunity to make its alterations and thereupon shall give effect to the scheme sanctioned by the said board. A-53.6 The board, on application of the library authority or region, modi~ any scheme sanctioned or replace it by a new scheme. A-53.7 The board shall conduct constant evaluation of library service to facilitate better planning. A-53.8 Conduct surveys or sample surveys whenever or wherever necessary. A-54 STATE PLANNING COUNCIL A-54.1 The Government shall constitute a state planning council, consisting of the following: a) b) c) d) e) t) g) Minister for libraries, shall be the chairman; The secretary to Government in education department; The secretary to Government in planning department; The representative of Raja Rammohan Roy Library Foundation; Librarian, state public library; Two chairmen and two secretaries of the library authorities; and The director of public libraries who shall be the convener of the council.

CATEGORIES

OF POSTS

A-57. 1 Notwithstanding any thing in the Act the Government shall by notification, constitute a state library service for appointing the staff in the department. A-57.2 The state library service shall consist of the following categories, namely: a) c) d) e) f) g) Director, Deputy directors, Assistant directors, Librarians ( all cadres), Card writers, and Managerial staff.

b)- Joint directors,

A-57.3 The Government by notification may fix the categories in this department with other departments. A-58 STATE LIBRARY SERVICE A-58.1 All the posts in'thedepartment of public libraries whether they exist in state public library or regional public libraries or any library working under the library authorities shall be filled by appointment of persons belonging to state library service. A-58.2 All members of such service shall be Government servants, A-58.3 The recruitment and conditions of service shall subject to Article 299 of the Constitution be regulated by rules. A-58.4 The salary, allowances, gratuity, pension and other benefits of the members of the state Iibrary service shall be met from the consolidate fund of the state.
CHAPTER STAFF WELFARE 13 BOARD

A-55 FUNCTIONS It shall be the function of the council to draw up a plan for library planning for the state and submit it to the Government for consideration and integration with the general economic plan of the state. A-56 TERM OF OFFICE A-56. 1 The term of office of the members other than the ex-ofjicio members of the council, shall be three years. A-56.2 The council shall meet at such times and such 19

A-59 RECOGNITION

OF THE STAFF

ASSOCIATION The State Government may grant recognition to the staff associations, on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed. A-60 WELFARE BOARD The Government may constitute a staff welfare board

IS 15339:2003 consisting of the representatives of the following: a) b) c) Government and library authorities, Staff, and Experts fiomsimilarorganizations todealwith the matters pertaining to the library authorities.
STATE A-65 BOOK CHAPTER 15 COUNCIL

DEVELOPMENT

CONSTITUTION

OF THE COUNCIL

The State Government shall constitute . .. ... . Book Development Council, consisting of the following: a) Minister for libraries, shall be the chairman. The secretary to Government in education department. The director of printing and stationery. One representative from Raja Rammohan Roy Library Foundation. One representative from state academies. One expert from book publishing fie~dof the state. Two representatives Iibrary authorities. from the city/district

A-61 WELFARE FUND The Government may constitute a staff welfare fund on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER STATE 14

b) c) d) e) o g) h)

BOARD OF LIBRARY EDUCATION

A-62 BOARD OF LIBRARY EDUCATION

The State Government shall constitute aboard of library education consisting of the following: a) b) c) d) e) O The director of public libraries shall be the chairman of the board; One university librarian in the state; The librarian, state public library; One representative from the recognized training institutes (by turns); Two experts in library education nominated by the director; and The director of state institute of library education, shall be the convener of the board. OF THE BOARD shall have the

Deputy director of public libraries, shall be the-convener of the council.

A-66 FUNCTIONS The ......... State Book Development Council shall have the following functions. It shall: a) Produce books on functional topics, which contribute to the cultural, social and economic development of the state; Produce books on functional literature; Produce books for children; Produce forms, registers, codes and manuals for the department; Promote book industry in the state, by assisting the publishers in rendering experts advice and in designing the books; Produce rare books and reference books, needed by libraries which the publishers do not generally venture to publish; Distribute the books of the Government and state sponsored academies to the libraries in the state; Serve as a res@irce centre to administer the books acquisition programmed of the department, or any agency commissioned to organize this work; Produce non-book materials for the use of libraries; Produce brain in games equipment for the use of children Iibrarigs and children sections in libraries; material for the

b) c) d) e)

A-63 FUNCTIONS

The board of library education following functions: a) b) c) d)

o To frame regulations and syllabus for the courses; To formulate education; the standards in library g)

To review the position of library education from time to time; and To advise the Government in the matters of library education.

h)

A-64 TERM OF OFFICE, ETC j) a) b) c) The term of office other than ex-o~~icio members of the board shall be three years. It shall meet at least once a year. It shall observe such rules and procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed.
20

k)

m) Produce publicity department.

IS 15339:2003 A-67 PROCEDURE OF THE COUNCIL

The council shall meet at such times and such places, and shall observe such rules or procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be prescribed. A-68 TERMS OF OFFICE The term of office of the members other than the exofficio members of the council, shall be two years. A-69 HEAD OF THE COUNCIL An officer not below the rank of a deputy director, shall be the head of the council.
CHAPTER AIDED 16

from the date of such acceptance to the competent authority. A-73 APPLICATION OF SANCTION OF GRANT A-73.1 Every application for the sanction of grant shall be made to the Government through the director in such form as may be prescribed and shall contain a declaration signed by the manager of the recognized institution to the effect that the conditions of recognition and of grant are being and shall continue to be fully observed, that all facilities for inspection of that institution, its accounts, registers and other records relating to the grant shall be afforded to the inspecting staff deputed for the purpose and that all the returns and reports prescribed in this behalf shall be submitted to the competent authority within the time specified by it. A-73.2 The Government, may sanction such grant or for good and sufficient reasons may refuse to sanction such grant. A-73.3 Subject to the other provisions of the Act, any order passed by the Government refusing to sanction the grant shall be final. A-74 POWER OF GOVERNMENT TO WITHHELD, REDUCE OR WITHDRAW GRANT A-74.1 Notwithstanding anything in this chapter the Government, may after such inquiry as they may deem fit, withhold, reduce or withdraw any grant payable to the public library having regard to the funds at the disposal of the Government, the conduct and efficiency and the financial condition of such library after giving any opportunity to the correspondent of the library concerned or making a representation against such holding, reduction or withdrawal. A-74.2 Without prejudice to the generality of the provision of this Act, the Government may, after such inquiry as they may deem fit, withhold reduce or withdraw any grant payable to any public library: a) If the correspondent of institution concerned fails to fulfil all or any of the conditions of grant; Denies admission to any citizen on grounds, only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them; Allows any member of the staff employed in the library to take part in any agitation intended to bring or attempt to bring into hatred or contempt or intend to excite or attempt to excite disaffection towards the Government established by law in India; Directly or indirectly, encourages any

LIBRARIES

A-70 PART OF PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM

All the aided libraries in the state shall be treated as part and parcel of public library system, in course of time, so that the larger units of libraries can serve the people comprehensively and efficiently. A-71 ALLOCATION FOR GRANT-IN-AID

The Government shall within the limits of its economic capacity set apart a sum of money annually for being given as Grant-in-Aid ( hereafter in this Act referred to as grant) to the aided libraries and adult education centres. A-72 AUTHORITIES GRANT WHICH MAY SANCTION

A-72. 1 The Government may in such cases as they think fit, by order, sanction grant to any recognized library or adult education centre subject to such conditions as they may impose in that order relating to such grant. A-72.2 Every grant sanctioned shall be disbursed by the director or such other officer subordinate to the director as the Government may be a general or special order authorize in this behalf in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. Provided that the institution already in receipt of grant before the commencement of this Act shall continue to receive such grant subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. A-72.3 The correspondent of every recognized institution which is receiving any grant out of state funds shall be responsible for the fulfillment of all the conditions subject to which such grant has been given. A-72.4 Any money received by way of voluntary donation from donors shall be accepted by the institution and the fact intimated within forty days 21

b)

c)

d)

IS 15339:2003 propaganda with the deliberate intention of outraging the religious feelings of any class of citizens of India or insulting the religion or the religious beliefs of that class; e) 1sguilty of falsification of registers, or misuse of funds or otherwise for purposes other than those for which they are collected; Fails to remedy within such reasonable time as may be specified by the competent authority the defects in the maintenance of accounts pointed out by the auditors; the competent authority, an employee whose service have been wrongfully dispensed with or fails to pay him arrears of salary or other benefits when directed to do so by the competent authority. A-75 UTILIZATION OF FUNDS AND MOVABLE PROPERTY A-75.1 All the money collected, grants received and other movable property held by, or on behalf of private libraries shall be utilized for the purpose for which they are intended, and shall be accounted for by the correspondent in such manner as may be prescribed. A-75.2 All the money received or held by on behalf of every private library shall be deposited in a bank, A-75.3 The surplus fund of every such library shall be invested in the Government securities or in such other manner as may be prescribed. A-76 MANAGEMENT, HAND OVER PROPERTIES, RECORDS, ETC A-76.1 In the event of the aided library beimg closed down or discontinued or its recognition being withdrawn, the management shall hand over or cause to be hand over to the competent authority all the properties, records and accounts of the institution in its possession. A-76.2 Where the competent authority is resisted in, or prevented from, obtaining the possession of properties, records or accounts of the institution by such management, any magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction shall on an application made by the competent authority, by order, at?er notice to the management, direct delivery of the possession of such properties, records or accounts of the library to the competent authority within the time specified in such order. A-76.3 Where the management fails to deliver possession of the properties, records or account within the time specified in the order of the magistrate under A-76.1, he shall be punished with imprisonment 22 which may extend to six months or with a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both and the magistrate shall cause to be delivered to the competent authority taking such police assistance as may be necessary. A-77 RESTRICTION ON ALTERATION OF PROPERTY OF PRIVATE INSTITUTION A-77. 1 Notwithstanding anything in any law for the time being in force, no sale, mortgage, lease pledge, charge or transfer of possession in respect of any property of a private library shall be made or created except with the previous permission in writing of the competent authority on an application made in this behalf. A-77.2 No permission applied for under A-77.1 shall be refused by the competent authority except where the grant of such permission will, in its opinion, adversely affect the working of the institution. A-77.3 Any person aggrieved by an order refusing permission under A-77.2 may, in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed appeal to the prescribed authority. A-78 LIABILITY OF MANAGEMENT TO REPAY DEBTS Where any management incurs debts for running a library it shall be the personal liability of such correspondent to discharge the said debts.
CHAPTER ADULT 17

f)

g) Fails to restore within the time specified by

EDUCATION

A-79 PROGRAMMED OF ADULT EDUCATION

The Government shall constitute a separate agency in the state public library to take up activities in the post literacy part of adult education towards the process of life-long education. The state librarian is responsible for supervising and carrying out all the adult education activities all over the state. He may delegate the supervising powers to regional librarians to watch the progress of adult education. For promoting adult education Government shall: a) b) c) in the state the

Involve the public libraries in the national literacy mission programmed; Raise the community awareness about the illiteracy problems; Sanction grants to city/district library authorities for conducting various adult

IS 15339:2003 education programmed in their respective areas; d) Constitute a state book development council for the production of books, etc, for adult education and manuals for instructors and learners; and Publicize the literacy programmed. education budget whichever is higher. The State Government contribution on the cess collected on sales tax, vehicle tax and land revenue should be credited to the state library fund.. The grant maybe increased as and when new areas are covered by the library service. A-82.2 The Central Government should contribute 6% percent of their education budget for the development of libraries in the country and distribute the same equitably amongst all the states. A-82.3 The local bodies, that is to say, the municipal corporation, the municipalities, zila parishads, panchayat samities and gram panchayats should contribute an amount not less than 21Apercent of their total budget to the city library fund or district library fund as the case may be. A-82.4 The Government should help the backward districts by evolving suitable criteria in order to ensure equal library service to the people of the state. A-83 CITY/DISTRICT LIBRARY FUND

e)

A-80 ADULT EDUCATION IN THE CITY/ DISTRICTS The city/district library authorities should take up programmed of adult education. The city/district libraries are responsible for successfully carrying out the programmed of adult education in the city or district as the case may be. For purposes of conducting adult education activities the library authorities should: a) Start adult education centres at mandal and village level;

b) Appoint branch librarians or teachers or social workers to conduct adult education classes; c) Allot reasonable funds for adult education activities in the annual budget while submitting the budget for approval to the director of public libraries. Co-operate with the voluntary organizations interested in the campaign of removing illiteracy; and Stock books, periodicals and non-book materials such as audio-visual equipment for their purpose.
CHAPTER FINANCE A-81 18

d)

Every city library authority and district library authorities shall maintain a fund called the city library fund and the district library fund as the case may be, from which all the payments under this Act shall be met. The following sums shall be credited to the tit} district library fund namely: a) b) c) The cess collected under A-84.2. The Grant under A-85.2(c). Contributions, gifts and income from endowments made to the library authorities for benefit of public libraries. Special grants from State Government or Central Government or Raja Rammohan Roy Library Foundation as the case may be. Funds and other amounts collected by the library authorities rules of bye-laws made under this Act.

e)

AND ACCOUNTS

d)

LIBRARY CESS e)

A-81. 1 With effect from the date of commencement of this Act, library cess in the form of surcharge at the rate of four paise per rupee on the following taxes be levied and collected by the agencies which collect the taxes and it be remitted to the state library fund: a) b) c) Sales tax, Vehicle tax, and Land revenue.

A-84 STATE LIBRARY FUND A-84. 1 The state library authority shall maintain a fund called the State library fund from which all its payments under this Act shall be met. A-84.2 There shall be credited to the state library fund the following sums namely: a) The grants made by the State Government to the state library authority to perform the duties entrusted to it;

A-81.2 While the library cess collected on property tax and house tax by the local bodies shall be remitted to the city/district library fund. A-82 GOVERNMENT GRANT

A-82. 1 The State Government should contribute an amount not less than the total amount of cess collected on the above said three taxes or 61Apercent of the 23

b) Grants which the Central Government to the state library authority to perform the duties entrusted to it;

IS 15339:2003 c)

Contributions and gifts made to the state library authority; Allproceeds of thedisposal of the property by and on behalf of the state library authority; Funds and other amounts collected by the state library authority under the rules of byeIaws made under this Act; and All interests and profits arising from any investment or from any transaction in connection with any money belong to the state library authority. OF LIBRARY FUND

d) e)

year, prepare an annual report of the progress made by the library authorities and Government libraries during the year along with such information and particulars as maybe prescribed and submit such report to the State Government. Through the state library council before such date as the State Government may be by order specify. A-89 INSPECTION A-89.1 The appropriate library authorities as mentioned below shall inspect any library under its jurisdiction for verifying whether the provisions of the Act, Rules and Bye-laws made thereunder are duly observed by the libraries: S1 No.
i) Authority Body

f)

A-85 APPLICATION

A-85.1 The money in the State library fund, the city/ district library fund shall be utilized by the state library authority, the city/district library authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act. A-85.2 Without prejudice to the generality of A-85.l the money in the library fund maybe utilized to defray expenditure on the following: a) b) Establishment maintenance and development of public libraries. Conveyance allowance payable to the members of state library council and library authorities and the committees and subcommittees appointed by the state library council and the library authorities. Grant-in-aid to public libraries, library associations, adult education centres received for the purpose by the Government. Other necessary expenditure.

Government Director State librarian Regional librarian

Directorate State public libraries Regional libraries public

ii) iii) iv)

Library authority and city/district public libraries Divisional and taluk libraries Aided libraries

v) vi)

District librarian Mandal librarian

c)

An officer in a superior cadre can always visit a subordinate office, generally or on a specific purpose as per the rules in vogue. A-89.2 In all the cases, after such inspections are made the inspecting officer shall submit a detailed report of his inspection to the appropriate library authority. A-89.3 The appropriate library authority may consider the report and pass such resolution as it may deem fit. The resolution shall be observed by the library concerned unless it is suspended or cancelled by the Government. A-89.4 For carrying out the provisions of the Act, the state library authority shall prepare an inspection code.
CHAPTER RULES AND 20

d)

A-86 ACCOUNTS A-86.1 An account shall be kept of the receipts and expenses of the state library authority and of each city/district library authorities. A-86.2 The accounts shal 1be open to inspection and shall be subject to audit, disallowance and surcharge and shall be dealt with in all other respects in such manner as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER 19 AND

REPORTS, RETURNS INSPECTIONS A-87 REPORTS AND RETURNS

BYE-LAWS

Every library authority and every person in-charge of public library shall submit such reports and returns and furnish such information to the director or any person authorized by him in this behalf. A-88 ANNUAL REPORT The director shall in respect of each financial 24

A-90 POWER TO MAKE RULES

The State Government may, afler previous publication, by notification make rules to carry out the purpose of this Act. A-91 APPROVAL OF THE RULES Every rule made under this Act shall, as soon as may

IS 15339:2003 be after it is made, be laid before each house of State legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more sessions and if before the expiry of the sessions in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both houses agree in making any modification in rule or both houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as th_ecase may be, so however, that any such modification or amendment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
A-92 PUBLIC ENQUIRY

excess or abuse to give a satisfactory explanation therefore within such time as the Government may fix in this behalf, the Government may suspend, dissolve or supersede the library authority and all or any of the powers and function of such library authority to be exercised and performed by the secretary of the library authority.
A-95 SECRETARY AS SPECIAL OFFICER

A competent authority shall hold a public enquiry for the purpose of exercising any other powers or performing any other duties under this Act, in respect of a library authority. A copy of the report of any public enquiry shall be furnished to the library authority concerned, and representations of such library authority, if any, shall be considered before taking any action on the report.
A-93 POWER OF GOVERNMENT TO REMOVE CHAIRMAN OF THE LIBRARY AUTHORITY A-93. 1 The Government may, by notification, remove any chairman or vice-chairman of the library authority who in their opinion wilfully omits or refuses to carry out or disobeys the provisions of this Act, or the rules, bye-laws or lawful orders made thereunder, or abuses his position or powers vested in him. A-93.2 The Government shall when they propose to remove a chairman or vice-chairman under A-93.1 give the chairman or vice-chairman concerned an opportunity for explanation and the notification issued under the said sub-sections shall contain a statement of the reasons of the Government for the action taken. A-93.3 The Government shall have a power to review

Where by any reason there is any delay in the constitution of the library authority, the Government may appoint the secretary library authority as special officer to manage the affairs of the authority or to perform the functions of the chairman, as the case may be, for the period not exceeding six months and may in the like manner from time to time extend such period of six months so, however, that the aggregate period including the extended period, if any, shall not exceed two years. A-96 LIABILITIES OF MEMBERS FOR LOSS, WASTE OR MISAPPLICATION A-96. 1 Every members of library authority shall be personally liable for the loss, waste or misapplication of any money or other property of the library authority to which he has been party, or which has been caused or facilitated by his misconduct or neglect of his duty as a member. A-96.2 [f after giving the member or members concerned a reasonable opportunity for showing cause to the contrary the director is satisfied that the loss, waste or misapplication of any money or other property of the library authority is a direct consequence ofa misconduct or neglect on his or their part, the director shall by order inwriting direct such member or members to pay to the library authority before a specified date, the amount required to reimburse it for such loss, waste or misapplication. A-96.3 If the amount is not so paid, it shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue. A-96.4 An appeal shall lie from the decision of the director to Government within such period as may be prescribed and the decision of the Government on such appeal shall be final. A-97 POWER TO REMOVE DIFFICULTIES If any difficulty arises, in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the State Government may by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appear to them to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty, provided that no order shal I be made under the section after the expiry of two years from the commencement of the Act. 25

any order of removal published under A-93.1 and pending such review to stay such order. A-93.4 Any person removed under A-93.1 from the office of the chairman or vice-chairman shall not be eligible for re-election to the said office for a period of five years from the date of his removal. A-94 CONTROL OF LIBRARY AUTHORITY BY THE GOVERNMENT If, at any time, it appears to the Government that, a library authority has failed to perform its functions or has exceeded or abused any of the powers conferred upon it by or under this Act, the particulars thereof and if the library authority omits to remedy such failure,

1S 15339:2003
CHAPTER PRESS AND 21 OF BOOKS A-99.2 The book selection committee of the state should select books for the public libraries only from the list of books delivered tinder the Act, and refuse to select any book not so delivered. A-1OO HEADS OF OPERATION

REGISTRATION

A-98 AMENDMENT TO THE PRESS AND REGISTRATION OF BOOKS ACT, 1867 The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 ( Central Act XXV of 1867 ) shall, in its application

to the State of . .. be amended as follows:
A-98.1 In the first paragraph of Section 9, for Clause ( a ) the following clause shall be substituted, namely:

A-1OO.1 An officer not below the rank of an assistant director, shall be the registrar of books, of thestate, who shall also be the' ex-officio head of the state' bibliographical bureau. A-1 00.2 The secretaries of the libraries authorities shall be made ex-officio registrars of books of the city or districts as the case may be, who are responsible for the collection of books printed in a ci~ or district concerned. A-1OO.3 The secretaries should keep one copy with city/district public library, and should not lend such copy in any case. They should be preserved carefully and made available for reference and research only. CHAPTER REPEAL A-101 SAVING AND 22 SAVINGS

a)

in any case, within one calendar month after the day on which any such book shall first be delivered out of the press three copies, and

Any second or subsequent edition ofa book in which addition or additions or alternations either in the letter press or in the book prints or other engravings belonging the book have been made, and three copies of the first or some preceding edition of which books have been delivered under this Act.
A-98.2 A-98.3 In Section H, for the first sentence the following

sentence shall be substituted namely: Out of three copies delivered pursuant to clause (a) of the first paragraph of Section 9 of this Act the copies shall be distributed to the following institutions. a) b) c)
A-99

CLAUSE

State public library; District public library, in the district where the book is printed; and Central secretariat library, New Delhi.
PENAL CLAUSES

A-99. 1 Penal clauses should be added by amendment more strongly, so as to Act as deterrent for those who violate the provisions of the Act.

All rules, bye-laws and regulations made under the said Acts and in force at the commencement of this Act, shall so far as new rules, bye-laws and regulations are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue to be in force in respective areas in which they are in force at such commencement and such rules shall be deemed to be rules and such bye-laws and regulations shall be deemed to be bye-laws made under the provisions of this Act until they are superseded or modified by rules and bye-laws made under this Act.

26

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. .
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed period icaliy; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. MSD 5 ( 147).
Amendments Issued Since Publication /

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 23230131,23233375,2323 9402
Regional Offices :

Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 603843 { 609285 22541216,22541442 22542519,22542315 { 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Central: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern: 1/14 C. 1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Northern: SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern: C. 1.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH.PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India

