( Reaffirmed 2004 )

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR EARTHWORK ON CANALS (

Firs1 Revision)

Second Reprint AUGUST 1991

UDC

626.131.5:006,76

@ Copyright 1983 BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDI*AN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 5

June 1983

IS :4701-1982

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR EARTHWORK ON CANALS

( First Revision)
Irrigation Canals and Canal Linings Sectional Committee, BDC 57
Chairman
SHRI S. B. KHARE Ministry of Agriculture

Representing
and Irrigation, New Delhi

Membirs
ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR SHRI N. C. BHATNAGAR SHRI R. K. PRASAD( Affcrnnfc ) DR A. S. CHAWLA Irrigation Research Institute, Khaugaul, Patna Central Ground Water Board, Chandigarh Water Resources Development Training University of Roorkee, Roorkee Centre,

DR R. .J. GARDE ( ANcrnatc) SHRI CHICKARYANE Union Carbide (India) Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. K. KARAMCHANDANI (Alternate) CHIEF ENGINEER Irrigation and Power Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh DR J. PURUSHOTHAM ( Afternatc ) CHIEF ENGINEER ( IRRIGATION) Public Works Department, Government of Karnataka, ( SOUTH) Bangalore CHIEF ENGINEER( Alfernntc ) CHIEF ENGINEER ( CANAL ) Irrigation Works, Covernment of Punjab DIRECTORCENTRAL DESIGNS ( Altern&) CHIEFENGINEER(IRRIGATION) Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu SR DY CHIEF ENGINEER ( IRRIGATION ) ( Alternote) SHRX0. P. DATTA Bear Dam Project, Talwara Township SHRI S. L. NIROLA ( Alternate) DIRECTOR ( B & CD-I ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi DEPUTY DIRECTOR( B & CD-I ) ( Altemotc) DIRECTOR Irrigation Department, Government of Rajasthan DIRECTOR( B & CD-II ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi DEPUTY DIRECTOR( HW-II ) ( Afternate) SHRI T. A. E. D'SA Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI N. C. DUGGAL ( AIttntdt) SHRIJ. M. GARG Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkce, Uttar Pradesh SHRI JAGDISHMOHAN (Alfemafc) ( Conliaucd on pugc 2 )

@ Copyright I983
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reptoducti II in whole or in part by any means except with written pecmisaioa of the publinhm B hall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the uid Act.

lS:4701-1982
( Corttinu~d from page I ) Members SHRI H. K. KHOSLA
SUPERINTENDINGENOINEER

Re&esenting Irrigation & Power Department, Government of Haryana ( Altrrnak ) Planning Commission, Government of India, New Delhi

Srm K. M. MAHESHWARI

SHRI N. K. DIKSHIT ( Altematr) SI~RI GAURI KANTA MISRA Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh SHRI R. ii. ACOARWAL ( Altematr) Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune SHRI P. C. SA~RNA SHRI V. P. Brian ( Aitem& ) Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi SECRETARY SHRI A. SI3AItIP Fibreglasr Piikington Ltd, Bombay SHRI G. K. TAKIAR ( AIta~k) SHRI C. D. THAT~E Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat SHRI K. B. SHAH (Alfemak) SWRI S. L. VARUDKAR Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra SHRI G. RAMAN, Director General, ISI (Ex-o&o Member) Director ( Civ Engg ) Senitay SHRI S. K. CHA~~HURI Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI

2

IS ; 4701- ma

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR EARTHWORK ON CANALS

( First Revision)
0. FOREWORD 0.1This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution
on 31 December 1982, after the draft finalized by the Irrigation Canals and Canal Linings Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 The construction of canals involves a variety of earthwork problems. Because of the great longitudinal extent of the work many different kinds of conditions are encountered which for maximum economy should be treated differently. Moreover, design of a work is based on assumptions regarding the quality of work which will be obtained during construction. These assumptions hold good only if the materials used and the work as actually executed are according to the specifications which are known to give desired results. This standard describes methods for carrying out projects for excavation and construction of embankments on canals. This standard does not, however, cover design of cuttings and embankment slopes for canals. 0.3 This standard was first issued in 1968. The revision of the standard has been taken up in the light of experience gained during the years. Salient changes made in this revision are listed below: a) Provisions regarding clearing the materials have been slightly modified; b) Side slopes in cutting in canals to be provided depending on type of soil have been added; c) Factors to examine sub-grade soil to determine the portion of canal reaches to be lined have been added; d) Protective measures for lined sections in areas of high ground water table have been indicated; e) Methods for classification of rock excavation have been stated; f) Provisions regarding preparation of sub-grade for lined reaches have been modified; and g) Treatment to repair the settlement in embankment subject to site conditions has been suggested; 3

IS : 4701-1982

h) Provisions regarding requirements for material for the embankment construction have been modified; and j) zo;;zcon requirements of embankments have also been
.

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test ok analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE

1.1This standard covers requirements and methods for earthwork on canals
covering excavation
2. GENERAL a.1 Effect of Weather Conditions - An earthwork project may be affected by weather conditions which may alter the conditions of the soil to some depth. The earthwork should be as far as possible, so planned that it is carried out during the most favourable season. Rainfall may so affect the exposed surface of cohesive soils as to result in interruption both in the use of excavating plant and in the transport of materials. In wet weather, work may have to be stopped entirely owing to excessive moisture near the surface of soil. Iri extremely dry weather, it may be necessary to add water to the soil in borrow area or at the fill to fulfil requirements of compaction. It is advisable to compact the soil in its final position in the fill or embankment immediately after it is placed.

and construction

of embankments.

a.2Safety Precautions - Blasting, where required, shall be permitted only
when proper precautions have been taken for the protection of persons and property in accordance with IS : 4081-1967t. Blasting shall be carried out only by persons thoroughly conversant with the working methods and precautions to be observed in using explosives. To avoid the danger of injury from flying debris all personnel in a blasting area shall retreat to an adequate distance and take adequate cover. While carrying out excavation adequate precautions in accordance with IS : 3764-1966: shall be taken for the safety of workers.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rhsed). and related work. drilling operations. t.Specification $Specification for safety for safety code for blasting code for excavation

IS:4701-1982 2.2.1 The location and desigu of magazines for explosives, method of their transport and general precautions to be taken to prevent accidents shall be in accordance with the provisions of Indian Explosives Rules, 1940 and local regulations and regular rules aud regulations framed thereunder, if any.
2.3 Hawing - Prior to the commencement of a work all relevant data shall be collected and drawings prepared showing the location of the excavation, and embankment reaches separately. On these drawings both the excavation and filling reaches should be distinctively indicated separately and the quantity of material to be excavated and placed in fill stated in these reaches. This information would be useful to ensure economic hauls throughout the work. Where the material to be excavated consists of different types and if the various types have to be used separately in the fill or run to spoil tip, the quantities of each class of material in each area should be shown on drawings. From the nature of material to be excavated and the method of its disposal, the type of excavation, the length of haul and the amount of compaction necessary, it is possible to select the most suitable type of plant for a particular job. 2.3.1 No earthwork on canals should be started unless proper acquisition and demarcation of land has been finalized and permission of concerned Such laud shall be demarcated by fixing permanent organization obtained. boundary stones at intervals of 200 m on both sides on straight reaches and at points where there is change in direction or change in land width. Similar precautions shall be taken for defining the borrow areas also. Such areas will be temporarily acquired and suitably demarcated. 3. SETTING OUT

3.1Prior to the commencement of work the ceutre line of the proposed canal shall be marked by stones or pegs each at about 30 m interval: Curves shall be laid out; top and bottom edges of the excavation and toe of all embankments suitably peg marked. Reference pegs should also be driven into ground at a fixed distance outside peg markings. All levels shall be referred to an established bench mark not subject to subsidence or interference.
3.2 Profiles of designed canal section in fill and moderate cut reaches may be marked at intervals of 25 m at curves and 50 m in straight reaches. 4. CLEARING

4.1The land over which embankments

are to be formed and other excavation is to be carried out shall be cleared of all trees, bushes, rubbish, ant hills 5

IS : 4701- 1982 and other objectionable disposed off. matter. `The cleared materials shall be suitably

4.1.1 All waste materials to be burned shall be piled neatly and when in suitable condition shall be burned completely. Piling for burning shall be done in such manner and in such locations as to cause the least fire risk. All burning shall be so thorough that the materials are reduced to ashes. Necessary precautions shall be taken to prevent fire from spreading to areas beyond the limits of cleared areas and suitable equipment, and supplied for use in preventing and suppressing fires shall be kept available at all times.

4.2 In filling reaches, all holes and hollows whether originally existing or produced by digging up roots shall be filled with suitable earth, well rammed and levelled off. 4.2.1 In filling reaches, the boulders in the top strata shall be removed and filled with suitable material. 4.2.2 Boulders which may interfere with the work should be generally removed after breaking them down, if necessary. 4.3 It is desirable to protect the trees outside the outer edge of the canal embankments. However, the presence of trees in the vicinity of a canal can accentuate variation of moisture content in the sub-stratum. In the case of expansive soils such excessive moisture variation can result in damage to the lining. Such influence is believed to extend to distances equal to twice the height of the tree. 5. EXCAVATION 5.1 Earthwork in Cutting - Canal section shall be excavated as shown on the drawings or as directed by the engineer-in-charge. Both edges of the bank, specially the inner one shall be neatly aligned symmetrically to the centre line of the channel. They shall be absolutely straight in straight reaches and smoothly curved on bends. All gangways, roads and stoppings shall be such that they fall within the canal section so that final dressing of slope will consist of digging only and no filling will be required. 5.1.1 Suitable arrangements for drainage shall be provided to take surface water clear of the excavation during the progress of work. S.umps may be constructed at suitable places and water collected may be pumped out. When cutting on cross sloping ground, it is advisable to cut a catch water drain on the higher side to prevent water from flowing down the cutting slope. 5.1.2 Wherever ground water is met during excavation adequate measures shall be taken to dewater the cutting. The choice of method to be employed and type of equipment to be used would depend on the nature of ground and the volume of water to be dealt with. 6

IS : 4701- 1982 5.1.2.1 If there is a continuous flow of water a subdrain with sumps at intervals may be installed, Drainage will be helped by excavating from downstream side to upstream side so that water tends to drain away from the working face. Generally area is drained by providing pilot cut to natural valley so as to drain the subsoil water.

5.1.2.2 In case of lined canals subsoil water shall not be allowed to accumulate in the bottom of the canal and pumping arrangements shall be so organized as to deal with any temporary flood water which may occur. As described' above ( 5.1.2.1) the subsoil water should be drained by providing drain or pumping the subsoil water so as to keep the area dry as far as possible. 5.1.3 Excavation may be carried out by manual labour or by excavating machines. The choice of type of excavating machine to be used will depend on the nature and quantity of materials to be excavated and also on the leads and lifts involved. '
5.1.3.1 Side slopes for canals should be provided depending on type of soil through which the canal is laid. Generally the following slopes are provided for unlined canals :

Sl No. 1. 2.

Type of Soil

Side Slopes ( HOW. : vet-t)

Very light loose sand to average sandy soil Sandy loam

3. a) Sandy soi! or gravel b) Muram, gravel mixed soil > 4. Black cotton 5. 6. Clayey soils Rock

15:1to2:1 (incutting) 2 : 1 to 3 : 1 ( in embankment) 1 : 1 to 2 : 1 ( in cutting) l-5 : 1 to 2 : 1 ( in embankment ) 1 : 1 to 1.5 : 1 ( in cutting) l-5 : 1 to 2 : 1 (in filling) l-5 : 1 to 2.5 : 1 (in cutting) 25 : 1 to 3.5 : 1 ( in embankment ) 1 : 1 to 2.5 : 1 ( in cutting ) 1.5 : 1 to 3 : 1 (in embankment) a25 : 1 to Q5 : 1 (in cutting )

NOTE 1 - The above slopes are for general guidance for height ofembankment up to 6 m. For heights in excess of the above special studies for the stability of slope are recommended. NOTE 2 -In case of rocky areas above recommended change due to any adverse jointing pattern. side slopes may require

5.1.4 Exploratory holes and type of soil shall be determined before excavation. The permeability characteristics of the soil encountered should be assessed by making use of in place permeability tests as required. Canal sub-grade soil on the slopes and bottom with respect to probable future seepage and erosion should be examined. In case of high seepage

7

xs : 4701 1982
l

losses are anticipated, or if the soils are fine and lacking in cohesion and could erode badly under the proposed operating conditions, suitable measures such as lining, etc, should be planned. 51.5 Above the lining in case of lined sections and above the proposed water level in case of unlined sections the rock may be allowed to stand at its steepest safe angle and no finishing is required other than removal of rock masses which are loose and are liable to fall. 5.1.5.1 Lined sections in areas of high ground water shall be protected against uplift by drainage system as per IS : 4558-1968*. If fine grain soils ( sand ) are to be placed as sub-grade below concrete or membrane lining, this should be without organic matter, gravel, pebbles, etc. Natural sub-grade should be inspected and organic material, gravels, pebbles, protruding should be removed from sub-grade. Filter blankets should be provided beneath lining as per IS : 4558-1968* to release uplift pressure. All washable materials and any soil which generally becomes unstable on saturation such as organic soil, loose, silts, expansive clays are generally removed or properly treated for embankment and canal linings so as to provide safe and stable sub-grade under operating conditions. 5.2 Rock Excavation - Rock may be excavated by the following methods : a) Quarrying out by hand with suitable rock wedges and hammers, steel bars, picks, etc, and breakings with rock hammers; b) Loosening by use of pneumatic paving breakers; cl Drilling suitable holes by hand with jumpers or pneumatic drilling machines, and breaking up rock with plugs and features; Drilling holes by hand jumpers or pneumatic drilling machines as 4 above, but breaking the rock with suitable commercial explosives, or blasting devices; and Ripping with suitable heavy duty tractors where the rock formation 9 falls within the range of ripability of commercially available units. 52.1 Classification of rock could be done as below: a) Disintegrated rock removable by crow bars and pick axes; b) Fissured and fractured rocks jointed at less than 450 mm apart; c) Hard rock boulders of size greater than 300 mm in any dimension up to 3 m3 ; dj Solid and sheet rock boulders of size greater than 3 m3; and e) Generally hard soil, hard muram, stoney earth and elrth/sand mixed with stone and boulders not exceeding 300 mm in any direction.
*Code of practice for under-drainage of lined canals.

8

IS : 4701-1982

5.2.2 Excavation of rock is usually done by loosening and removing the rock by forming a slightly sloping open face across the cut and working towards this open face. The depth and width of this face will vary according to the nature of rock and method adopted. Several faces may be worked simultaneously, one behind the other, with benches between each face; the space between the faces and the length of each bench varying according to the conditions prevailing and the methods adopted for removing the rock. Provided that proper equipment and technique are adopted, drilling and blasting is the most speedy and economical method for excavating hard rock. For soft rocks ripping may loosen the rock at greater speed and at much less cost. 5.2.3 Blasting in a manner as to produce over breakage which in the opinion of engineer-in-charge is excessive shall not be permitted. Special care shall be taken to prevent over-breakage or loosening of m.aterial on bottoms and side slope against which rigid lining is to be placed. 5.2.3.1 Final cutting for 45-60 cm in hard rock shall be carried out by controlled blasting or trimming or with the help of pneumatic paving breakers. 5.3 Preparation of Subgrade - Where the canal is to be lined the excavation and preparation of subgrade shall be done in accordance with IS : 3837-1978*. Where the canal is not to be lined, excavation shall be done to full depth and width required and shall be finished to prescribed lines and grades. Where the original ground surface is below the grade of the canal the bottom of the canal shall be filled to the grade in a mnnner prescribed for the construction of canal embankments (see 6.6.2 ). In so far as practicable the finishing operation required on canal sections shall be performed simultaneously with canal excavation. 5.3.1 The sub-grade and embankment for a canal may comprise of rock or soil. Canal sections excavated in rock should be inspected to examine whether joints or fissures exist which will cause excessive seepage or piping. In case this is so, rock will require grouting or the section may require lining. Rock surfaces on which compacted earth is to be placed should be moistened before placing the first layer of earth but standing water should not be allowed. The minimum soil cover over rock should be 225 mm. 6. EMBANKMENT CQNSTRUCTION

6.1 Before commencing the work, the toe of the slope on each side of the banks shall be lock-spitted ( Dag-Belled ) and marked by pegs, firmly driven into the ground at intervals of about 20 III. Profiles made by bamboos, earth or other convenient materials and strings shall be set up for the guidance of the workmen at about 50 m apart over straight reaches and

IS : 4701- 1982

about 25 m apart at curves. In setting up the profile for an embankment a suitable allowance shall be made for settlement ( see 6.2.2.1). 6.1.1 Masonry blocks shall be constructed at each profile to indicate the centre line as also the bed level of the canal before starting the entire earthwork. 6.2 General Requirements - Embankments shall be built to the height and slope as shown on the drawings. All the edges of the embankment shall be neatly aligned symmetrical to the centre line of the channel. They shall be absolutely straight in reaches and smoothly curved at bends. 6.2.1 Tbe top of each embankment shall be levelled and finished so as to be suitab!e for roadway and given a cross outward slope to drain away rain waters. The bank carrying inspection road shall be given a suitable cross slope. 6.2.2 For embankment in which controlled compaction has not to be carried out (6.6.1 ), suitable allowance shall be made for settlement. 6.2.2.1 An allowance of about 10 percent for settlement is recommended for embankments in which controlled compaction has not been carried out ( see 6.6.1 ). 6.3 Methods of Construction-Embankments may be built by tianual labour or by machinery depositing the materials directly from excavation. The choice of type of excavating plant will depend qn many factors. Where boulders which may interfere with the work are encountered they shall be dealt with in accordance with 4.2.2. 6.3.1 General Drainage - Under ordinary circumstances no special drainage works are necessary in embankments but where required ditches may be dug at a distance not less than 3 m from the toe of the slope. The necessity for any drain so provided will depend on the topography of the ground on which the embankment is constructed, having regard to the desirability of preventing an accumulation of water at the base of the embankment. 6.3.2 In case any settlement takes place in the embankment after its completion it would also induce cracks in the embankment in addition to causing damage to lining. The following treatment is suggested to repair the settlement subject to site conditions. A trench of minimum required width shall be dug along the crack in the embankment for a depth to which the crack has extended plus minimum 0.25 m or to a depth of I m whichever is more. The width of the trench shall, however, not be less than 0.5 m. This trench shall be lilled back with a thorough mixture of clay and fine sand having plasticity index of 10 or less, and should be placed in 150 mm thick layers and thoroughly compacted. 10

IS : 4701- 1982

6.4 Requirements for Material -Where the embankment is constructed by taking material from borrow pits care shall bc exercised that all large clods are broken and no clod bigger than human fist, say 8 to 10 cm, roots. grass and other rubbish are burried in the banks. Before procuring materials from borrow pits all perishable materisl shall be stripped off from the top surface as specified in 6.5.1. Unless otherwise directed by the engineer-incharge all materials shall be deposited in embankments so that cobbles, gravel and boulders are well distributed through other material and not rested in any position within or under the embankment. 6.4.1 In areas where gravel and stone is mixed with earth, these should be removed as far as possible. But the areas where all gravel material cannot be economically removed, cobbles, stones of size greater than 40 mm should be removed to ensure proper compaction. This is very important for lined sections where plastic membrane is provided to reduce seepage. The existence of nest of cobbles may result in more seepage and piping. In view of this measure to remove cobbles of larger size should be taken at the excavation area itself. 6.5 Preparation of Ground Surface for Embankment - Before beginning the construction of embankments the surface area of ground to be occupied shall be cleared of all roots and vegetable matter of any kind and stripped to a suitable depth. 6.5.1 The depth to which top soil is removed shall be adequate to remove all perishable material and any soil which may become unstable on saturation or may interfere with development of proper bond between the foundation and embankment. It is not necessary to remove all the soil containing fine hair like roots but only the rather heavy mat. Table 1 may serve as a guide for fixing the depth of stripping.
TABLE `TYPE OF
VEOETAI~LE (:OVER

1 DEPTH

0F

STRIPPING
DEPTH OF STRIPPING

ONTXESOIL Soil containing

light grass cover

5.0 to 7.5 cm
To the bottom

i\gricultural

land

zone usually

of ploughcd 15.0 to 22.5 cm

6.5.2 The ground surface under all canal embankments (excepting rock surfaces ) where it is below the maximum water level in the canal, shall be scarified making open furrows not less than 20 cm deep below natural ground surface at intervals of not more than 1 m. However, where the ground surface is below the bed level of the canal the entire surface of the foundations for embankments shall be stripped to a depth of not less than 20 cm. 11

IS : 4701- 1982

6.6 Compaction Requirement - Embankments shall be compacted, as shown on the drawings, to achieve the requirements laid down in 6.6.1 and 6.6.2. General methods of compaction of embankments are given in 7.
ground

6.6.1 Embankments Without Controlled Compaction - Where the natural surface is above the maximum water level in the canal but below the top of the embankment, the embankment shall be built in layers not exceeding 30 cm in thickness and to the full width of the embankment. Each layer shall be commenced from the edge farthest from the excavation. Top of each layer shall be kepr slightly depressed in the centre. The excavating and hauling equipment shall travel over the embankment to evenly distribute the material and compacting effort over whole surface. If the embankment is to carry a highway it shall be constructed in accordance with 6.6.2, 6.6.3.1, 6.6.4, 6.6.4.1 and 6.6.5. 6.6.2 I~mbankmewrs With Controlled Compaction - Where the ground is below the maximum water level in the canal the portion embankment up to the maximum water level or where rigid lining laid, the portion of embankment up to the upper level of the lining, built according to the requirements given in 6.6.3.1, 6.6.4 and 6.6.5. natural of the is to be shall be

6.6.2.1 Embankment shall be built in layers generally not exceeding 25 cm in thickness ( loose layer) and to full width of the embankment. Each layer shall be commenced from the edge farthest from excavation. Top of each Jayer shall be kept slightly depressed in the centre. 6.6.3 Generally blending of two or more materials are recommended to obtain suitable soil for earth lining. Fine soil from borrow areas is gsnerally added to coarse soil to improve impermeability. But coarse soils are added to fhre soils to improve erosion residance. The proportions for blending should be ascertained by laboratory test. 6.6.3.1 Impervious zone -The impervious zone wherever shown on the drawings shall be built of material having sufficient percentage of clay so that it can be compacted at optimum moisture content by suitable compacting equipment to the maximum dry density. The material shall be compacted to a density as specified in 6.6.5. The water tightness of material should be checked by carrying out permeability test. The coefficient of permeability of impervious material should not be greater than 30 cm per year. The impervious material should preferably be free from large size particles. If this is not possible the maximum size and percentage of gravels to be permitted is 40 mm and 20 percent respectively. When the above relaxation is allowed the engineer-in-charge should ensure that relative standards set for dry density and permeability are fulfilled. 6.6.3.2 The rest of the compacted zone may consist of any suitable support for the impervious core under various conditions of saturation and draw down. If silty or sandy material is used for this portion, such a material will not be amenable to compaction by the usual compaction 12

1s : 4701. i98a procedure using sheep foot rollers. For such. materials proper machinery utilising the principle of vibro-compaction should be used. The minimum relative density of the compacted material shall not be less than 70 percent. The distribution of material shall be such that the compacted material will The be homogeneous and free from lenses, pockets or other imperfections. maximum dimensions of stones placed in the embankment shall be not more than 10 cm. The excavating and placing operations shall be such that the materials when compacted will be blended sufficiently to secure the best practicable degree of compaction, impermeability and stability. 6.6.4 Moisture Content - Prior to and during compaction operations the embankment shall have optimum moisture content required for the purpose of compaction and this moisture content shall be fairly uniform throughout the layer. In so far as practicable the moistening of the material shall be performed at the site of excavation but such moistening shall be supplemented as required by sprinkling water at the site of compaction, if necessary. 6.6.4.1 If the moisture content isgreater than optimum for compaction, the compaction operation shall be delayed until such time as the material has dried to the optimum moisture content. 6.6.5 Dry Bulk Density After Compaction - The dry bulk density of the soil fraction in compacted embankment material shall be not less than 95 percent of the maximum dry bulk density at optimum moisture content obtained in accordance with IS : 2720 (Part VII)-1980*, or as specified. 7. COMPACTION METHODS AND FIELD CONTROL

7.1 Methods of Compaction - To obtain the required amount of compaction by most economic means it is necessary to employ systematic field control. For a particular job the following items should be decided: a) Dry density of the soil required with regard to the soil type; b) The most suitable moisture content at which to work and the effect of probable moisture content variation; c) The type or types of compaction equipment most suitable for compacting the soil having due regard to relative costs: and d) The thickness of loose layers. 7.1.1 Average performances of compaction plant for various types of soils are given in Appendix A. Whilst exact details of the procedure for compacting every type of soil and materials are not given in Appendix A, the information contained in it may be used as a reasonable guide.
*Method of test for soils : Part VII Determination relations using light compaction ( ( stcond rcuision ). of moisture contcn~
dry density

13

IS : 470111982 7.1.2 Where the magnitude of work justifies it, the procedure described in 7.1.2.1 to 7.1.1.3 is recommended to determine the required compaction method. In deciding the method to be employed, economic considerations should be kept in view. For example, it may have to be decided whether it is more economical to compact in layers of less thickness with a light roller or thick layers with heavy rollers; again, consideration may have to be given to the number of passes required with smooth and sheepfoot rollers to produce specified density. Often it may be found that a combination of two or more types of equipment would give best,results. 7.1.2.1 Standard compaction tests shall be made on available materials. The tests will indicate broadly which are the most suitable and give a rough idea of the best type of equipment to be used and the moisture content at which compaction should be undertaken. This method would help in classsifying a material according to its compaction characteristics. 7.1.2.2 Having decided on the filling material to be used, field compaction trials should, where porpsible, be made with the compaction equipment expected to be used under'conditions which are likely to obtain during construction to determine the effects of soil moisture content, thickness of layer, and number of!passes. 7.1.2.3 In deciding on the range of moisture contents, day-to-day variations in moisture content should be taken into consideration, particularly in the case of cohesive soils. Refer 6.6.4. Having decided on the thickness of layers and range of moisture contents, tests should be made with the different types of equipment available, and the required number of passes should also be determined. In all this work the state of compaction should be measured in terms of dry bulk density. 7.1.3 During the actual construction of any earthwork, maximum use should be made of constructional plant and routing of the plant should be careful1.y controlled to obtain uniform compaction over as wide an area as possible. Care should also be taken during the compaction operation to shape the surface of the works to facilitate the shedding and to minimize the absorption of rainwater, particular attention being given to the prevention of ponding. It is advisable to do this at the end of each day's work. 7.1.4 Where, in the construction of an embankment, it is necessary to construct a culvert over which the filling has to be placed, it is essential that the filling and subsequent compaction should be carried out in such a manner as to avoid an unbalanced thrust on the culvert, which might displace or damage it. 7.2 Tests for Compaction of Earthworks - The following tests shall be carried out for determining compaction: a) Density moisture relationship of the soil; b) Density of the soil in field; and c) Moisture content.

14

IS : 4701- 1981
7.2.1 Density moisture relationship of the soil shall be determ:ned in ;;y?daoce with IS : 2720 ( Part VII)-19808 and IS : 2720 ( Part VIII )-

7.2.2 Density of soil in field shall be determined in accordance IS : 2720 ( Part XXVIII )-1974$ or IS : 2720 ( Part XXIX )-19755. 7.2.3 Moisture content ( Part II )-1973/l. 8, DISPOSAL of soil shall be in accordance

with

with IS : 2720

OF MATERIALS

8.1 All excavated materials within economic lead, suitable for construction

of canal embankment should be used in its construction. Where the canal is aligned on sloping ground excavated material not required for the construction of embankment on the higher side shall be deposited on the lower side. Where canal is on level or nearly level ground the material from excavation shall be deposited on embankments on both sides of the canal. If there is excess of material from the excavation than needed for construction of embankments of canals, it should be deposited outside the embankments on either side of the canal in the form of spoil banks leaving a suitable berm and cross drains as directed by the engineer-in-charge. 8.2 A gap 3 m wide at toe may be left in spoil banks at 150 m intervals for the purpose of drainage. 9. BORROW PITS

9.1 Where canal excavation does not furnish sufficient suitable material for

embankments, additional material required may be procured from the borrow pits. The location of borrow pits will depend on the material that It may is being sought which in turn depends on the design consideration. be necessary to survey the soil by means of auger borings or trial pits to determine the extent and nature of the deposits in the borrow area. 9.2 No borrow pits shall be dug within 5 m of the toe of embankment, if their depth is less than 0.5 m, 1) and 10 m, if their depth is more than 0.5 m;
*Methods of test for soils : Part VII Determination relations using light compaction ( sc~ond revision). t'lkfethods of test for soils: Part VIII Determination relations using heavy compaction (jirst rrvihm ). $Methods of test for soils : Part XXVIII Determination by the sand replacement method (jrst rsvision 1. $Methods of test for soils : Part XXIX by the core cutter method (jut reviziun). Determination of moisture of moirture content content dry density

dry density

of dry density of soils, in p!acc, of dry density of roils, in place,

I(Methodr of test for soils: Part II Determination

of moisture

conten t ( second rmirion),

15

IS : 4701- 1982 or within such a distance from the toe of the bank where a 4 : 1 hydraulic gradient line cuts the ground surface, whichever is more. Borrow pits shall not be more than 1 m in depth and 25 m in length. A clear distance of 1 m shall be left between the pits. The bed of borrow pits shall be left reasonably smooth and even. 9.3 Borrow pits shall be drained to avoid stagnation of water. The bottom level of borrow pits should be fixed with reference to the prevailing ground slope towards the nearest natural drainage course. The pits shall be connected together by a drain about 0.5 m wide. The bottom level of connecting drain should suit the bed level of the pits it connects. 10. TURFING

10.1 Principles Underlying the Use of Grass on Earth Slopes - Surface stabilization of slopes and the prevention of soil erosion and weathering may be accomplished by the establishment of grass or other herbage. The living grass roots mechanically reinforce the soil, and the decaying organic matter improves soils structure. The grass leaves, living or dead, protect the surface against rain and wind. The combination of improved soil structure and protection gives stability against erosion.
Virgin clays and other subsoils are usually deficient in those bacterial organisms which promote healthy growth. The application of top soil to any new slope is usually a pre-requisite for the successful establishment of grass. 10.2 Topsoiling - The depth of topsoil required will vary according to the nature of the subsoil aod a depth of about 15 cm of good quality soil overlying the subsoil is usually sufficient to sustain plant growth. 10.3 Sodding - The sods used shall be cut in rectangular shape 8 to 10 cm thick and laid so that their edges are in close contact and then welded by being gently rammed till they form a level and compact mat. When old surfaces are to be turfed, they shall be picked up to a depth of about 4 cm to give a hold to the sods. For sodding any grass which forms a thick short turf shall be used. 10.4 TurfIng - It is difficult to generalize on the type of grass to be used since each particular soil type required a specific grass. To ensure a satisfactory result it is desirable to consult agriculture department, who would make any necessary analysis of the soil before specifying the type of grass. It would also be a help to study the grasses growing in the oeighbourhood and to include the varieties that appear to be most suitable; this, of course, largely depends on the top soil being obtained from the same vicinity.

16

APPENDIX (Ch7use 7.1.1 )
COMPACTION

A

CHARACTERISTICS FOR SOILS AND OTHER MATERIALS USED IN EARTHWORK CONSTRUCTION
SUITABLB TYPE OP

( The information given should be taken only as an approximate guide )
MAJOR DIVISIONS SUB-GROUPS

THICKNESS OF LOOSE LAYSR (ACTUAL THICKNESS DEPENDS ot4 PLANT USED), MC> cm REMARKS

No.
PASSES

OF FOR

COMPACTINO EQUPYENT

SATISFACTORY COMPACT ON

MiR

(2)

(3)

(4) Heavy earth-moving equipment

(5)

(6)
_30

(7) Maximum size of material will govern the minimum thickness of layer

-_
Boulders

and cobble: s

Boulder gravels

_Other materials Hard : Hard broken rock, hardcore, ctc soil binder) (no Heavy smooth-wheel roller Frog-rammer Heavy vibrating plate 8 2" 30 37.5 30 As for boulders bles and cob-

so/t :

Chalk, rocks rubble

soft

Prack laying tractor and heavy smoothwheel roller Frog-rammer

4 4*

20 37.5

Best compaction is obtained by spreading the material with a doser and compacting with four passses of the roller. In wet weather a smoothwheel roller may prove impracticable due to skidding. In this case adequate compaction obtained by can be using a heavy tractor and thinner layer

-_

_W'ell-graded gravel, gravels and mixtulittle or no res, fines
A

Gravel and I gravelly soils

concrete vibrator may be used when these soils are used as subgrade materials. For effective use of a vibrator the soil should be in relatively dry condition

Well-graded gravel sand mixtures with excellent clay indrr Uniform gravel with little or no fines Poorly-graded gravel and gravel sand mixtures, little or no fines Gravel with fines, silty gravel, clayey gravel, poorlygraded gravel-sand. clay mixtures Smooth-wheel roller 6 6 6 20 20 20

moisture content Close control is essential

As for well-graded gravel, gravel sand mixtures, little or no fines Close moisture content control is essential

-

_ 1 Vibrating
wheel

1 Pneumatic-tyred roller smoothroller

l

Where

one

prsn

is equivalent

to

6 f~ 8 blows

per

unit

ama.

( Conhued

)

T

-.
h'0. OF PASSES ~06
SATEFACTORY COMPACTION,

MAT

MAJOR DIVISIONS

SUB-GROUPS

SUITABLE TYPE
COMPACTING EQUIPMENT

THICKNESS OF LOOSE LAYER (ACTUAL THICKXES:,

REMARKS

Min

:>
(2) Smds and

(3) Well-graded sands and gravelly sands, little or no fines

(4)

(5)

(7)

sandy soih Heavy vibrating Frog-rammer Power-rammer platc 2* 3t 37.5 3 i.3 `0 Vibrating rollers or vibrators Lvill be very satisfactory if the moiture content of the soil IS low, but may bc uneconomical Close moisture content control is essential, when the moisture content is relatively high it is preferable to use a pneumatic-tyred roller As for well-graded sands and gravelly sands, little or no fines As for with binder well-graded excellent sand clay

Well-graded with excellent binder

sand clay-

Uniform sands with little or no fines Poorly-graded sands little or no fines Sands with fines, silty sands, clayey sands, poorly-graded sand. caly mixtures Soils havin l&v compre rsibility
P

--

Silts (inorganic) and very fine sands, rock flour, silty or clayey fine sands,. with slight plasnctty Zlayey silts(inorganic

-

These soils are difficult to compact and the rffcct of varying the contact pressure should be tried. Close moisture content control should be maintained

<oils having nedium :ompressi)ility

3rganic silts of plasticity

low

mcdtum

plasticity

:lays (inorganic) Tf medium plasticity -_ 1 rganic clays of medium plasticity ioils halving tigh comnessibility Ylicaccous or distomaccous fine sandy and silty soils, elastic silts ilays high clays (inorganic) plasticity, of fat

jmooth-wheel roller `neumatic tyrcd roller frack-la) ing tractor iheeps - foot roller: :rog-rammer `owcr-rammer

4 -

20

-

io"
2.

15 ;;.s 20

_

fhese soils are considcrcd very undesirable for use in earthwork and should not be employed if they are -_._. highlv ____. compressible_.~__ to compact thcsc soils at the rnoi+ turc content at which no change will occur suhscquently

1t

rIt is advisable

)rganic clays of high plasticity `cst and other highly organic swamp soils *Where tWhereone $For one pass is equivalent pass is equivalent ^ to 6 to 8

--

AS for micaccous or distomaceous fine sandy and silty soils

--. . b!ows per umt area.
per unit area.

These soils are entirely unsuirablc for earthI work construction

-

to 2 to 3 blows

use in dry climates.

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( C mmon to all Offices) 4 Telephone Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 *Eastern : 1 /14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road. Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH 160036 331 01 31 331 1375 I 36 24 99

21843 I 3 16 41 41 24 42 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 41 25 19 I 41 2916 twestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093 Branch Offices: `Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 2 63 48 AHMADABAD 380001 I 2 63 49 SPeenya Industrial Area 1 st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road 38 49 55 BANGALORE 560058 38 49 56 I Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 667 16 BHOPAL 462093 5 36 27 Plot No. 82/83. Lewis Road. BHUBANESHWAR 751002 53j5. Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 3 31 77 GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ). 23 1083 HYDERABAD 500001 6 34 71 R14 Yudhister Marg. C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 { 6 98 32 21 68 76 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 I 21 82 92 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 6 23 05 T.C. No. 14/1421. University P.O.. Palayam I6 21 04 TRIVANDRUM 695035 16 21 17 Iqpection Offices ( With Sale Point ): Pgshpanjali, First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, 2 51 71 Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 h#itution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji `Nagar, 5 24 35 PUNE 411005 l -Sale&ffica in Calcuttais al 5 ChowringheeApproach, P. 0. Princep 27 68 00 Straet, Calcutta 700072 tSales Office in Bombay ia at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, 89 65 28 Bombay 400007 $Sales Office in Bangalore is a1 Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, 22 36 71 Bangalore 560002 Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

