**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10979 (1984) : Powder resins for use in shell process in 
foundries [MTD 14: Foundry] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



13:10379-1984 

(Reaffirmed 2003) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

POWDER RESIN FOR USE IN 

SHELL PROCESS IN FOUNDRIES 



UDC 62l-744'56079 : 67a-e-492'2 




® Cofyrighl 19S4 
lNDtA14 STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MAMAK. KHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MaHO 

NEW D£LtfI 1 10002 

Gr 2 October 1984 



IS : 10979 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

POWDER RESIN FOR USE IN 

SHELL PROCESS IN FOUNDRIES 

Foundry Sectional Committee, SMDG 17 

Chairman Representing 

DrS.S.Khanna National Institute of Foundry & Forge 

Technology, Ranchi 

Members 
Shri M. M. G, Aqrawal Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi 

Shbi a. K. Banebjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. H. Commissariat Institute of Indian Foundrymen, Calcutta 

Shri R. P. Varshney ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. A. Gandhi Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri H. S. Ramaohandra ( Alternate I ) 

Shri A. Shantharam ( Alternate II ) 

Shri P. D. Chopra ( Alternate III ) 
Shri R. M. Gobanb Kirloskar Brothers, Kirloskarvadi 

Shri D. M. Dabak {Alternate) 
Shri P. L. Jain National Institute of Foundry & Forge 

Technology, Ranchi 

Shri K. Kishore ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. M. Joshi DCM Engineering Products, Ropar 

Shri K. N. Mehra Cooper Engineering Ltd, Satara 

Shri M. L. Navaue Versatile Equipment Pvt Ltd, Kolhapur 

Shri Subhash Kulkarni {Alternate) 
Shri N. V, Pandit M. M. Suri & Associates ( P ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri Thomas Paul Pioneer Equipment Co Pvt Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri G. Bhaskaran {Alternate) 
Shri G. N. Rao National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 
Shri N. R. Naoaraj Rao Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bhilai Steel Plant ), 

Bhilai 

Shri R. R. Saran ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. S. Venkoba Rao Ennore Foundries Ltd, Madras 

Shri K. V. Ramakrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. P, Rastoqi Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Rourkela Steel 

Plant ), Rourkela 

Shri S. Chaubey ( Alternate) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1984 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10979 - 1984 

( Continued from page I ) 

Members Representing 

Shri R. N. Saha Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 
Shri Dakbara Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri U. Sen Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri Y. H. Rattt ( Alternate ) 
Senior Chemist & Metallurgist Ministry of Railways 
CLW, Chittaranjan 

Chemist & Metallxtrqist ( SF ), 

CLW, Chittaranjan ( Alternate I ) 
Chemist & Metallurgist, NF Rly, 
New Bongaigaon ( Alternate II ) 
Shri V. P. Shenoy Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, 

Jamshedpur 
Shri A. Bhattacharjeb ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. N. Singh Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R, N. Mukherjee {Alternate) 
Shri V. N. Sunderrajan M. N. Dastur & Go Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. Thiyaoarajan Southern Alloy Foundries Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Shri A. Thangavelu ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. N. Upadhayaya Federation of Engineering Industries of India 

Shri H. L. Bhardwaj ( Alternate) 
Shri Nand Lal Varma International Steel Fabricators, Bombay 

Shri Rajesh Kumar Varma {Alternate ) 
Shri K. Raghavendran, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. K. Gupta 
Deputy Director (Metals), ISI 



IS : 10979 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

POWDER RESIN FOR USE IN 

SHELL PROCESS IN FOUNDRIES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 31 May 1984, after the draft finalized by the Foundry 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals 
Division Council. 

0.2 In recent years, solid resins in the form of powder in combination of 
catalyst and lubricant for use in the production of shell cores or moulds, 
using cold sand coating process are widely used in foundries. Resins in 
solid form as powder is being manufactured in the country presently as 
proprietry material. It is, therefore, felt that this standard will give 
assistance to the foundries to enable them to check the quality of powder 
resin, its catalyst and lubricant. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements for powder resin containing 
catalyst ( hexamin ) for use in production of shell cores or moulds 
in foundry using powder resin coated sand. 

1.1.1 For the purpose of this standard powder resin shall be phenol 
formaldehyde type suitable for shell process. 

2. MANUFACTURE 

2.1 The resin shall be synthetic in nature produced by catalytic reaction 
of phenol and formaldehyde. The resin shall be supplied in powder 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revistd) , 

3 



IS : 10979 - 1984 

form containing required hexamine, for thermosetting properties. The 
exact process of manufacture and formulation of the product shall be at 
the discretion of the manufacturer. 

3. SUPPLY OF MATERIAL 

3.1 General requirements relating to the supply of powder resin for 

foundry shall be as laid down in IS : 1387-1967*. 

4. REQJUIREMENTS 

4.1 Condition of the Material — • The material shall be in dry powdery 
form, free from lumps or the like. 

4#2 Melting Point — The melting point of the resin shall be in the 
range of 70^* - SS^C. 

4#3 Curing Temperature — The resin shall be curable at 150*^0 in 

30 - 60 seconds. 

4.4 Fineness — Minimum 98 percent of the material shall pass through 
75 fim IS sieve ( corresponding 200 Mesh BS and ASTM sieves ) [ see 
IS : 460 (Part 1 )-1978t]. 

4.5 Coated Sand Properties — The quality of resin shall be so 
controlled by the manufacturer that the resin coated sand {see 5) 
conforms to the following requirements: 

Hot Tensile Strength Gas Content 
Min Max 

NJTnnr ccjg 

Resin ( powder ) 4 percent 150 27 

5. SAND MIXTURE AND MIXING PROCEDURE FOR TESTING 

5.1 Sand Mixture — Sand mixture shall be of the following 

propositions: 

Standard silica sand conforming to 100 parts 

IS : 3018-19771 { 500 /xm IS SieveJ ) 

Powder resin 4 parts 

Solvent ( optional ) 1 part 



*General requirements for the supply of metallurgical materials {first revision ). 
fTest sieves: Part 1 Wire cloth test sieves { second revision ) . 
JStandard silica sand for raw material testing in foundries. 



IS : 10979 - 19B4 
5*2 Mixing Procedure — Mixing procedure shall be as given below: 

a) Charge sand into mixer/muller; 

b) Add powdered resin and mix for 2 minutes; 

c) Add solvent and mull until the coated sand returned approxi- 
mately to its original fineness. In case, solvent is used, care 
shall be taken for excessive mulling at this stage; and 

d) Discharge from muUer, 

6. SAMPLING 

6.1 Sampling and testing shall be carried out according to the 
manufacturer's production batches. A suitable sized sample shall be 
taken out from all the drums of a particular batch, mixed and used for 
testing. 

7. STORAGE 

7.1 Powder phenolic resin is a stable material and shall not sinter when 
stored in a closed container under optimum conditions. Optimum 
conditions are below 25°C and 60 percent relative humidity. 

8. TESTING METHODS 

8.1 Test requirements of resin and coated sand properties shall be as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 

8.2 The gas content of the coated sand shall be determined as specified 
in 18:1918-1966*. 

£.3 Melting point of the powder resin shall be determined by the 
capillary method as given in Appendix A, 

9. PACKING 

9 A The resin shall be supplied in 200 kg steel or fibre board diums. 

Id. SHELF LIFE 

10.1 When stored as recommended by the supplier, the material shall not 
fail to meet the requirements as given in 4, 



♦Methods of physical tests by foundry sands. 

5 



IS : 10979 - 1984 
11. MARKING 

11.1 Each drum shall carry the manufacturer's name, brand name of the 
product, data of manufacture, expiry date, and production batch 
number. 

1 1.1.1 The material may also be marked with the ISI Certification 

Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing 
and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI andoperated by the 
producer. ISI Marked products are also continuously checked by ISl for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a 
licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers 
or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



APPENDIX A 

(Clause S3) 

CAPILLARY TEST METHOD FOR THE DETERMINATION 
OF MELTING POINT OF POWDER RESIN 

A-1. APPARATUS 

A-1.1 The apparatus consists of a capillary tube holder having a 
magnifying glass in front and a bulb in the rear, a provision for fixing the 
thermometer and a controlled ( l**G/min ) heating device ( electrical 

filaments ), 

A-2. TEST METHOD 

A-2.1 The sample is filled in the capillary tube and placed on the holder. 
Ihe tube is slowly heated till the sample melts and becomes transparent. 
Heating is discontinued at this point and the melting point is noted. This 
experim_ent is repeated 3 times and the m.ean of these values shall 
be reported as the melting point of the powder resin. 



