eT dT Ah IS 18732 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


watt À {ета этїўгитчч HTAR eh 
таа % оит 


Guide for Implementation of 
Electrical Installation Standards in 
Building 


ICS 91.140.50 


© BIS 2023 


тї нч э] 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
COP ME, WAH чач, 9 seTet BE HK AMT, 4$ Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2023 Price Group 13 


Safety of Electrical Installations Sectional Committee, ETD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Electrical 
Installations Sectional Committee had been approval by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 


Electrical supply and installation is an important and essential part of building services. From initial planning, 
design, selection of material, installation/method of construction; to testing, commissioning and maintenance; 
every aspect is governed by statutory provisions referring various standards and code of practices. All such 
standards and code are oriented to minimize risk, provide safe use, operation, functionality and convenience 
throughout service life. Any lapse in any of the above aspect may lead to severe effects on human life and 
devastation of assets. Occasions of electrical fires are increasing with the increasing use of electrical gadgets. It is 
very important that quality of installation is maintained at every aspects of design, selection of product, 
workmanship and verification. 


Special installations such as high-rise buildings, hospitals, shopping complexes, hotels, large office complexes 
etc, where the fire hazard is high and evacuation is difficult, special conditions shall be fulfilled in electrical 
installation including safety services. 


Statutory provisions given in The Electricity Act, 2003 and Safety regulations are required to be followed. In 
addition IS 732, IS 3043, NEC and various product standards provide the backbone for the installation and its 
compliance is mandatory as insisted in regulation 14 of CEA measures relating to safety and Electic Supply 
Regulations 2023. IS 732 — Code of practice for electrical wiring installation, is a complete and comprehensive 
document for electrical installation of building. This Code covers the rules for the design, erection, and 
verification of electrical installations. The rules are intended to provide for the safety of persons, livestock and 
property against dangers and damage during the reasonable use of electrical installations and to provide for 
the proper functioning of those installations. IS 732 applies for design, erection and verification of electrical 
installations such as those of: 


a) Residential premises; 

b) Commercial premises; 

c) Public premises; 

d) Industrial premises; 

e) Agricultural and horticultural premises; 
f) Photovoltaic systems; and 

g) Low-voltage generating sets. 


NOTE — ‘Premises’ covers the land and all facilities including buildings belonging to it. 


Experience on implementation of Indian Standards and regulations in the field provides a feedback and it has 
been observed that standards for electrical installation are not so scrupulously followed for various reasons like, 
lack of knowledge, misinterpretation of some complex aspect of the standard, difficulties in finding out the 
various safety aspects in different standards etc. Therefore, a need was felt to prepare a document which can 
be understood by all, co-relates with various requirements at ground level and help to implement the standard 
for electrical installation. This standard can be used as a ready reckoner, a step by step guide (see Tables 1 
and 2 with the responsibilities of different stakeholders involved in a project) for implementation of electrical 
installation for any building. Each step will guide the implementer to specific clause or sub-clause of IS 732, NEC 
and NBC document whichever is relevant. 


The main advantages of following this Indian Standard are given below: 


a) Any electrical contractor can accomplish acceptable installation in compliance of required rules, 
regulation and standard; 

b) There will be similarity to the approach of electrical wiring system, regardless of type and size of building; 

c) Confirmation of type of design and subsequent verification will ensure the safety and reliability of the 
installation; and 

d) Some of the recent rules of real estate as propagated by Government of India (RERA Act) for the safety of 
buyers of the building, who may not have adequate knowledge of electrical installation, can get the 
confirmation of the quality of proper electrical installation and compliance of respective safety 
regulations by simply getting confirmation of both design and implementation through verification by 
third party inspection. 

(Continued on third cover) 


IS 18732 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


GUIDE FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF ELECTRICAL 
INSTALLATION STANDARDS IN BUILDING 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Standard specifies guidance for 
implementation of requirements of standards for 
design, installation and verification of electrical 
installations in buildings intended to provide safety 
of person, livestock and property against hazards 
associated with reasonable use of electricity while 
living in it or using it. This standard covers 
requirements for circuits at nominal voltage up to 
1 000 V a.c. or 1 500 V d.c. and frequency 50 Hz. 


1.2 This standard applies to the design, erection and 
verification of electrical installations of: 


a) Residential premises, 
b) Commercial premises, 
c) Public premises, 

d) Industrial premises, and 
e) Special locations 


1.3 This standard applies to new installations and 
with modification of existing installations but does 
not apply to temporary installation. 


1.4 Words Building and Premise are used in this 
standard concurrently meaning the same for 
interpretation purpose 


NOTES 


1 Classification of buildings covered under the scope of 
this standard and their co-relation with that of NBC is 
given in Annex J. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex P contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. AII 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purposes of this standard, in addition to the 
definitions given in 3 of IS 732, the following shall 


apply. 
3.1 Builder/Developer 


The individual or an agency/organisation assigned 


the responsibility to construct a building based on 
agreement with its owner. Requirement for 


competency shall be as per (Part 2/Sec 3) 12.9 of 
NBC. 


3.2 Architect 


The individual or an organization responsible for 
civil construction design of abuilding in compliance 
with relevant law/rules and regulation and has the 
necessary qualification and permission required for 
such work as defined in (Part 2/Sec 3) 12.9 of NBC. 


3.3 Owner/Occupier 


A person, a group of persons or a body having a legal 
interest in land and/or building thereon. This 
includes freeholders, leaseholders or those holding a 
sublease, who will have a legal right to occupation 
and have liabilities in respect of safety or building 
condition. In case of lease or sublease holders, as far 
as ownership with respect to the structure is 
concerned, the structure of a flat or structure on a 
plot belongs to the  allottee/lessee till the 
allotment/lease subsists. 


3.4 Licensed Electrical Contractor 


The individual or an organization who has the 
required competency and registration with relevant 
authority to carry out electrical installation work. 


3.5 Electrical Designer/Electrical Consultant 


The individual or an organization responsible for 
planning and design of the electrical installation in 
the building and have necessary qualification, and 
experience to carry out such activity. 


NOTE — For the purpose of this guide, electrical 
designer/electrical consultant is an electrical engineer 
having knowledge on the safety and technical requirements 
in various code of practices such as IS 732 and National 
Electrical Code of India 2023 and having experience and 
skill in electrical design. 


3.6 Licensed Electrician 


An individual who has the required qualification, 
experience and authorization from appropriate 
authority to work under a licensed electrical 
contractor to carry out the electrical installation 
work in a premise. 


3.7 Chartered Electrical Safety Engineer 


An engineer having the qualification and experience 
as specified by The CEA Regulation 6, having 
knowledge of The Electricity Act, 2003 Rules апа 


IS 18732 : 2023 


Regulations to assist the owner or supplier or 
consumer of electrical installations for the purpose of 
self-certification under regulation 32, 33, 38 and 45 
of CEA and regulation 43 of CEA (Measures 
relating to Safety and Electric Supply) Regulations, 
2023. 


4 ROLES, RESPONSIBILITY, AUTHORITY 
AND COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Roles and responsibility in respect of electrical 
safety shall be applicable as per relevant statutory 
laws and would precede any other requirements 
specified in this standard. In the context of 
compliance of requirements of this standard, 
necessary roles and responsibility as given in 4.2 
to 4.4 shall be applicable. 


4.2 After the completion of the building and taking 
possession of the building, the responsibility of 
electrical installation and all matters related to 
safety and statutory obligation rest with the 
owner/occupier, who is in possession of the building. 
Quality and health of the installation need to be 
verified (see 11.3) and required measures to be 
taken to address shortcomings, if any. At the time 
of construction of the building and before handing 
over, the builder/electrical contractor or the agency 
assigned the work for installation is responsible for 
ensuring compliance of all electrical requirements 
and handover to owner all documents required for 
complying these requirements. 


4.3 The owner/occupier of the building is 
responsible for compliance of relevant rules and 
regulations and shall demonstrate commitment 


with respect to the quality of electrical installations 
in the building by: 


a) Appointing minimum one responsible 
person with appropriate qualification and 
competency for compliance and 
maintenance of relevant  rules;taking 
responsibility/accountability ог the 
effectiveness of the quality of installation; 


b) ensuring that the resources needed for 
maintaining the quality of installation are 
available; 

c) engaging, directing and supporting persons 
to contribute to the effectiveness of the 
quality; and 

d) promoting improvement. 


NOTE — Engagement of Electrical Safety Engineer is 
required for multi-storey building, commercial 
complexes, industrial building and public building 
and may not be necessary for small stand-alone 
building. In such cases responsibility lies with the 
owner/occupier of the building. 


A summary of requirements for compliance of 
design, installation and verification of electrical 
system in building are given Table 1 and Table 2. 
This summary includes reference of relevant 
clauses of regulation, IS 732, NEC and NBC. 
Additional information as standard procedure for 
execution of electrical work on different aspects in 
a project are provided in Annex A to L. It is 
recommended that users of this standard may first 
follow the requirements mentioned in this standard 
which would refer to corresponding clauses of 
IS 732 and other standards, as necessary 


Table 1 Design Requirements in an Electrical Installation 


IS 18732 : 2023 


(Clause 4.2) 
Compliance 
E Е z 
ction Activit Е 92 t 
vity & e AY) oO 5 
2 Б Ба Ё 2 
< E 
= = = 
© = © 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (б) IOJ, О) (8) | ©) ао), aD (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) 
1 DESIGN PART 1 - PRELIMINARIES ү ү ү ү ү ү ү ү ү ү 
11 Appointments, Stakeholders A A 4 4 31 1/7/5 ANNEX A 4 
12 Land/Site Survey y y 
clearances from existing lines OH/UG 60, 1/7/ 
1.2.1 y y ү 62, 65 и 
1.2.2 prohibition of blasting/excavation, brick kiln d d 
Load Supply (Primary assessment) 14(1, 1/7/ 
1.3 ү N 2 and 4.2 
1.4 Equipment Requirement (Primary assessment) N 3) 4.1.4 
1.5 Architectural Planning, Drawings ANNEX B 5 
1.5.1 Space requirement for major equipment and system 46(1) 1/9/4 
1.5.1.1 location and access (DSS, Gen set, etc) J J 14(4) 
1.5.1.2 room (area, height, ventillation) 46(2) | 4.1.3.12 8/4/ 4.2 
— to 4.5, 
1.5.1.3 cable routes external 48 
1.5.2 Architectural drawings - Building construction J 4 
1.5.2.1 Cable shafts, meter, panel room(s), etc 
2 DESIGN PART 2 - ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION y y y y y y y 
1/7, 
1/9, 
2.1 Internal EI 1/22 
2.1.1 Layouts of light/power points and switch boards ү ү y 1/9/5 6.2 and 6.3 
2.1.2 Distribution and SLD 37, 39 6.2 and 6.4 
2.1.2.1 Division of circuits as per load, location, service-general/essential/critical ү 
6.2 апа 6.5 
2.1.2.2 ВВТ, cabling-mains, sub-mains, final branch circuits, grouping, looping, routing 1/9/6 
6.2 and 6.6 
2.1.2.3 DBs, MCBs and other protections* d 6.2 and 6.7 
2.1.2.4 Main/sub switchboard panels - switchgears, other protections*, instrumentation 4 4 ANNEX C 
6.2 and 6.8 
2.1.3 Protections* 
2.1.3.1 Electric shock 4.2 1/10 6.4 
14, 44 
2.1.3.2 Thermal effect y 43 [11 6.5 
2.1.3.3 Over current 4.4 1/12 6.6 
2.1.3.4 Voltage disturbance and EMI 4.5 1/13 6.7 
2.1.4 Fixtures ү N 1/9/9 6 


IS 18732 : 2023 


2.1.4.1 Lighting, illumination 
2.1.4.2 fans 
2.1.4.3 Other 
2.1.5 Additional Considerations 
2.1.5.1 Highrise buildings 38 3/22 
2.1.5.2 Hospitals, medical locations 3/9 
2.1.5.3 Hotels Y 3/20 
3/10, 
13, 
2.1.5.4 Places of public assembly/gathering 17 ANNEX D 
2.1.5.5 Other special locations uU 
2.2 External E.I. 
2.2.1 Street/Path Lighting К ЕА 
2.2.2 Garden Lighting 3 : 
2.2.3 Flood Lighting 
3 DESIGN PART 3 - SELECTION OF WIRING TYPE AND MATERIAL N N N N 
3.1 Type of Wiring 
3.1.1 Situation V 
3.1.2 External Influences 
3.2 Material and Specifications 4 
3.2.1 Cables/Wires - Conductor, Size Calculations 
3.2.2 Conduits/Trunking - Fill Factor, Size ANNEX E 
3.2.2 BBT - Type, Material, Accessories y 
3.2.3 Control Switchgears J 
3.2.3.1 DBs, protections - OCPD, RCD, SPD, AFDD, etc 
3.2.3.2 Control Panels and Instrumentation y 
32.4 Switches, Plug sockets and accessories ү 
3.2.5 Fixtures - Luminaries, Fans, etc 4 
4 DESIGN PART 4 - Supply Source y N y N 
А y 4.1.5.6. 
4.1 Design Load 1 
4.2 LT Supply 
4.2.1 Meter Room - Location, Design, Layout \ 
4.2.2 Type of system earthing 
4.1.3 Supplier's Side 
4.1.3.1 Service cable, feeder pillar, routing, space 4 
4.1.3.2 Equipment - control, distribution, meter, etc ANNEX F 
4.1.3.3 Earth terminal 
4.1.4 Consumer's Side 
4 
4.1.4.1 Control, protection, cable/mains, routing, etc 
4.1.5 Standby supply | 
4.1.5.1 Gen set(s) - capacity design, distribution 
4.1.5.2 UPS/Inverter - capacity design, distribution y 
43 HT Supply V 


IS 18732 : 2023 


4.3.1 Transformer(s) 

4.3.2 Infrastructure - supplier 

4.3.2.1 in coming line, Isolation/RMU, metering 

4.2.4 Infrastructure - Owner ү 

4.2.4.1 Isolation/HT panel К 

4.2.4.2 Transformer(s) - capacity design 

4.2.4.3 LT control and distribution panel 

4.2.4.4 Cable distribution network - size, route, etc ү 

4.2.5 Civil Infrastructure - Room, Duct, etc ү ү 

5 DESIGN PART 5 - EARTHING y N y 

5.1 Type of System Earthing 

52 Main Protective Equipotential Bonding 

5.2.1 Locations/Convenience for Verification y 

5.2.2 Main Earthing Terminal ү V ANNEX G 

5.2.3 Disconnection Time at Every Location 

5.2.4 Protective Conductor - Specifications 

5.3 Foundation/in RCC Earthing - Special Considerations y 

6 DESIGN PART 6 - Lightning Protection ү ү ү 

6.1 LPS Need - Risk Assessment 

6.1.1 Selection - External/Internal, Air Terminations, Down Conductor(s) - Natural Conductor/in 

RCC 4 ү ү ү ANNEX С 

6.1.2 Type of Earthing (А/В) (foundation/in RCC) 

6.1.3 Materials, Sizing, Routing 

7 DESIGN PART 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND LIFE SAFETY ү ү ү 

7.1 Civil Infrastructure - Rooms, Shafts, etc Y 1 Y Y 

7.2 Electrical Installation y ү y 

7.2.1 General, Material ү ү y 

7.2.2 Transformer(s) ү ү ү 

7.3 Classification of Building Under Utilisation Category ү ү y 

7.3.1 Special Requirements for Safety Service y y y y 

8 DESIGN PART 8 - SAFETY FOR SPECIAL INSTALLATIONS y y y 
N 

8.1 EV Charging 

8.2 Prosumer Installation (IEC 60364-8-2) y 

8.3 Solar PV (IS 16997) y 

9 DESIGN PART 9 - Energy Efficiency (IS 16996) y V 

9.1 Barycentre Method y Y 

9.2 Losses in Eiring - Conductor, PF, Harmonics, etc y 

9.3 Determination of Zones, Usages and Meshes y y 

9.4 Energy Efficiency and Load Management System y 


IS 18732 : 2023 


Table 2 Verification Requirements in an Electrical Installation 


(Clause 4.2) 
| 
Section Activity 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) | (10) (11) (12) (14) (17) (18) 
1 VERIFICATION PART 1 y y y 
11 Appointment of Chartered Electrical Safety Engineer V V V V 
1.2 Design Document Verification N V V 
1.3 Check Compilance to Standards and Regulations ү ү ү 
2 VERIFICATION PART 2 ү ү ү 
2.1 Work Completion V V V ү ү 
2.1.1 Confirming Physical Completion ү ү 
2.1.2 Initial Verification y Y 
2.1.2.1 Visual inspection 11.5 
2.1.2.2 Documentation - Equipment, material ү 11.4 
2.1.2.3 Testing with supply OFF 4 | 11.6 
2.1.2.4 Testing with supply ON y 
2.1.2.5 Documentation ү 11.4 
2.1.2.6 Report y y 11.4 
2.1.3 Statutory Compliance y y y 
2.1.3.1 Permission from electrical inspector 
2.1.3.1.1 Gen-set d 4 Y 
2.1.3.1.2 Highrise 3 
2.1.3.1.3 HT installation 
2.1.4 Commissioning y y y y 
2.1.4.1 Test Report to Supply Co. d 
2.1.4.2 Release of supply 
2.1.4.3 Satisfactory Working y Y Y 
2.1.5 Handing Over N y 
2.1.5.1 Documents to consumer/user Y y Y 11.4 
3 VERIFICATION PART 2 
3.1 Post Completion Mandates ү ү ү 
3.1.1 Maintenance Schedule 
3.1.2 Periodical Verification К 
3.1.3 Documentation y 11.4 
3.1.4 Reporting to Electrical Inspector ү 


5 ARCHITECTURE/CIVIL PLANNING AND 
DESIGN 


5.1 Depending upon the complexity of the project, 
planning process to be initiated and shall include 
involvement of Certified Electrical Contractor/ 
Consultant. This activity shall include plan for the 
selection of site, assessment of suitability of the site 
from electrical installation point of view (like 
overhead transmission line, railway crossing, etc). 
Checklist of project planning given in Annex B shall 
be followed. 


5.2 Health and life of an old installation in building 
need to be assessed and follow up action to be 
taken to augment the requirements or replacement 
of installation that are identified as necessary. 
Statutory provision for verification at a frequency of 
once in five years is specified for certain category of 
premises. For the purpose of this standard a 
safety audit ata frequency as per Annex К is 
recommended. 


5.3 When planning for electrical installation 
system, the owner/developer shall consider and 
determine the risks that need to be addressed to 
prevent or reduce undesired effects on electrical 
safety and take actions to address these risks. 


5.4 Architectural Planning Requirements 


5.4.1 At planning stage, the architect of the building 
shall consult with electrical consultant/contractor to 
take into account the requirements of applicable 
regulation/standards in respect of site and location 
(see Note below) of construction and in respect 
of drawings of building, requirement of spaces, 
clearances, approach ways, raceways, shafts, 
recommended wall thickness, required provisions 
for prevention from fire hazard likely to originate 
from electrical installation. 


NOTE — If proposed construction is within vicinity of 
existing overhead line/underground cable compliance with 
regulation 65 of CEA Safety Regulations, 2023 shall be 
checked prior to commencement of any work on site. 
Minimum clearance required for gas pipeline (except gas 
line connected to buildings) is 3 m. 


5.4.2 Architect shall incorporate following 
provisions in the drawings related to services as per 
the applicable requirements. 


a) Site plan — Site plan shall show existing 
overhead electrical — lines/underground 
cables if any and proposed construction 
within the boundaries of the area to be 
developed. 


b) Routes and service entry points — 
Architectural drawings shall clearly mark 
electrical service entry points, cable 


IS 18732 : 2023 


routes below ground, through the building 
structure, so that detailing in electrical shop 
drawings will restrict the work within 
specified route and no conflict shall occur 
with other building utility service. The 
drawings shall specify required horizontal 
and vertical clearance to be maintained 
between other utility services. 


5.5 Fire Safety 


Fire safety requirement shall comply with Part 4 of 
NBC and relevant clauses of Central Electricity 
Authority (measures relating to safety and electric 
supply) Regulations, 2023. Table for selection of 
electrical requirement of buildings based оп 
conditions of evacuation as per Table 7 of IS 732 and 
type of building occupancy as per Table 7, Part 4 
(fire and life safety) of NBC of India 2016 is 
provided in Annex J. 


5.5.1 Fire Rating 


The electrical panel rooms, doors, segregation 
arrangement within shaft shall have fire rating of 
2 h or as per requirements mentioned under 
NBC, Central Electricity Authority (Measures 
relating to safety and electric supply) Regulations, 
2023. 


5.5.2 Shafts/Ducts/Chambers 


Design and location of cable ducts, shafts, chambers, 
their covers and entry points, shall be as рег shop 
drawings provided by electrical designer/electrical 
consultant (see 6) and shall be in consultation with; 
considering further aspects of maintenance/repairs/ 
replacement. Size of chambers shall be in 
consideration with bending radii of cables. At every 
floor level, there shall be a provision to seal these 
shafts, so that in case of fire, it shall not spread or 
smoke shall not pass from one floor to other. 


6 ELECTRICAL DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT 


6.1 Electrical Provisions 


Requirements given in the following clauses shall be 
followed. A checklist for design and erection given 
in Annex A to H should be followed. 


6.1.1 Statutory Obligations — Appointment of 
Licensed Electrical Contractor 


Reg. 31 (1) (precautions to be adopted by 
consumers, owners, occupiers, electrical 
contractors, electrical workmen and suppliers) shall 
be followed by the owner/developer and work 
shall be carried out through Licensed Electrical 
Contractor who shall be responsible to do the 
work through the  qualified/certified workmen 
having required permit in that regard. He shall 
also see that the material to be used, work and 


IS 18732 : 2023 


workmanship shall conform to respective standards 
and regulations and shall submit test report of the 
work carried-out by him. 


NOTE — All work hidden inside the building shall be 
checked for conformity with respect to the requirements of 
the standards prior to getting it concealed and the same shall 
be certified by the contractor and verified by the chartered 
electrical safety engineer. 


6.1.2 Statutory Obligations | —  Approvals/ 
Permissions/Licenses 


Required approvals shall be taken as per related 
Rules and Regulations mentioned below prior to 
the commissioning and handing over the installation 
for beneficial use. 


a) Central Electricity Authority (measures 
related to safety and electric supply) 
Regulations 2023 including а 
amendments. 

b) Reg. 34 — Generator: Inspection and 
approval for commissioning. 

c) Reg. 38 — Multi-storied building (height 
above 15m) inspection and NOC for 
commencement of supply. 

d) Reg. 45 — Transformer sub-station or 
any installation above 650V: inspection 
and approval before commencement of 
supply. 

e) Relevant Lift and escalator Rules. 

f) Rule 5 — License for working of Lift and 
escalator. 

g) Approval from the concerned fire and 
safety department. 

h) Any other statutory approvals from local 
body/government/energy supplier 


NOTE — Compliance to National Electrical Code of 
India 2023, national Building Code of India 2016 and 
other IS standards are mandatory to fulfil the 
requirements of the regulation mentioned in a). 


6.2 Layout and Planning of Electrical Installation 


Layout and planning of electrical installation as 
specified below shall be conducted by licensed 
electrical contractor/electrical consultant. Close 
consultation/coordination shall be carried out with 
building architect for making provision as per 
requirement envisaged. 


6.2.1 Locations of Electrical Panels 


Locations and position for main and sub electrical 
panels shall be marked in building plan and adequate 
space/room shall be allocated considering size of 
panel, clearance in front, side апа back. 
Consideration shall be given to space required for 
opening of the panel doors/racking out breakers, and 
approach boundaries and accessibility. Floor 
mounting panels may preferably be located in 


separate electrical panel rooms, having outside door 
opening, required fire rating (minimum two hours) 
and ventilation arrangement. 


6.2.2. Electrical Meter Rooms 


Meter rooms may be separate. It shall be planned to 
have sufficient head room and clear space in front. of 
metres, control switches (at least 1 m). Space on 
wall shall be sufficient to accommodate required 
number of meters at such height that readings can 
be taken without aid of any tackle. Also the 
switchgears shall be at least 0.5 m above floor level 
and within such height to have an easy access for 
operation. The meter room shall be well ventilated, 
protected from external influences like sun, rain, 
water seepages, flood water, entry of rodents. 
Location of meter room shall be suitably adjacent or 
nearest to cable duct/shaft/vertical route of mains. 


NOTE — Meter rooms shall not be located below staircases 
where above requirements could notbe complied with. 


6.2.3 Movement of | Heavy/Bulky ^ Electrical 
Equipment 


For installation. of electrical equipment within 
building which is likely to be heavy/bulky in size or 
removing it for maintenance, provision of adequate 
passages, stairways or any alternate provision for its 
shifting/movement shall be taken into account. 


6.2.4 Shafts/Ducts 


There shall be provision of shafts with required fire 
rating (2 h if not mentioned specifically) for vertical 
electrical distribution which may preferably be 
adjacent to electrical panels. Shafts shall be 
separate for electrical HT cables, LT power 
cables/bus-bar trunking and cable work of extra low 
voltage systems like telephones, security system, 
fire alarm, signaling, BMS or data networking etc. 
If independent shaft is not possible, there shall be 
an arrangement for segregation in between, with 
required fire rating same as that of shaft. No other 
utility service shall run through these shafts. Shafts 
shall be accessible at all levels with doors having fire 
rating as that of shaft and shall not open in fire 
escape staircase. All shafts shall have fire prevention 
provision as per national building code and fire 
safety requirements of local statutory authorities. 


NOTE — As per CEA Reg. 38 provision in respect of 
independent electrical service shaft is mandatory for all 
buildings above 15 m height (high-rise buildings). 


6.2.5 Openings and Covers 


Manholes/opening of chambers shall not be less 
than 650 mm x 550 mm or 650 mm in diameter, 
where opening is intended for entry of person. 
Covers of manholes, chambers shall bear sufficient 


strength to withstand loads likely to be imposed on 
the structure. Covers shall be marked with the name 
of the service. Openings/Covers of junction 
boxes/draw-in boxes/accessories in conduit systems 
with inspection openings shall always be accessible. 


6.2.6 Enclosures for Underground Cables 


Pipes to be used for cable as enclosures shall be of 
required diameter so that cable can pass through or 
removed from easily and have sufficient mechanical 
strength and shall be erected at required depth to 
suite requirements of IS 1255. While selecting the 
size of cable enclosure appropriate space factor 
shall be applied. 


6.2.7 Wall Thickness 


Walls shall be of sufficient thickness to 
accommodate concealed boxes/switch 
boards/distribution boxes so that installation of 
boxes will not affect strength of wall. Additional 
strengthening shall be considered if necessary. 


NOTES 


1 Depth of box may be 60 mm or vary depending on 
manufacturer's design. Under circumstances іп 100 mm 
wall it is not possible to accommodate these boxes back to 
back. Staggering may solve problem to certain extent. 


2 Electrical installation in building may not be concealed 
always and it is left to the preference of user. 


6.2.8 Structural Strength 


In wiring installation where cable ladder, tray system 
is used for cable management, its structure along 
with the load of cables which it is going to support, 
is likely to impose load on the primary structure of 
building. This situation occurs when supports of this 
system are fixed on building structure. For this 
building structure shall have capacity to bear the 
load. At some locations there are chances of conduits 
getting crowded endangering structural strength due 
to number of circuits entering/passing out from the 
particular DB/panel. This situation may occur in 
beam, slab, and wall. If such situation is 
unavoidable necessary measures may be required to 
retain structural strength. 


6.2.9 Sleeves/Core Cutting 


As far as possible sleeves shall be got erected for 
entry of wires/cables through wall, flooring, RCC 
structure during construction to avoid core cutting, 
damages and reworking at finishing stage. 
Sometimes core cuttings may be required which 
shall be done with the consent of structural engineer 
and under supervision of civil engineer. 


6.2.10 Water Leakages/Seepages 


Design shall take into consideration possible 
seepages, leakages, accumulation, and ground in- 


IS 18732 : 2023 


surge of water, which is hazardous to electrical 
installation. Location of electrical installation/duct 
should Бе separate and away from installation 
related to water supply/gas supply system. Wherever 
necessary, required provisions shall be made at 
such locations to segregate the installation and 
work shall be executed with due care. 


6.2.11 Bathrooms/Washrooms 


Within bathrooms/washrooms, location of showers, 
faucets shall comply Part 3 (Section 2 and 3) of NEC. 


6.2.12 Tandems іп Flat Slab Post Tension 
Structures 


For flat slab post tension structures locations of 
tandems marking shall be made to avoid puncture 
of/damage to tandems during electrical construction 
activity. 


6.2.13 Earthing 


Any construction work, including excavation, 
subsequent to construction of earthing electrode/s; 
shall not disturb/damage any part of earthing 
system. Any civil work on construction site shall not 
cause  cover-up/concealing of any portion of 
electrical earthing system without notice and consent 
of person In-charge of electrical work. 


6.2.14 Sub Stations/Generators/Batteries 


Trenches, ventilation, approach roads shall be 
provided as per necessity. 


6.3 Electrical Design 


6.3.1 While designing the electrical installation, the 
following basic information shall be considered and 
selected appropriately keeping safety as the primary 
objective: 


a) An assessment of general characteristics of 
power supply; 

b) External influences which it is to be 
exposed (see Table 7 of IS 732); 

c) Compatibility of its equipment and 
characteristics; 

d) Maintainability; 

e) Safety service; and 

f) Continuity of service. 


6.3.2 Assessment of General Characteristics of 
Power Supply Includes Conductor Arrangement and 
System Earthing 


For system earthing, 4.1 and 5.4 of IS 732 shall 
be followed. Following points shall be considered 
for an easy selection: 


a) System earthing is divided into TN/TT 
and IT systems, out of which TN and TT 


IS 18732 : 2023 


are solidly earthed system and IT is 
unearthed or earthed through a high 
impedance. Clause 5 of IS 3043 provides 
more clarity on choice of earthed or 
unearthed system, 


b) TN system require a metallic low 
impedance fault return path from the 
installation to the source, whereas TT 
system use electrically independent earth 
electrodes at installation and source, 


c) For public electricity distribution the 
commonly used system is TN-C-S with 
PME (see 4 of IS 3043 statutory provisions 
for earthing for more information), 


d) Industrial system, at voltages higher than 
250 volt and up to 650 volts should be 
designed as a PME system with separate 
protective conductor. (TN-S system). 
(see 27 of IS 3043), 


e) Inall cases: 


1) The earth fault loop impedance has to 
be low enough to allow adequate earth 
fault current flow to cause an 
overcurrent protective device (for 
example, a fuse or circuit breaker) in 
the faulty circuit to operate in a 
sufficiently short time; or 


2) Where it is not possible to achieve a 
low enough earth fault loop 
impedance, disconnection may be 
initiated by fitting a residual current 
device (RCD) of 30 mA rating as 
specified in IS 732. 


f) Fault protection with an RCD of not more 
than 30 mA at origin of installation is 
necessary for a TT system. 


6.3.3 An assessment of following 
characteristics of equipment shall be made which 
is likely to have harmful effects upon other 
electrical equipment or other services or likely to 
impair the supply: 


a) Transient over voltages; 

b) Undervoltage; 

c) Unbalanced loads; 

d) Rapidly fluctuating loads; 

e) Starting currents; 

f) Harmonic currents; 

g) D.C. feedback; 

h) High-frequency oscillations; 

j) Earth leakage currents; 

k) Necessity for additional connections to 
earth; and 

m) Excessive conductor currents not due to a 
fault. 


6.3.4 Need for continuity of service shall be assessed 
for each circuit. 


For detailed information on considerations of design 
4.1.5.5 to 4.1.5.15 of IS 732 shall be referred. 


6.4 Protection against Electric Shock 


6.4.1 Protection against electric shock is achieved by 
implementing various measures as per 4.2 of IS 732. 
Protective measure shall consist of: 


a) An appropriate combination of a provision 
for basic protection and an independent 
provision for fault protection, or 

b) An enhanced protective provision which 
provides both basic protection and fault 
protection. 


The adopted protective measures shall confirm 4.2 
of IS 732. In addition, the following shall comply: 


6.4.1.1 RCDs used for AC applications, shall be 
selected based on the type of expected residual 
current wave shape. These types are known as type 
AC, type A, type F and type B. All these devices are 
intended to be used on AC supply systems. 


a) Type AC are used for general purposes 
applications; 


b) Type A shall be used in cases where the 
application may create pulsating DC 
residual current. (for example, single phase 
class 1 devices with rectifying circuit like 
cooking plates/supply to an electric vehicle 
charging station (mode 1 or 2) as per 
IS17017-1); 


c) Type F shall be used in the cases where the 
application may create composite residual 
current. (for example, single phase class 1 
devices containing a motor controlled by a 
variable speed drive such as a heat pump or 
air conditioner); and 


d) Type B shall be used in cases where the 
application may create smooth DC residual 
current. (for example, three-phase class 1 
devices containing a motor controlled by a 
three phase variable speed drive such as 
certain types of three phase air conditioner, 
or pumps, or supply to an electric vehicle 
charging station (mode 3) as per 
IS 17017-1). 


6.5 Protection against Thermal Effect 


6.5.1 Protection against thermal effect (fire 
caused by electrical equipment, locations where 
risks of fire exist, protection against burns and 
protection against overheating) shall confirm to 4.3 


of IS 732, (see Table 7, code B; utilization and 
code C; construction of building). 


6.5.2 In addition, it is recommended that special 
measures be taken to protect against the effects of 
arc faults in final circuits. AFDD with should be 
placed at the origin of the circuit to be protected. 


a) In premises with sleeping accommodation; 


b) In locations with risks of fire due to the 
nature of processed or stored materials, that 
is, BE2 locations, (for example, barns, 
wood-working shops, stores of combustible 


materials); 

c) In locations with combustible 
constructional materials, that is, CA2 
locations (for example, wooden 
buildings); 

d) In fire propagating structures, that is, CB2 
locations; 

e) In locations with endangering of 


irreplaceable goods. 


NOTE — Refer Table 7 of IS 732, Code B; utilization 
and code C; construction of building for information 
about various classifications such as BE2, CA2, CB2 
etc. 


6.6 Protection against Overcurrent 


Protection against over current shall confirm 4.4 of 
IS 732. 


6.7 Protection against Voltage Disturbance and 
Electromagnetic Disturbance 


Protection against voltage disturbances and 
electromagnetic disturbance shall confirm to 4.5 of 
IS 732. 


6.7.1 Electrical system shall be designed in such as a 
way that 


a) Temporary over voltages due to earth 
faults in the high-voltage system and due 
to faults in the low voltage system shall be 
limited as per 4.5.2 of IS 732. 


b) Lightning protection shall confirm to 
IS/IEC 62305 and National Building Code 
of India. Risk assessment shall be carried 
out as per IS/IEC 62305-2 and suitable 
protective measures selected as per IS/IEC 


62305-3 and IS/IEC 62305-4. 
Coordination between architect, civil, 
structural and electrical designers are 


necessary to carry out foundation earthing 
or using natural components as parts of 
lightning protection system. 


c) Suitable protective devices as per 5.3.5 of 
IS 732 are installed in order to ensure that 
the over voltages of atmospheric origin or 


IS 18732 : 2023 


due to switching are limited to a level 
lesser than the over voltage category of the 
equipment. 


d) Measures for reducing the electric and 


magnetic influences оп electrical 
equipment shall be a part of design, 
installation and verification. Electrical 


EMC 
product 


equipment, which meets the 
requirements of the relevant 
standard shall be used. 


e) UPS of inverters used in the installation 
shall have suitable measures in built to 
protect against back feeding of power to 
the source. Single phase UPS or inverters 
used, shall isolate line and neutral 
conductor in order to ensure this safety 
[see 6.5.7 of NEC (Part 1/Section 9]. 


f) A common entry point shall be preferred 
for all metallic services entering into the 
building. 


g) Drop in voltage, or a loss and subsequent 
restoration of voltage could not create any 
dangerous situations for persons ог 
property. 


h) Itshall be ensured that there is no common 
neutral or looping of neutral of different 
circuits on the consumers' side. Each 
circuit shall have its own neutral conductor 


7 SELECTION AND INSTALLATION OF 
EQUIPMENT 


7.1 Every equipment shall comply with relevant 
Indian Standard wherever available. In the absence of 
the relevant Indian Standard, IEC standards may 
be used, or special agreements can be made 
between developer/electrical contractor and user. 
Selection of the equipment shall confirm 5 of 
IS 732. Consideration shall be given to the following 
points from the respective clause of IS 732 and shall 
conform to provisions of National Electrical Code 
(NEC). 


a) Operational conditions such as voltage, 
current, frequency, power and 
compatibility. 


b) External influences selected as per Table 7 
in IS 732. 


c) All equipment, including wiring, shall be 
accessible for its operation, inspection and 
maintenance. 


d) Labels or other suitable means of 
identification shall be provided to indicate 
the purpose of switchgear and control gear, 
unless there is no possibility of confusion. 
(for example, a single line diagram of the 


IS 18732 : 2023 


installation shall be made available for 
ready reference and in the case of large 
installations it shall be exhibited in the 
electrical room) 


e) Wiring shall be so arranged or marked that 
it can be identified for inspection, testing, 
repairs or alteration of the installation. 


f) The identification of separate neutral and 
protective conductors as per IEC 60445. 


g) The protective devices shall be arranged 
and identified so that the circuits protected 
may be easily recognized. 


h) Diagrams, charts or tables shall be provided 
in accordance with IEC 81346-1 and the 


ІЕС 61082 indicating the type апа 
composition of circuits and the 
characteristics necessary for the 


identification of the devices. The symbols 
used shall be confirm IS 12032. 


j) Equipment shall be so selected and erected 
considering electromagnetic influences and 
harmful influence between the electrical 
installation and any non-electrical 
installations are avoided. 


k) Circuits operating at different voltages shall 
be effectively segregated wherever 
necessary to avoid mutual detrimental 
influence. 


m) Protective conductor current shall be 
restricted within the limits prescribed in 
Annex Q of IS 732. 


7.2 Selection and Installation of wiring systems 
shall confirm 5.2 of IS 732. Wires with class 2 
copper conductors shall be used as protective 
conductors, including protective bonding conductors 
and live conductors in final circuits. Copper wire 
shall be used for wiring cross section area at least 
upto 16 sq mm. 


7.3 Devices for Protection against Thermal 
Effects and Fire 


7.3.1 Devices shall be mounted so as to allow, safe 
dissipation of heat or arcs/sparks which could cause 
harmful thermal effects. Protective devices shall be 
installed as close as practically possibletothe origin 
of the circuit to be protected. 


7.3.2 In locations with a particular risk of fire exist 
(see Annex J), devices used for protection against 
thermal effects shall not be provided with automatic 
re-closure. 


7.3.3 With the exception of devices to facilitate 


evacuation, switchgear and control gear devices in 
locations with external influences BD2, BD3 or 
BD4 shall be accessible only to authorized 
persons. Where installed in passages, switchgear 
and control gear devices shall be placed within 
enclosures complying with IEC 60670-24, IS/TEC 
61439-2, IS/IEC 61439-3 or IEC 62208. 


7.3.4 Switchgear for protection, control or isolation 
in locations with external influences BE2 shall be 
placed outside location BE2, unless it is in an 
enclosure providing a degree of protection 
appropriate for such a location of at least IPAX, or 
IP5X in the presence of dust, or IP6X in the 
presence of conductive dust. 


7.3.5 Unless specifically designed to be inherently 
heat-limiting, in all operational modes, motors shall 
be protected against excessive temperature by a 
motor protective device with manual reset. 


7.3.6 RCD and RCM for protection against thermal 
effects and fire, shall confirm with 4.3.2.3.9 of 
IS 732. 


7.3.7 Where an IMD is selected for preventing the 
risk of fire the response value shall not be lower than 
100 Q/V except in a public distribution system with 
a galvanic supply, the value shall not be lower than 
40 Q/V; or 50 percent of the insulation resistance 
without insulation failure and full load. 


7.3.8 AFDD used for the protection against arc 
faults shall comply with IS 17121. 


7.4 Protection against over voltages of atmospheric 
origin and switching shall be achieved by installing 
SPD's as per 5.3 of IS 732. 


7.5 Protective equipotential bonding shall be 
implemented as a mandatory safety requirement as 
per 4.2.11.3.1.2 and 4.2.15.2 of IS 732. 


7.6 Where functional earthing and functional- 
equipotential-bonding system 15 not locally 
connected to the protective equipotential bonding 
system, the functional bonding conductors shall be 
insulated, and installed separately from the 
protective conductor, and connected to the main 
earthing terminal only once. 


7.7 Earth electrodes which may be used in an 
installation are concrete-embedded foundation 
earth electrode, soil-embedded foundation earth 
electrode, metallic electrode embedded directly in 
soil vertically or horizontally (for example, rods, 
wires, tapes, pipes or plates) welded metal 
reinforcement of concrete (except pre-stressed 
concrete) embedded in the earth. 


7.7.1 When selecting the type and depth of an earth 


electrode, consideration shall be given to possible 
mechanical damage and to local conditions to 
minimize the effect of soil drying and freezing. 


7.7.2 Consideration shall be given to electrolytic 
corrosion when using different materials in an 
earthing arrangement. For external conductors (for 
example, earthing conductor) connected to a 
concrete embedded foundation earth electrode, the 
connection made from hot-dip galvanized steel shall 
not be embedded in the soil. 


7.7.3 The earthing arrangement shall not rely on a 
metallic pipe for flammable liquids or gases as the 
earth electrode and their buried length shall not 
be considered when dimensioning the earth 
electrode. However protective equipotential bonding 
is necessary. 


7.7.4 Where an earth electrode consists of parts that 
must be connected together, the connection shall be 
by exothermic welding, pressure connectors, clamps 
or other suitable mechanical connectors. 
Connections made by a wrapped iron wire only are 
not suitable for protection purposes. 


7.8 Auxiliary circuits used for transmission of 
signals intended for control, detection, supervision 
or measurement of the functional status of a main 
circuit shall satisfy the requirements of 557 of IEC 
60364-5-55. 


7.9 Transformer Sub-Station 


Transformer sub-station providing supply to the 
building if located within building shall use dry type 
transformer. 


7.10 Generator Standby Supply 


For every high-rise building there must be a 
provision of generator supply as a standby 
arrangement which shall be of adequate capacity 
to cater load of all emergency systems for 
required time. Location and system of supply shall 
be such that functioning, and purpose of generator 
will not be affected due to emergency like fire in 
building. If fire authority requires standby supply 
arrangement for fire-fighting system also, provision 
of generators shall be made accordingly [see NEC 
(Part 2/Section 1)]. 


8 Safety Services 


Safety Services shall be selected and erected as per 
5.6 of IS 732. In addition, the following shall 
comply: 


8.1 One or more electrical sources for safety 
services shall be provided to maintain supply for 
adequate duration. Preferential circuits and all 
equipment of safety services shall be provided, 


IS 18732 : 2023 


either by construction or by erection, with fire 
protection to ensure normal operation, in fire 
conditions, for adequate duration. 


8.2 Circuits of safety services shall not be protected 
by RCDs or AFDDs. 


8.3 The higher resistance of conductors due to high 
temperature when exposed to fire shall be taken into 
account when sizing the conductor cross-sectional 
area. Fire survival cable as per relevant Indian 
standard shall be used for connection to all essential 
services including signaling and communication for 
fire services. 


8.4 The wiring systems of safety services should be 
segregated from other services other than metallic 
screened fire-resistant cables and installed in such a 
manner that the safety services are not affected by 
any fault occurring on non-safety services and 
mitigate the effects of a fire. 


8.5 Switching facility may be provided to prevent 
discharging of the electrical storage source for safety 
services when the building is not occupied. 


8.6 Each single-phase circuit shall have its own 
neutral conductor. A common neutral for more than 
one circuit is not permitted. 


8.7 If a fire switch is required, conductors 
supplying fire protection equipment whose 
operation is necessary during a fire, shall be 
connected at the power supply side of the fire switch. 


Itshall beclearly identified. 
9 SPECIAL INSTALLATION 


Following special installations/locations require 
additional safety measures. Additional safety 
measures shall confirm to requirements specified in 
Part 3 of National Electrical Code of India: 


a) Bathor shower; 

b) Swimming pools and fountains; 

c) Rooms and cabins containing 
heaters; 

d) Construction and demolition sites; 

e) Agricultural and horticultural premises; 


sauna 


f) Conducting locations with restricted 
movement; 

g) Caravan parks, camping parks and similar 
locations; 


h) Marine and similar location; 

j Medical locations; 

k) Exhibitions, shows and stands; 

m) Solar photovoltaic (PV) power supply 
systems; 

n) Furniture; 

p) External lighting installations; 

q) Extra low voltage lighting installation; 


IS 18732 : 2023 


r) Mobile or transportable units; 


s) Recreational, assembly buildings and 
workplace; 

t) Electrical installation in caravan and motor 
caravan; 


u) Supplies for electrical vehicles; 
v) Operating or maintenance gangway; 


w) Temporary electrical installations for 
amusement devices and booths at 
fairgrounds, amusement parks and circuses; 
and 

y) Heating cables and embedded heating 
systems 


10 ENERGY EFFICIENCY REQUIREMENT 


Electrical installation may be designed and installed 
confirming the energy efficiency requirements as 
per IS 16996 and NEC (Part 1/Section 22). 


11 VERIFICATION 
TESTING) 


(INSPECTION AND 


Verification (inspection. and testing) of a low 
voltage electrical installation shall be conducted as 
per 6 of IS 732 for installations up to 1 000 V a.c. 
and 1 500 V d.c.. For voltages above 1 000 V a.c. or 
1 500 V d.c. and special installation/locations, 
verification shall be conducted as per 4.2.1 of Part 1, 
Section 17 of national electrical code of India. 
Check list of verification given in Annex H should 
be followed with supporting document. 


11.1 Initial Verification 


Every installation must be verified during erection 
and before handing over to the user. In case of 
addition or modifications of existing installation, 
full scope of tests shall be performed. Verification 
shall be carried out by an independent third party 
other than designer and contractor. 


11.2 Periodic Verification 


Periodic verification is also necessary to ensure that 
the installation and its components are in a good 
condition to operate safely. Recommended 
frequency of periodic verification shall be as per 
Annex K. 


NOTE — Periodic verification in leased/rented building is 
subject to agreement between old and new owner/occupier 
(see 5.2). 


11.3 Test Result 


Test results of every circuit shall be recorded on 
the formats as recommended in Annex H. The 
results shall be compared with the required data. 
Non-conformities shall be rectified by the 
developer/contractor and retested before issuing the 
certificate. 


11.4 Inspection of LV System. 


Inspection shall include checking of the following, 
where relevant. The relevant clause of IS 732 is 
provided along with each inspection requirement. 


a) Method of protection against electric shock 
(see 4.2); 


b) Presence of fire barriers and other 
precautions against propagation of fire and 
protection against thermal effects (see 4.3 
and 5.2.10); 


c) Selection of conductors for current- 
carrying capacity (see 4.4, 5.2.6 and 5.2.8); 


d) Single-pole switching devices connected in 
the line conductors (see 5.3.7); 


e) Choice, setting, selectivity and 
coordination of protective and monitoring 
devices (see 5.3.7); 


f) Selection, location and installation of 
suitable overvoltage protective devices 
where specified (see 5.3.5); 


g) Selection, location and installation of 
suitable isolating and switching devices 
(see 5.3.6); 


h) Selection of equipment and protective 
measures appropriate to external influences 
and mechanical stresses (see 4.3.2, 5.1.2.2 
and 5.2.5); 


j Identification of neutral and protective 
conductors (see 5.1.4.3); 


k) Presence of diagrams, warning notices or 
similar information (see 5.1.4.5); 


m) Identification of circuits, overcurrent 
protective devices, switches, terminals etc 
(see 5.1.4); 


n) Adequacy of termination and connection of 
cables and conductors (see 5.2.9); 


p) Selection and installation of earthing 
arrangements, protective conductors and 
their connections (see 5.4); 


q) Accessibility of equipment for 
convenience of operation, identification 
and maintenance (see 5.1.3 and 5.1.4); 


r) Measures against 
disturbances (see 4.5.4); 


electromagnetic 


s) Exposed-conductive-parts are connected to 
the earthing arrangement (see 4.2.11); 


t) Selection and erection of the wiring 
systems (see 5.2.4 and 5.2.5); and 


u) Particular requirements for special 
installations or locations (see Part 3 of 
NEC). 


11.5 Tests and its Sequence of LV System 


It is important to keep the sequence of testing as 
follows. In case of failure in a test, retesting from the 
previous test onwards after rectification 15 
necessary. Testing іп potentially explosive 
atmosphere require appropriate safety precautions in 
accordance with IS/IEC 60079-17. 


a) Resistance of conductors (see 6.2.3.2); 
b) Insulation resistance of the electrical 
installation (see 6.2.3.3); 


с) Protection by SELV, PELV or by electrical 
separation (see 6.2.3.4); 

d) Floor and wall  resistance/impedance 
(see 6.2.3.5); 

e) Automatic disconnection of supply 
(see 6.2.3.6); 


f) Additional protection (see 6.2.3.7); 
g) Polarity test (see 6.2.3.8); 
h) Test of the order of the phases (see 6.2.3.9); 
i) Functional and operational tests 
(see 6.2.3.10); 
j) Voltage drop (see 6.2.3.11); and 
k) Additional tests for special locations (see Part 
3 of National Electrical Code of India). 
12 INSTRUMENTS FOR 
TESTING 


REQUIRED 


Instruments used for testing shall be chosen as per 
ТЕС 61557. The test instrument can be a stand-alone 
meter or a meter with multiple testing facilities. The 
meters shall be calibrated as per the standards 
requirement. Following meters are required to carry 
out testing of an LV installation. 


12.1 For general safety testing meters capable of 
testing the following parameters are necessary: 


a) Insulation resistance tester/meter; 

b) Loop impedance meter; 

c) Continuity resistance meter (micro-ohm 
meter with test current at least 10 A); 

d) Earth resistance meter (earth electrode 
resistance testing); 

e) RCD tester; 


IS 18732 : 2023 


f) Phase sequence tester; and 

g) Insulation fault location meter and meter to 
test effectiveness of residual current 
monitoring for IT system. 


12.2 For an advanced/detailed study meters to 
measure the additional features are necessary. These 
metres and the measurements shall confirm 
IEC 61557-12. 


a) Active power (P) and active energy (Ea); 

b) Reactive power (Qa, Qv) and reactive 
energy (Era, Erv); 

с) Apparent power (Sa, Sy) and apparent 
energy (Espa, Бару); 

d) Frequency (f); 

e) RMS phase current (I) and neutral current 
(In, Inc); 

f) RMS voltage (U) measurements; 

g) Power factor (РЕА, PFv); 

h) Short term flicker (Ps) and long term 
flicker (Pi); 

j) Voltage dip (Огь) and voltage swell (Uswi); 

К) Voltage interruption (О); 

m) Transient overvoltage (Uir) measurements; 

n) Voltage unbalance (Unb, Unva); 

p) Voltage harmonics (Ui) and voltage THD 
(THD, and THD-R,); 

q) Current unbalance (In, Inba); 

r) Current harmonics (In) and current THD 
(THD; and THD-R;); and 

s) Minimum, maximum, peak, three-phases 
average and demand. 


13 REPORTING OF VERIFICATION 
Reporting of results shall be done as per Annex H. 
14 HANDING OVER DOCUMENTS 


Completed verification report shall be the part of 
obligation to handover all the relevant documents to 
the prospective owner for his information and 
record. Check list of minimum handing over 
documents required for the compliance of electrical 
requirements in a building as per RERA Act, 2016 is 
provided in Annex M and N. 


IS 18732 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.3) 


(Informative) 


STANDARD PROCEDURES FOR EXECUTING ELECTRICAL WORK 


Check List No. 1 


Design Part 1 - 1.1 Preliminaries 


Ref. Reg. 31 
Name of Project/Work 
Site Address 
Name of Owner/Developer 
Contact details 
This 
SI No. 1.1.1 Appointments Guidelines 
1 Appointment of the Architect Yes No NA 
1.1 If yes, Name 
1.2 Date of appointment 
2 Appointment of MEP Consultant Yes No NA 
2.1 If yes, Name 
2:2 Date of appointment 
3 Name of Electrical Consultant Yes No NA 
3.1 Contact Details 
4 Appointment of Electrical Contractor 1* Yes No 
4.1 If yes, Name 
4.2 Contact details 
4.3 Date of appointment 
4.4 License No. Validity 
4.5 Agreement and Undertaking Yes No 
4.6 Name of Supervisor(s) -1 4 
4.6.1 Permit No. 
4.7 Name of Supervisor(s) -2 
4.7.1 Permit No. 
* for subsequent change(s) in Electrical Contractor repeat 4 below 
4A Re-appointment of Electrical Contractor 1* Yes No 
4.1 If yes, Name 
4.2 Contact details 
4.3 Date of appointment 
4.4 License No. Validity 
4.5 Agreement and Undertaking Yes No 
4.6 Name of Supervisor(s) -1 
4.6.1 Permit No. 
4.7 Name of Supervisor(s) -2 
4.7.1 Permit No. 
4B Re-appointment of Electrical Contractor 2* Yes No 


16 


IS 18732 : 2023 


Repeat 4.1 through 4.5.4, when applicable 


Signatures of stakeholders 


Architect 


MEP Consultant 


Electrical Consultant 


Electrical Contractor 


Developer/PMC 


Owner 


IS 18732 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Informative) 


STANDARD PROCEDURES FOR EXECUTING ELECTRICAL WORK 


(Clause 5.1) 


Check List No. 2 


Design Part 1 - Planning 


Ref. 


Reg. 14, 60, 62, 65, 67, NEC-Part 1/Section 7/4.2, IS 732-4.1.4, 4.1.3.1.2, 4.1.3.12 


Name of Project/Work 


Site Address 


Name of Owner/Developer 


Contact details 


SI No. 1.1.2 Land/Site survey Guidelines 
1 Does the electrical overhead line exist on site? Yes No 
1.1 If yes mention voltage level kV 
1.2 Did you check with power utility or concerned if UG line Yes No 51 
exists within plot 54 
1.3 If UG line exists mention voltage level kV 
1.4 If UG or OH line exists did you check compliance with CEA Yes No NA 
Reg. 63. 
1.1.2.2 Construction activities 
2 From the location of existing electrical overhead or underground line, will there be: 
2.1 Blasting within 300 m Yes No 
2.2 Cutting of soil within 10 m Yes No 5 
2.3 Brick kiln, or any polluting unit within 500 m Yes No 
2.4 If yes, did you check compliance with CEA Reg. 65 Yes No NA 
1.1.3 Electrical load, supply (primary assessment) 
3 Assessment of electrical load 
3.1 Assessment done? Yes No 
kVA/ 
3.2 If yes, anticipated capacity kW 
3.3 Power from utility provider 6 
3.4 Electrical supply HT LT 
kVA/ 
3.5 Power from standby supply kW 
3.6 Gen-Set КУА | NA 
3.7 UPS kVA | NA 
2 1.2 Assessment of Required Electrical Equipment and System and Architectural Planning 
2.1 DSS required? Yes No 
2.1.1 Required space, location considered? Yes No NA 
22 Gen-set required? Yes No NA 6 
2.2.2 Required space, location considered? Yes No NA 
23 Distribution cables Yes No NA 
2.3.1 Marking of routes in plot? Yes No NA 


IS 18732 : 2023 


2.3.2 Separate cable shaft in building? Yes No NA 
2.4 Rooms Yes | No | NA 
241 Approved design meter room(s) Yes No NA 
242 Control rooms and if other specify Yes No NA 


Signatures of stakeholders 


Architect 


Electrical Consultant 


Electrical Contractor 


IS 18732 : 2023 


ANNEX C 


(Informative) 


STANDARD PROCEDURES FOR EXECUTING ELECTRICAL WOR004B 


(Table 1) 
Check List No. 3 
Design Part 2 - Electrical Installation 
Ref. Reg. 14, 37, 38, 44; IS 732-4.2 ,3 ,4; NEC Part 1/Sections-9, 10, 11, 12 
Name of Project/Work 
Site Address 
Name of 
Owner/Developer 
1 Drawings Showing Layouts of Internal E.I. 
1.1 Compliance - Light and fan points Yes | No | NA 
1.2 Compliance - Power outlets 6A, 16A Yes | No | NA 
1.3 Compliance - Switchboards Yes | No | NA 
1.4 Does drawing provide all details? Yes | No | NA 
2 Electrical Distribution - Cables/Wires 
2.1 Compliance - Division of circuits Yes | No | NA 
2.2 Compliance - Type of cable Yes | No | NA 
2.3 Compliance - Current carrying capacity as per | Yes | No | NA 
situation 
2.4 Compliance - Derating factors Yes | No | NA 
2.5 Compliance - Cross-sectional area calculation Yes |No | NA 
2.6 Cable schedule with specifications prepared? Yes | No | NA 
3 Electrical Distribution - Cable/Wire Enclosures and Management 
3.1 Compliance - Conduit, trunking type and size, fill | Yes | No | NA 
factor, etc 
3.2 Compliance - Cable management Yes | No | NA 
3.3 Specification sheet with drawing prepared? Yes | No | NA 
4 Electrical Distribution - DBs, Panels 
4.1 Compliance - Distribution boards type Yes | No | МА 
4.2 Compliance - Panel boards Yes | No | NA 
4.3 Compliance - Protections Yes | No | NA 
4.3.1 Electric shock Yes | No | NA 
4.3.2 Thermal effects Yes | No | NA 
4.3.3 Over-Current Yes | No | NA 
4.3.4 Voltage disturbance, EMI Yes | No | NA 
44 Specifications prepared? Yes | No | NA 
5 Electrical Distribution - SLD 
5.1 compliance - SLD with all details Yes | No | NA 
6 Electrical Distrubution - Layouts 


20 


IS 18732 : 2023 


6.1 Compliance - Location and access of DBs ара | Yes | No | NA 
panels 

6.2 Compliance - Routing of distribution network Yes | No | NA 

6.3 Compliance - Safety clearances from other services | Yes | No | NA 

6.4 Drawing with all details prepared? Yes | No | NA 

7 Specifications for Fittings/Fixtures 

7.1 Compliance - Illumination standards for lighting | Yes | No | NA 
fixtures 

7.2 Compliance - Ceiling fans, locations, clearances Yes | No | NA 

7.3 Compliance - Exhaust fans, air circulation Yes | No | NA 

7.4 Drawings and specifications with details prepared? | Yes | No | NA 


Signatures of stakeholders 


Architect Electrical Consultant 


Electrical Contractor 


21 


IS 18732 : 


2023 


ANNEX D 


(Informative) 


STANDARD PROCEDURES FOR EXECUTING ELECTRICAL WORK 


(Table 1) 
Check List No. 4 
Design Part 3 - Special Locations, Safety Service and Energy Efficiency 
Ref. Reg. 14, 37, 38, 44; IS 732-4.2 ,3 ,4; NEC Part 1/Sections-9, 10, 11, 12 
Name of Project/Work 
Site Address 
Name of 
Owner/Developer 
Contact details 
SI No. | Type of additional requirements Guidelines 
1 High-Rise Buildings (height above 15m) Yes No 
1.1 Does building come under the purview of Electrical 
Inspector? Yes No | NA 
1.2 Compliance with CEA Reg. 38 (3) (i), read NEC P3S22 7.3.12 | Yes No | NA 6.1.2 
1.3 Compliance with CEA Reg. 38 (3) (ii) Yes No | NA 
1.4 Compliance with NEC P3 S22 Yes No NA 
2 Hospitals and Medical Locations (compliance with IS 17512) | Yes No | NA 9 
3 Hotels (compliance with NEC P3 S20) Yes No | NA 9 
4 Places of Public Assembly, Gathering (Compliance with NEC 
P3 S10, 13) Yes No | NA 9 
4.1 Compliance with Sec. 54 of The Electricity Act, 2003 Yes | No | NA 6.1.2 
5 Street, Path, Garden, Flood Lighting (compliance with NEC 
P5) Yes No | NA 9 
5.1 Compliance with Illumination Standards Yes No | NA 
6 Compliance of Safety Services Yes No NA 8 
7 Compliance to Energy Efficiency Requirements Yes No NA 10 
5 
"d 
© 
© 
o 
5 
- Architect Electrical Consultant Electrical Contractor 
5 
Е 
Бе] 
e 
o0 
2 


22 


ANNEX E 


(Informative) 


STANDARD PROCEDURES FOR EXECUTING ELECTRICAL WORK 


(Table 1) 


IS 18732 : 2023 


Check List No. 5 


Design Part 4 - Material Selection 


Ref. Reg. 12, 35, 36, 42; IS 732-4.2 ,3 ,4; NEC Part 1/Sections-9, 10, 11, 12 
Name of Project/Work 
Site Address 


Name of Owner/Developer 


Contact details 


1 3.1 Selection of Type of Wiring Guidelines 
1.1 Factors of external influences considered? Yes No 7 
1.2 Is method of construction suitable to situation? Yes No 
2 3.2 Material Selection and Specifications 
2.1 Switch-boards and accessories 
2.1.1 Compliance - as per specifications Yès No | NA 
2.1.2 
Compliance - [SI/international standard Yes No | NA 
22 Wires, cables 
2.2.1 Compliance - as per specifications Yes No | NA 
2.2.2 Compliance - [SI/international standard Yes No | NA 
2.3 Wiring Enclosures - conduits, trunkings 
2.3.1 Compliance - as per specifications Yes No | NA 
2.3.2 Compliance - [SI/international standard Yes No | NA 7 
2.4 Cable Management - trays, ladders, etc and accessories 
2.4.1 Compliance - as per specifications Yes No | NA 
2.4.2 
Compliance - [SI/international standard Yes No | NA 
2.5 Bub-bar trunking 
2.5.1 Compliance - as per specifications Yes No | NA 
2.5.2 Compliance - ISI/International Standard Yes No | NA 
2.6 Distribution boards and panels 
2.6.1 Compliance - as per specifications Yes No | NA 
2.6.2 Compliance - ISI/International Standard Yes No | NA 
2.7 Protections 


23 


IS 18732 : 2023 


2.7.1 Compliance - as per specifications Yes No | NA 
2.7.2 Compliance - ISI/ International Standard Yes No | NA 
2.8 Fittings and fixtures 

2.8.1 Compliance - as per specifications Yes No | NA 
2.8.2 Compliance - ISI/ International Standard Yes No | NA 
2.9 Record of makes/brands/manufacturer's test certificate 

2.9.1 List of all material showing make and brand prepared? | yo. No 

2.9.2 Record of test certificates of material maintained? Yes No | NA 


Electrical Consultant Electrical Contractor 


Signatures of stakeholders 


24 


ANNEX F 


(Informative) 


IS 18732 : 2023 


STANDARD PROCEDURES FOR EXECUTING ELECTRICAL WORK 


(Table 1) 


Check List No. 6 


Design Part 5 - Supply Source 


Ref. 

Name of Project/Work 

Site Address 

Name of 

Owner/Developer 

Contact details 

1 4.1 Design Load - Detailed Load Assessment Guidelines 

1.1 Preparation of detailed load assessment sheet for record 

1.1.1 In respect of every consumer Yes No NA 

1.1.2 In respect of group of consumers within complex Yes No NA 

2 4.1 LT Supply 

2.1 Does meter room comply Yes No NA 

2.2 Earthing system 6.3.2 

2.2.1 State type of system considered - TNS/TNCS/TT/IT 6.3.2 

2.22 Will a consumer have separate earth Yes No NA 6.3.2 
electrode/earthed terminal? 

2.2.3 Protective equipotential bonding considered? Yes No NA 7.4 

2.3 Supplier's side 

2.3.1 Provisions to install service cable and equipment Yes No NA 
done? 

2.3.2 Provision of supplier's earth terminal considered? Yes No NA 

2.3.3 Provision to protect supplier's installation taken? Yes No NA 

2.4 Consumer's side 

2.4.1 Switch-fuse/Circuit breaker at point of supply Yes No 


25 


IS 18732 : 2023 


2.4.2 Compliance - mains and its route up to main DB Yes No NA 
2.5 Standby supply - Gen-set 
2.5.1 Preparation of capacity design sheet for record Yes No NA 
2.5.2 Compliance - location, panel, cable work Yes No NA 
2.6 Standby supply - Battery backup UPS/Inverter 
2.6.1 Preparation of capacity design sheet and keeping record Yes No NA 
3 4.2 HT supply of Consumer/DSS of Supplier 
3.1 Provisions for installation 
3.1.1 Compliance - location, space and civil infrastructure 
3.1.2 Compliance — Transformer Yes No NA 
3.1.3 Compliance — Equipment Yes No NA 
3.1.4 Compliance — Metering Yes No NA 
ч 
е Е 
$ S ; | 
5% Architect Electrical Consultant Electrical Contractor 
ds 
na 


26 


ANNEX G 


(Informative) 


STANDARD PROCEDURES FOR EXECUTING ELECTRICAL WORK 


(Table 1) 


IS 18732 : 2023 


Check List No. 7 


Design Part 6 - Earthing, Lightning Protection 


Ref. | IS 732, IS/IEC 62305 


Name of Project/Work 


Site Address 


Name of Owner/Developer 


Contact details 

1 x.x Earthing Guidelines 
1.1 | Type of system earthing 6.3.2 
1.2 | Main protective equipotential bonding Yes No| NA 7.5 

1.3 | Supplementary equipotential bonding Yes No| NA 7.5 

1.4 | Fault loop impedance of all circuits Yes No | NA 6.3.2 (e) 
1.5 | Functional earthing requirements considered Yes No| NA 7.6 

1.6 | Earth electrodes Yes No| NA T 

2 x.x Lightning Protection System 

2.] | Risk assesment carried out Yes No | NA 6.7.1(b) 
2.2 | LPS required or not Yes No 

2.3 | Class of LPS (1 to 4 based on lightning protection level) 

2.4 | Type of air termination 

2.5 | Noof down conductors and routing 

2.6 | Noof down conductors routed through shafts 

2.7] | Soil resistivity 

2.8 | Type of earthing TypeA | TypeB 

2.90 | Iftype A, number of earth rods and its length 

2. 10 | Incoming service is HV or LV НУ | LV None 


2.11 | Number of low voltage incoming service lines 


2.12 (Туре and rating of each set of SPD at incoming service lines 


Architect Electrical Consultant 


Signatures of stakeholders 


Electrical Contractor 


27 


IS 18732 : 2023 


ANNEX H 


(Informative) 


STANDARD PROCEDURES FOR EXECUTING ELECTRICAL WORK 


(Clause 11, 11.3, 13) 


Check List No. 8 


Verification (Inspection and Testing of Installations) 


Ref. 


6 of IS 732, 4.2 and 4.3 of NEC Part 1 Section 17, IS 732 and IEC 61936-1 


regulations, 2023 


Reg No. 32, 33, 34 and 48 of CEA measures relating to safety and electric supply] 


Name of 


Project/Work 


Site Address 


Name of 


Owner/Developer 


Contact details 


Name of Safety 
Inspector 


Contact details 


1 Inspection and Testing of HV Installation Guidelines 
1.1 | Inspection completed as per 4.2.1 of NEC part 1, section 17 Yes | No 
1.2 | Testing completed as per 4.3.1 of NEC part 1, section 17 Yes | No 
1.3 | Number of defects reported during inspection 111 
1.4 | Number of defects rectified І 
1.5 | Number of defects which could not be rectified 
1.6 | Detailed report provided on non rectifiable defects provided to client Yes | No 
1.7 | Next periodic verification of HV system (in years) 
2 Inspection and Testing of LV System: (see 6 of IS 732) 
2.1 | Inspection completed and the forms in Annexure QQ and RR of IS 732 

submitted fulfilling the requirements of Annex MM Yes| No 

11.4 

2.2 | Number of defects reported during inspection 
2.3 | Number of defects rectified (reported during inspection) 
2.4 | Number of defects which could not be rectified (reported during inspection) 
2.5 | Testing completed and the forms in Annexure SS of IS 732-6 submitted Yes| No 
2.6 | Number of defects reported during testing 11.6 
2.7 | Number of defects rectified (reported during testing) 


28 


IS 18732 


: 2023 


2.8 | Number of defects which could not be rectified (reported during testing) 
2.9 | Detailed report provided on non rectifiable defects provided to client Yes| No 
2.10 | Next periodic verification of LV system (in years) 11.3 


NOTE — An installation with defects are unsafe to operate. 


Signatures of stakeholders 


Chartered Electrical Safety Engineer 


Electrical Consultant 


Electrical Contractor 


Architect 


29 


IS 18732 : 2023 


ANNEX J 


(Informative) 


GUIDANCE ON SELECTION OF ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENT OF BUILDINGS BASED ON 
CONDITIONS OF EVACUATION AS PER TABLE 7 OF IS 732 AND TYPE OF BUILDING 


OCCUPANCY 
(Clause 5.5, 7.3.2) 


Occupancy Type as Per NBC of India : 2016 


Category (For Detailed Description, Refer NBC: Part 4, Fi d Lif ор 
раоп, Keter * Fart 4, Fire and Lie In Meters/Category 
Safety, Table 7) 

Group A Residential < 15 (b) > 15 (h) 
Al, A2 Lodging and rooming houses, One- or two- private dwelling BDI NA 
A3, A4 Dormitories, Apartment Houses BDI BD2 

AS Hotels BD2 BD4 
A6 Starred hotels BD4 

Group B Educational < 15 (b) > 15 (h) 
B1, B2 Schools, all other/training institutions BD3 BD4 

Group C Institutional < 10 (h) > 10 (h) 

Cl Hospitals and sanatoria (IPD/OPD) BA3, BD3 
C2 Custodial institutions BDI BD2 
C3 Penal and mental institutions BA3, BD2 
Group D Assembly < 10 (h) > 10 (h) 
D1 to D6 Theatre/Cinema, accommodation, temporary and other structures, BD3 BD4 
mixed-assembly and mercantile 
D7 UG/elevated mass rapid transit system BD4 

Group E Business < 10 (h) > 10 (h) 

El to E5 Offices, laboratories, clinics, libraries, IT parks, telephone BD3 BD4 

exchange, broadcasting and TV stations 

Group F Mercantile < 15 (h) > 15 (h) 
F1, F2 Shops, stores BD3 BD4 

F3 UG shopping centers and service centers in same building BD4 

Group G Industrial 

G1 Low hazard BD2 
G2 Moderate hazard BE2, BD2 
G3 High hazard BE2, BE3, BD2 

Group H Storage, for example warehouses, cold storages, truck and marine BE1, BE2, BD2 

terminals 

Group J Hazardous BE3, BE4, BD2 
NOTES 


1 Wiring requirements with respect to building classification refer IS 732. 
2 The above categorization is to guide users for easy selection of classification of building as per IS 732 in line with the requirements 


of NBC. 


3 In case of confusion, the next higher difficult zone shall be considered. 


30 


IS 18732 : 2023 


ANNEX K 
(Informative) 
RECOMMENDED MAXIMUM INTERVALS BETWEEN PERIODIC VERIFICATION (IN YEARS) 
(Clause 5.2, 11.2) 


Category Occupancy Type as per NBC of India : 2016 Frequency of Periodic Verification 
(For Detailed Description, Refer NBC: Part 4, in Years (Y) Based on Height (H) in 
Fire and Life Safety, Table 7) Meters of Buildings 
Group | Residential <15 (h) >15 (h) 
Al, A2 Lodging and rooming houses, One- or two- private 10 (y) NA 
A3, A4 Dormitories, Apartment houses 10 (y) 5 (у) 
А5 3 (y) 
A6 Starred hotels 2 (у) 
Group В | Educational <15 (h) >15 (h) 
ВІ, B2 Schools, all other/training institutions 3 (y) 2 (у) 
Group C | Institutional <10 (h) >10 (h) 
Cl Hospitals and sanatoria (IPD/OPD) 2 (у) 
С2 Custodial institutions 5 (у) | 3 (у) 
C3 Penal and mental institutions 3 (y) 


Group D | Assembly «10 (h) >10 (h) 
Theatre/Cinema, accommodation, temporary and 
D1 to D6 other structures, mixed-assembly and mercantile З (у) 2 (у) 
D7 UG/elevated mass rapid transit system 2 (у) 
Group E <10 h) > 10 (b 


Offices, laboratories, clinics, libraries, IT parks, 
El to ES telephone exchange, broadcasting and TV stations 3) 2) 


Group F «15 (h) >15 (h) 


F1, F2 Shops, stores 3 (y) 2 (у) 
ЕЗ UG shopping centers and service centers in same building 2 (y) 
Group С | Industrial Any height 
Gl Low hazard 5 (у) 
G2 Moderate hazard 3 (y) 
Group Н | Storage, for example, warehouses, cold storages, truck 1 (у) 
Group Ј | Hazardous 1 (у) 


31 


IS 18732 : 2023 


ANNEX M 
(Informative) 


CHECKLIST FOR HANDING-OVER DOCUMENTS TO INDIVIDUAL BUYER 


(Applicable as minimum documents required for the compliance of electrical requirements in a building as per 
RERA act, 2016) 
(Clause 14) 


SI Document Yor X 


(3) 
Electrical service connection papers relating to individual energy meter— 
sanctioned/connected load, security deposit paid 


Copy of test report of the electrical installation 


Single line diagram of completed electrical installation 


Training for maintenance of the electrical installation 


V) | Instructions/Trouble shooting chart in respect with the use, limit of maximum load, 
operation, safety of electrical installation and precautions to be taken while making 
changes in existing installation 


vi) | Emergency contacts in respect with any possible problem with electrical installation 


Handed over Taken over 
Promoter Electrical Contractor Owner 
Date: 


32 


IS 18732 : 2023 


ANNEX N 
(Informative) 
CHECKLIST FOR HANDING-OVER DOCUMENTS TO SOCIETY/ASSOCIATION OF OWNERS 


(Applicable as minimum documents required for the compliance of electrical requirements in a building as per 
RERA act, 2016) 


Load sanctioned letter of electric supply company 
Copies of the payments made to supply company, towards proving supply 


Copy of agreement with supply company 
iv) Electrical service connection papers in respect of common energy meters 
sanctioned/connected load, security deposit paid 
v) Single line diagram from the tapping point of service cable to the point of supply 
(incoming terminal of consumers switch/MCRB installed near energy meter) 


respect of; Generating set/s (CEA Reg. 32) High-rise building (CEA Reg. 36) HT 


vii) | Copies of the approvals/permissions/licenses received from the authorities in 
installation (CEA Reg. 43); if installation is owned by consumer/s Lift/s 


viii) | Warranties/Guarantees and initial AMCs of lift/s, generating-set, UPS and batteries 
and also in respect of installation handed over to supply company etc as per 
applicable 


ix) Instructions in respect of maintenance and operation of water pump, lift and 
handling emergency. Telephone numbers of emergency services 


x) (1) List of liabilities, responsibilities to be undertaken: 


Copy of test report of the electrical installation RENE 


a) Maintaining electrical installation (related to common facilities like 
lights, water pump, fire-fighting equipment), in good condition so 
as to cause no danger; and 


b) Renewing AMCS in respect of generating set, lifts after defect 
liability period. Due dates shall be given. 


c) Safeguarding electrical installation belonging to supply company in 
the premises, for example, equipment in meter room; 

d) Communicating electrical inspector within 24 hours in respect of 
any electrical accident; and 


e) Any electrical related work to be got done only through 
license/permit holder person. 


Handed over Taken over 
Promoter Electrical Contractor Secretary/Office bearer 
Date: of Society/Association 


33 


IS 18732 : 2023 


ANNEX P 
LIST OF REFFERED STANDARDS 


a) CEA (Measures relating to Safety and Electric Supply) Regulations, 2010 (including further amendments 


to date). 


b) Referred standards: 


IS No./Other Publications 
IS 732 : 2019 
IS 3043 : 2018 
IS 12032 (all parts) 
IS 17017 (Part 1) : 2018 
IS 17121 : 2019 
IS/IEC 62305 (all parts) 
IS/IEC 60079 (Part 17) : 2013 


IS/IEC 61439 


(Part 2) : 2011 
(Part 3) : 2012 
IS/IEC 61557 (all parts) 


IEC 60364-5-55 : 2016 


IEC 60445 : 2021 


IEC 60670-24 


ТЕС 61082-1 : 2014 
TEC 61936-1 : 2021 
IEC 61557 (all parts) 


IEC 62208 : 2011 


IEC 81346-1 : 2022 


SP 7 : 2016 
SP 30 


Title 
Code of practice for electrical wiring installations (fourth revision) 
Code of practice for earthing (second revision) 
Graphical symbols for diagrams in the field of electrotechnology 
Electric vehicle conductive charging system: Part 1 General requirements 
General requirements for arc fault detection devices 
Protection against lightning 


Explosive atmospheres: Part 17 Electrical installations inspection and 
maintenance (first revision) 


Power switch gear and control gear assemblies 


Part 2 Power switch gear and control gear assemblies 
Distribution boards intended to be operated by ordinary persons (Dbo) 


Electrical safety in low voltage distribution systems up to 1000 V 
a.c and 1 500 V d.c. — Equipment for testing, measuring or monitoring of 
protective measures 


Electrical installations of buildings — Part 5-55: Selection and erection of 
electrical equipment — Other equipment 


Basic and safety principles for man-machine interface, marking and 
identification — Identification of equipment terminals, conductor 
terminations and conductors 


Boxes and enclosures for electrical accessories for household and similar 
fixed electrical installations — Part 24: Particular requirements for 
enclosures for housing protective devices and other power dissipating 
electrical equipment 


Preparation of documents used in electrotechnology — Part 1: Rules 
Power installations exceeding 1 КУ AC and 1 + 5 КУ DC — Part 1: AC 


Electrical safety in low voltage distribution systems up to 1000 V 
AC and 1 500 V DC — Equipment for testing measuring or monitoring of 
protective measures 


Empty enclosures for low-voltage switchgear and controlgear assemblies — 
General requirements 


Industrial systems, installations and equipment and industrial products — 
Structuring principles and reference designations — Part 1: Basic rules 


National building code of India, 2023 


National electrical code of India, 2023 


34 


IS 18732 : 2023 


IS No./Other Publications Title 


CEA Regulation CEA (Measures relating to safety and electric supply) Regulations, 2023 
(including further amendments to date). 


35 


IS 18732 : 2023 


ANNEX Q 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Electrical Installations Sectional Committee, ETD 20 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (90/14-B, Malviya Nagar New Delhi-110017) 
Areva T and D India Limited, Noida 


Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply and Transport Undertaking, Mumbai 


BSES Rajdhani Power Limited 


Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Limited, Kolkata 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited, Delhi 

Department of Telecommunications, Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology, New Delhi 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour Institutes, 
Mumbai 


Electrical Contractors Association of Maharashtra, Pune 


Electrical Installation Engineers' Welfare Association, Coimbatore, Tamil 
Nadu 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


GETCO, Vadodara 


Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited, Kolkata 


Government of Assam, Chief Electrical Inspector, Guwahati 


Government of Kerala, Chief Electrical 


Thiruvananthapuram 


Inspectorate, 


Government of Madhya Pradesh, Chief Electrical Inspectorate, Sagar 


Government of Orissa, Chief Electrical Inspectorate, Bhubaneswar 


36 


Representative(s) 


SHRIMATI SUMITA ANAND (Chairperson) 
SHRISAHA BISWAJIT 


SHRIH. V. VAGAL 
SHRI M. B. BAMBLE (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDER KANT SOOD 
SHRIRAJIV SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUJIT KUMAR PATHAK 
SHRI BRATIN BANERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR RAJPUT 
SHRI О. P. SUMAN (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 


SHRI ANAND KUMAR 
SHRI MANUJ SINGHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI VINOD KUMAR HIRNA 
SHRI SAURABH CHATURVEDI (Alternate) 


SHRIH. M. BHANDARI 
SHRI AMIT GOLA (Alternate) 


SHRISANJAY KOLHATKAR 
SHRI SUNIL BHURE (Alternate) 


SHRIS. MANIVANNAN 
SHRI S. GOPALAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


MS SHALINI VERMA 
SHRI ROHIT KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI A. S. SHAH 
SHRI M. A. PRAJAPATI (Alternate) 


SHRI SOUMITRA BHADURI 
SHRI T. K. GUHA Roy (Alternate) 


SHRI NILAMANI SARMA 


SHRI ANIL KUMAR V. C. 
SHRISAGAR V. K. (Alternate) 


SHRI MUJALDE S. S. 
SHRI DUBEY A. K. (Alternate I) 
SHRII. V. CHISHI (Alternate IT) 


SHRI SANTOSH DAS 
SHRIPYARIMOHAN MISHRA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Government of Tamil Nadu, Chief Electrical Inspectorate, Chennai 


Haryana Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Limited, Panchkula 


Havells India Limited, Noida 


Indian Electrical and Electronics Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Indian Railways Centre for Advanced Maintenance Technology 


(CAMTECH), Gwalior 


International Copper Association India, Mumbai 


Jaipur Vidyut Vitaran Nigam Limited, Jaipur 


Legrand India Private Limited, Mumbai 


Mazagon Dock Limited, Mumbai 


Ministy of Defence, Bengaluru 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation, 
Faridabad 


National Institute of Solar Energy, Gurugram 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, 
Mumbai 


Public Works Department, Government of Maharashtra, Mumbai 


Rural Electrification Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


Schneider Electric India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Siemens Limited, Mumbai 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, 
Navi Mumbai 


37 


IS 18732 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI THIRU. T. ELAMBOORANAN В. E. 
ER P. PALANI B. E. (Alternate) 


MS AMAN 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR GUPTA 
SHRI RAKESH KAUSHIK (Alternate) 


SHRI S. СОРА KUMAR 
SHRIJ PANDE (Alternate I) 
SHRI UTTAM KUMAR (Alternate IT) 
SHRI HIMANSHU MAHESWARI 
SHRI AMOL KALSEKAR 
SHRI MANAS KUNDU (Alternate I) 
SHRI DEBDAS GOSWAMI (Alternate II) 


SHRI ARJUN SINGH 


SHRI SURESH DEOTALU 
SHRI RAJKUMAR PANICKER (Alternate) 


SHRI PARAG PATIL 
SHRI A. M. JOGLEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH JOSHI 
MS MANISHA SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI SURYA SHANKAR BHARTI 


(Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH KUMAR 
SHRI MANOJ MORAMPUDI (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVISH CHANDRA JHA 


SHRI S. PANDARIGANTHAN 
SHRI D. A. BHASKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANT M. SALI 
SHRI DASTIDAR SHANTANU GHOSH 
SHRI SRINIVAS R KULKARNI 
SHRI P. SURESH RAJA (Alternate I) 
SHRI C. S. KORE (Alternate IT) 
SHRI AMITAVA NAYAK 


SHRI DESHPANDE ASHISH (Alternate) 


SHRI G. V. CHANDRA SEKHAR 
SHRI HRISHIKESH ACHARYA (Alternate) 


IS 18732 : 2023 


Organization 


Tata Power Delhi Distribution Limited, 
New Delhi 


The Shipping Corporation of India, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity (603 Peregrine, Rehejawoods, Kalyaninagar, Pune 
411006) 

In Personal Capacity (71B Swaroop Park Kothrud, Near Gandhi Bhavan 
Pune 411038) 

BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 
SHRI RITWIK ANAND 
SCIENTIST *D'/JOINT DIRECTIR 
(ELECTROTECHNICAL), BIS 


38 


Representative(s) 


SHRI KAPIL KUMAR 
SHRI NITIN TAKPERE 

SHRI ABHISHEK KASHYAP (Alternate) 
SHRI AMITABHA SARKAR 


SHRI HEMANT SALI 


Ms PRITI BHATNAGAR, SCIENTIST 
*E'/DIRECTOR HEAD (ELECTROTECHNICAL) 
[REPRESENTING 

DIRECTORATE GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


IS 18732 : 2023 


(Continued from second cover) 
The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex Q. 


This standard is developed with a view to provide such requirements in measurable terms to be complied 
with starting from project planning, design of electrical system, selection of equipment, installation, 
commissioning and finally testing and ensure compliance. Compliance to this standard is expected to be 
beneficial to various implementing agencies like Municipalities, RERA, Inspection agencies and would 
work as a bridge between the builder/electrical contractor and the ultimate users to provide the confidence that 
the installation is safe for use. Requirements specified can be used for compliance verification and certification 
purpose. Specific guidance at some places are also given for compliance. 


In this Standard, the following verbal forms are used: 


a) ‘shall’ indicates a requirement; 

b) ‘should’ indicates a recommendation; 

c) ‘may’ indicates a permission; and 

d) 'can' indicates a possibility or a capability. 


Information marked as *NOTE' is for guidance in understanding or clarifying the associated requirement. 


39 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 20 (17173). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


