Indian Standard 


siete Gaal car Aan — 
War wea ear 
(war YTO ) 


Industrial Plant Layout — Code 
of Safe Practice 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 13.100; 91.040.20 


© BIS 2018 


mA AA ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 gN AHL HM, Ae fercit-110002 
Velie” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2018 Price Group 6 


Occupational Safety and Health Sectional Committee, CHD 08 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision)was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


This standard was originally published in 1976. In view of the experiences gained over the period of about three 
decades, the standard was revised in 2008 to widen its scope to accommodate the outside facilities for which there 
was a separate standard IS 8089 : 1976 ‘Code of safe practice for layout of outside facilities in an industrial plant’. 


The standard now revised to elaborate safe practices for ‘Location of Building and Structures’, ‘Railway Sidings’, 
‘Roads and Footpaths’. 


There is no ISO standard on this subject. In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the 
following publications: 


a) Accident Prevention Manual for Industrial Operations, 1969. Ed.6 National Safety Council, Chicago, 
USA 


b) Loss Prevention in the Process Industries-Frank P Lees, 2™ edition 


IS 8091 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


INDUSTRIAL PLANT LAYOUT — CODE OF 
SAFE PRACTICE 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard provides safe practices for layout and 
building structures inside as well as outside facilities 
in an industrial plant. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard listed below contains provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revisions, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the Indian 
standards. 


IS No. Title 
2825 : 1969 Code for unfired pressure vessels 


3 INTRODUCTION 


3.1 Design for Safety 


Plant layout is concerned with the spatial arrangement 
of processing equipment, storage vessels, their 
interconnecting pipe work, workplace and warehouse. 
This is an important aspect in the design of chemical 
and process plants, since a good layout will ensure that 
the plant functions correctly, safely and efficiently. It 
considers the design constraints arising from safety, 
environment, construction, maintenance and operation 
with an economical balance. 


Access to the plant and supply of maintenance, 
construction and emergency services are all affected 
by the plant layout. Numerous accidents, occupational 
diseases, explosions and fires are preventable if suitable 
measures and code of standards are taken into 
considerations right from the earliest planning, design, 
and the initial project stage. 


3.1.1 Efficiency and safety in industrial operations can 
be greatly increased by careful planning of the location, 
design, and layout (of a new plant or of an existing 
one) in which major alternations are to be made. 


3.1.2 Plant layout will be based on following factors 
like: 


a) New site development or addition to 
previously developed site, 


b) Type and quantity of products to be produced, 

c) Possible future expansion, 

d) Operational convenience and accessibility, 

e) Type of process and product control, 

f) Economic distribution of utilities and services, 

g) Type of building and building code 
requirements, 

h) Guidelines related to health and safety, 

j) Waste-disposable problems, 

k) Space available and space requirement, 

m) Auxiliary equipment, and 

n) Roads and railroad. 


3.1.3 The guidelines related to safety, health, welfare 
and provisions related to hazardous processes can be 
incorporated in the plant layout and have a statutory 
binding on the industry. 


3.2 Building, Equipment and Processes 


3.2.1 Major factors determining the size, shape and type 
of buildings and structures are the nature of the 
processes and materials, maintenance, mechanical 
handling equipment, requirement for gravity flow, 
equipment needing specially strong foundations; access 
for construction; commissioning, operation; space for 
future expansion, escape and fire fighting, containment 
of accidents; environmental impact and working 
conditions. These can vary greatly. 


3.2.2 Catastrophes resulting in large loss of life and 
heavy property damage are often due to inadequate 
planning-stage consideration of the physical and 
chemical properties of dangerous substances and their 
processing methods. Hence, Code of practice should 
be strictly followed. Zoning/Division criteria should 
be considered at the planning stage. Hazard and 
Operability (HAZOP) and risk assessment should be 
undertaken. After this analysis, the best possible layout 
will emerge with major emphasis on safety. 


3.2.3 High hazard processes should be located in small 
isolated buildings of limited occupancy or in areas cut 
off by fire-resistant materials appropriate to the hazard 
involved. Buildings can be designed so that internal 
explosions will produce minimum damage and 
minimum broken glass. Lower hazard operations can 


IS 8091 : 2018 


justify larger units. Chemical compatibility should be 
thoroughly reviewed for defining the storage, handling 
and use of chemicals in process. 


3.2.4 Even less serious injuries resulting from poor 
housekeeping facilities and congestion of work places 
can be reduced substantially by preplanning for safety. 
Layout of equipment and buildings shall be such that 
production lines do not cross and that operators have 
enough working space. This saves time, increases 
production and helps prevent accidents. Pipe rack layout 
should also consider extra space to accommodate future 
modified lines and approaching space between overhead 
lines for ease of access during attending leaks, etc. 
Relevant safety standards and applicable regulations 
should be strictly followed especially for staircases in 
building, crane gang ways, railing and fencing such as 
those provided in Factories Act, 1948 and National 
Building Code 2016. Spatial arrangement of processing 
equipment, storage vessels and their interconnecting 
pipelines should be given utmost importance. 


3.2.5 Personnel facilities such as lunchrooms and health 
services and disaster services are essential for reasons 
of health and treatment of injuries. They can be planned 
and located for maximum effectiveness. As far as possible 
fire station and medical facility like ambulance should 
be located adjacent to each other so that in case of 
emergency call, both the fire tender and ambulance will 
tush together to the emergency spot. Communication 
facilities should be adequately provided. 


4 SITE PLANNING 


4.1 Safety is a prime consideration in plant siting. 
Selection of a site involves consideration of a number 
of factors such as possible hazards to the community 
and their relationships to climate and terrain, space 
requirements, type and size of buildings, necessary 
facilities, availability of raw material, cooling water, 
transportation, market, labour supply, population 
density near the site and means of effluent disposal. 
Ground water survey can be undertaken to ensure the 
availability of water for industrial requirement. Of the 
factors listed, those of direct concern to the safety 
professional are given below. While the safety 
professional is not directly responsible for specialized 
plant and process engineering and design, still it is his 
duty to keep the engineers and architects as safety 
conscious as possible and to anticipate potential safety 
hazards and try to have them designed out of the system 
before the construction stage begins. 


4.2 Location, Climate and Terrain 
4.2.1 Location 


As far as safety of the public is concerned, the most 
important feature is the distance between the site and 


built-up areas. Sites range from rural to urban, with 
population densities varying from virtually zero to high. 
Separation between a hazard and the public is beneficial 
in mitigating the effects of a major accident. An area of 
low population density around the site will help reduce 
causalities. Plants producing or using highly flammable 
or toxic substances in bulk should be located so as not 
to cause damage to a city or town, either generally or 
in case of disaster or some unexpected happening. 


4.2.2 Climate 


Study of the climate of the area may be required. It 
may reveal that, if a certain site is selected, the 
prevailing winds will cause noxious fumes or dusts to 
settle on a neighbouring community or plant, thereby 
doing severe harm to people or property or creating a 
nuisance. The prevailing winds may also determine the 
best location for processing equipment in relation to 
administration offices; especially their air conditioning 
air intakes; drainage and waste disposal problems shall 
also be anticipated. Winter conditions or winterization 
should be considered to protect the plant against severe 
winter conditions. The behaviour of airborne emissions 
of all types should be carefully considered. Although 
the predominant upwind direction is the main factor, 
other possible troublesome wind conditions should be 
taken into account referring to the wind-rose charts for 
past years. The effect of weather conditions such as 
inversions should also be considered. Location of air 
intake towers for air separation units should take into 
account, the wind directions, flare header locations (as 
hydrocarbon emissions from flare stacks can be sucked 
into the process causing severe accidents), and also the 
cooling tower locations to avoid corrosion of equipment 
and reduce moisture ingress into the compressors, etc. 


4.2.3 In a hurricane, flood or seismic prone area, plans 
and specifications should include suitable protective 
measures and safety factors shall be designed into the 
operation. 

NOTE — National Building Code 2016 give data on climatic 


changes and seismic zones with factor of safety to be taken 
while designing the building and equipment foundations. 


4.2.4 Terrain 


If site plans call for bridges over streams, ditches, and 
other hazards, be sure they are adequately protected 
by industrial fence or by hand rails 1 m high and 
intermediate rails. A typical layout is given in Fig. 1. 


4.3 Space Requirements 


4.3.1 Size ofa site is determined by both present space 
requirements and possible future expansion. In the past 
the growth of business and population have resulted in 
serious crowding and the resulting congestion of 
buildings and other facilities has increased fire, accident 
and health hazards. 


gy 


AS 
EPS 


<> 


SZ 


4 


Se ee eee 


CT 


IS 8091 : 2018 


a a S 


T L 


nO 0 asn © O om O O men © © om © O xem) 


ane 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL LAYOUT OF A BRIDGE 


4.3.2 Site Services 


The site central services such as the boiler house, 
power station, switch station, pumping stations, 
utilities station, etc should be placed in suitable 
locations. They should not be put out of action by 
events as fire or flood and if possible not by other 
accidents such as explosion and that they should 
not constitute sources of ignition for flame. For 
example, factors in siting the boiler house are that 
it should not constitute a source of ignition and the 
emissions from stack should not give rise to 
nuisance. 


4.3.3 New developments may figure in the size of the 
plant site. Some companies anticipating increased use 
of air transportation are allowing space for landing 
fields or heliports as they acquire new property. Plans 
for such installations should include all necessary safety 
precautions. 


4.3.4 Fire prevention codes specify minimum distance 
between buildings according to their size, type and 
occupancy. Laws governing storage of explosives and 
of highly flammable materials specify minimum 
distances between manufacturing and storage facilities 
for various quantities of such materials, as well as 
minimum distance between the above from adjoining 
property. 


4.3.5 Ample space for outdoor storage areas is 
essential. When the area for storing such materials as 
steel, pipe, and timber adjacent to shops proves 
insufficient, space has to be provided elsewhere. This 
necessitates added handling and transportation and 
increases both cost and accident risk. 


4.3.6 Parking lots are best located inside the plant fence 
for convenience, protection, and safety. Since a 
considerable area may be necessary to accommodate 


employee and visitor cars, space requirements are 
important in site planning. 


4.3.7 The site layout must accommodate the systems 
for handling the liquid effluents, gaseous emissions, 
solid wastes, storm water and firewater. For liquid 
effluents, one arrangement is to have three separate 
systems an open sewer system for clean storm water 
and two closed sewer systems, one for domestic sewage 
and one for aqueous effluent from the plant and for 
contaminated storm water, Process effluents are 
collected in a common sewer and closely controlled. 
The traditional sewer is the gravity flow type. This 
should have gradient and be self-cleaning. Measures 
should be taken to avoid flooding on process and 
storage plots. Drains should be designed to handle the 
corrosive materials and mixtures of materials, which 
may be discharged into them. In some cases, well- 
located disposal area for solid waste shall also be 
provided when a site is being laid out. Separate bins 
for paper, wood and metal be provided inside the 
premises, adjacent to road, in hazard free zone, for ease 
of lifting the material into a vehicle. 


Gaseous emissions should be burned or discharged from 
a tall stack so that fumes does not affect the site or the 
public. A flare stack may have to be located to a distant 
site, because flare stack radiate intense heat, light, and 
can be very noisy. 


4.3.8 Scale relief models of the site in addition to maps 
can be of much help to the planner in predesign and 
will help in spotting potential safety problems. 


5 PLANT LAYOUT 


5.1 General 


5.1.1 Size, shape, location, construction and layout of 
buildings and other facilities should permit the most 


IS 8091 : 2018 


efficient utilization of materials, processes and methods. 


5.1.2 Some materials and processes may favour gravity 
flow and the construction of a multistorey building, for 
example, in the case of mills for one treatment. In 
processes, where material charging is to be done 
through trolleys or drums, which are required to be 
carried from one floor to other, elevators may be 
provided, to avoid accidents in lifting them. 


5.1.3 Other uses, such as automobile assembly plants 
may favour a one-storey building because floor loads 
will be heavy and excessive handling of materials by 
vertical and inclined conveyors would be required in a 
multi-storey building. 


5.2 Location of Buildings and Structures 


5.2.1 The segregation of raw materials storage, 
processing buildings and storage for finished products 
warrants thorough study in laying out a plant to 
minimize fire and explosion hazards. Storage of volatile 
flammable liquids in an area apart from processing 
buildings reduces the fire hazards. In the event of fire, 
control is more easily achieved. Moreover, the coast 
of separate storage eventually may be less than the 
investment for storage in a processing building. The 
site should aim to contain an accident at source to 
prevent escalation and avoid creating hazard to 
vulnerable targets. 


Analytical laboratories should be in a safe area but 
otherwise as close as possible to the plants served. So 
should workshops and general stores. The stores also 
required ready access for stores materials. 


5.2.2 Ample space should be provide between 
segregated units, from such flame sources as boilers, 
and from shops, streets and adjoining property. The 
codes of local, state and central authorities should be 
followed in planning the location of the units of a plant. 


5.2.3 Wherever storage of explosives is involved, 
magazines should be located and constructed in 
accordance with the recommendations of the 
Department of Explosives. 


5.2.4 The type of retardant required in relation to the 
horizontal distance between building of frame, brick 
and fire-resistant construction and minimum separation 
distances between buildings shall be as required by 
government regulations. 


5.2.5 Many plants use and store flammable liquids 
having flash points below 93°C. Plans and layouts in 
such plants should conform strictly to specifications 
for handling and storing flammable liquids stipulated 
by Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organization 
(PESO) of Government of India. 


In large petrochemicals complex/refineries, multi fire 
station locations for a minimum distance from all plants 
should be considered. Containment infrastructure 
should be provided for leakage in underground storage 
tanks. 


Statutory specifications shall be met in storing 
flammable liquids outside the buildings in underground 
or above ground tanks. The amount of liquid that can 
be stored in an underground tank depends upon the 
proximity of the tank to any building, depth in the 
ground in relation to the building, and flash point of 
the liquid. Standards for tanks include type and 
thickness of material, provisions for relieving excessive 
internal pressure, grounding, insulation, piping, and 
other appurtenances, and similar details (see IS 2825). 


5.2.6 The required distance between the line of 
adjoining property, which may be built upon and the 
location of an aboveground tank depends upon the 
content, construction, fire extinguishing equipment and 
greatest dimension (diameter or height) of the tank. 
Consequence risk study should be carried out to 
determine safe distances of building from flammable 
storage tanks. 


5.2.7 Tanks shall be built of steel unless the properties 
of the flammable or combustible liquid are such that 
some other material has to be used for its corrosion 
resistance. 


5.2.8 The distance between occupied buildings and 
plant buildings will be governed by the need to reduce 
the dangers of explosion, fire and toxicity. In particular, 
evacuation routes should not be blocked by poor plant 
layout. Administration buildings should be situated in 
safe area on the public side of the security point. The 
main office block should always be near the main 
entrance and other administration buildings should be 
nears this entrance, if possible. Other buildings such 
as medical centers, canteens, etc, should be in a safe 
area and the latter should have ready access for food 
supplies. Consideration should be given to siting of 
occupied buildings outside the main fence. In all cases 
occupied buildings should be sited predominant upwind 
of hazardous plant areas. 


5.2.9 Control Facilities 


The control building should protect its occupants against 
the hazards of fire, explosion and toxic release. The 
control building should be situated on the edge of the 
plant to allow an escape route. Recommended minimum 
distances between the plant and the control building tend 
to lie in the range 20-30 m. Depending upon hazard 
studies, distance between the control room building 
should be increased. It should not be so near the plant 
that its occupants are at once put at risk by serious leak 
of flammable, toxic or corrosive materials. The control 


building should contain only the essential process control 
functions only one storey above ground. The building 
should be oriented to present minimum area to probable 
centers of explosion, with a strong construction, 
constructed in ductile materials (Ductile material include 
steel and reinforced concrete). 


The control room should not be used as a center to 
control emergencies, nor it should be used as an 
emergency assembly point. There should be a separate 
emergency control centre for controlling the incident 
by the incident controller, having necessary 
arrangements for positive pressure inside. 


5.2.10 Water drift from cooling towers can cause 
corrosion of plants, air intake towers, increase vibration 
in centrifugal air compressors, so the towers should be 
sited to minimize this. The entrainment of effluents 
from stack and of corrosive vapors from plants into 
cooling towers or air separation units should be avoided 
should the siting of buildings near the tower intakes. 
The positioning of natural draught cooling towers 
should also take into account resonance caused by wind 
between the towers. Another problem is recycling of 
air from the discharge of one tower to the suction of 
another, which is countered by placing towers cross- 
wise to the prevailing wind. Further guidance is 
available in standard references. 


5.2.11 Escape 


A minimum of two escape routes should be provided 
for any workspace, except where the fire risk is very 
small. No workplace should be more than 12-45 m, 
depending on degree of risk, from an exit, and a dead 
end should not exceed 8 m. 


Escape routes across open mesh areas should have solid 
flooring. Escape stairways should be in straight flights 
preferably be on the outside of buildings. Fixed ladders 
may be used for escape from structures if the number of 
people does not exceed 10. Escape routes should be at 
least 0.7 m and preferably 1.2 m wide to allow the 
passage of 40 persons/min on the flat and 20 persons/ 
min down stairways. The escape times of personnel 
should be estimated, paying particular attention to people 
on tall items such as distillation columns or cranes. 


The main switchgear and emergency controls should have 
good access, preferably on an escape route, so that the 
operator does not have to risk his life to effect shutdown. 


Emergency lights to be provided in high occupancy 
area, escape pathways and exits. 


5.2.12 Fire-Fighting 


Access is essential for fire-fighting. This is provided 
by the suggested plot size of 100mx200m with 
approaches preferably on all four sides and by spacing 
between plots and buildings of 15 m. Some basic 


IS 8091 : 2018 


principles are that it should be possible to get fire- 
fighting equipment sufficiently close to the site of the 
fire. 


Hydrant points should be positioned so that hoses can 
reach any fire on the plot. Hydrant spacing of 48, 65 
and 95 m are suitable for high, medium, and low risk 
plots, respectively. Plants over 18 m high should be 
provided with dry riser mains and those over 60 m high 
or of high risk should be equipped with wet riser mains. 
The inlets on the ground floor to dry riser mains and 
the outlets on all floors to both types of main should be 
accessible. Fire equipment should be located so that it 
is not likely to be disabled by the accident itself. The 
site layout should contribute to the containment of any 
fire, which may occur, and to combating the fire. Feature 
of the site layout relevant to fire hazards are illustrated 
in the Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 and described in Annex A. 


5.2.13 Compressors should be located in different 
buildings with acoustic enclosure to reduce noise. 


5.3 Flow Sheet 


5.3.1 A detailed flow sheet is a useful guide in the layout 
of plant, particularly those using dangerous and harmful 
materials and complicated processes. The nature of the 
materials and processes in each manufacturing stage 
can be studied and provision made to eliminate or 
control hazards. A typical flow sheet and layout showing 
a hazardous operation is given in Fig. 4. 


5.3.2 A comprehensive risk assessment study can be 
done which is based on consequence analysis and 
engineering judgment can lead to a set of conclusion 
and risk mitigation to arrive at a safe process flowsheet 
(HAZOP). Computer aided design (CAD) application 
can be used to plan the layout and flow sheet. 


5.4 Layout of Equipment 


5.4.1 Various methods are used to determine the safest 
and most efficient layout of production machines and 
equipment. The two-dimensional method consists of 
templates made to scale and fitted into a plan of the 
site or floor area. 


Now a days, computer aided design (CAD) methods 
are widely used. One type of Code gives visualization 
of the layout, 2D or in 3D forms. Typically such CAD 
packages not only give 3D display, but hold a large 
amount of information about the plant such as 
coordinates of the main items and branches, the piping 
routes, the materials list etc. 


5.4.2 The most effective method is to use three- 
dimensional models, made to scale and set up a scaled 
floor plan. The models can be rearranged until the safest 
and most efficient layout has been devised. 


5.4.3 Layout studies show the most suitable locations 


IS 8091 : 2018 


ACCESS ROAD 6m WIDE 


PROCESS AREA 


Ww 

ti 
fa] 
we 
Cu 
irr 


ROAD 4.5m WIDE 


PROCESS AREA 


ROAD 4.5m WIDE 


C.W. TOWER/ SWITCH/ CONTROL/ SWITCH 
N HOUSE 


HOUSE BUILDI 


Paa FIRED HEATERS 
ACCESS ROAD 6m WIDE 


SERVICES 
COMPRESSOR 
HOUSE 


m - METRES 


Fic. 2 Compact BLOCK LAYOUT SYSTEM IN THE PROCESS AREA OF A PETROCHEMICAL PLANT WITH 
4.5 m METRE Roaps 


AREA 


AREA 


SUBSIDIARY 
PROCESS AREA 


FIRE ACCESS 


DECANTER \ RECOVERED 
j OIL COMPOUND 


MAIN PROCESS 


MAIN PROCESS 


CONTROL ROOM AND \SERVICES 
AMENITY BUILDINGS 


FIRE ACCESS ——— FIRE ACCESS 


N 
S É g 
H 
< < o 
A I Q 
Oo ek i 
O W a 
qe & 
w * MAIN PROCESS 
Z AREA 
É STACK | 
< 
E g 
T Č 2 
a A w 
a á jo 
U č 
oO a: ro) < 
o2 a È X 
Q = 
uje z af E 
olg = vr SUBSIDIARY B 
AG PROCESS AREA | W 
X e 
E w 
a 
Ww 


SUBSTATION 


COMPRESSOR 
HOUSE 


Fic. 3 BLOCK LAOUT SYSTEM IN THE PROCESS AREA OF A PETROCHEMICAL PANT WITH 6 m ROADS 


for spray-painting, welding and similar work generally 
requiring segregation as they related to other operations. 


NOTE — Results to be obtained through layout studies are 
shown in Annex B. 


5.4.4 By using the three-dimensional method (3D) 
model of the space occupied by each item of equipment, 
congested areas can be anticipated and avoided. These 
pile-up areas mean frequent handling of materials, many 
unnecessary movements, and result in bad 
housekeeping, which, may be in itself a prolific source 
of accidents. 


This 3D envelope should include space for, 


a) operations access, 

b) maintenance access, and 

c) piping connections. 
Preparing a scale model showing details of the plant 
layout will help in determining the best location for 


equipments and facilities. It will also easily locate errors 
in a plant layout. 


5.4.5 Insufficient headroom at aisles, platforms, 


IS 8091 : 2018 


FOAM STATION 


L 


H.C. WARE BCE 
HOUSE 


ELEVATOR 


FOAM STATION 


Fic. 4 COMBINATION FLOW SHEET AND LAYOUT SHOWING A PLANT HAVING HAZARDOUS OPERATIONS 


pipelines, overhead conveyors, other parts of the 
structure and other installations is disclosed in studying 
the models. A vertical distance of at least 2.2 m is 
generally specified between passage stairways and 
overhead structures to provide ample clearance. 
Overhead cranes and conveyors require at least 60 cm 
of vertical and horizontal clearance. 


Walkways along overhead cranes and conveyors should 
be provided for safe inspection and maintenance. 


5.4.6 Trucks and other vehicles require enough room 
for movement without endangering men and equipment 
and need space to back and turn near machines. Aisles 
should be wide enough to permit trucks to pass without 
colliding. For one-way traffic, aisles should be not less 
than | m wider than the widest vehicles. Aisles for two- 
way traffic should be not less than 1 m wider than twice 
the width of the widest vehicle. These minimum widths 
are exceeded considerably in some new buildings 
where, because of anticipated heavy traffic, aisles from 
4 to 6 m wide have been specified. Considerations to 
be taken into account of bigger capacity tankers, before 
constructing loading bays and gates. Adequate radius 
should be provided near the loading bay for easy 
movements of the tankers. Separate routes must be 
made for tanker movements inside the tank farm (not 
from inside the plant roads). 


5.4.7 Safe layout of aisles requires that there should be 
no blind corners and that adequate radius be provided 
to allow for vehicle turns. A 2 m radius is large enough 
for small industrial trucks. 


5.4.8 Aisles should be clearly defined with approved 
markings of either traffic paint or striping material. 
Plastic buttons that are glued or fastened with metal 
fasteners to the floor, are used by many because of their 
durability. Aisles should also be clearly identified 
around every machine in a workshop with minimum 1 
m clearance maintained for easy movement of personnel 
considered. 


5.4.9 Parking areas for both hand and power trucks 
should be designated. Large plants often provide 
garages with room for both storage and maintenance. 


5.4.10 If building plans include ramps for use by 
pedestrians and trucks, a 1m wide section should be 
reserved as a walkway, and it should be clearly defined 
with approved markings of traffic paint. Sharp turns 
into aisles at the top and bottom of ramps are hazardous 
and should be avoided. Provide an abrasive coating 
where slippery-floor conditions may exist. 


5.4.11 Ifthe process materials are corrosive, this aspect 
should be taken into account in the plant layout. 
Foundations of both the buildings and machines, 
especially those constructed in concrete, may be 
attacked by leakage of corrosive materials. Additional 
thickness of concrete and corrosion resistant asphalt, 
bricks, and plastics can be used. Floors should be sloped 
so that spillages are drained away from vulnerable 
equipment, walkways and traffic lanes. Pipe flanges, 
which may drip corrosive substances, should not be 
located over walkways. 


5.4.12 Operators cabins must be located inside the 


IS 8091 : 2018 


plant in low hazard, low noise area for better 
communication and coordination in daily activities and 
during emergencies. 


5.5 Electrical Equipment 


5.5.1 Electrical substations should be located in areas 
where non-flameproof equipment can be used, except 
where they are an integral part of the plant. Complete 
metal enclosed unit substations have been developed 
for industrial plants and are grounded. Such rooms, 
however, are not proof against the hazards of oil-filled 
transformers. This equipment may give off flammable 
vapours under certain conditions, which may form an 
explosive mixture with the atmosphere in the room. 
Non-flammable transformers should be installed with 
the atmosphere in the room. Non-flammable 
transformers should be installed in confined areas and 
near flammable materials. Transformers should be 
separately located outside the substation building. 
Substation of individual plant should be located nearer 
to the control room for better coordination between 
the process and electrical department and also for ease 
in early detection of any untoward incidents like fire. 


High voltage and low voltage Motor Control Center, 
MCC’s panels should be clearly demarcated and all 
MCC’s should be easily identified by numbering and 
with list of motor drives under them. 


In case of any electromagnetic waves emitted from 
cellular phones/walkie-talkie affects particular MCC, 
it should be located in a separate room with a caution 
board. 


5.5.2 Short-circuit protective devices should be large 
enough to carry the load and should be rated to open 
without any danger from the maximum short-circuit 
current. Circuit breakers, fuses and safety switches that 
fail under short-circuit current may explode and cause 
serious damage and injuries. 


5.5.3 The potential of every grounding system should 
be measured with a meter to determine whether or not 
the system is capable of conducting the necessary 
amount of return. 


5.5.4 When direct current voltage is supplied from 
batteries, isolate the battery room from the work area. 
Battery room should be well ventilated and no smoking 
should be permitted. 


5.5.5 In an up-to-date industrial electrical system, 
sections may be de-energized for maintenance and other 
work without shutting down the entire system. In 
addition, all electrical installations should conform to 
the local regulations. Lighting protection should be 
designed to ensure that all storages and building are 
adequately secured. 


5.5.6 Major switching apparatus should have metal 
enclosures connected to the grounding system and cable 
circuits likewise should be enclosed in rigid conduit or 
interlocked armor cable. Metal enclosed plug-in-bus- 
ways should provide an easy method of connecting and 
disconnecting machine tools. 


5.5.7 Ungrounded portable electric tools and 
equipment constitute a common source of fatalities in 
industry. The hazard can be largely eliminated if plans 
include a three-wire system of which one is a ground 
wire and if the equipment is provided with three 
conductor cables. Eath Leakage Circuit Breaker 
(ELCB) provision should be made to avoid shock from 
leakage current. 


5.6 Ventilation, Heating and Air Conditioning 


5.6.1 Ventilation, heating and air conditioning are 
needed for both for personal comfort and very often to 
meet process conditions. Personal comfort is very 
important because it affects employee efficiency. All 
efforts should be made not only to make general office 
and plant conditions comfortable but also to eliminate 
or at least reduce poor conditions which can contribute 
to excessive employee fatigue or discomfort. If 
machinery or processes radiate heat or generate bad 
fumes, extra ventilation should be supplied to the work 
area. Where the ventilation rate is set by the need to 
remove a contaminant, the number of air changes per 
unit time is an appropriate measure. 


5.6.2 Boilers, fans, and air-conditioning equipment are 
usually kept separate from the general work areas 
because their adjustment is very fine. It is important to 
make certain that boilers receive adequate air and that 
combustion by-products are exhausted safely. In 
locating incinerators too, be sure that a negative 
pressure differential in a building does not cause an 
incinerator stack to serve as an air source. 


5.6.3 Maintenance should be considered. Not only 
shall authorized employees have easy access to the 
machinery, but also there shall be sufficient space 
around the equipment to replace parts as needed. 
There shall be room behind to pull the tubes if 
necessary. 


5.6.4 The control room and other work place should 
be maintained at positive air pressure to avoid ingress 
of dust and fumes from outside and also to dissipate 
panel heat. 


5.7 Inside Storage 


5.7.1 Industrial buildings seldom have enough storage 
room. Sufficient space for raw materials and finished 
products may be estimated on the basis of maximum 
production requirements with allowances for shortages, 
seasonal shipping and quantity purchases. 


5.7.2 Modern mechanical handling and stacking 
equipment permits extensive use of vertical space 
through double and triple decking. If this method is 
anticipated in the future, basic live floor requirements 
in the initial building design shall allow for the possible 
increase in m? load. Systematic optimization based 
approach and certain available software packages can 
be used for increasing space efficiency. 


5.7.3 Plans for storage of supplies, the finished product 
and empty or full pallets should permit ease of access, 
stability of piling or stacking and proper functioning 
of the emergency sprinkler system. Sprinkler design 
density (1/min/m? ) and area of application are 
dependent on type of material and the height to which 
it is piled. When piling height exceeds 3.5 m, double- 
check the sprinkler system’s ability to put out any fire. 


Space for storing supplies, tools and in frequently used 
equipment near working areas is seldom included in 
plans for departmental layouts. The result is that such 
items often are left in unsafe positions and locations. 
To discourage employees from leaving long materials 
and parts against walls or other places where they can 
fall, potable ladders, tools, such as pry bars and machine 
parts such as shafts should have definite storage places. 


5.7.4 Space should be provided for racks, bins and 
shelves. Materials that project from such places should 
be stored above eye level and barricaded. Metal baskets 
or special racks provided with drip pans can be used 
for storing machine parts covered with cutting oils. 
Flooring in oil storage area should be made antiskid 
and impervious. 


5.7.5 Closets should be built for the storage of sanitary 
supplies such as deodorants and soaps. 


5.7.6 Waste storage may take considerable room, 
especially if the waste is bulky or is produced in large 
quantities. In buildings with basements, chutes to 
basement storage bins help prevent accumulations in 
working areas. To dispose of small quantities of sharp- 
edged waste, boxes with handles that are protected from 
contact with sharp materials or similar safe containers 
may be specified. 


5.8 Receiving and Dispatching 


5.8.1 Receiving and dispatching facilities should fit in 
with overall material flow within the company or plant 
and should aid efficient flow of materials into and out 
of production areas. Separate material gate should be 
provided, like liquid movement, solid logistic 
movement, etc. that shall ensure all entries related to 
excise and taxation. Receiving and dispatching areas 
should be designed to keep building heating and cooling 
losses at a minimum. 


5.8.2 Self-leveling dock boards, truck levelers, and 


IS 8091 : 2018 


cranes can facilitate loading and unloading. Stores/Load 
office should be near to the material gate to have inward 
receipt of the goods. 


5.8.3 Separate truck siding should be provided near 
the material gate for parking of trucks after their 
movement of loading of finished goods or raw 
materials unloading. Parking facility should also be 
provided for tankers, which are in queue for loading/ 
unloading. In such case, proper communication (like 
pubic address system, walky-talky, hot lines, etc) 
between parking facility and the load office should 
be provided with security posts to control the vehicular 
movement. Facilities of toilets and canteen should be 
provided so as to avoid movement of Drivers in the 
work premises. 


5.8.4 Dispatch of all finished goods should be done 
from a separate location in the factory without 
interfering the movement in work premises. Proper 
barricade with security gate should be made to avoid 
any unauthorized entry of vehicle in the plant premises. 


5.9 Railway Sidings 


5.9.1 This commonly used receiving and dispatching 
facility requires planning, especially if bulk receiving 
of raw, process and maintenance materials is an 
economic advantage. Tank wagons containing 
hazardous materials, such as chlorine, caustics, acids, 
and other volatile, flammable, explosive and toxic 
materials, require proper consideration for pressure 
piping, break away piping, valves, pumps, derails, etc. 


5.9.2 Each side track should be guarded away from 
main line, public thoroughfares, and proper clearance 
between main plants and wagons observed. 


Guidelines provided by the railways should be followed 
while making a layout for a railway siding, making 
provision for the following: 


a) Gateways; 
b) Barriers and turn gates; 
c) Track clearances; and 
d) Crossings, etc. 
Worker’s pay windows, first-aid stations and other 


points where a crowd may collect should not be placed 
near a railway track. 


Reflective jackets and search lights (torch) should be 
provided to personnel working in night in siding. 
Adequate illumination and reflective markings should 
be applied at key pathways and work places. 


5.10 Roads and Footpaths 


5.10.1 The safety engineer should always be alert to 
opportunities where he can assist the civil engineer in 
designing for maximum safety. Roads in plant yards 


IS 8091 : 2018 


and grounds are sources of frequent accidents unless 
they are carefully laid out, substantially constructed 
and well surfaced and drained and kept in good 
condition. 


5.10.2 Heavy duty motor truck hauling requires road 
tip to 16 m wide for two-way traffic with ample radii at 
curves. Gradients, in general, are limited to a maximum 
of 8 percent. A slight crown is necessary for drainage, 
with ditches to carry off water. 


5.10.3 Road should be located at least 11 m from 
buildings, especially at entrances. At loading docks an 
allowance of one and a half truck length is desirable to 
facilitate backing. 


5.10.4 Intersection of roads should provide clear sight 
distance taking into account width of the roads, traffic, 
sighting angle, etc. 


Provisions of CCTV (Closed Circuit Tele-Vision) is 
recommended for better control and monitoring of all 
movements. 


5.10.5 The regulation and control of traffic, signs, road 
layout, and markings should conform to local and state 
practices. 


5.10.6 Traffic sings and signals regulating speed and 
movements at hazardous locations are essential. Stop 
signs are specified for railway crossings and entrances 
to main thoroughfares. ‘STOP, LOOK AND GO’ and 
‘SOUND YOUR HORN’ signs are necessary at sharp 
curves (blind corners) where view is obstructed and at 
entrances to buildings. Mirrors mounted to afford views 
around sharp turn or corners of buildings are of great 
help in preventing accidents, if roads have to be built 
close to buildings. Barricades and ‘MEN WORKING’ 
signs are needed for construction and repair work. 
Speed limit boards and Speed breakers with appropriate 
indications shall be installed before entrance/exit of 
plants, sharp curves, blind corners and also before such 
places where speeding vehicles would pose a particular 
hazard to pedestrian traffic and/or other vehicles 
moving in the area. If roads are used at night, traffic 
signs should be made of reflective or luminous 
materials. Separate gates should be used for allowing 
shift buses employee’s entrance/exist and other 
vehicles. 


5.10.7 Good footpaths between outside facilities 
prevent injury from employees stepping on round stones 
or into holes and ruts on rough ground. As far as 
possible, footpaths should be the shortest distance from 
one building to another to discourage short cutting. A 
footpath that has to be next to railway tracks should be 
separated from them by a fence or railing. Warning signs 
should be installed at railway crossings and other 
hazardous places. 


10 


5.10.8 Concrete is preferred for footpaths, especially 
in principal areas like entrances and between main 
buildings. Crushed rock surfaced with gravel or asphalt 
makes a good footpath for less used locations. Also 
pedestrian’s footpaths/railway can be made on both 
sides of main road clearly defined with approved 
markings of traffic paints. 


5.10.9 Footpaths should be kept in good condition, 
especially where they cross railway tracks and should 
be cleared of ice and snow. 


5.11 Parking Areas 


5.11.1 To reduce travel in the plant grounds, a desirable 
location for a parking area is between an entrance and 
the locker room. The entire parking area should be 
fenced. The parking stalls shall be laid out so that 
driving in, parking, opening of car doors and driving 
away is not obstructed. Typical layouts of parking stalls 
of staggered and non-staggered types are indicated in 
Fig. 5A and Fig. 5B respectively. The surface of the 
parking area should be smooth and hard, to eliminate 
the frequent injuries that would occur from falls on 
stony or rough ground. Good drainage is essential. 


5.11.2 The use of white lines 10 to 15 cm wide to 
designate stalls reduces confusion and the number of 
backing accidents. Standard stalls are 5 m wide and 6 
m long. The centre-to-centre distance between parked 
cars varies according to the method of parking. Be sure 
that parking does not encroach on approaches to 
comers, bus stops, loading zones and clearance spaces 
for islands. Driveways should be a minimum of 8 m 
for two-say traffic and there should be no obstructions 
to viewing. 


5.11.3 Angle parking has both advantages and 
disadvantages. The smaller the angle, the fewer the 
number of cars that can be parked in the same area. 
Aisle widths can be narrower but traffic is usually 
restricted to one way. On the other hand, angle parking 
is easier for customers and it does not require a lot of 
room for sharp turns. 


5.11.4 The area allowed per car in parking lots varies 
from 20 m? to more than 30 m?, if aisles are included. 
Large and economically laid out areas may approach 
the 20 m? figure; smaller and poorly configured parking 
areas may have a higher percentage of aisle space and 
may approach 30 m° car. A large commercial attended 
parking area is considered efficient if the layout keeps 
the space requirements to 24 m? per car. 


5.11.5 Separate entrances for incoming and outgoing 
cars facilities orderly traffic movements. Entrances 
should be designated with suitable signs. Speed signs 
and sings limiting areas to employees or visitors should 
be installed, as circumstances require. These signs 


IS 8091 : 2018 


5A Staggered 
NOTES 


5B Non-Staggered 


1 In both patterns, vehicles have to reverse into parking space. 


2 For parking areas with restricted lane widths, a slope angle of 30° is suggested. 
Depending upon the adequacy of lane width any angle up to 45° is recommended. 


Fic. 5 TYPICAL LAYOUTS OF PARKING STALLS 


should conform to recommended standards and would 
be similar to other street and highway signs. 


elevators, etc, in order to reduce transport by 
rail and road to an optimum extent. 


5.11.6 Traffic at exit to heavily travelled streets should b) Sectionalizing arrangement should be made 
either be controlled by a traffic light, or, there should in electrical supply line to equipment. 
be acceleration or merging lane. c) Planning and erection of equipment should 
. . es take into consideration facilities for repairs 
eth 5 the fn inhi at a oe PRE and preventive maintenance work. 
SOONER provided Tor satety ae ortie preventiono d) Equipment layout/installation should also 
theft, about 100 lux/m? at a height of 1 m should be an 3 ; 
iad leval consider the case of removal of the equipment 
q i (by cranes), especially when located on higher 
5.12 Additional Facilities floors. 
As fi ible, bridgi f the platfi 
Consideration of following suitable additional facilities 9 z EREE a ia R 
should also be borne in mind at the designing stage: evaporators, etc) should be done, for ease of 
a) Greater use should be made of mechanical operation especially during shutdown and start 
handling devices, such as conveyors, bucket up. 
ANNEX A 


(Clause 5.2.12) 
SITE LAYOUT RELEVANT TO FIRE HAZARD 


A-1 Figure 2 shows a compact layout, which minimizes 
land usage and pipe work, for petrochemical plant 
consisting of a major process with several stages and a 
number of subsidiary processes. 


There are two main process areas and at right angles to 
these is an area with a row of fired heaters and 
associated reactors, steam boilers and a stack. 


This layout has several weaknesses. The lack of firebreaks 
in the main process blocks would allow a fire to propagate 
right along these, particularly if wind is blowing along 
them. There is entry to the plant area from the 6 m roads 


from opposite corners, which allows for all wind 
directions. But the only access for vehicles to the process 
plots is the 4.5 m roads. In the case of a major fire, 
appliances might well get trapped by an escalation of the 
fire. Clearance is also not adequate. The layout also likely 
to cause difficulties in maintenance work. 


A-2 The alternative layout shown in Fig. 3 avoids these 
problems. The process areas are divided by firebreaks. 
There are more entry points on the site and dead ends 
are eliminated. The crane access areas provide 
additional clearances for fired heaters. 


IS 8091 : 2018 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 5.4.3) 
RESULTS OF LAYOUR STUDIES 


B-1 Results to be obtained through layout studies are saving in distance amounted to about 76 percent. The 
shown in Fig. 6. reduction is particularly significant to the safety 
professional because the largest number of injuries in 


B-2 Here the new layout reduced unit travel from . ; f ; i 
most industries occur in material handling. 


772 m to 246 m of which 63 m are conveyorized. The 


OLD LAYOUT 


FLOW STARTS AND 
ENDS AT ELEVATOR SMALL RUN 
ASSEMBLY 


L Bii li FIRST SOLDER 
| aa NAME 
i PLATE BUFFING 


ima TOO OOOO | l 


Me AT 


eo — = 


w, 
TRANSFORMER 
STORAGE | 7 iii d 11 U 
i 
S ER 2. See Ye Pee ERS SNS G E Me aE es E 
SECOND \Y 
secon \|// SOLDER HEAVY POTTING 
JERES DISPATCH REPAIR ASSEMBLY IMPREGNATION 
OFFICE SECTION 


PRODUCTION FLOW OF HERMETIC UNIT 


NEW LAYOUT 
FLOW STARTS 


AND ENDS AT 
ELEVATOR | 


REAR SECTION 
C 
SS 


HEAVY UNIT 


ASSEMBLY 
— 


TEST LABORATORY 


MATERIAL STORES 
TOOL GRIB 
SECOND ASSEMBLY 
ASSEMBLY CONVEYOR 
MATERIAL FIRST ASSEMBLY 
PREPARATION CONVEYOR 


BUFFING 


H 
RIN AWE DA 


IMPREGNATION 
ROOM 


\ MATERIAL 
ASSEMBLY PREPARATION 


POTTING SECTION 
CONVEYOR 


OFFICE 


Fic. 6 THE OLD AND NEw LAYOUT OF TRANSFORMER MANUFACTURING OPERATION 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 08 (10883). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


