Waa WIth IS 9403 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


mU aera ch Area À iA 

aat Zit face-31G ch 

ware ch fort eee apt fafa 
( Ye GRIT ) 


Method of Test for Thermal 
Conductance and Transmittance 
of Built-Up Sections by Means of 

Guarded Hot Box 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.60 


© BIS 2018 


RMA AH ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF FS, 9 FRM WAL At, ae fereit-110002 
Velie” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2018 Price Group 4 


Thermal Insulation Sectional Committee, CHD 27 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (first revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Thermal Insulation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1980. During this revision attempt is being made to incorporate changes, if 
any according to the latest developments in this field. 


In a method as complicated as the hot box method it is impossible and undesirable to establish the construction in 
such detail that the method could be used by a person not technically trained. It should be understood, therefore, 
that those applying the method shall be trained in the methods of temperature measurement, shall possess knowledge 
of the theory of heat flow, and shall understand the general requirements of testing practice. In standardizing this 
method it is recognized that it would be unwise to restrict the initiative of research workers who may wish to 
develop and improve upon the method. Accordingly, in the description of the apparatus given in 5, the essential 
principles and the general arrangement of the apparatus are first given and any test following this method shall 
satisfy these general requirements. The details of the apparatus and the suggested test procedure that follow are 
given, not as mandatory requirements, but simply as example of methods and precautions that have been found 
useful in the past to satisfy the general principles. It is realized that the variation in types of structures to be tested 
may be so great, and the demands of the conditions so different, that it would be wrong to restrict the test method 
unnecessarily and to confine all measurements to a single test arrangement. 


This method may be applied to any constructions for which it is possible to build a reasonably representative 
panel of size appropriate for the apparatus. It should be recognized that, in order to obtain a suitable test panel, it 
may be necessary to modify the details of some constructions. For example, for constructions incorporating 
airspaces, in order to prevent interchange of air between test area and guard area, it may be necessary to provide 
in the test panel a barrier that does not occur in the full-scale construction. Likewise, in construction incorporating 
an element of high lateral conductance (such as a metal sheet), it may be necessary to separate the test and guard 
areas of the high-conductance element by a narrow gap such as a saw cut. 


Heat transfer across an air space depends on the orientation of that air space and, therefore, panels incorporating 
air spaces must be tested in that orientation in which the construction is to be used. 


Since the method determines the total flow of heat from the warmer to the cooler side through the test area 
demarcated by the metering box, in principle it is possible to determine the heat flow through a building element 
smaller than the test area, such as a window or representative area of a panel unit, if the parallel heat flow through 
the remaining surrounding area, or mask, is determinable. 


In distinction to IS 3346 which is primarily applicable to homogeneous samples, the guarded hot box method is 
designed for measurements on non-homogeneous panels representative of construction such as walls, roofs, and 
floors of buildings. 


In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from ASTM C 236-66 ‘Standard test 
method for thermal conductance and transmittance of built-up sections by means of the guarded hot box’, published 
by the American Society for Testing and Materials, and is gratefully acknowledged. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS 2 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. 


IS 9403 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


METHOD OF TEST FOR THERMAL CONDUCTANCE 
AND TRANSMITTANCE OF BUILT-UP SECTIONS BY 
MEANS OF GUARDED HOT BOX 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes a method, known as the 
guarded hot box method, for the measurement of the 
thermal conductance and thermal transmittance of 
panels. 


NOTE — In applying this method, the general principles 
outlined here shall be followed. However, the details of the 
apparatus may be varied in order to suit the convenience of the 
individual operator 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 
3069 : 1994 Glossary of terms, symbols and 
units relating to thermal insulation 
materials 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definition of terms, 
symbols and units given in IS 3069 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL PRINCIPLES 


4.1 In order to determine the conductance C, and the 
transmittance U of any specimen, it is necessary to know 
the area A, the heat flux q and the temperature 
differences, all of which shall be determined under such 
conditions that the flow of heat is steady. The hot box 
is an apparatus designed to determine C or U for 
representative test panels and is an arrangement by 
means of which a desired steady temperature difference 
can be established and maintained across a test panel 
for the period of time necessary to ensure constant heat 
flux and steady temperature, and for an additional 
period adequate to measure these quantities to the 
desired accuracy. In such an arrangement the 
measurements of area and temperature present no 


difficulty, at least in principle. The heat flux, g, however, 
cannot be directly measured, and it is to obtain a 
measure of q that the hot box has been given its 
characteristic design. In order to determine q, a five- 
sided metering box is placed with its open side against 
the warm face of the test panel. If, ideally, the 
temperatures within the metering box and in the space 
surrounding it are maintained the same, then no heat 
flux through a known area of the panel. Except possibly 
at the metering box gaskets, the heat flow into the warm 
side of the panel is not affected by the presence of the 
metering box. The portion of the panel outside the test 
areas, laved by the air of the surrounding guard space, 
constitutes a guard area to minimize lateral heat flow 
in the test panel near the metering area. Condensation 
within the specimen causes errors in heat flow; in order 
to avoid this, the dew point temperature on the warm 
side must be kept below the temperature of the cold 
side. 


4.2 In practice, however, it is not always feasible or 
convenient to satisfy the ideal condition of zero 
temperature difference across the metering box walls 
required to prevent a net interchange of heat between 
the metering box and guard space. Since the total wall 
area of the metering box is usually more than twice the 
metering area of the panel, small temperature gradients 
through the walls may cause heat flows totaling an 
undesirably large fraction of the heat input to the 
metering box. For this reason, it is a general principle 
for a hot box apparatus that the metering box walls 
shall be equipped to serve as a heat flow meter so that 
the heat flow through them can be minimized by 
adjusting conditions during tests, and so that a 
correction can be applied in calculating test results. 


5 APPARATUS 
5.1 Arrangement 


Figure 1 (a) shows a schematic arrangement of the test 
panel and of various major elements of the panel 
apparatus; Fig. 1(b) and 1(c) show alternative 
arrangements. Still other arrangements, accomplishing 
the same purpose, may be preferred for reasons of 
convenience or ease of installing panels. In general the 


IS 9403 : 2017 


INSULATION 


METERING BOX 


Jp 


Z 
Y 
Z 


QQAANAAASAN 


N 


GUARD 
80x 


METERING 
BOX 


(b) 


INSULATION 
(aj 


000R 


INSULATION 


Fic. 1 GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF TEST Box, GUARD Box, TEST PANEL AND CoLD Box 


size of the metering box determines the minimum size 
of other elements. 


5.2 Metering Box 
5.2.1 Size 


The size of the metering box is largely governed by the 
metering area required to obtain a representative test 
area of panel. For example, for panels incorporating 
air spaces or stud spaces, the metering area, preferably, 
should exactly span an integral number of spaces. For 
most types of panels, a metering box width of 0.82 or 
1.22 m between centres of the gaskets is practical. The 
height of the metering box is not ordinarily subject to 
the same limitations and it may be made of any 
convenient height, preferably not less than the width. 
The depth of the metering box should be not greater 
than that required to accommodate its necessary 
equipment. 


5.2.2 Thermal Conductance 


The metering box walls shall have a thermal 
conductance of not more than 1.2 W/m°K. In order that 
the conductance of the box wall shall be uniform over 
all the box area, a construction without ribs should be 
used; for example, a glued balsa wood or a sandwich 


construction. The edge in contact with the panel shall, 
if necessary, be narrowed on the outside only, to hold a 
gasket not more than 13 mm wide. If necessary, a wood 
nose piece may be used to carry the gasket. The 
metering area of the panel shall be taken as the area 
included between the centre lines of the gaskets. 


5.2.3 Heat Supply and Air Circulation 


A possible arrangement of equipment in the metering 
box to assure an even, gentle movement of air over the 
metering area of the panel is shown in Fig. 2. The 
electric heaters are mounted in a cylindrical housing 
with walls of conductance not greater than 1.2 W/m°K, 
and with reflective outside surfacing to minimize 
radiation heat transfer to the metering box walls. In 
this arrangement air is continuously circulated by a 
small fan upward through the cylindrical housing and 
downward between the baffle and the panel in 
accordance with the motion that would result from 
natural convection forces. A slat-type baffle is placed 
at some distance above the outlet of the cylindrical 
housing to prevent impingement of a jet of heated air 
against the top inner surface of the metering box. A 
curved vane is mounted at the top of the baffle to smooth 
the entrance of air into the baffle space. In a hot box 
apparatus used for testing panels in a vertical position 


(A, 
h 
j 
A 
j 
j 
2 
j 
Y 
A 
Ø 


Fic. 2 ARRANGEMENT OF EQUIPMENT DURING THE TEST 


only, the moderate circulation of air resulting from 
natural convection may be sufficient without the use of 
a fan. The change in temperature of the air as it moves 
along the surface of the panel will, in general, be greater 
with natural circulation than with a fan. Ifa fan is used, 
and its motor is contained within the metering box, its 
electrical input must be metered, and its electrical input 
should be as small as feasible, since it represents the 
least possible heat input to the metering box. If the 
motor is located outside of the metering box, the heat 
equivalent of the shaft power delivered to the fan blades 
must be accurately known, and precautions must be 
taken to prevent air leakage into or out of the metering 
box around the shaft. 


5.2.4 Temperature Control 


A reliable thermostat may be used to control the 
metering box air temperature and heat input. For 
convenience, the setting of the thermostat should be 
adjustable from outside the apparatus; for best 


IS 9403 : 2017 


operation, the heaters controlled by the thermostat 
should be open-wire heaters of minimal heat capacity 
and lag. The sensitive element of the thermostat may 
be placed in any region of relatively fast moving air. 
As an alternative to using thermostat, it is possible to 
supply electrical energy to the metering box at a 
constant but adjustable rate. With constant electrical 
input and other conditions steady, the temperature of 
the metering box should become constant without the 
use of a thermostat. 


5.2.5 Gaskets 


The contact edges of the metering box should ensure, 
by a gasket or other means, a tight air seal against the 
surface of the test panel. For some panels special 
provisions may be necessary. The metering box should 
be pressed tightly against the panel by suitable means, 
such as springs or exteriorly tightened screws, exerting 
a thrust on the back of the metering box. 


5.2.6 Heat Flow Meter 


To equip the metering box walls to serve as a heat flow 
meter, a number of differential thermocouples 
connected in series to form a thermopile shall be applied 
to the inside and outside surface of the metering box 
walls. There shall be at least one differential pair of 
thermocouple junctions located directly opposite each 
other at the centre of each of the five sides of the 
metering box; more than five are preferable, located at 
the centres of approximately equal areas, if the metering 
box is large, or if uniformity of temperatures within 
the metering box is considered unlikely. The junctions 
and the thermocouple wires for at least a 100 mm 
distance from the junctions shall be glued or cemented 
practically flush with the surface of the wall. The 
thermocouples shall be connected in series so that their 
individual differential emfs are all additive in the same 
direction when the inside of the metering box is warmer 
than the outside. 


5.2.7 Thermopile EMF and Heat Flow Relationship 


The relationship between thermopile emf and heat flow 
through the metering box walls may be determined by 
the following method. Place a homogeneous panel of 
conductance not greater than 2.3 W/m’K in the 
apparatus, and establish a steady temperature difference 
of 28 K or more from air to air on the two sides. Adjust 
the guard box air temperature so that when steady 
temperature conditions prevail, the guard box air is (a) 
several degrees warmer, and (b) several degrees cooler, 
than the metering box air. Record the average steady 
power input to the metering box Q and the air 
temperatures on the two sides of the panel, for each of 
these two conditions of temperature unbalance. It is 
then possible, assuming that the U-value of the test 
panel and the heat flow meter coefficient, M, are 


IS 9403 : 2017 


constants, to write two equal equations of the following 
form: 


Q+ ME=AU (t,—t) 


where M is the thermopile constant, and E is the 
thermopile emf. From these equations the value of M 
may be calculated (care should be taken that the polarity 
of the thermopile is identified properly). It will be noted 
that the left hand side of the equations is the net heat 
flowing through the metering area of the panel, if the 
polarity of the thermopile is chosen properly. In routine 
tests adjust the guard box air temperature to yield as 
small a thermopile reading as is feasible, and use the 
coefficient M to compute the heat interchange that 
occurs between the guard box and metering box under 
these conditions. This heat interchange shall in no test 
exceed 3 percent of the metering box input. 


5.3 Guard Box 
5.3.1 Size 


The guard box shall be large enough so that there is a 
clear distance between its inner wall and the nearest 
surface of the metering box of not less than the thickness 
of the thickest panel to be tested, but in no case less 
than 150 mm. 


5.3.2 Thermal Conductance 


To ensure that there is a temperature difference of not 
more than a few degrees between the guard box air and 
its inner surfaces, the walls shall have a thermal 
conductance not greater than 0.6 W/m’K. A low 
conductance is also desirable for operating reasons, to 
assure that the heat flow into or out of the guard box 
from outside will be only a small fraction of the heat 
flow through the guard area of the, test panel. 


5.3.3 Heat Supply and Air Circulation 


One or more reflective-surfaced cylindrical heater units 
with a fan, of the type used in the metering box, may 
be used to supply heat to the guard box air and also to 
circulate the air gently around the metering box in a 
roughly oval path parallel to the face of the test panel. 
The fan air intake of at least one such heater unit should 
be located at the lowest point in the guard box, to 
prevent pooling of cool air at the bottom. The air 
discharged from the heater cylinder shall not impinge 
directly against either the metering box or the test panel. 


5.3.4 Temperature Control 


The guard box air temperature and heat input may be 
controlled by a reliable thermostat, or by means of a 
differential thermostat sensitive to slight differences in 
temperature between the metering box and guard box 
air. Several arrangements are possible for such a 
differential thermostat, for example a relay controlled 
either by a differential thermopile such as that used on 


the metering box for a heat flow meter or by a sensitive 
bridge circuit with opposed temperature sensitive arms 
located in the guard and metering boxes. To avoid 
hunting due to the small periodic temperature variations 
of the metering box air as its thermostat functions, it is 
desirable to put the temperature-sensitive element of 
the differential control in the metering box in good 
thermal contact with the inside surfaces of the metering 
box, The temperature-sensitive element in the guard 
box should be in the guard box air, and should be of 
minimum thermal lag. The setting of the thermostat or 
of the differential thermostat should be exteriorly 
adjustable so that it is possible to adjust it according to 
the indications of the metering box heat flow meter 
thermopile. 


5.4 Cold Box 
5.4.1 Size 


The size of the cold box is governed by the size of the 
test panel or by the arrangement of boxes used, as 
illustrated in Fig. 1. 


5.4.2 Insulation 


The cold box should be heavily insulated to reduce the 
capacity of refrigerating equipment required, and the 
exterior of the cold box should be provided with a good 
vapour barrier to prevent ingress of vapour and heavy 
frost accumulations on the cooling coils. 


5.4.3 Temperature Control 


The cold box may be cooled in any manner that is 
capable of the close control of air temperature necessary 
during a test. An arrangement of equipment similar to 
that in the metering box may be used if desired, with a 
fan to force air downward through the enclosed 
refrigerating coils and upward through the space 
between a baffle and the test panel as indicated in Fig. 2. 
It has been found satisfactory with an arrangement of 
this sort to operate a unit refrigeration system 
continuously with the evaporation temperature of the 
coil held constant by an automatic back-pressure 
regulating value, and refrigerant supplied to the coil 
through an automatic expansion valve. For fine control 
of the circulating air temperature, an open-wire heating 
grid of minimum heat capacity may be placed in the air 
discharged from the coil, electrical input to which is 
controlled by a sensitive thermostat in the cold box air. 


5.5 Temperature Measuring Equipment 
5.5.1 Surface Temperatures 


Thermocouples of wire not larger in size than 0.25 mm 
are recommended for measuring surface temperatures 
in the apparatus; for this purpose the thermocouple 
junction and the adjoining lead wires for a distance of 
at least 100 mm should be taped, or preferably 


cemented, tightly to the surface. The emittance of the 
surfacing material tape or cement should be close to 
the emittance of the surface. Either thermocouples or 
grids of temperature-sensitive resistance wire may be 
used to measure air temperatures in the boxes. The 
surface temperature of the metering area of the test 
panel shall be measured on the warm side by at least 
one surface thermocouple for each 0.2 m? of metering 
area, located judiciously with respect to structural 
members in the panel. If such members are deemed 
important in their effect on heat transfer, additional 
surface thermocouples shall be used. If possible, the 
thermocouples should be distributed symmetrically 
over the metering area. At least two surface 
thermocouples shall be placed on the guard area of the 
panel at suitable locations to indicate the effectiveness 
of the guard area. Surface temperatures on the cold side 
of the test panel shall be measured by surface 
thermocouples placed directly opposite those on the 
warm side of the panel. 


5.5.2 Air Temperatures 


Air temperatures in the metering box shall be measured, 
if thermocouples are used, by at least one thermocouple 
for 0.2 m? of metering area of the test panel. The 
junctions of the thermocouples used for measuring air 
temperature shall have bright metallic surfaces and shall 
be small, to minimize radiation effects. The 
thermocouple shall be located midway between the face 
of the panel and the baffle, if one is used, but in no 
case less than 75 mm from the face of the panel. The 
thermocouples may, if desired, be placed directly 
opposite the surface thermocouples; in any case, they 
should be located as symmetrically as possible over 
the metering area. Thermocouples shall also be placed 
in the guard space at suitable locations, to indicate the 
degree of uniformity of guard space air temperatures; 
preferably, one should be placed opposite each guard 
area surface thermocouple, but not less than 75 mm 
from the panel. Air temperatures on the cold side of 
the panel shall be measured by one thermocouple placed 
directly opposite each of the warm side air temperature 
thermocouples and located midway between the cold 
side baffle and the panel, but in no case less than 75 
mm from the panel. No thermocouples need be placed 
in the cold space opposite guard space thermocouples 
remote from the panel surface. 


5.5.2.1 If air temperatures are to be measured by means 
of resistance wire grids, the wire shall be distributed 
so as to indicate approximately the average temperature 
of the air on both sides of the panel at a plane midway 
between the baffle and the panel, but in no case less 
than 75 mm from the panel, with nearly symmetrical 
distribution of the resistance wire over the metering 
area, and similarly over the guard area. 


IS 9403 : 2017 


5.5.3 Measuring Instruments 


All thermocouples or temperature-indicating elements 
for observing surface and air temperatures shall have 
their leads brought out individually to suitable 
measuring instruments capable of indicating 
temperatures to within 0.05 K. If an average 
instantaneous air temperature is desired, the leads of 
the appropriate air-temperature thermocouples may be 
temporarily connected in series or parallel, as preferred, 
or a separate set of thermocouples located at nearly the 
same positions may be permanently installed for this 


purpose. 
5.6 Auxiliary Equipment 
5.6.1 Refrigerating Unit and Voltage Supply 


If refrigeration is used and a large refrigerating plant is 
not available, it is desirable to refrigerate the cold box 
with a small compressor unit wholly devoted to this 
apparatus, to avoid effects of other loads on the system. 
For a similar reason, it is advantageous to furnish the 
electric power for the compressor and for the fans, 
heaters, and other equipment from a stabilized voltage 
supply. 

5.6.2 Meter 


All electric power input to the metering box shall be 
accurately metered. A small domestic type integrating 
watt-hour meter may be used for this purpose if it is 
carefully calibrated, and if it has a dial that can be read 
by interpolation to the nearest watt-hour. The effect of 
the on-off action of a thermostat on a portion of the 
load on such a meter is not a significant source of error. 


5.6.3 Temperature Recorder 


A temperature recorder for recording certain salient 
temperatures, that is, an air and perhaps a surface 
temperature in the metering area on both sides of the 
panel, is not essential, but is very useful to indicate 
constancy of temperature conditions when other 
temperature readings are not being taken, The accuracy 
of the recorded temperatures is not important, since 
they are used only to show constancy or trends of 
temperature. 


5.6.4 Fans 


The fans used in the boxes shall be capable of operating 
continuously and uniformly for the duration of a test. 
Velocities of air over both surfaces of the panel should 
either be measured with suitable instruments, or be 
calculated from a heat balance between the rate of loss 
or gain of heat by the air as it moves through the baffle 
space, as indicated by its temperature change, and the 
rate of heat flow through the test panel, average values 
of which may be determined from the test data. 


IS 9403 : 2017 


5.6.5 Insulation for Test Panel Edges 


When a test panel is installed, its edges shall, if 
necessary, be carefully insulated to prevent edge effects 
from overtaking the guarding effect of the guard area 
of the panel. For this purpose, the edges of the panel 
should be protected against heat loss or gain by a 
thickness of at least 50 mm of good insulation. It may 
be necessary to vapour-proof the insulation to prevent 
condensation of moisture on the edges of the panel, if 
a test arrangement similar to that shown in Fig. 1(c) is 
used. 


5.7 Special Conditions 


It is expected that, in general, tests in the guarded hot 
box apparatus will be conducted on substantially dry 
test panels, with no effort made to impose or account 
for the effects of water vapour flow through or into the 
panel during tests. It is recognized that the heat transfer 
characteristics of many constructions may be affected 
significantly by simultaneous vapour flow. It is believed 
that the test apparatus described in this method could 
be used for making tests with imposed vapour pressure 
differentials across the test panel if proper modifications 
were made, including vapour-sealing of the metering 
box and guard box, and instrumentation to impose and 
measure the vapour-pressure conditions desired. 
Extension of the application of the hot box method of 
test in this direction is to be expected and encouraged, 
building upon the basic established in this method for 
determining the heat transfer coefficients of test panels. 


6 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 


Select and prepare a test panel so that the specimen is 
representative of the construction to be investigated, 
and yet suitable for test purposes that necessary 
modifications such as blocking of air spaces, slotting 
of conductive faces, and similar measures mentioned 
in the foreword have been made. Carefully study the 
panel construction to determine in advance whether, 
and where, peculiarities of the construction make it 
desirable to install extra thermocouples to facilitate 
analysis of the test results. When the test panel has been 
installed, take care to assure a tight seal of the metering 
box against the face of the panel to prevent movement 
of air into or out of the metering box, and to apply 
adequate insulation at the edges of the test panel, 
vapour-sealing it, if necessary. 


7 PROCEDURE 


Choose the test conditions of temperature and 
orientation to correspond as closely as possible to the 
circumstances of use of the construction to be tested. 
Impose and maintain the test conditions until 
substantially constant temperature and heat flow 
readings are attained, before beginning the test period 


proper. Continue the test period thereafter for at least 8 
hours but do not terminate the test until the values of 
thermal transmittance, U, and thermal conductance C, 
calculated from the average values of at least two sets 
of readings taken over a period of not less than 4 hours, 
do not differ by more than 1 percent from the values of 
U and C obtained similarly for the preceding period of 
not less than 4 hours. In testing panels that are heavily 
insulated, very massive, or both, it may be necessary 
to extend the duration of the test beyond the minimum 
period of two consecutive 4 hours periods in order to 
be assured that conditions are steady. 


NOTE — In 5.5 the locations of thermocouples or temperature- 
measuring elements at various points are stipulated, for example, 
in the guard space and on the guard area of the test panel. The 
temperatures indicated by such thermocouples are of great value 
in evaluating the uniformity of temperatures prevailing in the 
guard space and on the test panel surfaces, but it is not feasible 
to stipulate generally the limits within which certain of these 
measured temperatures should agree. It should, therefore, be 
the responsibility of the test engineer to observe and weigh the 
significance of these temperatures to ascertain their effect upon 
the validity of a particular test measurement. 


8 CALCULATION 


Calculate the final test results by means of the equations 
given below using average values of all the data during 
the entire test period. 


qL 


Thermal conductivity, 4 = % (i, -1,) W/m K 


q 
= 2 
Thermal conductance, C= “j Gay W/m’ K 
q 
Inside surface coefficient, h;= “4 Œt) W/m? K 
h 1 


q 
Outside surface coefficient, h,= % (1, —t,) W/m’?K 


c 


q 
Thermal transmittance, U = % (1, —4) W/mK. 


where 
q = time rate of heat flow through area A in W, 


L = length of path of heat flow (thickness of 
specimen) in m, 


A = area normal to heat flow in m’, 

ti = temperature of hot surface in K, 

t, = temperature of cold surface in K, 

t, = temperature of air 75 mm or more from hot 


surface in K, and 


t, = temperature of air 75 mm or more from the 
cold surface in K. 


9 REPORT 
9.1 The report shall include the following information: 


9.1.1 Name, and any other identification or description 
of the test construction, including if necessary a 
blueprint showing important details, dimensions, and 
modifications, if any. 


9.1.2 Pertinent information in regard to pre- 
conditioning of the test panel. 


9.1.3 Size and dimensions of the metering and guard 
areas of the test panel. 


IS 9403 : 2017 


9.1.4 Average values during the test period of the 
temperatures and velocities of the air on both sides of 
the metering area of the panel, and of the temperatures 
of the surfaces on both sides. (If significant, give the 
average values of the temperature of specific areas of 
the surface of the panel). 


9.1.5 Duration of the test period and the average rate 
of net heat input to the metering box. 


9.1.6 Average values of thermal transmittance U, 
thermal conductance C, inside surface coefficient A; and 
outside surface coefficient h,. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 27 (2200). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


