**************** 



*■ *Z**K 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

Jawaharlal Nehru 
Step Out From the Old to the New 



mrjsssss^^ft^: 




,_A» 




**************** 



BLANK PAGE 



<_<ii££ 





UJ> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14480 : 2006 

Indian Standard 

SIDE-DISCHARGE LOADERS FOR UNDERGROUND 

COAL MINES — SAFETY REQUIREMENTS, OPERATION 

AND MAINTENANCE — CODE OF PRACTICE 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 53.100 



©BIS 2006 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

July 2006 Price Group 4 



Mining Techniques and Equipment Sectional Committee, ME 08 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Mining Techniques and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division 
Council. 

This standard was first published in 1998. The experience gained in implementation of the standard has necessitated 
this revision. 

Loaders are extensively used at mine faces in underground mining operations. These machines can be categorized in 
various ways on the basis of motive power (diesel operated, electrically operated or compressed air operated), mounting 
(wheeled loader, crawler mounted or track mounted) loading and unloading [front end loader, side-discharge loaders 
(SDL) or load-haul-dump (LHD) loader], etc. Basically, all these equipment can also be termed as 'Earth-moving 
machinery'. Ariumber of standards have already been formulated at national level, which affects the design, manufacture, 
selection, operation and maintenance of this equipment. Some of these standards are: 



IS No. 
10280 : 1993 

10303 : 1993 
10689: 1993 
10704 : 1999 
11113: 1999 

11114 

(Part 2): 1993 
(Part 3): 1993 
(Part 4): 1993 

11115: 1999 

11249: 1985 

11252: 1993 

11738 
(Part 1) : 1993 
(Part 2): 1993 

12138: 1993 

12206:1993 

12209 : 1993 
13081 : 1991 
13116: 1999 
13253 : 1992 
13768 : 1999 



Title 

Earth-moving machinery — Operation and maintenance — Format and content of 
manuals (first revision) 

Earth-moving machinery — Preservation and storage (first revision) 

Earth-moving machinery — Minimum access dimensions (first revision) 

Earth-moving machinery — Access systems (second revision) 

Earth-moving machinery and tractors and machinery for agriculture and forestry — 
Seat index point (second revision) 

Earth-moving machinery — Definitions of dimensions and symbols: 

Base machines {first revision) • 

Equipment (first revision) 

Loaders — Terminology and commercial specifications {first revision) 

Earth-moving machinery — Human physical dimensions of operators and minimum 
operator space envelope (second revision) 

Data sheet for selection of front end loaders 

Earth-moving machinery — Zones of comfort and reach for controls (first revision) 

Bulk handling equipment — Crawler tractor — Datasheet: 
Information to be supplied by purchaser (first revision) 
Information to be supplied by manufacturers/suppliers (first revision) 
Earth-moving machinery — Basic types — Vocabulary (first revision) 

Earth-moving machinery — Loader and front loading excavator buckets — Volumetric 
ratings (first revision) 

Earth-moving machinery — Guide to procedure for operator training (first revision) 

Earth-moving machinery — Symbols — Guidelines for development and evaluation 

Earth-moving machinery — Engine test code — Net power (first revision) 

Earth-moving machinery — Diagnostic ports 

Earth-moving machinery — Laboratory evaluation of protective structures — 
Specification for deflection limiting volume (first revision) 



(Continued on third cover) 



IS 14480 : 2006 



Indian Standard 



SIDE-DISCHARGE LOADERS FOR UNDERGROUND 

COAL MINES — SAFETY REQUIREMENTS, OPERATION 

AND MAINTENANCE — CODE OF PRACTICE 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard lays down general guidelines for safety, 
operation and maintenance of side-discharge loaders 
(SDL) used in underground mines. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following standards contain provisions, which through 
reference in this text constitute provisions of this standard. 
At the time of publication, the editions indicated were 
valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below. 

IS No. Title 

10280: 1983 Earth-moving machinery — Operation 
and maintenance — Format and content 
of manuals {first revision) 

11114 Earth-moving machinery — Definitions 

(Part 4): 1993 of dimensions and symbols: Part 4 

Loaders — Terminology and 

commercial specifications (first 

revision) 

11249 : 1985 Data sheet for selection of front end 
loaders 

12138: 1 993 Earth-rnoving machinery — Basic types 
— Vocabulary (first revision) 

3 APPLICATION 

Use of side-discharge loaders in underground mines 
require compliance with specific provisions of Mine Act 
1952 and Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 

a) No SDL shall be used unless it is of a type approved 
by the Competent Authority and is maintained in 
its designed condition; and 

b) The gate end box controlling power supply to the 
SDL machine shall be suitably interlocked with the 
auxiliary fan(s) ventilating the blind headings so 
as to ensure that unless the auxiliary fan(s) is 



working the SDL machine should not receive 
power. This requirement may be relaxed for mines 
having first degree gassy seams. 

4 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, following definitions shall 
apply. 

4.1 Loader — A self propelled crawler machine with an 
integral front mounted bucket supporting structure and 
linkage which loads or excavates through forward motion 
of the machine, and lifts, transports and discharges material 
(see also 2.2 of IS 12138). 

4.2 Side-Discharge Loader — A loader as described by 
the manufacturer specification and provided 
with necessary mounting and attachments to secure 
a side-discharge bucket [see also 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4 of 
IS 11114 (Part 4)]. 

4.3 Side-Discharge Bucket — A bucket which loads 
through forward motion of the machine and can discharge 
to the side from an end of the bucket [see also 6.1.3 and 
6.3.1 of IS 11114 (Part 4)]. 

5 GENERAL INFORMATION AND GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS OF SDL 

5.1 No SDL shall be worked with hydraulic fluid which 
is not fire resistant and not specially approved by the 
Competent Authority for the purpose. 

5.2 No SDL shall be constructed with materials, namely, 
aluminium, magnesium, etc, incentive to sparking. 

5.3 The manufacturer/supplier of side-discharge loader 
shall provide the necessary information to the user in 
accordance with IS 11114 (Part 4) and IS 11249. The 
manuals as specified in IS 10280 shall also be supplied 
along with the equipment. 

5.3.1 The manuals specified in 5.3 shall also include the 
information specified in 6 to 10. 



IS 14480 : 2006 



6 FITTINGS OF SDL 

a) All rubber-tyred loaders and those crawler loaders 
travelling at speed exceeding 4 km/h shall be fitted 
with adequate service brakes and suitable parking 
brake. The crawler loaders travelling at speed 
lower than 4 km/h not equipped with brake must 
be provided with grade retarder/brake valve on 
traction motor which acts as instantaneous brake 
as soon as power is cut off to driving mechanism. 
However a suitable parking brake in addition shall 
be preferred; 

b) A suitable warning device located conveniently 
near the operator such as long bell or horn shall be 
provided on each machine. Red light reflecting 
material such as fluorescent paint, etc, should be 
provided on each end of all mobile machines. Each 
machine shall be provided with at least one 
headlight fitting on the front and rear of the 
machine; 

c) Each machine shall be provided with a audio-visual 
alarm to be appeared preferably automatically 
during movement in reverse direction; 

d) An efficient portable fire extinguisher suitable for 
fire due to electricity of minimum 1 kg capacity of 
appropriate type so placed as to be within reach of 
operator shall be provided on each machine; 

e) A seat for SDL driver and each arrangement of the 
controls that the driver can see ahead without 
leaning out of the SDL when running it shall be 
provided; 

f) A protective canopy or structure to protect the 
driver from falling objects shall be provided; 

g) Temperature gauge, temperature switch to cut-off 
the power in the event of temperature of hydraulic 
oil exceeds safe limit and a pressure gauge in 
hydraulic system shall be provided; 

h) All electrically driven rubber tyred loaders shall 
be provided with a cable reeling drum for efficient 
and safe handling of electric cable. The crawler 
mounted SDL should preferably be provided with 
cable reel for coiling the trailing cable; 

j) A foot operated dead man type switch shall be 
provided; 

k) All high pressure hydraulic hoses fitted in the 
SDL's must be approved by DGMS; 

m) Separate pressure gauge shall be provided for each 
section of the pump; 

n) Filter condition indicator shall be provided; and 

p) Tank mounted hydraulic return filter assembly of 
25 micron (replaceable filter) along with filter 
condition monitoring system be preferably 
provided. 



7 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENT FOR OPERATION 

7.1 Checks at the Beginning of Shifts 

The following checks shall always be carried out at the 
beginning of each shift: 

a) Check oil and fluid levels in hydraulic tank, transfer 
gear boxes, crawler drive units; 

b) Check filters condition; 

c) Refill the grease nipples; 

d) Check that all-power sources are locked off; 

e) Check to ensure that machine working area is clear 
of all obstructions; 

f) Check proper tension of the crawler chain} 

g) Check the oil cooler radiator and clean the fins; 
and 

h) Check the physical condition of trailing cables in 
each shift. 

7.2 Functional Tests 

Following functional checks shall be carried out for proper 
operation of the machine: 

a) Check all the control levers for their neutral 
position; 

b) Check the operation of pre-start working device; 

c) Check all the electrical controls for operation; 

d) Check all the hydraulic circuits for travelling and 
loading operations; 

e) Switch on the power for drive motor after the above 
checks; and 

f) Run the machine idle for at least 5 min before it is 
put into operation. 

7.3 Operation Mode 

Following operational checks shall be carried out with 
empty bucket before the machine is put to actual use: 

a) Push the bucket with high thrusting force of the 
telescopic boom into the material to be loaded; 

b) Retract the boom support at the discharge point, 
lift the loaded bucket during travel from loading 
to dumping point to obtain optimum centre of 
gravity; and 

c) Swivel the boom support at the discharge point, 
lift the loaded bucket to required height andfinally 
dump the material on the available conveyance. 

7.4 Precaution 

Precautions necessary for extending the service life of 
crawler components shall also be included in the manuals. 
Examples of such precautions are: 

a) Avoid turning the machine on crawler chains; and 



IS 14480 : 2006 



b) Keep minimum lead at the face to reduce the 
fleeting distance. 

8 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR 
MAINTENANCE 

8.1 Maintenance schedule daily, weekly, monthly, annually 
at 5 000 h and at 1 000 h as given in Annexes A to E shall 
be strictly followed and proper records maintained. 
Specific attention shall be paid to hydraulic systems. 
Assembling and dismantling of the machine shall be 
carried out in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 

8.2 Hydraulic System 

Following checks shall be carried out for hydraulic 
systems: 

a) Bring the hydraulic fluid up to operating 
temperature, 40 to 50°C prior to hydraulic system 
checking; 

b) Check the flow and pressure using flow meter and 
pressure gauge respectively; 

c) Wherever applicable, adjust, if required, flowrate 
at zero pressure within the hydraulic circuit; 

d) Adjust, if required, the operating pressure by 
adjusting the pressure regulating valve. Operating 
pressure should not be set higher than the minimum 
required; 

e) Check the complete hydraulic system after 
necessary adjustments; 

Repeat the same till desired flowrate is obtained at 
the specified pressure; 

g) Change fire resistant hydraulic fluid (FRHF) at 
every 1 500 h; 

h) The operating temperature of the hydraulic fluid 
shall not exceed 65°C in any case. To ensure low 
operating temperatures, check cooling system is 
properly in operation. Clean and set all relief valves 
properly and working areas adequately ventilated; 

j) Check the filter conditions. Clean or replace filter 
element if necessary. Filter element should be in 
green mode. Life of filter shall not exceed 500 h; 

k) FRHF of different makes shall not be mixed; 

m) On line filtration arrangement shall be provided 
For periodic filtration of fire resistant hydraulic 
fluid; and 

n) Contamination of FRHF to be avoided. 

8.3 Mechanical System 

Following checks shall be carried out: 

a) Check all fasteners of crawlers, gear boxes, motor 
base and pump flange. Tighten them with torque 



wrenches as per recommendations of the 
manufacturer; 

b) Check the tightness of crawler chain. Adjust the 
tensioning force of the chain strictly according to 
the manufacturer's recommendations. Low 
tensioned chains result in slipping the sprocket and 
excessively tensioned chains results in high wear 
and load on crawler parts and drives; and 

c) Ensure effectiveness of brake/grade retarders/brake 
valve. 

8.4 Electrical System 

a) Flame proof features of all the electrical equipment 
shall be maintained; 

b) Remote control/earth leakage protections/all 
electrical controls of the machine shall be kept in 
working order; and 

c) Insulation resistance of the trailing cable should 
be above 1 MQ, when tested by 500 V megger. 

9 OTHER SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 

9.1 Electrical 

a) No part of the structure or frame of the metallic 
body shall form a part or be connected to the 
electrical circuit except earthing; 

b) All electrical equipments associated with SDL shall 
be of adequate rating; 

c) All conductors shall be properly insulated, installed 
and maintained in such a manner to prevent leakage 
or sparking; 

d) All conductors, contacts, links and fuses shall be 
properly enclosed to prevent accidental contact; 

e) The terminals, contacts, links and fuses shall be 
maintained in such a way that there is no possibility 
of any part becoming loose and locking metallic 
structures on frame of the SDL; 

f) Plug and^ocket assembly affixed to the motor and 
gate and box shall be so inter-locked so as to 
prevent withdrawal of plug from socket when live; 

g) The trailing cable shall be inspected by competent 
person before the start of the shift to maintain that 
it is in proper order and any damage noticed in the 
cable shall immediately be reported to the Manager 
and Engineer. The damaged cable shall not be used. 
History of trailing cable used with the SDL machine 
namely, make, type, rating, voltage grade, date of 
installation, details of vulcanization/repair shall be 
maintained; 

h) The trailing cable supplying power to SDL shall 
be controlled and protected by gate end box of 
proper rating. Gate end box shall be provided with 



IS 14480 : 2006 



earth leakage relay, overload relay, pilot core 
protection and HRC fuses in the incoming side of 
the proper supply. 

9.2 Driving of SDL 

a) No SDL shall be operated otherwise than by a 
competent person appointed in writing by the 
manager to be the driver of the SDL. For repairs 
or tests, the SDL can be operated by competent 
person, other than the driver authorized in writing 
by the manager; 

b) The headlights of the SDL machine shall be kept 
continuously 'ON' position during the operation 
of the machine; 

c) SDL bucket shall be lowered and kept on ground 
when it is not in operation; 

d) When the SDL is not working suitable provision 
shall be provided to isolate the machine; 

e) When SDL is left standing on gradient, ensure that 
it is stationary and secured; 

f) Before starting the SDL machine, all persons in 
the vicinity shall be duly alerted through pre-start 
audible warning and given sufficient time to move 
away to a safe place. When SDL is in operation, 
no one shall be allowed to be present in front and 
behind the machine frame where he is not likely to 
be visible to the operator; 

g) SDL shall be brought to rest and power shall be 
cut off before undertaking any repair, servicing or 
adjustment. Before carrying out any maintenance 
work on the bucket in raised position, it shall be 
secured with suitable support or device; and 

h) SDL shall not be used for transporting long material 
like ropes, bars, etc, for pushing or pulling bulky 
materials like tubs, pumps, etc. 

9.3 Riding on SDL 

a) Except the operator, no person shall ride any SDL 
when it is in motion; and 

b) The control levers shall not be used as hand hold 
while climbing into the machine. 

9.4 Gradient 

The SDL shall not be allowed to ply on a gradient 
exceeding 1 in 6 unless otherwise permitted in writing by 
the Director General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad. 

9.5 Parking 

Every SDL shall, when not in use, be parked in a suitable 
station which shall: 

a) be located at a safe distance from face to prevent 
damage due to blasting, etc, and have a notice 



board; 

b) be provided with maintenance equipment such as 
tool box, lubricants, cleaning facility, etc; and 

c) be provided with adequate lighting arrangement. 

The operator shall ensure: 

a) lowering the bucket and the telescopic boom to 
the floor. 

b) cut-off the power supply to the machine. 

9.6 Cleaning 

Clean and rinse the side-discharge loader (SDL) especially 
the crawler drive unit at least once a week with compressed 
air/water jet. Do not clean the electrical apparatus with 
water jet. 

9.7 Tools 

Maintain all tools, particularly special tools and use only 
these during dismantling and assembling. 

10 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 

Following requirements shall be complied with to increase 
the safety of personnel, mine and the machine: 

a) Illuminate the working area of SDL; 

b) During operation ensure that cables, hydraulic 
hoses do not cross over the crawler chains; 

c) Use only approved type of hydraulic fluids; 

d) When leaving the working place, operator must 
ensure the following: 

1 ) Boom is completely retracted; 

2) Bucket is lowered to the floor; 

3) All levers are turned to the neutral position, 
locked with the devices available and 
secured; and 

4) Energy supply is switched-off from switch gear. 

e) Give pre-start alarm/warning before starting the 
machine; 

f) Use insulated hand gloves of required voltage 
grade specifically for handling the trailing cables; 

g) Ensure that all the protective switches of the SDL 
machine are operative; 

h) Ensure that flame proof features of the SDL 
electrical/gate end boxes are in working order as 
per Indian Electricity (IE) Rules/DGMS approvals; 

j) Ensure correct rotation of the cooling fan hydraulic 
motor; 

k) Ensure that there is no leakage in the hydraulic 

circuit; 
m) Ensure that the temperature limit of 65°C in the 



IS 14480 : 2006 



hydraulic circuit is not exceeded; 

n) Protect the trailing cable from any external damage; 

p) In any part of a coal seam at any time the presence 
of inflammable gas in the air is found to exceed 
1.25 percent, the supply of energy shall be 
immediately disconnected from all cables and 
apparatus in the area. The supply shall not be 
resumed so long as the percentage of the 
inflammable gas remaining is in excess of 1.2S 
percent; 



q) Adequate care shall be taken so that FRHF is not 
contaminated with dirt/coal dust. Filters shall be 
replaced as per the recommendation of the 
manufacturers; 

r) Never do welding on cyl inder, valves, motor body 
or even do not take earthing through it. If welding 
is unavoidable, use direct earth; and 

s) SDL machine shall be parked, when not in use, 
preferably on a level floor, otherwise suitable 
wedge/stop block at both the ends of the track chain 
shall be placed. 



ANNEX A 
{Clause 8.1) 

DAILY EXAMINATIONS 



a) Inspect the brakes of SDL for effectiveness. 

b) Inspect the crawler chain and its looseness. . 

c) Lubricate bearings and brake mechanism, inspect, 
adjust and lubricate chains where fitted. 

d) Check that the driver seat is kept secured. 

e) Ensure that the head lamps are securely attached to 
the frame of the SDL and that the glasses of lamps 
and instruments are clean and unbroken. 

f) Check that the canopy is well secured in its position 
and the SDL is clean from dust, greasy or oil soaked 
waste. 

g) Check and refill hydraulic oil tank and check the 
radiator. 

h) Check that: 

1) All operating levers and other external fittings 
are intact, accessible and functioning correctly. 

2) All accessible parts of the inter connecting cables 
between the control gear of motor and other 
fittings are properly attached to the apparatus and 
secured to the frame of the SDL and appear to be 
undamaged. 

3) There is no external indication of overheating 
on any accessible part of the electrical equipment. 



j) Before undertaking any examination or repair of 
bucket in raised position, check that it is fully secured 
with suitable support or other devices. 

k) Check: 

1) Fire extinguisher, 

2) Audible warning devices, 

3) Oil level in hydraulic oil tank and also 
compressor, if provided, and top up, if necessary, 

4) Lights and trailing cable, and 

5) Gauges and instruments. 

m) Remove covers when the motor running, inspect all 
oils, air and water pipes Tor any leaks and check 
readings of lubricating oil, hydraulic oil and pressure. 

n) Check all enclosures of all flame proof equipments 
and all fixing bolts are in place and spanner tight. All 
flame proof flange joints show gaps (measured by 
feelers) not exceeding the permitted maximum value 
and the bearings of spindles and push nuts show no 
play. 

p) Check that the operation of controller is free and the 
position on each notch is definite. The interlock 
between the controller main and dead man's handle 
features are in order. 



IS 14480 : 2006 



ANNEX B 
(Clause S A) 

WEEKLY EXAMINATIONS 



a) Examine the power transmission equipment. 

b) Check brake levers, and examine oil filter. 

c) Check radiator and inspect for any leakage, choking 
and damage. 

d) Inspect the linkages between the drive and hydraulic 
pump. 

e) Check that the interconnecting cables are undamaged 
and are properly secured to the chassis, clear of 
moving parts and the ends of the cables are securely 
attached to the apparatus. 

f) Check that main fuses are of correct rating and are 
secured in the fuse holders. 

g) The SDL shall be examined, tested and if necessary 
repaired or adjusted and necessary tests shall be 
carried out after each repair and adjustments. 

h) Check the brake by conducting deceleration test and 
stand still test. 



j) Check and ensure that the SDL is not operated at a 
pressure higher than what is recommended by the 
manufacturer. 

k) Check the crawler chain for worn out pads, pines, 
bushes, etc. Also check for proper tension of crawler 
chain. 

m) Check cable reel and its limit switch for its safe and 
satisfactory operation. 

n) Check thoroughly the entire length of trailing, cable 
and the end fittings for any defect. If any defect or 
damage is found, the same shall not be used. 

p) Check and if necessary replace all weak, broken, or 
missing springs which centre the hydraulic control 
valve levers in the neutral position. SDL shall not be 
used, if control valve levers do not return to neutral 
position when left free. 



ANNEX C 
(Clause 8.1) 

MONTHLY EXAMINATIONS 

a) Check the oil level in the gearbox or gear case and c) Check contamination of lubricating oil and 
top-up as necessary. hydraulic oil. 

b) Check the power transmission and its accessories. 



ANNEX D 
(ClauseS A) 

EXAMINATION AT 5 000 HOURS 



a) Examine all belt drives, chains and pulleys and replace 
any defective parts. 

b) Examine crawler chain and bearings for wear. 

c) Examine linkages and pins in the braking system for 
wear and security of pins and fasteners, wherever 
applicable. Adjust and replace as required. 



d) Replace the charge in the fire extinguisher. 

e) Examine and repair all valves, springs and clearances. 

f) Check the tension and condition of the track chains, 
etc. 

g) Drain and refill the hydraulic oil tank. 

h) Examine and test the safety devices and safety valve. 



IS 14480 : 2006 



ANNEX E 
(Clause 8.1) 

EXAMINATION AT 10 000 HOURS 



a) After every 1 000 h the competent person appointed 
by the manager shall test and renew defective parts 
and test pressure gauges. 

b) Examine the main frame for cracks. 

c) Examine and adjust crawler chain and bearings and 
renew worn or defective parts. 

d) Examine drive sprockets and springs and check for 
soundness and alignment. 

e) Dismantle brakes, examine, adjust and renew worn 
or defective parts. 

f) Test the speed km/h indicator and cables. 

g) Dismantle the hydraulic pump, examine pistons and 



rings. If rings are worn out, renew both pistons and 
rings (New rings should not be fitted in worn piston 
groove). 

h) Examine bearings, and replace if worn out. 

j) Flush all hydraulic hoses and blow with compressed 
air, test the hoses by hydraulic pressure for soundness. 

k) Thoroughly clean the hydraulic oil tank. 

m) Examine hydraulic oil filter and replace worn out or 
defective parts. 

n) Examine and repair all parts of transmission system 
including bearings, if necessary clutch and covers, 
gear box couplings torque converters, if provided and 
replace worn or defective parts. 



ANNEX F 
(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Mining Techniques and Equipment Sectional Committee, ME 08 



Organization 
Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 

Bharat Coking Coal Ltd, Dhanbad 
Bharat Earth Movers Ltd, Bangalore 

Central Coalfileds Ltd, Ranchi 

Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Ltd, Ranchi 

Central Mining Research Institute, Dhanbad 

Eimco Elecon (India) Ltd, Vallabh Vidyanagar 

Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation, Ahmedabad 
Hindalco Industries Ltd, Distt Sonbhadra 

Hindustan Copper Ltd, Kolkata 



Representative^) 

Shrj J. R Kashyup (Chairman) 
Shrj P. K. Ganguly (Alternate) 

Shrj Ramji Sahay 

Shri V. Palaniswamy 

Shrj T. R. Loganathan (Alternate) 

Chief General Manager (Operations) 

Chief General Manager (Equipment) (Alternate) 

Shrj S. K. Chatterji 

Shri U. Roy (Alternate) 

Shri A. K. Ghose 

Shri S. K. Ritolia (Alternate) 

Shri A. M. Deshpande 

Shri Ravindra Luthra (Alternate) 

Shrj S. N. Mathur 

Shrj K. K. Patodia 

Shri Ashok Bamzai (Alternate) 

Shrj Kamlesh Singh 

Shri O. P. Bhardwaj (Alternate) 



Hindustan Zinc Ltd, Udaipur 



Shrj K. C. Jain 



IS 14480 : 2006 

Organization 
Kapur Mining Equipment Pvt Ltd, Asansol 

Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd, Dist Sambalpur 

Manganese Ore (India) Ltd, Nagpur 

Mecon Ltd, Ranchi 

Nanda Millar Co, Kolkata 

National Aluminium Co Ltd, Bhubaneswar 

National Mineral Development Corporation, Hyderabad 

South Eastern Coalfields Ltd, Bilaspur 



Representative^) 

Shri Dipak. Kapur 

Shri Tapan Dutta (Alternate) 

Shri R. B. Upadhyay 

Shri B. P. Pattnaik (Alternate) 

Shri P. M. Reddy 

Shri G Wangneo (Alternate) 

Shri H. C. Mishra 

Shri H. K. Bhanjdev (Alternate) 

Shri J. P. Goenka 

Shri Pankan Goenka (Alternate) 

Shri R. C. Pati 

Shri C. M. D. Murthy (Alternate) 

Shri A. K. Gupta 

ShriC. V. Suresh (Alternate) 

Shri Kapil K. Rai 



The Eastern Coalfields Ltd, Sanctoria 

The Hutti Gold Mines Company Ltd, Distt Raichur 
The Singareni Colleries Co Ltd, Distt Khammam 

The Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Distt Dhanbad 

TRF Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Western Coalfields Ltd, Nagpur 

BIS Directorate General 



Shri S. C. Basu 

Shri D. K. Roy (Alternate) 

Dr M. L. Patil 

Shri K. Raghavendra Rao 

Shri E. Raja Rao (Alternate) 

Shri R. S. Singh 

Shri V. K. Srtvastava (Alternate) 

Shri S. S. Mukhopadhay 

Shri N. C. Goswami (Alternate) 

Shri A. K. Haldar 

Shri P. S. Raju (Alternate) 

Shri C. K. Veda, Scientist 'F' and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-qfficio)] 



Member Secretary 

Shri T. V. Singh 

Scientist 'E' (MED), BIS 



{Continued from second cover) 

The Indian Standards mentioned above relate to earth-moving machinery which ^re used as off-highway equipment 
and are generally diesel operated. Some of these standards can, however, be made applicable to similar equipment 
used in underground mines with modifications specially relating to prime mover. Manufacturers and users of side- 
discharge loaders (SDL) are, therefore, requested to examine these standards and apply their provisions during design, 
manufacture, selection, operation and maintenance of SDL's. 

This Indian Standard on side-discharge loaders for underground application has made references to some of the standards 
listed above. These standards specifically do not cover the crawler mounted, electrically operated machines specified 
in this standard. However, provision of these standards is equally applicable to SDL's with modifications. In addition, 
provisions of IS 11114 (Part 2) : 1993, IS 11114 (Part 3) : 1993, IS 12206 : 1993 and IS 11311 : 1985 'Technical 
requirements for loaders for use in underground mines' may also be used during implementation of this Indian Standard. 

Mines Act, 1952 and Rules and Regulations made thereunder have stipulated certain restrictions on the use of loaders 
in underground mines. Accordingly, the approval of the Competent Authority has to be obtained by the user of the 
equipment before installation of the equipment {see 5.1 ). 

The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex F. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed 
or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for 
rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be 
the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing 
the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. ME 08 (0787). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 

Regional Offices: 



website : www.bis.org.in 



Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 



Western 



Branches 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 



Telephones 

r 2323 7617 
12323 3841 

r2337 8499,2337 8561 
12337 8626,2337 9120 

r 260 3843 
1260 9285 

/2254 1216, 2254 1442 
12254 2519,2254 2315 

r2832 9295, 2832 7858 
12832 7891,2832 7892 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi 



