( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 9679 - 1980

Indian

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR WORK ENVIRONMENT MONITORING (AIRBORNE CONTAMINANTS )
Chemical Hazards
Chairman
SHRI

Sectional Committee,
Representing

CDC 18

S. C. KALE

Directorate General, Factory Advice Services & Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour ), Bombay

Members
SHRI V. P. GUPTA ( Alternate to Shri S. C. Kale ) National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. D. AMRE SHRI M. C. PATWARDHAN ( Alternate ) Directorate General Ordnance Factories (Ministry SHRI C. N. CHANDRASEKHARAN of Defence), Calcutta Controller of Explosives, Nagpur SHRI CHARANIIT LAL SHRI B. R. DAVE ( Alternate ) Indian Chemical Manufacturers' Association, DR D. CHOUDHURI Calcutta SHRI D. K. SIRKAR ( Alternute ) Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, Vadodara SHRI A. M. DAND SHRI D. L. VYAS ( Alternate ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR( CHEM ), RES- Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) EARCH,DESIGNS AND STANDARDS Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi DR S. S. GOTHOSKAR SHRI R. BALASUBRAMANYAN ( Alternate ) National Safety Council, Bombay SHRI K. C. GUFTA SHRI N. RAGHAVAN ( Alternate ) Century Rayon, Kalyan SHRI C. HINGARH SHRI J. J. ADHIA ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, DR V. R. B. MATHUR New Delhi Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Rasayani SHRI 0. P. NANGIA SHRI A. G. SHESHAN( Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay DR K. NARAYANAN RAO National Institute of Occupational Health, DR D. J. PARIKH Ahmadabad
ORGANIZATION, LUCKNOW

@ Copyright 1981
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9679 - 1980
( Continued from page 1 )

Members
DR S. B. RAY SHRI T. N. REWAL SHRIP. DLJTTA ( Almmre SHRI N. K. SAMANTA SHRI A. SINHA ( AIternate DR P. N. VISWANATHAN Ministry Ministry

Representing
of Defence of Defence ( DGI ) ( DGI )

) )

Indian Explosives Induts$loT$xicology General,

Ltd, Calcutta Research IS1 ( Ex-oficio Ceotre

( CSIR 1,

DR B. N. GUPTA ( Alternate ) Director DR HARKBHAGWAN, Director ( Chem ) ( Secretary )

Member 1

Industrial
Convener
SHRI S. C. KALE

Chemical Hazards

Subcommittee,

CDC 18 : 4

Directorate General, Factory Advice Service & Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour ), Bombay

Members
DR V. P. GUFTA ( Alternate to Shri S. C. Kale`) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay SHRI G. R. BALASUBRAMANIAN Controller of Explosives, Nagpur SHRI CHARANIIT LAL SHRI B. R. DAVE ( Alternate ) All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health, DR S. R. CHAUDHURY Calcutta Union Carbide of India Ltd, Calcutta DR D. CHOUDHURI DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( CHEM ). RES- Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) EARCH, DESIGNS AND STANDARDS URGANIZ~TION, LUCKNOW Albright Morarji and Pandit Ltd, Ambernath SHRI V. N. GODBOLE SHRI K. R. PRABHU (Alternate ) National Safety Council, Bombay SHRI K. C. GU~TA SHRI N. RAGHAVAN ( Alternate ) Manufacturers' Association, lndiz l~CF;mical SHRI P. V. KANGO a DR R. V. SUBRAMANIAM ( Alternate ) Industrial Toxicology Research Centre ( CSIR ), DR C. R. KRISHNAMPUR~ Lucknow -DR P. N. VISWANATHAN( Alternate ) Century Rayon, Kalyan DR S. L. MEHTA SHRI R. K. SHUKLA ( Alternate ) Ciba-Giegy of India Ltd, Bombay DR 0. P. MI~AL The Fertilizer and Chemicals Travancore Ltd, DR C. S. B. NAIR Udyogamandal Health, National Institute of Occupational DR D. J. PARIKH Ahmadabad

( Continued on page 10 )

2

IS : 9679 - 1980

indian

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR WORK ENVIRONMENT MONITORING (AIRBORNE CONTAMINANTS )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards

Institution on 22 December 1980, after the draft finalized by the Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council.

0.2 Persons working in industrial enterprises are liable to be exposed to environmental stress. Factors leading to this stress are broadly classified as chemical, physical and biological. To protect health of such persons from ailments and diseases arising out of their work and occupation, it is essential to control the various environmental factors properly. Therefore, monitoring of data on work environment is necessary as a first step. 0.3 Monitoring of work environment data also help to: ( a ) identify the processes or operations giving rise to environmental stresses, ( b) identify control needs and technical control measures, and ( c ) evaluate performance and adequacy of existing technical control measures. Subsequently, it is possible to ensure that under normal operating conditions the work environment is safe with reference to health protection. It is, therefore, always a step in the right direction to take immediate corrective measures to bring down the levels of air pollutants if they are found to be higher than permissible levels.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This code covers guidelines which should be followed while monitoring

data on chemical factors responsible for airborne contaminants in the work environment. This code also provides guidelines on frequency, mode and methods for collection of samples of airborne chemical contaminants and for interpretation of results of analyses. 1.2 This code does not apply to monitoring of the physical or biological factors in work environment for the chemical factors encountered in the general environment. This code also does not deal with analytical methods or procedures for any contaminant.
3

IS : 9679 - 1980 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this code, the definitions given in IS: 4155-1966* and IS : 4167-19557 shall apply.

2.1.1 In addition, for the purpose of this code the physical state of the air contaminants may also be defined in terms of their particle size as given below:
Air Contaminant Size-Range, in microns

Dust Fumes Mists Smokes Gases and vapours

0'5 to 10.0

0.2 to 0'1 to o-3 to o*ooo 1 to

1-o 1-o 0'5 0.007

NOTE l-111 various reference sources, particle size range for different air contaminants would be found to vary considerably. This is due to variation of the purpose for which the data are presented, such as, relative settlement velocities of pollutants, particle dynamics for calculation of ventilation design systems, limitations of air sampling equipment, and wide range of fumes, dusts or mists, containing different substances.

NOTE 2 -Contaminants which are flammable or explosive would have to be monitored in the work environment for taking steps for prevention of fires and explosions in the industries. This code, however, does not cover this aspect.
NOTE 3 -To ensure protection of health from exposure to a toxic chemical, if environmental conditions are so maintained that its concentration does not exceed its Threshold Limit Value ( TLV ), the fire and explosion hazard, if any, from this chemical, would be considerably reduced. The Threshold Limit Value ( TLV ) concentration, serving as a guideline for health protection purposes, is always an extremely small concentration when compared with the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) concentration, expressed as percent ( v/v ), for fire and explosion hazard evaluation.

NOTE d-Exact Threshold Limit Value for individual contaminants may be obtained from relevant literature, like the publications of American Council of Governmental Industrial Hygienists ( ACGIH ).

3. GUIDELINES

FOR WORK

ENVIRONMENT

MONITORING

monitoring in a plant shall be undertaken 3.1 General -Environmental under the normal process conditions. This standard shall not be deemed to have been followed if monitoring is undertaken under conditions different from normal, such as, maintenance, shut down, accidents, production upsets, etc.
*Glossary chemicals. tGlossary of terms relating to chemical and radiation hazards and hazardous

of terms relating to air pollution.

4

IS: 9679-1980

3.1.1 When the objective of monitoring is to assess performance of a technical control measure such as an enclosure or a ventilation system with the aim of improving them for health protection, it may be necessary to collect the -air samples by deliberately making the control measures non-effective for a short duration of time while the process and operations are continuing in the normal way. All precautions shall be taken to protect persons present in the work area at that time against possible exposure to health hazard. monitoring 3.2 Frequency of Monitoring - Ideally, work environment should be undertaken every day and throughout the day. This may, however, not be essential if guidelines given in this standard are followed ( see also 6.3 ). 3.3 Identification of Airborne Contaminants - Each stage of the process or operation where a person is likely to be exposed to toxic airborne substances shall be carefully studied to identify toxic/hazardous air contaminants likely to be released into the work environment. 3.4 Frequency of Operation and their Duration - When a process or operation is carried out repeatedly, total duration of such a process or operation shall be estimated. If this can be sub-divided into several well defined stages, the time required for each such stage shall also be estimated. 3.4.1 If a process or operation is carried out in several places in the same section in a staggered manner, this fact shall be noted and also taken into consideration for interpretation of results as such conditions may influence the levels of contaminants. 3.4.2 Where identical processes or operations are carried out in two or more locations isolated from each other, it is necessary to monitor work environment at each location separately. 3.5 Multiple Contaminants -When two or more air contaminants are present simultaneously all such contaminants shall be monitored individually and simultaneously. 3.5.1 When a contaminant is likely to interfere with sampling or analysis of the other contaminant, the trapping media may have to be enlarged as a series of two or more traps for each contaminant in a chain so as to ensure complete absorption of either contaminant separately. 3.6 Trapping Medium -The trapping medium effectively all the contaminants in the air drawn. shall be able to retain

3.6.1 Where a volatile solvent or solvent mixture is used for absorption, bubble contaminated air would usually accelerate evaporation and rephishment of ht solvent from time to time shall be ensured.
5

IS : 9679 - 1980 3.6.2 Where particulate contaminant is retained by simple filteration, the possibility of building of resistance to air flow due to accumulation of dust or particulate and hence reduction in air flow, shall be checked. 3.6.3 Where filter paper type substances are used and gravimetric analysis by mass is envisaged, precautions shall be taken to equilibrate them prior to and after collection of contaminant before any weighing is done. 4. CHOICE OF ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES

4.1 For any air contaminant, different analytical procedures are available. Information on the extent of accuracy, sensitivity, minimum quantity detected, analytical equipment necessary shall be obtained for all such procedures. The choice of the analytical procedure is governed by many of the above factors as well as resources such as equipment and manpower available. 4.2 Indian applicable.
NOTE --It

Standards

given in Appendix

A may be followed, wherever
on known samples

familiarization

is advisable to try analytical procedures before air samples are aualyzed.

for

5. CALIBRATION

AND CHECKING

OF METERING

DEVICES

5.1 All pressure or vacuum indicating instruments or gauges, rotameters, dry or wet gas meter, suction sources, etc, shall be checked for accuracy by following recommended procedures at regular intervals against suitable primary standards and correction factors applied where necessary. 6. SAMPLING 6.1 Sampling Equipment - Any air sampling equipment has three essential components, namely : ( a ) a suction device - for drawing/sampling contaminated air through the sampling equipment; ( b ) a metering device to accurately measure or record the quantity of air drawn; and ( c ) a trapping device to retain the contaminant. Equipment with two or even three of the above components in combination have been designed. While precautions for individual equipment would vary, general precautions are given below. 6.1.1 Electrically Operated Equipment - For any sampling equipment working with electrical energy, proper grounding or earthing shall be ensured to prevent hazard of electrical shock. Electrically operated monitoring equipment of any type shall not be used in work environment where flammable and/or explosive air contaminants are present, unless such equipment is certified flame-proof or intrinsically safe by an appropriate competent agency as per safety requirements of the particular situation. Electrical energy requirements of each equipment shall be duly checked. 6

IS : 9679 - 1980 6.1.2 Mechanically Operated Equipment - A belt driven or directly coupled component shall be properly guarded to prevent accidents.

6.1.3 Compressed Air-operated Equipment - When compressed air is used as a source of suction, all the recommended safety procedures shall be followed to prevent accidents from dealing with compressed air. 6.2 Choice of Sampling Equipment - Depending upon the physical state of the contaminant, such as fumes, dust, gas, mist, smoke and vapour, appropriate sampling equipment/apparatus shall be chosen. This shall also depend on physical and chemical properties of a contaminant. 6.3 Frequency of Sampling - Where an operation or process is repeated several times in a shift, at least 5 to 6 different series of samples should be collected at different times of the day and on three or more days. 6.3.1 Where each operation lasts for a sufficient time, separate samples shall be collected. When the operations a& of short duration, composite samples should be collected.
NOTEThis would help in obtaining of contaminants over a specified period.

a reasonable

idea of variations

in the levels

rate of sampling shall be so chosen that all the contaminants present in the air drawn are trapped. It shall not be too slow to extend sample collection time unduly. It shall also not be too rapid leading to possible loss of any contaminant. 6.4.1 Wherever retention is effected by chemical reaction ( such as acids with alkali and vice-versa), the rate of sampling shall allow for complete chemical reaction. 6.5 Duration of Sample Collection collection shall be accurately recorded. Time duration of each sample

6.4 Rate of Sampling-The

6.6 Size of Samples - Levels of contaminants in work environment are subject to variation over a wide range not only because of the nature of processes and operations but also because of the fact that it is a dynamic system. It would, therefore, be incorrect to expect identical results even if concurrent samples are collected is an environment. 6.6.1 The size of the sample shall be decided in such a way that the amount of the contaminant collected falls within the sensitivity range of the analytical method or is the minimum necessary for accurate detection and estimation. At the same time it should be possible to collect such a sample within reasonable time. 6.7 Location of Sampling Points --Where the operations are manual in nature, air samples shall be collected from the breathing zone of a person without interfering with his work. 7

IS : 9679 - 1980 6.7.1 Air samples from general atmosphere also be collected for comparison.

in work environment

may

6.7.2 When a process is continuous or self-sustaining and requires intermittent attention, it may usually be sufficient to collect air samples only from general environment. 6.7.3 While fluctations of contaminant would be considered in evaluation of time protection view point, it would be a good to reduce the levels of contaminant to protection. levels above and below TLV weighted exposure, from health practice toi fine ways and means below TLV to ensure health

6.8 Blank Samples - For every batch of samples two or more blank samples shall be identically treated and their results taken into account while interpreting data. 7. EXPRESSION
OF RESULTS

7.1 Results of analysis shall be expressed in units as given in IS : 9620-1980*.

8. INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS 8.1 For interpretation of results it may be advisable to consider the Threshold Limit Values ( TLV) as guidelines. However, the concept of Threshold Limit Values and their limitations shall be understood before using them for interpretation ( see also Note 3 under 2.1.1).

APPENDIX ( Clause 4.2 )
IS : 5182

A

Methods for measurement of air pollution: (Part I)-1969 Dustfall Sulphur dioxide Radioactivity (particulate) in air Suspended matter Sampling of gaseous pollutants Nitrogen oxides Hydrogen sulphide Sulphation rate Oxidants Carbon monoxide 8

(Part IQ-1969 (Part III)-1970 (Part IV)-1973 (Part V)-1975 (Part VI)-1975 (Part (Part (Part (Part VII)-1973 VIII)-1976 IX)-1974 X)-l976

*Guide for units used in air quality measurements.

IS : 9679 -

1980

(Part XII)-1974 (Part XIV)-1979 (Part XV)-1974 (Part XVI)-1980

Polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons culate matter Guidelines for atmospheres Mass concentration atmosphere planning the

in air partisampling of

of particulate

matter in the

Recommended practice for collection by filtration and determination of mass, number and optical sizing of atmospheric particulates C, to C, Hydrocarbons atography in air by gas chrom-

(Part XVII)-1979

(Part XVIII)-1974 Continuous analysis and automatic recording of the oxidant content of the atmosphere

IS : 9679 -

1980

( Continuedfrom page 2 ) Members
SHRI J. D. PARIKH SHRI M. V. DESAI ( Alternate SHRI A. N. RAO

Representing
The Atul Products Ltd, Atul of Technical Development,

)

Corporation, Bombay SHRI V. V. M. RAO SHRI V. A. RAJU ( Alternate ) Excel Industries Ltd, Bombay SHRI DEEPAK R. SHAH SHRI S: S. KAIMAL ( Alternate ) National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. K. SUBRAMANIAN SHRI M. C. PATWARDHAN ( Alternate ) Navin Fluorine Industries, Bombay SHRI S. A. TRIVEDI SHRI J. N. PAREKH ( Alternate ) Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Rasayani SHRI H. K. VENKATARAMIAH SHRI A. G. SHESHAN( Alternate )

Directorate General New Delhi Hindustan Petroleum

10

