IS 13665

: 1993

( Reaffirmed 1998 )

a

Tzfasi

SEDIMENTATIONIN RESERVOIRSMETHODOFMEASURliMENT
UDC 627.8l-034*7

0 BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN'STANDARDS
9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHl 1lorrO2 ZAFAR MARG .

May 1993

Price Group 2

Reservoirs

Sectional

Committee,

RVD 4

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Reservoirs Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. Silting of reservoirs play a vital role in the planning and design of storage reservoirs. The problem of sedimentation starts with the impounding of water in the reservoirs. Various factors influence the pattern The most predominant among them are rainfall characteristics like intensity, of sediment deposition. duration and annual volume and catchment characteristics like soil, geology of the area, vegetative cover, land use pattern and the reservoir operation.
To evaluate

the effect of each of these and to serve as a guide for future planning, systematic capacity surveys of reservoirs should be undertaken at regular intervals. It also helps in planning corrective measures by way of catchment treatment, if surveys reveal abnormal deviations. Depletion of storage in a reservoir on account of deposition of stream borne sediment poses many problems. Besides storage loss which is of much economic significance, there are planning and operational problems which require correct estimation of sediment deposit, its quantity and distribution in the The principal objectives of measurement of sedimentation in a reservoir entire body of the reservoir. are: (i) updating capacity chart for effective operation, (ii) collection of data for realistic project (iii) location of suitable areas for sediment extraction, planning with respect to storage allocation, outfall locations, economic implications and service expectancy, and identification of priority areas within. the catchment from soil conservation point of view. On account of the dynamic nature of water use planning, a periodic review of the storage status is essential from the point of view of optimum utilization, guaranteed performance and any alternatives in the system characteristics.

IS 13665 : 1993

Indian Standard

SEDIMENTATIONINRESERVOIRSMETHODOF~~EASUR~~MENT
1 SCOPE

range line method. 2.2.2 In contour method, a contour map of the reservoir with suitable scale and contour interval is prepared, from which the capacity of the reservoir at the time of survey is computed. The difference in capacity between two surveys indicates the loss of capacity due to sediment deposition during the intervening period. In the case of reservoir% with large surface area, loss in storage capacity above maxittmm drawdown level may also be estimated by aerial surveys and remote sensing techniques. In range method, survey is conducted along selected ranges across the rese,moirs and this forms the basis for the computation of,ctQbic contents between ranges. 2.2.3 While contour method of survey is generally applicable for all types of reservoir shapes, use of range method should be limited to relatively straight reaches. A suitable combination may also be justified in sotne cases. 2.3 Survey Equipmeut for Capacity Survey 2.3.1 The basis items of survey are : (i) Horizontal or distance measurement, (ii) Vertical or depth measurement. Some of the principal equipment and instruments required for the hydrographic and topographic coverage in relation to the above measurements include the following. 2.3.1.1 Distance meusuring equipment Survey equipment like chain, tape, plane table, transit sextant, range finder, electronic distance meter, etc and special hydrographic instruments like echo sounder, distance wheel, and other electronic equipment are generally used. 2.3.1.2 Depth measuring equipment Conventional equipments like dumpy level, sounding poles, etc and special hydrographic equipment like echo-sounder, etc. 2.3.1.3 Movement facilities such as truck with trailer, motor launch, small boats. 2.3.1.4 Signalling and shore contact equipment such as Walkie-Talkie, radio telephone, day light signalling, lamp, etc. 2.3.1.5 Accessories such as ranging rods, range monuments and bench mark pillars etc, floating buoys, life buoys, tents etc. 2.3.1.6 A sediment depth measuring equipment called "Spud" is sometimes used in reconnaissance type work for a quick estimation of sediment depth. This device is also used in roughly tracing out the original profiles of the reservoir bottom in case it is not already available.

This standard lays down guidelines for methods of measurement of sedimentation in reservoir projects in order to assess the volume of deposit and the distribution which will be considered for making suitable allowance in the design of future projects at the time of their planning. 2 METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT SEDIMENTATION OF of

There are broadly two methods for measurement sedimentation in reservoirs : a) Stream flow analysis, and b) Capacity survey. 2.1 Stream Flow Analysis

2.1.1 Stream flow analysis is a continuous observation process consisting of measurement of inflows and out110~s with sediment sampling. Apart from the measurements, accuracy of analysis depends a great deal on the proper estimation of unit mass of the deposited material from the point of view of volutnetric conversion.

2.1.2 In this method, the sediment inflow into the reservoir including estimated bed load and the outflow therefrom are measured at all significant points ofentry and exit. The difference gives the quantity of deposit during the period of analysis. The points of measurement should be sufliciently close to the reservoir periphery and particular care must be taken to complete outflow sampling before it tneets the erodible channel downstream. The analysis consists of two main parts: (1) measurement of water inflows and outflows, and (2) simultaneous measurement of sediment concentration. This method gives quantity of deposit in gravimetric terms and conversion into volumetric units calls for the estimation of the average unit mass of the deposited sediment material. Adirect method of doing this is by collecting systematic samples of the deposit in an undisturbed state from all over the reservoir bed and finding out a correlation between the average dry unit mass and the fractional cotnposition of different grains such as clay, silt and sand. 2.2 Capacity Su'wey 2.2.1 Capacity survey is a direct measurement carried out periodically to assess the volume of deposit along with its location in the reservoirs. This method, however, indicates the total sediment yield of the entire catchment and not its subcatchmentwise origin. In case sub-catchmentwise sediment yield is required, sediment sampling of the different stream is necessary. The main survey methods are the contour method and the

1

IS 13665 : 1993 2.4 Contour Survey Method 2.4.1 The basic objective of this method is to prepare a contour map of the reservoir bed. There are quite a few field techniques available, the application ofwhich depends mostly on the physical features of the reservoir, the operation schedule, working conditions and availability of instruments and other facilities. The most general method of contour survey are: a) b) c) d) e) grid contour, radial contouring, circular contouring, water surface mapping, and air survey. the reference monument should be connected with a triangulation network, supplemented by plane table or traverse survey, if necessary. 2.5.1 Layout of Ranges 2.5.1.1 Prior to impoundment of a reservoir it is necessary to have an accurate map on a relatively large scale for reservoir sites and upstream areas where sediment deposition may occur. 2.5.1.2 Before reservoir is filled proper location of silt ranges is made in sufficient number so that subsequent soundings on these ranges will furnish the necessary data for computation of silt volume. The ranges should first be located on a paper, in order to get a comprehensive idea as to how the ranges should lie with reference to each other and the reservoir as a whole. The point may need modification at site depending on topography etc. While fixing the ranges, the following points need careful consideration: The silt ranges should be carefully located and the ranges should be monumented in the field so that the range monuments may be traceable after a period.of about 3 to 5 years. b) The location of the tributaries with its sediment characteristics is to be ascertained and this area may need close ranging. C>Close spacing of ranges are preferable in the upper and shallower reaches than in the lower and deeper reaches. 4 If the reservoir is subject to heavy drawdown, the reaches between the drawdwwn level to the maximum water level should be more closely spaced, as the deposits and movement of silt throughout this range is greater than other parts of the reservoir. Ground survey above the water level along these ranges is essential. r) It is preferable if the ranges could be spaced parallel, but this need not be very rigid. g> In all cases, however, reservoir width is very important. h) The ranges may be spaced at 1 km intervals. .i) If the reservoir has embankment consequent on the tributaries joining the main river, this portion should be separately ranged and the ranges may have different orientation from the main ranges. Range monuments may be fixed above the maximum water level. m) Range monuments should not be located on the point of a short hill or abrupt change in reservoir section. At such places the elevation of the ground may show a variation within a relatively short distance away from the central line of the range so that the sounding which may-vary a few metre off the central line may lead to erroneous resultt with regard to deposition. n) If,it is found not practicable to layout the ranges parallel to one another, a divergence of 10'

2.4.2 In this method,, computation of capacity of reservoir is based on spot levels taken at grid points over the entire reservoii bed. Generally, a contour map of the reservoir with suitable scale and contour interval is prepareil, from which the capacity of the reservoir at the time of, survey is computed. The difference in capacity between two surveys indicates the loss of capacity due to sediment deposition during the intervening period. 2.4.3 Volumetric measurements in reservoirs are made by taking soundings and developing the configuration of the reservoir sides and bed below the water surface. Deposits above water level are measured by bank sections obtained by topographical survey method. i taken below p`. sre pie or by lead
r5

a>

?.4.4 In case of small reservoirs sufficient soundings the water level either by a sounding line, so as to permit the drawings of . %ours to compute and compare capacity for any given elevation. In these reservoirs ranges may be spaced sufficiently close so, that bottom contours may be drawn well. In some smaller reservoirs, the ranges may be dispensed with and indep.endent sounding surveys made. Whenever desired bottom contours are developed for comparison of capabilities. For smaller reservoirs, recomiaissance method of surveying is also carried otit. The reconnaissance survey has been designed to determine the approximate rate of loss of storage capacities, and consists in measuring the thickness of the deposited sediment from 15 to 20 or more well distributed locations in a reservoir by tneans of simple measuring device known as spud. 2.4.5 In case of large reservoirs, sounding by lead line or sounding pole or reconnaissance method cannot be applied as it would involve time and expenses. In such cases, volumes are found by sounding by means of supersonic. In such cases, volumes are found by sounding by means of supersonic sounding equipment along with silt ranges established usually at the time when the project is built. For large reservoirs this is the most feasible and practical method. 2.5 Rangeline Survey Method Rangeline method of capacity survey consists of carryingoutlevellingorsoundingalongafixedsetofranges. The object is to compute the areas at different cross sections and carry out volumetric computation on that basis. The range layout should be carefully planned and 2

e>

1

IS 13665 : 1993 between the ranges may be permitted for the convenience of location, but not more than 30' may be permitted. P) Range should cover the mouth of the tributaries joining the main river. q) Sometimes the presence of bends or curves in the river makes it impracticable to rigidly adhere to the divergence limit set. In such cases, the stretch should be divided into short reaches where the limit of divergence are maintained in each reach. In the segments between the reaches, the reaches may have any divergence not greater than 90'. In these transition segments, the end ranges may be set very close to one another, or starting from a common point with a view to concentrate the irregularity into the smallest area so that it will have the least effect: Where a tributary enters, or an arm of the lake is cut off, a new series of ranges may be started without any regard to the direction of the two main ranges of the segment. The first range should be across the mouth of the tributary and perpendicular to its general direction, or near to this as practical consideration would permit. 2.5.2 Range Monuments 2.5.2.1 The ends of the proposed ranges should be monumented in the field with a permanent type of monument. They may be of cemept, concrete masonry, depending upon the availability of the material in the locality. These monuments should be adequately referenced so that they can be found several years later without much difficulty. Experience has shown that finding range monuments in the field, after vegetation has grown would be costly as well as time consuming. For properly referencing the range monuments, a net work of triangles should be established with reference to an accurate base line preferably taking the base line on the dam itselC, where accurate linear measurement may be possible. Establishment of bench mark along the periphery of the reservoir at suitable intervals will also be necessary for establishing vertical controls whenever and wherever necessary. All triangulation stations, bench mark pillars, and range monuments should be properly indicated so that they may be identified easily. Some of the permanent objects in the shore should also be properly located so that they may be useful for horizontal control during theictual sounding work. The triangulation survey works may conform to the third degree ofaccuracy-Survey'ofIndia practice. All the range monuments may be properly numbered starting from the dam. Correct location of silt ranges on a contour map is necessary for obtaining the original capacity betweeIi.the ranges. 2.5.3 Base Line of Ranges 2.5.3.1 After the range monuments have been loc!ted in the field, base profile, that is, cross section along the range is necessary for future comparison at appropriate intervals of resurveys. This may be done either by topographic survey before filling of the reservoir, or by means of echo-sounding immediately after filling. It is . 3 r&ommended that in reservoirs where the sides of the valley are steep and water depth is great, an accurate profile should be taken by surveying along the reach before filling of the reservoir. In reservoirs located in terrain where the topography is not steep, the depth of water is low and the width is great, the profile along the silt range could also be determined by sounding immethe reservoir is filled. Bank work, diately after however, to supplement the sounding along the range above the water level will be necessary. 3. SEDIMENT SAMPLERS MEASIJREMENTS AND DENSITY

3.1 Sediment bulk density can be measured by two methods namely, using a gamma density pole, or by removing a sample of known volume. 3.2 Density measurements and sediment samples are taken along range lines. The number of sample and measurement locations depends on the accuracy desired and the variability of the sediment. The entire depth of the sediment deposits needs to be sampled and its volume weight measured accurately for determining sediment accumulation. Consolidation continues to occur throughout the entire sediment depth. 4 COMPUTATIONAL CAPACITY SURVEY PROCEDURE FOR

4.0 The two basis approaches for computation of volume of deposit are based on: (i) Surface area/contour method, and (ii) Sectional area/range method. 4.1 Surface Area Approach If the survey is done by the contour method, the contour map of the reservoir is prepared and by planimetering the successive areas enclosed by the contours, starting from the lowest contour a submergence area-elevation curve is first prepared. From this curve the area covered at different elevations can be obtained. The capacity may be worked out using the following methods: a) Contour area interval method, and b) Modified prisomoidal formula. 4.1.1 Contour Area Interval Method The capacity between the successive unit elevations can be worked out arithmatically by taking the average submergence area and multiplying by the unit height. 4.1.2 Modified Prismoidal Formula The capacity between the successive unit elevation can also be worked out by the modified prismoidal formula: Vs=y(A+4B+C)-Vy where Vs = H = A = B = C = Vy . = capacity between middle and top contours, contour interval between A and B contour, area of the bottom contour, area of the middle contour, area of the top contour, and capacity between middle and bottom contours previously determined.

IS 13665 : 1993

The capacity below the lowest contour may be computed by the contour area interva! method which provides I$. After finding the volume below the lowest contour this formula can be used progressively for each succeeding higher contour. 4.1.3 The cun~ulativcvalue ofthe capacitybet&Jeenthe successive unit elevations, obtained by any of the above two methods, starting from the lowest elevation, will g&c the new capacity of the reservoir at different elevation. The difference between the old capacity and the new capacity at any elevation will provide the accumulation of silt deposit between the surveys. 4.2 Sectional Area Approach The basic requirement in this approach is the evaluation of cross sectional areas of different ranges in the reservoir. Based ou the bed levels obtained on each range line, the cross-section of the reservoir forall range lines is generated. Then the cross sectional area at each range line for all requhed elevations up ToFRLis worked out. The capacity at a particular elevation between two successive range line may be worked out using any of the following methods: a) Average end area length method, b) Prisnmidal forniula, and c) Constant hcror method. 4.2.1 Averoge End Area Length Method The capacity between two successive any elevation up to FRL is worked formula: V=I;-(A,+A,) where I/= ill,Az = L = the capacity at eIevati,ln `X' between two succesive range lines, arca of successive cross-sections at clevatiou `X', and distance between the range lines. range lines at out using the

4.2.2 Primoiddol Forml;lcl The capacity between two successive ranges at any elevation may also be worked out using the pristnoidal formula : V=$(A, where V= L= AI, A? = the capacity between two successive range liiic< elevation ,`X', distance bl,tweeu the range lines, and area of successive cross-sections at elevation `X'.
ilt

+A,+1f&4,)

4.2.3 Constant Factor Method This method is a modification of the average and area length method. In this method the initial capacity of any giveu reach and its end areas are worked out based on the iuitia? survey. The ratio of original capacity of the reach and its average end area at different elevations remain constant throughout the life of a reservoir and is known as "constant factor". The new capacity betweeu successive cross-sections at any elevation my be worked out using the following equation: VS+m 0 where V p = comtant factor, `40 Vs = llew capacity in VO = original capacity A0 = original average An = ilew average,end

the reach, in the reach, end areas of the reach, and areas of the reach.

4.2.4 The new capacity of the reservoir at any elevation may be worked out by sunming up the capacities between the range liuc obtained from any of the three methods nientioned above. The difference between the old capacity and the uew capacity at auy elevation will provide the accumulation ofsilt deposit between the surveys.

4

hndyd Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau or Indian Standards Acr, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
I

Bureao of Indian Standards

<1

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are any reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Doe : No. RVD 4 ( 70 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002

STANDARDS

110002

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 I 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 1 37 85 61 37 86 62

Eastern : l/ 14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Andheri ( East )

53 38 43, 53 16 40 I 53 23 84 235 02 16, 235 04 42 I 235 15 19, 235 23 15 632 92 95, { 632 78 91, 632 78 58 632 78 92

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, BOMBAY 400093

BHOPAL. BANGALORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATT. HYDERABAD. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. JAIPUR. ' PATNA. THTRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Prlnted at New Indla Printlug has.

Ehnrla. India

