атт Ah IS 11315 (Part 3) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


т ATS RR Фф AAA {Әәчот ch 
GGJ 


ATT 3 «чт 
(чест Чат ) 


Methods for Quantitative Description 
of Discontinuities in Rock Masses 


Part 3 Persistence 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.060 


© BIS 2023 


+ 9198 aT 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 гете ЭПТЕ STAHL AMT, Ag (8 - 110002 
Nese’ МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 5 


Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 3) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


A series of Indian Standard on test methods for assessing the strength characteristics of rocks and rock masses 
are being developed/revised in view of recent advances in the field of rock mechanics. The majority of rock 
masses, in particular, those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontinuous, with the 
discontinuities largely determining the mechanical behaviour. It is, therefore, essential that structure of a rock 
mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described and quantified to have a complete and unified 
descriptions of rock masses and discontinuities. Careful field descriptions will enhance the value of in-situ 
tests that are performed since the interpretation and extrapolation of results will be made more reliable. 


Discontinuity is the general term for any mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass, along which the rock mass has 
zero or low tensile strength. It is the collective term for most types of joints, weak bedding planes, weak 
schistosity planes, weakness zones, shear zones and faults. The ten parameters selected for rock mass survey 
to describe discontinuities are orientation, spacing, persistence, roughness, wall strength, aperture, filling, 
seepage, number of sets and block size. These parameters are also evaluated from the study of drill cores to 
obtain information on the discontinuities. 


It is essential that both the structures of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described 
for determining the mechanical behaviour. This Indian Standard, covering various parameters to describe 
discontinuities in rock masses. 


This standard (Part 3) covers the methods for quantitative description of discontinuities in rock masses for 
persistence. This standard (Part 3) was first formulated in 1987. This revision incorporates the latest advancement 
and modifications based on the experience gained in the use of this standard. The other parts formulated in the 
series are: 


Part 1 Orientation 
Part 2 Spacing 

Part 4 Roughness 

Part 5 Wall strength 
Part 6 Aperture 

Part 7 Filling 

Part 8 Seepage 

Part 9 Number of sets 
Part 10 Block size 

Part 11 Core recovery and rock quality 
Part 12 Drill Core study 


Persistence describes the discontinuity trace length as observed in a exposure and provide a measure of the areas 
extent or penetration length of a discontinuity. Termination of a discontinuity in solid rock or against other 
discontinuities reduces the persistence. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant 
places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11315 (Part 3) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF 
DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES 


PART 3 PERSISTENCE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 3) covers the method for the 
quantitative description of persistence of discontinuities 
in rock mass. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard given below contains provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitutes provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of this standard: 


IS No. Title 


IS 11358 : 1987 Glossary of terms and symbols 
relating to rock mechanics 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions of terms 
given in IS 11358 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 Persistence implies the areas extent or size of a 
discontinuity within a plane. It can be crudely 
quantified by observing the discontinuity trace lengths 
on the surface of exposures. It is one of the most 
important rock mass parameters, but one of the most 
difficult to quantify in anything but crude terms. 


4.2 The discontinuities of one particular set will often 
be more continuous than those of the other sets. The 
minor sets will, therefore, tend to terminate against the 
primary features or they may terminate in solid rock. 


4.3 In the case of rock slopes and dam foundations, it 
is one of the greatest importance to attempt to 
assess the degree of persistence of those 
discontinuities that are unfavorably orientated for 
stability. The degree to which discontinuities 
persist beneath adjacent rock blocks without 


terminating in solid rock or terminating against other 
discontinuities determines the degree to which failure 
of intact rock would be involved in eventual failure. 
Persistence determines the degree to which ‘down- 
stopping’ would have to occur between adjacent 
discontinuities for a failure surface to develop. 
Persistence is also of the greatest importance to tension 
crack development behind the crest of a slope. 


4.4 In the case of tunneling, failure in the first instance 
may be a rather local affair, and persistence across a 
limited number of blocks may be all that is required 
provided that other conditions are compatible with 
failure, that is, the existence of smooth or clay filled 
discontinuities or at least three sets. Planer 
discontinuities that can be traced without offset for 5 m 
to 10 m in a tunnel construction may be of major 
significance to stability, while being of minor 
importance in the case of a 100 m high rock slope or 
large dam abutment. 


4.5 Frequently, rock exposures are small compared to 
the area of length of persistent discontinuities and the 
real persistence can only be guessed. Less frequently it 
may be possible to record the dip length and the strike 
length of exposed discontinuities, and thereby estimate 
their persistence along a given plane through the rock 
mass using probability theory. However, the difficulties 
and uncertainties involved in the field measurements 
will be considerable for most rock exposures 
encountered. 


4.6 Persistence described the modal trace length of sets 
of discontinuities as observed in an exposure and 
distinguished as systematic, sub-systematic or non- 
systematic according to their relative persistence. 
Measurements are made with a measuring tape of at 
least 10 m length. 


5 PROCEDURE 


5.1 Individual rock exposures or recognized domains 
should first be described according to the relative 
persistence of the different discontinuity sets present. 
The sets of discontinuities can be distinguished by the 
terms persistent, sub-persistent and non-persistent 


IS 11315 (Part 3): 2023 


respectively. Simple labelled field sketches such as for each of the discontinuity sets. 
those illustrated in Fig. 1 are useful aids in subsequent 
interpretation. 5.3 The modal trace lengths measured for each set are 


described according to the following scheme: 
5.2 Discontinuity lengths should be measured in the 


direction of dip and in the direction of strike. This may Very low persistence <1m 
be impossible in the case of limited planar exposures. Low persistence lmto3m 
However, in the case of large three-dimensional Medium persistence 3mtol0m 
exposures such as curved open pits with benches, or High persistence 10mto20m 
underground openings with intersecting tunnels, it may i А 

Very high persistence >20m 


be possible to obtain useful size-frequency histograms 


(a) (b) 


FIG. 1 SIMPLE SKETCHES AND BLOCK DIAGRAMS TO INDICATE THE RELATIVE 
PERSISTENCE OF VARIOUS SETS OF DISCONTINUITIES 


5.4 A useful procedure during the mapping of 
discontinuity lengths is to record the type of termination 
according to the following scheme. Discontinuities 
which extend outside the exposure (x) should be 
differentiated from those that visibly terminate in rock 
in the exposure (r), and from those that terminate 
against other discontinuities in the exposure (d). A 
systematic set of discontinuities with a high score in (x) 
is obviously more persistent than a sub-systematic set 
with predominant scores in (d). Non-systematic 
discontinuities will tend to have highest scores in (r). 


5.5 Termination data (х, r or d) should be recorded for 
each end of the relevant discontinuities, together with 
the length in metres. 


Example: 


6(dx) — Discontinuity length of 6 m, one 
termination against another discontinuity, other 
termination invisible because feature extends 
beyond the limits of the exposure 1. It is important 
to specify the dimensions of the exposure on which 
measurements are made since this will obviously 
influence both the number of (x) observations and 
the relevant lengths. 


NOTES 


1 Discontinuities where both terminations can be seen are 
generally smaller than discontinuities where one or no 
terminations can be seen. 


2 Analyses of dip lengths and strike lengths have indicated that 
discontinuities tend to be of approximately isotropic 
dimensions. When terminating in solid rock they may, 
therefore, tend to be circular, and presumably rectilinear when 
terminating against other discontinuities. 


3 Statistical tests simulating circular outline discontinuities 
with a normal distribution of diameters randomly spaced in 
the rock mass, indicate that the mean trace length can range 
from slightly smaller to slightly larger than the mean diameter. 
This is the result of the greater probability of intersecting the 
larger discontinuities outweighing the fact that trace lengths 
(that is, chords) are inherently shorter than diameters. 


4 Statistical methods can be used to analyse the maximum 
lengths of discontinuities. Using such techniques it is possible 
to estimate the expected recurrence interval for discontinuities 
of any specified length. Alternatively it is possible to estimate 
the mean probability of a discontinuity exceeding a specified 
length occurring in any portion of the rock mass. For example, 
if after analysis it is found that major discontinuities with 
strike lengths of 50 m or more are spaced on the average at 
150 m, it is possible to estimate the probability of strike 
lengths of 50 m or more occurring in any 100 m interval 
measured normal to the strike. The probability is equal to 
100/150 = 0.66. 


IS 11315 (Part 3) : 2023 


If the complete distribution of sizes is known the probability 
of occurrence of a discontinuity of a certain size can be 
evaluated on the basis of extreme value statistics. It may be 
noted that the ill-defined lower bound to observations of trace 
length (inevitable if the shortest features are ignored) leads to 
underestimation of the frequency of discontinuities and 
overestimation of their size. 


5 The descriptive term ‘persistence? may in theory be 
quantified by defining it as the percentage of the total area of a 
plane through the rock mass which is formed by 
discontinuities coincident (co-planar) with this reference 
plane. In practice, waviness of most discontinuities frustrates 
strict interpretation. A practical alternative is to select a band 
width equal to the mean spacing of the discontinuities in the 
particular set, and to estimate the persistence within this 
reference band. Since, on a probability basis, only one 
discontinuity would be expected to occur within this band, a 
slightly more realistic estimate of persistence is obtained. 


6 When assessing the persistence of the various discontinuity 
sets it is important to investigate the possibility of a stepped 
failure surface forming, as illustrated by failure modes (2) and 
(3) in Fig. 2. This mode of failure may tend to occur when the 
set involved in shear has less than 100 percent persistence, 
Down-stepping will tend to develop such that only a minimum 
percentage of the resulting shear surface passes through intact 
rock. The persistence of a potential failure surface will 
normally be higher than that along planes or bands parallel to a 
single set, unless the latter have 100 percent persistence. 


7 Estimates of persistence for given planes, bands or specific 
failure surfaces have at present to be based on engineering 
judgement and should be purposely weighted in the direction 
of conservatism (that is, closer to 100 percent persistence) 
since the shear strength of the intact rock bridges will form 
dangerously high percentage of the total shear strength of the 
compound failure surface. The shear strength (cohesion) due 
to any intact rock bridges can be crudely estimated from the 
Mohr diagram, assuming a linear shear strength envelope: 


1 1 
С= 5 (бс. о)? 


where 


о, = uniaxial compressive strength of the intact rock, and 
о; = tensile strength of the intact rock. 


If it is assumed for simplicity that o,/o,= 9 , then the cohesive 
strength is equal to one sixth of the unconfined compressive 
strength. It is safer to assume 100 percent persistence when in 
doubt, since the above cohesion is usually one to two orders of 
magnitude greater than the shear strength of the discontinuities. 


8 Persistence of discontinuities can be determined by remote 
technologies like the application of high resolution Terrestrial 
digital photogrammetry (TDP) and Terrestrial Laser Scanning 
(TLS) for the characterization of the structure of rock mass. 


9 New technique termed Forensic Excavation of Rock Masses 
(FERM) can be used as a procedure for directly investigating 
discontinuity persistence. This technique involves non- 
explosive excavation of rock masses by injecting an expansive 
chemical splitter along incipient discontinuities. On expansion, 
the splitter causes the incipient traces to open as true joints. 


IS 11315 (Part 3): 2023 


(1) PLANE FAILURI 
(1) E FAILURE 


€ 2) STEPPED FAILURE '20' 


(3) реке caus 
(3) STEPPED FAILURE '3D 


INTACT BRIDGE 


FIG. 2 IDEALISED EXAMPLES OF POTENTIAL FAILURES PLANES SHOWING THE IMPORTANCE OF 
‘INTACT BRIDGES’ AND ‘DOWN STEPPING’ 


6 PRESENTATION OF RESULTS 


The result format should include the following 
information: 


a) Dimension of rock outcrop/exposure; 

b) Discontinuity sets with orientation; 

c) Total no. of discontinuity of each sets; 

d) Type of termination of each discontinuity; 

e) Persistence of terminating/non-terminating 
discontinuity; and 

f) Remark on persistence of non-terminating 
joints based on judgment at site. 


6.1 The various set of discontinuities should be 
described as systematic, sub-systematic or non- 
systematic according to their relative persistence. Block 
diagrams or photographs should be labelled 
accordingly. 


6.2 Where exposures are of suitable dimensions, 
size-frequency histograms of trace lengths 
observed for each set of discontinuities should be 
given. (This is necessary if probability theory is to be 


applied subsequently). Mean trace lengths (in both 
strike and dip directions) should be quoted. 


6.3 Termination data which has been recorded for each 
discontinuity sampled [for example, 6(dx)], should be 
presented in the form of a ‘termination index’ (Т,) for 
the rock mass as a whole, or for chosen domains. T, is 
defined as the percentage of the discontinuity ends 
terminating in rock Ут compared to the total number of 
terminations. This is equal to twice the total sample 
since each trace has two ends. 


Т. = (xr) x 100 
r”2 (No. of discontinuites observed) percen 


NOTE — It is to be that systematic collection of data concerning 
T, will eventually improve the estimation of ‘persistence’. 


6.4 The persistence of potential failure surfaces 
(including stepped surfaces) should be estimated, 
if this is appropriate to the project being 
investigated. The estimate should perhaps be 
rounded upwards, to the next multiple of 10 percent 
(that is, 92 percent is assumed to be 100 percent). 


IS 11315 (Part 3) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 


Amberg Technologies, Gurugram 


Border Roads Organization, New Delhi 


Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 


Central Soil & Materials Research Station, 


New Delhi 


Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Institute of Mining & Fuel Research, 


Dhanbad 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology - ISM, Dhanbad 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Society for Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling 
Technology, New Delhi 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


Representative(s) 
DRN. K. SAMADHIYA (Chairperson) 
SHRI AKHIL RAJ 


SHRI KRIPAL CHOUDHARY 
SHRI RAKESH PANDITA (Alternate) 


LT COL. ANIL RAJ 


SHRIG. P. PATEL 
SHRI UDAY CHANDER (Alternate) 


SHRI HARI DEV 
SHRI MAHABIR DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI RIZWAN ALI 
Ок S. A. BURELE (Alternate) 


SHRI DARPAN TALWAR 
M. S. HARSHITHA (Alternate) 


DR SHANTANU SARKAR 
SHRI KOUSHIK PANDIT (Alternate) 


DR J. K. MOHNOT 
DR R. р. DWIVEDI (Alternate) 


DR PANKAJ GUPTA 
SHRIR. K. PANIGRAHI (Alternate) 


DR ALTAF USMANI 
SHRI SAIKAT PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR TRIPATHI 
SHRID. P. DANGWAL (Alternate) 


PROF К. AYOTHIRAMAN 
PROF PRASHANTH VANGLA (Alternate) 


PROF A. K. MISHRA 
DR К. К. SINHA (Alternate) 


DR MAHENDRA SINGH 
DR PRITI MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


DR С. S. KHOKHAR 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 
SHRI SHANKAR KUMAR SAHA (Alternate) 


Organization 


National Disaster Management Authority, 
New Delhi 


National Highways & Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited, Delhi 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 

National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, 
Faridabad 

National Institute of Rock Mechanics, Bengaluru 

NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd, New Delhi 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


RITES Ltd, Gurugram 

THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 

In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 4123, Tower 4, ACE 
Golfshire, Sector-150, Noida - 201310) 

In Personal Capacity (Naimex House, А-8, Mohan 
Co-operative Industrial Estate, Mathura Road, 


New Delhi - 110044) 


In Personal Capacity ( Jal Vidyut Apts, Sector 21-C, 
Faridabad - 121001) 


In Personal Capacity (A-125. Prodhyagiki Apartment, 
Sector-3, Dwarka, New Delhi - 110059) 


In Personal Capacity (C-1004, Park View City-2, 
Sector - 49, Gurugram - 122018) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 11315 (Part 3) : 2023 


Representative(s) 


JS (MITIGATION) 
DR RAVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV MALIK 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI RAJESH KUMAR 
SHRI AJAY KUMAR VERMA (Alternate I) 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR GARNAYAK (Alternate П) 


DR A. RAJAN BABU 
SHRI G. GOPINATH (Alternate) 


SHRIN. K. JAIN 
SHRI PRAKASH RAWAT (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
SHRI VIJAY DANGWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHISHEK SAMPATRAO BHOSALE 


SHRIMATI JYOTSNA DIXIT 
SHRI SANDEEP SINGH NIRMAL (Alternate) 


SHRI Т. S. ROUTELA 
SHRI SAMRAT MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRIR. K. GOEL 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 


SHRI IMRAN SAYEED 


DR RAJBAL SINGH 


DR MANOJ VERMAN 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


DR MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST *D”/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 48 (19665). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


