( Reaffirmed 2005 )

!s : 4993 -a1983

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO MODULAR CO-ORDINATION

Second Revision )
Modular Co-ordination Sectional
Chairman SHRI J. DURAI RAJ D l/141, Satya Marg, New Delhi Members Representing The Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI E. M. BENJAMIN SHRI N. C. D~~GAL ( Alternate ) Central Public Works Department ( Architectural CHIEF ARCHITECTS Wing ) SHRI K. R. JANI ( Alternate) Delhi Development Authority ENGINEER MEMBER Central Building Research Institute ( CBRI ), SHRI B. B. GARU Roorkee SHRI V. K. AGQARWAL ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Architects SHRI A. P. KANVINDE Maharashtra Housing Board, Bombay SHRI M. K. LAKRANI SHRI B. NARAYAN RAO ( Alfernnte ) Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi SHRI G. K. MAZUMDAR SHRI H. S. PASRICHA ( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army HQ SHRI J. V. MERTA SHRI N. HEMBRUM ( Alternate ) Enineering Construction Corporation Limited, SHRI G. B. SINUH Bombay SHRI S. SUBRAMAN~AN( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI K. S. SRINIVASAN SHRI M. M. MISTRY ( Alternate ) Ministry of Railways SHRI L. G. TOYE SHRI V..K. PUNJ ( Alternate ) Housing & Urban Development Corporation, New SHRI H. K. YADAV Delhi SRRI V. SURESH ( Alternate) ' Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member ) SRRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary
SHRI C. K, BEBARTA

Committee,

BDC

10

Senior Deputy

Director

( Civ Engg ), IS1

INDIAN

@ Copyright 1983 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any moans except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS :`4993 - 1983

hdian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO MODULAR CO-ORDINATION

Second Revision )
0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 24 February 1983, after the draft finalized by the Modular Co-ordination Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. This 0.2 This standard was first published in 1969 and revised in 1973. second revision has been prepared with a view to aligning it with the following recomendations issued by the International Organization for Standardization: IS0 IS0 1791-1973 1803-1973 Modular Tolerances co-ordination for buildings Vocabulary Vocabulary

0.3 Due weightage has also been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard gives definitions of terms used in modular co-ordination for study, planning and construction of bnildings designed in accordance with the principles of modular co-ordination and for the study and manufacture of the components used in such buildings. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 Actual Deviation size and the corresponding 2.2 Actual Size The The algebraic basic size. size obtained 2 difference between the actual

by measuring

a component.

1s : 4993 2.3 Basic fixed Size The size by reference to which the limits of size

1983 are

.
module used in modular cofor general application to build-

2.4 Basic Module - The fundamental ordination, the size of which is selected ing and components.

NOTE - The value of the basic module has been chosen as 100 mm for the maxiThe symbol for the basic module is M. mum flexibility and convenience.

2.5 Basic Modular the basic module.

Grid

-

Modular -

grid with Modular

lines space

spaced grid

apart with

at lines

2.6 Basic Modular Space Grid spaced apart at the basic module. 2.7 Building with building tion of these.

Frame Work - Part of building manufactured on site materials or one or more components or with a combinaMaterial for construction work as delivered

2.8 Building Material from quarry or factory. 2.9 Building Products Building products ing. 2.10 Clearance two components

- All things produced by man for use in buildconsist of building materials and components. between unit

- The empty space persisting after installation of which one at least is movable. formed as a

2.11 -Component - A building product having specified sizes in three dimensions.

distinct

2.12 Control ( Partial ) - Control in which in a lot are examined in one or more aspects.

only certain

parts or units

2.13 Controlling Plane - A plane in a modular space grid by reference to which the theoretical positions of structural elements are determined ( for example, a plane defining the boundary of a controlling zone, or the axis of a load-bearing wall or column ). 2.14 Control ( Universal ) - Control in which lot are examined in one or more aspects. all parts or units in a

NOTE - Universal con&o1 does not imply that the control is required the characteristics for which specifications have been laid down.

to cover all

2.15 Controlling Dimension - A modular co-ordinating dimension between controlling planes ( for example, storey height, distance between axes of columns, thickness of controlling zone ). 2.16 Co-ordinating Dimension - A dimension of co-ordinating space, which defines the relative positions of two or more components in an assembly according to the characteristics of the components which are relevant to the assembly. 3

IS:4993 2.16.1

-1983 Co-ordinating Size Face The The size of a co-ordinating relating dimension. to a modular one com-

2.17 Co-ordinating reference system. 2.18 Co-ordinating ponent is co-ordinated

part of a profile

Plane - A plane by reference with another.

to which

2.19 Co-ordinating Space - A space bounded by co-ordinating planes allocated to a component, including allowances for tolerances and joint clearances. 2.20 2.21 Co-ordinating Co-ordinating Surface Volume Two-dimensional Three-dimensional co-ordinating co-ordinating space. space. ( actual,

2.22 Deviation - The difference between a size or position limit, etc ) and the corresponding basic size or basic position.

2.23 Dimensional Co-ordination - A convention on related sizes for the co-ordinating dimensions of building components and buildings incorporating them, for their design, manufacture and assembly.
NOTE The purpose of dimensional co-ordination is

:

a) to permit b) to permit

the assembly of components the interchangeability

at site without cutting or fitting, and

of different components.

part of a building 2.24 Element - A functional ing materials and/or building components. 2.25 Finishing - All jobs for closure, partitions and facings. completion of

constructed a building

from buildand its en-

resulting from the difference, before 2.26 Fit -L Relationship between the sizes of two parts which are to be assembled.

assembly,

2.27 Functional Face - Any part of the profile designed to serve purposes other than co-ordination need not therefore be relating to the modular reference system. - Difference 2.28 Increment components of successive sizes. 2.29 Infra-modular Size The inner between to homologous dimensions of

A size smaller oftwo parts,

than the basic module. one of which is to be placed adopted by

2.30 Inner Part inside the other. 2.31 International the International

Modular Organization

System - Modular for Standardization. 4

sytem

IS : 4993 - 1983 2.32 Joint Clearance - The distance, between the joint faces of two components set side by side or one over the other, that is, the distance considered in the calculation of a work size in order to fit it. 2.33 Limits of Size - The two extreme permissible sizes between the actual size should lie, the limits of size being included. 2.34 Linkage measurements determinative which

Dimension ( Linkage Measurement ) - Linkage are the measurements of the building component that are for its buildings and fitting with other components. location deviation is the larin a determined direction from

2.35 Location Deviation - Permissible gest permissible deviation of a component the specified position.

- Location measurements are measure2.36 Location Measurement ments given on an assembly drawing indicating the location of a component in relation to the modular grid. 2.37 Lower Deviation - The algebraic difference limit of size and the corresponding basic size. 2.38 Lower Limit ( Minimum Limit between the minimum

of Size ) -

See 2.42.

2.39 Maximum Clearance - `The greatest permissible total clearance which under the influence of the magnitude and location of the tolerances of two mating parts will occur between the two parts. 2.40 Maximum Limit two limits of size. of Size ( Upper Limit ) -- The greater of

2.41 Minimum Clearance - The smallest permissible which under the influence of the magnitude and location of two mating parts will occur between the two parts. 2.42 Minimum Limit two limits of size. 2.43 Module ordination. of Size ( Lower Limit ) -

total clearance of the tolerances The lesser of the cothe sizes

A unit of size used A line load. in

as an increment a modular grid,

in dimensional which defines

2.44 Modular Axis position in plan of main 2.45 Modular are modular.

Component

A component Dimensional

whose co-ordinating co-ordination

2.46 Modular Co-ordination the basic module or a multimodule.

employing

NOTE - The purposes OC modular co-ordination are : a) to reduce the variety of component sizes produced, and b) to allow the components. building designer greater flexibility in the arrangement of

5

IS : 4993 - 1983
2.47 Modular Detail - Detailed drawing of a modular component or of a modular element or of the juxtaposition of components and elements indicating the relationship of the whole component or element or of its constituent parts ( whether modular or non-modular ) to a modular grid. 2.48 Modular in the modular Dimension co-ordination. The distance between two lines or planes princisizes are com-

- Drawing 2.49 Modular Drawing ples of modular co-ordination. 2.50 Modular modular. Elements -

executed whose

according

to the

An element

co-ordinating

2.51 Modular Gap - The distance between ponents and the modular plane that separates

one of two adjacent them.

2.52 Modular Grid - A rectangular co-ordinate reference system in which the distance between consecutive lines is the basic module or a multimodule. This multimodule may differ for each of the two dimensions of the grid. 2.53 Modular basic module. 2.54 Modular modular planes. 2.55 Modular Increment Lines Plane -A Increment expressed as a multiple of the

line

formed

by

the

intersection

of

two

A plane in a modular Grid Modular of

space grid. grid applied modular to the planes plannor two

2.56 Modular Planning ing of a building. 2.57 Modular modular lines. 2.58 Modular Point Size -

Intersection

three

A size that is multiple

of the basic module.

2.59 Modular Space - Space bounded by modular planes which may be allotted to a modular component or to an aggregate of components or to a modular element or may be left empty. 2.60 Modular Space Grid - A three-dimensional rectangular co-ordinate reference system in which the distance between consecutive planes is the basic module or multimodule. This multimodule may differ for each of the three dimensions of the space grid. 6

IS : 4993 - 1983 2.61 Modular Surface - Theoretical plane of a modular component, the principal dimensions of which are in accordance with modular COordination. 2.62 Modular System A system of rules for modular co-ordination. 2.63 Modular Volume - Theoretical volume of modular component, the principal dimensions of which are in accordance with modular coordination. 2.64 ( Modular ) Zone - A modular space between modular planes, which is provided for a component or group of components which do not necessarily fill the space, or which may be left empty. 2.65 Multimodules the basic module. 2.66 Neutral Zone which is not modular. A module whose size is a selected multiple of

A space between two consecutive modular planes a component is desi-

2.67 Nominal Size - The dimension by which gnated as a matter of convenience. 2.68 Normal Joint are both placed ideally measurement.

The total joint between two components which and whose size is the mean value of the limit

2.69 Normal Joint Part - The joint occurring on the side of the modular plane belonging to the component, when the size of the element has its average value and is ideally placed. 2.70 Outer Part inside the other. The outer of two parts, one of which is to be placed an non-load-bearing The greatest component permissible used to clearance

2.71 Partition - Generally divide a space into units.

2.72 Permissible Clearance between two mating parts.

2.73 Permissible Deviation - The greatest permissible difference between an actual measurement and the corresponding nominal dimensions. This difference may be positive, negative or zero. 2.74 Planning cations. Module A multimodule adopted for specific appli-

2.75 Preferred Dimensions - These are modular measurements that are preferred to others, especially in standardization in order to ensure greater combinability. 7

IS : 4993 - 1983 2.76 Preferred Increment - The smallest interval between two condimension for spaces or secutive sizes in any range of preferred components. - Substance of natural or artificial origin which 2.77 Raw Material may be used in the construction of building and in civil engineering. 2.78 Reference rectangular. 2.79 2.80 Reference Reference Grid A two-dimensional A plane reference system, generally

Plane Point -

in a reference

network. system.

A point of a reference

2.81 Reference Space - A space assigned in a building to receive a component, assembly or element including, where appropriate, allowances The space is bounded by reference for tolerances and joint clearances. planes which are not necessarily modular. 2.82 Reference Space Grid A three-dimensional reference system.

2.83 Reference System - A system of points, lines and planes to which sizes and positions of components or elements may be related. 2.84 Rip Space between bearing material points, formed or between to a definite larger beams of skelton. but basic a the

2.85 Section of unspecified

-- Building length.

cross seaction than the

2.86 Semimodular module and multiple

Dimension of a submodule. of

Dimension installations

2.87 Servicing - The group particular service to a building.

each of which

supplies by

2.88 Site Assembly - Application of a method of building positioning of prefabricated components on the site for assembly. 2.89 Site Works ( Site Operations ) - Application of a building on the site, including the making of certain functional 2.90 Structural of a building. Module Planning

system of elements.

module used to define the structure economic limits conof size

2.91 Technical Size - A size governed by important It may be modular only coincidentally. siderations. 2.92 Tolerance - The difference between the permissible or between the permissible limits of position.

2.93 To Modulate - To give building components and building linkage measurements which are based on a module or which refer to a modular grid. Modulated measurements that are based on modular measurements. 8

IS :4993 -1983 2.94 Unit - Building material formed as a simple article with all three dimensions specified, complete in itself but intended to be part of a compound unit or complete building. Examples are brick, block, tile, etc. 2.95 Upper Deviation - The algebraic difference mum limit of size and the corresponding basic size. 2.96 Upper Limit ( Maximum Limit of Size ) between See2.40. the maxi-

2.97 Work Size - The size given with its permissible deviations, specified for manufacturing a component the actual size of which should be within these deviations under reference conditions. 2.98 Work component. Tolerance A tolerance given for the fabrication of a

2.99 Zero Line - In a graphical representation of limit and fits, straight line to which the deviations are referred. The zero line is the line of zero deviation and represents the basic size. 2.100 Zone ( Modular ) See2.64. See 2.66. 2.101 Zone ( Neutral ) -

9

INTERNATIONAL

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS)

QUANTITY

UNIT

SYMBOL m kg
S

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance
Supplementary QUANTITY

metre kilogram
second

ampere kelvin candela mole

A

K cd mol

Units
UNIT radian steradian SYXBOL rad sr

Plane angle Solid angle
Derived Units

QUANTITP Force

UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal force

SYMBOL N 1 1

DEFINITION N = 1 kg.m/ss J = 1 N.m 1V.s

Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductanct Electromotive Pressure, stress

J
W Wb T Hz S V Pa

1 W = 1 J/s lWb= 1 1 1 T = 1 Wb/m S 1 1 A/V

1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-l) V = 1 W/A

1 Pa = 1 N/m'

