INATT Wah IS 16234 : 2015 


. (Superseding IS 4383) 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2020) 


Gat sim Gast Maa sme 
tifeat — faferfe 


Ships and Marine Technology 
Embarkation Ladders — 
Specification 


ICS 47.020.50 


© BIS 2015 


anda Aaa HA 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM NIA 9 aga WHC BÉ ae feeei-110002 
am MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2015 Price Group 4 


Shipbuilding Sectional Committee, TED 017 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Shipbuilding 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


This standard is intended to supplement existing Indian Government ‘Merchant Shipping (Life Saving Appliances) 
Rules, 1989’ requirements for embarkation ladders. Since Merchant Shipping (MS) Rules do not include specific 
requirements for prototype testing of embarkation ladders for approval, those tests included in this standard are 
in addition to the existing MS requirements. The inclusion of these tests was considered necessary in order to 
provide a means of ensuring conformance of embarkation ladders with the performance requirements prescribed 
in MS Rules and in this standard. 


This standard covers all the requirements as given in IS 4383 : 1983 ‘Pilot and embarkation ladders’ which has 
since been withdrawn, in order to align it with the ISO 5489 : 2008. This standard covers only embarkation 
ladders. Pilot ladders is covered in IS 16233. 


In the formulation of this standard. considerable assistance have been drawn from ISO 5489 : 2008 ‘Ships and 
marine technology — Embarkation ladders’, issued by International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of specified value in this standard. 


IS 16234 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


SHIPS AND MARINE TECHNOLOGY EMBARKATION 
LADDERS — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies requirements for a ship's 
embarkation ladder which is provided to enable safe 
embarkation of waterborne survival craft along a 
vertical portion of the ship's hull. It is applicable to 
merchant ships required to carry embarkation ladders 
under Part 6 of The First Schedule of the merchant 
Shipping (Life Saving Appliances) Rules, 1989. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which, 
through references in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subjected to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS/ISO No. Title 

6911 : 1992 Stainless steel plate, sheet and strip 

(first revision) 

Aluminium and aluminium alloys — 

Chemical composition 

Plastics — Methods of exposure to 

direct weathering to weathering 

using glass-filtered daylight and to 

intensified weathering by daylight 

using Fresnel mirrors 

ISO 1461 : 1999 Hot dip galvanized coatings on 
fabricated iron and steel articles — 
Specifications and test methods 


3 MATERIALS 


ISO 209 : 2007 


ISO 877 : 1994 


3.1 Wooden Parts 


Each wooden part shall be made of hardwood (Ash, 
oak, elm, beech, teak or apitong) free from knots. 


3.2 Side Ropes 


3.2.1 Each side rope shall be mildew-resistant manila 
rope or a spun thermoset polyster rope with a 
polypropylene core of a colour that contrasts with the 
spun polyester. Each side rope shall have a breaking 
strength of at least 26 kN and a normal diameter of 
20 mm (65 mm circumference). 


3.2.2 Alternative side ropes of synthetic material may 
be used if they, 


a) meet the breaking strength and size 
requirements of 3.2.1; 


b) are at least as resistant to elongation under 
load as the standard ropes described in 3.2.1; 

C) havean exterior surface suitable for grasping 
with bare hands similar to manila or spun 
polyester; 

d) are of a thermoset polymer resistant to 
deterioration form ultraviolet light; and 


e) provide a visual indication of excessive wear, 
similar to the spun polyester/polypropylene 
construction described in 3.2.1. 


3.3 Metallic Materials 


3.3.1 Each metal fastener shall be made of material 
which is inherently corrosion resistant or treated to be 
corrosion resistant. 


3.3.2 Each ferrous metal part which is not stainless 
steel shall be coated in accordance with ISO 1461. 


3.3.3 Each stainless steel part shall be of a marine 
grade alloy with a corrosion resistance at least equal 
to grade X 04Cr17Ni12M02 as per IS 6911. 


3.3.4 Each aluminium part shall be of grade containing 
not more than 0.06 percent copper, in accordance with 
ISO 209. 


3.3.5 Metals in contact with each other shall be 
galvanically compatible, or insulated to prevent 
galvanic corrosion in a marine environment. 


3.4 Mechanical Fastening Devices 


Each mechanical fastening device securing a part of a 
Jadder shall have locking mechanism to prevent the 
device from loosening. 


3.5 Plastic Materials 


Each plastic material shall be of a type that retains at 
least 30 percent of its original tensile strength and at 
least 80 percent of its original impact strength when 
subjected to the one-year outdoor weathering test 
described in Method A of ISO 877. 


3.6 Quality of Materials 


Each part of a ladder shall be free of splinters, burrs, 
sharp edges, corners, projections, or other defects that 
could injure a person using the ladder. 


IS 16234 : 2015 


3.7 Rope Seizing 


Seizing, if used shall consist of two or three ply marline 
of minimum breaking strength 800 N or other suitable 
material of equivalent strength. 


4 CONSTRUCTION 


4.1 Embarkation ladders length should be equal to 
length from the deck to the waterline in lightest sea- 
going condition under unfavourable condition of trim 
and with an adverse list not less than 20°. 


4.2 Each ladder shall have two side ropes on each side. 
Ladders may also be constructed as three-string ladders 
with a third set of ropes in the middle of the ladder as 
illustrated in Fig. 1. In a three-string ladder, the third 
set of ropes shall meet the same requirements as the 
side ropes. Each step in the ladder shall be supported 
by each side rope. 


4.3 The side ropes shall, 


a) be continuous from the top of the ladder to 
the bottom; and 


b) notbe painted or otherwise coated or covered. 


4.4 Unless a special arrangement is needed for a 
custom installation, the ends of the side ropes shall be 
finished as follows: 


a) Top end of one or both of the side ropes on 
each side shall terminate just above the top 
step in a single eye splice or thimble large 
enough to accommodate at least two passes 


of side rope. 


1A Conventional 


b) Top end of one side rope on each side of the 
ladder shall extend at least 3 m beyond the 
top ladder step, or an extension service rope 
shall be fitted to each side rope eye splice or 
thimble by means of an eye splice or shackle 
as shown in Fig. 2. The diameter of an 
extension service rope shall be at least the 
diameter of the side ropes. 

c) Side ropes shall not have fittings or form loops 
at the bottom of the ladder that can be used to 
attach additional ladder sections or tripping 
lines. 

d) Ends of each side rope which do not terminate 
in a splice or fitting shall be served or 


otherwise treated to prevent fraying. 


4.5 Each side rope shall pass through a hole in each 
step. If the hole is in the form of a slot, the slot shall be 
in the longer edges of the steps. The centre of each 
hole shall be at least 50 mm form the end of the step. 
Alternative arrangements are shown in Fig. 3. 


4.6 Each pair of side ropes shall be secured together 
both above and below each step with a mechanical 
clamping device or seizing method which holds each 
step level when the ladder is hanging freely. Alternative 
arrangements are shown in Fig. 4. 


4.7 If a mechanical clamping device is used to secure 
the side ropes and hold the step in place, the device 
shall not extend above or below the step surfaces by 
more than a distance equal to 0.7 x W (where W is the 
width of the step), so that the step is not prevented 


1B Three-string 


Fic. 1 EMBARKATION LADDERS 


2 


2015 


. 
. 


IS 16234 


z 3000 


SASS 


SINI 


330420 


SSSSSSY | 


| SSSNSSSSNM 


Key 


1 — extension service rope 
2 — rope seizing (typical) 


3 — step fixture 


4 — mechanical clamping device 


5 — step 


Fic. 2 ALTERNATIVE EXTENSION SERVICE ROPE ARRANGEMENTS AT TOP OF LADDER 


> 480 


2115 


o, 
OC 


250 


P anm, PP att O ati O” an O DE Lam. O ate. OP aum, O AO am, ae 


>25 


Key 


1 — grooved, patterned or textured non-skid surface area. 


Fic. 3 TYPICAL LADDER STEP SHOWING ALTERNATIVE HOLE AND SLOT DESIGNS FOR SIDE ROPES 


IS 16234 : 2015 


<0-7W 


340440 


CY | 


4A Mechanical Clamps 
Key 
1 — rope seizing (typical) 
2 — step fixture 
3 — typical value 


340+40 


4B Seizings and Step Fixtures 


Fic. 4 ALTERNATE LADDER CONSTRUCTION UsING MECHANICAL CLAMPS AND SEIZINGS AND STEP FIXTURES 


from rolling, if caught between a boat and the hull of 
the ship (see Fig. 4). 


4.8 If a seizing method is used to secure steps ropes 
and side ropes, a step fixture shall be used above and 
below the step. The step fixture shall be designed to 
lead and support the side ropes from the step to the 
point above or below the step where the side ropes are 
seized together. The step fixture shall be designed so 
that it stays in place when the ladder is rolled or the 
step is turned. 


4.9 The clear space between the side ropes on one side 
of the ladder and those on the other side shall be at 
least 480 mm. This distance shall be uniform 
throughout the length of the ladder (see Fig. 3). 


4.10 Each side rope shall be arranged so that, when 
the ladder is in use along the vertical hull of ship, the 


side rope cannot come to contact with the ship’s side. 


4.11 The spacing form the top of one step to the top 
of the next step shall be 340 + 40 mm, and shall be 
uniform throughout the length of the ladder (see 
Fig. 4). 


4.12 Each step shall be of one-piece construction of 
either wood or resilient plastic or rubber material 
complying with the applicable requirements of 3. 


4.13 The top face of each step shall have a rectangular 
surface that is at least 115 mm wide with a surface that 
is grooved, patterned or of a textured non-skid type. 
The step surface shall be designed so that it does not 
retain water. A textured non-skid surface shall be 
moulded into the step or adhered directly to it. Non- 
skid adhesive sheeting may not be used (see Fig. 3). 


4.14 Each step shall be least 25 mm thick at its thinnest 


point. In determining this thickness, the depth of 
grooves in the top face of the step, the diameter of any 
hole extending from one side of the step to the other, 
and the thickness of any non-skid treatment shall not 
be included (see Fig. 3). 


4.15 Each step shall be arranged so that it can bear on 
the vertical hull of the ship when the ladder is in use. 


4.16 The manufacturer shall offer replacement steps 
for the ladder, which can replace a removed step 
without the need for unstringing and restringing the 
ladder. Replacement steps shall meet all of the 
requirements in this standard for steps, and each step 
shall be supplied with all parts necessary to install the 
step in the ladder. 


4.17 Each embarkation ladder shall be capable of 
being rolled up for storage. Each ladder shall be capable 
of unrolling freely and hanging vertically. 


5 TESTING FOR APPROVAL 


Before approval of a ladder design by a maritime safety 
administration as complying with this standard, a 
prototype ladder and its components shall be subjected 
to the tests and meet the criteria specified in Table 1. 
Any step or other part of the ladder which is 
permanently deformed as a result of testing shall not 
be used in a ladder which is placed in service. 


6 DESIGNATION 


6.1 Ladders conforming to this standard shall be 
designated by the following indications in the order 
given: 

a) Embarkation ladder IS 16234; 

b) “S' followed by the number of steps; and 

c) ‘I’ followed by the length, in metre. 
Example A 5 m embarkation ladder consisting of 15 


steps conforming to this Standard is 
designated as follows: 


*Embarkation ladder IS 16234 — S15-LS’ 


6.2 Spare or additional components for ladders 
conforming to this Standard shall be designated by 
reference to this Indian Standard. 


Example A replacement step for a ladder conforming 
to this Indian Standard is designated as 
follows: 


Step IS 16234 


7 MARKING 


7.1 The bottom of at least two steps of the ladder shall 
be marked with the following: 


a) Name and address of the manufacturer; 


IS 16234 : 2015 


b) Manufacturer's model designation; 
c) IS 16234 and ‘SOLAS’; 
d) Yearofassembly or reassembly of the ladder; 


e) Identification of the approving maritime 
safety administration along with any approval 
indications required by that administration; 
and 

f) Where used identification of a recognized 
organization acting on behalf of the maritime 
safety administration. 


7.2 The bottom of each replacement step shall be 
marked with the following: 


a) Name and address of the manufacturer; 
b) Manufacturer's model designation; 

c) Words ‘REPLACEMENT STEP ONLY’; 
d) IS 16234 and ‘SOLAS’; 

e) year of production of the step; 


f) Identification of the approving maritime 
safety administration, along with any approval 
indications required by that administration; 
and 

g) Where used identification of a recognized 
organization acting on behalf of the maritime 
safety administration. 


7.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


7.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the licence for the 
use of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers 
of producers may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 


8 PRODUCTION TESTS AND INSPECTIONS 


Production tests and inspections of embarkation ladders 
approved as conforming to this standard should be 
carried out as described in Annex A. 


9 MAINTENANCE 


9.1 Damaged steps shall be replaced with replacement 
steps meeting the requirements of 4.16 and of the type 
supplied or specified by the ladder manufacturer. A 
ladder shall not include more than two replacement 
steps. 


9.2 If aladder requires a third replacement step it shall 
be rebuilt. A ladder constructed with spun polyester 
side ropes, with the inner core showing at any place 
throughout the length of the ladder is no longer 
serviceable. Such ladders shall be rebuilt to the original 


IS 16234 : 2015 


ii) 


iii) 


iv) 


v) 


Test 


Q) 


Visual examination 


Step flexibility 


Step friction 


Step surface durability 


Ladder and step attachment 


strength 


Table1 Prototype Tests 
(Clause 5) 


Item to be Tested 


(3) 
Fully assembled ladder 


Six steps, which shall include 
at least one of each different 
type including replacement 
steps, if different from steps 
used in the ladder’s original 
construction 


a) One step of each different 
material of construction 
and step surface design 

b) One reference step 
constructed of clean oak, 
115 mm wide and 480 
mm long 

c) The step surface shall 
have grooves 3 mm wide, 
3 mm deep and 15 mm 
apart. The grooves shall 
run parallel to each other 
and parallel to the long 
edge of the step 

d) One metal block of a 
mass between 1.5 kg and 
3.0 kg 

e) The metal block shall 
have a flat surface no 
more than 100 mm wide 
by 135 mm long. The flat 
surface shall have leather 
or composition shoe-sole 
material attached to it 


a) One step of each different 
material of construction 
and step surface design 

b) A metal block of the type 
described under the step 
friction test arranged to 
enable a vertical load of 
380 N to be applied to it 
as it slides back and forth 
over the step under test 


Fully assembled ladder of 
longest length to be approved 


Test Procedure 


4) 


Compare to construction 
requirements in 4 and the 
manufacturer's drawings 


Place each step on a pair of 
supports located where the 
side ropes would normally 
pass through the step. Apply 
a static load uniformly for a 
period of at least 1 min over a 
100 mm wide contact area at 
the centre of the step. The 
load shall be 3.0 kN. 


a) Set the reference step in a 
level position. Place the 
metal block at the centre 
of the stepping surface on 
the reference step with 
the shoe sole material 
resting on the stepping 
surface of the reference 
step and with the longer 
edge of the metal block 
running across the 
reference step over both 
edges. Slowly raise the 
edge of the step with the 
metal block on it. 
Measure the angle at 
which the block begins to 
slide 

b) Repeat the procedure with 
the standard reference 
step and the block under 
water. 

c) Repeat the procedure in 
both dry and wet condi- 
tions using each different 
ladder step. 


a) Secure the step in a 
horizontal position with 
the loaded block resting 
on it. Move the block 
back and forth from one 
end of the step surface to 
the other and back in the 
same line for a total of 
1500 cycles 

b) Repeat the step friction 
test on the worn step in 
both dry and wet condi- 
tions making sure the 
sliding block is resting 
completely on the worn 
surface of the step 


Suspend the ladder vertically 
hanging to its full length or 
extend the ladder to its full 
length on a horizontal surface 
with the top end of the ladder 


Acceptance Criteria 


(5) 


The ladder shall comply with 
the construction requirements 
in 4 and be constructed in 
accordance with the manufac- 
turer's drawings 


a) Deflection at the centre of 
the step shall not exceed 
25 mm under load 

b) There shall be no residual 
deflection after the load is 
removed and the step is 
allowed to recover 


The angles at which the block 
begins to slide on the dry and 
wet embarkation ladder step 
shall be greater than or equal 
to the corresponding angles 
measured for the standard 
reference step 


The angles at which the block 
begins to slide on the dry and 
wet embarkation ladder step 
shall be greater than or equal 
to the corresponding angles 
measured for the standard 
reference step 


a) Steps shall not break or 
crack 

b) Attachments between any 
step and a side rope shall 
not loosen or break 


Table 1 — (Concluded ) 


IS 16234 : 2015 


(1) 


Q) 


G) 


(4) 


(5) 


secured using its own 
attachments. Apply a static 
load of 8.8 kN widely distri- 
buted over the bottom step 


c) Side ropes shall not sus- 
tain any observable dama- 
ge elongation or deforma- 
tion that remains after the 


vi)  Unrolling 


manufacturer’s standard using new side ropes and using 
undamaged steps in place of all damaged steps and 
replacement steps. 


9.3 Each ladder shall be subjected to the ladder and 
step attachment strength test listed in Table 1 at 
approximately 30 month intervals. Each ladder which 
fails the test shall be rebuilt according to 9.2 or 


Fully assembled ladder of 
longest length to be approved 


for a period of at least 1 min test load is removed 
so that the load is applied 
evenly between the side ropes 
through the step attachment 
fittings. Repeat the procedure 
at five different steps except 
that the ladder is not required 
to be hanging at full length 
and only the step under test 
its side rope attachments and 
the side ropes immediately 
above the step attachment 
fittings are required to be 
subjected to the load 


Attach the rolled up ladder to a) The steps and attachments 
anchoring fixtures in a place shall not be cracked 
away from any wall or broken or loosened 
structure that would prevent b) The ladder shall not sus- 
it from falling freely and tain damage that would 
where it can hang vertically. make it unsafe to use 
Allow the ladder to unroll 

freely 


scrapped. The ladder shall be stamped or tagged near 
the bottom of the ladder with the date of the test and 
the identification of the person or company performing 
the test. The person or company performing the test 
shall also provide a test certificate for the owner of the 
ladder indicating the details of the test including the 
date and the identification of the person or company 
performing the test. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 8) 
RECOMMENDED PRODUCTION TESTS AND INSPECTIONS 


A-1 GENERAL 


The manufacturer should have a quality assurance 
system in place which is acceptable to the approving 
maritime safety administration to ensure that 
production ladders are produced to the same standard 
as the original prototype ladder tested for approval. 


A-2 SAMPLE SELECTION AND TESTING OF 
STEPS 


Steps should be separated into lots of 100 steps or less. 
Steps of different types should be in separate lots. One 
step selected at random from each lot should be 
subjected to the step strength test described in Table 2. 


If the step fails the test ten more steps should be selected 
at random from the lot and tested as described in 
Table 2. If any of the ten steps fails the test each step 
in the lot should be tested before it is used in a ladder. 


A-3 SAMPLE SELECTION AND TESTING OF 
LADDERS 


A visual examination as described in Table 1 and the 
tests in Table 2, should be conducted by the maritime 
safety administration that approved the ladder or 
recognized organization acting on its behalf at least 
annually on a ladder taken from the production line to 
ensure that it complies with the requirements of 4 and 5. 


IS 16234 : 2015 


Table 2 Production Tests 
(Clauses A-2 and A-3) 


SI Test Item to be Tested Test Procedure Acceptance Criteria 

No. 

ad) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) Step strength Ladder step Place supports under each end of the a) The step shall not break or crack 
step where the side ropes pass p) There shall be no residual 
through the step. Apply a static load deflection after the load is 
of 8.8 kN widely distributed over a removed and the step is allowed 
100 mm wide area at the centre of to recover’ 
the step 

ii) Ladder and step Fully assembled ladder Suspend the ladder vertically a) Steps shall not break or crack 

attachment strength atleast 3 m long hanging to its full length or extend b) Attachments between any step 
the ladder to its full length on a and a side rope shall not loosen 
horizontal surface with the top end or break 
of the ladder secured using its own c) Side ropes shall not sustain any 


attachments. Apply a static load of 
8.8 kN widely distributed over the 
bottom step for a period of at least 1 
min so that the load is applied evenly 
between the side ropes through the 
step attachment fittings 


observable damage elongation or 
deformation that remains after 
the test load is removed 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 17 (0914). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central 8: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


