**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 2597-5 (1971) : Code of Practice for the use of Electron 
Tubes^ Part 5: Rectifiers and Thyratrons [LITD 4: Electron 
Tubes and Display Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 1 2597 ( Part V). 1971 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
THE USE OF ELECTRONIC VALVES 

PART V RECTIFIERS AND THYRATRONS 

( First Reprint JANUARY 1990 ) 

UDC 621.385:621.367 



(3) Ctyright 1971 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

Or 4 Oclo*<rl97I 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JULY 1973 

TO 

18:2597 (Part V).1971 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

THE USE OF ELECTRONIC VALVES 

PART V RECTIFIERS AND THYRATRONS 

Alterations 

{ First cover page, pages I and 3^ Title) — Substitute the following for 
the existing title: 

* Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF 
ELECTRON TUBES 

PART V RECTIFIERS AND THYRATRONS' 

Suhsiiluic 'electron tubrs * for * circtronic valves* and 'electron 
tubes and valves * wherever it appears in the standard. 

Substitute * tube * for * valve ' wherever it appears in the standard. 

( ETDC 39 ) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



I8t29*7(PartV)*M71 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
THE USE OF ELECTRONIC VALVES 

PART V RECTIFIERS AND THYRATRONS 

Electron Tubes and Valves Sectional Committee, ETDC 39 

Chairman Rtpristniint 

Shiu C R. SuiaAMANiAN Bbsnt Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Mtmhtrs 

Da S. S. S. AoMiWALA Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

(CSIR}» Pliant 
Shri P. N. Deoshaicta Directorate General of Technical Development^ 

New Delhi 
Siiai Balraj Bhanot ( Aitertiatt ) 
DiRSCToa, Electrical EiibiNBiR- Naval Headquarters 

IMO 

Director, ELecrRONioi & Radar Directorate General of Research and Development 

Development Estabusuiiint ( Ministry of Defence ) 

Dr R. R. Dotta Gupta Directorate General of Inspection ( Minbtry of 

Defence) 
Shri p. K. Rao ( AitirmU ) 
SiiRi B. P. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri R. K. Jain Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers* 

Association ( RETMA ), Calcutta 
SiiRi S. B. Pai ( AlUrnati ) 
Shri S. C. Majumdar Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( Ministry of 

Tourism & Civil Aviation ) 
Skri J. S. Mono A All India Radio Merchadts' Anociation, Bombay 

Shri V.J. &iArr ( AlUrnati ) 

( Bombay ) 
SiiRi l>. N. CiiAUDiiURi ( AlUtnaU ) 

( Calcutta ) - 
Shri L. S. V. Easwar ( AlUmati ) 
(Madras) 
Stmt A. V. Raju Directorate of Technical Development and Production 

( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi 
StiRt P. M . SiiANKAR Rao ( AUtrnaU ) 
pROf S. Samfatii In personal capacity ( Indian tnsHtuU rf Tgchnaiau^ 

Aiadrns ) 
Shri S. N. Sen All India Radio« New Delhi 

StiRt K. S. Srer Prakasii Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

SiiRi A. V. Ramaciiandra Rao 
(Alltrnal$\ 

(CanHmmdanfaiiZ) 

BUREAU OP INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN» S^ B^VHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DfvLH! 110002 



ttt 2997 (9tetV)- 1971 

{OmUmudfimtaitl) 

Sbm G, H, Vazb Bhabhrn Atomk RaKardi Gesntre, Bombay 

Srri Y. S. VkNXATBfWAKAK» Ulrector Goieral, ISI {JSK-^0kh Mmktr) 

Director (Blectedi) 

S§tr4iary 

Sunt N. SMMIVAaAN 

Defynty Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 

Panel for Transmitting and Industrial Tubes, ETDC 39 : P2 

Com§ntr 
Shbi S. N. Sin All India Radio, New Delhi 

Mimktrs 

Snu A. K. Majoiidar %arat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri M. V. Ramana RiDBY ( illfarnali ) 
RBpmisiMTATivB Directorate General of Givil Aviation ( Ministry oC 

Tourism & Civil Aviation ) 



Ki 2597 ( Part V)- 1971 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
THE USE OF ELECTRONIC VALVES 

PART V RECTIFIERS AND THYRATRONS 
Oi FOREWORD 

0.1 This Iiidiivu S(an(lai"d ( Part V) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 21 April 1971, after the draft fnializcd by the Electron 
TuIhs and Valves Scriioi^al Coininittcc had been aj)proved by the Elcctro- 
tcdmii%'il Division C'ouncil. 

0*2 This standard deals l^ith the additional aspects that are applicable to 
reclifii^rs and thyratron;*! The general and other more commoin aspects 
have already been dealt ipi IS : 2397 ( Part I )-1964*, which is therefore, a 
necessary adjunct to this$tandard. ' 

0«2«1 This standard Applies to vacuum diodes, gas or va^ur-filled 
diodes, grid ixmtrollcd g|s-fiUcd rectifiers and thyralrons. p 

0*3 This sland;ird is intended to give general guidance to the ddligners of 
electronic cquipnienl Ui he supplen^ented by data sheets iVom ;the tube 
mannfacturcrs so that <^>tinium eificiency, performance, lile, cttt, cjga\ be 
obtained. 

0«4 In preparing this s^uidard, considerable assistance has beeli derived 
from B.S. CP 1005 (1962) *Ck)dc of practice for the use offelcctronic 
valves •, issued by the British Standards Institutioni | 

9»5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standard codes of practice 
for the use of electron CuW and valves, A iist of standards so fai; prepared 
\x\ this scries is given below: ^^^ 

IS: 2597 (l^art I)-1964 CJodc of practice for the use of'fcl^trottie 
valves; Part I CJommerdal Tccciving valves , , .^ 

IS : 2597 (Fart II )*1967 Code of practice for the use of dectronic 
valves: Part Hfipccial quaUty Tcceivi 

V IS: 2597 (Part in )-l%9C!odc of practice for the twc of electronic 
valves: Part III Transmitting and industrial valves 

'IS: 2597 (Part IV)49BftCi^ ojFpimcttce for the i^ c^dcc^tmic 
X , , ya^; Fart IV C^thodig^ray tubes > 



«Code of practice for the ^ ^^dectroale v«lv«st Ihurt I Cbaislutftfii^^^ valves. 



ISt2597 (Part V)- 1971 

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expresss- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be roimded off in accordance 
with IS: 2- 1960*. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Part V) covers additional recommendations required 
for use of rectifier and thyratron, the general and common aspects having 
already been covered in IS : 2597 ( Part I )-1964t ( see 0.2 ). 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply 
in addition to the relevant terms and definitions contained in 
IS : 1885 ( Part IV/Sec 1 ).1965t and IS : 2597 ( Part I ).1964t. 

2.1 #1 Rectifier Tube — An electronic tube designed to rectify alternating 
current, 

2.1.2 Grid-Controlled Rectal Thyratron — A hot-cathode gas-filled tube 
in which one or more electrodes initiate, but do not control, the anode 
current. 

3. RATINGS 

3.1 Peak Inverse Voltage and Peak Inverse Transient Voltage — 

The maximum peak inverse anode voltage is the hi^^hest instantaneous 
anode voltage which the valve can withstand repetitively in a direction 
opposite to that in which it passes current. In the assessment of the 
maximum peak inverse anode voltage at which a rectifier is operating, due 
allowance shall be made for the presence of transients. Transients may 
appear, for example, as mains and switching si^rges, or as overvoltages 
produced when, after current conduction, the inverse voltage rises abrupdy 
to a high value, introducing voltage oscillations. 

3*1 •! Surges may increase the calculated or measured standing peak 
inverse voltage sufficiently to cause arc-over with consequent damage to 
and possibly the destruction of the valve. Generally their value is difficult 
to calculate and should be ascertained by means of a cathode-ray 
oscillograph. 

<1Ui1m te rounding off nonierieilvahiai ( f«9^ 

tCodeofpracdceibrtlieiiseofdeetrooiC'Valveis Fart I Coi ao ar ci al rocelvinf vivos. 
tElecttoCeduikslvocabiikryt Pi«rt IV Eloctroirtiibes and vslvoi^ Sootioiil Reoetvittf 



IS!2597(PartV).mi 

3.1.2 The manufacturer should be consulted for the peak permissible 
inverse anode voltage for non-repetitive surges. 

3.2 Critical Grid Voltage — For every value of the anode voltage, there 
is a definite value of grid voltage at which the pulse will fire. If this firing 
point is plotted ( grid voltage versus anode voltage ), the firing ( control ) 
characteristic is obtained which should be furnished by the manufacturer 
in order to ensure reliable firing and to avail of the facility of control. 

3.3 Peak Anode Carrent — Adequate precautions should be taken to 
ensure that the peak anode current does not exceed the manufacturer's 
rated value. For a condenser input filter, when a minimum value of 
limiting resistance appears in the published tube data, the figure quoted 
should be taken as incloding the resistance component of the source 
impedance but excluding tube resistance. Any resistance specifically 
added to make up the necessary minimum may be put either in the 

!)rimary or in the secondary circuit of the supply transformer. In the 
brmer case, however, du^ allowance shall be made for the transformer 
ratio. Where it can be shown that other design precautions have been 
taken to ensure that both the working and surge peak current cannot 
exceed the permitted maxima, the omission of series limiting resbtance 
may be permissible, but it k recommended that the tube manufacturer be 
consulted. In gas or vapour-filled tubes the current is limited maibly by 
the circuit impedance and only to a relatively small extent by tl^^ tube 
itself. 

NoTB -— AttentioQ if drawn to the provifioBi of SJI.1. 

3.4 Majdmum Surge ( Fsolt ) Anode Current — The maximum surge 
( fault ) anode current rating applies to transient conditions only; Exceed- 
ing this value, even once, may reduce the life of a tube; and rcqpeated 
surges may destory it. The manu&cturer^s data may be consul^ for 
designing suitable protective devices for interrupting the surge (fault ) 
current accordingly within the specified time ( usually 100 millisecotds ). 

3*5 MAjdmam Averm|^e Gnrrent — This is the maximum average 
current which the valve is designed to carry continuously. ^In the case of 
a continuously repeating cycle, for example at commercial frequencies, 
the average current may be measured b)r a dc moving coil instrument 
under steady load conditions* Otherwise, it is necessary to calculate the 
average current over, a period not exceeding a definite time interval which 
in usually specified by the manufificturer. When the load |i]uctuates, the 
readings should be averaged over the averaging time specified in the 
tube data. 

3*6 Preqiaeney -r Attention should be given to &e manufacturer's recom* 
jiiendatiom regarding operating firequency. Except where otherwise 
itated the ratings api^y to cmeration at commercial fiitquencies that is 
25 to ^ Hz. 



iSi2S»7(PtetV)«l»71 

3^1 The lower the frequency^ the longer the time for which it ^ neces- 
sary for the anode current to be continuously at or near its peak value: 
some manufacturers^ therefore, reduce the peak current rating for operation 
at the lower frequencies. On the other nandi the higher the frequency^ 
the less the time allowed for deionization between successive positive half 
cycles; this sets an upper limit (%^ch depends on the conditions of 
service } to the firequency at whidi controlled operation is possible. 

3*7 Gommiitatioa Factor — The conunutation factor is related to the 
TOx>cess of deionization and is governed by external circuitry (see %)^ 
The commutation factor as specified in the tube data shall not be 
exceed^. 

3.7*1 The commutatious^factor may be measured by means of a dual 
beam-cathode-ray oscilloscope. From the curves ofi«a/(0 and F*- 
f(t)y the current in amperes is read off 10 microseconds before commuta- 
tion and the time ^ ( |as ) taken by the anode voltage after commutation 
to reach 200 V in the succeeding mverse phase. Then the commutation 
factor is 20 t'/Z^. 

3*8 ILecdBmr Ratiiig Chmrtm — Rectifier ratings for volta^ and cturent 
are inter-related in such a manner that it is often convement to express 
them in the form of three charts ffcnerally described as rectifier rating 
charts. The use of these charts will ensure that a tube will be operated 
with the maximum possible efficiency without exceeding its published 
ratings. These charts apply only to single phase configuration. For 
multiphase confi^ration, relevant factor should either be calculated or 
should be ascertamed from the nuuiufacturer. 

S.8.1 Examples of the rating charts and an explanation of their use in 
relation to t)^ of filter^ supply resistance, output voltage etc, are as 
follows: 

a) ChtAe input iUUr — The maximum anode supplv voltage which 
may be used as indicated at pK>int G on Rating Chart I ( Fig. 1 }. 
This voltage is the open circuit rms v(dtage availaUe at the 
supply terminals. 

Satisfactory operation within the published ratings may be 
achieved at any dc current output within the boundaries 
A^ By C, JD, C, of rating Chart I, provided that, at all times, 
the choke input filter inductance & not less than tlie n^n^um 
value necessary for good refutation and smoothu^. "" 

Under the limiting: conditions represented by point C^ 
inductance quoted for the chdce input filter will not necessarily 
provHe adequate rq^ati<m m^ smoothing at lower Vttltidi of dc 
outjmt ciurent. It is within the scope of me equipment ckislj|(tM^ 
to estimate the higher value of choke input mter inductai^ 
required. 

6 



I8t2S»7(PutV).1971 



DC OUTPUT 
CURREKT,mA 




ANODE SUPPLY VOLTAGE RMS 

Fio. 1 Rating Cha^t I 

b) Capacitor input filter -^Tht range of dc output currents which may 
be obtained over the permissible range of anode supply voltage 
13 indicated by the l)oundarics A^ E, D, G, on Ratm{[ Chart 1, 
but reference shoukj be made to Rating Charts II ( Fig. 2 ) and 
III ( Fig. 3 ) so that operation within the maximum peak st^y 
state, and maximum surge anode current ratings is assured. 

BOUNDARY 



DC OUTPUT 
CURRENT.mA 



NOTE 




•THE SHAOINO 
MOICATES AREAS 
OF PERMISSWlf 
OFERATIOM 



H) 

VOLTAGE RECTFICATION EFPIC€NCY 

Fxo, 2 Rating Chart II 



um ANODE 
SUPPLY 
RESISTANCE 
OHMS 



J MAX 
ANOOE SUPPLY V0LTA06 RMS 

Fio, 3 EUtuvo CHAm? Ill 




ISt2S97 (Part V). 1971 

Rating Charts II and III should be used in the following 
order: 

1) Minimum supply resistofut — For the required anode supply 
voltage determme from Rating Chart III ttie minimum supply 
resistance necessary per anode so that operation within the 
maximum surge anode current rating is assured. 

The minimum value of supply resistance includes the resist- 
ance presented by the transformer windings to the anode 
circuit, and if necessary, additional series resistance shall be 
added to the anode circuit to obtain the minimum value 
found from Rating Chart III. 

Adequate protection against surge ( fault ) current is not 
assured ( sei also 3 A ). 

2) Maximum dc output voltage — Rating Chart II shows that for a 
given dc output current there is a maximum value of voltage 
rectification efficiency or dc output voltage beyond which the 
maximum peak steady state anode current is exceeded. 

The voltage rectification efficiency at the required anode 
sup)Dly voltage and dc output current shall be less than or 
equal to the voltage rectification efficiency obtained from 
Rating Chart II for the required dc output current. 

If the rectification efficiency exceeds the value obtained from 
Rating Chart II, additional series resistance shall be added to 
the anode circuit to reduce the peak steady state anode current 
to a value less, or equal to the maximum rated value. 

The voltage rectification efficiency is found by measurement 
of the dc output voltage using the following relationship: 

y 
Voltage rectification efficiency = • 



EV"2 



where 



V0 = dc output voltage in volts, and 
E «= anode supply voltage in volts rms. 

3.9 Maltiple Ratings — Particular emphasis is directed to the warning 
giVen in 3.3 of IS : 2597 ( Part I ).1964* that voltage and current ratings 
on rectifiers are not mutually compensating, and where several alternative 
Voltage and current ratings are given, it should not be assumed that these 
can be safely extended in either direction. 

3.10 Input Filter — When the published ratings of a rectifier arc stated 
specifically for a choke*input filter only, it should not be used in a 
capacitor-input filter except t^fter consultation \vith the manufacturer, 

^Cod« of practice for ihe use of eleetronic valvet : Part I Gotntnercial receiving valves, 

8 



Us 2S#7 (Part V). 1971 

4. MOUNTING 

4.1 All rectifiers and thyratrons which contain mercury vapour, partially 
or wholly, should ordinarily be mounted bas^ down and in a verticail position. 
Caire shall be taken while mounting to provide adequate ventilation and 
proper fixation in the socket. The surface of each of the socket contacts 
shall always be clean and free from oxidation. Improper contacts lead to 
increased contact resistance with consequent reduction of voltages in the 
filament circuit. They produce overheating of the tube due to insuflSdent 
emission. 

4.2 To prevent damage due to vibration of severity exceeding 0*5 g, spring 
suspension shall be provMed. 

4.3 In cases where several tubes are to be mounted, a minimiun distance 
between the tube bulbs should be maintained in order to avoid over- 
heating. It is recommended that this distance should be at least half of 
the bulb diameter. 

4.4 Since external electric and magnetic fields due to metal parts or leads 
in the vicinity of the bulb may result in back firing inside the tube 
adequate shielding should be provided. The anode lead should be led 
away at right angles to the bulb instead of parallel to it. 

4.5 The glass bulb and contacts should be cleaned periodically. 

5. COOLING 

5.1 A gas-fiUed tube shall be operated within definite temperature limits. 
If a tube is being operated at high ambient temperatures or at its^specified 
maximum ratings, adequate flow of surrounding air or fan cooling shall 
be provided. However, care shall be taken that the lower part of the tube, 
where mercury condenses, shall be maintained at temperature Icnvcr than 
that at the upper part of the tube, 

3*2 Envelope Teniperatiire -— - With a mercury vapour rectifier the 
vapour pressure is a function of the temperature of the coldest spot inside 
the valve to which the vapour has unrestrictwj access. This temperature 
should be maintained within the limits specified by the manufacturer if 
use is to be made of the fiiU ratings of the rectifier. 

5.2.1 The performance of the mercury vapour rectifier differs from that 
of the high vacuum rectifier in that, owing to the presence of the mi&rcury 
vapour, the voltage drop between anode and cathode in the conducting 
direction is comparatively low and normally of constant value, usually 
between 6 and 20 V. Although this voltage droD is negligible in 
comparison with the output voltage of a high voltage rectifier, it is 
important in the rectifier itself. As the cold spot temperature is reduced, 
the! voltage drop increases and with it tihe energy dissipated in the tube; 



nt25§7(nivtV)-19n 

this may lead to overheating and sometimes it causes damage due to 
excessive iortbombardment of the cathode. 

5.2»2 Any increase in a tube drop is likely also to increase the anode 
dissipation beyond the permitted maximum value, with the possible ill 
effects of anode emission and cathode poisoning by release of occluded 
gases. 

5*2«3 On the other hand, if the cold spot temperature ( and hence the 
vapour pressure ) is allowed to increase, the inverse voltage which the valve 
can withstand is reduced. This voltage decreases very rapidly as the 
temperature increases above the maximum permissible rated vsdut. 

6. DEIONIZATION TIME AND RECOVERY TIME 

6*1 After anode current has ceased to flow, a process of deionization 
takes place, in which the electrons and ions in the discharge space recom- 
bin*e to form uncharged gas or vapour molecules. The rate of deionization 
is a function of electrode design, the gas or vapour pressure and the 
degree of ionization present in the discharge space. The degree of 
ionization present is itself a function of the anode current and the rate at 
which the anode current falls to zero. 

6.2 Deionization of a given gap in a gas-filled tube is the time re<}uired for 
the gap to regain the preconduction characteristic after interruption of the 
discharge across the gap. The recovery time of a given gap in a g»s«-filled 
tube is the time required for the gap to attain a specified condiuon ( for 
example, the regaining of grid control ) after interruption of the discharge 
across the gap. 

6.3 As the deionization time depends on the grid voltage, two values of 
deionization time at different grid voltages are given in the tube data. 
These values are only approximate and they vary with the gas pressure. 
The specified times are, therefore, approximate values retcrring to a 
particular set of conditions and are givexi mainly for comparison. 

€•4 The time required for recovery increases with anode current, with the 
rate at which the anode current falls to zero and with the gas or vapour 
pressure. In the grid controlled rectifiers and thyratroQS, the grid 
exercises no control during the passage of anode current ( except under 
special conditions . not normally met). When current flow ceases, th^ 

?id rqgains control only alter sufficient deionization has taken pli^, 
he grid voltage required to prevent conduction varies with the owree 
ofdefonization and in turn with the anode voltage. The recovery tmHe 
may be reduced by making the grid volta^gemore negative or by reducihj: 
the grid circuit resistance pr b)r both. A negative voltage on the ahbro ' 
m^y have the advantage of assisting deionnation but it also inereiiiN^ the 
tendency to fiashover with a danger, in extreme cases^ of a damage t6 fifj^ 



IBt2597(PtetV).lfn 

tube; it may lead to gas ' clean-up * and reduce the life of valves not 
provided with auxiliary means of maintaining the required gas or vapour 
pressure. 

7. USE OF REGTIFIEIIS IN PARALLEL 

7.1 When two or more rectifiers are used in parallel, a separate limiting 
or stabilizing device, such as a resistor or reactor, should be connected in 
each anode lead. Without these precautions, the rectifier having the 
lowest voltage drop will carry the heaviest current and may fail because of 
overloading. 

7.2 In gas-filled tubes there is the risk that only one tube may strike and 
hence it will carry all the current. Thus it is generally undesirable to 
operate gas-filled tubes in parallel. This restriction docs not apply when 
a second tube is intended as a standby to ensure continuity of service on 
the failure of the other. 

8. TUBE PROTECTION 

8.1 Switching On — The filaments/cathodes of gas-filled tubes should be 
heated for a sufficiently Jong period before the anode voltage is applied. 
To allow sufficient preheating, the application of anode voltage should be 
delayed by a suitable time delay relay. With high voltage rociifiers and 
thyratrons with ( Vinv greater than 5 kV ), it is a good practic|b to raise 
the anode voltage to its full value in steps or continuously over aVpciiod of 
one to five minutes. Procedures recommended for switching on the tube 
and applying the anode voltage recommended by the manufacturer should 
be followed at all particularly with regard to heating time. i 

8.2 Rajpid Start — For applications which require an extremely short 
preheating time, arrangements should be available to apply a !iit;hcr 
fUam^nt voltage and for switching on the anode voltage after ^ spci ified 
short heating time. The tube manufacturer should be consulted as regards 
the value of filament voltage and heating time required in sue h cases, Tiii 
higher value of filament voltage is usually obtained by a suitMhie^ap in tUc 
filament transformer and the predetermined delay for svviiehing on (he 
anode voltage is controlled by a precise timer. 

8.3 Overload Relays — Suitable overload relays shall be provided as 
protection against excessive load current and excessive peak or average 
tube current. 

8*4 Jproleetive Reaiatorf --^ In order to limit short-circuit currents 
restilting from inadvertent short circuits, suitable anode resistors shall be 
provided. 

I » 



I8s2597( Purr V). 1971 

8.5 Soft Transformer — Use of soft transformers ( transformers with 
large leakage coefficient) is recommended for limiting the back*fire 
current. 

9. RECTIFIERS WITH lONICALLY HEATED CATHODES 

9.1 In deciding on the starting supply voltage, due allowance should be 
made for the fact that the striking voltage of a tube increases with life^ 
otherwise it will be found that the tubes will fail prematurely. 

10. CATHODE HEATING 

10.1 Provision of Centre Tap — For directly heated tubes where the anode 
current is appreciable compared with the filament-heating current, it is 
desirable that the transformer secondary supplying the heater voltage 
should have a centre tap from which the anode current is drawn, 

10.1 J It should be noted, however, that in the latter case, the. anode 
current, including any surge or fault current, passes through the heater 
transformer winding. In some tubes requirements are met by the provi- 
sion of a separate cathode output terminal which is permanently con* 
nected to the mid-point of the filament itself. 

10.1.2 In large filament type rectifies the peak anode current is often 
several amperes. Owing to the inherently low voltage drop of the rectifier, 
particularly in the case of the gas-filled type, the voltage drop along the 
filament is comparable with the voltage drop between anode and filament 
The provision of a centre tap results in approximately equal distribution of 
current when the peak current is moderate. 

10.2 Pliase Relatioasliip — Maximum ratings specified for large directly 
heated rectifiers are often based on the assumption that the filament trans- 
former is so connected that the anode and the filament voltages are subs- 
tantially 90^ out of phase. In multiphase supply circuit this can 
readily be ensured, but in single phase circuits the use of some form of 
phase shiftep is desirable. 

10.2.1 For laxige currents the phase relatiomhip becomes important and 
if the anode and filament are operated in phase, the anode potential it at 
its maximum when one end of the filament is at positive maximum and die 
other end atnq^ative maximum. Anode current tHen tends to be drawn 
mainly firckn one end of the filament, camii^ uneven heating aloii^ tbt 
filament which may seriously reduce tfie Hfis ofdie tube. If, however/ tte 
anode voltage and the filament voltage are 90^ out of phase the tendency 
is to equalize the anode current throughout the filament. A j^miii^ dUtplmo^ 
ment of 60^ or 120^ is generally easi^ to provide and tne tidie nuutiii^ 
fiicturer should be cddsulted at to its aocq;>taraity. 

12 



IS : 2597 (Part V). 1971 

10.3 Cathode Heating Time— In gas-filled tu)>es and in some large 
vacuum tubes it is necessary to allow a time ( specified by the manufacturer) 
for the cathode to reach the operating temperature ( see also 8.1 and 10.4 ). 

10.4 Preheating of Mercnry Vapour Rectifiers — With a mercury 
vapour tube it is necessary to ensure that the temperature of the tube is 
above the minimum specified operating figure {see 5.2 ). Except in the case 
of small tube and with normal or low ambient temperature, this will 
generally require a longer time than that specified for the cathode heating. 

10.4.1 For a mercury vapour rectifier extra preheating of the filament or 
cathode is necessary after transport or handhng, or when the tul>c has 
been newly installed or has been inactive for a long period. It is essential 
that a sufficient time should elapse between the switching off the cathode 
supply and the application of the anode voltage ( see 8.1 ) to allow mercury 
deposited on the anode or cathode to vapourize. 

10.5 Abnormal Voltage Variations — Whereas for most types of tubes 
abnormally low heater or filament voltages produce a reduction in emission, 
in the case of thyratrons irregular operation may also result. Serious 
damage may also occur in large tubes. Use of automatic voltage regulator 
for filament power supply is recommended. 

11. RADIO FR£Q](JENCY EFFECTS 

11*1 Gas-filled rectifiers should not be operated in the vicinity of appreci- 
able rf fields since such conditions may cause continuous ionization or 
faulty control. 

11.2 Ionization in a tube may be caused by a surrounding rf field or by 
the appUcation of rf voltages to the tube through its associated wiring. It 
may» therefore, be necessary to screen the valve and its leads or to employ 
appropriate rf filters. 

12. INTERFERENCE FORM GAS-FILLED RECTIFIERS 

12*1 A S[as-fiUed rectiiier can cause rf interference in adjacent circuits. To 
avoid thit» it may be necessary to screen the tube and its leads and also to 
insert if filters in the supply leads. 

13. ORnVCONTROIXED RECTIFIERS AND THYRATRONS 

15.0 Owing to the presence of grid in these types of tubes, the recom-^ 
meadatlons specified in 134 to u«3 are particularly applicable. 

13.1 Grid Realataaca — A series ffrid resistance is required and its valves 
should lie within the range specified by the tube manufiicturer. 

IS 



ISi 2597 (Part V). 1971 

13*1 •! If the resistance is too low, the grid current may be excessive ami 
damage may be caused by overheating of the grid with consequent 
release of gas, or grid emission. Care should be taken to avoid a grid 
resistance so low that the voltage at the grid during conduction is more 
positive than -- 1 V and during the non-conduction period, the voltage 
at the grid docs not become more negative than —500 V. 

13.1 .2 If the resistance is too high, the grid may lose control owing to 
the grid potential being reduced by grid current flow through the grid 
resistance and the recovery time nwiy be unduly increased. 

13.1 .3 When operating within its rating, a thyratron shows approxi- 
mately linear relationship between its gnd potential and the anode 
voltage necessary to start ionization. Above a certain anode voltage this 
linear relationship no longer holds and breal^down may occur even 
though the grid is highly negative. If a tube is operated in this region it 
will be unstable in operation and may become completely uncontrollable. 

13.2 Antomatlc Bias — In circuits which apply automatic bias the sum 
of the bias voltage developed and the peak value of the heater voltage 
shall not exceed the heater-td*cathode voltage maximum specified by the 
manufacturer otherwise it may initiate and sustain ionization between 
heater and cathode, thereby modifying, if not nullifying, the control 
exercised by the grid. 

133 Control Ghmracteriitic wMi Directly-Hemted Cathode — Atten- 
tion is drawn to 33 of IS : 2597 ( Part I )*1964*. 

13.4 Gas Reservoir — Some manufacturers provide an extra store of gas 
inside their thyratrons in addition to the free gas present in the envelope. 
This gas is absorbed in a reservoir ( or replenisher ) from which it can be 
relea^ by suitable local heating to replace gas lost during operation by 
the gas clean-up. This device lengthens the useful life of such valves and 
ensures that the optimum gas pressure conditions can be nuuntained in the 
tube over most of its extended life. 

13.4.1 It is important that the manufacturer's recommendation for the 
operation of the reservoir or replenisher heater should be followed. 

13.5 Switdbiim Speed — Switching speed is the rate at which the thyra* 
troh is made to fire after the grid regains its faculty of control The maxi- 
mum sp^ that could be obtained has necessarily to be governed by the 
recovery time. If the period during which a thyratron is not fired is 
shorter than the recovery time, the control of the tube is no longer 
possible* 

13JI4 Operational hints for higher switching speed may be obtained 
from the manuiacturen, if required. 

^OodeofpiactlcelbrdieuseofclectroiikvaiwM: Pirt I CSommereial reeeiviiig valvw 

14 



tt}2597(lPtortV)-l971 
14. STORAGE AND TRANSIT 

14.1 Particular care should be taken in the storage of mercury vapour 
rectifiers. Once a tube has been conditioned, no redistribution of mercury 
should be allowed to take place. Precautions should be taken so that the 
tubes are not tilted either in storage or while transferring from circuit to 
storage or uia versa. 

14.2 The original crate or packing may be used for storage and for transit. 



15 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Mary, NEW DELH1 1 10002 
Telephones: 331 01 31. 331 13 76 Telegrams: Manaksartsthe 

( Common to all Offices) 
Regional Offices: Telep/fone 

Central Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadui Shah Zafar Marg, (331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 J331 13 76 

^Eastern : 1/1 4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road 36 24 99 

Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 
Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, ( 2 18 43 

CHANDIGARH 160036 I 3 16 41 

f 41 24 42 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 i 41 25 19 

(41 2916 
tWestem : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 92 95 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branch Offices: 

'Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur ( 2 63 48 

AHMADABAD 380001 | 2 63 49 

^Peenya Industrial Area Ist Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road (38 49 65 

BANGALORE 560058 |38 49 56 

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 6 67 16 

BHOPAL 462003 

Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5 36 27 

53/6. Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 3 31 77 

GUWAHATI 781003 

6-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), 23 10 83 

HYDERABAD 500001 

R1 4 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 { 6 98 32 

117/418 B Sarvodnya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 j^] ^ 92 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 6 23 OS 

T.C. No. 14/1421. University P.O.. Palayam f 6 21 04 

TRIVANDRUM 695035 \6 21 17 

Inspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): 

Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205* A West High Court Road, 2 51 71 

Shankar Nagar Square. NAGPUR 440010 
Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1 332 Shivaii Nagar, 5 24 36 

PUNE411005 



*SalM OfMce in Calcutta is at 5 Chowrinehea Approach, P. O. Princap 27 SS 00 
Straat. Calcutta 700072 

fSalat OfNca in Bombay ia at Novalty Chambart, Grant Road, 89 56 2S 
Bombav 400007 

tSaiea Office in Bangatora ia at Unity Building. Narasimharaja Squara, 22 36 71 
BangaloN|J60002 

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



