MAT WAH IS 14738 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


sat uyari ae star — faerie 
(Yee Yaa ) 


Flexible Intermediate Bulk 
Containers (FIBCs) — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 55.180.99 


© BIS 2017 


ads AM SKİ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM gei, 9 geigugig pi Art, we eet (1000? 
elimiz MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2017 Price Group 7 


Transport Packages and Packaging Codes Sectional Committee, TED 24 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Transport Packages and Packaging Codes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport 
Engineering Division Council. 


Indian Standard IS 14738 was earlier published in six parts which were based on ISO/WD 11895 (Parts 1 to 6) 
brought out by International organization of Standardization (ISO). ISO/WD 11895 (Parts 1 to 6) have not 
matured into ISO standards. This revised standard has been brought out in one composite standard merging all 
the six parts of the earlier standard. Major changes in the revised standard are modification in the test method for 
“Compression/stacking test’, requirement of testing of two specimens for “Cyclic top lift test’, one each having 
the shortest and vertical dimensions, modification in the FIBC label and incorporation of BIS Certification marking 
clause. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been drawn from the following: 


ISO 21898 : 2004 ‘Packaging - Flexible intermediate bulk containers (FIBCs) for non-dangerous goods’, issued 
by International organization of Standardization (ISO) 


BS EN 1898 : 2001 ‘Specifications for flexible intermediate bulk containers (FIBCs), for non-dangerous goods’, 
issued by British Standards Institute (BSI) 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14738 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


FLEXIBLE INTERMEDIATE BULK CONTAINERS 
(FIBCs) — SPECIFICATION 


(First Revision) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies materials, construction design 
and performance requirements for flexible intermediate 
bulk containers (FIBCs) intended to contain non- 
dangerous solid materials in powder, granular or paste 
form and designed to be lifted from top by integral or 
detachable devices. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following standard contains provisions, which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
15875 : 2009 Intermediate bulk containers (IBCs) 
for non dangerous goods — 
Terminology 


3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given 
in IS 15875 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 General Definitions 


3.1.1 Flexible Intermediate Bulk container (FIBC) — 
An intermediated bulk container having the body made 
of a flexible material such as woven fabric, plastics 
film or paper, designed to be in contact with the 
contents either directly or through an inner liner and 
easily foldable when empty. 


3.1.1.1 Heavy duty re-usable flexible intermediate bulk 
container — FIBC designed and intended to be used 
for a multitude of fillings and discharges. An FIBC of 
this category is both field and factory repairable in such 
a way that the tensile strength across a repair is at least 
as great as that of the original. 


3.1.1.2 Standard duty re-usable flexible intermediate 
bulk container — FIBC designed and intended to be 
used for a limited number of fillings and discharges. 
An FIBC of this category cannot be re-used if damaged, 
that is, not repairable. 


NOTE — Replacement of an inner liner is not considered a 

repair. 
3.1.1.3 Single-trip flexible intermediate bulk container 
— An FIBC designed and intended to be used for one 
filling only. 

NOTE — FIBC of this category cannot be reused. Neither 


replacement of an inner liner nor repair of the FIBC is relevant 
to this category. 


3.1.2 FIBC Type — FIBCs of like design, manufactured 
using like materials and methods of construction 
(giving at least equal performance) to the same nominal 
cross-sectional dimensions within type, by comparison 
with the samples successfully passing the type test(s) 
the circumference may be increased by up to 10 percent 
provided the same geometry is maintained. The design 
vertical dimensions may be increased to achieve a 
series of different volumes. Where the type has a base 
discharge spout, smaller diameter discharge spouts of 
like design may be used. The presence or absence of 
an inner liner does not constitute a change of type. 


3.1.3 Safe Working Load (SWL) — The maximum load 
which the FIBC should carry in service, as certified. 


3.1.4 Safety Factor (SF) — The integer quotient 
between the final test load in the cyclic top lift test and 
the SWL value rounded at lower side. Safety factors 
are illustrated as follows: 


Illustration 1 Illustration 2 


Designated SWL 500 kg 500 kg 
Final load, cyclic test 2 400 kgf 2 600 kgf 
Quotient 4.8 5.2 
Integer quotient rounded 4 5 
Lower side 


The results in Illustration 1 indicate a single trip FIBC 
which does not meet the requirements of this standard 
whilst those in Illustration 2 indicate a single trip FIBC 
which meets the requirements. 


3.1.5 Type Test — A test or series of tests conducted 
to determine whether the FIBC meets the requirements 
of this standard. 


3.1.6 Lifting Device — Integral and/or fixed lifting 
devices which form part of the FIBC and are tested 
with it. Lifting devices are shown in Fig.1 to Fig. 5. 


NOTE — Detachable lifting devices are regarded as lifting tools. 


IS 14738 : 2017 


Each lifting device Each lifting device 
fixed at two points fixed at one points 


Fic. 1 Four POINTED LIFTING DEVICES 


O 


CC d 


Sİ) 


Two tubular Lifting device formed 
lifting device out of the walls 


Fic. 2 Two Point LIFTING DEVICES 


Hoe 


Two lifting devices Two lifting devices 
fixed on side walls fixed on base 


Fic. 3 Two Lirtinc DEVICES 


IS 14738 : 2017 


Lifting devices formed 
out of the walls 


Fic. 4 ONE Point LIFTING DEVICE 


Fic. 5 Rope LIFTING DEVICES 


3.2 FIBC Parts 


3.2.1 Walls — Tube of one or more layers, seamless or 
made out of one or more panels joined together. 


3.2.2 Base — That part of the FIBC which is connected 
to or integral with the walls and forms the base of the 
standing FIBC. 


3.2.2.1 Plain base — Base without an opening. 


3.2.2.2 Base with opening — Base with opening or 
flat, can have the Flat Base or conical, square, circular 
or any other form base, with the opening depending 
on the customer’s requirement. 


3.2.2.3 Full open base — Extension of opening base 
to the wall or walls, forming the base of FIBC after 
closing. 


3.2.2.4 Top — Upper part of the FIBC, excluding 
handling devices, forming the top of the FIBC after 
closing. 


3.2.4 Body — The walls and base of the FIBC. 


3.2.5 Inner Liner — Integral or removable container 
which fits into the FIBC. 


3.3 Operating Devices 
3.3.1 Filling Devices 
3.3.1.1 Filling opening — Opening for filling the FIBC. 


3.3.1.2 Filling spout — Tube-shaped part at the top 
for filling the FIBC (see Fig. 6). 


3.3.1.3 Fillings slit — Slit-shaped opening at the top 
for filling the FIBC (see Fig. 7). 


3.3.2 Discharging Devices 
3.3.2.1 Outlet — Opening for discharging the FIBC. 


3.3.2.2 Discharge spout — Tube-shaped part at the base 
for discharging the FIBC. 


3.3.2.3 Closing parts — Webbings, cords, straps, etc, 
which are used to close the filling and discharging 
devices. 


IS 14738 : 2017 


IU 


Fic. 6 Top witH FILLING SPOUT 


Fic. 7 Top wm FILLING SLIT 


3.4 Handling Devices 


3.4.1 Supporting and Lifting Devices — Webbings, 
loops, ropes, eyes, frames or other devices formed from 
a continuation of the walls of the FIBC or integral or 
detachable and are used to support or lift the FIBC. 


3.4.1.1 Four point lifting — Four lifting devices used 
simultaneously to lift the FIBC. 


3.4.1.2 Two point lifting — Two lifting devices used 
simultaneously to lift the FIBC. 


3.4.1.3 One point lifting — One lifting device or more 
lifting devices brought to one point for lifting. 


3.5 Safety and Protection Devices 


Valves, ventilation devices and additional parts like 
top with skirt, which protect the filling, discharging or 
handling devices (see Fig. 8). 


3.6 Coated and Laminated Materials 


Materials having a surface coating or comprising two 
or more layers laminated together to protect the 
contents of the filled FIBC or to protect the 
environment against the leakage of the contents. 


3.7 Special Treatments 


3.7.1 Stabilization — It is the modification of the FIBC 
materials to give better resistance against weathering 
and ageing. For example by the addition of an ultra- 
violet (UV) absorber and or an anti-oxidant 


3.7.2 Electrostatic Conductivity Treatments — A 
treatment for modifying the electrostatic behavior of 
the FIBC. 


3.7.3 Other Treatments — For example, flame retardant 
properties, Insect repellent treatment, etc. 


Fic. 8: TOP WITH SKIRT 


4 


4 MATERIALS, CONSTRUCTION AND 


DESIGN 


4.1 Materials 


4.1.1 FIBC’s shall be manufactured from suitable 
flexible materials. These materials shall be covered by 
a written specification. 


4.1.2 The properties of the materials may be modified 
by suitable additives to improve the resistance of the 
materials against, such as, degradation by heat and 
sunlight and also the effect of static electricity. 


4.1.3 All material shall be tested for breaking force 
and shall be capable of retaining at least 85 percent of 
the original breaking force after being completely 
immersed in water for 25 + 1 h. This measurement 
shall be taken after drying the test specimen followed 
by conditioning for 60 + 5 min at temperature of 
27 + 2 °C and relative humidity of 65 + 5 percent. 


4.1.4 All load bearing materials which are likely to be 
exposed to sunlight shall, after the UV-resistance test 
in accordance with the test method at 10, retain at least 
50 percent of the original values of the breaking 
strength and elongation of the materials. 


4.1.5 Materials should be chosen and joined together 
in such a way that their recovery is possible. 


4.2 Construction 


All stitched seams and joints shall be locked off and/ 
or back sewn or a minimum 20 mm tail provided. All 
stitched seam-ends shall be secured. Joints that are 
welded, glued or heat-sealed, shall be clean. 


4.3 Design 


Height of the FIBC when filled, shall be between 0.5 
and 2.0 times the diameter at the base for FIBCs with 
a circular cross-section and the length of the shorter 
side at the base for FIBCs with a rectangular cross- 
section. 


5 PERFORMANCE TESTS 


5.1 All types of FIBCs shall be subjected to the 
following tests: 


a) Cyclic top lift test, and 
b) Compression/Stacking test. 


At least three specimen of each FIBC type shall be 
submitted for testing leading to certification. Specimen 
shall be tested as follows: 


1) Specimen 1 — Cyclic top lift test using the 
FIBC having the shortest vertical dimension. 


2) Specimen 2 — Cyclic top lift test using the 
FIBC having the greatest vertical dimension. 


IS 14738 : 2017 


3) Specimen 3 — Compression testing using the 
FIBC having the greatest vertical dimension. 


One specimen of the FIBC type shall be taken for each 
test. An FIBC which has passed one test may be used 
for other test. 


5.2 Selection of FIBC for Testing 


5.2.1 FIBC selected for testing shall be representative 
of the lot being tested. 


5.2.2 Where a type of FIBC covers a range of vertical 
dimensions, FIBC selected for the type tests shall be 
those with the smallest vertical dimensions. 


When the FIBC type has only one fixed vertical 
dimension, only Specimens 1 and 3 needs to be 
submitted and tested to withstand the tests. 


6 TEST REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Cyclic Top Lift Test 


6.1.1 FIBC shall be subjected to a cyclic top lift test in 
accordance with test method given at 9, for cycles as 
given in 6.1.1.1, 6.1.1.2 or 6.1.1.3 as applicable. 


6.1.1.1 Heavy duty re-usable FIBC 


This contains 70 cycles at 6 times of SWL (Safe 
Working Load) and a final cycle at 8 times of SWL. 


6.1.1.2 Standard duty re-usable FIBC 


This contains 70 cycles at 4 times of SWL and a final 
cycle at 6 times of SWL. 


6.1.1.3 Single-trip FIBC 


This contains 30 cycles at a test load of 2 times SWL 
and a final cycle at a test load of 5 times SWL. 


6.1.1.4 Criteria for Conformity 


After the FIBC has been tested the following conditions 
shall be satisfied: 


a) No breakage of any lifting devices to the 
extent that any of the lifting devices ceases to 
support its load; 

b) When tested with an inner liner, no protrusion 
of the latter beyond the outer surface of the 
FIBC except through the closure(s) where this 
is a design feature; 


c) No loss of contents. A slight discharge on 
impact, for example, from closures or stitch 
holes, should not be considered to be a failure 
of the FIBC provided that no further leakage 
occurs after the FIBC has been raised clear 
of the ground; and 

d) No deterioration of the body which renders 
the FIBC unsafe for transport or storage. 


IS 14738 : 2017 


6.2 Compression/Stacking Test 
6.2.1 Applicability 


All FIBCs types shall be subjected to the compression/ 
stacking test. 


6.2.2 Calculation of the Superimposed Load 


The load to be placed on the FIBC shall be four times 
the SWL of the FIBC. 


6.2.3 Duration of the Test 
The load shall be applied for at least 6 h. 
6.2.4 Criteria for Passing the Test 


After the test there shall be no loss of contents and no 
deterioration of the body which renders the FIBC 
unsafe for transport or storage. 


7 CERTIFICATION 


7.1 FIBC type which conforms to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified by an authorized 
certifying body with a certificate of conformity based 
on a successful test report(s). The certificate shall 
contain the data shown for the marking in 
8.1(a) to 8.1(p) together with the following: 


a) Name and address of the certifying body; 

b) Names and address(es) of the test station(s) 
together with the reference and dates of the 
relevant test reports; and 

c) Material used as contents in the cyclic top lift 
and compression/stacking tests. 


7.2 A certificate for a FIBC type shall be valid for a 
period of three years from the date of issue. 


7.3 FIBC certified and marked as a single trip FIBC in 
conformity with this standard shall not be re-used. 


7.4 An FIBC certified and marked as re-usable (heavy 
or standard duty) FIBC in conformity with this standard 
shall be re-used only with the same type of contents as 
in the first use. Re-use of FIBCs with contents differing 
from those from the first use is not permitted. 


8 MARKING 


8.1 All FIBCs which found conforming with the 
requirements given in this standard shall be marked 
by means of a permanently attached, easily visible and 
easily readable label or other means with the following 
data: 


a) Name and address of the holder of the FIBC 
certificate; 

b) Name and address of the manufacturer (where 
the manufacturer is not the certificate holder); 

c) Manufacturer’s reference (which shall be 
unique to any one FIBC type); 


d) Name and address of the supplier of the FIBC 
(where the supplier is neither the certificate 
holder nor the manufacturer of the FIBC); 


e) Safe working load (SWL), kgf/N; 

f) Safety factor; 

g) Type of FIBC; 

h) Type test certificate; 

j) Name of the organization issuing the 
certificate together with, if space permits, an 
abbreviated address; 

k) Reference to this standard; 

m) Date of manufacture of the FIBC, month and 
year; 

n) Pictograms of the recommended handling 
methods; and 

p) Not UV stabilized, (if applicable). 


NOTE — The layout of the label shall be as mentioned below: 


Manufacturer's Name and Address 
Manufacturer’s Reference 


S.W.L...... Kg Safety Factor.....: 


Test Certificate No. 


Test Certificate Date: 


Approved Laboratory: 


Test Standard 


FIBC Class 


Date F I B C Manufactured: 


Specific Treatments (if required) 


Certified only for (if required) 


Handling recommendations/Pictograms 


Suppliers name and address (if required) 


8.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The flexible intermediate bulk containers may also be 
marked with the Standard Mark. 


8.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the license for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to be 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


9 TEST METHOD - CYCLIC TOP LIFT TEST 


9.1 Apparatus 


The filled FIBC is suspended from a frame and a flat 
pressure plate is positioned on top of the contents. The 
flat plate is restrained either from above or below. An 


IS 14738 : 2017 


upward force is applied progressively to the frame 9.2 Suitable Suspension Frame, such that the filled 
lifting the FIBC against the resistance of the flat FIBC may be suspended clear of the ground with its 
pressure plate. The filled FIBC is subjected to a lifting devices-position as recommended by the 
repeated loading, unloading and dwell cycle. The force manufacturer. Key features of the apparatus are 
is recorded and the FIBC observed for breakage of o illustrated in Fig. 9 to Fig. 12 and details are given as 
any lifting device, other damage, or leakage of contents. under: 


Hoisting Device Hoisting Device 


Suspension 
Frame Frame 

FIBC Lifting FIBC Lifting 
Device Device 


FIBC FIBC 


Suspension 


Pressure Plate Pressure Plate 


Filler Material Filler Material 


Fic. 9 MuLTI-PoINT LirT FIBCs SusPENDED Ueme Top RESTRAINT 


Hoisting Device 


Pressure Plate 


Filler Material 


Fic. 10 SINGLE-Point Lirt FIBCs SUSPENDED USING Top RESTRAINT 


7 


IS 14738 : 2017 


Hoisting Device 


Hoisting Device 


Suspension Frame Suspension Frame 


FIBC FIBC 


Pressure Plate Pressure Plate 


Filler Material Filler Material 


CG 


Fic. 11 SINGLE-POINT Lirt FIBCs SUSPENDED USING BASE RESTRAINT 


Hoisting Device Hoisting Device 


spension Frame : 
SE Suspension Frame 


FIBC Lifting Device FIBC Lifting 


Device 
Pressure Plate 


Filler Material 
FIBC 


Filler Material 
FIBC 


Fic. 12 Mu.ti-point Lirt FIBCs SUSPENDED USING BASE RESTRAINT 


9.3 The cross-section of that part of the frame 
supporting the FIBC lifting devices shall be as shown 
in Fig. 13 (four and two point lift) and Fig. 14 (single 
point lift). 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 13 CROSS-SECTION OF SUSPENSION FRAME-TOP 
Lirt TEST FOR FIBCs 


Dimensions in millimetres 


A? 
` D 
ye 
F 
© 
be 


Fic. 14 CROSS-SECTION OF SUSPENSION FRAME-TOP 
Lirt TEST rop FIBCs with SINGLE POINT LIFTING 


IS 14738 : 2017 


9.4 A flat pressure plate, of such size that it covers 
between 60 and 80 percent of the surface area of the 
contents, restrained from above or below by means of 
an appropriate structure such that it resists, without 
deformation of the forces applied. 


NOTES 


1 Flanges may be fitted to the underside of the plate to prevent 
lateral displacement. 


2 As illustrated in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12, restraining the pressure 
plate may require connections passing through the body of the 
FIBC and its test contents. A suitable method involves passing 
through the body of the filling material. Considerable care 
should be taken. 


9.5 With woven fabrics, threads should be separated 
rather than cut and the rod shall pass through the base 
no closer than 20 mm to any base seam or joint. Two 
restraining rods (see Fig. 11 and Fig. 12) shall be used 
for FIBCs which have a seam or joint running across 
the centre of the base. It is recommended that a conical 
adapter is screwed to the top of each rod and removed 
once the FIBC is in position. Suitable nuts should be 
used to connect the rod(s) to the pressure plate and to 
a suitable restraint. 


9.6 Means of applying an upwards force to the 
suspension frame, at least equivalent to the requirement 
of the required test load, fitted with a means of 
registering the force applied. 


9.7 Preparation of the Test Specimen 


The FIBC to be tested shall be filled and conditioned 
in accordance with 9.7.1 and 9.7.2. 


9.7.1 Filling 


9.7.1.1 For both the top lift and compression/stacking 
tests, the FIBC shall be filled-up to the filling level 
recommended by the manufacturer with a tolerance 
ve percent of that height. 


9.7.1.2 The FIBC shall be filled with: 


a) the material, for example, plastics granules, 
having the following mechanical properties: 
1) Bulk density 
2) Mesh size 
3) Angle of repose : 


: 0.5 to 0.9 kg/l 
: 3 to 12 mm 
30 to 35° 
or 
b) the actual contents to be carried, when these 
are known and where their usage will not itself 
be a hazard. When this option is chosen the 


FIBC shall be certified for use with specific 
product only. 


9.7.2 Conditioning 
9.7.2.1 The filled FIBC shall be conditioned before 


IS 14738 : 2017 


testing at ambient temperature and relative humidity. 
However, in the event of a dispute, testing should be 
done after conditioning at 27 + 2 °C and 65 + 5 percent 
relative humidity. 


9.8 Procedure 


a) Locate the filled FIBC on the suspension 
frame with the lifting devices positioned as 
recommended by the manufacturer for multi- 
point or single point lifting. 

b) Position the flat pressure plate above the 
contents in such a way that there is no contact 
between the edge of the plate and the material 


of the FIBC during the test. 

Raise the frame to bring the filling material 
into contact with underside of the pressure 
plate. 


c) 


d) Continue raising the frame by application of 
the upward force at a rate of 70 + 20 kN/min 
until the total force equivalent to the specified 


test load is registered. 

Remove the applied force. 

Allow a dwell period of not more than 30s 
before repeating the cycle. 

Repeat the test cycle until the specified 
number of cycles have been completed. 


g) 


h) Carry out a further test cycle to the appropriate 


load specified for the final test cycle. 


NOTES 


1 Any top panel not designed to contribute to the overall strength 
of the FIBC may be removed to allow the entry of the test 
apparatus. The area removed should be the minimum 
commensurate with efficient operation of the test apparatus. 


2 After this test is complete, further loading may be applied 
until failure of the FIBC, to provide additional information. 
When this is done. The load at failure will together with other 
relevant test observations, be recorded in the test report. There 
is no requirement, however, for the load at failure (if it is greater 
than the specified test load) to be noted in the certificate or 
reflected in the marking of the FIBC. 


9.9 Test Report 


The test report shall record at least the following 
information: 


a) Test title/reference; 

b) Name and address of the test station and the 
location at which the test was carried cut; 

c) Name and address of the manufacturer of the 
FIBC and the location at which it was 
manufactured; 

d) Manufacturer’s description of the FIBC 


should include, 
1) manufacturer’s reference (unique to 
type); 


10 


2) dimensions; 
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
7) tare mass. 


The Safe working (SWL) stated by the 
manufacturer for single-trip and /or multi trip 
use; 


method and materials of construction; 
description of lifting devices; 
description of discharge devices; 
description of inner liner(if fitted); and 


e) 


Filling level the 


manufacturer’ s; 


recommended by 


Filling material used and the gross mass of 
the FIBC as tested; 


Apparatus used, method of restraint and 
dimensions of the restraining plate and cross 
section of suspension frame; 


Test load, in Newton, applied to the FIBC and 
the number of test cycle carried out at each 
load. The test load will also be shown 
converted into kilograms force in order to 
facilitate calculation of the safety factor; 


8) 


h) 


k) Resultsofthetest, including whether leakage 
of contents, breakage or loosening of lifting 
devices, or protrusion of the inner liner (if 


fitted) took place; 

Results of inspection to conform that the FIBC 
submitted for test conformed firstly to the 
definitions and requirements of this standard 
and secondly to the manufacturer’s 
description of the type; 

Date of the test; and 

Signature of the tester. 


m) 


n) 
p) 


10 TEST METHODS — UV-RESISTANCE TEST 


10.1 Applicability and Test Requirement 


All load bearing materials of the FIBCs which are likely 
to be exposed to sunlight shall be subjected to this test 
and after the test, the material shall retain at least 50 
percent of the original values of the breaking strength 
and elongation. 


10.2 Breaking Strength and Elongation 


The determination of the breaking strength and 
elongation of the material before and after the 
UV-resistance test shall be performed. 


10.3 Selection of Materials for Testing 


10.3.1 Samples of load bearing materials selected for 
testing shall be representative of the materials of the 
FIBC type for which certification of conformity with 
this standard is sought. 


10.4 Test Procedure 


The test specimen shall be exposed with fluorescent 
UV lamp type B for at least 200 h using test cycle of 
8 hat 60°C with UV-radiation alternating with 4 h at 
50°C with condensation. After exposure is complete, 
test the specimen for breaking force and elongation at 
break using the conditioning requirements given 
at 9.7.2. Compare the values with results performed 
on simultaneously cut specimens that have been stored 
under dark and cool conditions. 


10.5 Test Report 


The test report shall record at least the following 
information: 


a) Test title/reference; 

b) Name and address of the test station and 
location at which the test was carried out; 

c) Name and address of the manufacturer of the 
material and the location at which it was 
manufactured; 

d) Manufacturer’s description of the material to 
include: 

1) manufacturer’s reference (unique to 
type); 

2) dimensions; and 

3) method and materials of construction. 

e) Type of apparatus and type of lamp used and 
method used; 

f) Duration of test, and test cycle; 

g) Breaking strength and elongation of the 
material measured on simultaneously cut 
samples: 

1) Tested before exposure to the UV- 
radiation; and 

2) Tested after exposure to the UV- 
radiation. 

h) Results of inspections to confirm that the 
material submitted or test conformed to the 
manufacturer’s description of the type; 

j) Date of the test; and 

k) Signature of the tester. 


11 GUIDANCE ON SELECTION AND USE OF 
FIBCs 


11.1 Selection of FIBCs 


When selecting an FIBC for use consideration shall 
be given to, 


a) the physical and chemical properties of the 
intended contents of the FIBC, such as: 
1) bulk density; 


2) flow characteristics; 


11 


IS 14738 : 2017 


3) degree of aeration; 

4) particle size and shape; 

5) compatibility with the materials used for 
the construction of the FIBC; 

6) fill temperature; and 

7) whether the intended contents are food 


stuffs, when special conditions normally 
apply. 


b) the methods to be used for filling, handling, 
transporting, storing and emptying the FIBC; 
c) the number of trips required, the number of 


times the bag is lifted on each trip, and the 
environmental conditions likely to be 
encountered; and 


d) general environmental considerations. 


NOTE — Where methods of handling are known and can be 
controlled (such as in-house use), it may be possible to use a 
standard duty FIBC, compared with the situation where the 
handling methods are not known and cannot be controlled (such 
as export to remote destinations), where a heavy duty reusable 
may be more appropriate. 


11.2 Storage of Empty FIBCs 


Empty FIBCs and liners shall be stored in such a 
manner that accidental damage and exposure to 
sunlight, extreme climate conditions and harmful 
substances are avoided. Where liners are supplied with 
the FIBCs they may be delivered either fitted inside 
the FIBCs or separately. In both instances care shall 
be taken to avoid contamination. Liners are vulnerable 
to damage which may not always be visible obvious, 
and therefore shall be given particularly careful 
handling and storage. 


11.3 Filling of FIBCs 


11.3.1 FIBCs are normally filled suspended using the 
lifting device(s) and with the base of the bag on or 
near the ground or a pallet. Other methods may be 
applicable in consultation with the manufacturer or 
supplier. 


11.3.2 If the FIBC has a discharge spout or other 
discharging device this shall be tied off or closed before 
filling. 


11.3.3 Before filling with material at a temperature 
above 60°C the manufacturer or supplier shall be 
consulted. 


11.4 Stability of Filled FIBCs 


The FIBCs shall be filled so that the ratio of filled height 
to base is between 0.5 and 2.0 using as base dimension. 
The diameter of FIBCs with a circular cross-section 
and the length of the shorter side for FIBCs with a 
rectangular cross-section. 


IS 14738 : 2017 


NOTE — Other major factors which affect the stability of filled 
FIBCs are the flow characteristics of the contents, free space 
and air entrapment. 


11.5 Lifting of Filled FIBCs 


11.5.1 Before lifting any FIBC, it shall be inspected 
for any damage which may render it unsafe. The lifting 
loops or other lifting devices shall be positioned 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The 
hooks, bars or forklift arms employed for lifting shall 
be inspected to ensure that they have rounded edges 
with a radius greater than the diameter or thickness of 
the suspension of the FIBC and/or be protected by 
wrapping. The rounded edges shall have a minimum 
radius of 5 mm. The necessary characteristics are 
shown in Fig. 15. 


11.5.2 When the FIBC is suspended personnel shall 
not be around in the area under the FIBC. 


11.6 Storage of Filled FIBCs 


11.6.1 Storage of filed FIBCs at a temperature above 
50°C shall be avoided except with the approval of the 
manufacturer or the supplier. 


11.6.2 Filled FIBCs shall have any top closures 
properly closed before storage. Except for FIBCs 
which have been specifically designed for outdoor 
storage, all FIBCs stored outdoor shall be sheeted over 
to prevent water collection on the tops of the FIBCs 
and shall not be stored in standing water. 


11.7 Emptying of Filled FIBCs 


FIBCs may be emptied by suction and by certain types 


Key 

1 FIBC suspension (for example webbing loop) 

2 lifting device (for example fork-lift arm) 

3 FIBC suspension (for example rope) 

4 lifting device (for example fork-lift arm or crane) 
NOTES 


of blowing, but they are usually emptied by gravity. 
The flow characteristics of the contents and the cost of 
ancillary equipment will generally dictate which 
method is chosen. When emptying by gravity, 
personnel shall not stand under the FIBC nor put their 
arms between the base of the FIBC and a receiving 
vessel or similar except where the FIBC is supported. 


11.8 Inspection of Heavy Duty and Standard Duty 
FIBCs 


Before reuse of FIBCs, consideration shall be given to 
the possibility of contamination from previous 
contents. Before reuse, FIBCs shall be thoroughly 
examined for damage to stitching/gluing/welding and 
for surface abrasion, cuts, tears or any other damage 
to the bag. Particular attention shall be paid to the lifting 
loops or devices and their attachments. The examining 
person shall look for the following: 


a) Abrasion — The effects of abrasion are 
variable, but some loss in strength is to be 
expected. In extreme cases, the fabric 
becomes so worn that the outer yarns of the 
weave are severed. On lifting loops or devices, 
localized areas of abrasion may be present 
caused by handling equipment with sharp 
edges and these areas can result in a serious 
loss in strength. 

b) Cuts, contusion — Cuts, particularly in the 
lifting loops or devices, shall result in a serious 
loss of strength. 


c) Ultraviolet degradation and/or chemical 
attack — These may be indicated by the 


3 


1 The value of r should be greater than /. The minimum value of r is 5 mm. 


2 When the FIBC is suspended, personnel should be excluded from the area under the FIBC. 


Fic. 15 CHARACTERISTICS OF LIFTING DEVICES 


12 


softening of the material (sometimes with 
discoloration) so that the outer surface can 
be rubbed off or plucked off, an in extreme 
cases the outer surface may become 
powdered. 

d) Damage to coatings — Some FIBCs are 
manufactured from coated polyolefine fabric 
and the coating may be on the inside and/or 
outside of the bag. Consideration shall be given 
to the possible contamination of the contents 
by an unacceptable level of coating fragments 
if an inside coating is damaged and to the 
increased possibility of moisture ingress 
(particularly if the contents are hygroscopic) 
when damage occurs to either the inside and/ 
or outside coatings. When damage affecting 
the strength of the FIBC is discovered the FIBC 
shall be taken out of service immediately. 


IS 14738 : 2017 


11.9 Repair of Heavy Duty FIBCs 


Repairs shall be carried out so that the repaired FIBC 
is capable of meeting the requirements of new FIBCs 
as marked on the label. Before undertaking any repairs, 
the manufacturer or supplier shall always be consulted. 
Factors which shall be taken into account in deciding 
whether the FIBC is field repairable, factory repairable 
or not repairable include: 


a) Materials of constructions; 
b) Type and area of damage; 
c) Age of the FIBC; 


d) Conditions to which the FIBC has been 
subjected during service; and 


e) Location of the damage. 


11.10 How to Use FIBCs 


Do’s 


Don’t 


Select the right FIBC for the job in consultation with 
the manufacturer or supplier 

Read the instruction label on the FIBC 

Inspect reusable FIBCs before refilling 

Check that the discharge spout is closed off before 
filling 

Ensure that the filled FIBCs is stable 

Close the top inlet correctly 

Use lifting gear of sufficient capacity to take the 
suspended load 

Adjust the distance between forklift arms to the 
correct width for the FIBC being handled 

Tilt the mast of the forklift truck rearward to an 
appropriate angle 

Ensure that crane hooks, bars or forklift arms used or 
lifting are adequate size and are rounded to at least 
the thickness of the sling, belt or rope suspension, 
with a minimum radius of 5 mm 

Take appropriate measures in regard to dust control 
Consider the possibility of static electricity hazards 
Protect the FIBCs from rain and/or prolonged 
sunlight 

Ensure that FIBCs are adequately 
transportation 


secured in 


Choose FIBCs without consulting the manufacturer 
or supplier 


Exceed the SWL in any circumstances 

Fill the FIBCs unevenly 

Stop or start suddenly during transportation 
Subject FIBCs to snatch lift and/or jerk stops 
Drag FIBCs 

Allow personnel under suspended FIBCs 


Allow FIBCs to project over the side of a vehicle or 
pallet 


Tilt the mast of the fork lift forward 


Withdraw the forklift arms prior to relieving all the 
load on the lifting devices 


Stack FIBC unless sure of stability 


Use FIBCs in new conditions without consulting the 
manufacturer or supplier 


Reuse single-trip FIBCs 


Repair heavy-duty reusable FIBCs unless the as-new 
requirements can be met 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards ` Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 24 (0849). 
Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


