WAT ATA IS 16719 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Ste urgu six fofin d» arrest fees d 
Ru fede 351 RAA efénr — 
ARR 


(TECH FRIA) 


Solvent Free Polyurethane Coatings for 
Exterior of Steel Pipe and Fittings — 
Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 87.040 


© BIS 2022 


Rda Wr Sl 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAP Ho, 9 sg Tax SITE vitx AT, 4g RT - 110002 
www MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110 002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2022 Price Group 12 


Paints, Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee, CHD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after 
the draft finalized by the Paints, Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


This Standard was originally published in 2018 by the title “Polyurethane coatings for the 
interior and exterior of steel pipe and fittings-Specification". This Standard is being revised, 
in order to specify the requirements for Polyurethane (PU) coatings for external purpose only 
in line with international standard EN 10290-2002. For covering the specification of 
Polyurethane coatings for internal use a separate Standard would be formulated. 


This Standard is for the product — Solvent free Polyurethane coatings for exterior of the steel 
pipe, buried pipes, mounded bullets and fittings. This Standard provides guidance to the 
industry in selecting and evaluating Polyurethane coatings for steel pipes (for exterior coating 
of steel pipe transmitting various fluids and gases) and sets optimum requirements for shops 
or field-applied polyurethane external coating. Consideration should be given to the ability of 
the coating to resist degradation against weathering in natural sun light (except slight change 
of colour) and attack by other environmental agents. It is advisable that the purchaser and 
manufacturer should consult each other for compliance of this standard with reference to their 
intended use. Other specific tests outside the tests mentioned in the requirement table may be 
adopted depending on the actual use condition or use environment of the coated pipes based 
on the mutual agreement between the supplier and the user. 


In addition, the following additional requirements have been incorporated in the requirement 
table 6.6 of the Standard. 


1. Pot life/ Gel time 
Specific electrical Insulation resistance 
Indentation resistance 


Infrared scan of cured film 


Soo cT up 


Elongation (in free film up to 1.0 mm Dry film thickness (DFT)) 


Assistance has also been derived from the following international standards in formulation of 
this standard : 


ASTM D 16 Type V — Thermoset, aromatic polyurethane plastic polymer that is the reaction 
product of diphenyl methane di-isocyanate (M.D.I) resin and polyol resin, polyamine resin or 
a mixture of polyol and polyamine resin. 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 16719 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


SOLVENT FREE POLYURETHANE COATINGS FOR EXTERIOR OF 
STEEL PIPE AND FITTINGS — SPECIFICATION 


(First Revision) 

IoCOBE IS No. Title 
1.1 The standard specifies the requirement 
of Solvent free Polyurethane coatings ordi : Reagent grade. water. — 
method of sampling, test, and handling of Specification (rhird revision) 
rated Orso vena e Componer IS 9954 : Pictorial surface preparation 
fast curing polyurethane coatings used for 1981 standards tov oaaine o steel 
external corrosion protection of steel f. P 8 
pipeline, mounded bullets and fittings. SARER 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


1.2 This standard does not deal with the 
requirements of internal coatings of 
pipelines carrying various fluids and gases. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain 
provisions, which through reference in this 
text, constitute provisions of this standard. 
At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


IS No. Title 


IS 101 Methods of sampling and test 

(Part 1/Sec for paints, varnishes, and 

1) :1986 related products — Part 8 
Test on liquid paints (General 
and Physical) Sec 1 Sampling 
(third revision) 


IS 101 Methods of sampling and test 

(Part 8/Sec for paints, varnishes, and 

5) :1993 related products — Part 8: 
tests for pigments and other 
solids : Sec 5 Lead restriction 
test (third revision) 


For the purpose of this standard, the 
following definitions and the definitions 
given in IS 1303 shall apply. 


3.1 Applicator 


The organization which undertakes the 
task of coating application in accordance 
with the provisions of this standard. 


3.2 Manufacturer 


Organization responsible for 
manufacturing of polyurethane coating 
materials. 


3.3 Holiday 


The coating imperfections such as 
pinholes, porosity etc. that exhibit 
electrical continuity to the substrate when 
measured by a scanning electrode attached 
to high arc voltage. 


3.4 Coating System 


The cured solvent free Polyurethane 
coating film with or without primer 
applied on a blast cleaned steel surface as 
per recommended Dry film thickness 
(DFT) for a specific end use. 


4 TYPES 


IS 16719 : 2022 


Polyurethane Coating mentioned in the 
Standard shall be two component, fast 
setting solvent free coating. The product 
when mixed as per recommended ratio of 
base and hardener must have minimum 98 
percent non-volatile by weight when 
checked by as per Annex R (air drying 
method). 


5 COMPOSITION 


5.1 The coating and lining system shall 
consist of thermoset polyurethane prepared 
from two components : 


5.1.1 Resin/Base Component 


Various kind of polyol or polyamine or 
mixture of these polyol and polyamine 
resins together with additives, pigments, 
catalysts, etc. as per requirement. 


5.1.2 Activator/Hardener Component 


Polymethylene, Polyphenylene 
Diisocyanate (Polymeric MDI), various 
pre-polymers as well as mixtures of the 
two products. 


5.2 The mix ratio and pot life should be as 
per manufacturer’s technical data sheet 
(TDS). 


5.3 Exact composition shall vary from 
product to product and is usually a 
proprietary formulation of the coating 
manufacturer. 


5.4 Use of Primer 


Solvent free Polyurethane coating is 
applied either directly or over primer on 
the blast cleaned steel surface. Maximum 
DFT of primer, if applied, should not be 
more than 40 pom. 


5.6 Class A and class B coating : 


The pipe manufacturer shall ensure that 
the total DFT of applied system must 
confirm to 1 000 wm for class A category 


and 1 500 um for class B category as per 
the requirement of customer. Both 


categories must conform to all the test 
parameters of requirement given in Table 
1. 


In general class A coating is recommended 
service temperature varies from -20°C to 
40°C and class B is recommended when 
service temperature varies from -20°C to 
60°C. However, the ultimate choice will 
remain with user. 


6. REQUIREMENT 
6.1 Application Procedure 


The content of both packs should be 
stirred, unless specified otherwise by the 
manufacturer, using a suitable device to a 
homogeneous state prior to mixing or 
application. 


Polyurethane coating system (PUC- 
system) shall be suitable for application by 
airless spray machine or plural component 
airless spray machine at ambient or hot 
condition as recommended by paint 
supplier. It should be applied using the 
method and equipment prescribed by the 
product manufacturer within the specified 
pot life/ gel time of the product. Weld joint 
coatings or repair coatings for touch up 
may be mixed and applied as per 
manufacturer’s instructions using spray, 
brush, rollers, or putty knives, as 
applicable. 


In case of field or site application the 
coating shall not be applied during rain, 
fog, high humid condition and under 
condition of condensing moisture on the 
surface (preferably 5°C above dew point). 
Erection of suitable canopies, use of 
heaters, dehumidifiers may be considered 
to control the application environment 
during adverse weather conditions. Coated 
components should not be backfilled until 
the desired hardness, as recommended by 
the product manufacturer, is achieved. 


The coating layer shall be uniform in 
appearance and ensure complete coverage 
of the area to be coated. 


6.2 Recoating Properties 


Solvent free high reactive Polyurethane 
coatings applied by plural feed spray 
should be finished preferably in single step 
using multiple wet on wet passes. 
Recoating should be avoided, as far as 
possible, to mitigate the risk of adhesion 
failure. If more than one coat has to be 
applied for reasons of localized damage or 
touch up, then the identified area should be 
abraded sufficiently before application of 
touch up material. The second coat shall 
be applied within the prescribed specified 
overcoating time limits and temperature as 
recommended by the manufacturer. After 
application of final coat, the coating shall 
be tested for DFT and degree of cure in 
accordance with solvent rub test, as 
prescribed in Annex Q. Necessary care 
must be taken in the handling of the 
components prior to the attainment of 
minimum hardness as recommended by 
the product manufacturer. 


6.3 Consistency 


Insert a clean metal rod into the original 
container and examine the nature of 


IS 16719 : 2022 


settling, if any. The material shall not be 
cake hard inside the container. The 
material shall be in such condition that 
manual stirring or agitation using 
mechanical device/power stirrer, produces 
easily a smooth, homogeneous mass 
suitable for application by recommended 
method. 


6.4 Keeping Properties 


The material shall confirm to all the 
requirements prescribed at 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 
6.5 and 6.6, when tested immediately after 
expiry of shelf-life period declared by the 
manufacturer. The material shall be stored 
in original sealed container under shade at 
ambient atmospheric conditions. 


6.5 Lead Restriction 


The material shall be tested for restriction 
from lead in accordance with IS 101 (Part 
8/Sec 5). When thus tested the material 
shall not contain lead or compounds of 
lead or mixtures of both, exceeding 90 
ppm, calculated as Metallic lead. 


6.6 The material shall also comply with 
the requirement given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Requirements of Polyurethane Coating System 


(Clause 6.6) 
SI No. Characteristics Requirement Test Method Annex 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Gel Time, at 27 € 2?C, min, Max 30 A 
il) Dry Film Thickness, 27 + 2°C, am, Min 
(a) For class A coating 1 000 B 
(b) For class B coating 1 500 
ili) Hardness Shore “D”, at 27 + 2°C, Min 65 C 
iv) Electrical continuity No holidays by D 
a) For class A coating, at 8 kV spark insulation 
tester 


b) For class B coating, at 12 kV 


IS 16719 : 2022 


SI No. Characteristics Requirement Test Method Annex 
(1) Q) (3) (4) 
v) Adhesion Test 
(a) Pull Off adhesion on 20 mm dolly To pass 7 MPa E 
(b) X cut adhesion, rating less than 4 F 
equal to 
vi) Immersion Test : 5 G 
Tap water, Rating, Max 
vii) Specific Electrical Insulation Resistance H 
(Q.M? ) on coated panel, after 100 days , 
at 50V 
a) For class A coating Rs(100d) > 10° 
b) For class B coating Rs(100d) > 107 
vili) Taber Abrasion Resistance, gm loss, Max 100 J 
ix) Impact Resistance at 5 J No perforation K 
x) Cathodic disbondment, mm disbondment 8 
from incision point, Max 
xi) Indentation resistance, at 25 N, percent, 30 M 
Max 
xii) Flexibility- mandrel test, at 76 mm No crack or N 
mandrel detachment 
xiii) Infrared Scan of cured film, Fourier- Close match to Supplier to provide 
transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) the reference reference scan at the 
scan time of approval 
xiv) Elongation (in free film up to 1.0 mm 10 P 
DFT), percent, Min 
Note — 7 PACKING AND MARKING 
1 All test panels must be prepared on 5 7.1 Packing 


mm thick blast cleaned steel panel with 
150 mm X 100 mm dimension. Other 
dimensions may be used for specific tests 
as described in text annexure. 


Unless otherwise specified, the material 
shall be packed in suitable metal container 


in two separate packs (base and hardener). 


2 After applications test panels are to be 


matured for 7 days at ambient condition 7.2 Marking 


prior to commencement of test 


7.2.1 Each container shall be marked with 


3 All tests should be done in duplicate 


the following : 


a) Name of the material; 


b) Manufacturer's name, logo and 
recognised trade-mark, if any; 


c) Lead content (Max); 
d) Net mass or volume of material; 


e) Batch number or Lot number in 
code or otherwise; 


f) Month and year of manufacture; 
and 


g) Shelf life of the material. 


h) Use of suitable hand gloves, PPE, 
masks etc. during handling and 
application 


j Acautionary note as given below : 
1) Keep out of reach of children. 


2) Dried film of this paint may be 
harmful if eaten or chewed. 


3) This product may be harmful if 
swallowed or inhaled. 


k) Additional information- 
Manufacturer should also provide 
all necessary information, 


instructions and recommended 
condition for coating application of 
product along with each 
consignment of product for bulk 
supply or individual packaging as 
applicable. 


7.2.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product may also be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 


7.2.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is 
governed by the provisions of Bureau of 
Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations made thereunder and as 
amended time to time. The details of 
conditions under which the licence for the 
use of Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be 


IS 16719 : 2022 


obtained from the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 


8 SAMPLING 


Representative samples of the material 
shall be drawn, as prescribed in IS 101 
(Part 1 / Sec 1). 


9 TESTS 


9.1 Tests shall be conducted according to 
the methods prescribed in Annex A to Q. 


9.2 Quality of Reagents 


Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals 
and distilled water (see IS 1070) shall be 
used. 


NOTE — Pure chemicals shall mean 
chemical that do not contain impurities 
which affect the results of analysis 


10 COATING APPLICATION ON 
PIPES 


10.1 General 


The polyurethane coating system shall be 
applied in accordance with manufacturer's 
recommendations. Application by plural 
component machine is recommended. 


10.2 Pipe preparation, Painting and 
Inspection 


10.2.1 Initial Preparation — All dirt, 
contaminants, defect, irregularities shall be 
removed from the steel surface prior to 
blasting. 


10.2.2 Blast Cleaning — Pipe shall be 
blast cleaned with mineral abrasives, slag 
abrasives, steel shot or steel grit. The 
degree of cleanliness shall be minimum Sa 
2.5 grade (See IS 9954). The anchor 
profile depth shall not be less than 50 um. 


10.2.3 Coating Application 


10.2.3.1 Material preparation shall be in 
accordance with manufacturer's 
recommendations. 


IS 16719 : 2022 


10.2.3.2 Holdback for field welds 


When pipe sections are to be joined 
together by field welding, a band, free 
from lining and coating, shall be left on 
both side of surfaces at the end of sections. 
This band shall be of sufficient width as 
specified by the purchaser to permit 
making of field joints without damage to 
lining and coating. The manufacturer shall 
be consulted for holdback width. 


10.2.3.3 Application temperature 


Coating shall be applied when the 
component metal temperature is more than 
3*C above the dew point temperature. The 
temperature of the coating material and the 
pipe at the time of application shall not be 
lower than 15?C. Preheating of coating 
material may be carried out using online 
heaters as per recommendations of the 
manufacturer. If the ambient temperature 
goes below 15? C, base/hardener or both is 
required to be heated when applied by 
airless spray or plural component machine. 


10.2.3.4 Application of polyurethane 
coating system 


The polyurethane coating system shall be 
applied as per recommendations of the 
manufacturer. If application of more than 
one coat is required, the subsequent coat 
shall be applied within the time limits 
recommended by the manufacturer. If time 
gap between application of coats 
exceeded, a repair procedure shall be 
obtained from the coating manufacturer 
and recommendations should be followed. 
Ensure that the temperature and holding 
time of component prior to coating shall 
not result in oxidation of the blast cleaned 
surface leading to visible rust. 


10.2.3.5 Coating Thickness 


Coating thickness shall be in the range of + 
20 percent when tested as per method 
prescribed in Annex B. 


10.2.3.6 Electrical inspection 


After curing but prior to installation, the 
coating system applied on the pipe shall be 
tested for holidays as per the method 
prescribed in Annex D. Any holiday, 
indicated by the detector, shall be marked 
with chalk to identify the area to be 
repaired. The entire area shall be subjected 
to electrical inspection. 


10.2.3.7 Adhesion test 


After electrical inspection (see 10.2.3.6), 
the coated surface is subjected to adhesion 
(X-cut) test as prescribed in Annex F, 
followed by adhesion pull-off test either 
on painted pipe or on painted steel plate 
painted in the same production line as 
prescribed in Annex E. The frequency of 
test shall be one in every 300 square 
meters. 


10.3 Coating Repair 


10.3.1 Defective Coating — Coating shall 
be repaired as specified in 10.3.1.1 to 
10.3.1.2. 


10.3.1.1 Surface preparation 


Accessible areas of pipe requiring repair of 
coating shall be cleaned by removing 
debris and damaged coating using surface 
grinders or other means. The adjacent 
coating shall be feathered by sanding, 
grinding or other method. Accumulated 
debris shall be removed by blowing with 
contaminant free air or wiping with clean 
rags. Areas not accessible for coating 
repair, such as interior surfaces of small 
diameter pipe, shall be reprocessed and 
recoated as specified in 10.2.3. 


10.3.1.2 Coating application 


The coating system shall be applied to as 
specified in 10.2.3 on the prepared surface 
areas. 


10.3.2 Repair Inspection — Repaired 
portion shall be electrically inspected 
using a holiday detector as prescribed in 
Annex D. 


10.4 Welded Field Joints 
10.4.1 Preparation 


Weld joints shall be cleaned so as to be 
free from mud, oil, grease, welding flux, 
weld spatter and other foreign 
contaminants. Cleaned metal surfaces of 
weld joints shall be blasted or abraded 
using rotary abrading pads. The adjacent 
coating shall be feathered by abrading the 
coating surface for a distance of 25 mm. 


10.4.2 Electrical Inspection 


After curing, the coating system applied to 
welding joints shall be tested for holiday 
as prescribed in Annex D. Holidays 


IS 16719 : 2022 


indicated shall be marked to identify the 
area of repair. For factory and site control 
holiday test should be conducted on every 
painted pipe. 


10.5 Bedding and Trench Back-filling 


Back-filling shall be done in a manner that 
avoids abrasion or other damages to both 
shop floor and field applied coatings. 
Where the trench traverses rocky ground 
containing hard objects that could 
penetrate the protective coating, a layer of 
screened earth, sand or rounded river run 
gravel not less than 150 mm thick with a 
maximum particle size of 20 mm shall be 
placed in the bottom of the trench prior to 
installation of the coated pipe. 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
[Table 1, SI. No. (1)] 
DETERMINATION OF GEL TIME 


A-1 GENERAL 


This test aims at measuring the length of 
time from the mixing of two components 
(base and activator) together of a 2 K 
thermoset system to the point at which the 
mixed paint is no longer flowable or 
usable due to sharp rise in viscosity. 
During gel time determination the mixed 
material undergoes cross linking leading to 
transition from liquid state to semi-solid 
state or 'gel' state due to chemical 
reaction. The exothermic nature of this 
reaction further catalyzes the crosslinking 
process leading to sharp rise in viscosity. 
Gel time determination is required for 
specifying the speed of curing that is 
required for various application techniques 
such as handheld twin feed spray or rolling 
bed spray, snap set spray on screw 
conveyor and hand mix kits for field joint 
coating. Temperature of the coating 
materials, amount of sample taken for 
testing and room temperature play an 
important role in Gel time determination 
and hence must be clearly specified. 


A-2 APPARATUS 

A-2.1 Disposable mixing cup 

A-2.2 Mixing stick or plastic beaker 
A-2.3 Mixing rod 

A-2.4 Stopwatch 

A-2.5 Spatula 

A-2.6 Digital Pyrometer/thermometer 
A-3 PROCEDURE 


Keep both base and activator component 
in the lab at 27°C for few hours for 
conditioning. Ensure temperature of both 
packs has attained 27 + 1?C. Cool the 
packs if temperature is higher. Weigh out 
accurately requisite quantities of base and 
hardener as per recommended mixing ratio 
into a plastic beaker or metal can. The 
quantities should be adequate to produce 
100 gm of mixed material. Pour the base 
component first into the metal can/ beaker 
and then the activator. Start the stop watch 
and mix the two components vigorously 
with the spatula for 20 s taking care to 
scrape the sides and the bottom. Viscosity 
starts rising up rapidly as reaction 
exotherm begins. After 20 s mixing, lift 
the flat end of the spatula from the surface 
of the material about 75 mm. Initially the 
mixed coating will lift with the spatula and 
form a liquid vertical ‘string’. Gel time is 
achieved when the coating no longer 
makes a string and breaks when lifted. 
Stop the stopwatch and note the time 
interval in s or min. Record this as the gel 
time. If mixed material is unable to form 
string after 20 s then report gel time as 
below 20 s. 


A-4 REPORT 
Report the following: 


a. Resin and activator temperature in 
degree Celsius. 


b. Surface temperature in degree Celsius. 


c. Geltime in seconds. 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
[Table 1, SI. No. (ii) and Clause 10.2.3.5] 
MEASUREMENT OF DRY FILM THICKNESS 


B-1 GENERAL 


The prescribed test method is for checking 
the thickness of a dried film of coating on 
a test panel. 


B-2 APPARATUS 


Magnetically induced thickness measuring 
gauge. 


B-3 PROCEDURE 
B-3.1 Number of Measurements 


For 9 m test area, five spots per test area 
(each spot of 4 cm) in diameter shall be 
selected. Three-gauge readings per spot 
shall be taken. If the structure is less than 
28 nr, each 9 m? should be measured. If 
the structure is between 28 m? and 90 m?, 


three 9 m? test areas shall be selected 
randomly and measured. For structures 
exceeding 90 nr, three 9 square meter test 
areas shall be selected randomly for the 
first 90 m? and one test area of 9 m? area 
for each additional 90 m? area or less. 


B-3.2 OBSERVATIONS 


Individual readings taken to get 
representative measurement shall be 
unrestricted, but abnormally low or high 
readings shall be discarded. Spot 
measurements (average of three readings) 
shall be within 80 percent of the minimum 
thickness and 120 percent of the maximum 
thickness. 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX C 
[Table 1, SI. No. (iti)] 
HARDNESS BY DUROMETER - SHORE “D” 


C-1 GENERAL 


The prescribed test method is meant for 
checking indentation hardness of dried 
paint films applied on a steel substrate 
with the help of durometer. The Durometer 
recommended for this test is Type D shore 
Durometer. A specified indenter is forced 
into the coated panel under specified 
conditions and the depth of penetration 1s 
measured. Indentation hardness is 
inversely related to the depth of 
penetration of indenter into the coated test 
panel which, in turn, is dependent on the 
modulus of elasticity and viscoelastic 
properties of the coating material. This is 


an empirical test method intended 
7 
| ZA 
a 
Key 
1 presser foot 
2 indenter 


full protrusion: 2.5mm + 0.04 mm 


primarily for control purpose. There is no 
direct relationship between the indentation 
hardness determined by this method with 
the fundamental properties of the material 
being tested. 


C-2 APPARATUS 
C-2.1 Type D durometer, see Fig. 1 


Consists of presser foot having hole 
diameter 3 mm + 0.5 mm centered at least 
6 mm from any edge of the foot and an 
indenter which is hardened steel rod of 
diameter 1.25 mm + 0.15 mm. Indicating 
device of durometer reads extent of 
protrusion in terms of unit ranging from 0 
to 100 


@3 +0.5 


@1.25 +0.15 


RO.1 +0.01 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Fig. 1 


C-3 TEST SPECIMEN 


Testing should be carried out on coated 
MS panel having total thickness of at least 
4 mm or above. Ideally the thickness of 
test panel and applied film should be 5 mm 
and 1 mm respectively. Coating must be 
full cured at 30 °C for 7 days prior to 
testing. 


C-4 : CALIBRATION 


The spring of durometer should be 
calibrated from time to time by the 
manufacturer. 


C-5 : PROCEDURE 


Place the test specimen on a hard, 
horizontal, plane surface. Hold the 
durometer in a vertical position with the 
point of the indenter at least 9 mm from 


11 


IS 16719 : 2022 


any edge of the test specimen. Apply the 
presser foot to the test specimen as rapidly 
as possible, without shock, keeping the 
foot parallel to the surface of the test 
specimen. Apply just sufficient pressure to 
obtain firm contact between presser foot 
and test specimen. Observe reading on 
indicating device within 15 + 5 s after 
presser foot is in firm contact with test 
specimen. Maximum reading shall be 
recorded from the gauge. Take 5 
measurements of hardness at different 
position on the test specimen at least 6 mm 
apart. Determine mean value of reading. 


C-6 Results 


Average value of indentation hardness 
should be reported along with coating 
thickness, temperature, type of durometer 
used. 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX D 
[Table 1, SI. No. (iv), 10.2.3.6, 10.3.2 and 10.4.2] 
ELECTRICAL CONTINUITY (HOLIDAY) TEST 


D-1 GENERAL 


All the lined / coated pipes shall be tested 
with an approved high voltage holiday 
detector, preferably equipped with an 
audio-visual signalling device, to indicate 
any faults, holes, breaks or conducting 
particles in the protective coating. 


D- 2 PROCEDURE 


D-2.1 The applied output voltage of 
holiday detector shall have a spark 
discharge for thickness equal to at least 
twice the thickness of the coating to assure 
adequate inspection voltage ^ and 
compensate for any variation in coating 
thickness and calculated according to 
formula prescribed in D-3. The electrode 
shall be passed over the coated surface at 
approximately half the spark discharge 
distance from the coated surface only one 
time at the rate of approximately 10 to 20 
m/min. The edge effect shall be ignored. 
Excessive voltage shall be avoided as it 
tends to induce holiday in the coated 


12 


surface, thereby, giving erroneous 
readings. 
D-2.2 While selecting test voltages, 


consideration should be given to the 
tolerance on coating thickness and voltage 
should be selected on the basis of 
maximum coating thickness likely to be 
encountered during testing of a particular 


pipe. 
D-3 CALCULATION 


The testing voltage shall be calculated by 
using following formula : 


Testing Voltage V = 7 900 NT + 10 
percent, where T is the average coating 
thickness in mm. 


D- 4 RESULT 


Record any audio visual sound or spark 
indicates pinhole, break or presence of 
conducting particle. 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX E 
[Table 1, SI. No. (v) (a) and 10.2.3.7] 
PULL OFF ADHESION USING PORTABLE ADHESION TESTER 


E-1 GENERAL 


The test aims to measure the adhesion of a 
coating to the steel surface by application 
of a perpendicular negative force to a dolly 
bonded to the surface of the coating having 
uniform thickness. Although the aim is to 
test the tensile stress necessary to break the 
weakest interface (adhesive failure to the 
base), failures may take place within the 
coating (cohesive failure) or interface 
between the dolly and surface (glue 
failure) or a mix of these failures. 
Readings with adhesive failure to the base 
may be considered as the true adhesion. 
The pull off load is computed based on 
maximum indicated load from a calibrated 
pull off tester and the area stressed. The 
result may vary between different devices 
depending on the instrumental parameters. 


E-2 APPARATUS 
Apparatus shall comprise of the following: 
E-2.1 Adhesion (Tensile) Tester 


Preferably automatic with self-aligning 
aluminum dolly, centering device and 
hydraulically ^ operated. ^ Hand-driven 
instrument may be used for site testing. 


E-2.2 Loading fixtures / test dollies 


Usually, aluminum make cylindrical test 
dollies having a flat surface on one end 
and a means of attachment to the tensile 
tester on the other end. Dolly diameter 
shall be 20 mm for this test standard. If the 
dolly surface is highly polished roughen 
the same lightly using an emery paper. 


E-2.3 Core cutter or a sharp knife 


E-2.4 Adhesives 


13 


For securing the fixture to the coating. 
Adhesive should not affect the coating 
properties. The most suitable adhesives 


recommended for this test are two 
component | solvent free epoxies, 
cyanoacrylates and — peroxide-catalyzed 


polyester adhesives. 


E-2.5 Fine scouring pad or fine 
sandpaper, (400 grit or finer), clean cloth. 


E-3 PREPARATION OF 
SPECIMENS 


TEST 


Apply the coating on a sand blasted steel 
plate of at least 4 mm thickness having 
dimension approximately 100 mm X 150 
mm. Ensure there is no oil, grease or dust 
on the blasted test specimen. The coating 
thickness must be 1000 + 200 um and 
fully cured at the time of testing. Unless a 
faster cure is specified by the 
manufacturer, cure the applied film for 7 
days at 27 + 2°C. The test must be 
conducted at 27 + 2°C, relative humidity 
of 50 + 5 percent. 


E-4 PROCEDURE 


Very lightly abrade the surface of the dried 
coating and the surface of the test dolly 
with scouring pad (preferred) or fine 
sandpaper and wipe with cloth. Prepare 
and apply the adhesive in accordance with 
the manufacturers instructions. Use the 
minimum quantity of adhesive required to 
produce a firm, continuous and even bond 
between the surface and the test dolly. 
Remove any excess adhesive immediately 
if possible. Allow the adhesive to cure for 
at least 24 h or as specified by the 
manufacturer. 


Use the core cutter or sharp knife for 
cutting through cured adhesive and the 
paint coating to the substrate, round the 


IS 16719 : 2022 


circumference of the dolly. This is 
essential when testing thick coatings of 
this nature. Adhesion test shall be carried 
on fully cured coating at 20-30 °C 
temperature. Use standard 20 mm dolly to 
obtain direct reading from the analogue 
dial gauge of the self-aligning, Type V 
adhesion tester. For the 20 mm dolly the 
pressure reacted by the dolly is the same as 
pressure in the actuator and is transmitted 
directly to the pressure gauge. When using 
digital version of the tester, enter the 
correct dolly size being used that is 20 
mm. When using hand plunger pump type 
manual machine, apply stress at a rate not 
greater than 1 MPa/s such that failure of 
the assembly takes place within 90 s of the 
initial application of the stress. If the 
surface curvature causes error in readings, 
the adhesion will be tested on reference 
flat steel coupons. Average reading from 
three randomly selected spots shall 


SI No. Gauge Type of Failure 
Reading 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) > 7.0 MPa A/B, B, Y, Y/Z 


ii) < 7.0 MPa 
and first coat) 


ili) < 7.0 MPa 
coat) 


iv) < 7.0 MPa 
adhesive) 


v) <7.0 MPa  Y/Z (adhesive failure 


A/B (> 90 percent adhesive 
failure between substrate 


B (cohesive failure of first 


Y (cohesive failure of 


constitute one test. Test to be pass if pull 
of adhesion value is minimum 7 MPa for 
both class A and class B. 


E-5 REPORT 

Report the following : 
a) Coating thickness. 
b) Diameter of dolly 


c) Make and model of Pull Off 
Gauge. 


d) Individual readings in MPa and 
nature of failure (cohesive or 
adhesive failure) 


The following protocol shall be used for 
determining adhesion test failure / success. 


Result / Conclusion 


(4) 


Coating meets adhesion criteria. Take 
actual reading of bond strength and 
record type of failure and percent area 
to the nearest 10 percent for each 
failure. 


Coating fails adhesion criteria. Remove 
coating and re-coat. 
Allow coating to cure for additional 4 


days and re-test. 


Replace the adhesive and re-test. 


Roughen, clean dolly and re-test. 


between adhesive and dolly) 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX F 
[Table 1, SI. No. (v) (b) and 10.2.3.7] 
X-CUT ADHESION - RESISTANCE TO REMOVAL 


F-1 GENERAL 


The test consists of determining the 
adhesion of coating by destructive process. 
This test is carried out on a painted test 
specimen applied at approximately 1 mm 
DFT on a 5 mm Mild steel (MS) panel 
which has been matured for 7 days at 27 + 
2*C post application. 


F-2 APPARATUS 


F-2.1 Utility knife, with a stiff straight 
blade 


F-2.2 Steel ruler 
F-2.3 Steel rod 
F-2.4 Oven 

F-3 PROCEDURE 


The test area shall consist of any coated 
area on the component or test piece that is 
free from all defects and with the correct 
dry film thickness. 


F-3.1 Using a sharp-bladed utility knife 
against a steel rule if necessary, straight 30 
mm to 50 mm cuts shall be made in the 
coating through to the metal surface to 
form an X with an angle of approximately 
30° at the intersection point. 


F-3.2 The point of the utility knife shall be 
inserted horizontally (that is the flat of the 
blade) under the coating at the point of 
intersection of the cuts such that the blade 
point is at the metal surface. 


F-3.3 A levering action against a fulcrum 
(such as steel rod) shall be used to force 
the flat point of the blade up from the 
metal surface describing a single, vertical 
(that is at 90° to the surface) motion in an 
attempt to prise the coating off. 


15 


F-3.4 The same procedure (from F.3.1 to 
F.3.3) shall be applied to test the coating at 
the maximum service temperature. A 
sample shall be conditioned in an oven for 
4 h. Immediately after the removal from 
the oven, an adhesion test shall be carried 
out in accordance with the procedure 
mentioned above. Then the sample shall be 
maintained at 23 + 2 °C for 24 h and the 
adhesion test shall be repeated. 


F-4 RESULTS 


The adhesion of the coating shall be 
determined by the following rating system 
(see Fig. 2). 


Fig. 2 


1 Adhesive loss of coating (rating 1 to 5) 


Rating 1 : No removal of coating other 
than that caused by insertion of the flat 
point of the knife blade at the intersection 
point (nominally less than 1 mm). 


Rating 2 : Not more than 2 mm of 
adhesive loss of coating from the metal 
surface. 


Rating 3 : Not more than 3 mm of 
adhesive loss of coating from the metal 
surface. 


Rating 4 : Not more than 5 mm of 
adhesive loss of coating from the metal 
surface. 


IS 16719 : 2022 


Rating 5 : More than 5 mm of adhesive 
loss of coating from the metal surface. 


2 Cuts 


The rating of the coating adhesion is 
determined by adhesive failure. Limited 
cohesive rupture within the coating shall 
be considered a pass if there is satisfactory 
adhesion. Cohesive rupture caused by 


16 


excessive interface or cross-section 
porosity leaving a noticeable honeycomb 
structure on the specimen surface shall 
constitute a failure. For the test at the 
maximum operating temperature the 
adhesive loss in millimetres, measured 
vertically from the intersection point of X- 
cuts to the adherent coating, not along the 
X-cuts, shall be recorded (see Fig. 2). 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX G 
[Table 1, SI. No. (vi)] 
IMMERSION TEST IN TAP WATER (LOSS OF ADHESION) 


F-1 GENERAL 


The test consists of determining the 
resistance to loss of adhesion of the 
coating by water absorption, a measure of 
wet adhesion. This test is carried out on a 
painted test specimen applied at 
approximately 1 mm DFT on a 5 mm MS 
steel panel which has been matured for 7 
days at ambient condition post application. 
All sides and edges of the panel shall be 
coated. 


F-2 APPARATUS 


F-2.1 Utility knife, e.g.; with a stiff 
straight blade 


F-2.2 Steel rule 
F-2.3 Steel rod 
F-2.4 Oven 

F-3 PROCEDURE 


Immerse the sample in tap water for 100 h 
at 27 +2°C. Remove, wipe clean and 
proceed with the test. The test area shall 
consist of any coated area on the 
component or test piece that is free from 
all defects and with the correct dry film 
thickness. Using a sharp-bladed utility 
knife against a steel rule if necessary, 
straight 30 mm to 50 mm cuts shall be 
made in the coating through to the metal 
surface to form an X with an angle of 
approximately 30° at the intersection 
point. The point of the utility knife shall be 
inserted horizontally (i.e. the flat of the 
blade) under the coating at the point of 
intersection of the cuts such that the blade 
point is at the metal surface. A levering 
action against a fulcrum (such as steel rod) 
shall be used to force the flat point of the 
blade up from the metal surface describing 


17 


a single, vertical (that is 90 to the surface) 
motion in an attempt to prise the coating 
off. 


F-4 RESULTS 


The adhesion of the coating shall be 
determined by the following rating 
system (see Fig 3). 


Fig. 3 
1 Adhesive loss of coating (rating 1 to 5) 


Rating 1 : No removal of coating other 
than that caused by insertion of the flat 
point of the knife blade at the intersection 
point (nominally less than 1 mm). 


Rating 2 : Not more than 2 mm of 
adhesive loss of coating from the metal 
surface. 


Rating 3 : Not more than 3 mm of 
adhesive loss of coating from the metal 
surface. 


Rating 4 : Not more than 5 mm of 
adhesive loss of coating from the metal 
surface. 


Rating 5 : More than 5 mm of adhesive 
loss of coating from the metal surface. 


2 Cuts 


IS 16719 : 2022 


The rating of the coating adhesion is 
determined by adhesive failure. Limited 
cohesive rupture within the coating shall 
be considered a pass if there is satisfactory 
adhesion. Cohesive rupture caused by 
excessive interface or cross-section 
porosity leaving a noticeable honeycomb 


18 


structure on the specimen surface shall 
constitute a failure.For the test at the 
maximum operating temperature the 
adhesive loss in millimetres, measured 
vertically from the intersection point of X- 
cuts to the adherent coating, not along the 
X-cuts, shall be recorded (see Fig 3). 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX H 
[Table 1, SI. No. (vii)] 
SPECIFIC ELECTRICAL INSULATION RESISTANCE 


H-1 GENERAL 


The test consists of measuring the specific 
electrical insulation resistance (electrical 
resistance of the coating in relation to the 
surface area of the coated pipe) by 
exposure to a sodium chloride solution 
over a period of 100 days. 


H-2 APPARATUS 
The equipment consists of the following : 
a) Supply, direct current (DC) > 50 V 


b) Voltmeter, with an accuracy of 0.1 
V, and ammeter, with an accuracy 
of 5 percent, or DC-ohmmeter, 
with equivalent accuracy 


c) Counter electrode (copper), inert, 
with an area of at least 10 cm? and 
conducting leads for connecting the 
pipe and electrode to the power 


supply. 
H-3 PREPERATION OF TEST 
SPECIMEN 


Three 0.5 m lengths of pipe of at least 50 
mm diameter prepared by blast cleaning 
the surface to SA 2 !2 with > 50 Microns 


Anchor Profile, shall be coated in 
accordance with the | manufacturer's 
instructions. Sprayed sample must be 


allowed to cure for at least 7 days at 
minimum 27 °C. The coated area shall be 
at least 0.03 m’. 


Prepare a 0.1 mol/l sodium chloride 
(NaCl) solution. Immerse the pipe in one 
of the two following ways. 


a) Place the coated sample 
horizontally in a plastic container 
through appropriate holes in the 
opposite faces of the side walls. 


19 


Seal the entry of the pipes with a 
suitable  nonconductive sealant. 
(See Fig. 4). 


b) Seal the coated sample at one end 
with a suitable non-conductive 
sealant, ensuring that the metal 
pipe is prevented from contacting 
the sodium chloride (NaCl) 
solution. Place the pipes vertically 
in the plastic container. (See Fig. 
5). 


Alternately, for large diameter pipes, a 
tank can be attached to the pipe (See Fig. 
6). 


H-4 PROCEDURE 


Fill the container with the sodium chloride 
(NaCl) solution. Immerse at least 10 cm? 
of the counter electrode into the solution. 
Carry out the test at 27 + 2 °C. For each 
measurement, connect the positive pole of 
the direct current supply to the end of the 
pipe that is not immersed and the negative 
pole to the counter electrode. 


Apply the voltage during measurements 
only. Measure the resistance using an 
ohmmeter or record voltage (U) and 
current (J) after 1 min. The first 
measurement shall be taken after three 
days. Thereafter continue to monitor the 
measurement at weekly intervals for a total 
of 100 days. 


If the resistance of any one sample falls 
below the specified value, repeat the test 
with three new samples. The measured 
value of the resistance or current is that 
due only to the current passing through the 
submersed coating. If this requirement is 
not met, check for possible current 
leakage. 


IS 16719 : 2022 


H-5 EVALUATION 


Calculate the specific electrical resistance, 
Rs, expressed in ohm square metres, using 
formula : 


Where 


Rı is the measured electrical resistance 
of the submerged sample, expressed 
in ohms; 


U is the voltage between counter 
electrode and pipe, expressed in 
volts; 


A is the submerged surface area of 
coating, expressed in square metres; 


Rs-UxA/IZRixA 


I is the measured current, expressed in 
amperes. 


Plot a graph of specific electrical 


resistance against time. Between the 70th 
day (Rs70) and the 100th day (Rs100), a 
linear, straight regression line shall be 
calculated from the measured values. 
Using the regression line, calculate the 
ratio of the specific electrical resistance, 
Rs100/Rs70. 


FIG. 4 — HORIZONTAL PIPE PLACEMENT 


20 


IS 16719 : 2022 


Key 
Tank in non-conductive material 
Copper electrode introduced only at the time of measurement 
NaCl solution 
Pipe with Polyurethane Coating 
Sealing 


Exposed Steel Pipe 


FIG. 5— VERTICAL PIPE PLACEMENT 


Key 


Tank in non-conductive material 


Copper electrode introduced only at the time of measurement 


NaCl solution 


Pipe with Polyurethane Coating 


Sealing 


Exposed Steel Pipe 


21 


IS 16719 : 2022 


FIG. 6 - LARGE DIAMETER PIPE WITH ATTACHED CELL 


Key 
1 Tank in non-conductive material 
2 Copper electrode introduced only at the time of measurement 
3 NaCl solution 
4 Pipe with Polyurethane Coating 
5 Sealing 
6 Exposed Steel Pipe 


22 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX J 
[Table 1, SI. No. (viii)] 
ABRASION RESISTANCE 
BY TURNTABLE ABRASION TESTER (TABER ABRASION) 


J-1 GENERAL 


This test method covers the determination 
of the resistance of Polyurethane Coating 
to abrasion produced by the Taber Abraser 
on coatings applied to a plane, rigid metal 
surface. 


J-2 APPARATUS 
J-2.1 Turntable abrasion tester 


Consist vacuum suction system and 
adjustable height vacuum pick-up nozzle 
of 8 mm diameter to remove debris and 
abrasive particles from the specimen 
surface during testing. 


J-2.2 Abrasive Wheels, Calibrase CS-17 


J-2.3 Resurfacing medium, P 150 


abrasive paper disc 


J.2.4 Weighing scale, with minimum 200 
gm capacity and least count of 0.1 mg. 


J-3 PREPERATION OF 
SPECIMEN 


TEST 


The test panels shall be of steel measuring 
100 mm X 150 mm and thickness of 1.00 
mm, spray coated with Polyurethane 
Coating of 900-1100 um DFT after blast 
cleaning the surface to SA 2 ! with > 50 
Microns Anchor Profile. The panel shall 
have a centre hole of 6.5 mm diameter. 
The test panels shall be flat and free from 
distortion, and both the front and the back 
shall be free from any visible ridges. 


J-4 CONDITIONING 


Sprayed sample must be allowed to cure 
for at least 7 days at minimum 27 °C. 


23 


Condition the test specimens for at least 24 
h at 27 + 2°C and 50 x 5 percent relative 
humidity, and test in the same environment 
or immediately on removal therefrom. 


J-5 PROCEDURE 


Weigh the test specimen to nearest 0.1 mg 
and record the weight. Mount the test 
specimen on the abraser with coting side 
up. Secure using clamp plate and nut. 
Place the abrading head on the test 
specimen and the vacuum pick up nozzle. 
Resurface the CS-17 wheels with P 150 
abrasive paper disk by running them 50 
cycles against the resurfacing medium. 
Install the wheels. Add weight totalling 
1,000 gm per arm (including weight of 
arm). Start the vacuum and subject the 
specimen to 500 cycles, resurface wheel 
and then another 500 cycles. Remove any 
loose abrading remaining on the test 
specimen by light brushing. Reweight the 
test specimen. Perform three tests on three 
coated specimens. 


J-6 EVALUATION 


Evaluate weight loss, L, of the test 


specimen as follows : 
L-A-B 
where 


A = Weight of test specimen before 
abrasion, mg, and 


B - Weight of test specimen after 
abrasion, mg. 


Calculate the arithmetic mean of the three 
specimen and report the value. 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX K 
[Tablel, Sl. no. (ix)] 
IMPACT RESISTANCE 


K-1 GENERAL 


The prescribed test method is for 
determination of energy required to 
rupture coatings applied to pipe under 
specified condition of impact from a 
falling weight. 


K-2 APPARATUS 
K-2.1 Striker 


The apparatus shall consist of a drop 
weight testing machine comprising 
Option 1 : The striker shall consists of 
body and nose having a combined fixed 
weight of 1.361 kg and shall be used over 
a drop range of 0.61 to 1.22 m. The striker 
nose shall have a 15.87 mm hemispherical 
head. Option 2 : The striker shall consists 
of body and nose having a combined fixed 
weight of 1 + 0.005 kg and shall be used 
over a drop height of 0.5 m. The striker 
nose shall have a 25 mm hemispherical 
head. 


K-2.2 Drop Tube 


A tube 1.52 m long shall be used to guide 
the striker during free fall. 


K-2.3 Specimen Holder 


The base plate of the apparatus shall 
include a device for positioning and 
holding the pipe specimen on line with the 
axis of the vertical drop tube. 


K-2.4 Thickness Gauge, for measurement 
of coating thickness of test specimen. 


K-2.5 Holding Detector, for locating 
breaks in coating film. 


K-3 TEST SPECIMEN 


Test specimen shall be coated pipe of 
406.4 mm (16 inch) length with 60.325 
mm outside diameter 


K-4 PROCEDURE 


Perform the test at a room temperature of 
27 + 2°C. Use a suitable detector to 
determine penetration. If the coating film 
is penetrated on the initial drop, perform 
the subsequent test at the next lower height 
increment. If the first specimen does not 
fail, perform the second test at next higher 
increment. Calculate the impact resistance 
as follows : 


Impact resistance = weight of striker x 
falling height 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEXL 
[Table 1, SI. No. (x)] 
CATHODIC DISBONDMENT TEST 


L-1 General 


This test method aims at measuring the 
extent of disbondment of applied coating 
layer from the steel substrate of painted 
pipes or panels which are made 
cathodically active. The purpose is to 
simulate the resistance of coated pipes to 
mitigate corrosion and loss of adhesion 
(disbondment) under buried /immersed 
condition which are protected by cathodic 
current. Cathodic disbondment (CD) is 
measured by the longitudinal distance 
between the edge of intentional holiday to 
the point up till which coating layer can be 
removed easily with the help of knife due 
to under film corrosion creep. 


L-2 APPARATU 


L-2.1 Cathodic 
Instrument, (see Fig. 7) 


disbondment 


Instrument shall have stable direct current 
(DC) power unit, having controlled voltage 
output between O0 and 10 V and a current 
capacity sufficient to supply 20 mA to site 
in circuit. The digital voltmeter shall be 
capable of reading up to third decimal 
place and the maximum effective input 
current shall not be greater than 11 A. 


L-2.2 Variable resistor, shall be of 5 KO 
+ 10 percent, 1 W for each test site. 


L-2.3 Flaw detector, to detect any flaw 
like pinholes prior to start of the test. 


L-2.4 Reference electrode, of saturated 
calomel type having formed plug of 
diameter less than 10 mm for measurement 
of voltage. 


L-2.5 Platinum wire, of diameter 0.8 mm 
and 75 mm of length to act as anode at 
each site. 


25 


L-2.6 Rigid plastic tube, of 50 mm 
nominal bore and 60 mm length at each 
site of coating forming the test cell 


L-2.7 Twist drill, for making a 6 mm hole 
at the middle of the test cell. 


L-3 REAGENTS 


3.1 Electrolyte — Sodium chloride, 3 
percent solution (m/v). 


3.2 Indicator — Phenolphthalein indicator 
for measurement of extent of corrosion at 
the end of the test. 


L-4 PREPARATION OF 
SPECIMEN 


TEST 


Specimens shall be a 150 mm X 100 mm x 
6 mm MS steel panel. Apply uniform 
coating of polyurethane coating system. 
Cure the panels for 7 days at 27 + 2°C 
before testing. 


L-5 PROCEDURE 


Test specimens as prepared at L-3 shall be 
subjected to cathodic disbondment test for 
28 days at -1.5 V potential and at 30 +5°C. 
For cathodic disbondment test, individual 
cells shall be made having electrolyte of 
sodium chloride solution, 3 percent. A 
hole of 6 mm diameter shall be drilled at 
the centre of cell to remove the coating 
material up to the base metal substrate as a 
pre-damaged area, which acts as a cathode. 
Platinum electrode shall be used as anode 
and reference calomel electrode shall be 
immersed in test cell to measure 
continuous potential for 28 days. 


L-6 ASSESSMENT 


Remove plastics tube from each test site 
and wipe along the surface of the coating 
using a lint free paper towel and cathode 


IS 16719 : 2022 


area material Make about 8 radial 
incisions using a sharp knife through the 
coating to the substrate extending 
outwards from the holiday for a distance of 
at least 40 mm. Make these incisions at an 
angle of approximately 45? from each 
other. Insert the knife point into the centre 
portion of the holiday down to the metal 
substrate. Using a gentle levering action, 
peel away slowly a radial section of 
coating continuing until firm adhesion is 
encountered. As adhesion loss is not 
always obvious, carefully examine the 
substrate for sign of residual coating which 
indicates that disbonding has not occurred. 
Repeat the same procedure for each radial 
segment. 


Wann n nnn 
MLLLLLELELLULUME 


L-7 REPORTING 


Report the extent of disbonding as average 
distance between the edge of holiday area 
and positions of firm adhesion. If the 
coating is strongly adherent to the 
substrate, take the average distance at 
which the coating breaks as the extent of 
disbonding. The cathodic disbondment test 
is defined as the arithmetical mean value 
of the 8 single values. The maximum 
single value of disbondment and the 
arithmetical mean value shall not exceed 
the values given in Table 1. 


FIG. 7 -CATHODIC DISBONDMENT TEST ASSEMBLY 


Key 

1.Working electrode 

2. Electrode (anode) 

3. Electrode (reference) 
4. Reference electrode 
5. Plastic cover 


6. Plastic pipe, minimum internal diameter 
50 mm 


7. Electrolyte > 150 ml 


26 


8. Coating 

9. Steel test piece 
10.Sealing material 
11.Artificial defect 
12.Sealing material 
13.Electrode (cathode) 


14.Platinum electrode of diameter 0.8 mm 
to 1.0 mm (anode) 


15.Potentiostat 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX M 
[Table 1, SI. No. (xi)] 
INDENTATION RESISTANCE 


M-1 GENERAL 


The test consists of measuring the 
indentation of a punch into the coating 
under fixed conditions of temperature and 
load. 


M-2 APPARATUS 


M-2.1 Chamber or bath, thermostatically 
controlled to + 2?C. 


M-2.2 Penetrometer, comprised of the 
following : 


a) A cylindrical punch of 1.8 mm (cross 
sectional area of 2.5 mm?) on the top 
of which is mounted a weight. The 
assembly, punch plus weight, shall 
produce a force of 25 N. 


b) Dial gauge or any other measurement 
system, accurate to + 0.01 mm. 


M-3 PREPERATION OF TEST 
SPECIMEN 


The test panels shall be of steel measuring 
100 mm X 150 mm and thickness of 4.00 
mm, spray coated with Polyurethane 
Coating of 900-1100 um DFT after blast 
cleaning the surface to SA 2 1⁄2 with > 50 
Microns Anchor Profile. Measure the DFT 
at five spots on each panel and record the same 
to ensure that the panels meet the DFT 
requirements. 


M-4 CONDITIONING 


Sprayed sample must be allowed to cure 
for at least 7 days at minimum 27°C. 
Condition the test specimens for at least 24 
h at 27 + 2°C and 50 + 5 percent relative 
humidity, and test in the same environment 
or immediately on removal therefrom. 


M-5 PROCEDURE 


27 


Perform three tests on the coated 
specimen. Place the test sample, held 
within the penetrometer assembly, in the 
thermostatically controlled chamber and 
set to the test temperature (+ 2°C). The test 
sample shall be kept in the chamber for 1 
h. 


Make the following readings : 


a) to — the reading on the dial gauge 
placed on an uncovered part of the 
steel plate or pipe. 


b) t; — the reading on the dial gauge 
with the indenter without the mass 
positioned centrally over the 
sample. 


c) t? — the reading of the dial gauge 
after the mass has been applied, 
giving the total desired pressure on 


the indenter for a minimum 
duration of 24 h. 

M-6 EVALUATION 

Calculate indentation as under : 

Coating Thickness : t3 = t1 — to 

Residual Thickness : t4 = t2 — to 

Indentation : tszti-t 

The arithmetic mean of the three 


individual determinations of each of the 
thicknesses t3, ta and ts shall be calculated 
and reported. 


Percentage indentation shall be calculated 
as under : 


t 
= x 100 
t5 


The arithmetic mean shall be calculated 
and reported. 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX N 
[Table 1, SI. No. (xii)] 
FLEXIBILITY — BEND TEST USING CYLINDRICAL MANDREL 


N-1 GENERAL 


This test method covers the determination 
of the resistance to cracking (flexibility) 
and/ or detachment of the Polyurethane 
Coating to metal when subjected to 
bending around a cylindrical mandrel 
under standard conditions. This is a pass 
and fail test, by carrying out the test with a 
76 mm diameter mandrel to assess 
compliance with this standard. 


N-2 APPARATUS 


N-2.1 3 inch diameter pipe (76.2 mm OD) 
of 60 cm length, firmly affixed on a vice 


N.2.2 Safety gloves 


N-2.3 Safety goggles 


N-3 PREPERATION OF 
SPECIMEN 


TEST 


The test panels shall be of steel, tinplate, 
or soft aluminium measuring 100 mm X 
150 mm and thickness of 0.80 mm, spray 
coated with Polyurethane Coating of 500- 
900 um DFT after abrading the surface to 
shiny metal with a coarse grade 40-60 
sandpaper. The test panels shall be flat and 
free from distortion, and both the front and 
the back shall be free from any visible 
ridges or cracks. Measure the DFT at five 
spots on each panel and record the same to 
ensure that the panels meet the DFT 
requirements. 


28 


N-4 CONDITIONING 


Sprayed sample must be allowed to cure 
for at least 7 days at minimum 27°C. 
Condition the test specimens for at least 24 
hr at 27 + 2°C and 50 + 5 % relative 
humidity, and test in the same environment 
or immediately on removal therefrom. Test 
at least three specimens at the specified 
mandrel diameter and for passing this test 
readings of two specimens should meet the 
requirement. 


N-5 PROCEDURE 


Place the test panel over the mandrel with 
the uncoated side in contact with the 
mandrel. Using a steady pressure of the 
hand, bend the panel approximately 180? 
around the mandrel at a uniform velocity 
in a time of around 1-2 seconds. Do not 
allow ‘tenting’ of the specimen in the 
middle. Gently remove and evaluate. 


N-6 EVALUATION 


Use normal corrected vision examines the 
coating for cracking or detachment from 
the substrate, ignoring the surface of the 
coating less than 10 mm from the edge of 
the panel Panels showing cracking or 
detachment shall be deemed to have failed. 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX P 
[Table 1, SI. No. (xiv)] 
DETERMINATION OF PERCENT ELONGATION IN FREE FILM 


P-1 GENERAL 


The test method is prescribed specifically 
for determining percent elongation of free 
film prepared from a coating material 
under defined conditions. Depending on 
the tensile strength and tensile modulus of 
the material (rigid, plastic or composite 
materials) under test different types of test 
specimen may be used. In this test method, 
specimen is extended in universal tensile 
machine (UTM) along its major 
longitudinal axis using force at constant 
speed until specimen fractures or until the 
stress load or elongation reaches to a 
predetermined value. During this test the 
load sustained by the specimen and the 
elongation at break are measured. 


P-2 APPARATUS 
P-2.1 Universal testing machine (UTM) 


Testing machine should be capable of 
maintaining testing speed of 1 mm/min to 
100 mm/min. Average thickness of the 
film shall be taken as per test specimen 
thickness. 


P-2.2 Silicone release paper 


P-3 PREPERATION OF 
SPECIMEN 


TEST 


Cast a free film having average thickness 
in the range of 1000 + 200 um on a 
silicone release paper using drawdown. 
The cast length should be more than 150 
mm long and 50 mm wide. Allow the film 
to dry at ambient conditions. For 
elongation testing cut out a test strip from 
the casted film as per the dimension 
indicated below. It is advisable to cut the 
strip after overnight drying of casted film 
and then condition the cut out strip. 


29 


Specimen Dimension: 


The test strip should be dumbbell shaped 
as per dimensions indicated in the Fig. 8. 
Make sure the edges are smooth and free 
from notches. 


/ 
Gauge marks M 


b, Width of narrow parallel-sided portion: 10mm + 0.2 mm 
bz Width at ends: 20 mm + 0.5mm 
h Thickness: < 1mm 

Gauge length: 50 mm + 0.5 mm 


Initial distance between grips: 115 mm * 5 mm 
Overall length: > 150 mm 


ly 
h Length of narrow parallel-sided portion: 60 mm + 0.5 mm 
L 
I. 
r Radius: > 60 mm 


Fig. 8 
P-4 CONDITIONING 


Free film cut strip must be allowed to cure 
for at 7 days prior to testing. Condition the 
test specimens at 27+ 2 °C and 50 +5 % 
relative humidity, and then subject it to 
test. Test at least three specimens of free 
film test strips for evaluation and for 
passing this test readings of two specimens 
should meet the requirement. 


P-5 PROCEDURE 


Conduct the test at same atmosphere used 
for conditioning of specimen. 


Place the test specimen in the grips and 
align longitudinal axis of specimen with 
axis of testing machine. Tighten grips 
evenly and firmly to avoid slippage of test 
specimen and movement of grips during 
test. Set the pull rate to a uniform test 
speed of 10 mm/min. It is preferable to 


IS 16719 : 2022 


unload the test specimen before testing at a 
different speed, but it is also acceptable to 
change the speed without unloading after 
the tensile modulus has been determined. 
When changing the speed during the test, 
make sure that the change in speed occurs 
at strains € < 0.3 percent. 


P-6 OBSERVATION 


Record increase of gauge length and of the 
distance between the grips during test 


P-7 CALCULATION 


Record the displacement between the grips 
of the machine from the beginning of the 
test. Calculate nominal strain (Elongation) 
using : 


30 


E, (95) =X 100 


where 


Et 


Li 


is the nominal strain (Elongation), 
expressed as a dimensionless ratio or 
percentage; 


is the gripping distance, expressed in 
millimetres (mm) 


is the increase of the gripping 
distance occurring from the beginning 
of the test, expressed in millimetres 
(mm). 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX Q 
[Clause 6.2] 
ASSESSING SOLVENT RESISTANCE OF ORGANIC COATING BY SOLVENT 


Q-1 SAMPLE PREPARATION 


Take mild steel pipe of 152.4 mm diameter 
and 304.8 mm length, apply a coat of 
Polyurethane system and dry the coating to 
surface dry. Apply another coat of 
Polyurethane coating. The final coating 
thickness should be minimum 400 um. 
Cure the pipe for minimum 15 days. 


Q-2 CHESSECLOTH 


100 percent cotton mesh, grade 28 x 24 
and size 300 mm x 300 mm and 
contrasting in colour to the coating being 
evaluated. 


Q-3 PROCEDURE 


Select areas on coated surface of at least 
150 mm long on which to run the test. 
Clean the surface with tap water to remove 
any loose material and allow to dry. 
Measure dry film thickness of coating in 
the selected area. Mark 150 mm x 25 mm 
rectangular test area by pencil or marker 
pen. Fold cheese cloth into a pad of double 
thickness and saturate it to dripping wet 
with methyl ethyl ketone. Place properly 


RUB 


3l 


protected index finger in the centre of the 
pad while holding excess cloth with thumb 
and remaining fingers of the same hand. 
With the index finger at 45? angle to the 
test surface, rub the rectangular test area 
with moderate pressure, first away from 
operator and then back towards operator. 
One forward and backward motion (width 
wise) is one cycle of rubbing and should 
be completed in 1 second. Continue 
rubbing the test area for 25 cycles of 
rubbing. Impact the middle 125 mm of the 
rubbed area, disregarding 12.5 mm at each 
end with fingernail. Check for any visual 
changes in appearance. 


Q-4 OBSERVATIONS 


Compare the rubbed area with an adjacent 
area which is not under test. Measure the 
film thickness of the rubbed area and 
visually examine the cloth for indications 
of coating removal. The coating thickness 
shall not decrease by more than 25 percent 
of the original film thickness. There shall 
be no sign of blistering or any other visual 
defect. 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX R 
[Clause 4] 


DETERMINATION OF NON- VOLATILE CONTENT OF MIX PAINT BY AIR 
DRYING METHOD 


R-1 GENERAL 


This method is used to determine the non- 
volatile content of highly reactive two 
component material where the one or both 
the reactive components might tend to 
evaporate if subjected to NVM 
measurement at higher temperature before 
the expiry of pot life. 


R-2 APPARATUS 
R-2.1 Aluminium Foil 
R-2.2 Petri dish 

R-2.3 Can lid 

R-2.4 Lab Oven 

R-3 PROCEDURE 


Weigh out an empty clean lid along with a 
cut out aluminium foil to cover the lid and 


32 


a glass rod or a metallic pin for mixing. 
Note this reading (Wi). Weigh out 
accurately calculated quantity of base and 
hardener material as per recommended 
ratio so as to ensure total sample weight of 
approximately 2-4 gm mix in the can lid. 
Mix 1 min with the clip and immediately 
cover the lid with the aluminium foil. Take 
the weight and record reading (W2). Keep 
it at 27 + 2°C temperature for 1 hr to 
ensure thorough curing. After 1 hr open 
the aluminium foil cover carefully and 
place it in the oven for 1 h at 110 °C Take 
out the assembly from the oven and cool to 
room temperature. Then take the second 
weight (W3). 


R-4 CALCULATION 
Percent of Non-Volatile by weight 


-i x100 
W,—W, 


IS 16719 : 2022 


ANNEX S 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Paints, Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee, CHD 20 


Organization 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Central Public Works Dept., New Delhi, 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA) 


Ministry of Industry, New Delhi 


Ministry of Defence, Department of 
Standardization, New Delhi 


Office of the Micro Small & Medium 
Enterprises (MSME), New Delhi 


Research Designs & Standards Organization, 
Lucknow 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Harcourt Butler Technical University, 
Kanpur 


Institute of Chem. Technology, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


National Test House (ER), Kolkata 


Naval Materials Research Laboratory 
(NMRL), Thane 


Shriram Institute for Indl. Research, Delhi 


Representative(s) 


PROF. P A MAHANWAR, (Chairman, Chd 20) 


SHRI AMAR SINGH 
SHRI M L PRASAD (Alternate) 


DR GURBACHAN SINGH 
SHRI B S TOMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI NAND LAL 


LT COL PRAVEEN DEO 
SHRI V.K.CHHABRA, (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI M ANNABACKIAM 
SHRIMATI M S RAMMIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI P K BALA 
SHRI K P SINGH (Alternate) 


DR SUKHDEO R.KARADE 
(DR. P. C. THAPLIYAL) (ALTERNATE) 


PROF. P K KAMANI 
PROF. ARUN MAITHANI (Alternate) 


PROF. V. V. SHERTUKADE 
PROF. SMRUTIRANJAN PARIDA 


SHRIMATI P. NATARAJAN 
DR A. B. MONDAL (Alternate) 


DR T. K. MAHATO 
DR G GUNASEKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. MAJUMDAR 


33 


IS 16719 : 2022 


Organization 


The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd., 
Mumbai 


SSPC India Chapter, Kolkata 


Akzo Nobel Coatings India Pvt. Ltd 


Asian Paints Ltd., Mumbai 


Berger Paints India Ltd., Howrah 


J K White Cement 


Kansai Nerolac Paints Ltd., Mumbai 


Meta-Chem Paints & Adhesives Pvt. Ltd. 


Pidilite Indusries Ltd., Mumbai 


Indian Paints Association, Kolkata 


Indian Small Scale Paint Association 


Paint and Coating Technologists Association, 
Kanpur 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd., Tiruchirapalli 


Representative(s) 


SHRI N. K. TRIPATHI 
SHRI SUSHIL ORAON (Alternate) 


DR BUDDHADEB DUARI 
SHRI ANIL SINGH (Alternate) 


MR SANATAN HAJRA 


MR RAJEEV KUMAR GOEL 
DR. SUBRAHMANYA SHREEPATHI 
(Alternate) 

SHRI TAPAN KUMAR DHAR 
SHRI SWAGATA CHAKROBORTY 
(Alternate) 

SHRI RANA PRATAP SINGH 
DR. PRITI PILLAY (Alternate) 


SHRI LAXMAN NIKAM 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR SOMANI 
(Alternate) 

SHRI BISWANATH PANJA 
SHRI HEMANT KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI TAPAS KUMAR RAY 
DR. PRADEEP T.GADEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBROTO BANERJEE 
DR M B GUHA (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKUND HULVALKAR 
SHRI ASHOK-SHREYAS PATHARE (Alternate) 
(SHRI NIRAV RAVESHIA) (Alternate) 


MR. USHENDRA SINGH 
MR. VIVEK KUMAR SAXENA 
(Alternate) 

SHRI K SRINIVASAN 
(SHRI V RAJESHKHARAN) (Alternate) 


34 


Organization 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Consumer VOICE 
In Personal Capacity 
In Personal Capacity 


Director General, BIS 


IS 16719 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRI S GHOSHAL 


(SHRI A. SATYA SRIDHAR) (Alternate) 
SHRI M A U KHAN 
DR. SUNIL KUMAR SAHA 
DR. B P MALUK 


A K LAL Scientist ‘ʻE’ And Head (Chd) 


[Representing Director General, Bis (Ex- 


Officio)] 


Secretary 


SHRI PUSHPENDRA KUMAR 
Scientist ‘B’, CHD, BIS 


35 


IS 16719 : 2022 


Panel responsible for revision IS 16719 CHD 20 : P10 


Organization Representative(s) 
Harcourt Butler Technical University, PROF. P K KAMANI, (Convenor) 
Kanpur 
Amchem Products Pvt. Ltd., Noida SHRI SHOMENDRA MANN 
SSPC India Chapter, Kolkata DR. BUDDHADEB DUARI 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi SHRI S. GHOSHAL 
In Personal Capacity Dr. B P MALLIK 


36 


(Continued from second cover) 


AWWA C222-2018 PU Coatings and Linings for Steel Water Pipe and Fittings issued by 
American Water Works Association of America (ANSI/AWWA C222-18). 


ISO 21809-3 Petroleum and natural gas industries — External coatings for buried or 
submerged pipelines used in pipeline transportation systems — Part 3: Field joint coatings 


The Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex S. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied 
with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall 
be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values 
(second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 20 (15708). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


