**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10973 (1984): Code for hygienic conditions for food 
hawkers [FAD 15: Food Hygiene^ Safety Management and Other 
Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 10973 1984 

(Reaffirmed 2012) 



Indian Standard 

CODE FOR 
HYGIUNrC CON Dm ON S FOR 

FOOD HAWKERS 



UDC 6136 I I 653 S79 14:664] 




© Copyright 19S4 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 ftAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARQ 

NEW DELHI ||WH>2 

Gr 2 Ocfober I9R4 



tS : 10973 - 1984 



Indian Standard 

CODE FOR 

HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

FOOD HAWKERS 



Food Hygiene Sectional Committee, AFDC 36 

Chairman Representing 

Dr a. N. Rai Chowdhury National Institute of Communicable Diseases 

( DGHS ), New Delhi 

Members 

Agricultural Marketing Adviser Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, 
TO THE Government of India ( Ministry of Agriculture ), Faridabad 

Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. p. Bhalla Indian Veterinary Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

Is^tnagar 
Dr S. B. Kulshreshtha ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Chadha Central Committee for Food Standards, New 

Delhi 
Dr ( Shrimati ) Indira Chakraborty All India Institute of Hygiene & Public 

Health, Calcutta 
Shri Om P. Dhamua Export Inspection Council of India, New 

Delhi 
Shri C, T. Dwarkanath Central Food Technological Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore 
Executive Health Officer Municipal Corpotation of Greater Bombay, 

Bombay 
Municipal Analyst ( Alternate ) 
CoL O. P. Kapoor Central Food Laboratory, Mysore 

Shri S. Kasturi Government Analyst to the Government of 

Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Shri S. J. Kekobad Cadbury India Ltd, Bombay 

Maj-Gen Kewal Krishna Directorate General Armed Forces Medical 

Services, New Delhi 
Col N. L. Sachdeva ( Alternate ) 
Dr ( Shrimati ) R. Sankaran Defence Food Research Laboratory, Ministry 

of Defence (R&D), Mysore 
Dr ( Shrimati ) D. Vijaya Rao ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1984 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright /<cf ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act, 



IS : 10973 - 1984 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Dr N. K. Sen 
Shri G. D. Sharma 

Dr B. K. Nandi ( Alternate ) 
Col L. R. Sharma 

Dr a. G. Ajwani ( Alternate ) 
Dr I. A. SiDDioi 



Representing 

Northern Railway, New Delhi 
Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies, New 
Delhi 

Health Department, Municipal Corporation 
of Delhi. Delhi 



Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils & 
Fats, Ministry of JFood & Civil Supplies, 
New Delhi 
Shri S. M. Bhatnagar ( Alternate ) 
Dr R, S, Singh National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR), 

Karnal 
Dr S. C, Sarma ( Alternate > 
Dr T. a. V. Subramanian Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, Delhi 

Brig R. N* Verma QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters. New 

Delhi 
Lt-Col K. N. Acharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandum, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri N. K. Grovek 
Assistant Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



Hygienic Codes Subcomjniitee, AFDC 36 : 5 
Convener 
j>R R. S. Singh 

Members 



National Dairy Research institute, Karnai 



Agricultural Marketing Advises 
TO THE Government of India 
Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 

Or N. p. Bhalla 



Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, 
Faridabad 



Indian Veterinary Research Institute ( ICAR ), 
Izatnagar 

Dr S. B. Kulshreshtha ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. N Brahme Deonar Abbatoirc, Bombay 

Dr D. N. Gore ( Alternate ) 

^ Department of Food Technology and 

Bio-cbemical Engineering, Jadavpur 
University, Calcutta 
Central Food Technological Research 

Insittuie ( CSIR ), Mysore 
Bombay Municipal Corporation, Bombay 
All India Institute of Hygiene and Public 
Health, Calcutta 
urn S. P. MuKHOPADHYAY {Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 6 ) 



Shri D. R. Choudhuri 



Shri C. T. Dwarakanath 

Dr M. N. Gurnani 
Dr B. N. Ghosh 



IS : 10973 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR 

HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

FOOD HAWKERS 

0, FOREWORD 

0*1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 19 April 1984, after the draft finalized by the Food 
Hygiene Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Food materials prepared and ready to eat are sold at various 
places like railway stations, bus terminals, school premises, MELAS, 
road-side DHABAS and bazaars by hawkers. It has been often obser- 
ved that these hawkers do not maintain proper hygienic conditions and 
there is a considerable scope for improving the hygienic conditions. 
Unless proper hygienic norms are adopted, the consumption of such 
foodstuffs from these hawkers, may be a potential health hazard to 
the consumers. This standard provides guidelines for food hawkers 
in maintaining optimum hygienic conditions. 

0,3 It is expected that this standard will be of considerable assistance 
to local health authorities in enforcing proper hygienic conditions in 
the interest of public health. 

0.4 This code is subject to the provisions of the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act^ 1954, and the rules framed thereunder as amended 
from time to time and other local regulations. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code prescribes hygienic conditions to be maintained by the 
food hawkers. 

2. HANDLING OF FOOD MATERIAL AND OTHER ASPECTS 

2.1 The prepared articles of food shall be kept either in glass, stainless 
steel, brass or copper utensils of adequate capacity with proper covers. 
If bpass or copper utensils arc used they shall be tinned periodically. 



IS : 10973 - 1984 

However, the acidic products should not be stored in copper vessels. 
Use of containers made from galvanized sheet shall be avoided. 

2.2 All these utensils containing articles of food shall be kept in a glass 
case of the pattern approved by the concerned health authorities. At 
no time the articles of food shall be kept exposed to the dust and flies. 

2.3 All equipment used for preparation of food shall be thoroughly 
cleaned with boiling water or chlorinated water ( 15 to 20 ppm ). 

2.4 Only stainless steel spoons of sufficient size shall be used for 
taking out or mixing the articles of food. No article of food shall be 
touched by hand while taking out or mixing with other articles of food. 
The spoons shall be kept dry in a suitable container to protect them 
from dust and flies, 

2.5 The articles of food shall be served in stainless steel, china clay, 
glass dishes or plain white paper dishes. These shall be stored in a 
suitable container. 

2.6 These dishes and spoons shall be washed thoroughly with boiling 
water or chlorinated water ( 15 to 20 ppm ) immediately before use. 

2.7 Paper dishes, paper cups, wooden spoons and straws used for 
serving food and drinks shall not be reused. 

2.8 Potable water shall be stored in a stainless steel, brass or copper 
receptacle which shall be provided with a tap at the bottom and a tight 
fitting lid. The receptacle shall be placed on a stand at least two feet 
high and a bucket shall be provided under the receptacle for collection 
of waste water. The collected waste water shall be disposed oflF pro- 
perly without causing any nuisance. 

2.9 The articles of food kept for sale shall be brought from the licen- 
sed manufacturer only and name and address of the manufacturer of 
articles of food stored or kept for sale shall be intimated to the health 
authorities. 

2.10 No article of food which is unwholesome or otherwise unfit for 
human consumption based on microbiological or chemical examination 
shall be stored or kept for sale. 

2.11 A dust bin of sufficient size shall be provided for collection of 
refuse and shall be emptied at appropriate intervals in the nearest 
public dust bin. 

3. PERSONAL HYGIENE 

3.1 No person suffering from any skin disease or any infectious or con- 
tagious disease shall be permitted to sell food items* 



18:10973-1984 

3.1.1 It shall be impressed on all the food hawkers that they should 
notify to the health authorities the cases of fever, sore throat, cough, 
vomitting, diarrhoea, typhoid, dysentery, boils, cuts, sores and ulcers 
{ however^teali ), discharging ears and notifiable diseases occurring in 
their own homes and families, 

3.2 The hiwkers shall keep their finger nails short and clean and wash 
theii? hands with soap or detergent and again with plain water before 
commencing work and after each absence, specially after using sanitary 
conv&tnen^^s^ The hawkers shall not use any nail polish while serving 
food. Towels used for drying hands should be clean. No hawkers 
shall alloW'bis hands or any part of his body or clothing to come in 
contact with the prepared food items. He should adopt strict hygienic 
practices so as to avoid adding any microbial contamination to the 
naaterial. /^ 

33 The hankers shall wear clean uniforms ( preferably white ) or 
aprons or both and clean washable caps. 

3;4 All tMf' hawkers shall be inoculated and vaccinated against the 
enteric group of diseases as prescribed by the concerned health authori- 
ties, and a necessary certificate in this respect should be always 
available with him for inspection. 

3.5 Eating, spitting, nose cleaning or use of tobacco in any form or 
chewing betel leaves shall be strictly avoided near the food material. 



IS: 10973 -19t4 



AtfyfnB0fS 
Dr B. C. Ghoshal 

Joint Director ( Prevention of 

Food Adulteration ) 
On. O. K K.Jmm 
DR.V.V. KJmuw: 

D& S. J. ^AMSMSLAJBiiAUienuUe ) 
Dr B. K. I*Iandi 

Sms U/mtAh SiNGff ( AUewm^ ) 
Dr P.V. A.C PittoocBK 



CcBtial Health. EduG«tio0 Bttcet* ( DGHS )k 

New DelfB 
Delhi Administnttiotr, Delhf 

C«ibral Food X^^orttOiT, M^mm m 
Brooke Bond Bsdta UmtUd^ Aitfaa^ted 

Food aad Nutrition Board. Ministry of Food 
and C^vil Supplies, Plew Diefii 



Ntfion^ £»vkciaincii^ Etif iaMTi^ Rcscasdi 
IiKStkvte ( CSUt X Nagpw 
DittSHRiMATi >A. S. Gadkari (^Alternate > 
Sbri Ravi Kkisinf a BrftanBia Industnes Ltd, New D^&f 

Secretary Central Committee for Food Standa«tfir Iffmw 

Delhi 
Shri KAiLAm WAi Kaira Distt CoopenNiive Mii^ Prwiucen^^ 

UtnoB Limtted, A&aoiA 
Dr Brijesh Narayan ( Alternate ) 
Bftie IL N. Verm^ OMG^s^ Bsaacb*^ Ama^ Hca^ttOVlers, New 

Demi 
Lr-Cot K. N. Acharta ( Afteman > 



