( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 9894- 1981

Indian Standard
METHOD OF TEST FOR SMOOTHNESS/ ROUGHNESS OF PAPER
Paper and Its Products Sectional ( Excluding Committee,
Chairman
SHRI N. NARASIMHAN

Packaging CDC 15

Materials)

C-48, NDSE, Part II, New Delhi 110049 Representing Indian Tourism Development Corporation (Ministry of Tourism and Civil Aviation), New Delhi SHRI N. J. ARDESHIR All India Federation of Master Printers, New Delhi SHRI R. VENKATESWARAN ( Alternate ) DR H. L. BAMI Central Forensic Science Laboratory, New Delhi SHRI S. K. GUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI S. K. BHOUMIK Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), Bhubaneshwar SHRI S. K. CHOPRA Indian Paper Makers Association, Calcutta SHRI A. B. DAS Sree Saraswaty Press Ltd, Calcutta SHRI R. C. DEVGAN Atkins Das Pvt Ltd, Calcutta MAP K. R. DHARMADHIKARY Ministrv of Defence ( DGI 1. I, Kannur . SHRI C. G. TEKCHANDANI ( Alternate ) _ SHRI D. R. GUPTA Central Revenues Control Laboratory, New Delhi SHRI M. K. RANGANATHAN ( Alternate ) SHRJ S. K. KESHAVA ITC Ltd. Calcutta SHRI P. DAYAL ( Alternate ) SHRI D. MAHANTA Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), Jorhat SHRI C. N. SAIKIA ( Alternate ) SHRI MAN MOHAN SINGH Forest Research lnstitute and Colleges, Dehra Dun SHRI H. MITRA Controller of Stationery, New Delhi DR A. PANDA Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd, Calcutta SHRI N. B. PODDAR All India Small Paoer Mills Association, Bombay DR K. K. TALWAR ( Alternate ) SHRI A. N. RAO Directorate General of Technical Development,
SHRI M. B. N. ANAND New Delhi SHRIV. B. SAXENA ( Alternate ) SHRIP. S. SHIVARAM India Security Press, Nasik SHRI K. S. A. CHARY ( Alternate )

Members

Road ( Continued on page 2 )

@I Copyright 1981 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and production in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

I

IS : 9894 - 1981
( Continued from Members SHRIS.S. THAKUR DR D. C. TAPADAR ( Alternute SHRI PREM OBEROI page 1 ) Representing Indian Paper Mills Association, Calcutta

Federation of Paper Traders Association of India, Bombay SHRI RAMESHS. DESAI ( Alternate ) DR B. S. VARSHNEY Institute of Paper Technology, Saharanpur SHRI ASHOK KUMAR ( Alternate ) DR HAKI BHAGWAN, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) Director ( Chem ) Secretary SHRI A. K. BAHL Assistant Director ( Chem ), IS1

)

Methods
Convener DR S. R. D. GUHA Members

of Test

Subcommittee,

CDC

15:2

Forest Research Institute and Colleges,

Dehra Dun

Orient Paper Mills Ltd, Brajrajnagar SHRI K. K. BAJAJ SHRI S. S. THAKUR (`Alternate ) Ballarpur Industries Ltd, New Delhi SHRI 0. L. DUGGAL SHRI R. VARDHAN ( Alternate ) Rohtas Industries Ltd, Dalmianagar SHRI S. P. GOYAL The West Coast Paper Mills Ltd, Bombay SHRI N. S. JASPAL SHRI H. G. KULKARNI ( Alternate ) SHRI KESHAVPRASAD Central Revenues Control Laboratory, New Delhi SHRI S. NARAYANAN ( Alternate I ) SHRI N. SUBRAMANIAN( Alternate II ) Pulp and Paper Research Institute, Orissa DR A. Y. KULKARNI SHRI SUBHASHMAHESHWARI ( Alternate ) The Central Pulp Mills Ltd, Pnne DR A. K. PRASAD SHRI A. P. NAGARKAR ( Alternate ) Indian Security Press, Nasik Road SHRI P. S. SHIVARAM SHRI N. P. SARNAIK ( Alternate ) The Titaghur Papei Mills Co Ltd, Calcutta DR D. C. TAPADAR Institute of Paper Technology, Sahranpur DR B. S. VARSHNEY SHRI ASHOK KUMAR ( Alternate )

IS : 9894- 1981

Indian Standard
METHOD OF TEST FOR SMOOTHNESS/ ROUGHNESS OF PAPER
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 September 1981, after the draft finalized by the Paper and Its Products ( Excluding Packaging Materials ) Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 It is not possible to recommend a single method for measuring the smoothness or roughness of a paper, and there is no exact correlation among the various methods used for determining these properties. However, several instruments of the constant pressure air-flow type have been designed to obtain a numerical value indicative of the smoothness or roughness of paper or board. But as results of determinations obtained with different instruments are not necessarily convertible, it is necessary to refer to the results of this test in terms of the specific type of instrument used, such as Bendtsen roughness and Sheffield roughness instrument. 0.3 Although different methods of test have been given in this standard, as far as possible, Gurley instrument values should be indicated as this is the most widely used instrument. 0.4 While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from IS0 2494-1974 Paper and board - Recommended procedure for the determination of roughness - Constant-pressure air-flow method. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes of paper and board.
*Rules for rounding

the method

of test for smoothness/roughness

off numerical values ( revised ).

3

IS : 9894 - 1981 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following to those given in IS:4661-1968* shall apply. definition in addition

2.1.1 Roughness - The measure of the extent to which the surface of the paper deviates from a plane and involves the depth, width and number of departures from the plane. 3. BENDTSEN AND SHEFFIELD INSTRUMENTS

3.1 Principle -The test piece is pressed under a definite pressure by one or two annular metal lands against a smooth, plane, hard surface. Air is supplied at a constant pressure to the centre of the annular land or between the lands, and the air flow passing between the annular land and the surface of the paper is measured. The instrument reading is greater with rougher papers and boards and, for this reason, the values are known as a measure of roughness. 3.2 Apparatus components: -The apparatus shall consist of the following major

3.2.1 Means of supplying clean conditioned air to the measuring head at a relative humidity of 65 & 2 percent at a temperature of 27 f 2�C and at a constant pressure of: a) 1.47 + 0.02 kPa instrument; and b) 10.3 f ( 150 & 2 mm H,O) in the Bendtsen-type

0.2 kPa in the Sheffield-type

instrument.

air in a NOTE - This may conveniently be done by passing the normal conditioned laboratory through a small compressor. The compressed air should be cooled to room temperature and the pressure stabilized by means of a large capacity reservior ( about 10 litres is a suitable size ).

The constant pressure is normally manostat, or regulator, which is an integral
3.2.2

maintained by means part of the instrument. to f5 percent.

of

a

Device to measure

the air flow rate accurate

NOTEThe lowest flow rate normally measurable is 5 ml/min. However the required accuracy cannot normally be obtained with a flow rate of less than 10 ml/min. It is convenient to use variable area flowmeters of overlapping ranges.

The accuracy

requirement

then applies

to the flowmeter

in use.

3.2.3 Measuring Head-It shall be under surface of which one or two protrude far enough so that only the lands shall be made of or finished with *Glossary of terms used in paper
trade

constructed of hard steel, on the optically flat annular metal lands lands contact the test piece. The a corrosion-resistant meterial ( for

and industry.

4

IS : 9894 - 1981 example, stainless steel or chromium plating ). In the Bendtsen-type instrument, the air supply is led to the annular groove between concentric The air then escapes across the surface of the test piece under the lands. land(s). With the air supply off the pressure of the land(s) should be 17Oh.5 kPa, obtained as follows: a) in the Bendtsen-type instrument, with a head having 267 & 2 g and an annulus of 0'1.50 f 0'002 mm 31.75 + 0% mm internal diameter. a mass of width and

b) in the Sheffield-type instrument, with a head having a mass of 1640 f 2 g and two concentric lands each of 0,380 f 0'005 mm in width, the two having a tolerance and total area 97&3 mm2 With the air supply slightly on the Sheffield instrument. 3.2.4 Flat Plate test piece. on, this pressure instrument, but is reduced by buoyancy, only to 98 kPa on the Bendtsen flaws, on which to rest the
move-

Glass Surface -

free from

NOTE - The flatness of the glass should be sufficient to give no detectable ment of the flowmeter float over the working area.

3.2.5 Heavy metal annulus or other suitably keeping the test piece flat around the measuring

shaped head.

weight,

suitable

for

NOTE - The components may conveniently be connected with rubber tubing. Care shall be taken to ensure that the rubber tubing does not affect the pressure exerted by the measuring head. For the connections between instrument and measuring head, thin walled rubber tubing of 5 mm inside diameter and elsewhere tubing of 7 mm inside diameter have been found suitable.

3.3 Calibration 3.3.1 Leakage - Check the instrument frequently for leakage. First place a piece of smooth, soft, impermeable rubber on the plate glass and place the measuring head on it. With the instrument working and the lowest range Bowmeter connected, no rise of the flowmeter float should be detectable ( other than a slight jump when the air supply is switched on ). If this is not so, there is a leak between the flowmeter and the measuring head and the connecting tubing and joints should be checked. Minor leaks on the high pressure side of the flowmeter do not matter. 3.3.2 Measuring Head - If the instrument is leakproof, check the flatness of the annular land(s) on the measuring head. Clean the flat plate glass surface and place the measuring head on it. Switch on the instrument and connect the lowest range flowmeter; it should be possible to find a position on the glass plate where there is no rise of the flowmeter float. If no such position can be found, clean the land(s) with a suitable solvent. 5

IS : 9894- 1981 If the instrument is still not leakproof examine the annular land(s) for visible defects. This may be done using a magnification of X 20 to X 30, for instance, with a stereoscopic microscope. If any major change can be seen, the head should be discarded, or ground and polished by a Minor defects may be eliminated by placing the head competent person. on a plate glass square upon which has been placed some fine polishing powder in a suitable medium, for example, jewellers rouge, crocus powder or metal polish. The defects are polished out by holding the head lightly but firmly flat on the plate and imparting a circular motion to it. The head shall be lifted from time to time and the operation continued until the defect has disappeared.
NOTE - Care should area of the land(s). be taken to ensure that the polishing does not change the

3.3.3 Rate of Air-Flow to check the flowmeters.

Use capillary

gauges

or standardized

orifices

NOTE - Further specification of the checking methods for air pressure and flow rates is not considered justified because of the limited overall accuracy of the method and the limited overall precision resulting from the high variability of the roughness of paper.

Select specimens and take at least ten test pieces, each 3.4 Test SpecimenIt is essential to use a fresh test measuring not less than 100x 100 mm. There shall be no folds, creases, visible area for each determination. cracks or other defects on the area to be tested and the test pieces shall not include any part of the sample that is less than 15 mm from the edge of If watermarks are present, this should be stated in the the sheet or, reel. test report. 3.5 PROCEDURE 3.5.1 Condition 1966*. the test specimens as prescribed in 5 of IS: 1060 (Part I)-

3.5.2 Level the instrument and place it on a surface free from vibration. Remove or raise the measuring head, place the test piece on the glass plate with the side to be tested uppermost. If the test piece does not lie flat, it is important to use the metal annulus. Turn on the compressed air supply and select the maximum flowmeter range.
instrument, the air supply should be turned on NOTE - In the Bendtsen-type before the manostat is placed on the spindle, and the manostat weight should be removed before the air supply is turned off. This prevents wear of the manostat and spindle caused by friction. *Methods of sampling and test for paper and allied products, Part I ( revised ).

6

IS : 9894 - 1981 3.5.3 Gently place the measuring head on the test piece keeping the land(s) parallel to the test piece surface and being careful not to exert any pressure on it apart from the weight of the gauging head, as this may deform the paper excessively and lead to a falsely low value.
NOTE - The way in which the, head is placed on the test piece is most important and has been shown to affect the results by as much as 20 percent. Great care should be taken to see that this is done properly.

3.5.4 Ensure

that the connecting

tube is correctly

positioned.

3.5.5 If the flow rate is within the compass of a lower range meter, switch over to it. Note the reading indicated at the top of the float 5 seconds after the head is placed on the test piece (, even if the flowmeter reading is still changing ). 3.5.6 For subsequent readings, leave the instrument switched on and merely raise and place the head on other ,test pieces, until ten readings have been obtained. When possible, use the same .flowmeter throughout a series of measurements. 4. GURLEY - HILL SPS INSTRUMENT 4.1 Apparatus 4.1.1 The apparatus shall consist of a pair of optically flat, circular clamping plates having an effective area of 64'516 f 0'322 mm". The upper plate shall be fixed to the outlet of an air tube, and the power plate shall be supported at its centre upon' a `round-headed pin and shall be arranged to clamp the paper sample under a pressure of approximately 21 kN/m2 by means of an unweighted lever arm. 4.1.2 Air pressure for the test shall be provided by an inner cylinder having a closed top, which slides freely in an outer cylinder filled to a depth of approximately 127.0 millimetres with mineral oil ( viscosity 65 f 5 seconds Saybolt at 37.7"C ). Air shall be conducted to the clamping plates through a tube extending above the surface of the oil within the inner cylinder. 4.1.3 The outer cylinder shall -be approximately 254'0 millimetres in height and 82.5 millimetres in diameter. Four bars, each approximately 190.5 mm in length, 3.0 mm in width and 1.5 mm in thickness shall be mounted vertically and equidistantly on the inner surface of the outer cylinder to act , as guide tracks for the movable cylinder. 4.1.4 The have a total an external shall weigh of water. movable range of diameter 567f0.5 cylinder, shall be graduated in units of 50 ml, and shall 350 ml. It shall be 254.0 mm in height and shall have It of 76.2 mm and an internal diameter of 73.7 mm. grams, producing an a&pressure equal to 124.2 mm I 7

IS : 9894 - 1981 4.1.5 A support shall be provided on the outer cylinder cylinder in a raised position prior to making a test. to hold the inner

4.2 Calibration - Test the apparatus for air leakage by clamping the clamping plate in the normal manner after their contact surfaces have been thoroughly cleaned by a solvent. Release the inner cylinder so that it floats in the same manner as when making a test. The air leakage shall not exceed y ml in 5 hours.
NOTE - If a greater leakage occurs, tighten all joints and examine the clamping plate for scratches or dents. Any damaged instrument will not give true reading and should be repaired.

4.3 The test specimen shall be clean water marks, creases and wrinkles.

and free from

abnormalities

such as

4.3;l Each test specimen shall consists of not less than 5 cm square, arranged to so sides are respectively in contact with each In give eight thicknesses may be used. smoothness, it may be convenient to use thickness of paper of the test specimen. 4.4 Procedure 4.4.1 Condition 1966*. the test specimens

8 thicknesses of the sample, each that all the felt and all the wire other. A single sheet folded to cases of extremely high or low a greater or lesser number of

as prescribed

in 5 of IS : 1060 ( Part I)-

4.4.2 Place the apparatus on a level surface. Insert the prepared specimen in the punch on the base of the apparatus, and punch a hole in the centre of the pad. Raise the inner cylinder until it rests on the support. Insert the punched specimen between the upper and lower clamping plates Adjust the lower plate until the so that the hole is centred in the clamps. lift produced by the lever arm is sufficient to clamp the sample securely. Lower the lever arm by means of the handle which actuates the lifting cam. The specimen is now clamped for test. 4.4.3 Gently lower the inner cylinder until it floats in the oil. When a steady downward movement has been reached, measure by a stop watch or an automatic timing attachment the number of seconds required for any two consecutive 50 ml intervals to pass the rim of the outer cylinder, or for greater or smaller volumes if the finish of the sample makes this advisable. 4.4.4 Take precautions to avoid subjecting this increases the rate of air displacement. 5. EXPRESSION OF RESULTS roughness in millilitres per minute or as unit' ), separately for each side of the the apparatus to vibration as

5.1 Express the results as Bendtsen Sheffield roughness in ( `Sheffield

*Methods of sampling and test for paper and allied products: Part I ( revised 1. 8

IS : 9894 - 1981

paper or board. For Gurley-Hill SPS instrument, report the smoothness as the average time in second required for 50 ml of air to pass between the test surfaces of the test sample; report also the minimum and maximum test values. 5.2 No general figure for the precision of the results can be quoted. range of variability of results is a particular feature of this property. The

5.3 Roughness values of some papers are subject to large irreversible changes due to moisture brought about by standard conditioning and the results of this test will not necessarily indicate the roughness of the paper as manufactured. 6. TEST REPORT
6.1 The test report shall include the following particulars:

a) reference to this Indian Standard; b) type of instrument used; c) mean result, calculated to three significant figures; d) number of tests; e) precision of the mean; f) coefficient of variation, as a percentage; g) any deviation from this Indian features that are optional; and Standard, and details of any

h) any circumstances which might have affected the results.

9

INDIAN ON PAPER IS: AND

STANDARDS

BOARD

1064-1980 1396-1960 1763-1961 1774-1961 1775-1961 1848-1971 2483-1963 2991-1964 3064-1964 3302-1965 3303-1965 3338-1980 3413-1977 3673-1966 4645-1968 4658-1968 4661-1968 4664-1968 5195-1969 5457-1969 6211-1971 6956-1973 8431-1977 8460-1977 9032-1978 9033-1978

Paper sizes ( second revision ) Blotting paper Substances of paper and pulp board Paper for permanent records Base paper for sensitized paper Writing and printing papers ( first revision ) Ticket board Base paper for waxed paper Hand made drawing paper Backing sheet for stencil Paper for match boxes Sizes of correspondence envelopes ( first revision ) Base paper for carbon paper ( first revision ) Alkali resistant paper Code of practice for storage of paper and board Coated paper and board ( art and chrome ) Glossary of terms used in paper trade and industry Pulp board Paper stationery items for schools Sizes of folders and files Code of practice for packaging of paper and board Cover paper Tracing paper Wrapping tissue paper Diazo sensitized paper Reproduction tracing paper

