( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS:12080 -1987

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR L~OCAL EXHAUST VENTILATION SYSTEMS IN PREMISES MANUFACTURING PRODUCTS CONTAINING ASBESTOS

Cement
Chairman

and Concrete

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

BDC

2

DR H. C. VIS~ESVARAYA Members

National Council for Cement and Building Materials, New Delhi

ADDITIONAL D~RECTOW STAND- Research, Designs & Standards Organization ARDS(B&S) ( Ministry of Railways), Lucknow DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDAXDS ( B & S.) ( Akefnofe) Larsen and Toubro Limited, Bombay &RI K. P. BANERJEE SHRI HARISR N. MALANI ( Alternate ) PHRI S. K. BANERJEE National Test House, Calcutta Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal Township CHIEF ENQINEER ( BD ) SRRI J. C. BASUR ( AIterrrcte ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi CHIEF EWGI~~PR ( DESIGNS ) EXECUTIVE E&IP~PEB (D)-III ( Allernale ) CII~EF ENQINFER ( RESEARCP )- Irrigation and Power Research Institute, Amritsar CUm-DTRKCTGR RESEARCH OFFICER ( Cm-. CRETE TECRNOLCQY j ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR A. F. Engineering Research Laboratories, Hyderabad JOJNT Drs~clor. ( Alternate ) Central Soil and Materials Research Statian, DIRECTOR New Delhi CHIEF RESEARCB OFFICER ( -Alternate ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi D~REC~OB ( CMDD-1 ) DEPOT& DIREC'IP; ( CMDD-I ) ( Alternafe ) Stru;EictLengineering Research Centrs ( CSJR ), Ss~r V. K. GBANERAR The India Cements Ltd, Madras SARI S. GOFYNATB &RI T. TAMILABER AZ~( Alternate )

( Continued on pugs 2 ) @ Copyright 1987
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by anv means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : J2080- 1987 ( Continuedjhz
pge 1) Representing

Members

SHRI A. K. GUPTA Hyderabad Industries Limited, Hyderabad SHRI P. J. JAGUS Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay DR A. K. CRATTERJEF: ( Allcrnate ) SHRI N. G. JOSHI Indian Hume Pipes Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. L. KAPOOR Ministry of Transport, Department of Surface Transport (Roads Wing ), New Delhi SHRI R. K. SAXENA ( Alternate j SHRI S. K. LAHA ' `The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI B. T. UNWALLA ( Alternate ) DR A. K. MULLICK National Council for Cement and Building Materials, New Delhi SER1S.N. PAL M. N. Dastur and Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI BIMAN D.\SQUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI H. S. PASRICHA Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi SHRI Y. R. PHTJLL Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi; and Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI M. R. CHATTERJEE Cent;JlhiRoad Research Institute ( CSIR ), New ( Alternate ) DR MOHAN RAI Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkee DR S. S. REHSI ( Alternate ) DR M. RAMAIAE Struc;;;ia3ngineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), DR A. G. MADH-AVA RAO ( Alternate ) SHRI A. V. RAMANA Dalmia Cement ( Bharat ) Ltd, New Delhi DR K. C. NARAXG ( Alternatc ) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SHRI G. RAMDAS New Delhi National Buildings Organization, New Delhi DR A. V. R. RAO SHRI J. SEN GUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI T. N. SUBBA Rao Gammon India Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. A. REDDI ( Alternate ) SHRI A. U. RIJHSIN~HANI Cement Corporation of India, New Delhi SHRI C. S. SHARMA ( Alternate ) SHRI H. S. SATYANARAYANA Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi SHRI V. R. K~TNIS ( Alternate ) Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi SECRETARY SHRI K. R. SAXENA ( Alternate ) Development Commissioner for Cement Ind.ustry SHRI R. K. SINHA ( Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi SHRI S. S. MIGLANI ( Alternate ) ENGINE~K Public Works Department, Government of SUPERINTENDING Tamil Nadu, Madras ( DESIGNS ) EXECUTIVE ENQINI+ER ( SMR DIVISION ) ( Alternate ) Orissa Cement Ltd, New Delhi SERI L. SWAROOP SHRI H. BH~TTACHARYA ( Alternate ) Gannon Dunkerle y & Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. K. GU~A TH.\KURTA SRRI S. P. SANRARNARAYANAN ( Alternate ) Director General, BIS ( Ex-o&o Member ) SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SNRI N. C. BAND~OP.~DHYAY Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS ( Conlinuedon page 18

)

2

IS:12080-1987

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LOCAL EXHAUST VENTILATION SYSTEMS IN PREMISES MANUFACTURING PRODUCTS CONTAINING ASBESTOS

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 30 July 1987, after the draft finalized by the Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 In recent years there has been a growing awareness that exposure to asbestos dust can have harmful effects on the health of workers. In order to give guidance on how the risk of exposure to asbestos dust can be prevented, controlled or minimized, it was feltnecessary to lay down some standards regarding safe use of different products containing conditions in workplaces, preventive measures, asbestos, improving protection and supervision of the health of workers, packaging and This standard lays down the recomtransport, disposal of waste, etc. mendations for local exhaust ventilation systems in premises manufacturing products containing asbestos so as to control the concentration of asbestos dust. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. This has been met by deriving assistance from the following publications: IL0 Codes of practice: by the International Schedule under RAJHAKS asbestos Safety in the use of asbestos, Labour Office, Geneva and Act processing 1984, publtshed framed of

XIV on `Handling Section 87 of Facrories

of asbestos'

( G S ) and BRAGG ( G M ). dust control. Ann Arbor Science 3

Engineering Publishers,

aspects USA

IS :12080-1987 0.4 This standard
is one of ~a series of Indian Standards on safety in Other standards in the series already handling and use of asbestos. formulated and under preparation are as follows: IS : 11450-1986 Method for determination fibre concentration in work environment ( membrane filter method ) IS : 11451-1986 ments relating of airborne asbestos by light microscopy requireand waste con-

Recommendations for safety and health to occupational exposure to asbestos for for cleaning disposal of of

IS : 11767-1986 Recommendations plants using asbestos fibres IS : 11768-1986 material Recommendations

premises asbestos

IS : 11769 ( Part 1 )-I987 Guidelines for safe use of products taining asbestos: Part 1 Asbestos cement products IS : 11769 ( Part 2 )-1986 Guidelines containing asbestos: Part 2 Friction for safe materials use of

products

IS : 11769 ( Part 3 )-1986 Guidelines for safe use of products containing asbestos: Part 3 Non-cement asbestos products other than friction materials IS : 11770 ( Part 1 )-1987 Recommendations of asbestos dust in premises manufacturing asbestos: Part I Asbestos cement products IS : 11770 ( Part 2 )-1986 Recommendations of asbestos dust in premises manufacturing asbestos: Part 2 Friction materials for control products for control products of emission containing of emission containing

IS : 11770 ( Part 3 )-1987 Recommendations for control of emission of asbestos dust in premises manufacturing products containing asbestos: Part 3 Non-cement asbestos products other than friction materials IS : 12078-1987 Recommendations for workers engaged in handling asbestos IS ; 12079-1987 Recommendations storage of asbestos for personal packaging, protection transport of and

IS : 12081 ( Part 1 )-1987 Recommendations for pictorial warning signs and precautionary notices for asbestos and products containing asbestos: Part 1 Workplaces IS : 12081 ( Part 2 )-1987 Recommendations for pictorial warning for asbestos and products consigns and precautionary notices taining asbestos: Part 2 Asbestos and its products IS : 12082 ( Part emission: Part 1 )-I987 1 Mining Recommendations of asbestos ore 4 for control of asbestos

IS: IS : 12082 ( Part 2 ) Recommendations for control emission: Part 2 Milling of asbestos ( under fir@aration Method for determination fxeparation )

12080 - 1987 of ) water asbestos ( under

of asbestos

concentration

in

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down the recommendations for local exhaust ventilation systems in premises engaged in processing and use of asbestos fibre and in manufacture of products containing asbestos.
2. OBJECT

2.1 The

objects

of this standard

are: concentration of asbestos containing asbestos; and dust during

to control the workplace manufacture of products

b)

to provide a dust control system by which the dust laden air is entrained and taken to a collector for effecting separation of asbestos fibre and dust from the air stream for discharge and disposal.

3. APPLICATION 3.1 The the use there is blending, carding,
provisions oi this standard shall apply to any operation involving of asbestos and manufacture of asbestos based products where a possibility of asbestos dust emission, such as fibre preparation, spinning, mixing, forming, sheeting, cutting, polishing, braiding doubling, weaving, plaiting, machining, etc. EXHAUST VENTILATION SYSTEM by entraining the exhaust ventilation and entrain-

4. LOCAL 4.1 General

4.1.1 Control of airborne asbestos dust is exercised dust-laden air into a dust control system. Local ' system normally consists of the following: a) Hooding - This is required ment of airborne dust; b) Ducting - This is required the dust collector; for optimum for connecting

enclosure

the hood or hoods with separation air.
of

for effecting c) Dust Collector - This is required particles and dust from the air stream; and d) Fan This is required for moving 5 the dust laden

IS:12080- 1987 4.1.2 Arrangements shall be made from the local exhaust ventilation any workroom.
to prevent asbestos dust discharged system being drawn into the air of

4.1.3 For efficient operation, local exhaust ventilation system shall be located as close as possible to the source of dust emission by the use of captor hoods, booths or enclosures ( see 4.2.1 ). 4.1.4 The local exhaust and remove all dust-laden ventilation air. systems shall be designed as possible to collect while still

4.1.5 Opening in the enclosures shall be as small allowing access to the necessary work operation.

4.1.6 In case of captor hoods and booths ( see 4.2.1 ), the ventilation equipment shall be SO constructed that air turbulence and eddies created by the work process or by the wo:kers do not prevent the effective removal of dust. - Locating and determining the source and free path ofthe 4.2 Hooding emitted dust, and the design of the hood to entrain such dust is imporThe use of a high intensity light beam to locate and examine the tant. path of dust is effective and helpful with regard to hood design. 4.2.1 All the operations shall be studied in details before deciding upon a final design of hood which will usually fall into one of the following two categories: used to entrain a) Captor Type - Captor type of hood is commonly the dust from a localized dust source into the system through which it is finally collected; or b) Enclosure OY Booth Type - Enclosure or booth type of hoods, inside which the dust produced is contained as it is generated, is designed so as to prevent the dust escaping into the workplace. Enclosures~are generally used for operations like feeding, bagging, bench work, etc, where dust is generated over an area rather than from a localized source. 4.2.2 The speed of air entering the hood shall be such that for captor it would create sufficient air flow to draw in or entrain type of hood, dust into the system; and for enclosure type of hood, it would create negative pressure within the enclosure so that dust shall not leak out into the workplace. Hoods of either kind shall be SO designed that the openings are not larger than what is absolutely necessary since excess entry area will increase the volume of air to be handled. Larger increasing its effectiveness. openings will also increase the size without Some guidelines regarding assessment of air requirements are given in Appendix A. 6

IS : 12080 - 1987
In any dust control installation, where the collector and fan are located away-from the dust source and where plants with more than one dust source are served by one collector and fan, ducting shall be made. 4.3.1 Some recommendations regarding ducting are Appendix B for guidance. However, the following general shall be observed: given in principles

4.3 Ducting -

4 b)

Ducting of circular section shall be of such an adequate air carrying velocity throughout The interior of the ducting be of generous radii; shall be smooth

size as to provide the system; and all bends shall

C>Connections 4

to a main duct shall be made from top or from side. A series of upward rising connections into the bottom of a main duct is not effective; at intervals and adjacent Suitable test points shall for stability. to be

Access doors shall be provided bends where build-up may occur. provided; and ducting shall be adequately

All e>

supported

4.4 Dust Collectors - Generally two types of dust collector, namely, cyclones and fabric filter collectors as detailed in 4.4.1 and 4.4.2 are recommended for use. 4.4-l Cyclones - Cyclones are of relatively poor efficiency as dust separators and for this reason shall not be used as sole collectors of asbestos dust. They may, however, sometimes be used before a fabric filter to take out heavy materials and particles from the air stream and thus reducing the load on the filter. are most suitable 4.4.2 Fabric Filter Collectors - Fabric filter collectors for asbestos working. There are two main types of such collectors, the choice of which will depend upon the working conditions to be controlled. These are as follows: Intermittent a> allows the Tyfle - These are used when the pattern of work system to be closed down for cleaning and where the dust load between cleaning times is within the capacity of the filter; and

b)

Continuous Type - These are of more sophisticated design and usually arranged in sections, allowing one section at a time to be automatically isolated from the fan system for a few minutes for while the remainder of the filter sections continue cleaning, The filters are cleaned either with their normal function 7

IS :12080 - 1987
by shaking the sleeves or reverse air through applying them. The air supply to such reverse jets shall be clean, dry and at the stipulated pressure. The continuous operation filter is usually considered in cases where duty has to be nonstop, or where the dust load is so high~as to call for the removal of the collected dust from the filter element at more frequent intervals than the work routine permits. 4.4.2.1 Fitter materials - The materials used for the filter may be felt or woven cloth or a combination of both. The felt material has a better permeability and a higher collection efficiency; the woven material generally has greater strength and flexibility. Woven material shall be limited to 2'5 cm/s air velocity through the cloth, while velocity of 5 cm/s are recommended for felt materials. 4.4.2.2 Filter capacity - The volume of air to be handled and the air velocity through the filter material determine the filter area and consequently the size of the filter collector. Total filter area shall be calculated as follows: Total filter area volume of air to be handled filtering speed

types of filter collectors, ranging 4.4.2.3 Filter collectors - Many from large installations serving multiple dust points with the filter suitably housed outside the factory building to small units complete with integral fan and motor located near the machine -being served, may be used. These unit filters allow rapid and inexpensive provision of dust control facilities to a single machine or a group of limited size. The location of the filter collector shall be such as to give easy access for all Hopper design shall be done caresorts of maintenance and cleaning. fully so as to avoid bridging of the waste material, that is, blocking by the arching of fibres. All filters shall exhaust to outside atmosphere. 4.5 Fans and Motors - These shall be capable of continuous and efficient operation. The fan shall not work at the extreme limit of its performance. Where fabric filters are used, the fan shall be located after the filter, on the clean air side. Full aerofoil fans are recommended Where the fan is located on the dirty side and is pushing air for use. through the filter, fan with simple impellers shall be used. 4.5.1 The fan shall be installed after the filter. This ensures that the Additional air entrainment is system works under negative pressure. to be allowed for in the design to cater for leakages which may occur during the life of the installation. 4.5.2 The correct on each fan casing. direction of rotation 8 of fans shall be clearly marked,

IS : 12080 - 1987 4.6 Operation of the System checks on the exhaust important guidelines Appendix C. It is essential to exercise periodical system so as to ensure its proper functioning. Some for the operation of the system are given in

4.7 Extension of Existing System - The addition of extensions to an existing dust exhaust ventilation system without increasing the total air extracted shall be avoided. Ad-hoc extension may result in the extension being inffective and the efficiency of the original installation will be impaired. 5. HIGH-VOLUME,

LOW-VELOCITY

EXHAUST

SYSTEMS

5.1 The high-volume, low-velocity exhaust system uses high volumes of air at relatievely low velocities to control the dust at workplaces. Control is achieved by exhausting the air directly from the dust generation area using well designed suction hoods, ducts, etc. The capture velocity shall be such that even the particles generated farthest from the hood is sucked to ensure that all particles are taken into the suction hood. 5.2 The recommendations high-volume, low-velocity 5.2.1 The face velocity position at dust generating 5.2.2 Hood shall be as source and shall enclose it. given in 5.2.1 exhaust system. to 5.2.7 shall be followed the suction in

and air requirement for point should be determined. close as practicable

hood

to the dust generation designed such be streamlined particles that all towards at the

5.2.3 The shape of hood shall be appropriately the particles generated from the source shall the centre of mouth of hood. 5.2.4 greater A shield velocity. shall be provided to capture the

released

5.2.5 The air velocity moving dust releasing velocity to achieve 5.2.6 Suction same direction. air velocity and

into the hood shall be greater than complete capturing of particles. dust release velocity shall

be in the the dust

5.2.7 Operator shall not come between generating source. 6. LOW-VOLUME,

the exhaust

hood and

HIGH-VELOCITY

EXHAUST

SYSTEMS

6.1 Low-volume,

high-velocity exhaust systems are useful particularly to hand tools and machining operations. Control is achieved by exhausting the air directly from the point of dust generation, using close-fitting custom-made hoods and nozzles. Capturing velocities are generally as 9

IS : 12080 - 1987
high as 50 to 60 m per second, but the volume of air used is low ( generally 0.3 to `7 m3 per minute ) because of close proximity of the nozzle to the dust source. For flexibility, small-bore Plastic hose may be used as a connection to the tool with the remainder of the system utilizing fixed steam ~piping and fittings. This method provides local exhaust ventilation with effective control at the dust source and in situations where conventional high-volume, low-velocity systems would be too cumbersome.

6.2 The

dust is conveyed at high speed through the flexible piping. With the high entering velocities involved, exhaust needs to be provided with a multi-stage centrifugal exhauster capable of providing a static pressures of about 125 mm mercury at the nozzle opening. Suitable industrial vacuum cleaners may sometimes be adopted to provide this type of localized extraction. 7. PRESSURE

MONITORING

7.1 Checks

on the performance of an exhaust system shall be made by comparing the static pressut-e readings at points in the system with the readings recorded at the same points upon commissioning. portable manometer may be used to measure the static Test holes to take the tubing from the manoducting. provided at suitable test points in the system. These holes with rubber stoppers when not in use. points estabeach

7.2 A simple pressure in the meter shall be shall be sealed

7.3 Dial-type gauges may also be permanently installed at selected in the system, the dials being marked with the limiting readings lished on commissioning of the plant. 7.4 Recommeded points for pressure monitoring hood, and entry and exhaust of the filtering units. are exit from

7.4.1 If permanent gauges are fitted, then these should be mounted on rigid parts of the plant or building adjacent to the test point and connected to the test point by small-bore piping. 8. INSPECTION

VENTILATION

AND EXAMINATION SYSTEM

OF EXHAUST

8.1 Exhaust ventilation system shall be examined and inspected at least once in every seven days and shall be thoroughly examined and tested by Any defect found by such a competent person at least once in a year. examinations or tests shall be rectified forthwith. A report of the results of such examination and particulars of repairs or alterations carried out shall be properly maintained.
8.1.1 Every report ( see 8.1 ) shall be attached to the general and be preserved and kept available for inspection. 10 register

IS : 12080 - 1987 8.1.2 The weekly check is made to ensure that the plant is being handled correctly. The checks to be generally exercised during weekly inspection are given in Appendix D for guidance.
8.1.3 The examination and testing carried calls for a more detailed technical approach. this examination and test is given in Appendix 9. COLLECTION out at least once in a year A specimen check list for E for guidance.

AND

DISPOSAL

OF WASTE

9.1 Fine

Dust - Fine dust, which is normally produced by sanding or The air machining operations, is collected by fixed extraction systems. is filtered and the dust is collected in hoppers which are normally fitted These outlets shall be designed to make bag with bagging-off outlets. Polyethylene bags of changing easy and to minimize dust leakage. adequate strength shall be used so that the dust levels are visible from outside to facilitate its change before being over-filled.
9.1.1 When of dust during filled, the bags shall be sealed so as to prevent subsequent handling. and respirator the escape

9.1.2 Suitable protective clothing bags on a dust collector are changed. 9.2

shall be worn when

Waste

Other

than

Fine Dust

9.2.1 Waste materials from operations like strapping, cutting, stripping, etc, shall be collected in polyethylene bags and sealed. Where such material has been allowed to fall on floors, it shall be thoroughly damped before sweeping and the damped materials shall be placed in impermeable bags and sealed.
9.3 Asbestos waste, in sealed bags, shall be disposed of in accordance in such a way that no with the procedures laid down in IS : 11768-1986" dust is emitted into the air during transport or in the act of final disposal.

APPENDIX 0 Clause 4.2.2 )
GUIDELINES A-l. FOR ASSESSMENT

A

OF AIR REQUIREMENTS

The quantity of air needed at any point is determined by the design of the hood and its proximity to the source of the dust. Thereafter the sum of the volumes of air taken by each hood in a system determine the size of collectors, fans, etc. `Recommendations for disposal of asbestos waste material. 11

IS :12080-1987 A-2. Broad indications of the air volumes used for some machines are It is given in A-2.1 to A-2.4. These shall be taken as guidelines only. important that the air velocity at the point of origin of the dust shall be sufficient to capture it. Hoods shall be carefully designed to make them -effective. A-2.1 Typical exhaust rates of some machines for conventional volume, low-velocity system are given in Table 1.
TABLE SL No. 9 1 TYPICAL EXHAUST RATES FOR CONVENTIONAL VOLUME, LOW-VELOCITY SYSTEM COXNECTION saw Top connection Bottom connection Top connection Bottom connection Top connection Bottom connection 8*5 9.9 I;.;5 8.5 9'9

high-

I-IIGH-

MACEINES Power circular

EXHAUW RATE m3/Min

a) 250 to 300 mm dia b) 400 to 450 mm dia ii) iii) Bandsaw up to 900 mm dia pulleys Sander a) Double b) Bobbin disc 750 mm dia sander

per disc per disc

9.9 12'75

A-2.2 Typical ~airflow/capture velocity and transport velocity for some operations using high-volume, low-velocity system are given in Table 2. A-2.3 Routing -Routing machines are difficult to provide with a standard hood due to the wide range of operations performed on them. For small repetitive work, a close-proximity hood fitted with a bristle curtain may be applied. The open area face velocity shall be not less a booth enclosure on the than 3 m/s. For large and varied operations, machine table and around the cutter is recommended with a face velocity of not less than 1.25 m/s. A-2.4 Drilling - Fixed pedestal drills are best served when fitted with a small hood having high velocity in excess of 10 m/s. Recommended air volume per spindle is 3.4 ms/min. A-2.5 Milling and Turning - Close proximity hood with face velocity However, the nature of the of 10 m/s should be used, where possible. machining operation will often prevent this and it may be necessary to supplement or replace the local exhaust points with a booth type hooding around the machining area and in such cases the face velocity shall be 1.75 to 2.5 m/s. 12

IS : 12080 - 1987
TABLE 2 TYPICAL VELOCITY AIRFLOW/CAPTURE FOR OPERATIONS LOW-VELOCITY TYPE OB HOOD VELOCITY AND TRANSPORT USING HIGH-VOLUME, SYSTEM AIRFLOW/CAPTURE VELOOITY (4) 2 740 ma/h/ma of opening 3 650 ma/h/ma through hood openings but not less than 450 ma/h/m" of screen area 1 800 ms/h/m* of open area 1 to l-25 m/s through opening 1 to 1'25 m/s 0'75 to 1.0 m/s 1.0 to 1.25 m/s I.0 m/s 1-O to I.25 m/s 2.8 m/s at the tool rest TRANSPORT VELOCITY m/s, Min (5) 20 to 23 20

SL NO. (1) i) ii)

OPERATION

(2)
Crushing Screening

(3) Enclosure Enclosure

iii) iv) v) vi) vii) viii) ix) x)

Conveying Bagging Dumping Mixing Bag slitting Preform press brake shoes for

Enclosure Enclosure/ Booth Booth Booth over the mixture Enclosure Enclosure Enclosure Enclosure

20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20

to 23

Hot press for brake shoes Grinding shoes of brake

A-3. ENCLOSED

DUST POINTS
inside the designed enclosure, through the arranged aperture

A-3.1 In order to ensure that dust remains
velocity of the air entering the enclosure shall not be less than 0'75 m/s. A-4.

LOW-VOLUME,

HIGH-VELOCITY

SYSTEMS

A-4.1 These

systems are quite different from conventional systems and generally require 0.3 to 7 m3/min of air at velocities of 50 to 100 m/s. Experimental work shall be undertaken in order to ascertain nozzle design, air quantity and air speed more accurately and in such cases an industrial vacuum cleaner may be useful for this exploratory work. 13

IS : 12080 - 1987

APPENDI~X ( -clause 4.3.1 )
RECOMMENDATIONS B-l. B-l.1 GENERAL

B
DUCTING

REGARDING

All ducting shall be circular in section and manufactured from mild steel. Interior surface shall be smooth and free of obstructions. Ducting shall be sized to give a minimum air conveying velocity of 1'7'5 m/s. Velocities of 22.5 m/s may be necessary for dust containing metal particles. B-2. THICKNESS OF SHEETING the recommended 0'90 mm I.25 mm I.60 mm 2'00 mm thicknesses

B-2.1 For different diameter of ducting, of mild steel sheet are as follows: Up to 300 mm diameter From 300 to 750 mm diameter From From B-3. B-3.1 B-4. 750 to 1 000 mm diameter 1 000 mm and above

FINISH Ducting JOINTS shall have a suitable protective finish.

B-4.1 Ducting up to 350 mm diameter shall have rivetted and taped slip joints; for 350 mm diameter and above, flanged and gasketted joints are recommended. B-5. BENDS radius of three times the diameter of

B-5.1 All bends shall have a mean the duct, whenever possible. B-6. CONNECTIONS

B-6.1 Branch connections shall enter the side of the main duct on an expending taper and at an angle of not more than 30" to the main duct. B-7. BALANCING

B-7.1 Where system balancing is necessary, the design volume is obtained by the fitting of balancing cones or slide dampers. Balancing cones have the advantage of not being subject to unauthorized alteration, but require the provision of access doors for their adjustment. Slide dampers, being adjustable from outside the ducting, may be tampered with and, as such, shall be locked after initial adjustment. 14

IS : 12080 - 1987 B-8. ACCESS DOORS AND PANELS

B-8.1 When balancing cones are fitted, adjacent access panels shall be required. Inspection doors for duct maintenance shall be provided at intervals in horizontal main ducting and adjacent to bends. B-9. INSTRUMENT TEST HOLES

B-9.1 Test holes of 10 mm diameter shall be provided for checking air These holes shall be covered when not in flow throughout the system. use. B-10. LOW-VOLUME, HIGH-VELOCITY SYSTEM

B-10.1 This system generally does not use conventional sheet metal ducting, but makes use of commercial steam piping and fittings. Bends should be of the `long sweep' type and kept to the least possible number.

APPENDIX ( Chse 4.6 3
GUIDELINES

C
EXHAUST

FOR OPERATION OF LOCAL VENTILATION SYSTEM

C-l. Before starting any machine which incorporates exhaust ventilation, make sure that the exhaust system is switched "ON" and that suction is felt at the extraction hood. Where multiple extraction points are used, ensure that all are effective. C-2. For short stoppages of a machine for normal operative attention, the exhaust system shall remain "ON". Locals exhaust ventilation system shall, while any work of maintenance or repair to the machinery, apparatus or other plant or equipment in connection with which it is provided is being carried on, be kept in use so as to produce an exhaust draught which prevents the entry of asbestos dust into the air of any workplace. C-3. When the machine or process is to be stopped for meal breaks or at the end of a-shift, the exhaust system shall be left running for at least two minutes after the machine has stopped to clear hoods and ducting. C-4. Where the installed filter is cleaned by manual operation of the shaking gear, this should be carried out at all convenient break periods. Some unit dust collectors have filters incorporating shaking gear which operates automatically each time the suction fan is switched off. C-5. Exhaust ventilation systems normally have dampers incorporated in the ducting to achieve initial balancing of the system. These, after 15

IS

:12080 -1987

balancing has been carried out, shall be securely looked in position. The dampers shall not be used for any other purpose; if it becomes necessary subsequently to re-adjust the air balance, this work shall be carried out by trained staff and all dampers affected re-secured. C-6. Weekly inspection of the exhaust ventilation system shall be carried out as mentioned in 8.1.2. The extraction hoods shall be checked to see that they are free from obstruction. If there is doubt as to the correct position of a hood,the effectiveness of the hood shall be re-examined by the light beam method. This will enable the optimum hood position to be re-established and arrangements shall then be made for a more effective fixing of the hood to prevent a recurrence of mis-alignment.

APPEND-IX ( Clause 8.1.2 )
CHECK LIST OF WEEKLY VENTILATION INSPECTION SYSTEMS

D
OF EXHAUST shall include

D-l. The weekly inspection of exhaust at least the following checks:

ventilation

systems

a) That the condition of the hoods and nozzles is being and that they are correctly positioned; b) That the filter hoppers routine is being regularly c) That d) That there are no leakages are not overfilled carried out; in the system; are leaking dust; equipment and

maintained

the emptying

none of the filter elements

e) That the filter shaking properly; and f)

gear or cleaning

is functioning

That the designed pressures are being maintained in the gauges The normal or expected gauge reading should be where fitted. clearly marked on or near the gauge.

16

IS : 12080 - 1987 APPENDIX ( Clause 8.1.3 3 CHECK LIST OF YEARLY EXAMINATION LAND TESTING EXHAUST VENTILATION SYSTEMS E-l.
The yearly inspection and testing of exhaust shall include at least the following checks: ventilation

E OF

systems

a) That all hoods and ducting are in position and in good order; b) That there are no air leakages in any part of the system;

c) That the condition of all filter elements is good;
d) That there is no unacceptable wear of component parts of the filter shaking or cleaning gear; e) That all lubrication points are charged; f) That the fan and drive correctly adjusted; and to the fan are in good condition and

g) That the air flow in each part of the system and the fan inlet pressure are to the designed specification.
NOTE - While the above inspection and testing are to be carried out at least once i;oanq;+r, it is recommended that items (d), (e) and (f) be also checked every three

17

IS :12080 - 1987
( Continued from page 2 )
Asbestos Cement Products Subcommittee, BDC 2 : 3

Convcnar DRS.K. GHOPRA S-436 Greater Kailash New Delhi Members SHRX S.K. BANZRJEE SHRI N. G. BASAK SERI P. K. JAJN ( Alternate ) SH~I S. N. BASU Reprcscnting National Test House, Calcutta Directorate General of Technical New Delhi Development,

Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi SHRI T. N. OBOVEJA ( Alternate ) Shree Digvijay Cement Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. R. BHANDARI SHRI V. R. NATARAJAN ( Alternate ) Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, SHRI S. K. CEAKRABORTY New Delhi SERI S. C. KUMAR ( Alternate ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS Research, Designs & Standards Organization ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow (B&S) ASSISTANT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( B & S )-II ( Ahrnate ) DIRECTOR, ENQI~EERIN~ GEOLOGY Geological Survey of India, Calcutta DIVISION I SRRI S. K. MATHUR ( Alternate ) Southern Asbestos Cement Ltd, Madras SHRI S. GANAPATHY Rohtas Industries Ltd, Dalmianagar GEXERAL MANAQER ( CEM~T ) SERI D. N. SINQH ( Altcrnate ) Sarbamangala Manufacturing Co, Calcutta SHRI S. S. GOENEA SHRI I. P. GOENKA ( Alternate ) Everest Building Products Ltd, Bombay SHRI SRINIVASANN. IYER DR V. G. UPADHYAYA ( Altcrnatc ) Saurabh Construction Co, Indore SHRI P. S. KALANI Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), DR KALYAN DAS Roorkee SHRI K. D. DHARIYAL ( Aftcrnate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, LT-COL KAXLESH PRAKASR New Delhi SHRI K. R. BHAMBANI ( Altcrnatc ) Flowel Asbestos Products, Ahmadabad SHRI HARSHAD R. OZA Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI V. PATTABRI SRRI A. K. GUPTA ( Ahrnate ) National Council for Cement and Building DR N. RA~HAVENURA Materials, New Delhi National Buildings Organization, New Delhi DR A. V. R. RAO SHRI J. SEN GUPTA ( Alternate ) STJPEXINTENDINQ SURVEYOR OF Central Public Works Department, New Delhi WORKS ( CZ ) SURVEYOR OF WORKS ( CZ ) ( Alternate ) Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Delhi SBRl S. A. SWAi%:Y ( &hued on page 19 )

18

IS:12080 - 1987
( Continued from page 18 )

Panel

for Safety in Handling

and Use of Asbestos,
Representing

BDC 2 : 3/P2

Convener SHRI D. K. BISWAS Members SHRI R. K. BANERJEE SHRI K. PANDARINATH SHRI N. G. BASAK Sundaram-Abex

Department of Bio-Technology ( Ministry of Science and Technology ), New Delhi Ltd, Madras of Technical Development,

( Alternate )

SHRI P. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) SERI S. K. &AKI%ABoRTY

Directorate General New Delhi

SHRI S. C. KUMAR ( Alternate ) In DR G. G. DAVAY DIRECTOR

Development Commissioner, New Delhi

Small Scale Industries,

DR S. K. DAVE ( Alternate) Southern Asbestos Cement Ltd, Madras SHRI S. GANAPATHY SHRI S. A. BEIMA RAJA ( Aftemnte) Directorate General of Factory Advice Service and DR H. N. GUPTA Labour Institutes, Bombay SHRI V. S. SASIKUMAR ( Alternate 1 Everest Building Products Ltd, Bombay SHRI SRINIVASAN N. IYER SRRI T. S. PRADHAN ( Alternate ) Asbestos Information Centre ( India ), New Delhi BRIU D. B. KAPOOR ( RETD ) Indus~~;%40~ Research Centre ( CSIR ), DR J. L. KAW DR N. K. MERROTRA ( Alternate ) National Environmental Engineering Research DR M. V. NANOTRI Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur DR D. M. DHARMADHIKARI ( Altemntc ) Department of Environment, New Delhi SHRI G. K. PANDEY Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI V. PATTABHI DR S. P. VIVEK CHANDRA RAO ( Alternate ) National Council for Cement and Building DR N. RAGHAVEND~LA Materials, New Delhi SHRI RATTAN LAL ( Alternate ) Hindustan Ferodo Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. RAWASWAMY SHRI A. HOMEM ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi DR A. V. R. RAO .SHRI D. N. MATHUR ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Mines Safety ( Ministry of SHRI B. K. SHARAN Labour ), Dhanbad DR D. K. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) Reinz Tal-Broz ( Pvt ) Ltd, New Delhi SHRI NAVNIT TALWAR SHRI A. K. SHARMA ( Alternate )

personal capacity ( 7/72, Varma Nagar, Old Nagardas Road, Andheri East, Bombay ) National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmadabad

19

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units QU~TITY Length
hkSS

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS

)

UNIT metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

SYMBOL

m kg s A K cd mol

Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Units

Supplementary QUANTITY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QUANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency

UNIT radian steradian

SYMBOL rad sr

UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

SYMBOL N 1 1 1w 1 1 1

DEBINITION N = 1 kg.m/P J = 1 N.m = 1 J/s

J
W Wb T Hz S V Pa

1 Wb = 1 V.s T = 1 Wb/m* s i5i: 1 A/V V=lW/A 1 Hz = 1 c/s (I-`)

-Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress force

1 Pa = 1 N/m*

