NAT Alan IS 17181 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


TEA TART HT BS THT CAT HT 
frate faces vel arte UR OT 


Remote Field Eddy Current Testing 
of Steam Generator and Heat 
Exchanger Tubes 


ICS 77.040.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2020 Price Group 2 


Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee, MTD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Non-Destructive 
Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 


Remote field eddy current testing is generally used to evaluate the condition of the tubing towards its failure 
during service and also to generate baseline data. 


This standard applies to application of the procedure on ferromagnetic tubes only of uniform cross section and 
chemical composition. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised y. 


IS 17181 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


REMOTE FIELD EDDY CURRENT TESTING 
OF STEAM GENERATOR AND HEAT 
EXCHANGER TUBES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the procedure to be followed 
during remote field eddy current testing of installed 
seamless ferromagnetic steam generator and heat 
exchanger tubes for baseline and service induced flaws. 
This procedure is intended for use on ferromagnetic 
tubes with outside diameters from 12 to 50 mm 
with wall thickness in the range of 0.75 to 3.5 mm. 
This procedure is applicable only to ferromagnetic 
tubes of uniform cross section and chemical 
composition. 


2 PRINCIPLE OF TEST 


Remote field eddy current testing uses separate 
exciter and receiver coils which are axially separated 
by 2 to 3 times the inner diameter (ID) of the tube. 
The electromagnetic field emitted by the exciter 
travels outwards through the tube wall, axially along 
the outside of the tube and back through the tube wall 
to the receiver coil. Flaw indications are observed 
when: 


a) In thin-walled areas, the field arrives at the 
receiver with less attenuation and less time 
delay; 


b) Flaws interrupt the lines of magnetic flux, which 
are aligned mainly axially; and 


c) Flaws interrupt the eddy currents which flow 
mainly circumferentially. 


A flaw at any point on the through-transmission path 
between the exciter and receiver coils can create a 
perturbation; thus the remote field eddy current testing 
has approximately equal sensitivity to flaw on the inner 
and outer walls of the tube. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Exciter — A coil or element that generates a 
time-varying electromagnetic field, usually a coil 
energized with alternating current; also known as 
transmitter. 


3.2 Receiver — One or more coils or elements used 
to sense or measure magnetic field; also known as 
detector. 


3.3 Remote Field — Electromagnetic field which has 
been transmitted through the tube and is observable 
beyond the direct coupling field of the exciter. 


3.4 Remote Field Testing — Non-destructive test 
method that measures changes in the remote field 
region to detect and characterise flaws. 


3.5 End Effect — The field from the exciter is able to 
propagate around the end of a tube. A flaw indication 
may be obscured or distorted if the flaw or any active 
probe element is within approximately three tube 
diameters of the tube end. 


3.6 Remote Field Probe — The single entity of exciter- 
receiver coil assembly. 


3.7 Effective Depth of Penetration — The depth in 
a material at which the induced current intensity due 
to sinusoidal excitation practically reduces to zero is 
called the effective depth of penetration. In effect, the 
test system does not detect any flaw situated beyond the 
effective depth of penetration in the material. 


4 SUMMARY OF PRACTICE 


The purpose of remote field eddy current testing is to 
evaluate the condition of the tubing. The evaluation 
results may be used to assess the likelihood of tube 
failure during service and also to generate baseline data. 
The remote field eddy current testing data is collected 
by passing remote field probe through each tube. The 
electromagnetic field transmitted from the exciter to the 
receiver is affected by: 


a) Flaws; 

b) The dimensions and electromagnetic properties of 
the tube; and 

c) Objects in and around the 
ferromagnetic or conductive. 


tube that are 


Sensitivity of remote field eddy current system is 
verified using reference standard (see 6.1). System 
sensitivity and settings are checked and recorded prior 
to and at regular intervals during the examination. Data 
and systems settings are recorded in a manner that 
allows archiving and later recall of all data and system 
settings for each tube. Interpretation and evaluation 
are carried out using one or more flaw characterization 
standards. The supplier generates a final report detailing 
the results of the examinations. 


IS 17181 : 2020 


5 REMOTE FIELD EDDY CURRENT TESTING 
SYSTEM 


5.1 Equipment 


The electronic instrument shall be capable of creating 
alternating current source at a fixed or variable 
frequency appropriate for the tube material. It shall 
be capable of measuring the amplitude and phase lag 
of the induced voltage in the receiver coil for each 
frequency. The instrument shall display data in real 
time. Saturation of electronic components is a potential 
problem in remote field eddy current testing because 
signal amplitude increases rapidly with decreasing 
tube wall thickness. Data acquired in such conditions 
is not acceptable. The instrument settings shall be 
set as appropriate to achieve the minimum required 
sensitivity to flaws. 


5.2 Recording Devices 


Storage oscilloscopes in XY mode or two channel 
strip chart recorders or analog to digital converter 
(minimum two channels and 200 samples per second 
sampling rate) controlled through a personal computer 
can be used as recording and storage devices. Alarm 
or a marking system can also be used with the main 
equipment. 


5.3 Probe Driving System 


A mechanical system capable of driving the remote 
field eddy current probe at a constant speed inside 
the tube shall be used to avoid unwanted signals due 
to probe wobble. The driving system shall in no way 
damage the tubes being tested. Servo motor or stepper 
motor based driving systems can also be used for this 
purpose. Probe centering is recommended. 


5.4 Probes 


The remote field probes should be of largest practically 
achievable diameter for the tubes being examined, 
leaving clearance for debris, dents, changes in tube 
diameter, and other obstructions. The probes should be 
of an appropriate configuration and size for the tube 
being examined and for the type or types of flaws to 
be detected. 


5.4.1 Probe Configuration 


The receiver is typically placed two to three tube 
diameters from the exciter in a location where the 
remote field dominates the direct coupling field. 
Other probe configurations or designs may be used to 
optimize flaw detection. Reduction in inner diameter 
may require smaller diameter probe that is able to pass 
through the restriction. In the unrestricted sections, the 
sensitivity is likely to be limited by the smaller probe 
fill factor. 


5.4.2 Absolute Receiver 


Absolute receiver coils are commonly used to locate 
and size large volume flaws and gradual metal loss. 


5.4.3 Differential Receiver 


Differential receiver coils tend to maximize the 
response from small volume flaws and abrupt changes 
along the tube length, and are also commonly used to 
locate and size large volume flaws. 


5.4.4 Array Receiver 


Array receiver coils use a configuration of multiple 
sensing elements. Each element is sensitive to a discrete 
section ofthe tube circumference. The elements may be 
oriented with their axes aligned axially or radially with 
respect to the tube. 


5.4.5 Exciter and Receiver Configuration 


Probes may have multiple exciters and receivers in a 
variety of configurations. These configurations may 
reduce interference from support plates and other 
conductive objects. 


6 TEST PROCEDURE 


6.1 System Reference Standard 


The reference standard used shall be of the same nominal 
dimensions, material type and grade, fabrication route 
and heat treatment as that of the tubes to be examined. 
Artificial standard defects shall be machined (or using 
EDM) with a tolerance levels of + 10 percent of the 
specified values. Artificial flaws shall be well separated 
(3 times the tube OD) such that the signals due to them 
would not overlap with each other and also lie well 
above the end effect region. The reference standard 
contains the following artificial machined flaws. 


6.1.1 Through Hole (A) 


A through hole whose diameter is equal to the tube 
wall thickness multiplied by a specified factor F is 
used. For tubes of outside diameter less than 25 mm 
the factor is 2. For tubes of outside diameter greater 
than or equal to 25 mm the factor is 3. 


6.1.2 Short Circumferential Groove (B) 


A short circumferential groove of a depth of 10 percent 
of the wall thickness and axial length of 15 mm is used. 
Edges shall be straight (approximately 90°) with an 
angle not more than 105° as shown in Fig. 1. 


6.1.3 Support Plates 


Support plates may be simulated by drilling a hole 
through a solid flat plate or circular plate of diameter 
equal to 5 times the outer diameter of the tube. The 
radial clearance between the support plate hole and 


IS 17181 : 2020 


RESET ESSAI 


3x OD 3x 0D 
Expanded view RSS RES 


Section view 


Smm 


Fic. 1 REFERENCE STANDARD TO BE USED FOR REMOTE FIELD EDDY CURRENT TESTING 


tube outer diameter shall be less than 1.0 mm. 


6.2 Preparation 


Cleaning of tubes prior to remote field testing 
is necessary to remove obstructions and heavy 
ferromagnetic or conductive debris. 


6.3 Operating Frequency 


The frequency of the instrument shall be optimized 
such that the effective depth of penetration is ensured 
and signals from reference flaws A and B in Fig. 1 are 
distinctly seen with maximum possible amplitude and 
phase angle separation with respect to ambient noise. 


6.4 Pull Speed 


Determine a pull speed appropriate to the frequency, 
sampling rate and required detection sensitivity. 
Maintain uniform pull speed during the testing of tubes. 


6.5 Method of Testing 


Ensure that the remote field testing system yields 
the minimum required sensitivity to all the system 
reference standard defects at the examination pull 
speed (see 6.4). 


For a flaw to be considered detectable, its indication 


should exceed the ambient noise by a factor of at 
least 3, unless and otherwise specified by the user. An 
exception may be made when the user requires only 
a large volume metal loss examination, in which case 
the sensitivity should be demonstrated for specified 
large volume flaws machined in a separate reference 
standard. 


Insert the remote field probe into the tube and acquire 
data while pulling the probe at the optimized pull 
speed (see 6.4). Maintain as uniform speed as possible 
throughout the examination to produce repeatable 
indications. 


6.6 System Check 


Carry out system check at regular intervals using 
the reference standard to verify working of remote 
field probe and to demonstrate system sensitivity 
and operating parameters to the satisfaction of the 
user. Carry out system check prior to starting the 
examination. System check shall be carried out at: 


a) The beginning and end of each work shift; 
b) When equipment function is in doubt; 
c) After a change of inspection personnel; 


IS 17181 : 2020 


d) Afterachange ofany essential system components; 
and 


e) Overall at a minimum of every four hours. 


If flaw responses from the system reference standard 
are changed substantially, all the tubes examined since 
the last system check shall be reexamined. The remote 
field probe shall be replaced, if not working. 


7 ACCEPTANCE STANDARD 


The recording criteria and acceptance standard shall be 
subject to agreement between the contracting parties. 
All indications and flaws which are equal to or greater 
than the agreed values may be the cause for rejection. 


8 REPORTING OF TEST RESULTS 
The test report shall contain the following information: 


a) Tube sheet lay out drawing reference number 
where applicable; 


b) Material grade and tube dimensions; 


c) Surface conditions of the tube before and after 
testing; 


d) Make of the remote field instrument used for 
testing; 


e) Remote field probe details such as dimensions 
(OD, ID), coil spacing; 

f) Operating frequency and instrument settings; 

g) Test speed or pull speed of the probe; 

h) Approximate location of the flaw detected from 
a reference point, size and its extent in the axial 
direction; 

j) Chart record or data where available; 

k) Any unusual occurrence encountered during test; 
and 

m) Personnel performing the examination and their 
qualifications and signatures. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 21 (10414). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


