(Reaffirmed 2012)

1$:7802-1975

Indian Standard
CODE OF HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR SWEETMEAT SHOPS
Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis Sectional Committee, AFDC 36
Chairman DB RANJIT SEN Members AQRIOIJLTURALMAREETINQ A~vIDirectorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry arm TO THE GOVEENYENT or of Agriculture & lrrigation ), Faridabad INDIA SHRI T. V. MATHEW ( Alternate ) Institute of Agricultural Research Statistics SHRI V. N. AMBLE ( ICAR ), New Delhi SHRI K. S. KRISHNAN ( Alternate) Public Analyst, Government of Tamil Nadu, SERIK. BALASUSBAMANIAN Madras Heal;tlhyepartment, Municipal Corporation of COL S. L. CHADHA DR A. J. AJWANI ( Alternate ) DR G. C. DAS DR P. K. DATTA SHEI K. C. DE DR V. V. KARNIK ( Alternate ) SHRI SUKUYAR DE Health Officer, Corporation of Calcutta All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Calcutta The Metal Box Co of India Ltd, Calcutta National Dairy Karnal Research Institute Representing Serologist to the Government of India (Directorate General of Health Services ), Calcutta

Health, . ( ICAR ),

DR C. A. MULAY ( Alternate ) Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta DIREOT~R EXE OUTWE HEALTH OFFIOER Bombay Municipal Corporation MUNIOIPAL ANALYST ( Alternate ) Municipal Corporation of Madras HEALTH OF~IOER Department of Health & Family Planning, DB ( SUT) S. KEOSLA Government of Punjab, Chandigarh DR P. K. KYMAL Food & Nutrition Board ( Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ), New Delhi DE 0. N. A~ARWALA ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ INDIAN C@yright 1976 INSTITUTION

`I

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

ISr7802-1975
(Continued from page 1 ) Members Representing Defence Food Research Defence ), Mysore Laboratory ( Ministry of

MAJ V. A. NABAYANAN

DR G. A2A$,c~ ( Alternate ) & Government of West Bengal, Calcutta PUBLIC ( FOOD WATER ) PUBLIC ANALYST ( BACTERIOLOGY) ( Alternate ) DR T. N. RAMACHANDRA RAO Central Food Technological Research Institute ( CSIR), Mysore SHRI C. T. DWARKANATH (Alternate) COL K. SEETARAM Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters LT-COL 0. P. KAPUR ( Alternate) SENIOR MEDIOAL 0 F BI o E R Northern Railway, New Delhi
D; EE%%A . . Ds M. R. SUBBARAM Public Analyst, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow Directorate of Sugar l(r Vanaspati (Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation), New Delhi Vallabhbhai Pate1 Chest Institute, Delhi Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of Health & Family Planning ), New Delhi

DR I. A. SIDDIQI (Alternate) DR T. A. V. SIJBRAMANIAN
DR M. C. SWA~~INATHAN SHRI D. S. CHADHA ( Alternate)

SHRI P. c. VIN

The Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi SRRI J. D. CONTRACTOR ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o$cio Member ) &RI P. PURNANANDAM? Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary SHRI SOHRAB Deputy Director ( Agri & Food), IS1

Hygienic

Codes

Subcommittee,

AFDC 36 : 5

Convener COL S. L. CHADHA Members AGRICULTURAL MARKETINQ ADVI- Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad SER TO THE GOVERNMENT OIP INDIA SHRI T. V. MATHEW ( Alternate ) Food & Nutrition Board ( Ministry of Agriculture DEPWXY TECHNICAL ADVISER & Irrigation ), New Delhi ( Continued on page 9 ) Health Department, Delhi Municipal Corporation of

2

IS:7802-1975

Indian Standard
CODE OF HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR SWEETMEAT SHOPS
0. FOREWORD

0.1This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 September 1975, after the draft finalized by the Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council.
0.2 Consumers do not have knowledge and means of determining the hygienic quality of the food they purchase. For this, they rely on the hygienic standards of various industries that prepare and handle foods. A series of codes has, therefore, been evolved stipulating hygienic standards in respect of layout, construction and personnel for different food establishments, giving due consideration to the fact that unless the manufacture, storage and sale of food is governed by suitable hygienic practices, the quality of the food should not be considered safe. 0.3 Sweetmeat is one of the popular foods widely consumed by people of These are sold in various forms all classes and age groups in the country. These are served in restaurants, and contain a large variety of ingredients. catering establishments, HALWAIS and sweetmeat shops, by itinerant vendors and through other selling agencies. 0.4 During the course of its manufacture, storage, packaging and distribution, sweetmeat is open to microbial and other contamination from a variety of sources including raw materials, water, containers and persons handling it. It is, therefore, necessary to maintain proper hygienic conditions at all stages of its production. 0.5 This code has been formulated to provide general guidelines to the sweetmeat establishments regarding hygienic requirements to ensure safety and wholesomeness of the sweetmeat for human consumption. 0.6 This code is a necessary adjunct requirements specific to the production to IS : 2491-1972* of sweetmeats. and covers only

0.7 This code is subject to the provisions Adulteration Act, 1954, and the Rules framed time to -time.

of the Prevention of Food thereunder as amended from

*Code for hygienic conditions for food processing units (Jrst revision ).

a

IS : 7802 0 1975 0.8 In the preparation of this standard, considerable help has been rendered by the Bombay Municipal Corporation, Bombay. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This code prescribes the hygienic conditions required for establishing and maintaining sweetmeat shops. 2. SITE 2.1 A sweetmeat shop shall be situated in clean and healthy surroundings and at least 25 m away from cattle sheds, open sewage drains, public latrines or other places likely to breed flies. It should be sufficiently away from any dusty trade like coal shop, flour mill, cement factory, etc. There shall not be accumulation of refuse, trash or similar waste in the vicinity of the premises. 3. BUILDING 3.1 Structure - The structure shall be of permanent nature having natural light and ventilation. The material of construction shall be brick, plaster, cement, concrete, tile or any other equivalent material which ensures cleanliness. shall be separate rooms for manufacturing, storing 3.2 Rooms -There raw materials, storing prepared sweetmeats and serving sweetmeats. All the rooms shall be well lighted and well ventilated either naturally or by artificial means. 3.3 Details' of Rooms for Various Activities - If sweetmeats are only manufactured, there shall be minimum of two rooms - one for storage of raw materials and the other for manufacture. 3.3.1 If sweetmeats are only sold, there shall be minimum of one room for storage of sweetmeats. 3.3.2 If sweetmeats are manufactured and sold, there shall be minimum of three roomsone each for manufacturing, storage of raw materials and storage of prepared sweetmeats. 3.3.3 If sweetmeats and savoury articles are manufactured and served, there shall be minimum of four rooms - one each for manufacture, storage of raw materials, storage of prepared sweetmeats and serving. 3.4 Flooring - The flooring shall be laid with hard and impervious material and shall have smooth and even surface. The flooring shall be kept in good repairs and in a clean condition.

4

IS t 7802 - 1975 3.5 Walls - The internal walls of the rooms shall have smooth and nonabsorbent surface free from crevices and sharp angles to facilitate proper cleaning. The walls of the room where sweetmeats are manufactured shall have glazed tiles at least 1'8 m from the flooring. The tiles should be The walls impervious to moisture and oil and should afford easy cleaning. should be limewashed once in a year or oil-painted once in two years to keep them in clean condition. and doors of the rooms shall be 3.6 Windows and Doors -Windows provided with wire nets to prevent entry of flies, wherever necessary. Selfclosing doors opening outside should be provided. 4. WATER SUPPLY 4.1 There shall be adequate supply of potable water. 4.2 Washing Place -There shall be a washing place with a water tap The from water main, in the room where sweetmeats are manufactured. washing place shall be properly paved and drained. Where drainage system does not exist, the arrangement for disposal of waste water shall be such as Where there should cause no nuisance from foul smell, flies or mosquitoes. is no water available from the water main, a water receptacle of a sufficient size with tight-fitting lid and a tap shall be provided. The receptacle shall be completely emptied and thoroughly cleaned every day before filling. The water stored in the receptacle should be of potable quality and should be changed frequently during the day. 4.3 Storage of WaterThe water, if stored, shall be in receptacles of sufficient size with tight fitting lid and a tap below. The receptacle shall be kept at a height of at least 60 cm from the flooring. The receptacle shall be cleaned from inside every day before filling and care should be taken to see that water is not contaminated in the process of storing and handling. 4.4 Wash-Basin for Customers - A wash-basin with a water tap shall be provided in the service room. A soap shall also be provided near the wash-basin. 5. EMPLOYEE HYGIENE

5.1 Every person employed for handling in the sweetmeat shop shall be medically examined by an authorized registered medical practitioner and The exathe examination shall include x-ray of the chest for tuberculosis. mination shall also include examination of stool Ear protozoa1 and helminthic infestation for those parasites which are transmitted by ingestion, and for the presence of Salmonella, Shigella species and Vibrio cholerae. Subsequently, the employee shall be medically examined once in a year or more frequently, if necessary, to ensure medical fitness of the employee and absence from communicable diseases. A record of such examination shall be maintained, 5

5.1.1 It shall be impressed on all employees that they should notify the management, cases of fever, sore throat, cough, vomiting, diarrhoea, typhoid, dysentery, boils, cuts and sores and ulcers ( however small ), discharging ears and notifiable diseases occurring in their own homes and families. 5.1.2 No worker who is suspected to be suffering from any of the disorders listed in 5.1.1 shall be permitted to work inside the establishment unless found medically fit. The supervisor shall check the personal hygiene of the workers before the start of work and whenever they enter any processing room after any absence. 5.2 Employees shall keep their finger nails short and clean and wash their hands with soap or detergent and water before commencing work and after Towels used for each absence, specially after using sanitary conveniences. drying hands should be clean. They should adopt strict hygienic practices SO as to avoid adding any microbial or other contamination to the materials. 5.3 All employees shall be inoculated and vaccinated against the enteric groups of diseases once every two years and against smallpox once every five years. In case of an epidemic, all workers shall be inoculated. A record shall be maintained. 5.4 Employees shall be provided with clean uniforms ( preferably white ) or aprons or both, and clean washable caps, where necessary. 5.4.1 Separate room or place for changing the clothes shall be provided. The clothes shall not be hung in any processing room. 5.4.2 The uniforms shall not be worn outside the sweetmeat shop but put on just before starting the work and changed when leaving. 5.5 Eating, spitting, nose cleaning or the use of tobacco in any form or chewing beta1 leaves shall be prohibited within the manufacturing, packing and storage area of the unit. Notice to this effect shall be prominently displayed and enforced. 5.6 Sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences shall be provided, maintained and kept clean in every establishment. The conveniences shall be properly lighted. Separate conveniences shall be provided for each sex. No convenience shall open directly into any work room in the establishment. The conveniences shall always be maintained clean and in good repairs. 5.7 Sufficient number of wash-basins with adequate provision of nail brushes, soap and towels, latrines and urinals in the prescribed manner should be provided. They shall be conveniently situated and accessible to workers at all times while they are at the establishment ( see also Table 3 of

6

IS : 7802 - 1975 IS : 1172-1971* ). The wash-basins shall be installed in or alongside the sanitary conveniences. 6. HYGIENIC OPERATION

6.1 Premises -The premises and surroundings of the sweetmeat shop shall be maintained in good repairs and in a clean and hygienic condition at all times. 6.2 Cleanliness of Utensils shall be clean. All the utensils used in the sweetmeat shop

6.3 Tinning - Copper and brass utensils used in the preparation and storage of sweetmeats shall be tinned as often as necessary or at least once in every two months. 6.4 Cracked Crockery - No chipped or cracked crockery shall be used for any purpose in the sweetmeat shop. Sweetmeats should be sold and They should be served on tables having imperserved in clean containers. vious and washable surface. 6.5 Storage of Sweetmeats - One or more tables with impervious and washable surface shall be provided in the manufacturing room for the temporary storage of sweetmeats. Sweetmeats shall not be stored on paper or trays kept on the flooring. 6.6 Avoidance of Contamination - AU. sweetmeats stored or exhibited for sale on the premises shall be kept covered in clean containers so as to avoid contamination by flies, insects, dust, etc. 6.7 Operatioqal Restrictions 6.7.1 All processes and operations connected with the preparation sweetmeats shall be restricted to the preparation room only. 6.7.2 shop. of

No process or operation shall be carried on outside the sweetmeat

6.8 Unauthorized Operation - No portion of the sweetmeat shop shall be used for any process or operation other than that connected with the preparation of sweetmeats. 6.9 Prohibition of Residence - No portion of the sweetmeat shop shall be used for residence or for any domestic purposes. 6.10 Old Materials - Old materials or unused articles shall not be kept on any part of the sweetmeat shop.
*Code revision ) . for basic

requirements for water supply, drainage and sanitation 7

(second

premises of the sweetmeat shop 6.11 Pest Control Measures -The should be sprayed with pyrethrum or similar insecticides using hand sprayer once in a day. The premises shall be treated with insecticide through the Insecticide Officer of the area or through an approved firm once in every four months. A record of such treatment shall be maintained and produced on demand by the concerned authority. 6.12 Waste Bin - A waste bin of approved pattern with a tight-fitting lid thereon shall be provided at a suitable place in the sweetmeat shop for the deposit of waste food, refuse, etc. The waste bin shall not be allowed to overflow or be littered with refuse around and shall be emptied from time to time at a place appointed for the deposit of refuse. The waste bin shall be maintained in good repairs at all times. 7. FUEL 7.1 Fuel used in the preparation produce smoke. of sweetmeats should be such as not to

8

fS:7802-1975
( Continued from page 2 ) Members DIRECTOR (HEALTH) DEPUTY DIRECTOR HEALTHOFFICER SHRIN. MAZUMDAR DRD.V.PARULEEAR DRB.RANQANATRAN SECRETARY DR RANJIT SEN SHRIP. C.VIN ( Alternate ) Ministry Representing of Railways, New Delhi

Municipal Corporation of Madras All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, Calcutta Bombay Municipal Corporation National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR 1, Karnal . Central Committee for Food Standards I 1. \ DGHS ,, New Delhi Serologist to the Government of India ( Directorate General of Health Services ), Calcutta Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi

INDIAN ON FOOD

STANDARDS

HYGIENE

IS:
2491-1972 4303 (Part 5059-1969 5404-1969 5837-1970 5839-1970 6540-1972 6541-1972 6542-1972 6968-1973 6969-1973 7003-1973 7005- 1973 7799-1975 7go2-1975 Code of hygienic conditions for food processing conditions units (jrst
revision )

I)-1975 Code for hygienic stage (Jlrst revision ) Code for hygienic bakery units Code of practice Code for hygienic Code of hygienic Code of hygienic consumption conditions for handling conditions conditions conditions

in fish industry:

Part I Pre-processing units and analysis

for large scale biscuit

manufacturing

of food samples for microbiological for soft drinks manufacturing for manufacture, for manufacture for establishment and handling units

storage and sale of ice-creams of ice for human of mid-day

Code of hygienic conditions school meal programme Code for hygienic Code for hygienic Code of hygienic water Code for hygienic conditions conditions conditions conditions

and maintenance canning units

for fruit and vegetable for PAX ( beta1 leaf) for handling

stalls and vendors drinking units and

and sale of refrigerated manufacturing

for sago (SABOODANA) for production, in foodstuffs shop?

Code for hygienic conditions distribution of milk Code for preservation Code of hygienic conditions

processing,

transportation

of vitamins

for sweetmeat

DECEMBER 1983 AMENDMENT NO. 1 TO IS:7802-1975 CODE OF HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR SWEETMEAT SHOPS Alteration -----

@age 6, cZause 5.3)
for the existing cl&se:

-

Substitute the following

'5.3 All the employees shall be inoculated against typhoid and paratyvhnid A diseases on their first appointment'and thereafter, once in every five years. In case of epidemic, all workers shall be inoculated. A record shall be maintained'.
Reprography Unit, ISI, New Delhi, India

