**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  3427  (1997) :  A.C.  Metal  Enclosed  Switchgear  and  Control 
gear  for  Rated  Voltages  Above  1  kV  and  Up  to  and  Including 
52  kV  [ETD  8:  High  Voltage  Switchgear  and  Controlgear] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  3427  :1097 
lEC  298(1990) 


W^^  HHch  <  Reaffirmed  2002 ) 

( wcTT  ^^mj ) 


Indian  Standard 

A.C.  METAL  ENCLOSED  SWITCHGEAR  AND 

CONTROLGEAR  FOR  RATED  VOLTAGES  ABOVE 

1  kV  AND  UP  TO  AND  INCLUDING  52  kV 

(  First  Revision  ) 


ICS   29.120.60 


O  BIS  1997 

BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

July  1997  Price  Group  15 


183427  :1997 
lEC  298(1980) 

High  M>ltage  Switchgear  and  Contiolgear  Sectional  Conunittee»  ET  08 

CONTENTS 

Page 

NxnoNAL  Foreword 3 


Section  One — General 


Clause 
1.     Scope 


Section  Two —  Servict.  niNDrnoNs 

1    Nonnal  and  qmial  service  conditions 5 

Section  Three — Terms  and  OEHNmoNs 

1     Definitions 6 

Section  Four  — IIated  characteristics 

4.  Rating 10 

4.1       Ratedvdtage 10 

42      Rated  insulation  levd 10 

4.3  Rated  frequency 10 

4.4  Rated  normal  current  and  temperature  rise 10 

4.5  Rated  short^ime  withstand  current 11 

4.6  Rated  peak  withstand  current 11 

4.7  Rated  duration  of  short  circuit 11 

4.8  Rated  supply  voltage  of  closing  and  opening  devices  and  auxiliary  circuits 11 

4.9  Ratedsupply  frequency  ofoperating  devices  and  auxiliary  circuits 11 

4 10     Rated  pressure  ofcompressed  gas  supply  for  operation 11 

4.101    Rated  filling  pressure  ( of  gas*filled  compartments) 11 

Section  Five — Rules  for  design  and  constri  jction 

5.  Design  and  construction 11 

5.1  Requirements  for  liquids  inswitchgearandcontrolgear 12 

5.2  Requirements  for  gases  inswitchgearandcontrolgear 12 

5.3  Earthing 12 

5.4  Auxiliary  equipment 13 

5.5  Dependent  power  closing 13 

5.6  Stored  energy  closing 13 

5.7  Operation  of  releases 13 

5.8  Low  and  high  pressure  interlocking  devices 13 

5.9  Nameplates 13 

5.101  Degree  of  protection  and  internal  fault 14 

5.102  Enclosure 15 

5.103  Partitions  and  shutters 17 

5.104  Pressurerelief  of  gas-filled  conq>artments 18 

5.105  Disconnectors  and  earthing  switches 18 

5.106  Interlocks 19 

5.107  Provisions  for  dielectric  tests  on  cables 20 

Section  Six — Rules  por  type  tests 

6.  lypetests 20 

6.1  Didectrictests 21 

6.2  Radio  interference  voltage  (RIV)  tests 24 

6.3  Temperaiture-rise  tests 24 

6.4  Measuremem  of  the  resistance  of  the  nuuncircuit 24 

6.5  Short-time  and  peak  withstand  current  tests 24 

1 


183427  :1M7 
lEC  296(1990) 

Page 

6.101  Vferificatton  of  making  aiulbrtaking  capacities 2S 

6.102  Mechanical  operation  tests 26 

6.103  Verification  (rf'the  degree  of  protection 26 

6.104  Pressure  withstand  test  for  gas-filled  compartments 26 

6.105  Gas  tightness  tests  of  gas-fllled  compartments 26 

6.106  Measurement  of  leakage  currents 27 

6.107  Weatherproofingtest 27 

6.108  Arcing  due  to  internal  fault 27 

Section  Seven — Ruijes  rjr  rcxhtne  tests 

7.    Routinetests 28 

7.1  Power-frequency  voltage  tests  on  the  main  circuit 28 

7.2  Dielectric  tests  on  auxiliary  and  control  circuits 28 

7.3  Measurementof  the  resistance  of  the  main  circuit 28 

7.101  Partial  discharge  measurement 29 

7.102  Mechanical  operation  tests 29 

7.103  Pressure  tesu  of  gas-filled  conq>artments 29 

7.104  Gas  tightness  tests  of  gas-filled  compartments 29 

7.103   Tests  of  auxiliaiy  electrical,  pneumaticand  hydraulic  devices 29 

7.106  Vaification  of  correct  wiring 29 

7.107  Tests  after  erecti(»i  on  site 29 

7.108  Measurementof  gas  condition  after  filling  on  site 30 

Section  Eight  —  Generai,  rNFORMATioN 

a    Guide  to  the  selection  ofswitching  devices  for  service 30 

9.  Information  to  be  given  with  enquiries,  tenders  and  orders .30 

9.101  Infbrmationwith  enquiries  and  orders 30 

9.102  Information  with  tenders 31 

10.  Rules  for  transpoit  storage,  erection  and  maintenance 32 

10.1  Conditions  during  transport  storage  and  erection 32 

10.2  Erection  (mounting) 32 

10.3  Maintenance 32 

Figure  1  —Standard  test  finger 33 

Annex  AA  —  Internal  fiiult 34 

Annex  BB   —  Method  of  calculating  the  cross-sectional  area  of  bare  conductors  with  regard  to  thermal 

stresses  due  to  currents  of  short  duration 42 

Annex  CC   —  Recommended  method  for  the  weatherproofmg  test  for  outdoor  metal-enclosed  switchgear 

and  controlgear 43 

AnnexDD  —  Guide  for  voltage  tests  after  erection  on  site 46 

AnnexEE    —  Rated  insulation  level  for  Series  II 47 

Annex  FF    —  Partial  discharge  measurement 48 

AnnbxCG  —  Gas  tightness  specifications  and  tests 53 


18  3427  :1M7 
lEC  298(1990) 

Indian  Standard 

A.C.  METAL  ENCLOSED  SWITCHGEAR  AND 

CONTROLGEAR  FOR  RATED  VOLTAGES  ABOVE 

1  kV  AND  UP  TO  AND  INCLUDING  52  kV 

(  First  Revision  ) 

NATIONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  which  is  identical  to  lEC  Pub  298  ( 1990)  AC.  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  for 
rated  voluges  above  1  kV  and  up  to  and  including  32  kV\  issued  by  the  International  Electrotechnical  Commission, 
was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  the  recommendations  of  the  High  Voltage  Switchgear  and 
Controlgear  Sectional  Committee,  ET  08.  and  approval  of  the  Electrotechnical  Division  Council. 

While  taking  iq)  the  revision  of  IS  3427  :  1969  *  Specification  for  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  for 
voltages  above  1  kV  but  not  exceeding  1 1  kV\  the  Sectional  Committee,  ET  08,  decided  to  adopt  lEC  298  ( 1 990)  to 
cover  the  requirements  of  metal  encolsed  switchgear  and  controlgear  up  to  52  kV. 

This  standard,  therefore,  replaces  and  cancels  IS  3427  .  1969. 

The  text  of  the  lEC  Standard  along  with  its  Amendment  No.  1  has  been  approved  as  suitable  for  publication  as 
Indian  Standard  without  deviations. 

Corrigendum  issued  by  lEC  in  1995  has  been  incorporated. 

In  this  standard,  certain  terminology  and  conventions  are  not  identical  with  those  used  in  Indian  Standards.  Attention 
is  specially  drawn  to  the  following: 

a)  Wherever  the  words  international  Standard*  appear,  referring  to  this  standard,  the\  should  be  read  as 
indian  Standard*. 

b)  Comma  ( , )  has  been  used  as  a  decimal  marker  while  in  Indian  Standards,  the  current  practice  is  to  use 
a  point  ( . )  as  the  decimal  marker. 

Only  the  English  language  text  in  the  International  Standard  has  been  retained  while  adopting  it  in  this  Indian 
Standard. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value, 
observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with 
IS  2  :  1960  *Rules  for  roimding  off  numerical  values  (  revised  )\  The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the 
rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard 

In  this  adopted  standard,  reference  appears  to  certain  International  Standards  for  which  Indian  Standards  also  exist. 
The  corresponding  Indian  Standards  which  are  to  be  substituted  in  their  place  are  listed  below  along  with  their 
degree  of  equivalence: 


International  Standard 

lEC  50  (151):  1978 
International     electrotechnical 
vocabulary,       Chapter      151  : 
Electrical  and  magnetic  devices 

IEC50(441):1984 
International     electrotechnical 
vocabulary.        Chapter     441  : 
Switchgear,   controlgear     and 
fuses 


Corresponding  Indian  Standard 


IS  1885  (Part74):  1979 


IS1885(Partl7):1979 


Degree  of 
Equivalence 

Identical 


Technically 
equivalent 


183427  :19«7 
lEC  296(1990) 


International  Standard 


lEC  129: 1984 

AC  disconnectors  and  earthing 

switches 


Corresponding  Indian  Standard 


lS9921(Partsl  to4) 


Degree  of 
Equivalence 

Technically 
equivalent 


lEC  137 :  1984 
Bushings      for 
above  1  000  V 


AC     voltages 


IS2099:1986 


Technically 
equivalent 


EC  243-1: 1988 

Methods  of  test  for  electric 
strength  of  solid  insulating 
materials  —  Part  1  :  Tests  at 
power  frequencies 

EC  270: 1981 

Partial  discharge  measurements 

EC  466: 1987 

AC  insulation  enclosed  switch- 
gear  and  controlgear  for  rated 
voltages  above  1  kV  and  up  to 
and  including  38  kV 

EC  480: 1974 

Guide  for  the  checking  of  SF6 

taken  from  electrical  equipment 

EC  517: 1990 

Gas  insulated  metal-^nclosed 
switchgear  for  rated  voltages 
of72.5kV  and  above 

EC  529: 1989 

Degree  of  protection    provided 

by  enclosures  (IP  Code) 


IS2584  :1%3 


EC694:1980 
Conunon    clauses      for 
voltage         switchgear 
controlgear  standards 


high 
and 


156209:1982 


Under  print 


IS  12063 :  1987 


IS  12729 :  1988 


Techmcally 
equivalent 


Technically 
equivalent 

No  ISS  exists 


No  ISS  exists 


Identical 


Technically 
equivalent 


Technically 
equivalent 


IS  3427:1997 
lEC  298(199«) 


SECTION  ONE  —  GENERAL 


1.    Scope 


This  standard  specifies  requirements  for  factory-assembled  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and 
controlgear  for  alternating  current  of  rated  voltages  above  1  kV  and  up  to  and  including 
S2  kV  for  indoor  and  outdoor  installation,  and  for  service  frequencies  up  to  and  including 
60  Hz. 

For  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  containing  gas-filled  compartments,  the 
design  pressure  is  limited  to  a  maximum  of  3  bar  (gauge).  Gas-filled  compartments  having  a 
design  pressure  exceeding  3  bar  (gauge)  shall  be  designed  and  tested  in  accordance  with  I  E  C 
517. 

Metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  for  special  use,  for  example  in  flammable 
atmospheres,  in  mines  or  on  board  ships,  may  be  subject  to  additional  requirements. 

This  standard  does  not  deal  with  components  contained  in  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and 
controlgear  for  which  individual  specifications  exist. 

NOTES 

1  Switchgear  and  controlgear  assemblies  having  an  insulation  enclosure  are  covered  by  I  E  C  466. 

2  Metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  for  rated  voltages  above  52  kV  insulated  by  air  at  atmos- 
pheric pressure  may  be  covered  by  this  standard  Uking  into  account  the  insulation  levels  of  I  E  C  694. 

3  Liquid-insulated  hermetically  sealed  compartments  are  equal  to  gas^fllled  compartments  with  respect  to 
independence  from  ambient  atmosphere. 


SECTION  TWO  —  SERVICE  CONDITIONS 

2.    Normal  and  special  service  conditioiis 

Unless  otherwise  specified  in  this  standard,  the  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear 
is  designed  to  be  used  under  normal  service  conditions. 

Refer  to  Clause  2  of  I  E  C  694, 

For  outdoor  installation  it  is  assumed  that  inside  the  enclosure,  normal  indoor  conditions 
prevail.  If  necessary,  appropriate  measures  shall  be  taken,  such  as  air  conditioning,  so  that 
common  indoor  components  may  be  used.  This  does  not  apply  to  gas-filled  compart- 
ments. 


IS  3427 :  1997 
lEC  299(1990) 


SECTION  THREE  —  TERMS  AND  DEFINITIONS 


3.    Deflnitioiis 


For  the  definitions  of  general  terms  used  in  this  standard,  reference  is  made  to  the 
International  Electrotechnical  Vocabulary  (lEV),  namely  I  EC  50  (441)  and  I  EC  SO 
(151). 

The  following  definitions  apply  for  the  purpose  of  this  standard: 

3.101  Switchgear  and  controlgear 

A  general  term  covering  switching  devices  and  their  combination  with  associated  control, 
measuring,  protective  and  regulating  equipment,  also  assemblies  of  such  devices  and  equip- 
ment with  associated  interconnections,  accessories,  enclosures  and  supporting  structures 
(lEV  441-11.01). 

3. 102  Metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear 

Switchgear  and  controlgear  assemblies  with  an  externa)  metal  enclosure  intended  to  be 
earthed  and  complete  except  for  external  connections  (lEV  441-12-04). 

NOTE  —  The  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  is  subdivided  into  three  types: 

—  metal-clad  switchgear  and  controlgear; 

—  compartmented  switchgear  and  controlgear  (with  one  or  more  non-metallic  partitions); 

—  cubicle  switchgear  and  controlgear. 

3. 102. 1  Afetal'Clad  switchgear  and  controlgear 

Metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  in  which  components  are  arranged  in  separate 
compartments  with  metal  partitions  intended  to  be  earthed. 

NOTES 

1  This  term  applies  to  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  with  metal  partitions  providing  the 
degree  of  protection  included  in  table  1  (or  higher)  and  having  separate  compartments  at  least  for  the 
following  components: 

a)  each  main  switching  device; 

b)  components  connected  to  one  side  of  a  main  switching  device,  for  example  feeder  circuit ; 

c)  components  connected  to  the  other  side  of  the  main  switching  device,  for  example  busbars;  where  more 
than  one  set  of  busbars  is  provided,  each  set  being  in  a  separate  compartment. 

2  Metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  having  metal  partitions  and  meeting  all  the  requirements  of 
note  1,  may  utilize  an  insulating  shutter  barrier  as  a  part  of  the  shutter  arrangement,  the  combination  of 
which  provides  the  degree  of  protection  included  in  table  1  (or  higher)  and  satisfies  the  requirements  of 
Sub-clause  5.103.1  for  partitions  and  shutters  made  of  insulating  material. 

3.102.2  Compartmented  switchgear  and  controlgear  (with  non-metallic  partitions) 

Metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  in  which  components  are  arranged  in  separate 
compartments  as  for  metal-clad  switchgear  and  controlgear,  but  with  one  or  more  non- 
metallic  partitions  providing  the  degree  of  protection  included  in  table  1  (or  higher). 

NOTE  —  Metal-endosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  in  which  the  main  circuit  components  are  individually 
embedded  in  solid  insulating  material  can  be  considered  at  an  alternative,  provided  that  the  conditions 
specified  in  I  E  C  466  are  met. 

3.102.3  Cubicle  switchgear  and  controlgear 

Metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear,  other  than  metal-clad  and  compartmented 
switchgear  and  controlgear. 


IS  3427:1997 
IEC29«(1990) 

NOTE  —  This  lerm  applies  to  switchgear  and  conlrolgear  having  a  metal  enclosure  and  having  either: 

a)  a  number  or  compartments  less  than  that  required  for  metal-clad  or  compartmented  switchgear  and 
controlgear; 

h)  partitions  having  a  degree  of  protection  lower  than  those  included  in  table  1 ; 

c)  no  partitions. 

3.103  Transport  unit 

A  part  or  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  suitable  for  shipment  without  being 
dismantled. 

3 . 1 04  Functional  unit 

A  part  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  comprising  all  the  components  of  the 
main  circuits  and  auxiliary  circuits  that  contribute  to  the  fulfilment  of  a  single  function  (lEV 
441-13-04). 

NOTE  —  Functional  units  may  be  distinguished  according  to  the  function  for  which  they  are  intended,  for 
example:  incoming  unit,  outgoing  unit,  etc. 

3.105  Enclosure 

A  part  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  providing  a  specified  degree  of 
protection  of  equipment  against  external  influences  and  a  specified  degree  of  protection 
against  approach  to  or  contact  with  live  parts  and  against  contact  with  moving  parts  (lEV 
441-13-01). 

3 . 1 06  Compartment 

A  part  of  meial-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  enclosed  except  for  openings  neces- 
sary for  interconnection,  control  or  ventilation  (lEV  441-13-05). 

NOTES 

1  A  compartment  may  be  designated  by  the  main  component  contained  therein,  e.g.  circuit-breaker 
compartment,  busbar  compartment,  etc. 

2  Openings  necessary  for  interconnection  between  compartments  are  closed  with  bushings  or  other 
equivalent  means. 

3  Busbar  compartments  may  extend  through  several  functional  units  without  the  need  for  bushings  or 
other  equivalent  means. 

3 . 1 07  Gas'filled  compartment 

A  compartment  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  in  which  the  gas  pressure  is 
maintained  by  one  of  the  following  systems: 

a)  controlled  pressure  system; 

b)  closed  pressure  system; 

c)  sealed  pressure  system. 
(Refer  to  annex  GG.) 

NOTE  —  Several  gas-filled  compartments  may  be  interconnected  to  a  common  gas-system  (gas-tight 
assembly). 

3.108  Component 

An  essential  part  of  the  main  or  earthing  circuits  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and 
controlgear  which  serves  a  specific  function  (for  example  circuit-breaker,  disconnector, 
switch,  fuse,  instrument  transformer,  bushing,  busbar,  etc.). 

3.109  Partition 

A  part  of  metal^nclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  separating  one  compartment  from 
other  compartments  (lEV  441-13-06). 


IS  3427:  lf97 
IEC2M(1990) 

3.110  Shutter 

A  part  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  that  can  be  moved  from  a  position 
where  it  permits  contacts  of  a  removable  part  to  engage  fixed  contacts,  to  a  position  where  it 
becomes  a  part  of  the  enclosure  or  partition  shielding  the  fixed  contacts  (lEV  441-13-07). 

3.111  Bushing 

A  structure  carrying  one  or  more  conductors  through  an  enclosure  and  insulating,  it 
therefrom,  including  the  means  of  attachment. 

3.112  Removable  part 

A  part  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  that  may  be  removed  entirely  from 
the  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  and  replaced,  even  though  the  main  circuit  is 
aUve  (lEV  44M3-08). 

3.113  Withdrawable  part 

A  removable  part  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  that  can  be  moved  to 
positions  in  which  an  isolating  distance  or  segregation  between  open  contacts  is  established, 
while  the  part  remains  mechanically  attached  to  the  enclosure  (lEV  441-13-09). 

3.114  Segregation  (of  conductors) 

An  arrangement  of  conductors  with  earthed  metal  interposed  between  them  in  such  a 
manner  that  disruptive  discharges  can  only  occur  to  earth  (lEV  441-11-11). 

NOTE  —  A  segregation  may  be  established  between  the  conductors  as  well^as  between  the  open  contacts  of 
a  switching  device. 

3.1  IS    Service  position  (connected  position) 

The  position  of  a  removable  part  in  which  it  is  fully  connected  for  its  intended  function 
GEV  441-16-25). 

3.116  Earthing  position 

The  position  of  a  removable  part  in  which  the  closing  of  a  mechanical  switching  device 
causes  a  main  circuit  to  be  short-circuited  and  earthed  (lEV  441-16-26). 

3.117  Test  position  (of  a  withdrawable  part) 

The  position  of  a  withdrawable  part  in  which  an  isolating  distance  or  segregation  is 
established  in  the  main  circuit  and  in  which  the  control  circuits  are  connected  (lEV  441- 
16-27). 

3.1 18  Disconnected  position  (of  a  withdrawable  part) 

The  position  of  a  withdrawable  part  in  which  an  isolating  distance  or  segregation  is 
established  in  tlie  circuits  of  the  withdrawable  part,  that  part  remaining  mechanically 
attached  to  the  enclosure  (lEV  441-16-28). 

NOTE  —  In  high-voltage  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear,  the  auxiliary  circuits  may  not  be 
disconnected. 

3.1 19  Removed  position  (of  a  removable  part) 

The  position  of  a  removable  part  when  it  is  outside  and  mechanically  and  electrically 
separated  from  the  enclosure  (lEV  441-16-29). 


S 


IS  3427:1997 
lEC  29t(]990) 

3.120  Main  circuit 

All  the  conductive  parts  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  included  in  a  circuit 
which  is  intended  to  transmit  electrical  energy  (lEV  441-13-02). 

3.121  Auxiliary  circuit 

AH  the  conductive  parts  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  included  in  a  circuit 
(other  than  the  main  circuit)  intended  to  control,  measure,  signal  and  regulate  (lEV  441- 
13-03). 

NOTE  —  The  auxiliary  circuiu  of  meul-encloted  switchgear  and  controlgear  include  the  control  and 
auxiliary  circuits  of  the  switching  devices. 

3.122  Rated  value 

A  quantity  value  assigned,  generally  by  a  manufacturer,  for  a  specified  operating  condition 
of  the  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  (lEV  IS  1-04-03). 

NOTE  —  See  Section  Four  for  individual  rated  values. 

3. 1 23  Degree  of  protection 

The  degree  of  protection  provided  by  an  enclosure  to  protect  persons  against  contact  with 
or  approach  to  live  parts  and  against  contact  with  moving  parts  inside  the  enclosure  and  to 
protect  the  equipment  against  ingress  of  solid  bodies. 

3.124  Ambient  air  temperature  (of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear) 

The  temperature,  determined  under  prescribed  conditions,  of  the  air  surrounding  the 
enclosure  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear. 

3. 1 25  Disruptive  discharge 

Phenomena  associated  with  the  failure  of  insulation  under  electric  stress,  in  which  the 
discharge  completely  bridges  the  insulation  under  test,  reducing  the  voltage  between  the 
electrodes  to  zero  or  nearly  to  zero. 

NOTES 

1  The  term  applies  to  discharges  in  solid,  liquid  and  gaseous  dielectrics  and  to  combinations  of  these. 

2  A  disruptive  discharge  in  a  solid  dielectric  produces  permanent  toss  of  dielectric  strength  (non- 
self-restoring  insulation);  in  a  liquid  or  gaseous  dielectric,  the  loss  may  be  only  temporary  (self-restoring 
insulation). 

3  The  term  '^sparkover*'  is  used  when  a  disruptive  discharge  occurs  in  a  gaseous  or  liquid  dielectric. 

The  term  ^'flashover**  is  used  when  a  disruptive  discharge  occurs  over  the  surface  of  a  solid  dielectric  in 
gaseous  or  liquid  medium. 

The  term  **puncture**  is  used  when  a  disruptive  discharge  occurs  through  a  solid  dielectric. 

3. 1 26  Minimum  functional  pressure  (of  gas-flUed  compartments) 

The  gas  pressure  in  bars  (gauge)  referred  to  atmospheric  air  conditions  of  20  ''C  and 
1  013  hPa  at  and  above  which  the  rated  values  of  the  switchgear  are  maintained. 

3.127  Design  pressure  (of  gas-filled  compartments) 

The  pressure  in  bars  (gauge)  used  to  determine  the  design  of  a  gas-filled  compartment. 

3.128  Design  temperature  (of  gas-filled  compartments) 

The  highest  temperature  which  can  be  reached  by  the  gas  under  service  conditions. 


IS  3427:1»97 
lEC  2M(1990) 


SECTION  FOUR  —  RATED  CHARACTERISTICS 


4.    Rattttg 

The  ratings  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  are  the  following: 

a)  rated  voltage  and  number  of  phases; 

b)  rated  insulation  level; 

c)  rated  frequency; 

d)  rated  normal  current  (for  main  circuits); 

e)  rated  short-time  withstand  current  (for  main  and  earthing  circuits); 

f)  rated  peak  withstand  current,  if  applicable  (for  main  and  earthing  circuits); 

g)  rated  duration  of  short  circuit; 

h)  rated  values  of  the  components  forming  part  of  the  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and 
controlgear  including  their  operating  devices  and  auxiliary  equipment; 

i)   rated  filling  pressure  (of  gas-flUed  compartments). 

For  the  co-ordination  of  rated  voltages,  rated  short-time  withstand  currents,  rated  peak  with- 
stand currents  and  rated  normal  currents  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  reference  is 
made  to  I E  C  56  and  to  I E  C  129. 

4.1  Rated  voltage 

Refer  to  Sub-clauses  4.1  and  4.1.1  of  I  EC  694. 

NOTE  —  Components  forming  part  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  may  have  individual 
values  of  rated  voltage  in  accordance  with  their  relevant  standards. 

4.2  Rated  insulation  level 

Refer  to  Sub-clauses  4.2  and  4.2. 1  of  I  E  C  694.  For  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and 
controlgear  the  rated  withstand  voltage  values,  based  on  current  practice  in  Canada  and  the 
United  States  of  America,  are  given  in  the  table  of  annex  EE. 

4.3  Rated  frequency 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  4.3  of  I  E  C  694  with  the  addition  of  the  following  rated  values: 

16^3  Hz  and  25  Hz 

4.4  Rated  normal  current  and  temperature  rise 

4.4. 1     Rated  normal  current 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  4.4.1  of  I  EC  694  with  the  addition  of  the  following  paragraph: 
Some  main  circuits  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  (e.g.  busbars,  feeder 
circuits,  etc.)  may  not  have  the  same  value  of  rated  normal  current. 


10 


IS  3427 :1W7 
lEC  298(1990) 

4A2     Temperature  rise 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  4.4.2  of  I  EC  694  with  the  addition  of  the  following  supplement: 

The  temperature  rise  of  components  contained  in  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  control- 
gear  which  are  subject  to  individual  specifications  not  covered  by  the  scope  of  I  E  C  694  shall 
not  exceed  the  temperature-rise  limits  permitted  in  the  relevant  standard  for  that  compon- 
ent. 

The  maximum  permissible  temperatures  and  temperature  rises  to  be  taken  into  account  for 
busbars  are  those  specifled  for  contacts,  connections  and  metal  parts  in  contact  with 
insulation,  as  the  case  may  be. 

The  temperature  rise  for  accessible  enclosures  and  covers  shall  not  exceed  30  K.  In  the  case 
of  enclosures  and  covers  which  are  accessible  but  need  not  be  touched  during  normal 
operation,  the  temperature-rise  limit  may  be  increased  by  10  K. 

4.5  Rated  short- time  withstand  current 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  4.5  of  I  E  C  694. 

4.6  Rated  peak  withstand  current 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  4.6  of  I  E  C  694. 

NOTE  —  In  principle,  the  rated  sKort*tiine  withstand  current  and  the  rated  peak  withstand  current  of  a 
main  circuit  cannot  exceed  the  corresponding  rated  values  of  the  weakest  of  its  series  connected  components. 
However,  for  each  circuit  or  compartment,  advantage  may  be  taken  of  apparatus  limiting  the  short-circuit 
current,  such  as  current-limiting  fuses,  reactors,  etc. 

4.7  Rated  duration  of  short  circuit 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  4.7  of  I  E  C  694. 

4.8  Rated  supply  voltage  of  closing  and  opening  devices  and  auxiliary  circuits 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  4.8  of  I  E  C  694. 

4.9  Rated  supply  frequency  of  operating  devices  and  auxiliary  circuits 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  4.9  of  I  E  C  694. 

4. 10  Rated  pressure  of  compressed  gas  supply  for  operation 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  4.10  of  I  E  C  694. 

4.101     Rated  filling  pressure  (of  gas-filled  compartments) 

The  pressure  in  bars  (gauge)  assigned  by  the  manufacturer  referred  to  atmospheric  air 
conditions  of  20  ""C  and  1  013  hPa  at  which  the  gas-filled  compartment  is  filled  before  being 
put  into  service. 

SECTION  FIVE  ~  RULES  FOR  DESIGN  AND  CONSTRUCTION 

S.    Design  and  construction 

Metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  shall  be  designed  so  that  normal  service, 
inspection  and  maintenance  operations,  including  the  usual  checking  of  phase  sequence. 


U 


IS  3427:1997 
lEC  29t(199d) 

earthing  of  connected  cables,  locating  of  cable  faults,  voltage  tests  on  connected  cables  or 
other  apparatus  and  the  elimination  of  dangerous  electrostatic  charges,  can  be  carried  out 
safely. 

All  components  of  the  same  rating  and  construction  which  may  need  to  be  replaced  shall 
be  interchangeable. 

If  there  are  removable  parts  with  different  ratings  and  if  parts  are  interchangeable  within 
the  assembly  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear,  any  possible  combination  of 
removable  and  fixed  parts  shall  withstand  the  rated  insulation  level  specified  for  the  fixed 
parts  of  the  equipment  concerned. 

The  various  components  contained  within  the  enclosure  are  subject  to  the  individual 
specifications  applying  to  them. 

For  main  circuits  with  current-limiting  fuses,  the  manufacturer  of  the  switchgear  and 
controlgear  may  assign  the  fused  short-circuit  current. 

5.1  Requirements  for  liquids  in  switchgear  and  controlgear 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  5.1  of  I  E  C  694. 

5.2  Requirements  for  gases  in  switchgear  and  controlgear 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  5.2  of  I  E  C  694. 

NOTE  —  For  checking  of  sulphur  hexafluoride  in  service*  refer  to  1  E  C  480. 

5. 3  Earthing 

5.3.1  Earthing  of  the  main  circuit 

To  ensure  safety  during  maintenance  work,  all  parts  of  the  main  circuit  to  which  access  is 
required  or  provided  shall  be  capable  of  being  earthed  prior  to  becoming  accessible.  This 
does  not  apply  to  withdrawable  and  removable  parts  which  become  accessible  after  being 
separated  from  the  switchgear. 

5.3.2  Earthing  of  the  enclosure 

Refer  to  5.3.  of  I  EC  694  with  the  addition  of  the  following  supplement: 

An  earthing  conductor  shall  be  provided  extending  the  whole  length  of  the  metal-enclosed 
switchgear  and  controlgear.  The  current  density  in  the  earthing  conductor,  if  of  copper,  shall 
not  exceed  200  A/nmi'  under  the  specified  earth  fault  conditions;  however,  its  cross-section 
area  shall  be  not  less  than  30  mm'.  It  shall  be  terminated  by  an  adequate  terminal  intended 
for  connection  to  the  earth  system  of  the  installation. 

NOTE  —  If  the  earthing  conductor  is  not  made  of  copper,  equivalent  thermal  and  mechanical  requirements 
should  be  met. 

In  general,  the  continuity  of  the  earth  system  shall  be  ensured  taking  into  account  the 
thermal  and  mechanical  stresses  caused  by  the  current  it  may  have  to  carry.  The  maximum 
value  of  earth  fault  currents  depends  upon  the  type  of  system  neutral  earthing  employed  and 
shall  be  indicated  by  the  user.  ' 

Where  earthing  connections  have  to  carry  the  full  three-phase  short-circuit  current  (as  in 
the  case  of  the  short-circuiting  connections  used  for  earthing  devices)  these  connections  shall 
be  dimensioned  accordingly. 

NOTE  —  As  guidance,  reference  is  made  to  a  method  of  calculating  cross-sectional  areas  of  conductors 
given  in  annex  BB. 


12 


IS  3427: 19f7 
lEC  2M(1990) 

The  enclosure  or  each  functional  unit  shall  be  connected  to  this  earthing  conductor.  All  the 
metallic  parts  intended  to  be  earthed  and  not  belonging  to  a  main  or  auxiliary  circuit,  shall 
also  be  connected  to  the  earthing  conductor  directly  or  through  metallic  structural  parts. 

For  the  interconnection  within  the  functional  unit,  fastening  by  bolting  or  welding  is 
acceptable  for  providing  electrical  continuity  between  the  frame,  covers,  doors,  partitions  or 
other  structural  parts.  Doors  of  the  high-voltage  compartments  shall  be  connected  to  the 
frame  by  adequate  means. 

The  metallic  parts  of  a  withdrawable  part  which  are  normally  earthed  shall  also  remain 
earth-connected  in  the  test  and  disconnected  positions  under  the  prescribed  conditions  for 
the  isolating  distance  (see  I  EC  129)  and  also  in  any  intermediate  position  whilst  the 
auxiliary  circuits  are  not  totally  disconnected. 

5.4  Auxiliary  equipment 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  5.4  of  I  E  C  694. 

5.5  Dependent  power  closing 

Refer  to.  Sub-clause  5.5  of  I  E  C  694, 

5.6  Stored  energy  closing 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  5.6  of  I  E  C  694. 

5.7  Operating  of  releases 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  5.7  of  I  E  C  694. 

5.8  Low  and  high  pressure  interlocking  devices 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  5.8  of  I  E  C  694. 

5.9  Name  plates 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  5.9  of  I  EC  694  with  the  addition  of  the  following  supplement: 

Metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear,  all  their  components  and  operating  devices 
shall  be  provided  with  durable  and  clearly  legible  nameplates  which  shall  contain  the 
following  information: 

manufacturer's  name  or  trade  mark; 

-  type  designation  or  serial  number; 

-     applicable  rated  values: 

number  of  the  relevant  standard. 

The  nameplates  of  each  functional  unit  shall  be  legible  during  normal  service.  The 
removable  parts,  if  any,  shall  have  a  separate  nameplate  with  the  data  relating  to  the 
functional  units  they  belong  to,  but  this  nameplate  need  only  be  legible  when  the  removable 
part  is  in  the  removed  position. 

NOTE        The  word  **ralcd*'  need  not  appear  on  ihe  nameplate. 


13 


IS  3427 :  1W7 
lEC  2W(19fO) 

5.101     Degree  of  protection  and  internal  fault 

5.101.1     Protection  of  persons  against  approach  to  live  parts  and  contact  with  moving  parts 

For  metal-clad  and  for  compartmented  switchgear  and  controlgear,  the  degree  o(  protec* 
tion  shall  be  specified  separately  for  the  enclosure  and  for  partitions. 

For  cubicle  switchgear  and  controlgear,  it  is  only  necessary  to  specify  the  degree  of 
protection  for  the  enclosure. 

For  main  circuits  of  gas-filled  compartments,  no  degree  of  protection  needs  to  be 
specified. 

The  degree  of  protection  against  contact  of  persons  with  live  parts  of  auxiliary  circuits  and 
with  any  moving  parts  (other  than  smooth  rotating  shafts  and  moving  linkages)  shall  be 
indicated  by  means  of  the  designation  specified  in  table  I . 

The  characteristic  numeral  indicates  the  degree  of  protection  provided  by  the  enclosure 
with  respect  to  persons,  also  to  the  equipment  inside  the  enclosure. 

Table  1  gives  details  of  objects  which  will  be  "excluded"  from  the  enclosure  for  each  of  the 
degrees  of  protection. 

The  term  "excluded*"  implies  that  a  part  of  the  body  or  an  object  held  by  a  person  either 
will  not  enter  the  enclosure  or,  if  it  enters,  that  adequate  clearance  will  be  maintained  and  no 
moving  part  will  be  touched. 

Table  1 


Degree  of 
protection 

Protection  against  approach  to  live  parts 
and  contact  with  moving  parts 

IP2X 

By  fmgers  or  similar  objecu  of  diameter  greater  than  12  mm 

IP3X 

By  tools,  wires,  etc,  of  diameter  or  thickness  greater  than  2,5  mm 

IP4X 

By  wires  of  diameter  or  strips  of  thickness  greater  than  1,0  mm 

NOTE  —  The  designation  of  the  degree  of  protection  corresponds  to  I  E  C  529. 

5.101.2  Protection  of  equipment  against  externa!  effects 

a)  Protection  against  ingress  of  solid  bodies:  No  additional  provisions  beyond  those  in 
SubH:lause  S.  10 1.1  are  to  be  taken. 

b)  Protection  against  weather:  Equipment  for  outdoor  installation  provided  with  appro- 
priate protective  features  is  to  be  indicated  by  the  characteristic  letter  W  placed  imme- 
diately after  the  letters  IP. 

c)  Protection  against  ingress  of  water:  No  degree  of  protection  is  provided  by  indoor 
metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  against  harmful  ingress  of  water. 

5.101.3  Protection  of  equipment  against  mechanical  damage 

Under  consideration.  For  the  time  being  the  manufacturer  shall  be  consulted  where 
enclosures  may  be  subjected  to  mechanical  impacts  or  similar  effects. 

5.101.4  Internal  fault 

Failure  within  the  enclosure  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  due  either  to  a 
defect  or  an  exceptional  service  condition  or  mal-operation  may  initiate  an  internal  arc. 

There  is  little  probability  of  such  an  event  occurring  in  constructions  which  satisfy  the 
requirements  of  this  standard,  but  it  cannot  be  completely  disregarded. 


14 


IS  3427:1997 
lEC  299(1990) 

Such  an  event  may  Jead  to  the  risk  of  injury,  if  persons  are  present,  but  with  an  even  lower 
probability. 

It  is  desirable  that  the  highest  possible  degree  of  protection  to  persons  should  be  provided. 
The  principal  objective  should  be  to  avoid  such  arcs  or  to  limit  their  duration  and  conse- 
quences. 

Experience  has  shown  that  faults  are  more  likely  to  occur  in  some  locations  inside  an 
enclosure  than  in  others,  so  special  attention  should  be  paid  to  these. 

For  guidance,  a  list  of  such  locations  and  of  causes  is  given  in  table  AA.I  of  annex  A  A, 
columns  (1)  and  (2).  Measures  to  decrease  the  probability  of  internal  faults  or  to  reduce  the 
risk  are  recommended  in  column  (3).  Examples  of  measures  to  limit  the  consequences  of 
internal  faults  are  given  in  table  AA.2  of  annex  AA. 

If  such  measures  are  considered  to  be  insufficient  then  a  test  in  accordance  with  annex  AA 
may  be  agreed  between  the  manufacturer  and  the  user,  to  verify  that  the  chosen  criteria  are 
fulfilled  as  agreed.  This  test  covers  only  the  case  of  an  arc  occurring  entirely  in  air  or  in 
another  insulating  gas  within  the  enclosure  but  not  within  components  having  a  separate 
enclosure,  for  example  switching  devices  and  fuses,  or  within  components  like  instrument 
transformers,  etc. 

Such  a  test  should  be  unnecessary  on  those  parts  of  circuits  which  are  protected  by 
current-limiting  devices,  for  example  fuses. 

NOTE  -  The  overpressure  in  the  building  caused  by  arcing  due  to  an  internal  fault  in  the  metal-enclosed 
switchgcur  and  controlgcar  and  the  efTects  of  the  ejection  of  gases  Trom  pressure  relief  devices  should  be  taken 
into  consideration. 


5.102     Enclosure 

5.102.1     General 

Enclosures  shall  be  metallic.  When  the  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  is 
installed,  the  enclosure  shall  provide  at  least  the  degree  of  protection  specified  in  table  I.  It 
shall  also  assure  protection  in  accordance  with  the  following  conditions: 

The  floor  surface,  even  if  not  metallic,  may  be  considered  as  part  of  the  enclosure.  The 
measures  to  be  taken  in  order  to  obtain  the  degree  of  protection  provided  by  floor  surfaces 
shall  be  subject  to  an  agreement  between  manufacturer  and  user. 

The  walls  of  a  room  shall  not  be  considered  as  parts  of  the  enclosure. 

Gas-filled  compartments  shall  be  capable  of  withstanding  the  normal  and  transient 
pressures  to  which  they  are  subjected  in  service.  While  these  compartments  are  permanently 
pressurized  in  service  they  are  subjected  to  particular  conditions  of  service  which  distinguish 
them  from  compressed  air  receivers  and  similar  storage  vessels.  These  conditions  are: 

—  gas-fillcd  compartments  enclose  the  main  circuit  not  only  to  prevent  hazardous  approach 
to  live  or  moving  parts  but  are  so  shaped  that,  when  at  or  above  the  minimum  functional 
pressure  (sec  sub-clause  3.126),  they  ensure  that  the  rated  insulation  level  (see  sub- 
clause 4.2)  for  the  equipment  is  achieved  (electrical  rather  than  mechanical  considera- 
tions predominate  in  determining  the  shape  and  materials  employed); 

—  gas-filled  compartments  are  normally  filled  with  a  non-corrosive  gas,  thoroughly  dried, 
stable  and  inert;  since  measures  to  obtain  the  gas  in  this  condition  with  only  small 


15 


IS  3421:IW7 
lEC  2W(IW0) 

fluctuations  in  pressure  are  fundamental  to  the  operation  of  the  switchgear  and  since  the 
compartments  will  not  be  subjected  to  internal  corrosion,  there  is  no  need  to  make 
allowances  for  these  factors  in  determining  the  design  of  the  compartments; 

—  the  service  pressure  is  relatively  low. 

For  outdoor  installation,  the  manufacturer  shall  take  into  account  the  influence  of  climatic 
conditions. 

5.102.2    Design  of  gas-filled  compartments 

The  design  of  a  gas-filled  compartment  shall  be  based  on  the  design  temperature  and  on 
the  design  pressure  as  defined  in  this  standard. 

The  design  temperature  of  the  gas-filled  compartment  is  generally  the  upper  limit  of 
ambient  air  temperature  increased  by  the  temperature  rise  of  the  gas  due  to  the  flow  of  rated 
normal  current.  Solar  radiation  should  be  taken  into  account  if  it  has  a  significant  effect. 

The  design  pressure  of  the  enclosure  is  at  least  the  upper  limit  of  the  pressure  reached 
within  the  enclosure  at  the  design  temperature. 

Account  shall  be  taken  of  the  following : 

a)  the  full  difTcrential  pressure  possible  across  the  compartment  walls  or  partitions,  includ- 
ing any  evacuation  process  if  used  during  filling; 

b)  the  resulting  pressure  in  the  event  of  an  accidental  leak  between  ihc  compartments  in  the 
case  of  adjacent  compartments  having  different  service  pressures ; 

c)  the  possibility  of  the  occurrence  of  an  internal  fault  (see  Sub-clause  5.101,4). 


5. 102.3  Tightness  of  gas-filled  compartments 

The  manufacturer  shall  state  the  pressure  system  used  and  the  permissible  gas-leakage  rate 
for  the  gas-filled  compartments  (refer  to  annex  GG). 

If  requested  by  the  user,  in  order  to  permit  entry  to  a  gas*filled  compartment  of  closed  or 
controlled  pressure  systems,  the  permissible  gas  leakage  across  partitions  should  also  be 
stated  by  the  manufacturer. 

For  gas-filled  compartments  where  the  minimum  functional  pressure  exceeds  I  bar  (gauge) 
it  is  recommended  that  an  indication  be  provided  when  the  pressure  at  20  'C  has  fallen  below 
the  minimum  functional  pressure  (see  Sub-clause  3.126). 

A  partition  separating  a  compartment  filled  with  insulating  gas  from  a  neighbouring 
compartment  filled  with  liquid,  such  as  a  cable  box  or  a  voltage  transformer,  shall  not  show 
any  leakage  affecting  the  dielectric  properties  of  the  two  media. 

5. 102.4  Covers  and  doors 

Covers  and  doors  which  are  parts  of  the  enclosure  shall  be  metallic.  When  they  are  closed, 
they  shall  provide  the  degree  of  protection  specified  for  the  enclosure. 

Covers  or  doors  shall  not  be  made  of  woven  wire  mesh,  expanded  metal  or  similar.  When 
ventilating  openings  and  vent  outlets  are  incorporated  in  the  cover  or  door,  reference  is  made 
to  Sub-clause  5.102.6. 

Two  categories  of  covers  or  doors  are  recognized  with  regard  to  access  to  high-voltage 
compartments: 


16 


IS  3427:if97 
lEC  298(1990) 

a)  those  which  need  nol  be  opened  for  the  normal  purposes  of  operation  or  maintenance 
(fixed  covers).  It  shall  not  be  possible  for  them  to  be  opened,  dismantled  or  removed 
without  the  use  of  tools; 

h)  those  which  need  to  be  opened  for  the  normal  purposes  of  operation  (removable  covers, 
doors).These  shall  not  require  tools  for  their  opening  or  removal.  They  shall  be  provided 
with  locking  facilities  (for  example  provision  for  padlocks),  unless  the  safety  of  persons  is 
assured  by  a  suitable  interlocking  device. 

With  metal-clad  or  compartmented  switchgear  and  controlgear,  covers  or  doors  should 
only  be  opened  when  the  part  of  the  main  circuit  contained  in  the  compartment  being  made 
accessible  is  dead. 

5.102.5  Inspection  windows 

Inspection  windows  shall  provide  at  least  the  degree  of  protection  specified  for  the 
enclosure. 

They  shall  be  covered  by  a  transparent  sheet  of  mechanical  strength  comparable  to  that  of 
the  enclosure.  Precautions  shall  be  taken  to  prevent  the  formation  of  dangerous  electrostatic 
charges,  either  by  clearance  or  by  electrostatic  shielding  (for  example  a  suitable  earthed 
wire-mesh  on  the  inside  of  the  window). 

The  insulation  between  live  parts  of  the  main  circuit  and  the  inspection  windows  shall 
withstand  the  test  voltages  specified  in  Sub-clause  4.2.1  of  I  E  C  694  for  voltage  tests  to  earth 
and  between  poles. 

5.102.6  Venf Haling  openings,  vent  outlets 

Ventilating  openings  and  vent  outlets  shall  be  so  arranged  or  shielded  that  the  same  degree 
of  protection  as  that  specified  for  the  enclosure  is  obtained.  Such  openings  may  make  use  of 
wire  mesh  or  the  like  provided  that  it  is  of  suitable  mechanical  strength. 

Ventilating  openings  and  vent  outlets  shall  be  arranged  in  such  a  way  that  gas  or  vapour 
escaping  under  pressure  does  not  endanger  the  operator. 

5.103     Partitions  and  shutters 

5.103.1     General 

Partitions  and  shutters  shall  provide  at  least  the  degree  of  protection  specified  in 
table  I. 

Partitions  and  shutters  made  of  insulating  material  shall  meet  the  following  require- 
ments: 

a)  the  insulation  between  live  parts  of  the  main  circuit  and  the  accessible  surface  of 
insulating  partitions  and  shutters  shall  withstand  the  test  voltages  specified  in  Sub-clause 
4.2.1  of  I  EC  694  for  voltage  tests  to  earth  and  between  poles; 

h)  apart  from  mechanical  strength,,  the  insulating  material  shall  withstand  likewise  the  test 
voltages  specified  in  Item  a).  The  appropriate  test  methods  given  in  I  E  C  243-1  should  be 
applied; 

c)  the  insulation  between  live  parts  of  the  main  circuit  and  the  inner  surface  of  insulating 
partitions  and  shutters  facing  these  shall  withstand  at  least  150%  of  the  rated  voltage  of 
the  equipment; 

d)  if  a  leakage  current  may  reach  the  accessible  side  of  the  insulating  partitions  and  shutters 
by  a  continuous  path  over  insulating  surfaces  or  by  a  path  broken  only  by  small  gaps  of 
gas  or  liquid,  it  shall  be  not  greater  than  0,5  mA  under  the  sjpecified^est  conditions' (see 
Sub-clause  6.104). 


IS  3427:1997 
lEC  29S(1990) 

Openings  in  the  enclosure  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  and  in  the 
partitions  of  metal-clad  or  cotnpartmented  switchgear  and  controlgear  through  which  con- 
tacts of  removable  parts  engage  fixed  contacts  shall  be  provided  with  automatic  shutters 
properly  operated  in  normal  service  operations  to  assure  the  protection  of  persons  in  any  of 
the  positions  defined  in  Sub-clauses  3.1  IS  to  3.119. 

If  maintenance  requirements  imply  that  one  set  of  fixed  contacts  shall  be  accessible 

through  opened  shutters,  all  the  shutters  shall  be  provided  with  means  of  locking  them 

independently  in  the  closed  position  or  it  shall  be  possible  to  insert  a  screen  to  prevent  the 

live  set  of  the  fixed  contacts  being  exposed. 

NOTE  —  Conductors  passing  through  metallic  partitions  arc  insulated  by  bushings  or  other  equivalent 
means  and  the  openings  may  be  provided  by  bushings  or  shutters  having  non-metallic  parts.  Bushings  shall 
comply  with  I  EC  137. 

5.103.2  Partitions 

Partitions  of  metal-clad  switchgear  and  controlgear  shall  be  metallic  and  earthed. 

Partitions  of  compartmented  and  cubicle  switchgear  and  controlgear  may  be  non-metallic, 
provided  they  do  not  become  part  of  the  enclosure  in  any  of  the  positions  defined  in 
Sub-clauses  3.116  to  3.119.  If  partitions  become  part  of  the  enclosure  with  the  removable 
part  in  any  of  these  positions,  they  shall  be  metallic,  earthed  and  provide  the  degree  of 
protection  specified  for  the  enclosure. 

Partitions  between  two  gas-filled  compartments  or  between  a  gas-filled  compartment  and 
another  compartment  may  be  of  insulating  material  provided  they  do  not  become  part  of  the 
enclosure  but  are  not  intended  by  themselves  to  provide  electrical  safety  of  personnel,  for 
which  other  means  such  as  earthing  of  the  equipment  may  be  necessary;  they  shall,  however, 
provide  mechanical  safety  against  the  normal  gas  pressure  still  present  in  the  adjacent 
compartment. 

NOTES 

1  A  partition  becomes  a  part  of  the  enclosure,  if  it  is  accessible  in  any  of  the  positions  dcfmed  in 
Sub-clauses  3.116  to  3.119. 

2  If  a  door  is  provided  which  can  be  closed  in  the  positions  defmed  in  Sub-clauses  3.1 15  to  3.1 19  the 
partition  behind  the  door  is  not  considered  to  be  a  part  of  the  enclosure. 

5.103.3  Shutters 

The  shutters  of  the  three  types  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  may  be  either 
metallic  or  non-metallic. 

If  shutters  are  of  insulating  material,  they  shall  not  become  part  of  the  enclosure.  If  they 
are  metallic,  they  shall  be  earthed,  and  if  they  become  part  of  the  enclosure,  they  shall 
provide  the  degree  of  protection  specified  for  the  enclosure. 

5. 1 04  Pressure  relief  of  gas-filled  compartments 

Where  pressure  relief  devices  are  provided,  they  shall  be  arranged  so  as  to  minimize  the 
danger  to  an  operator  during  the  time  that  he  is  performing  his  normal  operating  duties  if 
gases  or  vapours  are  escaping  under  pressure. 

In  certain  designs  pressure  relief  may  be  achieved  by  allowing  the  arc  to  burn  through  the 
enclosure  at  designated  points.  Where  such  means  are  employed,  the  resultant  hole  is  deemed 
to  be  a  pressure  relief  device. 

5.105  Disconnectors  and  earthing  switches 

The  devices  for  ensuring  the  isolating  distance  between  the  high-voltage  conductors  are 
considered  to  be  disconnectors  which  shall  comply  with  I  EC  129,  except  for  mechanical 
operation  tests  (see  Sub-clauses  6.102  and  7.102). 


18 


IS  3427:1997 
iKC  2911(1990) 

The  rcquiremeiK  (hat  it  shall  be  possible  lo  know  the  opcming  position  of  the  discon- 
nector  or  earthing  switch  is  met  if  one  of  the  following  conditions  \s  fulfilled; 

—  :he  isolating  distance  is  visible; 

—  the  position  of  the  withdrawable  part,  in  relation  to  the  fixed  part,  is  clearly  visible  and 
the  positions  corresponding  to  full  connection  and  full  isolation  arc  clearly  identified: 

—  the  position  of  the  disconnector  or  earthing  switch  is  indicated  by  a  reliable  indicating 
device. 

Any  removable  part  shall  be  so  attached  to  the  fixed  part  that  its  contacts  will  not  open 
inadvertently  due  to  forces  which  may  occur  in  service,  in  particular  those  due  to  a  short 
circuit. 

5.106    Interlocks 

Interlocks  between  different  components  of  the  equipment  are  provided  for  reasons  of 
safety  and  for  convenience  of  operation.  The  following  provisions  are  mandatory  for  main 
circuits : 

a)  Metal-enclosed  swiichgear  and  controlgear  with  removable  parts 

The  withdrawal  or  engagement  of  a  circuit-breaker,  switch  or  contactor  shall  be  impos- 
sible unless  it  is  in  the  open  position. 

The  operation  of  a  circuit-breaker,  switch  or  contactor  shall  be  impossible  unless  it  is  in 
the  service,  disconnected,  removed,  test  or  earthing  position. 

It  shall  be  impossible  to  close  the  circuit-breaker,  switch  or  contactor  in  the  service 
position  unless  it  is  connected  to  the  auxiliary  circuit,  unless  it  is  designed  to  open 
automatically  without  the  use  of  an  auxiliary  circuit. 

b)  Metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  without  removable  parts  and  provided  with 
disconnectors 

Interlocks  shall  be  provided  to  prevent  operation  of  disconnectors  under  conditions  other 
than  those  they  are  intended  for  (see  I  E  C  129).  The  operation  of  a  disconnector  shall  be 
impossible  unless  the  associated  circuit-breaker,  switch  or  contactor  is  in  the  open 
position. 

NOTE  —  This  rule  may  be  disregarded  if  it  is  possible  to  have  a  busbar  Irunsfcr  in  a  double  busbar 
system  without  current  interruption. 

The  operation  of  the  circuit-breaker,  switch  or  contactor  shall  be  impossible  unless  the 
associated  disconnector  is  in  the  closed,  open  or  earthing  position  (if  provided). 

The  provision  of  additional  or  alternative  interlocks  shall  be  subject  to  agreement  between 
manufacturer  and  user.  The  manufacturer  shall  give  all  necessary  information  on  the 
character  and  function  of  interlocks. 

It  is  recommended  that  earthing  switches  having  a  short-circuit  making  capacity  less  than 
the  rated  peak  withstand  current  of  the  circuit  should  be  interlocked  with  the  associated 
disconnectors. 

Apparatus  installed  in  main  circuits,  the  incorrect  operation  of  which  can  cause  damage  or 
which  are  used  for  assuring  isolating  distances  during  maintenance  work,  shall  be  provided 
with  locking  facilities  (for  example  provision  for  padlocks). 

NOTE  —  Whenever  practical,  preference  should  be  given  to  mechanical  intcrhKks. 


19 


IS  3427 :1H7 
lEC  inil99») 

5.107    Provisions  for  dielectric  tests  on  cables 

When  it  is  not  practical  to  disconnect  the  cable  for  the  dielectric  tests  from  the  metal- 
enclosed  switchgear  and  controigear,  those  parts  which  remain  connected  to  the  cable  shall 
be  capable  of  withstanding  the  cable  test  voltages  specified  in  the  relevant  cable  stan- 
dards. 

NOTE  --  Atlcniion  is  drawn  lo  ihc  fact  that  practicaMy  no  safety  margin  is  left  in  some  cases  between  the 
rated  power-frequency  test  voltage  for  the  isolating  disUncc  and  the  resulting  voluge  stress  across  the 
isolating  distance  due  to  the  application  of  the  d.c.  cable  test  voltage  while  the  other  side  of  the  isolating 
distance  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controigear  is  still  live. 


SECTION  SIX  —  RULES  FOR  TYPE  TESTS 


6.    Type  tests 


Refer  to  Clause  6  of  I  E  C  694  with  the  addition  of  the  following  modification: 

Components  contained  in  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controigear  Nvhich  are  subject  to 
individual  specifications  not  covered  by  the  scope  of  I  E  C  694  shall  comply  with  and  be 
tested  in  accordance  with  those  specifications,  taking  into  account  the  conditions  given  in  the 
following  sub-clauses. 

The  type  tests  are  made  on  a  representative  functional  unit.  Because  of  the  variety  of  types, 
ratings  and  possible  combinations  of  components,  it  is  not  practical  to  make  type  tests  with 
all  the  arrangements  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controigear.  The  performance  of  any 
particular  arrangement  may  be  substantiated  by  test  data  of  comparable  arrangements. 


NOTE  —  A  representative  functional  unit  may  take  the  form  of  one  extensible,  unit.  However,  it  may  be 
necessary  to  bolt  two  or  three  of  such  units  together. 

Other  tests  than  those  indicated  hereafter  can  be  carried  out  on  metal-enclosed  switchgear 
and  controigear  including  organic  insulating  materials.  These  tests  are  subject  to  agreement 
between  manufacturer  and  user. 

The  type  tests  and  verifications  comprise: 

Normal  type  tests 

a)  Tests  to  verify  the  insulation  level  of  the  equipment  including 

tests  at  power-frequency  test  voltages  on  auxiliary  circuits:  Sub-clause  6.1 

b)  Tests  to  prove  the  temperature  rise  of  any  part  of  the  equipment    Sub-clauses  6.3 
and  measurement  of  the  resistance  of  the  main  circuit:  and  6.4 

c)  Tests  to  prove  the  capability  of  the  main  and  earthing  circuits  to 
be  subjected  to  the  rated  peak  and  the  rated  short-time  withstand 

currents:  Sub-clause  6.S 

d)  Test  to  prove  the  making  and  breaking  x:apacity  of  the  included 

switching  devices :  Sub-clause  6.101 


e)   Tests  to  prove  the  satisfactory  operation  of  the  included  switching 
devices  and  removable  parts: 


Sub-clause  6.102 


20 


IS  3427:1997 
lEC  298(1990) 

f)  Tests  to  verify  the  protection  of  persons  against  approach  to  live 

parts  and  contact  with  moving  parts:  Sub-clause  6.103 

g)  Tests  to  verify  the  protection  of  persons  against  dangerous  elec- 
trical effects :  Sub-clause  6.106 

h)   Tests  to  verify  the  strength  of  gas-filled  compartments:  Sub-clause  6.104 

i]    Gas  tightness  tests  of  gas-filled  compartments:  Sub-clause  6. 1  OS 

Special  type  tests  (subject  to  agreement  between  manufacturer  and  user) 

j)    Tests  to  verify  the  protection  of  the  equipment  against  external 

effects  due  to  weather:  Sub-clause  6.107 

k)   Tests  to  verify  the  protection  of  the  equipment  against  mechani- 
cal damage:  Sub-clause  5.101.3 
I)    Tests  to  assess  the  effects  of  arcing  due  to  an  internal  fault:         Sub-clause  6.108 

m)  Tests  to  detect  certain  defects  in  the  solid  insulation  of  the 

equipment  by  the  measurement  of  partial  discharges:  Sub-clause  6.1.9 

NOTE  —  Some  of  the  type  tests  may  impair  the  suitability  of  the  tested  parts  for  subsequent  use  in 
service. 

6.1     Dielectric  tests 

6.1.1  Ambient  air  conditions  during  tests 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  6. 1 . 1  of  I  E  C  694  with  the  following  limitation : 

Where  the  insulation  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  comprises  atmospheric 
air,  voltage  tests  shall  be  made  in  conditions  as  near  as  possible  to  the  standard  reference 
atmosphere.  The  application  of  correction  factors  for  air  density  and  humidity  are 
allowed  for  the  determination  of  the  test  voltage  subject  to  agreement  between  manufacturer 
and  user. 

6.1.2  IVet  test  procedure 

I  EC  694  is  not  applicable  as  no  dielectric  tests  under  wet  conditions  are  necessary  for 
metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear. 

6.1.3  Conditions  of  switchgear  and  controlgear  during  dielectric  tests 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  6.1.3  of  I  EC  694  for  those  tests  which  are  applicable. 

6. 1 .4  Application  of  test  voltages  and  test  conditions 

I  E  C  694  is  not  applicable.  Because  of  the  great  variety  of  designs,  it  is  not  feasible  to  give 
specific  indications  of  the  tests  to  be  performed  on  the  main  circuit,  but,  in  principle,  they 
shall  cover  the  following  tests: 

a)  To  earth  and  between  phases 

The  test  voltages  specified  in  Sub-clause  6.1.5  shall  be  applied  connecting  each  phase 
conductor  of  the  main  circuit  in  turn  to  the  high-voltage  terminal  of  the  test  supply.  All  other 
conductors  of  the  main  circuit  and  the  auxiliary  circuits  are  to  be  connected  to  the  earthing 
conductor  or  the  frame  and  to  the  earth  terminal  of  the  test  supply. 

Gas-filled  compartments  with  sealed  pressure  systems  (sec  Sub-clause  3,107)  may  be  tested 
at  the  rated  filling  pressure  when  it  is  lower  than  0«S  bar  (gauge). 


^t 


IS  3427 :  1997 
lEC  299(1990) 

If  the  phase  conductors  are  segregated,  only  tests  to  earth  and  no  tests  between  phases 
apply. 

The  dielectric  tests  shall  be  made  with  all  switching  devices  closed  and  all  removable  parts 
in  their  service  position.  Attention  shall  be  given  to  the  possibility  that  switching  devices  in 
their  open  position  or  removable  parts  in  the  disconnected,  removed,  test  or  earthing 
position  may  result  in  less  favourable  field  conditions.  Under  such  conditions  the  tests  shall 
be  repeated. 

NOTE  —-  The  removable  parts  are  not  to  be  subjected  to  these  voltage  tests  whilst  they  are  in  the 
disconnected,  test  or  removed  position. 

For  these  dielectric  tests,  current  transformers,  any  direct  overcurrent  release  or  overcur- 
rent  indicator  and  the  cable  terminal  boxes  (placed,  if  necessary,  in  several  configurations  if 
in  doubt  about  the  most  unfavourable  situation)  should  be  installed  as  in  normal  service. 

In  order  to  check  compliance  with  the  requirements  of  Sub-clause  S.102.S  and  Item  a)  of 
Sub-clause  5.103.1  inspection  windows,  partitions  and  shutters  of  insulating  material  shall  be 
covered  on  the  side  accessible  during  operation  or  maintenance,  in  the  most  unfavourable 
situation  for  the  test,  with  a  circular  or  square  metal  foil  having  an  area  as  large  as  possible 
but  not  exceeding  100  cm^  which  shall  be  connected  to  earth.  In  case  of  doubt  about  the 
most  unfavourable  situation,  the  tests  shall  be  repeated  with  different  situations.  For 
convenience  of  testing,  subject  to  agreement  between  manufacturer  and  user,  more  than  one 
metal  foil  may  be  applied  simultaneously  or  larger  parts  of  the  insulating  material  may  be 
covered. 

b)  Across  the  isolating  distance 

Each  isolating  distance  of  the  main  circuit  shall  be  tested  using  the  test  voltages  specified  in 
Sub-clause  6.I.S.  The  isolating  distance  may  be  the  distance  between  the  two  parts  of  the 
main  circuit  intended  to  be  connected  by  a  withdrawn  or  removed  switching  device. 

If,  in  the  disconnected  position,  an  earthed  metallic  shutter  is  interposed  between  the 
disengaged  contacts  to  assure  a  segregation,  the  gap  between  the  earthed  metallic  shutter  and 
the  live  parts  shall  withstand  only  the  test  voltages  required  to  earth. 

If,  in  the  disconnected  position,  there  is  no  earthed  metallic  shutter  or  partition  between 
the  fixed  part  and  the  withdrawable  part,  the  test  voltages  specified  across  the  isolating 
distance  shall  be  applied: 

—  between  the  fixed  and  moving  contacts  intended  to  engage,  if  conductive  parts  of  the 
main  circuit  of  the  withdrawable  part  can  inadvertently  be  touched; 

—  between  the  fixed  contacts  on  one  side  and  the  fixed  contacts  on  the  other  side,  with  the 
switching  device  of  the  withdrawable  part  in  the  closed  position,  if  they  cannot  inadver- 
tently be  touched. 

c)  Complementary  tests 

In  order  to  check  compliance  with  the  requirement  of  Item  c)  of  Sub-clause  S.  103.1,  the 

insulation  between  the  live  parts  of  the  main  circuit  and  the  inside  of  insulating  partitions  or 

shutters  shall  be  subjected  to  a  power-frequency  test  voltage  of  150%  of  the  rated  voltage  for 

.    I  min  after  covering  the  inner  surface  of  the  partition  or  shutter  facing  the  live  parts  by  an 

earthed  metal  foil. 

6.1.5    Test  voltages 

Refer  to  Subclause  4.2.1  of  I  EC  694. 


22 


IS  3427:  Wf7 
lEC  2M(19fO) 

The  test  voltages  to  earth  and  between  phases  shall  be  selected  fron  table  1,  columns  (2)  or 
(4)  and  (6),  or  the  table  of  annex  EE,  columns  (2)  and  (4).  The  test  voltages  across  the 
isolating  distance  shall  be  selected  from  table  1,  columns  (3)  or  (S)  and  (7),  or  the  table  of 
annex  EE«  columns  (3)  and  (S). 

6. 1 .6  Lightning  and  switching  impulse  voltage  tests 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  6.1.6  of  I  EC  694  with  the  addition  of  the  following  supplement: 

Metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  shall  be  subjected  to  lightning  impulse  voltage 
tests  only.  Normally,  the  fifteen-impulse  withstand  test  shall  be  applied.  However,  in  the  case 
where  non-self-restoring  insulation  predominates,  the  conventional  impulse  withstand  test 
may  be  applied  subject  to  agreement  between  manufacturer  and  user,  so  as  to  avoid  possible 
damage  to  the  solid  insulation. 

Voltage  transformers,  power  transformers  or  fuses  may  be  replaced  by  replicas  reprodu- 
cing the  field  configuration  of  the  high-voltage  connections. 

Overvoltagc  protective  devices  shall  be  disconnected  or  removed.  Current  transformer 
secondaries  shall  be  short-circuited  and  earthed.  Current  transformers  with  a  low  ratio  may 
have  their  primaries  short-circuited  too. 

During  the  lightning  impulse  voltage  tests,  the  earthed  terminal  of  the  impulse  generator 
shall  be  connected  to  the  enclosure  of  the  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear,  except 
that  during  the  tests  in  accordance  with  Item  h)  of  Sub-clause  6.1.4  the  enclosure  shall,  if 
necessary,  be  insulated  from  earth  in  order  that  the  voltage  appearing  between  any  of  the  live 
parts  and  the  enclosure  will  not  exceed  >hc  test  voltage  specified  in  Item  a)  of  Sub-clause 
6.1.4. 

6.1.7  Power-frequency  voltage  tests  on  the  main  circuit 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  6,1.7  of  I  EC  694  with  the  addition  of  the  following  supplement: 

The  main  circuits  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  shall  be  subjected  to 
power-frequency  voltage  tests  in  dry  conditions  only. 

Voltage  transformers,  power  transformers  or  fuses  may  be  replaced  by  replicas  reprodu- 
cing the  field  configuration  of  the  high-voltage  connections.  Overvoltage  protective  devices 
may  be  disconnected  or  removed. 

During  the  power-frequency  voltage  tests,  one  terminal  of  the  test  transformer  shall  be 
connected  to  earth  and  to  the  enclosure  of  the  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear, 
except  that  during  the  tests  in  accordance  with  Item  h)  of  Sub-clause  6.1.4  the  mid-point  or 
another  intermediate  point  of  the  voltage  source  should  be  connected  to  earth  and  to  the 
enclosure  in  order  that  the  voltage  appearing  between  any  of  the  live  parts  and  the  enclosure 
will  not  exceed  the  test  voltage  specified  in  Item  a)  of  Sub-clause  6. 1 .4. 

If  this  is  not  practicable,  one  terminal  of  the  test  transformer  may,  with  the  agreement  of 
the  manufacturer,  be  connected  to  earth  and  the  enclosure  shall,  if  necessary,  be  insulated 
from  earth. 

6. 1 .8  Artificial  pollution  tests 

I  E  C  694  is  not  applicable. 

6. 1 .9  Partial  discharge  tests 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  6.1.9  of  1  E  C  694  and  to  annex  FF  with  the  addition  of  the  following 
supplement : 

The  measurement  of  partial  discharges  should  be  made  as  a  type  test  to  show,  in 
correlation  with  the  other  dielectric  tests,  if  and  where  there  are  weak  points  with  respect  to 
the  dielectric  stresses  resulting  from  the  design  of  the  equipment. 


23 


IS  3427 :  19f7 
19c  19»(t990) 

ir  the  test  is  made,  it  shall  be  carried  out  before  and  after  the  lightning  impulse  and 
power-frequency  voltage  tests,  at  the  minimum  functional  pressure  or  at  the  rated  filling 
pressure  if  applicable. 

6.1.10     Dielectric  tests  on  auxiliary  and  control  circuits 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  6.1.10  of  I  EC  694  which  is  applicable  to  all  low  voltage  auxiliary 
circuits. 

Current  transformer  secondaries  shall  be  short-circuited  and  disconnected  from  earth. 
Voltage  transformer  secondaries  shall  be  disconnected. 

6.2  Radio  interference  voltage  (RIV)  tests 

1  E  C  694  is  not  applicable. 

6.3  Temperature-rise  tests 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  6.3  of  I  EC  694  with  the  addition  of  the  following  supplement: 

Where  the  design  provides  alternative  components  or  arrangements,  the  test  shall  be 
performed  with  those  components  or  arrangements  for  which  the  most  severq  conditions  are 
obtained.  The  representative  functional  unit  shall  be  mounted  approximately  as  in  normal 
service,  including  all  normal  enclosures,  partitions,  shutters,  etc.  and  the  covers  and  doors 
closed. 

The  tests  shall  be  made  normally  with  the  rated  number  of  phases  and  the  rated  normal 
current  flowing  from  one  end  of  the  length  of  busbars  to  the  terminals  provided  for  the 
connection  of  cables. 

When  testing  individual  functional  units,  the  neighbouring  units  should  carry  the  currents 
which  produce  the  power  loss  corresponding  to  the  rated  conditions.  It  is  admissible  to 
simulate  equivalent  conditions  by  means  of  heaters  or  heat  insulation,  if  the  test  cannot  be 
performed  under  actual  conditions. 

The  temperature  rises  of  the  different  components  shall  be  referred  to  the  ambient  air 
temperature  outside  the  enclosure  and  shall  not  exceed  the  values  specified  for  them  in  the 
relevant  standards.  If  the  ambient  air  temperature  is  not  constant,  the  surface  temperature  of 
an  identical  enclosure  may  be  taken  under  the  same  ambient  conditions. 

6.4  Measurement  of  the  resistance  of  the  main  circuit 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  6.4  of  I  EC  694  with  the  addition  of  the  following  paragraph: 

The  measured  resistance  across  the  complete  main  circuit  of  an  assembly  of  metal-enclosed 
switchgear  and  controlgear  is  indicative  of  the  proper  condition  of  the  current  path. 
However,  no  tolerance  can  be  specified. 

6.5  Short-time  and  peak  withstand  current  tests 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  6.5  of  I  E  C  694. 

6.5.101     Test  on  main  circuits 

Main  circuits  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  shall  be  tested  to  verify  their 
capability  to  withstand  the  rated  short-time  and  peak  withstand  current  under  the  intended 
conditions  of  installation  and  use,  i.e.  they  shall  be  tested  as  installed  in  the  metal-enclosed 
switchgear  and  controlgear  with  all  associated  components  influencing  the  performance  or 
modifying  the  short-circuit  current. 


24 


IS  3427: 1»»7 
lEC  29S(1»90) 

For  these  tests,  short  connections  to  voltage  transformers  are  not  considered  as.  parts  of 
the  main  circuit. 

The  short-circuit  current  tests  should  preferably  be  carried  out  three-phase.  The  r.m.s. 
value  of  the  short-circuit  current  during  the  test  shall  be  obtained  by  applying  the  rated 
short-time  withstand  current  to  the  main  circuit  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  control- 
gear. 

Short  and  direct  connections  between  circuits  having  a  high  short-circuit  current  and 
current  limiting  devices  may  be  tested  with  a  reduced  short-circuit  current. 

With  the  exception  of  protective  devices  which  limit  the  value  and  the  duration  of  the 
short-circuit  current,  it  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  no  protective  device  operates.  Current 
transformers  and  tripping  devices  which  may  be  present  shall  be  instalUed  as  in  normal 
service,  but  with  the  release  made  inoperative. 

Current  limiting  fuses,  if  any,  shall  be  provided  with  fuse-links  having  the  maximum  rated 
current  specified. 

After  the  test,  no  deformation  or  damage  to  components  or  conductors  within  the 
enclosure  which  may  impair  good  operation  of  the  main  circuits  shall  have  been  sus- 
tained. 

6.5.102     Tests  on  earthing  circuits 

Earthing  conductors,  earthing  connections  and  earthing  devices  of  metal-enclosed  switch- 
gear  and  controlgear  shall  be  tested  to  verify  their  capability  to  withstand  the  rated 
short-time  and  peak  withstand  current  under  the  neutral  earthing  condition  of  the  system, 
i.e.  they  shall  be  tested  as  installed  in  the  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  with  all 
associated  components  influencing  the  performance  or  modifying  the  short-circuit  cur- 
rent. 

The  short-circuit  current  tests  with  earthing  devices  should  preferably  be  carried  out  three- 
phase. 

When  there  are  removable  parts,  the  earthing  connection  between  the  fixed  part  and  the 
removable  part  shall  be  tested  under  earth  fault  conditions.  The  earth  fault  current  shall  flow 
between  the  earthing  conductor  and  the  frame  of  the  removable  part.  The  earthing  connec- 
tion between  two  removable  parts,  if  any,  shall  also  be  tested. 

After  the  test  some  deformation  and  degradation  of  the  earthing  conductor,  earthing 
connections  or  earthing  devices  is  permissible,  but  the  continuity  of  the  circuit  shall  be 
preserved. 

6.101     Verification  of  making  and  breaking  capacities 

Switching  devices  forming  part  of  the  main  circuit  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and 
controlgear  shall  be  tested  to  verify  their  rated  making  and  breaking  capacities  according  to 
the  relevant  standards  and  under  the  proper  conditions  of  installation  and  use,  i.e.  they  shall 
be  tested  as  normally  installed  in  the  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  with  all 
associated  components  the' arrangement  of  which  may  influence  the  performance,  such  as 
connections,  supports,  provisions  for  venting  etc. 

NOTE  —  In  determining  which  associated  components  are  likely  to  inOuence  the  performance,  special 
attention  ishould  be  given  to  mechanical  forces  due  to  the  short  circuit,  the  venting  of  arc  products,  the 
possibility  of  disruptive  discharges,  etc.  It  is  recognized  that,  in  some  cases,  such  influences  may  be  quite 
negligible. 


25 


IS  3427:1997 
DEC  298(1990) 

6.102  Mechanical  operation  tests 

6. 1 02. 1  Switching  devices  and  removable  parts 

Switching  devices  shall  be  operated  50  times  and  removable  parts  inserted  25  times  and 
withdrawn  25  times  to  verify  satisfactory  operation  of  the  equipment. 

6.102.2  Interlocks 

The  interlocks  shall  be  set  in  the  position  intended  to  prevent  the  operation  of  the 
switching  devices  and  the  insertion  or  withdrawal  of  removable  parts.  Fifty  attempts  shall  be 
made  to  operate  the  switching  devices  and  25  attempts  shall  be  made  to  insert  and  25 
attempts  to  withdraw  the  removable  parts.  During  these  tests  only  normal  operating  forces 
shall  be  employed  and  no  adjustment  shall  be  made  to  the  switching  devices,  removable  parts 
or  interlocks. 

The  interlocks  are  considered  to  be  satisfactory,  if 

a)  the  switching  devices  cannot  be  operated; 

b)  the  insertion  and  withdrawal  of  the  removable  parts  are  prevented; 

c)  the  switching  devices,  removable  parts  and  the  interlocks  are  in  proper  working  order  and 
the  effort  to  operate  them  is  practically  the  same  before  and  after  the  tests. 

6.103  Verification  of  the  degree  of  protection 

The  tests  shall  be  performed  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  specified  in  Clause  7  of 
I  E  C  529  for  the  appropriate  first  characteristic  numeral. 

It  shall  be  veriHed  that  the  test  instruments  according  to  table  2  cannot  either 

—  cause  a  lowering  of  the  dielectric  strength  of  the  main  circuit  below  the  rated  insulation 
level,  or 

—  touch  moving  parts  inside  the  enclosure,  or 

—  in  the  case  of  IP2X  pass  through  openings  in  the  enclosure  or  partition. 

The  test  shall,  however,  be  made  only  in  the  case  of  doubt  as  to  whether  the  requirements 
are  met. 

Table  2 


Degree  of 
protection 

Test  instruments 

IP2X 

Standard  meullic  test  finger  (figure  1)  and  rigid  sphere 
of  I2,0t8'^^  mm  diameter 

1P3X 

Straight  rigid  steel  wire  of  2,5 1 8,03  ^^  diameter 

IP4X 

Straight  rigid  steel  wire  of  l,OtS,os  ^^  diameter 

6.104    Pressure  withstand  test  for  gas-filled  compartments 

Each  design  of  gas-fiUed  compartincnU  shall  withstand  a  pressure  of  three  times  the  design 
pressure  for  1  min.  After  the  test  this  compartment  may  be  distorted.  This  test  is  carried  out 
without  pressure  relief  devices  if  any. 

The  replacement  of  pressure  relief  devices  for  pressure  withstand  tests  shall  not  have  any 
efTect  on  the  mechanical  strength  of  the  enclosure. 

6.10s    Gas  tightness  te)sts  of  gas-fUled  compartments 
Refer  to  annnex  CG. 


26 


IS  3427 :  1W7 
lEC  298(1990) 

The  measurement  of  gas  tightness  shall  be  performed  with  each  type  of  gas-flUed  com- 
partments as  a  type  test  to  show  that  the  leakage  rate  will  not  be  changed  by  influences 
caused  by  the  thermal  and  mechanical  type  tests. 

6. 1 06  Measurement  of  leakage  currents 

When  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  cpntrolgear  contains  insulating  partitions  or  shut- 
ters, the  following  tests  shall  be  made  in  order  to  check  compliance  with  the  requirement  of 
item  d)  of  Sub-clause  S.103.I. 

The  main  circuit  shall,  at  the  discretion  of  the  manufacturer,  be  jionnected  either  to  a 
three-phase  supply  of  power-frequency  voltage  equal  to  the  rated  voltage  of  the  metal- 
enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear,  with  one  phase  connected  to  earth,  or  to  a  single-phase 
supply  of  a  voltage  equal  to  the  rated  voltage,  the  live  parts  of  the  main  circuit  being 
connected  together.  For  three-phase  tests,  three  measurements  shall  be  made  with  the 
diflerent  phases  of  the  supply  successively  connected  to  earth.  In  the  case  of  single-phase 
tests,  only  one  measurement  is  necessary. 

A  metal  foil  shall  be  placed  in  the  most  unfavourable  situation  for  the  test  on  the  accessible 
surface  of  the  insulation  providing  the  protection  against  contact  with  live  parts.  In  case  of 
doubt  about  the  most  unfavourable  situation,  the  test  shall  be  repeated  with  diflerent 
situations. 

The  metal  foil  shall  be  approximately  circular  or  square,  having  an  area  as  large  as 
possible  but  not  exceeding  100  cm^.  The  enclosure  and  the  frame  of  the  metal-enclosed 
switchgear  and  controlgear  shall  be  earthed.  The  leakage  current  flowing  through  the  metal 
foil  to  earth  shall  be  measured  with  the  insulation  dry  and  clean. 

If  the  value  of  the  leakage  current  measured  is  more  than  0,5  mA,  the  insulating  surface 
does  not  provide  the  protection  required  in  this  standard. 

If,  as  indicated  in  Item  d)  of  Sub-clause  5.103.1,  the  continuous  path  over  insulating 
surfaces  is  broken  by  small  gaps  of  gas  or  liquid,  such  gaps  shall  be  shorted  out  electrically.  If 
these  gaps  are  incorporated  to  avoid  the  passage  of  the  leakage  current  from  live  parts  to 
accessible  parts  of  insulating  partitions  and  Shutters,  the  gaps  shall  withstand  the  test 
voltages  specifled  in  Sub-clause  4.2.1  of  I  EC  694  for  voltage  tests  to  earth  and  between 
poles. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  measure  leakage  currents,  if  earthed  metal  parts  are  arranged  in  an 
appropriate  manner  to  ensure  that  leakage  currents  cannot  reach  the  accessible  parts  of  the 
insulating  partitions  and  shutters. 

6.107  Weatherproofing  test 

When  agreed  between  manufacturer  and  user,  a  weatherproofing  test  shall  be  made  on 
metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  intended  for  outdoor  use.  A  recommended 
method  is  given  in  annex  CC.  This  test  also  takes  into  account  the  effects  of  wind-driven 
snow. 

6.108  Arcing  due  to  internal  fault 

This  test  is  subject  to  an  agreement  between  manufacturer  and  user.  If  such  a  test  is 
agreed,  the  procedure  shall  be  in  accordance  with  that  described  in  annex  AA. 

The  test  procedure  represents  the  effects  of  an  arc  occurring  entirely  in  air  or  in  another 
insulating  gas  within  the  enclosure  when  doors  and  covers  are  closed  but  does  not  cover  all 
cases,  particularly  those  faults  occurring  within  the  components  or  in  solid  or  liquid 
insulation. 


27 


IS  3427:19>7 
lEC  298(1990) 

/' 
SECTION  SEVEN  —  RULES  FOR  ROUTINE  TESTS 

7.    Routine  teste 

The  routine  tests  shall  be  made  with  each  transport  unit  and,  whenever  practicable,  at  the 
manufacturer's  works  to  ensure  that  the  product  is  in  accordance  with  the  equipment  on 
which  the  type  test  has  been  carried  out.  ^ 

Refer  to  Clause  7  of  I  E  C  694  with  the  addition  of  the  following  routine  tests: 

—  mechanical  operation  tests:  Sub-clause  7.102 

—  tests  of  auxiliary  electrical,  pneumatic  and  hydraulic  devices:        Sub-clause  7.105 

—  verification  of  correct  wiring:  Sub-clause  7.106 

—  pressure  tests  of  gas-filled  compartments  (if  applicable):  Sub-clause  7.103 

—  gas  tightness  tests  of  gas-filled  compartments  (if  applicable):         Sub-clause  7.104 

—  partial  discharge  measurement  (subject  to  agreement  between 
manufacturer  and  user):  Sub-clause  7.101 

—  tests  after  erection  on  site:  Sub-clause  7.107 

NOTE  —  It  may  be  nessessary  to  verify  the  interchangeability  of  components  of  the  same  rating  and 
construction  (see  Clause  5). 

7.1  Power-frequency  voltage  tests  on  the  main  circuit 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  7.1  of  I  EC  694  with  the  addition  of  the  following  supplement: 

The  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  is  an  assembly  of  components  which 
individually  have  been  subjected  to  appropriate  routine  tests.  The  tests  according  to  this 
sub-clause  serve  in  principle,  to  prove  the  interconnections. 

The  power-frequency  voltage  test  shall  be  performed  according  to  the  requirements  in 
Sub-clause  6.1.7.  The  test  voltage  specified  in  table  1,  column  (6),  of  I  E  C  694  or  the  table  of 
annex  EE,  column  (4),  shall  be  applied  connecting  each  phase  conductor  of  the  main  circuit 
in  turn  to  the  high-voltage  terminal  of  the  test  supply,  with  the  other  phase  conductors 
connected  to  earth  and  the  continuity  of  the  main  circuit  assured  (e.g.  by  closing  the 
switching  devices  or  otherwise). 

NOTE  —  On  special  request  by  the  user  and  in  addition  to  these  routine  tests  at  the  manufacturer's 
premises,  dielectric  tests  with  a  reduced  test  voltage  may  be  performed  af\er  erection  on  site  (see  annex 
DD). 

For  gas-filled  compartments  the  tests  shall  be  performed  at  the  rated  filling  pressure  of  the 
insulating  gas  (see  Sub-clause  4.101). 

7.2  Dielectric  tests  on  auxiliary  and  control  circuits 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  7.i  of  I  E  C  694. 

7.3  Measurement  of  the  resistance  of  the  main  circuit 

I  E  C  694  is  not  applicable.  Subject  to  agreement  between  manufacturer  and  user  the  d.c. 
voltage  drop  or  resistance  of  eaqh  phase  of  the  main  circuit  shall  be  measured  under 
conditions  as  nearly  as  possible  similar  to  those  under  which  the  corresponding  type  test  was 
carried  out. 


28 


IS  3427:1997 
lEC  29t(1990) 

7.101  Partial  discharge  measurement 

This  test  is  subject  to  agreement  between  manufacturer  and  user. 

The  measurement  of  partial  discharges  may  be  appropriate  as  a  routine  test  to  detect 
possible  material  and  manufacturing  defects  especially  for  gas-filled  compartments. 

If  such  a  test  is  agreed,  the  procedure  shall  be  as  described  in  annex  FF. 

7.102  Mechanical  operation  tests 

Operation  tests  are  made  to  ensure  that  the  switching  devices  and  removable  parts  comply 
with  the  prescribed  operating  conditions  and  that  the  mechanical  interlocks  work  properly. 

During  these  tests  which  are  performed  without  voltage  on  or  current  in  the  main  circuits*  it 
shall  be  verified,  in  particular,  that  the  switching  devices  open  and  close  correctly  within  the 
specified  limits  of  the  supply  voltage  and  pressure  of  their  operating  devices. 

Each  switching  device  and  each  removable  part  shall  be  tested  as  specified  in  Sub-clause 
6.102,  but  substituting  five  operations  or  five  attempts  in  each  direction. 


7.103  Pressure  tests  of  gas-filled  compartments 

Pressure  tests  shall  be  made  on  all  gas-filled  compartments  after  manufacture.  Each 
compartment  shall  be  subjected  to  a  test  at  1.3  times  the  design  pressure  for  one  minute. 

This  does  not  apply  for  sealed  compartments  with  a  rated  filling  pressure  of  0,5  l>ar  (gauge) 
and  below. 

After  this  test  the  compartments  shall  show  no  signs  of  distress  or  any  distortion  likely  to 
affect  the  operation  of  the  switchgear. 

7.104  Gas  tightness  tests  of  gas-filled  compartments 
Refer  to  annex  GG. 

7.105  Tests  of  auxiliary  electrical,  pneumatic  and  hydraulic  devices 

The  electrical,  pneumatic  and  other  interlocks  together  with  control  devices  having  a 
predetermined  sequence  of  operation  shall  be  tested  five  times  in  succession  in  the  intended 
conditions  of  use  and  operation  and  with  the  most  unfavourable  limit  values  of  auxiliary 
supply.  During  the  test  no  adjustment  shall  be  made. 

The  tests  are  considered  to  be  satisfactory  if  the  auxiliary  devices  have  operated  properly, 
if  they  are  in  good  operating  condition  after  the  tests  and  if  the  effort  to  operate  them  is 
practically  the  same  before  and  after  the  tests. 

7.106  Verification  of  correct  wiring 

It  shall  be  verified  that  the  wiring  conforms  with  the  diagram. 

7.107  Tests  after  erection  on  site 

After  erection,  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  shall  be  tested  to  check  correct 
operation. 


29 


IS  3427: Iff? 
lEC  2ft(lffO) 

For  parts  which  are  assembled  on  site  and  for  gas-filled  compartments  which  are  filled  on 
site  it  is  recommended  to  carry  out  the  following  tests: 

a)  Voltage  test  of  the  main  circuit:  annex  DD 

b)  Gas  tightness  tests  of  gas-filled  compartments  (if  applicable):        Sub-clause  7.104 

c)  Measurement  of  gas  condition  after  filling  on  site:  Sub-clause  7.108 

7.108    Measurement  of  gas  condition  after  filling  on  site 

The  condition  of  the  gas  in  gas-filled  compartments  shall  be  determined  and  shall  meet  the 
manufacturer's  specification. 

If  the  gas  is  sulphur  hexafluoride,  reference  should  be  made  to  I E  C  480. 


SECTION  EIGHT  —  GENERAL  INFORMATION 

8.    Guide  to  the  selection  of  switdiiiig  devices  for  service 

For  a  given  duty  in  service,  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  is  selected  by 
considering  the  individual  rated^  Vahies  of  their  components  required  by  normal  load  con- 
ditions and  in  the  case  of  fault  conditions. 

If  is  desirable  that  the  rated  values  be  chosen  as  suggested  in  this  standard  regarding  the 
characteristics  of  the  system  as  well  as  its  anticipated  future  development.  The  complete  list 
of  ratings  is  given  in  Clause  4. 

Other  parameters  such  as  local  atmospheric  and  climatic  conditions  and  the  use  at 
altitudes  exceeding  1  000  m  are  also  to  be  considered. 

The  duty  imposed  by  fault  conditions  should  be  determined  by  calculating  the  fault 
currents  at  the  place  where  the  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  is  to  be  located  in 
the  system. 


9.    InfonnatkNi  to  be  given  with  enquiries,  tenders  and  orders 

9.101     Information  with  erujuiries  and  orders 

When  enquiring  about  or  ordering  an  installation  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and 
controlgear  the  following  information  should  be  supplied  by  the  enquirer: 

1.  Particulars  of  the  system: 

Nominal  and  highest  voltage,  frequency,  type  of  system  neutral  earthing. 

2.  Service  conditions: 

Minimum  and  maximum  ambient  air  tenlperature;  any  condition  deviating  from  the 
normal  service  conditions  or  affecting  the  satisfactory  operation  of  the  equipment,  as,  for 
example,  the  ui^usual  exposure  to  vapour,  moisture,  fumes,  explosive  gases,  excessive  dust 
or  salt;  the  rislc  of  earth  tremors  or  other  vibrations  due  to  causes  external  to  the 
equipment  to  be  delivered. 


30 


IS3427:19»7 
lEC  298(1990) 

3.  Particulars  of  the  installation  and  its  components: 

a)  indoor  or  outdoor  installation; 

b)  number  of  phases; 

c)  number  of  busbars; 

d)  rated  voltage; 

e)  rated  insulation  level; 

f)  rated  normal  currents  of  busbars  and  feeder  circuits; 

g)  rated  short-time  withstand  current  {I^; 

h)  rated  duration  of  short  circuit  (if  different  from  1  s); 

i)  rated  peak  withstand  current  (if  different  from  2,5  I^\ 

j)  rated  values  of  components; 

k)  degree  of  protection  for  the  enclosure  and  partitions; 

I)  circuit  diagrams; 

m)  type  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  (e.g.  metal-clad,  compartmented  or 
cubicle). 

4.  Particulars  of  the  operating  devices: 

a)  type  of  operating  devices; 

b)  rated  supply  voltage  (if  any); 

c)  rated  supply  frequency  (if  any); 

d)  rated  supply  pressure  (if  any); 

e)  special  interlocking  requirements. 

Beyond  these  items  the  enquirer  should  indicate  every  condition  which  might  influence  the 
tender  or  the  order,  as,  for  example,  special  mounting  or  erection  conditions,  the  location  of 
the  external  high-voltage  connections  or  the  rules  for  pressure  vessels. 

Information  should  be  supplied  if  special  type  tests  are  required. 

9.102    Information  with  tenders 

The  following  information,  if  applicable,  should  be  given  by  the  manufacturer  with 
descriptive  matters  and  drawings: 

1.  Rated  values  and  characteristics  as  enumerated  in  Item  3  of  Sub-clause  9.101. 

2.  Type  test  certificates  or  reports  on  request. 

3.  Constructional  features,  for  example: 

a)  Mass  of  the  heaviest  transport  unit. 

b)  Overall  dimensions  of  the  installation. 

c)  Arrangement  of  the  external  connections. 

d)  Facilities  for  transport  and  mounting. 

e)  Mounting  provisions. 

f)  Instructions  for  operation  and  maintenance. 

g)  Type  of  gas-pressure  system. 

h)   Rated  filling  pressure  and  minimtun  functional  pressure. 
i)    Volume  of  gas  for  the  different  compartments. 
j)    Specification  of  gas  condition. 


31 


IS  3427: 19f7 
lEC  2M(lf90) 

4.  Particulars  of  the  operating  devices: 

a)  Types  and  rated  values  as  enumerated  in  Item  4  of  Sub-clause  9.101. 

b)  Current  or  power  for  operation. 

c)  Operating  times. 

d)  Quantity  of  free  gas  for  operation. 

5.  List  of  recommended  spare  parts  which  should  be  procured  by  the  user. 

10.    Rules  for  transport,  storage,  erection  and  maintenance 
Refer  to  Clause  10  of  lEC  694. 

10.1  Conditions  during  transport,  storage  and  erection 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  10.1  of  lEC  694. 

10.2  Erection  (mounting) 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  10.2  of  lEC  694. 

10.3  Maintenance 

Refer  to  Sub-clause  10.3  of  lEC  694  with  the  addition  of  the  following  paragraph: 

If,  for  certain  maintenance  purposes,  temporary  inserted  insulating  screens  are  required, 
these  screens  shall  be  supplied  by  the  manufacturer  who  shall  also  give  advice  about  their 
use.  Such  insulating  screens  shall  meet  the  requirements  of  Sub-clause  S.  103.1.  They  and  their 
supports  shall  have  sufficient  mechanical  strength  to  avoid  incidental  touching  of  live 
parts. 

NOTE  —  Insulating  screens  provided  for  mechanical  protection  only  are  not  subject  to  this  standard. 


32 


IS  3427  :im 
lEC  298(1990) 


Stoppltt« 


sccnoN 


Both  joints  of  this  finger  miy  be  bent 
through  an  ingle  of  90\  but  in  one  and  the 
»me  direction  only. 

Dimensions  in  miUimetres 
Tolerances: 
on  angles:  ±5' 
on  linear  dimensions: 
less  than  25  mm:  I^q, 
over  25  mm:  ±0.2 


Figure  1  —  Standard  test  finger 


33 


IS  3427 :  1997 
IFX  298(1990) 


Annex  AA 

(normative) 

Internal  fault 


Table  AA.  1  —  Locations,  causes  and  examples  of  measures  decreasing  the  probability  of  internal 
faults  or  reducing  the  risk 


Locations 

where  internal  faults  are 

more  likely  to  occur 

(1) 

Possibles  causes 
of  internal  faults 

(2) 

Examples  of  measures 
0) 

Cable  boxes 

Inadequate  design 

Selection  of  adequate  dimensions. 

Faulty  mstallation 

Avoidance  of  crossed  cable  connections.  Checking  of 
workmanship  on  site. 

Failure  of  solid  or  liquid 
insulation 
(defective  or  missing) 

Checking  of  workmanship  and/or  dielectric  test  on 
site.  Regular  checking  of  liquid  levels. 

Disconnectors 
Switches 
Earthing  switches 

Mal-operation 

Interlocks  (sec  Sub-clause  5.105).  Delayed  reopening. 
Independent  manual  operation.  Making  capacity 
for  switches  and  earthing  switches.  Instructions  to 
personnel. 

Bolted  connections 
and  contacts 

Corrosion 

Use  of  corrosion  inhibiting  coating  and/or  greases. 
Encapsulation,  where  possible. 

Faulty  assembly 

Checking  of  workmanship  by  suitable  means. 

Instrument  trans- 
formers 

Ferroresonance 

Avoidance  of  these  electrical  influences  by  suitable 
design  of  the  circuit. 

Circuu-brcakcrs 

Insufficient  maintenance 

Regular  programmed  maintenance.  Instructions  to 
personnel. 

All  locations 

Error  by  personnel 

Limitation  of  access  by  compartmentation.  Insulation 
embedded  live  parts.  Instructions  to  personnel. 

Ageing  under  electric  stresses 

Partial  discharge  routine  tests. 

Pollution,  moisture,  ingress  of 
dust,  vermin,  etc. 

Measures  to  ensure  that  the  specified  service  condi- 
tions are  achieved  (tee  Clause  2). 

~  Use  of  gas-fitted  compartments. 

Overvoltages 

Lightning  protection.  Adequate  insulation  co-ordina- 
tion. Dielectric  tests  on  site. 

34 


IS  3427:1997 
lEC  298(1990) 


Table  AA.2  —  Examples  of  measures  limiting  the  consequences  of  internal  faults 


—  Rapid  fault  clearance  times  initiated  by  detectors  sensitive  to  light,  pressure  or  heat  or  by  a  differential 
busbar  protection 

—  Application  of  suitable  fuses  in  combination  with  switching  devices  to  limit  the  let-through  current  and 
fault  duration 

—  Remote  control 

—  Pressure  relief  devices 


METHOD  FOR  TESTING  THE  METAL-ENCLOSED  SWITCHGEAR 

AND  CONTROLGEAR  UNDER  CONDITIONS  OF  ARCING 

DUE  TO  AN  INTERNAL  FAULT 

A  A.  I     Introduction 

The  occurrence  of  arcs  inside  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  is  coupled  with 
various  physical  phenomena. 

For  example,  the  arc  energy  resulting  from  an  arc  developed  in  air  at  atmospheric  pressure 
or  in  another  insulating  gas  within  the  enclosure  will  cause  an  internal  overpressure  and  local 
overheating  which  will  result  in  mechanical  and  thermal  stressing  of  the  equipment.  More- 
over, the  materials  involved  may  produce  hot  decomposition  products,  either  gaseous  or 
vaporous,  which  may  be  discharged  to  the  outside  of  the  enclosure. 

This  standard  makes  allowance  for  internal  overpressure  acting  on  covers,  doors,  inspec- 
tion windows,  etc.,  and  also  takes  into  consideration  the  thermal  efiects  of  the  arc  or  its  roots 
on  the  enclosure  and  of  ejected  hot  gases  and  glowing  particles,  but  not  damage  to  partitions 
and  shutters.  Consequently,  it  does  not  cover  all  effects  which  may  constitute  a  risk,  such  as 
toxic  gases.  Moreover,  the  test  procedure  only  simulates  situations  when  doors  and  covers 
are  closed  and  correctly  secured. 

AA.2    Types  of  accessibility 

A  distinction  is  made  between  the  two  types  of  accessibility  corresponding  to  the  different 
test  conditions  given  in  Sub-clauses  AA.5.3.2  and  AA.5.3.3.  The  enclosure  may  have 
different  types  of  accessibility  on  its  various  sides. 

Type  A:  Metal*enclo$ed  switchgear  and  controlgear  with  accessibility  restricted  to  autho- 
rized personnel  only. 

Type  B:  Metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  with  unrestricted  accessibility,  includ- 
ing that  of  the  general  public. 

AA.3    Test  arrangements 

The  choice  of  the  functional  units,  their  number,  their  equipment  and  their  position  in  the 
room,  as  well  as  the  place  of  initiation  of  the  arc  arc  to  be  decided  upon  in  consultation.  In 
each  case,  the  following  points  shall  be  observed: 

—  the  test  should  be  carried  out  on  a  functional  unit  not  previously  subjected  to  arcing; 


35 


IS  3427:1997 
lEC  29S(1W0) 

—  the  mounting  conditions  should  be  as  close  as  possible  to  those  of  normal  service.  The 
room  should  be  represented  at  least  by  the  floor,  the  ceiling,  two  perpendicular  walls  and 
the  cable  ducts; 

—  the  functional  unit  should  be  fully  equipped.  Mock-ups  of  internal  components  are 
permitted  provided  they  have  the  same  volume  and  external  material  as  the  original 
items; 

—  the  test  unit  shall  be  earthed  at  the  point  provided; 

—  the  arc  shall  not  be  initiated  in  such  a  way  that  it  can  be  considered  unrealistic  in  service 
conditions. 

AA.4    Current  and  voltage  applied 

AA.4.1     General 

The  tests  on  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  should  be  corried  out  three-phase. 
The  short-circuit  current  applied  during  the  test  is  to  be  stated  by  the  manufacturer.  It  may 
be  equal  to  or  lower  than  the  rated  short-time  withstand  current. 

AA.4.2     Voltage 

The  applied  voltage  of  the  test  circuit  should  be  equal  to  the  rated  voltage  of  the 
metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear.  A  lower  voltage  may  be  chosen  if  the  following 
conditions  are  met: 

a)  the  current  remains  practically  sinusoidal; 

b)  the  arc  is  not  extinguished  prematurely. 

AA.4.3     Current 

AA.4. 3.1     A.C.  component 

The  short-circuit  current  for  which  the  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  is 
specified  with  respect  to  arcing  should  be  set  within  a  -h5%  -0%  tolerance.  This  tolerance 
applies  to  the  prospective  current  only  if  the  applied  voltage  is  equal  to  the  rated  voltage.  The 
current  should  remain  constant. 

NOTE  —  If  the  test. plant  does  not  permit  this,  the  test  should  be  extended  until  the  integral  of  the  a.c. 
component  of  the  current  equals  the  value  specified  within  a  tolerance  of  -HlO%  -0%.  In  this  case,  the 
current  should  be  equal  to  the  specified  value  at  least  during  the  first  three  half-cycles  and  should  not  be  less 
than  S0%  of  the  specified  value  at  the  end  of  the  test. 

AA.4.3.2    D.C.  component 

The  instant  of  closing  should  be  chosen  so  that  the  prospective  value  of  the  peak  current 
(with  a  tolerance  of  +5%  -  0%)  flowing  in  one  of  the  outer  phases  is  2,5  times  the  r.m.s. 
value  of  the  a.c.  component  deflned  in  Sub-clause  AA.4.3. 1,  and  so  that  a  major  loop  also 
occurs  in  the  other  outer  phase.  If  the  voltage  is  lower  than  the  rated  voltage,  the  peak  value 
of  the  short-circuit  current  for  the  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  under  test 
should  not  drop  below  90%  of  the  prospective  peak  value. 


AA.4.4    Frequency 

At  a  rated  frequency  of  50  Hz  or  60  Hz,  the  frequency  at  the  beginning  of  the  test  should 
be  between  48  Hz  and  62  Hz.  At  other  frequencies  it  should  not  deviate  from  the  rated  value 
by  more  than  ±  10%. 


36 


IS  3427 :  »•? 
lEC  299(1990) 

AA.4.5    Duration  of  the  test 

The  arc  duration  is  chosen  in  relation  to  the  probable  duration  of  the  arc  determined  by 
the  protection  facilities  and  should  not  normally  exceed  1  s. 

For  testing  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  provided  with  pressure  relief 
devices,  merely  for  proving  its  resistance  to  pressure,  an  arc  duration  of  0,1  s  is  generally 
sufficient.  This  does  not  apply  for  gas-Ailed  compartments. 

NOTE  —  It  is  in  genertl  not  possible  to  calculate  the  permissible  arc  duration  for  a  current  which  differs 
from  that  used  in  the  test  The  maximum  pressure  during  the  test  will  generally  not  decrease  with  a  shorter 
arcing  time  and  there  is  no  universal  rule  according  to  which  the  permissible  arc  duration  may  be  increased 
with  a  lower  test  current. 

AA.5    Test  procedure 

AA.S.I  *  Supply  circuit 

The  neutral  is  only  earthed  in  the  case  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  to  be 
operated  in  a  solidly  earthed  system. 

Care  shall  be  taken  in  order  that  the  connections  do  not  alter  the  test  conditions. 

Generally,  inside  the  enclosure,  the  arc  may  be  fed  from  two  directions:  the  direction  to  be 
chosen  is  the  one  likely  to  result  in  the  highest  stress. 

AA.5.2    Arc  initiation 

The  arc  should  be  initiated  between  the  phases  by  means  of  a  metal  wire  of  about  0,5  mm 
diameter  or,  in  the  case  of  segregated  phase  conductors,  between  one  phase  and  earth. 

In  functional  imits  where  the  live  parts  are  covered  by  solid  insulating  material,  the  arc 
should  be  initiated  between  two  adjacent  phases  at  joints  or  gaps  of  the  insulation-embedded 
parts.  The  infeed  from  the  supply  circuit  shall  be  three-phase  to  allow  the  fault  to  become 
three-phase. 

NOTE  —  The  arc  shall  not  be  initiated  by  perforating  the  solid  insulation. 

The  point  of  initiation  shall  be  chosen  so  that  the  effects  of  the  resultant  arc  produce  the 
highest  stresses  in  the  functional  unit.  In  case  of  doubt  it  may  be  necessary  to  make  more 
than  one  test  on  each  functional  unit. 

AA.5.3    Indicators  (for  observing  the  thernutl  effects  of  gases) 

AA.S.3.1     General 

Indicators  are  pieces  of  black  cotton  cloth  so  arranged  that  their  cut  edges  do  not  point 
toward  the  test  unit.  Care  shall  be  taken  to  see  that  they  cannot  ignite  each  other.  This  is 
achieved  by  fitting  them,  for  example,  in  a  mounting  frame  of  steel  sheet  (see  figure  AA.l). 
The  indicator  dimensions  should  be  about  ISO  mm  x  ISO  mm. 

AA.S.3.2    Accessibility  Type  A 

Indicators  should  be  fitted  vertically  at  the  operator's  side  of  the  enclosed  switchgear  and 
controlgear  and,  if  applicable,  at  sides  which  are  readily  accessible  to  personnel. 

They  should  be  placed,  up  to  a  height  of  2  m  and  at  a  distance  of  30  cm  ±S%  from  the 
enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear,  facing  all  points  where  gas  is  likely  to  be  emitted  (e.g. 
joints,  inspection  windows,  doors).  Indicators  should  also  be  arrang^  horizontally  at  a 


37 


IS  3427:  lf»7 
lEC  2M(1990) 

height  of  2  m  above  the  floor  and  between  30  cm  and  80  cm  from  the  enclosed  switchgear 
and  controlgear,  (sec  Figure  AA.2). 

Black  cretonne  (cotton  fabric  approximately  ISO  g/m^)  should  be  used  for  the  indica- 
tors. 

AA.5.3.3    Accessibility  Type  B 

Indicators  should  be  fitted  vertically  on  all  accessible  sides  of  the  enclosed  switchgear  and 
controlgear. 

They  should  be  placed,  up  to  a  height  of  2  m  and  at  a  distance  of  10  cm  ±5%  from  the 
enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear,  facing  all  points  where  gas  is  likely  to  be  emitted  (e.g. 
joints,  inspection  windows,  doors).  Indicators  should  also  be  arranged  horizontally  at  a 
height  of  2  m  above  the  floor  and  between  10  cm  and  80  cm  from  the  enclosed  switchgear 
and  controlgear.  If  the  test  unit  is  lower  than  2  m,  indicators  should  be  placed  horizontally 
on  the  top  covers,  facing  all  points  where  gas  is  likely  to  be  emitted  and  close  to  the  vertical 
indicators,  which  in  this  case,  are  only  required  up  to  the  actual  height  of  the  equipment,  (see 
Figure  AA.2). 

Black  cotton-interlining  lawn  (approximately  40  g/m^)  should  be  used  for  the  indica- 
tors. 

AA.6    Asseatmtnt  of  the  test 

The  following  criteria  allow  for  the  arcing  effects  listed  in  Clause  AA.  1 .  Whoever  requests 
the  test  to  be  performed  shall  decide  by  which  of  these  criteria  the  results  of  the  test  should  be 
assessed. 

It  is  to  be  observed: 

Criterion  No.  1 
Whether  correctly  secured  doors,  covers,  etc.,  do  not  open. 

Criterion.  No.  2 

Whether  parts  (of  the  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear),  which  may  cause  a 
hazard,  do  not  fly  off.  This  includes  large  parts  or  those  with  sharp  edges,  for  example, 
inspection  windows,  pressure  relief  flaps,  cover  plates,  etc.,  made  of  metal  or  plastic. 

Criterion  No.  3 

Whether  arcing  does  not  cause  holes  to  develop  in  the  freely  accessible  external  parts  of  the 
enclosure  as  a  result  of  burning  or  other  effects. 

Criterion  No.  4 

Whether  the  indicators  arranged  vertically  (Sub-clause  AA.S.3)  do  not  ignite.  Indicators 
ignited  as  a  result  of  paint  or  stickers  burning  are  excluded  from  this  assessment. 

Criterion  No.  5 

Whether  the  indicators  arranged  horizontally  (Sub-clause  AA.S.3)  do  not  ignite.  Should 
they  start  to  bum  during  the  test,  the  assessment  criterion  may  be  regarded  as  having  been 
met,  if  proof  is  established  of  the  fact  that  the  ignition  was  caused  by  glowing  particles  rather 
than  hot  gases.  Pictures  taken  by  high-speed  cameras  should  be  produced  in  evidence. 

Criterion  No.  6 
Whether  all  the  earthing  connections  are  still  effective. 


38 


IS  3427: lf97 
lEC  2M(1»M) 


AA.7    Test  report 


The  following  information  should  be  given  in  the  test  report: 

—  Rating  and  description  of  the  test  unit  with  a  drawing  showing  the  main  dimensions* 
details  relevant  to  the  mechanical  strength,  the  arrangement  of  the  pressure  relief  flaps 
and  the  method  of  fixing  the  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  to  the  floor  and 
to  the  walls. 

—  Arrangement  of  the  test  connections  and  the  point  of  initiation  of  the  arc. 

—  Arrangement  and  material  of  indicators  with  respect  to  the  type  of  accessibility. 

—  For  the  prospective  or  test  current: 

a)  r.m.s.  value  of  the  a.c.  component  during  the  first  three  half-cycles; 

b)  highest  peak  value; 

c)  average  value  of  the  a.c.  component  over  the  actual  duration  of  the  test; 

d)  test  duration. 

—  Oscillogram(s)  showing  currents  and  voltages. 

—  Assessment  of  the  test  results. 

—  Other  relevant  remarks. 


39 


IS  3427  5 1997 
lEC  29S(1990) 


Dimensions  in  millimetres 


Figure  AA.l  —  Mounting  frame  for  indicators 


40 


IS  34i7:t997 
lEC  2M(I»90) 


Accessibility  -  lyptA 


Aoctssibility  -  1Vp«  6 


h>2m 


h<2m 


h>2m 


h<2m 


Figure  AA.2  —  Position  of  indicators  (i) 
Height  of  equipment  (h) 


41 


IS  3411 :  IW7 
lEC  ZWdWO) 


Annex  BB 

(normative) 

Metiiod  of  calculating  the  cross-sectional  area  of  bate 
conductors  with  regard  to  thermal  stresses  due  to  currents 

of  short  duration 


The  following  formula  can  be  used  to  calculate  the  cross-section  of  bare  conductors  necessary 
to  withstand  the  thermal  stress  due  to  currents  with  a  duration  of  the  order  of  0,2  s  to  S  s. 


where: 

S  is  the  cross-section,  expressed  in  square  millimetres 
/  is  the  r.m.s.  value  of  the  current  in  amperes 

a  is  expressed  in    ^  ("1?"/   *    ^^^  ^**  ^^*  following  values: 

13     for  copper 

8.5  for  aluminium 

4,5  for  iron 

2,5  for  lead 
/  is  the  time,  expressed  in  seconds 
A^is  the  temperature  rise,  expressed  in  Kelvins  (K);  for  l>are  conductors,  it  is  normally  180  K 

If  the  time  is  more  than  2  s  but  less  than  S  s,  the  value  for  Ad  may  be  increased  in  the  same 
formula  to  21S  K. 
This  takes  account  of  the  fact  that  the  temperature  rise  is  not  strictly  adiabatic. 


42 


tS  3427; 1997 
lEC  29t(1990) 


Annex  CC 

(normative) 

Recommended  method  for  the  weatherproofing  test 
for  outdoor  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear 


The  enclosure  to  be  tested  shall  be  fully  equipped  and  complete  with  all  fittings  such  as  roof 
bushings,  etc.,  and  placed  in  the  area  to  be  supplied  with  artificial  precipitation.  For  installations 
comprising  several  functional  units,  a  minimum  of  two  units  shall  be  used  to  test  the  joints  between 
them;  a  roof  joint  shall  be  included. 

The  artificial  precipitation  shall  be  supplied  by  a  suflicient  number  of  nozzles  to  produce  a 
uniform  spray  over  the  surface  under  test.  The  various  vertical  surfaces  of  an  enclosure  may  be 
tested  separately,. provided  that  a  uniform  spray  is  simultaneously  applied  also  to  both  of  the 
following: 

1)  the  roof  surface  from  nozzles  located  at  a  suitable  height; 

2)  the  floor  outside  the  enclosure  for  a  distance  of  1  m  in  front  of  the  surface  under  test  with  the 
enclosure  located  at  the  minimum  height  above  the  floor  level  specified  by  the  manufac- 
turer. 

Where  the  width  of  the  equipment  exceeds  3  m,  the  spray  may  be  applied  to  3  m  wide  sections  in 
turn. 

Each  nozzle  used  for  this  test  shall  deliver  a  square-shaped  spray  pattern  with  uniform  spray 
distribution  and  shall  have  a  capacity  of  30  1/min  ±  10%  at  a  pressure  of  4,6  bar  (460  kPa)  ±  10% 
and  a  spray  angle  of  60""  to  80"".  The  centre  lines  of  the  nozzles  shall  be  inclined  downwards  so  that 
the  top  of  the  spray  is  horizontal  as  it  is  directed  towards  the  vertical  and  roof  surfaces  being 
tested.  It  is  convenient  to  arrange  the  nozzles  on  a  vertical  stand-pipe  and  space  them  about  2  m 
apart  (see  the  test  arrangement  in  figure  CCA), 

The  pressure  in  the  feedpipe  of  the  nozzles  shall  be  4,6  bar  (460  kPa)  ±  lOVo  under  flow 
conditions.  The  rate  at  which  water  is  applied  to  each  surface  under  test  shall  be  about  S  nun/min, 
and  each  surface  so  tested  shall  receive  this  rate  of  artificial  precipitation  for  a  duration  of  5  min. 
The  spray  nozzles  shall  be  at  a  distance  between  2,5  m  and  3  m  from  the  nearest  vertical  surface 
under  test. 

NOTE  —  When  a  nozzle  in  accordance  with  figure  CC.2  is  used,  the  quantity  of  water  is  considered  to  be  in 
accordance  with  this  standard  when  the  pressure  is  4,6  bar  (460  kPa)  ±10%. 

After  the  test  is  completed,  the  enclosure  shall  be  inspected  promptly  to  determine  whether  the 
following  requirements  have  been  met: 

1)  No  water  shall  be  visible  on  the  insulation  of  the  main  and  auxiliary  circuits. 

2)  No  water  shall  be  visible  on  any  electrical  components  or  mechanisms  of  the  equipment. 

3)  No  significant  accumulation  of  water  shall  be  retained  by  the  structure  or  other  non-insulating 
parts  (to  minimize  corrosion). 


43 


IS  3427: 1W7 
lEC  iWdWO) 


n)  n  n  n  n  n  n  n 


¥m 


HpzilM 


Wt^ 


77*7777 


A 

About                     ^  *" 

B 

1  m 

C 

2,5  m         10          3  m 

D 

Minimum  height  above  floor 

FiointE  CC.I  —  Arrangement  for  weatherproofing  test 


44 


IS  3427 :1W7 
lEC  298(1990) 


Body 


27.e 


(^ 

1 

-i 

5 

h 

s 

2 

1 

i£-^ 

Z 

Material:  brass 


0 

19  k7 

^ 

p 

h 

\ 

: 

! 

L. 

J 

4 

4 

Material:    brass 


Internal  vanes 
14.3 


3  ^ 
3^ 

J^^ 

r  =  0,2 


Assembly 


Scala 


.,.  £3^- 


Dimensions  in  millimetres 

FiGURt  CC.2  —  Nozzle  for  weatherprooflng  test 

45 


18  Mtlxim 
lEC  2M(1990) 


Annex  DD 

(normative) 

Guide  for  voltage  tests  after  erection  on  site 


When  agreed  between  manufacturer  and  user,  power-frequeny  voltage  tests  in  dry  conditions 
may  be  carried  out  on  the  main  circuits  of  metal-enclosed  weitchgear  and  controtgear  after  the 
erection  on  site  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  specified  in  Sub-clause  7.1  for  the  routine  test  at  the 
manufacturer's  premises. 

The  power-frequency  test  voltage  shall  be  80%  of  the  values  indicated  in  Sub-clause  7.1  and 
shall  be  applied  to  each  phase  conductor  of  the  main  circuit  in  succession  with  the  other  phase 
conductors  earthed.  For  the  tests,  one  terminal  of  the  test  transformer  shall  be  connected  to  earth 
and  to  the  enclosure  of  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear. 

If  the  voltage  test  after  erection  on  site  replaces  the  routine  test  at  the  manufacturer's  premises, 
the  full  power-frequency  test  voltage  shall  be  applied. 

D.C.  voltage  tests  are  under  consideration. 


46 


IS  3427:1997 
lEC  29<(1990) 


Annex  EE 
(normative) 

Rated  insulation  level  for  Series  II 

(based  on  current  practice  in  Canada  and  the  United  States  of  America) 


This  annex  gives  for  information  the  rated  in&ulation  levels  for  Series  II,  based  on  current 
practice  in  Canada  and  the  United  States  of  America,  for  60  Hz  only. 


Rated  voltage 

U 
(r.m.s.  value) 

(kV) 

Rated  lightning  impulse 

withstand  voltage 

(peak  value) 

Rated  power-frequency 

withstand  voltage 

(r.m.s.  value) 

To  earth  and 

between  phases 

(kV) 

Across  the  isolating 

distance 

(kV) 

To  earth  and 

between  phases 

(kV) 

Across  the  isolating 

distance 

(kV) 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

4J6 

60 

66 

19 

21 

8.25 

75 

83 

26 

29 

15 

95 

105 

36 

40 

15,5 

110 

121 

50 

55 

25,8 

125 

138 

60 

66 

38 

150 

165 

80 

88 

48.3 

200 

220 

100 

110 

47 


IS  3427:1997 


Annex  FF 

(normative) 

Partial  discharge  measurement 


FF.l     General 


The  measurement  of  partial  discharges  is  a  suitable  means  of  detecting  certain  defects  in 
the  equipment  under  test  and  is  a  useful  complement  to  the  dielectric  tests.  Experience  shows 
that  partial  discharges  may  lead  in  particular  arrangements  to  a  progressive  degradation  in 
the  dielectric  strength  of  the  insulation,  especially  of  solid  insulation. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  yet  possible  to  establish  a  reliable  relationship  between  the 
results  of  partial  discharge  measurements  and  the  life  expectancy  of  the  equipment  owing  to 
the  complexity  of  the  insulation  systems  used  in  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  control- 
gear. 


FF.2    Application 

The  measurement  of  partial  discharges  may  be  appropriate  for  metal-enclosed  switchgear 
and  controlgear  if  organic  insulating  materials  are  used  therein  and  is  recommended  for 
gas-filled  compartments. 

Because  of  the  design  variations  a  general  specification  for  the  test  object  cannot  be  given. 
In  general,  the  test  object  should  consist  of  assemblies  or  sub-assemblies  with  dielectric 
stresses  which  are  identical  to  those  which  would  occur  in  the  complete  assembly  of  the 
equipment. 

NOTES 

1  Test  objects  conWsting  of  a  complete  assembly  are  to  be  preferred.  In  the  case  of  integrated  switchgear 
design,  especially  where  various  live  parts  and  connections  are  embedded  in  solid  insulation,  tests  are 
necessarily  carried  out  on  a  complete  assembly. 

2  Fn  the  case  of  designs  consisting  of  a  combination  of  conventional  components  (for  instance  instrument 
transformers,  bushings),  which  can  be  tested  separately  in  accordance  with  their  relevant  standards,  the 
purpose  of  this  partial  discharge  test  is  to  check  the  arrangement  of  the  components  in  the  assembly. 

For  technical  and  economic  reasons,  it  is  recommended  to  perform  the  partial  discharge 
tests  on  the  same  assemblies  or  sub-assemblies  as  are  used  for  the  mandatory  dielectric 
tests. 

NOTE  —-  This  test  may  be  carried  out  on  assemblies  or  sub-assemblies.  Care  has  to  be  taken  thai  external 
partial  discharges  do  not  affect  the  measurement. 

The  routine  test  may  also  be  carried  out  on  components. 

Criteria  to  be  considered  in  deciding  on  the  necessity  for  a  partial  discharge  test  are,  for 
instance: 

1)  Practical  experience  in  service  including  the  results  of  such  testing  over  a  period  of 
production. 

2)  The  value  of  the  electric  field  strength  at  the  most  highly  stressed  area  of  the  solid 
insulation. 

3)  The  type  of  insulating  material  used  in  the  equipment  as  part  of  the  major  insulation. 


48 


IS  3427 :  IfW 
lEC  2M(1990) 


FF.3    Test  drcuits  and  measuring  instnnnents 


The  recommended  test  circuits  and  measuring  instruments  and  the  method  of  calibration 
are  given  in  I  E  C  270. 

Three-phase  equipment  is  either  tested  in  a  single-phase  test  circuit  or  in  a  three-phase  test 
circuit  (sec  table  FF.l). 

a)  Single-phase  test  circuit 

Procedure  A 

To  be  used  as  a  general  method  for  equipment  designed  for  use  in  systems  with  or 
without  solidly  earthed  neutral. 

For  measuring  the  partial  discharge  quantities,  each  phase  shall  be  connected  to  the  test 
voltage  source  successively,  the  other  two  phases  and  all  the  parts  earthed  in  service  being 
earthed. 

Procedure  B 

To  be  used  only  for  equipment  exclusively  designed  for  use  in  systems  with  solidly 
earthed  neutral. 

For  measuring  the  partial  discharge  quantities,  two  test  arrangements  shall  be  used. 

At  first,  measurements  shall  be  made  at  a  test  voltage  of  1,1  (/  ((/  is  the  rated  voltage). 
Each  phase  shall  be  connected  to  the  test  voltage  source  successively,  the  other  two 
phases  being  earthed.  It  is  necessary  to  insulate  or  to  remove  all  the  metallic  parts 
normally  earthed  in  service. 

An  additional  measurement  shall  be  made  at  a  reduced  test  voltage  of  1,1  (//>/3  during 
which  the  parts  being  earthed  in  service  are  earthed  and  the  three  phases  connected  to  the 
test  voltage  source  are  bridged. 

b)  Three-phase  test  circuit 

When  suitable  test  facilities  are  available,  the  partial  discharge  tests  may  be  carried  out  in 
a  three-phase  arrangement. 

In  this  case,  it  is  recommended  to  use  three  coupling  capacitors  connected  as  shown  in 
figure  FF.l.  One  discharge  detector  can  be  used  which  is  connected  successively  to  the 
three  measuring  impedances. 

For  calibration  of  the  detector  on  one  measuring  position  of  the  three-phase  arrange- 
ment, short-duration  current  pulses  of  known  charge  are  injected  between  each  of  the 
phases  taken  in  turn  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  earth  and  the  other  two  phases,  on  the 
other  hand.  The  calibration  giving  the  lowest  deflection  is  used  for  the  determination  of 
the  discharge  quantity. 


FF.4    Test  procedure 

The  applied  power-frequency  voltage  is  raised  to  at  least  1,3  (/  or  1,3  (//v/3  in  accordance 
with  the  test  circuit  (table  FF.l)  and  maintained  at  this  value  for  at  least  lOs  *. 

The  voltage  is  then  decreased  without  interruption  to  1,1  (/or  1,1  UlJZ  in  accordance 
with  the  test  circuit  and  the  partial  discharge  quantity  is  measured  at  this  test  voltage  (see 
table  FF.l). 


*  Alternatively,  the  partial  discharge  te$t  may  be  performed  while  decreasing  the  voltage  after  the  power- 
frequency  voluge  tests. 


49 


IS  3427:1997 
lEC  298(1990) 


As  far  as  possible  with  respect  to  the  actual  background  noise  level,  the  partial  discharge 
inception  and  the  partial  discharge  extinction  voltages  should  be  recorded  for  additional 
information. 

In  general,  tests  on  assemblies  or  sub-assemblies  should  be  made  with  the  switching  devices 
in  the  closed  position.  In  the  case  of  disconnectors  where  deterioration  of  the  insulation 
between  the  open  contacts  by  partial  discharges  is  conceivable,  additional  partial  discharge 
measurements  should  be  made  with  the  disconnector  in  the  open  position. 


FF.S    Maximum  permissible  partial  disdiarge  quantity 

The  maximum  permissible  partial  discharge  quantity  at  1,1  {/  and/or  1,1  (7/^3  shall  be 
agreed  between  the  manufacturer  and  the  user. 

NOTE  —  Limit  values  of  the  partial  discharge  quantity  will  not  be  specified  until  further  substantiated 
information  is  available.  For  the  time  being,  these  values  are  left  to  the  responsibility  of  the  manufacturer  or, 
in  the  case  of  acceptance  tests,  are  subjected  to  agreement  between  the  manufacturer  and  the  user. 


The  partial  discharge  quantity  is  expressed  in  coulombs  (C). 


50 


! 

1 

a 


^ 


3 


CO 


f 


I 


I 


I 


L 


I 

9 


3  J 


1 


I 
li 


3" 


I 

Hi.     -^ 
I 


h- 


•♦. 


Hi- 


IS  3427:1997 
lEC  298(1990) 


1 
I 


,2 

i 


I 


p.S 

ll 


51 


IS  3427:l>f7 
lEC  2M(1990) 


N 

a>  Neutral  connection 

E 

»  Earth  connection 

L„  Lj.  L3 

s  Terminals  for  the  connection  of  the  three-phase  voltage  source 

Z„  Z2,  Z3 

•  Impedances  of  the  test  circuit 

c„ 

»  Coupling  capacitor 

Zm 

»  Measuring  impedance 

D 

«  Partial  discharge  detector 

fREFF.l 

—  Partial  discharge  test  circuit  (three-phase  arrangen 

IS  3427 :  1997 
IKC  298(1990) 


Annex  GG 

(normative) 

Gas  tightness  specifications  and  tests 


INTRODUCTION 

This  annex  GG  is  derived  from  a  corresponding  Appendix  EE  of  I  E  C  56  (1987).  At  the  TC  17 
meeting  in  Helsinki  (October  1987)  it  was  decided  to  transfer  gas  tightness  specifications  and  tests 
as  a  common  clause  to  1  E  C  694  on  the  occasion  of  a  future  revision.  Meanwhile  the  annexes  shall 
be  retained  in  the  relevant  standards  (I  EC  56  (1987),  I  EC  517  (1990)  and  I  EC  298  (1990)). 

Annex  GG  has  been  adapted  as  far  as  necessary  to  the  conditions  of  medium  voltage  gas-filled 
compartments.  Other  modifications  for  example  to  delete  definitions  which  are  not  relevant  to  this 
standard  or  to  transfer  definitions  from  the  annex  to  the  standard  itself,  have  not  been  imple- 
mented in  order  to  preserve  the  common  character  of  the  annex  and  thus  to  facilitate  a  later 
transfer  to  1  E  C  694. 


CiG.I     Scope  and  object 

This  annex  applies  to  gas-tight  assemblies  and  gas-filled  compartments  of  metal-enclosed 
switchgear  and  controlgear  which  use  gas,  other  than  air  at  atmospheric  pressure,  as 
insulating  or  combined  insulating  and  interrupting  medium.  Its  purpose  is  to  define  char- 
acteristics and  test  procedures  relative  to  gas  tightness. 


GG2     Dermitions 

GG.2. 1     Controlled  pressure  system 

An  assembly  which  is  automatically  refilled  from  an  external  or  internal  gas  source. 

GG.2.2     Closeil  pressure  system 

An  as.sembly  which  is  refilled  only  periodically  by  manual  connection  to  an  external  gas 
source. 

G G .  2 . 3     Sealed  pressure  system 

An  assembly  for  which  no  further  gas  processing  is  required  during  its  expected  operating 
life. 

Note        Sealed  pressure  systems  are  completely  assembled  and  tested  in  the  factory. 

GG.2.4    Rated  filling  pressure,  P^  (or  density  D^ 

The  pressure  in  bars  (gauge)  referred  to  atmospheric  air  conditions  of  20  "C  and  1013  hPa 
(or  density)  at  which  the  gas-filled  compartment  is  filled  before  being  put  into  service  or 
automatically  refilled. 


53 


IS  3427 :  1997 
IRC  298(1990) 

GG.2.5     Minimum  functional  pressure,  P^  (or  density  D„) 

The  gas  pressure  in  bars  (gauge)  referred  to  atmospheric  air  conditions  of  20  °C  and 
1013  hPa  (or  density)  at  and  above  which  the  rated  values  of  the  switchgear  are  maintained 
and  at  which  refilling  becomes  necessary. 

GG.2.6      Absolute  leakage  rate,  F 

The  amount  of  gas  escaped  by  time  unit,  expressed  in  bar  •  cmVs. 

GG.2.7     Permissible  leakage  rate,  F^ 

The  maximum  permissible  leakage  rate  specified  by  the  manufacturer  for  several  gas-filled 
compartments  combined  into  one  gas  system  (gas-tight  assembly),  by  using  the  tightness 
co-ordination  chart  TC,  or  for  single  gas-filled  compartments. 

GG.2.8     Relative  leakage  rate,  /Vci 

The  absolute  leakage  rate  related  to  the  total  amount  of  gas  in  the  system  at  rated  filling 
pressure  (or  density). 

It  is  expressed  in  per  cent  per  year  or  per  cent  per  day. 

GG.2.9     Time  between  refillings,  T 

The  time  elapsed  between  two  refillings  performed  either  manually  or  automatically  to 
compensate  the  leakage  rate  F. 

GG.2.10     Number  of  refillings  per  day,  N 

The  number  of  refillings  to  compensate  the  leakage  rate  F. 
This  value  is  applicable  to  controlled  pressure  systems. 

GG.2.11     Pressure  drop,  AP 

The  drop  of  pressure  in  a  given  time  caused  by  the  leakage  rate  F,  without  refilling. 


GG.2,12     Tightness  co-ordination  chart,  TC 

A  survey  document  supplied  by  the  manufacturer,  used  when  testing  single  gas-filled 
compartments  to  demonstrate  the  relationship  between  the  tightness  of  the  complete  gastight 
assembly  and  that  of  single  compartments. 

GG.2.13     Cumulative  leakage  measurement 

A  measurement  which  takes  into  account  all  the  leaks  from  a  given  assembly  to  determine 
the  leakage  rate. 

GG.2.14    Sniffing 

The  action  of  slowly  moving  a  leakmeter  sensing  probe  around  an  assembly  to  locate  a 
leak. 


54 


IS  3427 :  1997 
lEC  298(1990) 

GG.3    Specifications  for  gas  tightness 

GG.3. 1     Controlled  pressure  systems 

The  tightness  of  controlled  pressure  systems  is  specified  by  the  number  of  refilling 
operations  per  day  (N)  or  by  the  pressure  drop  per  day  (AP).  The  permissible  values  shall  be 
given  by  the  manufacturer. 

GG.3.2     Closed  pressure  systems 

The  tightness  of  closed  pressure  systems  is  specified  by  two  quantities: 

—  relative  leakage  rate  F^ 

(preferred  values  are  \%  and  3%  per  year); 

—  time  between  reflllings  T 
(preferred  values  are  3  and  10  years). 

GG.3.3     Sealed  pressure  systems 

The  tightness  of  sealed  pressure  systems  is  specified  by  their  expected  operating  life. 
Preferred  values  are  10,  20  and  30  years. 


GG.4    Tests 

The  purpose  of  tightness  tests  is  to  demonstrate  that  the  total  system  leakage  F  does  not 
exceed  the  specified  value  Fp. 

If  possible,  the  tests  should  be  performed  on  a  complete  gas-tight  assembly  at  P,  (or  D,).  If 
it  is  not  convenient,  the  tests  may  be  performed  on  single  gas-filled  compartments.  In  these 
cases,  the  permissible  leakage  rate  of  the  tested  objects  in  relation  to  the  leakage  rate  of  the 
total  assembly  shall  be  shown  by  the  tightness  co-ordination  chart  TC.  The  possible  leakages 
between  compartments  of  different  gas-tight  assemblies  shall  also  be  taken  into  account  (see 
figure  GG.l). 

In  general,  only  cumulative  leakage  measurements  allow  calculation  of  leakage  rates. 

The  type  test  report  should  include  such  information  as: 

—  a  description  of  the  object  under  test,  including  its  internal  volume  and  the  nature  of  the 
filling  gas; 

—  the  pressures  and  temperatures  recorded  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  test  and  the 
number  of  refillings; 

—  the  cut  in  and  cut  off  pressure  settings  of  the  pressure  (or  density)  control  or  monitoring 
device; 

—  an  indication  of  the  calibration  of  the  meters; 

—  the  lesults  of  the  measurements; 

—  if  applicable,  the  test  gas  and  the  conversion  factor  used  to  assess  the  results. 

GG.4.1     Type  tests  of  pressure  systems 

The  tightness  test  shall  be  performed  before  and  after  the  mechanical  operation  test  and 

the  temperature-rise  tests  (sec  Sub-clauses  6.102  and  6.3). 

NOTE  -  -  For  lempeniturc-nsc  tests  the  test  object  is  normally  fitted  with  internal  sensors  and  metering 
foodcrs  which  may  afToct  a  correct  lightness  measurement.  In  this  case  an  additional  tcmperature*rise  lest 
with  original  enclosures  has  to  be  performed*  for  the  tightness  measurement. 


« 


IS  3427 :  1997 
lEC  298(1990) 

An  increased  leakage  rate  at  extreme  temperatures  (if  such  tests  are  required  in  the  relevant 
standards),  and/or  during  operations,  is  acceptable  provided  that  this  rate  resets  to  the  initial 
value  after  the  temperature  is  returned  to  normal  ambient  air  temperature  and/or  after  the 
operations  are  performed.  The  increased  temporary  leakage  rate  shall  not  exceed  three  times 
the  specified  permissible  value  Fp. 

a)  Controlled  pressure  systems 

The  relative  leakage  rate  /\ei  shall  be  checked  by  measuring  the  pressure  drop  A/^  over  a 
period  t  sufficient  to  determine  it.  A  correction  should  be  made  to  take  into  account  the 
variation  of  ambient  air  temperature.  During  this  period  the  refilling  device  shall  be 
inoperative. 

AP      24 
Fre,  =  ~p-  X  —  X   '00  (%  per  day) 

M  A/>  24 


r  m 

t  =  test  time  (hours) 
NOTE  —  In  order  to  maintain  the  linearity  of  the  formula,  AP  should  be  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as 

Alternatively,  the  number  of  refilling  operations  per  day  may  be  measured  directly. 

b)  Closed  pressure  systems  and  sealed  pressure  systems 

Any  method  (examples  are  given  in  figure  GG.2)  may  be  used  to  measure  the  leakage  rate 
F,  which  is  used  in  combination  with  the  tightness  co-ordination  chart  to  calculate: 

—  the  relative  leakage  rate  F„^  and  the  time  between  refillings  T  for  closed  pressure 
systems; 

—  the  expected  operating  life  for  sealed  pressure  systems. 

Due  to  the  comparatively  small  leakage  rates  of  these  systems,  pressure  drop  measure- 
ments are  not  applicable. 

If  the  test  object  is  filled  with  a  test  gas  different  from  the  gas  used  in  service  and/or  at  a 
test  pressure  different  from  the  normal  operating  pressure,  corrective  factors  defined  by 
the  manufacturer  shall  be  used  for  calculations. 

NOTE  —  Leakage  rate  measurements  in  practice  may  have  an  inaccuracy  of  ±50%. 

GG.4.2    Routine  tests  of  pressure  systems 

Routine  tests  shall  be  performed  at  normal  ambient  air  temperature  with  the  assembly 
filled  at  the  pressure  (or  density)  corresponding  to  the  manufacturer's  test  practice.  Sniffing 
may  be  used  under  controlled  conditions : 

a)  Controlled  pressure  systems 

The  test  procedure  corresponds  to  Sub-clause  GG.4.1  a), 

b)  Closed  pressure  systems  and  sealed  pressure  systems 

The  test  may  be  performed  in  accordance  with  Sub-clause  GG.4. 1  h)  at  several  stages  of 
the  manufacturing  process  on  single  compartments  according  to  the  tightness  co- 
ordination chart  TC. 


56 


IS  3427 :  If  >7 
lEC  298(1990) 

Gas*insulated  meul-enck>sed  switchgear,  single-phase  encapsulated,  circuit-breaker  compartments  of  the  three 
phases  connected  to  the  same  gas  system. 


Leakage  rate  of  the  system: 

Compartment  A 

Compartment  B 

Compartment  C 

Control  tx>x  D  (including  valves,  gauges, 
monitoring  devices) 

Piping  e 

Piping/ 

Piping  f 

Complete  system 


14  X  10"*  bar  x  cm^s 

14  X  l(r*  bar  x  cm^s 

14  X  l(r*  bar  x  cm^s 

20  x  10"*  bar  x  cm^s 

2  X  la-*  bar  x  cm^/s 

2  X  I O'*  bar  X  cm^s 

2  X  10"*  bar  X  cm^s 

68  X  10"*  bar  x  cm^s 


Rated  filling  pressure 
Minimimt  functional  pressure 
Total  internal  volunte: 

68  X   10^  X  60  x  60  X  24  x  365 
"^  "  (0,5  +  I)  X  30  X  10^  "^  *"" 


F^:  0,5  bar  (gauge) 
?„:  0.3  bar  (gauge) 
30  dm^ 


4,8%  per  year 


T^ 


(0,5-0,3)  X  30  X  10^ 
68  X  10^  X  60  X  60  X  24  X  365 


»  2,8  yean 


Figure  GG.l  —  Example  for  a  tightness  co«ordination  chart  TC 


57 


IS  3427 :  1997 
lEC  298(1990) 


T3 

O 

J2 

'^-^ 

^ 

•2 

E 

> 
4> 

c 

x: 

o 

o 

«>rf 

cd 

u 

£ 

C 

13 

3 

^ 

>» 

CO 

D 

> 

(^ 

S) 

o 

55 

c 

o 

& 

«/> 

a 

s. 

c 

E 

o 

o 

i 

u 

3 

1 

i 

1 

9^ 

d 

^ 
:« 

o 

^ 

n 

u 

a> 

0^ 

■8 
2 

00 

u 

«-• 

c 

c 

o 

(S^ 

(A 

zs 

c 

*9 

o 

o 

*•* 

g 

■g 

!i< 

a 

iJ 

^ 

JS 

#• 

1 

00 

? 

a 
£ 

£ 

c 

S 

NOTES 

I       Sni 

^ 

<S^ 

IN 

f*^ 

58 


IS  3427 :  1997 
lEC  298(1990) 


lEC 
298 


AMENDMENT  1 


Page  5 
1    Scope 

Replace  the  fourth  paragraph  by  the  following: 

Components  contained  in  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  are  to  be  designed 
and  tested  in  accordance  with  their  various  relevant  standards.  This  standard  supplements 
the  standards  for  the  individual  components  regarding  their  installation  in  switchgear  and 
controlgear. 

The  notes  remain  unchanged. 

Page  11 

5    Design  and  construction 

Replace  the  first  paragraph  by  the  following: 

Metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  shall  be  designed  so  that  normal  service, 
inspection  and  maintenance  operations,  determination  of  the  energized  or  de-energized 
state  of  the  main  circuit,  including  the  usual  checking  of  phase  sequence,  earthing  of 
connected  cables,  locating  of  cable  faults,  voltage  connected  cables  or  other  apparatus 
and  the  elimination  of  dangerous  electrostatic  charges,  can  be  carried  out  safely. 


Page  12 

5.3.2    Earthing  of  the  enclosure 

Replace  the  second  paragraph  by  the  following: 

59 


IS  34Z7 :  1997 
lEC  298(1990) 


An  earthing  conductor  shall  be  provided  extending  the  whole  length  of  the  metal-enclosed 
switchgear  and  controlgear.  The  current  density  in  the  earthing  corKluctor.  if  of  copper, 
shall  under  the  specified  earth  fault  conditions  not  exceed  200  Afmmr  for  a  rated  duration 
of  short-circuit  of  1  s,  and  125  A/mm^  for  a  rated  duration  of  short-circuit  of  3  s.  However, 
its  cross-section  shall  be  not  less  than  30  mm^.  It  shall  be  terminated  by  an  adequate 
terminal  intended  for  connection  to  the  earth  system  of  the  installation. 


Replace  the  last  paragraph  by  the  following: 


The  metallic  parts  of  a  withdrawable  part  which  are  normally  earthed  shall  also  remain 
earth-connected  In  the  test  and  disconnected  positions  under  the  prescribed  conditions  for 
the  isolating  distance  (see  lEC  129)  and  also  in  any  intermediate  position. 

Add  at  the  end  the  following  new  paragraph: 

The  metallic  parts  of  a  removable  part  which  are  normally  earthed  shall  remain  earth- 
connected  until  the  removable  part  is  separated  from  the  switchgear 


Page  14 

5.101.1     Protection  of  persons  against  approach  to  live  parts  and  contact 
with  moving  parts 

Modify  the  title  as  follows: 

5.101.1  Protection  of  persons  against  access  to  hazardous  parts  and  protection 
of  the  equipment  against  solid  foreign  objects 

Replace  the  text  of  this  subclause  and  table  1  by  the  following: 

Refer  to  lEC  694. 

5.101.2  Protection  of  equipment  against  external  effects 
Modify  the  title  as  follows: 

5. 1 01 .2  Protection  against  ingress  of  water 
Replace  the  text  of  this  subclause  by  the  following: 
Refer  to  lEC  694. 

5.101.3  Protection  of  equipment  against  mechanical  damage 
Replace  the  title  as  follows: 

5.101.3    Protection  of  equipment  against  mechanical  impact  under  normal  service 
conditions 

60 


IS  3427: 1W7 
lEC  298(1990) 


Replace  the  text  of  this  subclause  by  the  following: 

Refer  to  lEC  694. 

5.101.4    Internal  fault 

Replace,  on  page  15,  the  penultimate  paragraph  by  the  following: 

If  such  measures  are  considered  to  be  insufficient,  then  a  test  in  accordance  with 
annex  AA  nray  l>e  agreed  between  the  manufacturer  and  the  user.  This  test  covers  only 
the  case  of  a  fault  resulting  in  an  arc  occurring  entirely  in  air.  or  in  another  insulating  gas 
within  the  enclosure,  or  within  components  having  housings  which  form  part  of  the 
enclosure.  In  order  to  Xake  into  account  possible  failure  in  other  conH)onents.  practical 
steps  shall  be  taken  for  the  safety  of  pemons  who  may  be  in  the  vicinity  of  the  switchgear. 


Page  16 

5. 1 02.3  Tightness  of  gas-filled  compartments 

Replace  the  first  paragraph  by  the  following: 

The  manufacturer  shall  state  the  pressure  system  used  and  the  permissible  gas-lealcage 
rate  for  the  gas-filled  compartments  (refer  to  lEC  694). 

5. 1 02.4  Covers  and  doors 

Replace,  on  page  17,  item  b)  In  the  third  paragraph  by  the  following: 

b)  those  which  need  to  be  opened  for  the  normal  purposes  of  operation  (removable 
covers,  doors).  These  shall  not  require  tools  for  their  opening  or  removal.  For  the  safety 
of  persons  they  shall  be  provided  with  suitable  interlocldng  devices  and/or  loclcing 
facilities  (e.g.  provisions  for  padloci^s  or  for  lx>iting). 

Add  the  following  note  after  the  last  paragraph: 

NOTE  -  Attention  should  b#  pakt  to  tho  roquiromont  (if  any)  to  carry  out  oporation  of  tho  twitcfiing  dovicot 
without  voltago/curront  on  tho  main  circuit  with  doors  and  covars  opan  as  part  of  tha  maintananca 
procaduras. 

Page  17 

5.103.1    General 

Replace  the  first  paragraph  by  the  following: 

Partitions  and  shutters  shall  provide  at  least  a  degree  of  protection  as  specified  in 
lEC  694. 

Replace  Item  b)  in  the  second  paragraph  by  the  following: 

61 


IS  3427 :  1W7 
lEC  29S(1990) 

b)  apart  from  mechanical  strength,  the  Insulating  material  shall  withstand  likewise  the 
power-frequency  test  voltages  specified  in  item  a).  The  appropriate  test  methods  given 
in  lEC  243-1  should  be  applied; 

Add,  on  pag0 1 8  •  f/ie  following  to  the  penultimate  paragraph: 

Means  shall  be  provided  to  ensure  the  reliable  operation  of  the  shutters,  e.g.  by  a 
mechanical  drive,  where  the  movement  of  the  shutters  is  positively  driven  by  the 
movement  of  the  removable  part. 

Replace  the  last  paragraph  by  the  following: 

Ift  for  maintenance  or  test  purposes,  there  Is  a  requirement  that  one  set  of  fixed  contacts 
shall  be  accessible  through  opened  shutters,  all  the  shutters  shall  be  provided  with  means 
of  locidng  them  independently  in  the  closed  position  or  it  shall  be  possible  to  insert  a 
screen  to  prevent  the  live  set  of  fixed  contacts  being  exposed.  When,  for  maintenance  or 
test  purposes,  the  automatic  closing  of  shutters  is  made  inoperative  in  order  to  retain  them 
in  the  open  position,  it  shall  not  be  possible  to  retum  the  switching  device  to  the  service 
position  until  the  automatic  operation  of  the  shutters  is  restored.  This  restoration  may  be 
achieved  by  the  action  of  returning  the  swKchIng  device  to  the  service  position. 


Add  the  following  sentence  to  the  note: 

Nofi-fiMUliic  thuttvrt  thall  comply  with  th«  requir«m«ntt  for  non-metalfic  partitiont. 

Page  19 

5.106    Interlocks 

Replace,  In  item  a),  the  third  paragraph  by  the  following: 

It  shall  not  be  possible  to  close  the  circuit*breaker,  switch  or  contactor  in  the  service 
position  unless  any  auxiliary  circuits  associated  with  the  automatic  opening  of  these 
devices  are  connected.  Conversely,  it  shall  not  be  possible  to  disconnect  the  auxiliary 
circuits  with  the  circuit-breaker  closed  in  the  service  positton. 

Item  b),  first  paragraph: 

Replace  this  paragraph  by  the  following: 

Interlocks  shall  be  provkled  to  prevent  operation  of  disconnectors  under  conditions 
other  than  those  they  are  intended  for  (see  lEC  129).  The  operatton  of  a  disconnector 
shall  not  be  possible  unless  the  associated  circuit-breaker,  switch  or  contactor  is  in  the 
open  positton. 

Add  the  following  paragraph  before  the  note: 

If  earthing  of  a  circuit  is  provided  by  a  circuit-breaker  in  series  wHh  an  earthing  switch, 
the  earthing  switch  shall  be  interlocked  with  the  circuit-breaker  and  the  circuit-breaker 
shall  be  secured  against  unintenttonal  opening. 


62 


IS  3427:1997 
lEC  29S(1990) 


Page  20 

6    Typ«Mtt8 

Replace,  on  page  21.  the  existing  Items  f)  and  k)  by  the  following  new  Items  f)  and  k): 

f)    Tests  to  vsrif y  the  protection  of  persons  against  access  to  subciauM 

hazardous  parts  and  the  protection  of  the  equipment 

against  soiid  foreign  objects:  6. 1 03 

k)  Tests  to  verify  the  protection  of  the  equipment  against 

mechanical  inrn^act:  6.1 09 

Page  25 

6.5.1 02    Tasfs  on  earthing  circuits 

Replace  the  second  paragraph  by  the  following: 

The  short-circuit  current  tests  with  earthing  devices  shall  be  carried  out  three-phase,  with 
further  single-phase  tests  if  necessary  in  order  to  verify  the  performance  of  all  the  circuits 
that  are  intended  to  provide  the  connection  between  the  earthing  device  and  earth. 

Page  26 

6. 1 02.1    Switching  devices  and  removable  parts 

Replace  this  subclause  by  the  foltowing: 

Switching  devices  and  withdrawable  parts  shall  be  operated  50  times,  and  removable 
parts  inserted  25  times  and  removed  25  times  to  verify  satisfactory  operation  of  the 
equipment. 

6. 1 03    Verification  of  the  degree  of  protectton 

Replace  the  title  and  text  of  this  subclause  as  well  as  table  2  by  the  following: 

6. 1 03    Verification  of  the  IP-coding 

Refer  to  lEC  694. 

6. 1 05    Qas  tightness  tests  of  gas-filled  compartments 

Replace  the  first  sentence  by  the  foltowing: 

Refer  to  lEC  694. 

Page  27 

6. 1 07    Weatherproofing  tests 


63 


IS  3427 :  1*97 
lEC  29S(1990) 

Replace  this  subclause  by  the  following; 

When  agreed  between  manufacturer  and  user,  a  weatherproofing  test  can  be  made  on 
metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  intended  for  outdoor  use.  A  recommended 
method  Is  given  in  lEC  694. 

6. 1 08    Arcing  due  to  internal  fault 

Replace  the  second  paragraph  by  the  following: 

The  test  procedure  represents  the  effects  of  a  fault  resulting  in  an  arc  occurring  entirely  In 
air  or  another  insulating  gas  within  the  enclosure  when  the  doors  and  covers  are  closed. 
The  test  procedure  also  covers  the  particular  case  of  a  fault  occurring  in  solid  insulation 
where  this  insulation  is  both  applied  during  assembly  on  site  of  the  metal-enclosed 
switchgear  (e.g.  tape)  and  does  not  comprise  prefabricated  insulating  parts.  Faults  in  ail 
other  solid  insulation  and  in  liquid  insulation  are  not  covered  by  the  test  procedure. 


Add  the  following  new  subclause: 

6. 1 09    Mechanical  impact  tests 

Refer  to  lEC  694. 

Page  29 

7. 1 04    Gas  tightness  tests  of  gas-filled  compartments 

Replace  this  subclause  by  the  following: 

Refer  to  lEC  694. 

Page  35 

Annex  AA 

Table  AA.2  -  Examples  of  measures  limiting  the  consequences  of  internal  faults 

Add  to  the  table  the  following  fifth  example: 

-     Transfer  of  a  withdrawable  part  to  or  from  tha  tarvica  position  only  whan  tha  front  door  is  closed 

AA.1    Introduction 

Replace  the  first  paragraph  by  the  following: 

Internal  faults  inside  metal-enclosed  switchgear  and  controlgear  can  occur  in  a  number  of 
locations  and  can  cause  various  physical  phenomena. 


64 


IS  3427:  If  »7 
lEC  29S(1990) 


AA.3   T0st  arrtno^mtnts 

Replace  this  subclause  by  the  following: 

The  choice  of  the  functional  unitf,  their  numk)er,  their  equipment  and  their  position  in  the 
room,  a$  well  as  the  piece  of  initiation  of  the  arc  are  to  be  decided  between  manufacturer 
and  user.  In  each  case,  the  following  points  should  be  observed: 

-  functional  units  of  representative  sizes  should  be  tested; 

-  representative  compartments  of  different  designs  should  be  tested; 

-  the  mounting  conditions  should  be  as  close  as  possible  to  those  of  normal  service. 
The  room  should  be  represented  at  least  by  the  floor,  the  ceiling,  two  walls  perpen- 
dicular to  each  other  and  simulated  cable  access  ways; 

NOTE  -  If  th9  twitdiQ^ar  it  installed  in  combinatioo  with  •  special  •xhautt  ^anoai,  leading  tha  fat  out  of 
tha  roofln.  no  room  mock-up  it  nacattary. 

-  the  functional  units  should  be  fully  equipped.  Mock-ups  of  internal  components  are 
permitted,  provided  they  have  the  same  volume  and  external  material  as  the  original 
items.  8ut)clause  5.101.4  should  be  taken  into  account; 

-  the  test  unit  shall  be  earthed  at  the  point  provided; 

*  in  the  case  of  gas-filled  compartments  the  test  should  be  made  with  the  original  gas 
at  the  rated  filling  pressure. 

NOTE  -  At  an  altamativa  and  with  tha  agraamant  of  tha  manufacturar.  tha  tatt  may  k>a  carriad  out  with  air. 
but  it  hat  to  t>a  takan  into  account  that  tha  prattura  rita  will  ba  diffarant. 

-  the  arc  shall  be  initiated  in  a  way  that  is  representative  of  faults  which  could  occur 
under  service  conditions. 

Page  36 

AA.4.1    General 

Replace  this  sutKlause  by  the  following: 

The  tests  on  metal-enctosed  swltchgear  and  controlgear  should  be  carried  out  three- 
phase.  The  short-circuit  current  applied  during  the  test  conresponds  to  the  rated  short-time 
withstand  current.  It  may  t>e  tower,  if  specially  required  by  the  manufacturer. 

Page  37 

AA.S.2    Arc  initiation 

Replace  the  first  two  paragraphs  and  the  note  by  the  following: 

The  arc  should  preferably  be  initiated  between  the  phases  by  means  of  a  metal  wire  of 
about  0,5  mm  diameter  or,  in  the  case  ol  segregated  phase  conductors,  between  one 
phase  and  earth.  If  the  application  of  such  a  wire  is  not  practicable  in  case  of  arc  initiation 
in  a  component,  it  is  permissible  as  an  alternative  to  initiate  the  fault  by  other  methods.  In 
this  case,  the  method  chosen  shall  be  agreed  between  the  manufacturer  and  the  user. 


65 


IS  3427 :  I9fj 
lEC  29S(1990) 

In  functional  units  wherci  the  live  parts  are  covered  by  solid  insulating  material,  the  arc 
should  be  initiated  between  two  adjacent  phases  or,  in  the  case  of  segregated  phase 
conductors,  between  one  phase  and  earth  at  the  following  locations: 

i)    at  gaps  in  the  insulation  of  insulation-embedded  parts; 

ii)  by  perforation  at  insulated  Joints  made  on  site  when  prefabricated  insulating  parts 
are  not  used. 

Except  for  case  ii).  solid  insulation  shall  not  be  perforated.  The  infeed  from  the  supply 
circuit  shall  be  three-phase  to  allow  the  fault  to  become  three-phase. 

AA.5.3.2    Aoe0sslbmy  Typ0  A 

Page  38 

AA.5.3.3   AecesslbUlty  Type  B 

Add  in  both  subclauses  In  the  second  paragraphs  the  following  new  second  sentence: 


Care  should  be  taken  when  positioning  the  indicators  to  take  into  account  the  possibility  of 
hot  gas  escaping  in  slant  directtons. 


AA.6   Aasetament  of  the  teat 

Replace  the  first  paragraph  by  the  following: 

The  following  criteria  shoukf  be  used  to  record  the  results  of  the  internal  fauH  tests. 

Delete,  under  criterion  No.  2,  the  words:  'trade  of  metal  or  plastic'. 

Page  39 

AA.7  Test  report 

Replace  the  second  dash  by  the  following  two  new  dashes: 

-  Arrangement  of  the  test  oonnecttons. 

-  Point  and  method  of  initiatton  of  the  internal  fault. 

Replace  the  penultimate  dash  by  the  following: 

-  Assessment  of  the  test  results,  including  a  record  of  the  observattons  in  accordance 
with  AA.6. 


66 


IS  3427:1997 
lEC  29g(1990) 


Pages  43. 44  and  45 

D0M»  anMx  CC. 

Paget  53.  54.  55.  56.  57  and  58 

DeMe  anrwx  QQ. 


67 


