IRA Hd IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


uaa ara, Fort sik factor 
amt 1 ferarfater 
( TET FRAT ) 


Project Planning, Monitoring 
and Control 
Part 1 Methodology 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 03.100.40 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEGE TH AMT, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2020 Price Group 9 


Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Management and Productivity Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in year 1998. This has been revised to bring it in line with the latest practices, 
experience gain and to incorporate modern tools and techniques. 


This standard deals with the project planning, monitoring and control methodology using the technique of network 
analysis. 


A project is described as a onetime activity with an identifiable beginning and an identifiable end unlike other 
routine activities that are repetitive. A project has a well defined purpose and scope and a definite set of separate 
but interrelated and interdependent activities which must be completed to achieve the objectives for which the 
project is instituted. It has a well defined project product or service including performance criteria and well 
defined completion criteria. For example, the construction of a steel plant or the development of a computer 
software system is a project but its subsequent operation is not a project. 


Project implementation is preceded by a project formulation and a feasibility phase. The recognitions of need for 
the project may be environment based originating from customers, vendors or government sources. It may also 
be received or initiates internally by the top or senior management to channelize opportunities of potential market 
demand, availability of more cost-effective technologies, or more effective utilization of organization resources. 
The decision to implement the project is made on the basis of a utilization study which may technological, 
economic, environmental and other operational aspects of the project. The technical assessment of potential project 
designs is followed by estimation of projected cash flows during the life cycle of the project. The techniques of 
discounted cash flow and risk analysis may be used to determine the economic viability of the project. In addition 
to financial costs and benefits, other social and environmental factors may be taken into consideration during the 
feasibility study. 

IS/ISO 21500 provides guidance on project management, from concept to commissioning. Therefore, the focus of 


this standard is on the implementation phase of the project using network techniques. It covers project planning, 
monitoring, and control including termination procedures. 


Project network techniques as used now have developed since the mid 1950’s. These developments include both 
activity-on-arrow and activity-on-node systems. The technique as developed aimed at improving the ability to 
plan and control complex engineering projects and was called the Critical Path Method (CPM). Probabilistic 
elements appropriate to the research and development (R&D) area were also included in a modified technique 
called Programme Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT). 


Activity-on-arrow network were quite popular in the manual processing of network with the increasing use of 
computer for processing, activity-on—node or precedence networks have now become more popular, a number of 
ready-made software packages are available for use on computer which provide support not only for planning but 
also for updating and monitoring of progress from time to time. 


The techniques have since been extended to handle resources, uncertainty of outcome as well as duration and 
many other specific applications. 


Systems based on network analysis provide various advantages over other conventional methods of planning and 
control. These advantages may include the following: 


a) Clear definition of the scope of the project and the complex interrelationships between its constituent 
activities; 

b) Better coordination between different organizations within the project and provision of information about 
organization’s progress and future plan to the others; 

c) Ease of preparing schedules of activities and adjusting these schedules to last minute developments; 

d) Ready means of reviewing the project and exercising control over time, resources and costs; and 


e) Clear identification of critical and risk areas, plus an excellent model for generating ‘what-if? scenarios 
for making management decisions. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


PROJECT PLANNING, MONITORING AND CONTROL 
PART 1 METHODOLOGY 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) deals with the basic aspects of 
project planning, monitoring and control using various 
techniques including network. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No./ Title 
Other Publication 
7337 : 2010 Glossary of terms in project 


management 


14580 (Part 2) : 2006 Use of network analysis for 
project management: Part 2 


Use of graphic techniques 


ISO 21500 : 2012 Guidance on 


management 


project 


SECTION 1 PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT OVERVIEW 


3 GENERAL 


3.1 A project is a unique set of processes consisting 
of coordinated and controlled activities with start 
and finish dates, undertaken to achieve an objective. 
Achievement of the project objective requires 
deliverables conforming to specific requirements, 
including multiple constraints such as time, cost and 
resources. 


3.2 The project life cycle spans the period from the 
start of the project to its planned end or its termination. 
The phases are divided by decision points, which can 
vary depending on the organization environment. The 
decision points facilitate project governance. By the 
end of the last phase, the project should have provided 


all deliverables. To manage a project throughout its 
life cycle, project management processes should be 
employed for the project as a whole, or for individual 
phase for each team or sub-project. 


3.3 Governance is the framework by which an 
organization is directed and controlled. Project 
governance includes, but is not limited to, those areas 
of organizational governance that are specifically 
related to project activities. 


3.4 The purpose of this section is to highlight important 
aspects relating to project types, project organization, 
project management, and familiarization and training. 


3.5 Since a substantial portion of a project is typically 
executed through contracts, the proper management of 
contracts is critical to the successful implementation 
of the project. The contract system and terms and 
conditions of contract agreed between the client and the 
contractor are also important. The technical, financial, 
legal and managerial basis of the contract must be 
reflected accurately in project planning, implementation 
and control. 


4 PROJECT TYPES AND FEATURES 


Projects could be categorized in a number of different 
ways according to requirements such as, by,: 


a) time frame (for example, long term, medium term 
and short term); 


b) cost (small, medium, major and mega); 


c) purpose or function ( for example, social 
infrastructure projects such schools, hospitals; 
economic infrastructure project such as roads, 
railways, ports, telecommunications, power, gas 
and water, etc); 


d) production of good (for example, steel, cement, 
petroleum, fertilizers, etc); 


e) sectors of the economy (for example, agriculture, 
industry, mining, transport, education, health care, 
housing, etc); 

f) ownership (for example, public, private, joint 
sectors, etc); and 

g) specific purpose (for example, export oriented, 
research and development, modernization, 
replacement and renewal, etc). 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


5 PROJECT ORGANIZATIONS 


5.1 As projects are unique, so are the organizations in 
which they are carried out. All organizations have their 
own styles and cultures that influence how the project 
is implemented. It is helpful to know and understand 
the organizational structure and the culture of the entity 
where project is being executed. 


5.2 The project may be governed by a project board/ 
steering committee that comprises of senior stakeholders 
as well as the project manager. The role of this board/ 
committee is to provide appropriate direction to the 
project team through decisions beyond the authority of 
the project manager. 


5.3 The level of authority, the project manager enjoys 
is denoted by the type of organization. The project 
organization structure could be one of the 3 types: 


a) Functional organization structure — In these 
types of organization structures, project manager 
is a separate entity and the various functional 
departments like finance, engineering, construction, 
etc. provide service to the project manager. 


b) Matrix organization structure — A coordinator/ 
manager is identified for each project, which 
operates through the functional department, 
and has overall responsibility for the project. 
Project staff is drawn from corporate functional 
departments and assigned to the project as a team. 
This team may be supported by outside personnel, 
for example, consultants, temporary staff, etc. 


c) Projectised organization structure — Under 
the projectised structure a new self-contained 
interactive organizational setup is created headed 
by a project manager and separated from corporate 
functional departments. The project manager has 
complete authority and control. Organizational 
resources are dedicated to the project and are 
controlled solely by the project manager. 


A partial projectised structure could be used in which 
crucial project functions are assigned to the project 
manager and support functions are performed with in 
corporate functional departments. 


NOTE — It is also sometimes called “Task Force Organization 
Structure’. 


5.4 Factors to be taken into account for developing a 
project organization are as follows: 


a) First of all define an ideal organization so that 
weaknesses of existing organization could be 
foreseen. 

b) The project organization should be adaptable to 
changes as the project moves from phase to phase. 

c) The number and type of personnel and their prime 


function, authority and responsibility required 
should be clearly defined. 


d) The current organizational capabilities and the 
need to employ consultants should be assessed. 


e) The motivation and commitment of project groups 
should be ensured. 


6 PROJECT MANAGEMENT 


6.1 Project management is the application of methods, 
tools, techniques and competencies to a project. Project 
management includes the integration of various phases 
of the project life-cycle. Project manager could be one 
person in the organization, a head of the management 
team or a management contractor. The aim of project 
management is to successfully achieve the objectives 
of the project by completing it as per scope statement 
of the project, on schedule, within cost and fulfilling 
performance-criteria utilizing prescribed resources and 
within given constrains. 


6.2 The principles for project management should be 
as follows: 


a) It should be forward looking. 


b) Decisions should be made at the lowest feasible 
level consistent with responsibility and authority. 
Decisions by managers at senior levels should 
be based on the principle of management by 
exception. 


c) Project managers and project teams should be 
selected and trained based on job requirements 
and the ability to manage. 


d) The authority should always match with project 
responsibilities at all levels. 


6.3 The role and responsibilities of a project manager 
should be as follows: 


a) To lead and manage project activities and 
completion of project deliverables. 


b) To help formulate objectives and policies for the 
project and operationalise them to ensure that 
these are met. 


c) To ensure availability and effective utilization of 
project resources. 


d) To prepare and ensure approval of project plans by 
appropriate stakeholders. 


e) To devise systems and procedures and define 
the roles and responsibilities of the project 
stakeholders. 


f) To monitor and control progress, performance 
quality and cost. 


g) To ensure safety standards and conformity to legal 
requirements. 


h) To determine the information needs of the stake- 
holders and to ensure establishment and operation 
of information, communication and reporting 
systems. 


j) To motivate the project team/ individuals to 
achieve their goals. 


k) To serve as the prime point of contact for the 
project. 


6.4 Project management should include the following 
functions: 


a) Define the scope, work content and deliverables 
of the project. 


b) Develop time schedules, budgets and identify key 
milestones. 


c) Prepare implementation plans and involve all 
concerned project stakeholders ensuring that all 
project components and elements are interrelated, 
integrated and coordinated. 


d) To define various base lines as a reference basis 
for comparison. 


e) Develop a suitable project organization. 


f) Decide strategies to get the project activities 
executed. 


g) Adapt the organization as the project progresses. 


h) Define contracting strategy and policy, prepare 
the contract documents and specify contractor’s 
responsibilities and administer them. 


j) Design monitoring and change control system for 
project performance measurement, identification 
of variances and subsequent corrective actions. 
Also, define methods and procedures to manage 
changes from project’s initial stage to its close-up. 


k) Design reporting systems and ensure their proper 
operation. 


m) Specify training requirements and make 


appropriate strategies. 
n) Identify, analyse and plan responses to risks. 


6.5 Procurement and Contract Management 


6.5.1 The ‘procurement’, includes the processes 
required to purchase or acquire products and 
services in order to complete the project. ‘Plan 
procurement’ and ‘select suppliers’ are the two main 
rocesses to achieve this. For administering contract 
‘administer contracts’ process is used, which is also 
termed as ‘contract management’ A contract, in the 
context of project management, is an agreement 
enforceable by law between two or more parties 
for procuring goods and services. Normally money 
is exchanged for the goods and services procured. 
Procurement management includes the processes 
necessary to purchase or acquire products, services, 
or results needed from outside the project team. It 
also includes the contract management and change 
control processes required to develop and administer 
contracts or purchase orders issued by authorized 
project team members. 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


6.5.2 The contracts are basically of the following types 
based on method of payment: 


a) Item rate contract — It is an agreement requiring 
the completion of different items of project work 
according to bills quantities, specifications of 
quality and rates for unit quantity of work of each 
item. 


b) Percentage rate contract — It provides for 
reimbursement of actual costs of different items of 
project work plus payment of an agreed percentage 
of the cost as profit. 


c) Lump sum contract — Under this, the payment is 
made for the project as a whole either at a fixed 
price or at a fixed price plus a pre-determined 
incentive fee for superior work. 

d) Cost plus contract — It provides reimbursement 
of actual cost plus either a fixed fee proportionate 
to the project work, or a predetermined fee as a 
bonus for superior work. 


6.5.3 The contracts can also be classified based on the 
following integrated delivery methods: 

a) Turn key contract — Under this, the contractor is 
responsible for setting up a plant or facility and 
putting it into operations to achieve prescribed 
performance standards. 

b) Build own operate (BOO) — An agent is granted 
the right to develop, finance, design, build, own, 
operate and maintain a project for the client. The 
agent owns the project and retains the revenue and 
risk for a specified period. 

c) Build own operate transfer (BOOT) — An agent 
is granted the right to develop, finance, design, 
build, own, operate and maintain a project for the 
client. The agent owns the project and retains the 
revenue and risk for a specified period after which 
the ownership is transferred to the client. 

NOTE — It is also referred as ‘Build Own Transfer (BOT)’. 


6.5.4 Standard procedures for use during the life cycle 
of the project should be developed for the following: 


a) ‘Make-or—buy decision’, based on the capacity 
and capability of the organization; 


b) Pre-tender planning; 

c) Pre-qualification if agencies and suppliers; 

d) Bidders conference; 

e) Invitation and receipt of tender; 

f) Opening ,evaluation and negotiation of tender; 
g) Award of contract; 

h) Release of work orders, designs and drawings; 
j) Termination/closing and off-loading contract; 


k) Measurements, methodologies of the tendered 
items and payments to contractors; 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


m) Modifications and changes in contracts; and 


n) Monitoring, reporting and reviewing progress and 
performance of contracts. 


6.5.5 Standard form of contract, including general and 
special clauses and conditions, related documents and 
methods for each types of contract should be developed. 


7 FAMILIARIZATION AND TRAINING 


7.1 After the basic project management and control 
systems have been developed and agreed, all those 
who have to participate in the project should be 
appropriately familiarized and trained to operate/use 
them. This would help in creating team environment, 
establishing lines of communication, breaking barriers 
between organizations and reducing confusion and 
misunderstanding as to who does what, when and why. 


7.2 In addition to project specific training, 
supplementary educational courses may be organized 
to provide background information in the application 
of network based techniques. 


SECTION 2 PLANNING THE 
PROJECT 


8 GENERAL 


8.1 This section deals with the planning for the execution 
of the project in order to ensure timely completion of 
the project and optimal utilization of project resources 
to avoid time and cost over-runs. 


8.2 The owners/corporate management should outline 
the scope of work, defining what is required, the global 
objectives, the enterprise’s police, boundary conditions, 
overall timescales to be met and levels of resourcing 
and funding generally available. It is the responsibility 
of the project team to decide how the work will be 
conducted within these constraints. 


8.3 Planning is the process by which a manager looks 
to the future and discovers alternative courses of action. 
A Project plan should give detail about product/work 
(quantity and quality), timescales, resources, cost 
and organization, also monitoring and control. It will 
involve: 


a) Conscious and explicit awareness of the ultimate 
corporate goals; 


b) Establishment of project objectives; 
c) Articulation and evaluation of alternatives; 
d) Selection of most suitable alternative; and 


e) Identification of activities required to achieve the 
objectives. 


9 LEVELS OF PLANNING 


Plans are prepared for use at various levels of the 
organization and by the relevant stakeholders. In a 
typical organization, the different levels in this context 
can be viewed as, 


a) corporate management, 
b) project management, and 


c) operational management. 


9.1 To cater to the needs of different project management 
levels, there may be hierarchy of plans, which may 
consist of the following: 


a) Project schedule — Project schedule relates 
specifically to the project and indicates the plans 
of execution of all the activities envisaged in a 
project. Project’s relationship with the environment 
is indicated in the form of external dependencies 
(interface milestones), but activities outside the 
project are not reflected in the project plan. The 
project schedule is the basic reference document 
for all the members of the project team though its 
approval may involve the project management as 
well as the corporate management. Upon approval 
from relevant stakeholders, wherever necessary 
the project schedule is considered as the “Baseline 
Schedule’ and would not be revised without 
written approval. 


b 


wm 


Unit/facility/phase-wise schedule — A project is 
usually composed of a set of units, facilities and 
chronological stages and may be divided into 
phases. A detailed set of activities leading to the 
end of each unit/ facility/ phase form a “baseline 
schedule’ for that unit/ facility/ phase, on which 
further development of the project is planned. 
In case of phase-wise execution, to that extent, 
the project plan prepared at the beginning of 
the project is tentative, except for the first phase 
plan which is prepared in detail; subsequent 
phase plans need to be reviewed and detailed on 
attaining significant progress in the earlier phase. 
For large projects, Phase-wise Schedule may 
preferably be prepared at the beginning of each 
phase based on all relevant information available 
at that time. 


c) Detailed schedule — for some facilities/ 
sub-projects — It may be useful to record more 
details than what appears in the project schedule 
and Unit/Facility/Phase-wise Schedules. Thus, 
the detailed schedule would form a subset of 
the Unit/Facility/Phase-wise Schedules. Sub- 
project may constitute of packages where overall 
responsibility lies with the supplier, for example, 
in a typical large project the setting up of water 
system or cooling system or power systems, etc. 
are generally considered as packages. 


d) Functional schedules or individual work plan — 
Here, the activities of an individual functional 
team are scheduled to track each deliverable 
prepared by the team and scheduling the activities 
by each stage (milestone) till completion. Such 
plans are useful to allocate precise responsibilities 
to each member or group of members of the team 
for the activities of the project. 


e) Equipment loading schedule — Equipment 
loading schedule indicates the allocation schedule 
of individual equipment to various activities from 
time to time. When the equipment is not allocated 
to any activity, it is indicated as unallocated. 


There could be situations where the project activity 
cannot be initiated unless the specific equipment is 
available at that time. In such cases, it might require 
preparation of equipment loading schedule at the start 
of the project schedule itself. 


10 COMPONENTS OF PROJECT PLANS 


A project plan would provide information about 
scope, technical requirements, schedule, resource, 
cost risk aspects of the project. All these components 
are interrelated and should be in agreement with each 
other. The project schedule correlates through technical 
resource and risk component of project. 


a) Scope — The scope of the project needs to be 
defined and decompose it. Understand work 
required to be done and define activities. 


b 


wm 


Technical/work plans — It focuses on the technical 
dependencies and the work content of the project, 
the relationship between the work components 
and their plan of execution. This includes: 


1) Identify internal and external dependencies 
on activities and define logical relationship 
amongst activities which may be represented 
in the form of an activity network. 


2 


wa 


Identify the resources required for each 
activity. 

3) Provide a time schedule of activities consistent 
with resource requirements and the total 


resources available to the project. 


wa 


4 


wa 


Identify the milestones in projects and stages 
for major assessment and review. 


5 


wa 


Identify internal and external dependencies on 
activities. 


They may be prepared separately for each level of 
planning and plans at each level must be consistent 
with each other. Consistency must be maintained 
after every review when the plans are revised. 


c 


Resource plans — Resource plans specify the 
resource requirements of the project during 
different periods and how they are planned to be 
made available. It would indicate, 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


1) how resources would be obtained and 


allocated. 


2) the work schedule for each individual/ group 
resource. 


3) methods of disposition of excess resources, if 
any. 

Resource plan should be derived from the technical 

plan and not vice versa. It should be consistent 

with the technical plan at all levels of planning. 


Resources should be indicated in physical 
quantities for each category as well as in terms of 
cost. 


d) Quality plans — Quality plans focus on the 
quality characteristics that need to be achieved in 
the products of the project and the procedures of 
quality control and quality assurance to ensure the 
achievement of these characteristics. 


Quality plan would indicate the required quality criteria 
for each end project and the relative priorities of those 
quality criteria related to the work plan. The quality 
characteristic must be measurable. 


Quality planning must cover at least the following 
topics: 

a) Agreement on quality with all concerned; 

b) Prevention, detection and rectification of faults; 


c) Setting appropriate and measurable quality criteria 
for each product; 


d) Establishment of systems and procedures to assess 
and demonstrate whether quality goals have been 
achieved; and 


e 


Resourcing of quality control activities. 


Activities to assure quality will form part of 
technical plans as well as resource plans. Thus the 
quality plans cannot be separated from technical 
and resource plans at the same planning level. 


Cost and cash flow plans — Cost and cash flow 
plans are required to make necessary financial 
provisions, and to exercise financial and cost 
control on the project. The cost estimate of each 
activity should be worked out from the standard 
unit cost and quantity of each resource category 
required by the activity. The cash flow plans can 
be derived by translating the technical plan into 
financial terms. 


e 


Performance budgeting is the technique used to relate 
the financial aspects of the project with its physical 
progress. It requires that for monitoring, physical 
progress must always be reported with financial 
progress and the two should be interrelated. 


Zero-base budgeting is the technique to ensure cost 
effectiveness of the project at every stage. It requires 
that the financial provisions of the project are to be 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


notionally reduced to zero-base at every budget review. 
The revised estimated benefits are justified against 
revised provisions for the remaining activities of the 
projects. 


11 STEPS IN PROJECT PLANING 


11.1 Planning of a typical project may follow the 
following steps: 


a) Identify the project objectives, scope and 
components — The planning of project would be 
to prepare a list of the objectives and components 
of the project. The components may be identified 
from project description and scope of work in 
work breakdown structure (WBS) of the project, 
which shows the work structure in a hierarchic 
way with estimated work quantum, revalidated in 
course of work progression. 


b) Identify the activities — This includes 
establishment of execution philosophy which 
will clearly identify responsibility matrix, 
procurement and implementation philosophy. 
Based on the execution philosophy finalized, the 
plan must identify all the activities necessary to 
achieve the objectives of the project. This can be 
shown in the form of a work breakdown structure. 
The work breakdown decomposes the project into 
its various components. Each component will be 
further broken down into its constituent activities 
in a hierarchic structure. 


c) Identify dependencies — Activities may 
be dependent on other activities (internal 
dependencies) or on resources outside the project 
(external dependencies). The internal and external 
dependencies for each activity may be recorded 
in the activity breakdown derived from the work 
breakdown Structure. 


d) Produce activity network — Once the activities and 
their dependencies have been identified they can 
be represented in the form of an activity network 
arranging them in logical sequence. Either an 
activity-on-arrow or a precedence network may be 
used for the purpose. For large projects, multilevel 
networks may be produced. At the project level, 
a ‘Master Control Network’ will give only an 
overview of the organization of activity. The 
activities included in the master control network 
will be at much higher level of hierarchy than 
the lowest level in the activity breakdown. The 
detailed activities would be included in the detailed 
networks prepared for each stage of the project 
Most of the projects are executed with a definitive 
time frame with pre-defined start and finish dates. 
However, in case the project time frame and 
duration is left to be decided at the planning phase 
based on resource and other environmental factors, 
in that case, the initial network will not show 
planned start and finish dates for the activities, 


which would be determined later after the time and 
resource analysis. 


e) Determine time and resource requirement of 


activities — The next step would be to estimate 
the normal expected duration and the normal 
resource requirement of each activity to achieve 
within the desired duration. But, before starting 
to estimate it is necessary to classify the project 
resources into resource types. The resource type 
may be classified in such a way that the individual 
resources within a type are interchangeable and 
any individual of a resource type could be assigned 
to an activity requiring that type. 


At this stage, the most efficient way of performing 
the activity should be selected without regard 
to the availability of resources or the clash of 
resources with other activities. This is the best 
starting point as the clash of resources can be 
resolved later during resources analysis. Estimates 
may be produced using algorithm, an estimating 
tool or simply on the basis on the part experience. 
The estimates at the beginning of the project may 
not be accurate and may need to be revised at 
every review. 


Time analysis of the network (Scheduling) — 
Time analysis (Scheduling) determines the time 
related characteristics of the project namely, 
estimated project duration, earliest and latest start 
and finish times of activities, activities’ floats, etc. 
All software project management tools perform 
analysis automatically. Time analysis takes into 
consideration the internal and external dependency 
constraints of activities. Results of time analysis 
are called the ‘Operation Plan’ of the project and 
form the baseline for resource and cost analysis. 
The operational plan can be displayed graphically 
in the form of bar chart. 


g) Resource and cost analysis — Operational plan is 


the first step in the process of planning the project. 
It provides numerous possibilities for scheduling 
the project activities. The activities with float 
could be started on the earliest start date, or they 
could be started on the latest start date or any 
time in between the two. But every scheduling 
portion may not be feasible from the point of view 
of resources. Sometimes the aggregate resources 
required by the scheduled activities may exceed 
the total available resources. Even if a schedule is 
feasible from the point of view of resources, it may 
not be the economical one. May be the duration 
of the project can be reduced by crashing the 
critical activities or staggering the activities with 
clash of resources may reduce the total resource 
requirement. These alternatives can be simulated 
using ‘Resource constrained project scheduling’. 
The final choice would depend on the evaluation 
of the alternatives with respect to the time duration 
and cost of the project. 


12 PROJECT PLANNING TECHNIQUES 


12.1 Bar Charts (Gantt Charts) 


12.1.1 In this type of chart, the time which an activity 
should take represented by a horizontal line, the length 
of the line being proportional to the time duration 
of the activity. In order that several activities can be 
represented on the same chart, a framework or ruling 
is setup, giving time flowing from left to right, the 
activities being listed from top to bottom as shown in 
Fig.1. The bar charts can be used both for depicting the 
plans as well as the progress of activities. 


12.1.2 However, the bar charts do not depict the 
precedence relationship between activities, though 
they are placed in time frame as per sequence of 
occurrence. The plans and progress are only indicated 
in terms of time; and work content of activities is not 
clear in the Traditional Bar chart. However, user can 
insert additional columns indicating ‘Duration’, ‘Start’, 
‘Finish’, ‘Quantity’, etc, to customize. 


12.2 Project (Work) Breakdown Structure 


A project can be broken down into its elements in a 
hierarchical structure such that in every step in the 
structure it is broken down into smaller and smaller 
elements. These elements could be the components/ 
products of the project or activities or a combination 
of the two. The activities can be grouped according to 
functional or administrative responsibility. 


12.2.1 Component/Product Breakdown Structure 


Component/product breakdown structure gives the 
product structure of the project in a hierarchical way, 
breaking down the project into component/product 
groups and finally into the individual components/ 
products at the lowest level of the hierarchy. 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


12.2.2 Activity Breakdown 


Components/products are produced by the performance 
of activities. The construction of a component/ product 
can also be further broken down into work packages 
and individual activities. The levels to which activities 
are broken down into their smaller constituents would 
depend on the level of detail required in the project plan 
for a manageable level of monitoring and control. 


One of the guidelines is to break down the activities 
to a level where they are independent of each other. 
Though this is usually the level of detail required in 
network based planning, further breakdown of larger 
activities is not ruled out. 


12.2.3 The work breakdown structure of a project is 
basically a combination of its product/components 
breakdown structure and the activity breakdowns of 
its constituent components/products. For a smaller 
project, the work breakdown structure may consist of a 
single level while for a larger project it may consist of 
multi-level structure. 


12.3 Network Techniques 


There are various types of network techniques in use 
depending of nature of the projects. The most common 
of the used techniques are Critical Path Method (CPM) 
and Programme Evaluation and Review Techniques 
(PERT), which are more or less identical, and, are 
commonly known by the name of Network Technique. 
The only difference being, that CPM uses deterministic 
time estimates while PERT uses probable time estimates 
for each activity. 


Depending on nature of the project, risk and uncertainty 
factors associated with various activities and also 
depending on occurrence of a possible succeeding 
activity among alternatives or even non-occurrence of 
any of them, based on result achieved in the preceding 


Fic. 1 BAR CHART (GANTT CHART) 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


activity, there are various other network techniques 
which are used in specific cases. They are not being 
in general use and being different in applications, have 
not been covered in this standard. 


The network technique makes use of a network to 
represent precedence relationships and to analyses 
various project characteristics. With various software 
based tools for network preparation in place, networks 
can now be generated in various forms of layout like 
Gantt Chart, Linked Bar Chart, Activity Precedence 
Diagrams and Tabular Reports. 


12.3.1 Precedence Networks 


Precedence networks are also known as activity-on- 
node networks. These networks use boxes or rectangles, 
referred as nodes, to represent activities and connect 
them with arrows to indicate dependencies. Using this 
representation, the precedence network for the project 
‘Design a Sales Leaflet’ would be as shown in Fig. 2. 


12.3.2 Time Estimates 


In order to plan the schedule of activities, it is necessary 
to estimate the time duration of each activity. The 
initial time estimate of an activity is called the ‘Normal 
Expected Duration’. The term ‘normal’ in this context 
means the normal level of resources and technology 
which the organization would use had the activity been 
executed in isolation with no clash of resources with 
any other activity. This duration is indicated in the 
‘Duration’ column in the data table part of the network 
plot. In the precedence networks, the activity duration 
is usually indicated in the left bottom corner of the 
activity node. 


Apart from natural ‘Finish to Start (FS)’ relationship 
dependency among activities, in the network logic 
there may be other logical relations among activities 
like ‘Start to Start (SS)’, ‘Finish to Finish (FF)’ and 
‘Start to Finish (SF)’. Many a times this dependencies 


are further linked with a dependency time defined as 
‘Lead’ or ‘Lag’ time that must elapse allowing partial 
overlaps or an imposed gap within logical chain of 
activities, which in turn controls the overall project 
time estimate. 


In the precedence networks, this dependency time may 
be different from the duration of the predecessor activity 
and is indicated as a subscript to the dependency arrow. 


12.3.3 Milestones in Project 


12.3.3.1 A milestone may be the completion of a 
phase or a significant stage in the phase of the project. 
Milestones usually represent the completion of a 
number of activities leading into a significant event. It 
may be useful to use a different notation to represent 
a milestone event in order to distinguish it from other 
events. The network software provides various symbols 
and colour options which can be used suitably for this 


purpose. 


12.3.3.2 In a precedence network, events do not exist, 
as such, but it is possible to represent a milestone by 
introducing a link activity of zero duration. 


12.3.4 Time Analysis 


The Time Analysis is carried out by the network 
software directly. After establishing activity durations 
and linking them logically, user has to ‘Schedule’ the 
network for time analysis. However, for conceptual 
clarity on how the analysis actually takes place, the 
following section will be useful. 


12.3.4.1 The time analysis is carried out in two stages, 
namely, the forward pass (a) and the backward pass (b). 
The following notations are used: 


t = Normal expected duration of activity ‘n’; 


2 
3 
ll 


= Early start time of activity ‘n’; 
EFT = Early finish time of activity ‘n’; 


DECIDE MGMT FINAL 
i CONTENTS RESHARGH f WRITING | „| APPROVAL , COMBINE , APPROVAL 
MGMT 
DESIGN APPROVAL 
>|. HEADINGS , ILLULSTRATIONS 


Fic. 2 PRECEDENCE NETWORK FOR THE PROJECT ‘DESIGN A SALES LEAFLET’ 


LST = Latest start time of activity ‘n’; 
LFT = Latest finish time of activity ‘n’; 
FI = Total float of activity ‘n’; and 
FF = Free float of activity ‘n’. 
a) Forward pass — This involves the forward 


traversal of the network from the project first 
activity to the project last activity. During this 
pass the earliest start and finish times of activities 
and the earliest completion time of the project are 
worked out. The first step is that the starting of 
first activity of the project is assigned an earliest 
start time of zero from the start of the project. For 
every next activity, the earliest start time of the 
activity is determined by the completion of the last 
activity leading into the activity which is largest of 
the activity duration added to the earliest start time 
of its preceding activity. This could be expressed 
mathematically as: 


EST, = Max {EST + t,,} 
Where, (n-1) are all preceding activities 


For example, in the network shown in Fig. 3 there 
are two activities leading in to activity 8. The 
activity 5 has a duration of 3 units and together 
with the earliest finish time of its preceding 
activity which is 7 units, the activity can be 
completed earliest in 10 units of time. Similarly, 
the other activity 6 has a duration of 5 units 
and together with the earliest finish time of its 
preceding activity which is 7 units, the activity can 
be completed earliest in 12 units of time. So the 
earliest start time for activity 8 is the larger of the 
two, that is, 12 units of time. 


b) Backward pass — This involves the backward 
traversal of the project from the project last 
activity to the project first activity. During 
this pass, the latest starting and finish times of 
activities and activity floats are worked out, and 
the critical activities are identified. The first step 
is that the last activity of the project is assigned 
the latest finish time from the start of the project 
depending on the target date of completion of 
the project which may be the same as the earliest 
finish time for this activity or may be more or less. 
For every preceding activity, the latest finish time 
of the activity is worked out by subtracting the 
activity duration from the latest finish time of its 
succeeding activity. The smallest of all the latest 
start time of the activities is the latest finish time 
of the preceding activity. This can be expressed 
mathematically as: 


EFT, = Min {EFT, - t,,,} 
Where, (n+1) are all succeeding activities. 


For example, in Fig. 3, for activity 1 there are two 
activities starting from the activity. Activity 2 has 
a duration of 5 units and the latest start time of 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


its succeeding activity is 9 units, so it could start 
latest at 4 units of time. The other activity 3 has 
a duration of 5 units and the latest start time of 
its succeeding activity is 7 units, so it could start 
latest at 2 units of time. So the latest finish time of 
activity 1 is the smaller of the two that is, 2 units 
of time. 


12.3.4.2 Since the precedence networks are often used 
on automated tools, the time analysis is carried out 
automatically by the tool. 


12.3.4.3 The project time analysis practiced in 
‘Critical Path Method (CPM) can be improved further 
by resource balancing introduced in ‘Critical Chain 
Project Management’ (CCPM) method where the 
matching resources can be shared among multiple 
activities depending on priorities associated with them. 
This eventually would lead to betterment of resources 
utilization for both constrained and surplus resources 
and also likely to improve upon all over project 
completion time due to reduction in likely duration of 
the activities sharing available resources. 


12.3.5 Critical Path and Float 


12.3.5.1 Activity time characteristics 


Earliest start time of an activity is the earliest time its 
preceding activity is achieved. Earliest finish time of 
an activity is given by adding its duration to its earliest 
start time. So, the earliest start and finish times of an 
activity are related to its preceding activity: 


EST = Max {EFT} 
EFT =EST +t, 
Similarly, the latest finish time of an activity is given 
by the latest start time of its succeeding activity. Latest 
start time of an activity is given by subtracting its 


duration from the latest finish time. So, the latest times 
of an activity are related to its succeeding activity: 


LFT, = Min {LST} 
LST, = LFT, T b 


12.3.5.2 Activity floats 


The difference between the earliest and the latest times 
of an activity is called ‘Total or Activity Float’, that is. 


Fl, = LST,- EST, = LFT,- EFT, 


There is another way in which the activity float is 
defined, which is the amount of float an activity can 
consume out of the total float defined above, without 
effecting the float available to the succeeding activity. 
This is called the free float. In this case, the activity 
must be completed by the earliest time of its succeeding 
activity, that is, 


FF, = Min {EST} — EFT, 


OI 


Description 


Duration 


Early 
start EF 


Early 
finish 


Late 
start LF 


Late 
finish 


Float FF 


DECIDE 
CONTENTS 


Free 
float 


RESEARCH 


WRITING 


MGMT 
APPROVAL 


COMBINE 


0 EF 


EF 


EF 


12 EF 


15 | EF 


0 LF 


LF 


LF 


14 LF 


15 LF 


0 FF 


FF 


DESIGN 
HEADINGS 


FF 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


2 FF 


MGMT 
APPROVAL 


2 EF 


EF 


12 EF 


2 LF 


LF 


12 LF 


0 FF 


FF 


TAKE PHOTOS 


EF 


LF 


FF 


0 FF 


Fic. 3 Time ANALYSIS OF PROJECT NETWORK 


0 FF 


0Z0Z : (T Hed) OSSPI SI 


The activity float can be negative, if the project 
target date is earlier than its earliest achievement 
date. 


12.3.5.3 Critical activities, critical path 


The activities with zero total float (or in general, 
with minimum total float if the project target date is 
different from its earliest achievement date) are called 
the critical activity. Any delay in the completion of a 
critical activity means a corresponding delay in the 
project completion. The path connecting the critical 
activities, form the starting activity of the project to its 
ending activity, is called the critical path. The critical 
path is also the path of longest duration between 
the starting and ending activity equal to the project 
duration. A project may have more than one critical 
path if there are alternative paths of equal duration. 
In Fig. 3, it is the path connecting activities 1, 3, 6, 8, 
9 and 10. This could be indicated by double lines on 
the network. Note that activity 5 is not critical (due 
to available total float) although both the activities 3 
and 8 (preceding and succeeding) are both on the 
critical path. 


ACTIVITY 


DECIDE CONTENTS 


RESEARCH 


DESIGN HEADINGS 


WRITING 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


TAKE PHOTOS 


MGMT APPROVAL 


MGMT APPROVAL 


COMBINE 


FINAL APPROVAL 


1 


0 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


12.3.5.4 Network analysis and bar chart 


While the network is a very useful tool for the 
representation and analysis of precedence relationship, 
bar chart presents a more useful visual representation 
of the project schedule. The two advantages can be 
combined by displaying the results of time analysis on 
a bar chart. Figure 4 shows a bar chart for the leaflet 
project. The firm portion of the bar indicates the 
early schedule of the activity and the extended dotted 
portion shows the total float available to the activity. 
The preceding and succeeding event numbers of the 
activities may be indicated at the two ends of the bar. 
This is useful for linking the activities and making any 
on-the- spot modification in the schedule. 


Software base plotting allows plotting of early, late and 
float bars also, adding more flexibility in the matter. 


13 CHECKLISTS 


Checklists can be used for several purposes and in 
several ways in computer project planning control. 
A number of checklists and the ways in which they are 
used are given. 


23 4 5 6 7 B 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 


TIME (IN DAYS) 


— 


Fic. 4 TIME ANALYSIS ON BAR CHART 


11 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


13.1 Task Lists 


13.1.1 A task list comprises of a list of tasks associated 
with a given activity. The tasks are subdivisions of an 
activity but of a direction which is at too low a level 
to warrant formal techniques of planning and control. 
Standard task lists should be built up over the life of 
several projects to produce as comprehensive a set of 
tasks as possible. When planning for a given activity 
in a particular project, the relevant tasks should be 
selected from the standard list and other tasks added 
as found necessary. Task lists should be used as an 
aid to estimating the resources required to perform a 
particular activity. 


13.1.2 It is quite possible that a task may be added after 
the start of an activity. Tasks which are not foreseen 
when the activity was planned are revealed during the 
life of an activity. Such tasks should be added to the 
list, but physically separated from the original entries 
as a measure of the stability of a particular activity 
in terms of its tasks content over the life of several 
projects. 


13.1.3 The tasks list may be used as a follow-up- 
document by entering estimated completion dates 
against each task and checking at a predefined interval 
on the progress of the tasks. Provision should be made 
for insertion of that actual completion date if only as 
a means of ensuring that the particular task has been 
completed. 


13.1.4 Some estimation of partial completion of the 
activity can be made by examining the tasks list to 
determine those tasks which have been completed, 
compared with those still to be done. 


13.2 Document Lists 


13.2.1 The list comprises of the necessary documents 
to be produced to provide information for making 
project decisions in the proper manner. The documents 
related to organizational structure, linear responsibility 
chart, work breakdown structure, activities description, 
networks (overall and detailed). This may include 
Bar charts and milestone charts, resource plans and 
schedules, cost estimates, specifications, designs and 
drawings, contract forms and procedures, systems and 
procedures, operating instructions and manuals. 


13.2.2 It is not possible to generate standard list because 
it would vary with the nature, size and contents of the 
project. 


13.3 Responsibility List 


13.3.1 There are parts of projects, especially those 
concerned with what is usually termed implementation, 
in which the responsibility for carrying out particular 
tasks is not always clear. For example, responsibility for 
ordering new equipment, training staff, preparing test 


12 


data and transferring files in a software development 
project can rest with different departments in the 
organization. 


13.3.2 The main purpose of a responsibility list is to 
assist the project leader by ensuring that responsibility 
for the completion of tasks has been allocated. The list 
should be prepared by the project leader comprising 
those tasks for which responsibility could lie outside 
his own department. The tasks which appear on the 
list will probably be the same for different projects 
within the same organization. So, like the tasks lists, a 
standard responsibility list may be developed within an 
organization. 


SECTION 3 REVIEW PROCEDURES 
FOR PROJECT COORDINATION 
AND CONTROL 


14 NEED AND SCOPE OF PROJECT REVIEW 


For a complex project which runs from few months 
to several years, a scientific procedure is required. 
The review procedure should provide guidelines 
for comparing the project performance with the 
baseline planned targets in terms of performance, 
time, resource and cost and should set into motion the 
corrective mechanism. The review procedure should 
be such that it should avoid any irretrievable damage 
which may occur due to mis-reporting or delayed 
reporting. 

The project review procedure should have inbuilt 
mechanism for checking the quality of various systems, 
sub-systems which may affect the overall performance 
of the project. While reviewing time, resources and 
costs, if the conformance to the performance aspect is 
not done in an integrated way, it may lead to serious 
consequences in terms of escalation in time and cost 
and even premature termination in some cases. 


14.1 Review Procedures Based on Size of the Project 


14.1.1 For a smaller project, the review cycle can be set 
on demand as at the initial planning stage itself, tighter 
control can be built-in and self-correcting mechanism 
can be developed which may last throughout the project 
life. 


14.1.2 For a larger project, a comprehensive system 
of project coordination and project control is to be 
set up. The review procedure will commence from 
the conceptual phase of the project, starting from data 
collection on identification of needs, establishment of 
goals and objectives, preparing economic feasibility 
and financial viability, risks to the stakeholders, 
estimation of resources, identification of alternatives 
and procedure for getting approval to the next phase. 


14.2 Review Procedures Based on Life Cycle of the 
Project 


14.2.1 In the development phase, the review should 
incorporate appointment of key team members, defining 
the scope, establishment of master plan, budget, cash 
flow and work breakdown structure as also the policies 
and procedures with necessary approval to proceed. 
Planning workshop should be held in development 
phase for taking into account interdependency of 
various stakeholders in master plan. 


14.2.2 In the implementation phase, review should 
cover setting up of organizational and communication 
channels, identification of terms, appointment of 
team member, establishment of detailed technical 
requirements for various work packages, execution 
of various work packages, review of directives, 
monitoring, changes to baselines, various costing and 
control procedures with respect to scope, quality, time 
and cost with a mechanism to resolve various problems 
encountered. Also, decision regarding revision in 
baseline schedule should be taken in case of significant 
deviation from the baseline. 


14.2.3 While nearing completion of the project, the 
procedures relating to the review of the description 
of the final product, capturing learning during project, 
settlement of final accounts, approval of product/ 
services responsibility documentation of results and 
release/ reallocation of all resources including the re- 
deployment of project staff. 


15 PROJECT REVIEW CYCLE 


Periodic re-assessment of the project becomes 
necessary to bring back the project to its normal course 
if any deviation is encountered. The project review 
cycle should be set keeping in view different phases of 
the project, the requirement from the project owners, 
statutory and regulatory agencies, project management 
team and other stakeholders. At the beginning of the 
project a typical review cycle is estimated and the 
review is done at a predetermined time interval. The 
review cycle also includes engagement of additional 
resources in critical areas, identification of critical 
path, changes in methods of execution, re-allocation 
of resources and operation with the budgeted cost. 
Project review cycle will also depend upon the project/ 
services. The periodicity of the review cycle should be 
kept in such a way that it helps for timely completion 
of the project with limited deviation in the resource 
requirements. 


15.1 Review Procedure 


Project review procedure requires involvement of 
senior management to ratify project management 
decisions, implementation by project teams and 
project organization for preparation of plans and 
establishment of assessment mechanism, monitoring, 


13 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


analysis and controlling of the project by project 
organization. The frequency of the project review 
cycle will depend upon the quantity of the data to 
be updated, the size of the project management team 
and the rate at which the project moves. If many 
organizational levels are involved, the review should 
be synchronized in such a fashion so that there is no 
delay in any action which becomes necessary at any 
stage of the project. The project review procedure 
should take into account all aspects of project life cycle 
starting from concept/development/implementation 
and termination. The review procedures should 
incorporate various methods to process the data and 
review project status while updating and analyzing 
the status depending upon the original plan. The 
monitoring method should involve the measurement 
of various deviation from the plan and collection of 
the data in order to monitor various implementation 
procedures and methods by the project management 
team who will consider the changes in the plan and 
will take appropriate decision. 


Project review should be conducted at the end of each 
phase. This is critical to the success of the project, 
because it evaluates impact of current phase of project 
on subsequent phases and allows the project sponsor to 
control the progress of the project and make sure that it 
passes through each project phase smoothly. 


15.2 Use of Network for Project Control 


Networks provide a valuable data for the project. At 
the planning stage of the project, networks are prepared 
considering the work breakdown structure, work 
packages and the group of activities and their inter- 
linking mechanism for completion of various tasks in 
the project. The network also provides a mechanism 
for evaluating the performance, a schedule of activities, 
resource status and various cost aspects concerning 
various activities individually and for various work 
packages collectively and the project as a whole. 


Based upon this data which have been generated at the 
initial cycle of the project, that is, upon the planning 
stage, valuable standards for control are developed. 
The control mechanism totally depends up on the 
measurement of various deviations which have been 
encountered in comparison to the plan. After each 
update some new critical paths may emerge or some 
existing ones may cease to be critical or there may be 
many more thinks which may require special attention. 
In a situation like this, the networks provides a review 
mechanism which can be used by changing the 
methods of working without affecting the performance 
parameters and/or redeployment of resources with 
slight or no cost and time overruns. The networks will 
provide an outline for controlling all aspects of project 
using various methods which have been discussed in 
Section 2, for example, use of master control networks, 
preparation of histograms for resource deployment and 
cost control, etc. 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


15.3 Use of Earned Value for Project Control 


Earned value analysis is a method for measuring 
project performance. It indicates how much of the 
budget should have been spent, in view of the amount 
of work done so far and the baseline cost for the task, 
assignment, or resources. In earned value analysis 
project cost and schedule performance measurement 
are managed as integrated element and not as separate 
entities. 


16 PROJECT MONITORING, ANAYLSIS AND 
UPDATON 


16.1 Project Monitoring 


16.2 Sources of Data 


As discussed above, the mechanism for reviews, 
coordination and control should be well thought out at 
the planning stage itself. The data originating from the 
source of activity should be compared with the planned 
data. The data for project review, coordination and 
control will be collected from the following: 


a) General description of the project including the 
objectives; 

b) Scope of services required at the various levels of 

the project; 

c) Project organization including that of clients, 

consultants and other participating divisions and 

the defined inter-relationships amongst them; 

d) Division of responsibility between the various 

participants; 

Project control system as described at the planning 

stage; 

Project completion dates 

milestones, assemblies, 

various other components; 


including that of 
sub-assemblies and 


Communication channels as defined in the plan, for 
example, general correspondence, engineering and 
manufacturing information, correspondence with 
the vendor and subcontractors, correspondence 
with the clients and consultants and other project 
documentation; 


g) 


h) Approved documents and their distribution 
among project participants and other ownership 
documents; 

j) Project reports comprising of periodical progress 
report, resource status report, cost status report, 
etc; 

k) 


m) 


Change order procedure including deviations; 


Procurement procedure for equipments and 
material, tax data, customs clearance procedures, 
management of foreign exchange and associated 
quality checks and expediting procedures; 


14 


n) Tendering procedure and documentation, for site 
activities and coordination procedures; and 


p) Billing and accounting procedures. 


16.3 Methods of Data Collection 


The methods of data collection should be such that 
a clear reference to the plan as specified for the 
above referred point is provided. The networks will 
provide a basis for working out details for each and 
every activity and task to be performed and various 
inputs including the procedures, drawings, manpower 
and other materials. Each of these inputs should be 
assigned a target date from the time analysis of the 
network being followed. These target dates are drawn 
from the latest allowable date required for completion 
of each of these tasks. The network can be divided into 
its work contents depending upon the work breakdown 
structure and work packages described at the planning 
stage. 


16.3.1 Data on Time Aspects 


a) A list of activities which have been completed 
since the last review, together with (if historical 
records are to be maintained) the actual start 
and/or finished dates. (These activities may not 
necessarily have been scheduled for the current 
cycle.) Also where historical records are kept, any 
past activities which were deleted from, or added 
to the programme. 

b) A list of activities started but not finished, together 

with their start date and/or either an estimated 

finish date, revised total duration, or time-to- 
completion from the ‘Time Now’ date. 


A list of activities which were at the last review, 
and still are, in progress, again with an estimated 
finish date, revised overall duration or time-to- 
completion. 


The estimated start date of activities which could 
start but have not yet done so. 


The achievement dates for any specified events, 
particularly key and interface events. 


Identification of any revised durations for future 
activities, or changes to any scheduled dates. 


Details of any revised network logic. If new 
activities are added to a computer files, they need 
to be listed with all their relevant information. 
Activities to be deleted should also be 
identified. 


g) 


16.3.2 Date on Resource Aspects 


Revisions to resource availabilities, gives resource 
category with the level and periods of availability. 
Also any changes in resource requirements against any 
activity. 


16.3.3 Data on Cost Aspects 


a) Approximate costs of completed work packages; 
the extent of approximation allowable should be 
defined. There may be some delay in obtaining 
these figures after completion of the work, 
dependent on the organization’s cost collection 
system; 

b) Cost-to-date of work packages in progress; 

c) Revised estimates of future work packages; and 


d) A list of changes to the activity content within any 

work package, resulting from changes in project 
scope, corrective procedures or omissions. 
NOTE — In certain circumstances, especially where the 
changes have been significant, for example, basic project 
requirements, the data collected should be supported by a list of 
reasons for the changes reported (or allocation of responsibility 
for such changes). 


16.4 Scope, Characteristics and Techniques 


A multi-level system of project monitoring is needed 
for establishing any meaningful review procedure. 


For a typical large project with three levels of planning, 
Level I will be the project in its entirety but the level 
of control will be such as to be exercised by the top 
management. The key stake holders may be interested 
in monitoring the project at Level I stage. It will 
determine the status of the project and assess the 
anticipated completion date which is committed to the 
client. It will also indentify problem areas and assign 
responsibilities to investigate reasons for slippages and 
will make agencies responsible for making up for any 
deviations. 


At Level II, the project is broken down into the levels of 
participating divisions or the functional level. For this 
level, the project is divided into either in its systems/ 
components or in the form of various participating 
divisions and their set-up. At this level, divisional 
level of performance and problems are reviewed and 
responsibility assigned. 


Level III is the working level detail often comprising 
list of activities or a work packages at supervisor level. 
Activities need should be detailed out to the extent 
it is identifiable, measurable and controllable. The 
major data collection will take place from here. Care 
should be taken to link them to Level I task/activity 
through Level II network. The monitoring of resource 
deployment and cost incurred will take place at this 
level. Any corrective action will also flow from top to 
this level for implementation. 


16.5 Project Updation 


For any project, updates of the data must be referred 
to a particular point of time known as ‘Time Now’. 
At this point of time, details of work completed at 
the time of last review must be collected. The work 
currently in progress and all work which has over-short 
the target dates or latest allowable date affecting the 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


project completion must be monitored. The Level I 
network with deals with the corporate activities must 
be exploded into Level II covering all participating 
divisions. These are further exploded into Level III 
depicting various tasks being performed. 


Following checks should be performed after updation 
of network. 


a) System checks — While using computer based 
networking software check need to be made while 
updation to ensure that system settings related 
to definition of working hours, completion date, 
methodology of network calculation is same as 
finalized during baseline plan. 


b 


we 


Activity checks: 


1) Deleted activities of the project to be closed in 
schedule network with planned date if planned 
date is less than “time now”. Also, check need 
to be made that activities deleted during current 
updation is not driving subsequent activities. 


2 


Newly added activities should be properly 
logged and communicated with updated 
schedule. Also, relevant linkage to be 
established for newly added activities. 


3 


wa 


Check should be made to ensure that activity 
type defined in baseline schedule is not 
changed inadvertently during updation 

4) Activities calendars should be ensured same as 
baseline. 


5) Original duration should be unaltered 
throughout the project only remaining duration 
should be changed. 


Suspend and resume dates of the suspended 
activities should be checked while updation. 


6 


wm 


7 


x 


If activity is shown started then there should 
be progress associated with activity and vice- 
versa. 

8) Milestones need to be updated in line with the 
completed activities. 


c) Relationship checks : 


1) Logic check to be made for list of activities 
with the float change more than number of 
work days in last update period. 

2) Invalid relationships should be removed and 
logged. 

3) Negative lag should be avoided as far as 
possible in updation. 

4) Open ended activities should be fixed while 
updation of the schedule. 


d 


Constraint checks — Preferably network should 
be free of constraints as far as possible. 


e) Cost checks : 


1) Budgeted cost should be unaltered during 
updation. 


15 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


2) Actual cost should not be negative. 


3) Earned value should never be more than 
budgeted. 

4) Activity or WBS having diminishing earned 
value need to checked. Possible cause of 
diminishing earned value is damaged to 
existing work or a revised activity scope and 
budget. 


f) Resource checks — While updating network 
check should be made for changes in driving 
resources of the network. Also, check should be 
made for added/deleted resources and its effect on 
overall schedule completion date. 


Overall review — Overall network should be 
checked for delayed milestone, activity starting 
earlier than allowed, activity starting later than 
allowed and change in critical path. 


16.6 Schedule Catch-up and Revised Schedule 
Requirement 


a 


8 


During planning phase of the project, criteria should 
be defined for threshold of revision in schedule. 
Threshold can be in terms of the percentage 
backlog of percentage or delay in schedule with 
respect to overall duration of the project. If delay 
or backlog is more than threshold then revised up 
plan should be prepared for achieving baseline 
completion date. 


16.7 Project Analysis 


Once a multi-level system of monitoring and review 
is established, the most important aspect is the timely 
review, updation and corrective action. For this, quick 
mechanism has to be thought of for time, resources 
and cost analysis. The data collected should not be 
very old and preferably on-line updation of all level of 
networks should be carried out. At the planning stage 
Level I is envisaged to the corporate level network, 
Level II is divisional level and Level III is working 
level document. Level III can be in the form of network 
or description of work package or a component list like 
drawing schedule, valve schedule or any other material 
component list. The data collection for updation and 
review should take place from the source. 


The time analysis will show, on each update run the 
criticality of the project which will require certain 
modifications with respect to the planned schedules, 
resource inputs and costs incurred. At the planning 
stage when the resource analysis is done, the project 
progress is analyzed keeping in view the available 
resources and associated cost for project completion as 
agreed with the client. When the updation takes place 
at each review cycle and new criticality develops a 
relook into the resource and cost analysis is to be done. 
It may not be essential to do this with every update run 
because this is a costly exercise. Therefore, a decision 
must be taken about the cycle of resources and cost 


16 


analysis. A typical example of time, resource and cost 
analysis is while doing the time analysis of the project. 
Some critical areas are indentified. These areas, if not 
attended to, may delay the project. This may require re- 
deployment of resources during that weeks/fortnight or 
month, thus diverting resources from other non-critical 
areas. This may cause disruption in the weekly resource 
loading plans. This method of the redeployment may 
affect the project cost structure. Once the cost is 
collected at the work package level, the cost of work 
performed should be collected on the following three 
aspects: 


a) Earned value (Budgeted cost of work performed), 


b) Planned value (Planned cost of work performed), 
and 


c) Actual value (Actual cost of work performed). 


However, the actual cost deviation from the 
original estimate/contract value should be noted 
and documented. This will help in investigating the 
causes of cost deviation and arriving at the projected 
completion cost of the project. 


16.8 Schedule Risk Analysis 


Schedule risk analysis is done on CPM network 
with the technique known as “Monte Carlo’ analysis. 
It is probabilistic model of analysis. First step is 
to carry out three point estimation of duration for 
defined activities. Then any new likely scenario can 
be mapped in to network. Duration distribution can 
be selected based on nature of three point estimate. 
Simulation to be run with the help of computer 
program to find out likelihood of project completion, 
sensitivity analysis of activities, contingency time 
required for the project completion and area of 
greatest risk in the project. 


17 PROJECT MANAGEMENT DECISIONS 
AND IMPLEMENTATION 
Essential part of review procedures, project 


coordination and control are progress meetings. A 
periodic project review meeting can be held at the 
corporate level. The agenda of the review meeting 
will cover the specific areas affecting the project 
completion adversely, sanction of various resources 
and decisions regarding the various costs. 


A project engineering coordination meeting and 
divisional review meeting may take place at motherly 
interval. This will involve divisional managers, project 
manager and the functional coordinators; also purchase 
manager, construction manager and technology 
manager. They will discuss the performance, schedule 
and cost of various systems, sub-systems including 
work packages. They will also take decision on 
performance of various activities within the given 
schedule. 


The project schedule review meeting should take 
place every week which will assign work to various 
levels of supervisors. They will prepare a checklist 
and also collect data on the performance of various 
activities and also implement decisions taken at the 
highest level regarding reworking/redeployment or 
any other changes including the inputs to the projects. 
The information generated after each cycle of project 
review may be divided into the following: 


a) For information — This means for the top 
management, manufacturing agency, funding 
agencies and others, having stakes in the project 
directly or indirectly. 


b) 


For decision making — The information is mainly 
for the head of the division, the client, inspection 
agencies, and others who are interested in the 
project and may affect the project by virtue of 
their actions. 


For action — The information at this level is most 
vital. They are the actual doers and each one of 
them must be told about reflection of their action 
on the timely completion of the project. Any kind 
of deviation should be clearly specified in terms 
of project completion. Thus care should be taken 
for each and every activity or task which may 
affect the timely completion of the project. They 
should also specify the resultant delays on account 
of non-adherence, effect on resource mobilization 
and cost overrun. 


c 


wa 


SECTION 4 REPORTING 
DOCUMENTATION AND 
PROCEDURES 


18 GENERAL 


18.1 Reporting documents are a means to assess the 
progress in the context of the plan and provides the 
basis for making revision in the plan. The reports should 
contain reasons for deviation from plan, corrective 
actions taken and corrective actions required. The 
report should be relevant and timely. 


18.2 To facilitate selective controls, quick decisions 
and actions, exception reporting must be followed. For 
exception reporting, appropriate exception indicators 
relevant for each decision making level in respect of 
physical progress, cost, resources, time schedules, etc, 
should be evolved. 


18.3 The reports can be presented in three different 
ways namely, tables, graphs and charts, narration, 
and by different medias. The methods of presentation 
should be selected according to the type and nature of 
information to be conveyed and the management level. 
This can be produced manually or by computer. 


17 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


19 TABULAR PRESENTATION 


The data relating to time, resources and cost details, 
exceptions, trends and analysis can be meaningfully 
and effectively presented in a tabular form. 


19.1 Tables on Time Schedules and Actual/Anticipations 


An illustrative list, which can be used to highlight the 
progress relating to time aspects of the project, is given 
below: 


a) Activity list showing schedule and actual/ 
anticipated time against each activity 


b) List of critical activities. 


c) List of key/milestone events showing earliest/ 
latest occurrence, schedule occurrence, actual/ 
anticipated completion time. 


d) List of events falling on the critical path showing 
earliest/latest occurrence, schedule occurrence, 
actual/anticipated completion time. 


e) Exception report to highlight significant variations. 


19.2 Float Order List 


This list enables identification of the critical activities. 
A float order list depicting activities, in the ascending 
order of the total float available should be prepared. 
In cases, where the activities have negative floats, the 
activities with the highest negative float value should 
appear first in the list. 


19.3 Tables on Resources 


An illustrative list, which can be used to highlight 
resource utilization and their status, is given below: 


a) Reports relating to materials, man-power, 
machines and equipments should reflect the 
utilization of these resources against the plan. 


b) Reports pertaining to resources required and 
available should also be prepared linking with 
project schedules. 


c) Detailed reports on material requirements can 
be prepared on the basis of work packages and 
activities. 


d) Separate report for deployment and utilization 
of equipments on critical activities can also be 
generated. 


19.4 Tables on Cost 


19.4.1 The basic unit of costing should be work 
package. The cost report should contain information on 
budgeted/actual/projected and cost variances against 
different work packages. The planned cost, the cost 
incurred to date and projected cost on completion 
should be linked to the actual physical progress of the 
project. 


19.4.2 Exception reports should be made for variances 
beyond specified tolerance limits as and when required. 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


20 GRAPHICAL PRESENTATION 


20.1 Graphical presentation should be simple and self 
contained. The graphical presentations suggested are: 


20.1.1 Overall Schedule Network 


The overall schedule networks would show the status 
of completion of milestones of components against 
plans/schedules and in case of delays or shortfalls, the 
impact of delays on completion of the project. 


20.1.2 Bar Chart 


20.1.2.1 Bar chart constitutes a widely used method 
of presenting both planned and progress data on time 
scale. It can also depict data by responsibility area, 
WBS components and work packages. 


WEEK NUMBER 


yt tt EN 
ide 


REVIEW DATE 


20.1.2.2 The time scale is indicated along the 
horizontal axis and the activities along the vertical 
axis. The critical activities are indicated by 
crosshatches (see Fig. 5). 


20.1.2.3 Bar charts should show the scheduled start 
and scheduled finish, the status and projected 
completion. For manual resource loading of manpower/ 
equipments, the bar charts should show activity floats. 


20.2 Milestone Bar Chart 


The milestone bar chart should contain schedules of 
selected key/critical events derived from the network, 
their status of start or finish and the projected delay 
in the occurrences of milestones by a dotted line 
(see Fig. 6). 


| | SCHEDULE 
|, í CRITICAL ACTIVITY 


mememe PROGRESS 


awe et ee 


PROJECTED 


Fic. 5 BAR CHART 


NOW 


BUILDING 


CLAD 
ROGRESS 


WEEKS | 5| 


TIME 
NOW 


OFFICE 
COMPLETED 


Fic. 6 MILESTONE CHART 


18 


20.3 S-Curves and Histograms 


Typical S-curves depict the cumulative planned 
and actuals of inputs such as, materials, manpower, 
expenditure, etc; forecast of these to project completion; 
time, resources and cost overruns. 


20.3.1 The diagram (see Fig. 7) is an illustration of 
S-Curve for project man-hours interrelated with other 
facts such as, planned and actual work and cost of 
activities. 


20.3.2 Special diagrams like histogram can also 
be prepared for materials, manpower and critical 
equipment for resource levelling/loading (see also 
Fig. 7). 


Possuble 
overspend 


value projection 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


20.3.3 Manual loading and status charts of various 
resources can also be prepared. 


21 NARRATIVE PRESENTATION 


21.1 The narrative portion of the report, expressed in 
words, should be used to highlight the following: 


a) Special problems, 

b) Exceptional situations, 

c) New developments and changes, 

d) Corrective actions taken and required, and 
e) Suggestions for future. 


21.2 These reports should be simple and concise. 


Time scale ————— 


Number of 
personnel 


Fic. 7 TYPICAL S-CURVES AND RELATED HISTOGRAM SHOWING CURRENT STATUS AND PLAN 


19 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


SECTION 4 PROJECT CLOSE-OUT 
22 PROJECT CLOSE-OUT 


22.1 Project close-out arises when the project objectives 
have been realized or due to unforeseen circumstances 
the project is terminated prematurely. 


22.2 Project close-out plan will be based upon the 
following: 


a) Approved project objectives, and deliverables, 
means for achieving them and authorization for 
commencement of work. 


b) Recorded Changes in the project plan. 
the 


c) Project performance vis-à-vis 


objectives. 
d) Updated results and modified plans. 


project 


23 TYPES OF PROJECT CLOSE-OUT 


23.1 Normal Project Close-Out 


It is a process that provides for acceptance of the 
project and its deliverables by the project sponsor/ 
customer/project steering committee or board, 
completion of project records, final revision and issue 
of documentation to reflect the ‘as-built’ condition, and 
the retention of essential project documentation. 


The project authorities authorize dissolution of 
the project management setup and all concerned 
stakeholders are notified. A skeleton staff is identified 
and retained to tackle any left out issue and their terms 
of reference is documented in consultation with project 
accepting-authorities and the project manager prior 
to relinquishing the charge of the project by project 
manager. 


23.2 Premature Project Termination 


It is a condition when the project is terminated before 
it reaches the stages of full realization of project 
objectives. 


23.2.1 Premature project termination may become 
necessary due to changes in environment both external 
and internal, changes in the organization’s policies, 
funding of the project, shift in priorities, economic 
difficulties, inability of the executing agency to 
complete the project etc. 


23.2.2 The project termination proposal shall be 
initiated by the project manager on the basis of a written 
authorization from the project sponsor/customer/ 
project steering committee or board. All the decisions 
regarding the project termination shall be documented 
and signed by all involved key stakeholders. 


23.2.3 The project termination proposal shall contain the 
causes and consequences of the premature termination 
with reference to the project plan, description of 


20 


the activities with reference to project network and 
resources required for termination. 


24 RESPONSIBILITY OF PROJECT 
MANAGER FOR PROJECT CLOSE-OUT 


24.1 Making available all the necessary documents, 
to the sponsor/customer/project steering committee or 
board, suggesting alternative plans for continuation or 
for termination of the project regarding scope, time, 
cost performance and technology. 


24.2 Preparing the project close-out plan with 
reference to the agreed framework of project scope and 
contractual obligations. 


24.3 Acting as focal point for communication between 
project and organizations external to the project. 


24.4 Taking stock and recording the accomplishment 
of all work packages vis-à-vis, the project plan and 
subsequent modifications thereof. All deviations in the 
project network plan emanating due to deviations in 
accomplishment of work packages in terms of time, cost 
and performance/technology should be incorporated in 
project close-out network. 


24.5 Documenting results in terms of achievement of 
project objectives and deliverables. 


24.6 Handing over ‘Operation and maintenance 
procedures manuals’, as-built-drawings, records of 
deviations, etc. 


24.7 Organizing for the completion and close-out 
of the project management activities such as release 
of resources, redeployment of staff, transfer of 
responsibility, arranging for the financial closing and 
final handing of the project 


25 STEPS FOR PROJECT CLOSE-OUT 


25.1 Project close-out plan and schedule: 


a) Preparation of a complete record of changes made 
in the project objectives due to changes in scope, 
project plan schedules and costs. 


b) Preparation of record of technical performance 
namely original plans, causes for deviation, if any, 
and remedial measures taken. 

c) Establishing procedures for start-up operations, 
check-out detail of all systems/equipments and 
procedures for total operations 


d 


ww 


Preparation of record of implementation of various 
systems during the total project life cycle, the 
success and failure of various systems and their 
positive and negative impacts in achievement of 
overall project objectives. 


e 


Preparation of record of formulation and 
maintenance of quality standards for work/systems. 


f) preparation of records of special action taken to 
cope with environmental changes, changes in 
organizational setup and policies, government 
regulations, changes in priorities, calamities and 
unique circumstances which have affected the 
project objectives, plans, schedules, resources and 
cost. 


Preparation of record of special tools and technique 
used, methods and procedure adopted. 


g) 
h) Preparation of guideline for future course of action 
based upon the success and failures of various 
systems/ procedures/ methods/ processes adopted. 
j) Collection and preparation of the indexed lessons- 
learnt document from the start of the project to 
close-out of the project. 

k) In case of premature termination, preparation and 
execution of all terminal agreements with internal 
and external sources as authorized by the project 
authorities. 

m) Close-out of all the suppliers? contracts and 
preparation of any other contractual/legal 
document, if required during the close-out. 


25.2 Network for project close-out activities shall 
be prepared, which will provide schedule of all the 
activities of project termination or normal close-out. 
This shall form part of contract document and is to be 
agreed to by project approving authorities. 


25.3 Reassignment of Project Staff 


The reassignment of project staff should be done in the 
following order. 


25.3.1 Reassignment of Project Staff to Other Similar 
Projects 


This is the best possible way of redeployment to use, 
fruitfully utilizing the experience and capabilities 
acquired, as it is difficult to find trained project staff for 
project work. 


25.3.2 Reassignment of Project Staff to Other Allied 
Area Projects 


With some additional knowledge related to product, 
process and systems pertaining to new projects, 
the project staff can be redeployed in other allied 
area projects, with little training as they are already 
adapt in project management skills. 


25.3.3 Reassignment of Project Staff for Operations 
and Maintenance 


The staff engaged in execution, commissioning, quality 
and performance testing of components, subassemblies, 
assemblies and systems can be retrained to meet 
the requirements of operations and maintenance. 
Preparation of position descriptions and organization 
chart, recruitment of personnel, placement and training 
of staff required for operation and maintenance are 


21 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


some of the areas where such retrained staff can be 
used. If the project authorities are different from the 
executing agencies, commercial modalities may be 
settled between project authorities and executing 
agency’s top management with the help of project 
manager. 


25.3.4 Reassignment of Projects Staff as Consultant’ 
Trainer 


Project management expertise and skills are fairly 
scarce and not to lose such resources redeployment of 
project staff as consultants/trainers is advisable. 


26 DIVEST PROJECT RESOURCES 


The divesting of project resources should be done in the 
following manner: 


a) Resources drawn from the common pool must 
be released for use in the other projects as 
detailed in the project human resources plan, 
other physical resources that is tools and plants, 
testing equipment etc may be released under the 
appropriate procedures drawn up. 

b) The resources unique to the project and non- 
consumable in nature as also left over consumables 
like fuel, oil, lubricants, commissioning spares, 
attachments, etc, may be transferred to operation 
and maintenance authorities for use during the 
operations and maintenance with commercial 
modalities settled Alternatively these can be 
auctioned by the project manager under the 
procedures drawn up for this purpose. 

c) Other resources provided by project sponsor/ 

customer may either be absorbed as project 

property or released as per contract stipulations. 

d) Staff set up especially for winding up of the project 

must be released as per the terms of reference 

between project execution and operations and 
maintenance authorities. 


27 RECOMMENDATIONS REQUIRED FOR 
FUTURE PROJECTS 


27.1 In addition to lessons learnt document of the 
closed-out documentation, the project manager, 
based on his experience of the project, may make 
recommendations in areas such as, 
a) project objectives; 
b) project plan; 
c) project control; 
d) project updating and review mechanism; 
e) project organization; 
f) project staff selection, recruitment, placement and 
training; 
g) efficiency, efficacy and proper use of various 
resources; 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


h) systems developed and implemented from start to 
finish of the project; 


j) project process, method and procedures followed; 
k) unique features of the project and learning; 
m) temporary arrangements made and future plan of 
action; 
n) difficulties encountered and precautions taken; 
p) quality/performance/technology planned versus 
achieved; 
q) safety requirements and early warning signals; 
r) interfaces managed with internal and external 
environment/organizations; 
s) recommendations for change of procedures, etc; 
and 
t) O and M procedures, instructions for all systems/ 
sub-systems with precautions needed. 


27.2 The above information will be useful for 
developing proposals future projects and will not 
only help in improving existing methods, systems, 
procedures, quality standards, and performance but 
also in planning, scheduling, monitoring and optimum 
utilization of resources for the future projects. 


28 CLOSE-OUT REPORT 


This report may contain normally the following: 


a) Historic records containing complete project 
documentation as planned initially and 


22 


subsequently changed, that can establish 
deviations from the project objectives/scope duly 
authorized by project authorities/participating 
agencies for proper project close-out. 

b) A formal analysis in the form of report containing 
project data like costs, schedules, technical 
performance, vis-d-vis original plan 

c) A report on financial closing stating how the 
funds were raised and spent with commercial 
implications at the time of project close-out. 


d) Documentation regarding: 
1) As-built-drawings, 
2 


3) Maintenance manuals, 


wa 


Operating procedures manual, 


4) Guidelines for training of operation and 
maintenance staff, 


5) Position description, placement, and 
recruitment guidelines for O and M, 

6) Transfer of responsibility, 

7) Release of resources, 


8) Project acceptance and operations report 
with systems check-out and start-up results 
(individual and collective), 

9 


10) Deviations and remedial action report, and 


wa 


Quality/performance/technology documents, 


11) Any special features. 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 4 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi 


Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of 


India (ASSOCHAM), New Delhi 
Bharat Electronics Ltd., Bengaluru 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi 


Deloitte India, Gurgaon 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Kanpur 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


Ernst & Young, New Delhi 
FICCI, New Delhi 


Grant Thornton, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi 


Indian Statistical Institute, New Delhi 
International Management Institute, New Delhi 
Maruti Suzuki India Ltd, Gurgaon 


Microsoft Corporation India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


National Informatics Centre, New Delhi 
Orange Renewable Power Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
Ordnance Factory Board, Kolkata 


Project Management Institute (PMI), New Delhi 
Punj Lloyds Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Steel Authority of India (SAIL), New Delhi 


Standardization Testing and Quality Certification 
(STQC), New Delhi 


Tata Consultancy Services (TCS),New Delhi 
In personal capacity, Lucknow 


In Personal Capacity, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri V. K. JAIN (Chairman, MSD 4) 


PROF AMAN AGARWAL 


SHRI SUDHIR ERANDI 
Ms Exta BHARDWAJ (Alternate) 


SHRI K. K. SETH 
SHRI JAGDISH PRASAD (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI DEVKI NANDAN 
SHRI M. V. KUMBHALKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHWANI SONI 
Suri R. Monan (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI HIMANSHU DHUNDIA 
Suri MRITUNJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV JAIN 
Ms Tusu Goyat (Alternate) 


Suri M. K. BHARDWAJ 
Ms RINA CHAKRAVORTY 
Dr B. A. METRI 


SHRI PRITIMAN DEY 
SHRI SUSHANT Bose (Alternate I) 
Suri Ravi KANT Yapay (Alternate II) 
SHRI KARMINDER SINGH (Alternate III) 


SHRI ALOK LAL 
Suri Duras GYANI (Alternate) 


DR V. SIVARAMAKRISHNAIAH 
SHRI MUKESH ARORA 


SHRI S. K. YADAV 
Suri P. R. LOHAKPURE (Alternate) 


SHRI TEJAS SURA 
Ms LEENA Gupte (Alternate) 


FRESH NOMINATION TO BE SOUGHT 
Mr Firoz Mouamp (Alternate) 


FRESH NOMINATION TO BE SOUGHT 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


NOMINATION AWAITED 
PROF S. CHAKRABORTY 


Pror R. K. SACHDEVA 


IS 14580 (Part 1) : 2020 


Organization 


In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI MAHESH CHAUDHARY 
SHRI BALRAJ SETH 
Suri R. K. ANAND 


Ms SNen LATA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MSD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms SNEH LATA 


Scientist ‘E’ (MSD), BIS 


Composition of the Sub Committee MSD 4:1 on Project, Programme and 
Portfolio Management, ISO/TC 258 


Organization 
International Management Institute, New Delhi 
BHEL, New Delhi 
EIL, New Delhi 
FICCI, New Delhi 
L&T, Baroda 
Ordnance Factory Board, Kolkata 


Project management Institute 


SAIL, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 


In personal capacity, New Delhi 


24 


Representative(s) 


Pror B. A. METRI (Convener) 
SHRI PIYUSH AGGRAWAL 

SHRI TUSHARKANTI NANDA 
SHRI HIMANSHU DHUNDIA 

SHRI SHAUNAK VAIDYA 

Suri S. K. YADAV 


SHRI TEJAS SURA 
SMT LEENA GUPTE 


Suri R. K. ANAND 
Pror R. K. SACHDEVA 


Suri M. C. CHAUDHURY 


(Continued from second cover) 


Section | highlights the important aspects relating to project organizations, project management, contract 
management and familiarization and training. 


Section 2 highlights the various aspects involved in planning at various levels incorporating the various plan 
components namely, time scales, resources, quality and cost. 


Section 3 deals with the review procedures for coordination and control of the project. 


Section 4 deals with reporting documentation and procedures. Reporting procedures are a means to assess 
the progress of the project and make revision in the plan, if needed. There is a need for providing the relevant 
information in any reporting document. 


Section 5 gives detail about the project termination/closure activity which arises when either the project objective 
have been realized or due to unforeseen circumstances, the project is terminated prematurely. 


This Indian Standard is published in two parts. The other part in this series is: 


Part 2 Use of graphical and estimating techniques 
The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 04 (10560). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 CIT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


