IS 14194 (Part 5) : 2013 


(Reaffirmed 2018) 


Uda HAF 
THR Aa A teases — alae = eTA 
aT 5 TWAT aaa at wga 


Indian Standard 


RADIONUCLIDES IN ENVIRONMENTAL 
SAMPLES — METHODS OF ESTIMATION 


PART 5 SAMPLING 


ICS 13.020.40; 13.280 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


August 2013 Price Group 3 


Nuclear Materials for Peaceful Applications Sectional Committee, CHD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 5) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Nuclear Materials for Peaceful Applications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 


Collection of samples for radioactivity surveillance of environment depends on the purpose for which the results 
shall be used. Selection of sample type, sampling location, frequency of sampling and sample size to be used for 
analysis are all depend on the objectives of monitoring work. The results obtained may be used for checking 
regulatory compliance or for assessing the spatial and temporal changes in radioactivity levels or for environmental 
research such as radionuclide migration modelling, dating, etc. For obtaining dependable results, special attention 
is required in sampling, sample processing and preservation and also to prevent any contamination. 


ISO has published ISO 18589-2 : 2007 ‘Measurement of radioactivity in the environment — Soil — Part 2: 
Guidance for the selection of the sampling strategy, sampling and pretreatment of samples’. However, there is no 
ISO Standard encompassing all other environmental matrix. The document is prepared based on the indigenous 
data available and taking assistance from the following documents: 


a) BARC report BARC/1992/PD/O02, Analytical procedures, Manual of Health Physics Division, BARC, 
1992. 


b) IAEA Technical Report Series No. 295, Measurement of Radionuclide in food and the environment 
(A guide book), IAEA, 1989. 


c) EML Procedures Manual Report HASL -300; 26th Edition; Environmental Measurements Lab., N.Y. 
USA, 1983. 


The other parts in this series are: 


Part 1 Gross beta activity 
Part2 Gross alpha activity 
Part3 Uranium 

Part4 Radium 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. 


IS 14194 (Part 5) : 2013 


Indian Standard 


RADIONUCLIDES IN ENVIRONMENTAL 
SAMPLES — METHODS OF ESTIMATION 
PART 5 SAMPLING 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 5) prescribes the methods of 
sampling for determination of radionuclides in 
environmental samples. 


2 GENERAL ASPECTS OF SAMPLING AND 
SAMPLE PRESERVATION 


2.1 Sample Collection 


The sample collected should be representative with 
respect to area, time and the matrix being sampled. 
Radioactive element is often present in sub microgram 
amounts and a significant fraction may be lost by 
adsorption on the surface of containers used in the 
sampling. The sample should be collected in adequately 
cleaned plastic bottles for liquid samples, bags and wide 
mouth bottles for solid samples. A record of sample 
identification number, date of sampling, sample 
description, location and fresh weight should be noted 
on the sample container and also in a register maintained 
at the Laboratory. The minimally required sample 
amount depends primarily on the concentration of the 
analytes present in sample matrices. The sample volume 
should be sufficient to perform all required laboratory 
analyses with an additional amount remaining to provide 
for analysis of QA/QC including duplicates and spikes. 
For heterogeneous samples, a larger portion is generally 
required to be a representative of the actual sample 
variations such that possible biased results can be 
minimized. This larger portion of the collected sample 
is then homogenized thoroughly followed by 
subsampling. Taking too large or too many samples can 
be avoided because of its storage (cold room and 
freezer), transportation, and disposal costs. 


2.2 Sample Storage 


The collected samples shall be properly stored to avoid 
degradation, spoiling or decomposition and also to avoid 
contamination, until it is taken up for analysis. In case 
of analysis of volatile, or short lived (like I-131 
evaluations) radionuclides, samples should be analysed 
at the earliest possible. Sample storage for short duration 
may require refrigeration, freezing, or the addition of a 
preservative such as sodium bisulphite, alcohol or 
formalin for preservation of biological samples. 


In case of the liquid samples, the loss of radionuclides 
due to absorption on the walls of the container can be 
minimized by the addition of concentrated 
hydrochloric acid (HCI) for radio cesium and mixture 
of conc. nitric acid (HNO; ) or hydrochloric acid (HCI) 
to obtain pH < 2 for all other radionuclides. Stable 
element carriers of the radionuclide of interest or some 
complexing agent may also be added. Sample storage 
area should be clean. 


2.3 Pre-treatment of Samples 
2.3.1 Drying, Evaporation and Ashing 


Drying reduces the weight of the samples and also 
permits storage for a longer time. Drying may be done 
in an oven at a temperature ranging between 100 and 
110°C for a sufficient period of time to give a constant 
dry weight of the sample. To prevent any loss of volatile 
radionuclides such as I-131, freeze drying can be 
adopted for analysis of radioactive constituents in easily 
volatilizing organic compounds. Freeze drying is time 
consuming and also expensive and as such it may be 
used only when it is essential. 


The sample should be dried in an oven at 105 + 5°C. 
Ashing the sample reduces the bulk of the sample 
considerably and helps in storing it for a long period of 
time. The temperature recommended for dry, ashing in 
muffle furnace is 450 + 10°C. If the temperature of 
ashing goes beyond 500°C, there can be some loss of 
radiocesium and radioruthenium. The radioactivity 
contents in a sample should be expressed on dry weight 
basis rather than ash weight basis. Measurement of ash 
weight is necessary for calculations of radionuclide 
concentration. Platinum dish or platinum crucible are 
the best containers for ashing. Low carbon nickel dishes, 
crucibles or trays for radionuclide other than nickel (Ni) 
isotopes or silica (vitrified) dishes may also be used for 
ashing the environmental samples. 


2.4 Homogenization 


The homogeneity of the sample always plays a role when 
the material under investigation is not mixed thoroughly. 
Dried or ashed samples require homogenization before 
taking any portion of it for analysis. Homogenization 
can be carried out using mixer-blenders, ball mill or 


IS 14194 (Part 5) : 2013 


manually using mortar and pestle. Large quantities of 
powdered sample can be homogenized in a rotating 
stainless steel drum homogenizer. 


3 SAMPLE AMOUNT 


Amount of the sample to be taken for analysis depends 
on following two factors: 


a) Fraction of the derived limit of radionuclide 
concentration that has to be measured. 

b) The detection limit of the measuring instrument 
with the required confidence level. 


Lower limit of detection (LLD) or minimum detectable 
activity (MDA) is defined as the smallest quantity of 
sample radioactivity that will yield a net count on which 
there is a predetermined level of confidence that 
radioactivity is present. For sample and background 
counting rates that are similar (as expected at or near 
the LLD) the smallest amount of radioactivity that has 
a 95 percent probability of being detected is, 


2.71+4.66/B 
MDA (Bq/kg) = 
TXEX Ym X(M or V) 
where 
B = counts; 
T = counting time, in s; 
E = counting efficiency; 
abn = gamma abundance; 
M = sample weight, in kg; and 
V = sample volume, in 1. 
Example: 


Say one wants to measure Cs-137 in food samples. 
Determine the optimum amount of sample, if 0.1 
percent of derived maximum permissible concentration 
(MPO) of Cs-137 in food has to be measured. Derived 
MPC for Cs-137 in food is given as 1 000 Bq/kg. That 
is, if 1 Bq/kg is to be measured and the sample amount 
to be taken for this can be obtained by using the above 
relation and the following values for the factors: 


0.1 percent of derived MPC = 1.0 Bq/kg, T= 3 600 S, 
B = 5 000 counts 


E = 0.1 (10 percent) 


Then M (mass of 
sample required = 


= 0.851 (85.1 percent) 


° abn 


2.71 + 4.66 x ¥5 000 x 1 000 
3 600 x 0.1 x 0.851 x 1.0 


that is, as per the above relation, 1 084 g of sample 
should be sufficient for analysis. 


The sample amount should be selected on the basis of 
nuclide of interest having the lowest derived limit when 
analysis is required for various radionuclides. 


4 SAMPLING AND SAMPLE PREPARATION 
(PROCESSING) 


4.1 Type of Samples 


The samples for radioactivity measurements can be any 
of the following environmental matrices: 


a) Atmospheric; 

b) Atmospheric fallout deposition or wet 
precipitation; 

c) Terrestrial; or 

d) Aquatic (fresh water or marine). 


4.2 Atmospheric Sampling 


4.2.1 Samples from the atmospheric air are classified 
into two categories, namely, gaseous and particulates. 
The equipments required for air sampling are: 


a) Air suction pump; 
b) Flow rate meter; 
c) A time totalizing device; and 


d) Filter (holder) head for particulates or 
adsorbent cartridge for gases. 


4.2.2 Air should be pumped through the filter at known 
flow rate for a known period of time so that total volume 
of air sampled can be known and radioactivity concen- 
tration is reported per unit volume (Bq/m? or Bq/l). 


4.2.3 In case of gaseous I-131 collection, either 
activated charcoal cartridge or charcoal impregnated 
filters are used as adsorbers. For the purpose of 
particulate collection, there are many varieties of filter 
media such as glass fibre filter paper, cellulose fibre 
filter papers, polycarbonate filters, etc. Pumps with 
lower flow rates (50 to 100 l/min) can be used for 
routine air sampling to obtain weekly averages. There 
are air sampling equipments available with constant 
flow rate or a flow integrating device to take care of 
the varying dust loads. Battery operated samplers can 
be used where electric mains supply is not available. 


For sampling air particulates in emergency conditions, 
high volume air samplers (300 l/min) can be used. 
Though the sampling time is dependent on the expected 
activity level in any case, for rapid assay, it need not 
be more than 30 min. 


4.3 Atmospheric Fallout Deposition or Wet 
Precipitation 


4.3.1 Dry fallout deposition sample may be collected 
on a stainless steel or a plastic tray of known area. 
Normally this sample is collected on a monthly 
cumulative basis. Collection tray area of 1 m? is 
adequate. The fallout collectors should be kept in a 
completely open area without cover of trees or bushes. 


4.3.2 For the collection of rain water, a wide diameter 
(15 cm) plastic funnel attached to a Plastic carboy (20 1) 
may be used. While sampling rain water for longer 
duration (weekly or monthly), stainless steel or plastic 
trays of 0.1 m? area with arrangement to drain the 
collected water to a container carboy may be used. 
Mixed bed ion exchange columns with known water 
collection area (area of the funnel kept on the top of 
the column) may also be used for weekly or monthly 
rain water sample collection. From the rainfall data 
and area of the collection, one can get the volume of 
rain water passed through the column. The rain water 
collectors also should be kept in an open area. 


4.4 Samples from Terrestrial Environment 


4.4.1 Soil, grass vegetation/vegetables, food crops, milk 
and meat are the important matrices from the terrestrial 
environment for the purpose of radiation exposure 
evaluation. Certain samples are good indicators of 
terrestrial radio activity deposition of particular 
radionuclides. For example, animal thyroids especially 
of goat/sheep are good concentrators of deposited 
I-131. Dung of the grazing cattle is a good indicator of 
pasture deposited radionuclides like plutonium. Leafy 
vegetation is good indicator of terrestrial deposited 
radionuclides. 


4.4.2 Soil and soil radioactivity is measured to evaluate, 


a) radionuclide deposited on land (which will 
give rise to direct radiation exposure); 

b) availability of radionuclides for pick up by 
vegetables and crops grown over it; and 

c) to estimate the leachable fraction of radio- 
nuclides to ground water. 


For evaluating land deposition, soil has to be collected 
from undisturbed area on level ground and open terrain. 
An area of 1 m? has to be marked and all the soil up to 
a depth of 15 cm should be collected by digging with 
a small pick-axe. If there is grass growth over the land, 
the top grass has to be cut and removed before soil 
sampling. Root and mat portion can remain. For the 
purpose of evaluating radionuclide pickup by food 
crops, soil up to a depth of 5 to 10 cm has to be collected 
to cover the complete root zone. 


Auger samplers can be used to collect soil core up to 
the required depth. Instead of digging with pick-axe, 
soil coring in about 10 places in 1 m? area up to the 
required depth can be carried out. The cores have to 
be mixed to make a single representative soil sample. 
Soil samples can be put in polythene bags and labeled 
properly. In the laboratory, samples may be dried, 
powdered and rocks and stone particles may be 
removed. Dry powder may be sieved through a 70 mesh 
sieve and this processed soil may be stored in wide 
mouthed polythene or plastic bottles. 


IS 14194 (Part 5) : 2013 


4.4.3 Grass 


Grass and any other type of animal forage are sampled 
from known land area. A 1 m x 1 m (1 m°) area frame 
may be made from wooden strip and can be used to 
mark 1m? area on grass land. The frame may be kept 
on the grass land and all grass within the frame may 
be cut just 4 cm above ground so as to prevent any soil 
contamination on grass and also represent the portion 
normally used as fodder. If grass is grown only to a 
small height it can be cut just above ground avoiding 
soil contamination. In case of huge wide grass lands, 
samples from three to four locations from the same 
area may be composited to get a representative sample 
for the area. Grass can be collected in a polythene bag 
on which the sample identification number and other 
details shall be written. If the grass is green and not 
dry, the sample weight should be taken at the earliest. 


For storage of green grass, perforated plastic bags may 
be used. If I-131 is to be estimated, the grass sample in 
the bag can be directly counted provided the instrument 
calibration exists. Otherwise grass should be chopped 
into small pieces, dried at 100 to 105°C, powdered in 
a mixer-grinder, and this dry powder used for 
radionuclide determination by gamma spectrometry. 
The dried grass can be dry ashed in a muffle furnace 
below 450°C or wet ashed using concentrated nitric 
acid (HNO,) and hydrogen peroxide (H,O,) for further 
radiochemical analysis. 


Sample weight, dry weight, and ash weights should be 
properly registered such that the result expressed as 
Bq/g ash can be converted for any required state of 
sample. 


4.4.4 Vegetables/Vegetation 


While sampling vegetables/vegetation from the field, 
a composite sample should be made by taking small 
and equal quantity of vegetables/vegetation from 
different places in the same area. A sample weight of 
about 2 kg is normally sufficient for radioactivity 
analysis. This sample may be collected in perforated 
polythene bags and stored under refrigeration. Sample 
weight should be taken at the earliest before storage. 
Vegetables and vegetation vary from place to place and 
the sample chosen need to be representative for the 
location. 


The sample can be dried at 110°C in an oven, after 
removing non-edible portions. Dry sample should be 
powdered for the purpose of gamma spectrometric 
analysis. The dry powder can be ashed in a muffle 
furnace at 450 + 10°C and can be taken for radio- 
chemical analysis. Wet ashing with nitric acid (HNO,) 
and hydrogen peroxide (H,O,) can also be carried out 
before radiochemical analysis. Sample weight, dry 
weight, and ash weight can be noted. 


IS 14194 (Part 5) : 2013 


4.4.5 Food Crops 


Rice, wheat, millets and pulses are the main food crops 
in the country. Samples may be collected from the field 
or from the granaries where grain is stored. About 2 kg 
of sample normally be sufficient. Dry crop sample can 
be directly counted without processing. For radio- 
chemical analysis, the crops have to be either dry ashed 
in muffle furnace at 500°C or wet ashed using nitric 
acid (HNO,) and hydrogen peroxide (H,O,). 


4.4.6 Milk 


Milk needs to be collected from dairy farms where milk 
from different area is processed for distribution. In the 
absence of a dairy, sample should be collected from 
about five milk producers and composited to make a 
representative sample from the area. Milk sample 
should be preferably taken from cattle which graze in 
the outside grass land and not from cattle fed from 
stored cattle feed. One litre of milk is normally be 
adequate for radioactivity measurement. 


Refrigeration method is sufficient for short time 
preservation of milk samples. Long term preservation 
can be carried out by adding Formalin (about 5 ml of 
5 percent solution per liter) as a preservative. Milk can 
be ashed below 450+10°C for the purpose of radio- 
chemical analysis. A direct gamma spectrometry using 
Nal:TI detector can also be carried out. 


4.4.7 Meat/Animal Thyroid 


Fresh meat of cattle, sheep or goats may be collected 
from the local abattoir or from the local market. Non- 
edible portion should be removed and only edible 
portion has to be processed and analyzed. Bones are 
easily separated from the flesh by heating the sample 
at 150°C in an oven for 30 min to | h. Meat samples 
can be collected in plastic bags and stored in deep 
freezer after taking weight. Normally 2 kg of soft tissue 
should be sufficient. 


Animal thyroids have to be collected mainly from the 
place where animals are slaughtered for meat. The 
person collecting this sample needs to know the 
position of thyroid gland in animal body. Thyroids can 
be kept in polythene specimen tube and can be stored 
by refrigeration. 


The meat samples may be ashed below 450°C to avoid 
loss of radio cesium at higher temperatures. Ashing 
can be done without ignition of the sample. 10 to 25 g 
of ash is sufficient for radiochemical analysis. 


4.5 Samples from Aquatic Environment 


4.5.1 Fresh Water/Sea Water 


In case of municipal supplies, drinking water sample 
can be collected from water taps. About 10-20 1 of water 


can be collected in a plastic carboy and about 10 ml of 
concentrated HClI/l of sample can be added as 
preservative. 


If well water has to be collected, water sample from the 
public well used by maximum number of people, need to 
be collected. Sample should be acidified with HNO, for 
preservation. Sampling river or lake water can be carried 
out from a bridge or dock or jetty or a boat. A plastic 
bucket tied to a nylon rope can be used to take the sample 
from the surface. Sample can be filled in a 51 plastic 
carboy. Acidify with concentrated HNO, (5 ml/l) for 
sample preservation. For depth sampling special depth 
samplers are available (Nansen bottle sampler). 


For sampling sea water from different depths, special 
depth samplers should be used. Continuous water 
samplers (with varying sampling time and varying 
sampling frequency) are available which can be used 
conveniently for sampling streams receiving liquid 
waste. While sampling of river water, lake or coastal 
waters, sample need to be collected slightly away from 
the shore where depth of water is 0.5 m or more. 5 to 
10 1 sample are normally sufficient to detect any sea 
water contamination. Concentrated HNO, (3 ml/l) can 
be added as preservative. 


4.5.2 Sediment 


River bed, lake bed and sea bed can be sampled using 
a grab sampler. About | to 2 kg sediment need to be 
collected in plastic bags and can be stored under 
refrigeration. 


When depth profile of radioactivity in a sediment bed 
has to be investigated, a sediment core can be collected. 
A tube penetrates the sediment layer to take vertical 
cylindrical samples. A non return valve arrangement 
stops the sample falling down while lifting up. After 
lifting, the sediment core can be pushed out of the tube 
and cut into different fractions for studying vertical 
pattern of radionuclide distribution. 


Before carrying out analysis, the sediment sample 
should be passed through a 10 mesh screen to remove 
large stones and pebbles. If necessary, sample can be 
forced through the sieve with a rubber stopper. The 
sample can be dried in oven at 110°C, powdered, sieved 
through 70 mesh and analyzed by gamma spectrometry. 
The sample can be ashed at 450°C in a muffle furnace 
for radiochemical analysis. 


4.5.3 Fish and Other Aquatic Organisms 


Fish sample from the coastal area can be collected from 
the fish landing centres, or brought directly from the 
boats or trawlers. Samples of marine organisms such as 
crabs, oysters, clams and sponges are good concentrators 
of radionuclides and can many times serve as indicators 
for specific radionuclides, and hence need to be collected 
along with fish samples. Oyster samples are good for 


indicators for Zn-65 detection in the environment; 
sponge is the best indicator for Ni-63 and Co-60. These 
samples of aquatic organisms can be collected depending 
on their availability. About 1 kg of sample is normally 
sufficient. Plastic bags can be used for keeping the 
collected samples. Samples should be kept in an ice box 
soon after collection and subsequently stored in deep 
freeze, if it is not taken up for analysis immediately. 


The sample may be processed to isolate edible and non 
edible portion and oven dried at 110°C. In case of aquatic 
organism such as fishes, clams, etc, heating at about 
150°C in an oven helps in separating soft tissues from 
bone or shells. Dry ashing in a muffle furnace (at 450°C) 
or wet ashing with HNO, can be carried out for 
radiochemical analysis. Wet oxidation of soft tissue is 
better for preventing loss of volatile radionuclide. 


IS 14194 (Part 5) : 2013 


4.5.4 Aquatic Plants and Weeds 


The phytoplankton and zooplankton samples from the 
water body may be collected by passing a known 
volume of water through plankton net. The samples 
can be preserved at 4 percent formalin. 


Sea weeds are good samples for I-131 detection in 
coastal waters and can be used as an indicator. Samples 
can be collected in plastic bags with perforations and 
preserved in deep freezer. Processing of these samples 
can be done similar to terrestrial vegetation. The 
important point to be observed in case of aquatic plant 
sample processing is to dislodge the deposited silt by 
thorough washing. About 0.5 to 1 kg sample is adequate 
for radionuclide measurement. Noting of sample 
weight, dry weight and ash weight is essential and need 
to be properly recorded. 


IS 14194 (Part 5) : 2013 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Nuclear Materials for Peaceful Applications Sectional Committee, CHD 30 


Organization 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (Radiochemistry & Isotope Group), 


Mumbai 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (Environment Division), Mumbai 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Hyderabad 
Board of Radiation and Isotope Technology (BRIT), New Delhi 


Defence Research & Development Organisation, Jodhpur 


Department of Atomic Energy, Nuclear Fuel Complex, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 
Indian Rare Earths Ltd (Research Centre), Mumbai 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 

Larsen and Tubro Ltd, Mumbai 

Madras Atomic Power Station, Kalpakkam 

Ministry of Defence (Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied 
Sciences), Delhi 

Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 

Ministry of Environment and Forests, New Delhi 

Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 

Rajasthan Atomic Power Station, Rajasthan 

Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute and Research Centre, New Delhi 

Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Kolkata 

Shriram Institute of Industrial Research, Delhi 

Tarapur Atomic Power Station (1 & 2), Mumbai 


Tarapur Atomic Power Station (3 & 4), Mumbai 


Uranium Corporation of India Ltd, Jharkhand 
Vikram Sarabhai Space Research Centre, Thiruvananthapuram 
In personal capacity, Lucknow 


BIS Directorate General 


Representives(s) 


Dr V. VENUGOPAL (Chairman) 
Dr K. L. RAMAKumaR (Alternate) 


Dr (Surimati) G. G. PANDIT 
Suri K. NATARAJAN 
Dr N. C. GooMER 


SHRI S. G. VAWAPURKAR 
Dr PRApDpEEP Narayan (Alternate) 


Dr B. N. MuRTHY 
Suri Y. BALAJI Rao (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. KALRA 


SHRI A. N. PATRA 
Suri V. K. VERMA (Alternate) 


Dr Barpev RAJ 
Dr K. S. VISWANATHAN (Alternate) 


Suri K. KisHAN BABU 
SHRI ANIL Paras (Alternate) 


Dr K. S. KrisHNA Rao 


Dr Ravi KASHYAP 
Dr Anupam Monpat (Alternate) 


Suri C. S. P. RATHORE 
Suri P. G. Dare (Alternate) 


DR A. SENTHIL VEL 
Da Y. P. KAKAR (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. PANDARINATHAN 
SHRI BHASKAR PANpIr (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. PAL 
Suri S. L. Saint (Alternate) 


Pror P. S. NEGI 
Suri R. K. Muna (Alternate) 


Pror SupEB BHATTACHARYA 
PRoF SuSANTA Lauirt (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. VERMA 
Suri SANJAY RAJPUT (Alternate) 


Suri U. RAMAMURTHY 
SHRI S. BHATTACHARJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. PAWAR 
Dr S. C. Dasu (Alternate) 


Suri S. SIDDIQUE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri S. P. AGARWAL 


Suri E. DEVENDAR, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (CHD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRIMATI MEENAL Passi 
Scientist ‘ʻE’ (CHD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 30 (1255). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 

NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Published by BIS, New Delhi 


