RAT TAP IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


tran eh rha TAWA 
TATA & feu ares 
TT 6 HAWA gÈ A MANE FAN 


Criteria for Earthquake Resistant 
Design of Structures 


Part 6 Base Isolated Buildings 


ICS 91.120.25 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay Reef 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2022 Price Group 7 


Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 6) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Earthquake 
Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Large part of land area of India is prone to moderate to severe earthquake shaking, and there are many critical structures 
built in these areas. Hence, earthquake resistant design is essential. In contrast to conventional approach of earthquake 
resistant design, wherein damage is expected in select structural members, the approach adopted in this standard 
attempts to reduce the extent of damage through base isolation of buildings. Unless stated otherwise, provisions of this 
standard are to be read necessarily in conjunction with the general provisions as laid down in IS 1893 (Part 1). 


This standard IS 1893 (Part 6) covers the requirements of base isolated buildings, or portions thereof, which shall be 
designed and constructed to mitigate the effects of earthquake induced displacements and forces. The provisions of 
this standard are applicable only to regular RC buildings and steel frame buildings, as covered by Table 9 of IS 1893 
(Part 1) conforming to the configuration requirements as per 7.1 of IS 1893 (Part 1), and not to buildings with precast 
elements based lateral load resisting systems. The standard provides guidelines for estimation of design lateral force 
and displacement to be considered in the design of buildings with base isolation system, method of structural analysis 
to be adopted in the analysis of such buildings, and guidelines for testing of the seismic isolation devices that are 
used in such buildings. The underlying philosophy of this standard is that a base isolated building will perform better 
than a conventional building (with fixed base), when subjected to moderate to severe earthquake shaking. It is not the 
intent of this standard to reduce the construction cost, but to minimize damage to base isolated buildings and their 
contents and enhance the likelihood of continued functionality of the building. Generally, it has been observed that 
base isolation system is more effective for buildings with following conditions: 


a) stiff superstructure, 

b) rigid foundation on stiff and competent soil, 

c) certain ground motions that do not have sharp pulse-like motions, and 
d) ductile detailing of the whole structure. 


For identifying and ascertaining the proximity of the site of a base isolated building to an active or potentially active 
fault, reference may be made for geo-scientific data to the Bhukosh gateway of the Geological Survey of India. For 
buildings within 20 km of an active fault, site-specific spectra shall be developed and used, and the building analysed 
using specialist literature. 


Base isolated buildings that are not addressed explicitly by this standard require full dynamic analysis to be carried out 
to ascertain their likely performance; this standard shall not be used to design such buildings. 


This standard IS 1893 (Part 6) may be used also for the design of base isolation system for existing buildings, as part 
of earthquake retrofitting. In such cases, full dynamic analysis shall be required to ascertain the likely performance. 
In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications: 
EN 15129 : 2019 Anti-seismic Devices, European Standard. 
IBC 2015, International Building Code, International Code Council USA, 2015. 
ASCE 7 (2016) Minimum Design Loads and Associated Criteria for Buildings and Other Structures American 
Society of Civil Engineering, USA 2016. 
ISO 22762-1 : 2018 Elastomeric Seismic-protection Isolators — Part | : Test Methods, International Standards 
Organization. 
FEMA P.751— 2009 NEHRP Recommended Seismic Provisions, Federal Emergency Management Agency, 
USA. 


Japan Notification Nos. 2009 and 1446, Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport, Government of 
Japan. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final, observed 
or calculated value, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 


‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


CRITERIA FOR EARTHQUAKE RESISTANT 
DESIGN OF STRUCTURES 


PART 6 BASE ISOLATED BUILDINGS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard provides requirements for base 
isolated buildings, which shall be designed and 
constructed to resist earthquake induced effects 
(namely displacements and forces) as specified herein. 
The provisions of this standard are applicable only to: 


a) Conventional monolithic RC buildings and steel 
frame buildings, excluding those with pure flat slabs 
or with precast elements based lateral load resisting 
systems that are, not covered by IS 1893 (Part 1); 
and 


b 


ma 


Buildings with base-isolation devices, such as 
elastomeric and sliding systems, all of which are 
located at the same level only, along the height of 
the building (and not at multiple levels). 


1.2 Buildings with base-isolation devices are expected 
to perform better than the conventional fixed-base 
buildings, especially interms of damage in the structural 
and non-structural elements in the superstructure above 
the isolation level. 


1.3 The underlying principles of the provisions of this 
standard are: 


a) Base-isolated buildings designed using this 
standard shall perform betterthan the corresponding 
fixed-base buildings when subjected to ground 
motions expected in the applicable the Seismic 
Zone; and 


b) The desired sequence of location of damage 
is superstructure, isolators, substructure and 
foundation. 


1.4 This standard suggests the estimation of design 
earthquake lateral forces and displacements to be 
considered and the method of structural analysis to be 
adopted, in the design of buildings with base isolation 
systems, and the specifications and method of testing of 
the base isolators that are proposed to be used in such 
buildings. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this standard, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 


subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms shall have 
the meaning as mentioned below: 


3.1 Base Level — The top level of the base isolators 
placed in the building. 


3.2 Base Isolation System — The collection of special 
elements, including all individual isolators and their 
connections to the adjoining structural elements, which 
transfer forces due to gravity and forces induced during 
earthquake shaking, between the structural elements of 
the building above and below the base-isolation system. 


3.3 Base Isolator — The horizontally flexible and 
vertically stiff structural element of the Base-Isolation 
System provided in the building, which is designed to 
permit a specified value of lateral displacement at the 
base level of the building during earthquake shaking, 
and to dissipate energy under cyclic loading. 


3.4 Design Displacement — The lateral displacement, 
excluding additional displacement due to actual and 
accidental torsion, to be considered in the design of the 
base-isolation system (or one of its isolators thereof) of 
a building to resist earthquake shaking. 


3.5 Effective Damping — The equivalent viscous 
damping (as percentage of critical damping) of 
the base-isolator, obtained from its experimental 
characteristic cyclic loop at the amplitude of interest, 
which is considered in design of the base-isolator. 


3.6 Effective Stiffness — The secant stiffness of the 
characteristic cyclic loop of the base-isolator at the 
amplitude of interest, which is considered in design of 
the base-isolator. 


3.7 Load Transfer System — The collection of all 
structural elements through which the loads (namely 
axial forces, shear forces, bending moments and 
torsional moments) flow, which are generated by 
gravity, earthquake shaking or other load effects on 
the building. It includes segments of columns and 
connecting beams above the base isolation system. 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


3.8 Total Design Displacement — The lateral 
displacement, plus additional displacement due to 
actual and accidental torsion, to be considered in 
the design of the base-isolation system (or one of its 
isolators thereof) of a building to resist earthquake 
shaking. 


4 SYMBOLS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following letter 
symbols shall have the meaning indicated below 
against each: 
A, Gross cross-section area 
B Plan dimension of the building, above 
the base level, perpendicular to the 
considered direction of earthquake 
shaking 


D Plan dimension of the building, above 
the base level, along the considered 
direction of earthquake shaking 


DL Dead Load on the building as per IS 875 
(Part 1) 


EQ Design Earthquake Load as per IS 1893 
(Part 1), unless otherwise specified in 
this standard 


e Actual eccentricity measured in 
plan between the Centre of Mass 
of the building above the base level 
and the Centre of Resistance of the 
Base-Isolation System, plus accidental 
eccentricity (5 percent of the maximum 
building dimension perpendicular to 
the considered direction of earthquake 
shaking) 


Ft Force in a base-isolator unit in the 

d forward direction along the considered 

direction of earthquake shaking, during 

a single cycle of prototype testing, at a 
displacement amplitude of A $x 


F- Force in a base-isolator unit in the 

= backward direction along the considered 

direction of earthquake shaking, during 

a single cycle of prototype testing, at a 
displacement amplitude of A pax 


h Height of floor i from the base level 


I Importance factor to be used in the 
estimation of design earthquake lateral 
force of the building, as given in Table 8 
of IS 1893 (Part 1) 


I Gross moment of inertia of a section 


eff, max 


eff, min 


initial 


eff, max 


eff, min 


LL 


eff, max 


Maximum effective stiffness of the 
Base-Isolation System at the design 
displacement along the considered 
direction of earthquake shaking 


Minimum effective stiffness of the 
Base-Isolation System at the design 
displacement along the considered 
direction of earthquake shaking 


Initial stiffness of the base-isolator along 
the considered direction of earthquake 
shaking 


Maximum effective stiffness of the 
base-isolator estimated along the 
considered direction of earthquake 
shaking, in a single cycle during 
prototype testing of the base-isolator 
out of the first three repeated cycles 
of loading in the design displacement 
range [-A,,,+ Ap] of the base isolator 


Minimum effective stiffness of the 
base-isolator estimated along the 
considered direction of earthquake 
shaking, in a single cycle during 
prototype testing of the base-isolator 
out of the first three repeated cycles 
of loading in the design displacement 
range [—A,,,+ Ap] of the base isolator 


Imposed load on the building as per 
IS 875 (Part 2) 


Design floor lateral forces to be applied 
at floor level i of the building above the 
base level 


Response reduction factor of a fixed 
base building as per IS 1893 (Part 1) 


Response reduction factor of a 
base-isolated building 


Design horizontal spectral acceleration 
coefficient (corresponding to 5 percent 
damping) at a natural period of T,,, as 
obtained from Fig. 2 of IS 1893 (Part 1) 


Fundamental lateral translational natural 
period (in s) of the fixed-base building 
(without a base isolation system) 


Effective natural period (in s) estimated 
of base-isolated building at the design 
displacement in the considered direction 
of earthquake shaking 


Maximum value of effective natural 
period (in s) 7; obtained from 
experiments of the base-isolation 
devices at the design displacement in 
the considered direction of earthquake 
shaking 


eff, min 


S,min 


Minimum value of effective natural 
period (in s) 7), obtained from 
experiments of the  base-isolated 
building at the design displacement in 
the considered direction of earthquake 
shaking 


Site period i.e., the fundamental natural 
period of the site for shaking in the 
horizontal direction 


Design earthquake lateral force to be 
used in the design of the structural 
elements below the base-level in the 
direction of shaking 


Design earthquake lateral force to be 
used in the design of the structural 
elements above the base-level system in 
the direction of shaking 


Elastic maximum base shear without 
using the response reduction factor 


Minimum earthquake lateral force to 
be used in the design of the structural 
elements above the base-level in the 
direction of shaking 


Effective seismic weight of floor i of the 
building above the base-level 


Effective seismic weight of floor j of the 
building above the base-level 


Effective seismic weight of the building 
above the base-level 


Distance between the centre of 
resistance of the all base-isolators 
together and location of the base isolator 
in focus, measured perpendicular to 
the considered direction of earthquake 
shaking 


Seismic zone factor, as given in Table 3 
of IS 1893 (Part 1) 


Multiplier to be applied on 5 percent 
damping, corresponding to effective 
damping of the base-isolator in focus 


Effective damping in the base-isolation 
system at the design displacement 


Effective damping in the base-isolator i 
estimated through prototype testing of 
the base-isolator 


Design displacement of a base-isolator 
unit, including both translational 
displacement at the centre of resistance, 
and the component of torsional 
displacement in the considered direction 
of earthquake shaking 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


At. Maximum displacement in a base- 
isolator in the forward direction along 
the considered direction of earthquake 
shaking, in a single cycle during 
prototype testing of the base-isolator 


Le Maximum displacement in a base- 
isolator in the backward direction along 
the considered direction of earthquake 
shaking, in a single cycle during 
prototype testing of the base-isolator 


AS, Design displacement of the base-isolation 
system at the centre of resistance in 
the considered direction of earthquake 
shaking 


When other symbols are used, they are explained at 
the appropriate place. Unless otherwise specified, all 
dimensions are in millimetres (mm), loads in Newtons 
(N), stresses in Mega-Pascals (MPa) and time in 
seconds (s). 


5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


The base-isolation system employed shall: 
a) be stable at the total design displacement, 


b) offer increased resistance with 
displacement, 


increase in 


c) not sustain significant degradation of its properties 
under repeated cyclic loading, and 


d) possess well-established and reproducible 
engineering properties (namely effective stiffness 
and effective damping). 


Items (c) and (d) above shall be in compliance with 
requirements given under 7. 


A base-isolated building shall be designed considering 
seismic zone, site characteristics, vertical acceleration, 
grosscross-sectionproperties, occupancy, configuration, 
structural system and height in accordance with clauses 
provided for the same in IS 1893 (Part 1). 


In general, base isolated buildings should be located 
at sites that have Soil Types I and J as classified in 
IS 1893 (Part 1). Also, even within sites with Soil 
Types I and II, sites that can liquefy shall not be chosen 
for constructing base-isolated buildings. 


All base-isolated buildings shall be provided with 
ductile detailing as per the requirements for special 
moment frames and/or special structural walls of 
IS 13920 for reinforced concrete building, and as 
per the requirements of special moment frames 
and/or special concentrically braced frames of IS 800 
for structural steel buildings. 


5.1 Elements of a Base-Isolated Building 


The design requirements of this standard distinguish 
between the three sub-systems of a base isolated 
building (Fig. 1), namely: 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


Column Column 


Load Transfer System 


Base- 
Isolation 
System 


Foundation 


Fic. 1 SECTIONAL ELEVATION OF A BASE-ISOLATED BUILDING 


4 


a) Superstructure, which includes elements of the 
structure above the base level; 

b) Base-isolation system, which includes all 
individual base isolators and their connection 
elements; and 


c 


wa 


Substructure, which includes structural 
elements of the structure below the base level, 
namely-foundation structural elements and the 
soil in contact with the foundation and beyond 
it up to a depth and width beyond the foundation 
structural elements as per acceptable principles of 
soil mechanics and structural dynamics. 


All base isolator units shall be firmly anchored to the 
substructure and the superstructure. The forces in the 
connecting elements shall not exceed their design 
strength as per IS 800 for elements in structural steel, 
and as per IS 456 for elements in reinforced concrete. 


5.2 Stability of the Base Isolation System 


The stability of the base-isolators (under the expected 
maximum vertical loads) shall be verified by both 
structural analysis and cyclic testing (as per 7.1), at the 
total design lateral displacement. A base-isolator is said 
to be in uplift condition, if it develops tensile force in 
the axial vertical direction under any load combination. 


In general, no tensile load shall be permitted in any base 
isolation device. In case of tensile loading in elastomeric 
base isolators, the maximum tensile stress should not 
exceed G (shear modulus of the base isolator). Whether 
or not uplift is likely to occur in base isolated buildings 
with any type of base isolator system, response history 
analysis shall be performed (including the effect of 
vertical earthquake ground shaking). 


Under the load combinations that involve earthquake 
load effects, the factor of safety against overturning at 
the base of the substructure shall be at least 1.4 and 
that against sliding at least 1.2. For the purposes of the 
estimation of the above factors of safety, the earthquake 
load effects in the superstructure shall be estimated 
using elastic maximum base shear without using the 
response reduction factor as given by: 


Ver = z2) W, 
EJT, 


eff 


5.3 Configuration Requirements 


The structural configuration of a base-isolated 
building shall be assessed to be regular or irregular 
based on of the portion of the building above the 
base-isolationsystem, inaccordancewiththeprovisionsof 
IS 1893 (Part 1). The provisions of this standard shall 
be applicable only for base-isolated buildings that 
are regular as per IS 1893 (Part 1). In addition, the 
in-plan placement of the base isolators shall be such 
that their centre of resistance along two horizontal plan 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


directions shall coincide with the centre of resistances 
of the substructure as well as the super structure. 


5.4 Residual Displacement 


Base-isolated building may sustain residual 
displacement at the level of isolator. Services and 
utilities that cross the isolation interface shall be 
designed and detailed to accommodate the total 
displacement without disruption in their functionality. 


5.5 Separation from the Adjacent Building and 
Location of Moat 


The wall of the moat of a base-isolated building 
shall be placed at a distance not less than the total 
design displacement A, of the base-isolator units, as 
estimated in 6.1.4. 


For base-isolated buildings that are adjacent to 
each other, the minimum clear distance between the 
buildings shall be equal to the sum of the design 
displacement and the two times the total lateral 
displacement of each building, as estimated in 6.1.8. 


A base-isolated building shall be separated from an 
adjacent building (base-isolated or otherwise) by a 
distance at least equal to the design displacement A,» 
(as estimated in 6.1.4) plus the separation distance 
specified in 7.11.3 of IS 1893 (Part 1). 


5.6 Design Acceleration Spectrum 


The design acceleration spectral value of the 
base-isolated building shall be taken as per 6.4 of 
IS 1893 (Part 1). 


5.7 Location of Base Isolators 


All base isolators in a building shall be placed at a 
single level such that their top levels are in the same 
horizontal plane. When isolators are placed on column 
stubs, the maximum height of the column stubs below 
the isolators shall not be more than 2.5 m. Also: 


a) All lift shafts, stair wells and specialist equipment 
which require to be with the superstructure, shall 
be suspended from the superstructure, even 
though they cross below the isolation plane; and 


b) All flexible elements crossing the isolation 
plane from the substructure to the superstructure 
shall be detailed to comply with the relative 
deformation imposed at the isolation plane. 


All base isolator units shall be placed such that there 
is adequate space for inspection-related movement, 
both during installation and later for replacement. 
Necessary provisions shall be incorporated in the 
general design of the building to ensure that there 
is no possibility of damage to the base isolator units 
due to exposure to fire, flooding or freezing, as the 
case may be. 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


6 METHODS OF ANALYSIS 


Any of the following two linear structural analysis 
methods may be employed for structural analysis of 
base-isolated buildings to arrive at the design lateral 
displacement and the design lateral force of the isolation 
system, superstructure and substructure: 


a) Equivalent static method, and 
b) Response spectrum method. 


And, nonlinear response history analysis (or nonlinear 
time history analysis) may be used for checking the 
adequacy of the design of the base-isolated buildings, 
as specified in 7.7.4 of IS 1893 (Part 1). The loads 
and load effects due to earthquake shaking, and the 
analytical modelling of the structure shall be as per 
6.4.3 of IS 1893 (Part 1), except as modified by 6.2.1 
of this standard. 


6.1 Equivalent Static Method 


The Equivalent Static Method (ESM), also called 
equivalent lateral force method, is a linear static analysis 
procedure, which uses effective stiffness and effective 
damping properties in the modelling of base isolators. 
Here, the first translational mode of the building 
associated with the horizontal displacement of the 
base-isolation system alone (also known as isolation 
mode) is considered. This method assumes that most 
of the lateral displacement occurs in the base-isolation 
system. The method shall be used for design of 
superstructure, base-isolation system and substructure 
of buildings that meet the conditions given in 6.1.1. 
The results of this method of analysis stand as the 
lower-bound limit to the results of Response Spectrum 
Method (RSM) as per 6.2, when used. 


6.1.1 Conditions for Use of ESM 


The method can be used for design of Base-Isolated 
Buildings, without performing dynamic analysis to 
confirm the acceptable behaviour, if the building 
satisfies all of the following: 


a) Not located within 20 km from any known active 
fault; 


b) Resting on Soil Type I or Soil Type Il, as per 
IS 1893 (Part 1); 


c) Less than or equal to 20 m in height, above the 
base level; 


d) Has effective natural period T „ equal to or less 
than 3.0 s; 


e) Has Effective Natural Period T „ along a 
considered direction of shaking more than three 
times the Fundamental Natural Period T along 
the same direction of shaking of the corresponding 
Fixed-Base Building; 


f) The base isolation system meets all of the 
following three criteria: 
1) Its effective stiffness at the design displacement 
is more than one-third of its effective stiffness 
at 20 percent of the design displacement; 


2) It is capable of re-centering after the 
earthquake; and 
3) It possesses Force-Displacement 


Characteristic independent of the rate of 
cyclic loading. 
g) Located in Seismic Zone II only; and 


h) Conforms to configuration regularity criteria as 
per IS 1893 (Part 1). 


6.1.2 Design Displacement 


The Base-Isolation System shall be designed and 
constructed to withstand atleast a minimum lateral 
earthquake displacement of A,, along each of its 
principal plan direction, and estimated by: 


S To max 
Ass =| Z| = P |g = 2 
£ T 4r 


eff. max 


where damping multiplier 2 is given by: 


0.10 
p= | 
0.05+ By 


6.1.3 Effective Natural Period of the Base-Isolated 
Building 


The Maximum Effective Natural Period T,,..,, and 
Minimum Effective Natural Period T pin of the 
base-isolated building at the design displacement along 
each of its principal plan direction shall be determined 
using its effective minimum stiffness K, P and effective 
maximum stiffness K ra respectively, of the entire set 
of the base isolators provided in the building, which 
are derived from the hysteretic force-displacement 
loops of the testing of typical base isolators used, when 
subjected to cyclic inelastic excursion in the design 
displacement of —A,, and +A,,, respectively, of the 
base-isolation system, shall be estimated as: 


W 
off mar = 270 “and 
& eff min 
W, 
Tap mas = 27 K £ 
& eff, max 


6.1.4 Total Design Displacement 


A base isolator of the Base-Isolation System shall be 
designed to sustain additional displacement owing to 


actual and accidental torsion arising from the spatial 
distribution of the lateral stiffness of the base isolators 
distributed in plan and the most disadvantageous 
location of mass eccentricity. The base-isolator of a 
base-isolated building with uniform spatial distribution 
of lateral stiffness shall be designed to resist a Design 
Displacement A,, of the Base Isolator given by: 


A, estimated as above shall not be less than 1.1 times 
the Design Displacement A,, of the Base-Isolation 
System specified in 6.1.2, provided the Base-Isolation 
System is shown by analyses to be capable of resisting 
torsion accordingly. 


6.1.5 Design Earthquake Lateral Force for Design 
of the Components of Isolation System and of the 
Structural Elements below the base 


The components of the Base-Isolation System and 
the structural elements below the base-level shall be 
designed to resist effects along each principal plan 
direction, at least for the Design Earthquake Lateral 
Force V, estimated by: 


V, = K rrii Asp 
The maximum inter-storey drift in the substructure 
shall not exceed 0.001 times the storey height, when 
subjected to Design Earthquake Lateral Force V} 
specified above. 


6.1.6 Design Earthquake Base Shear Force for the 
Superstructure 

The structural elements above the base-level, that is, 
of the superstructure, shall be designed to resist effects 
of Design Earthquake Base Shear Force V, along each 
principal plan direction, which is estimated as: 


where 
R, = Response Reduction Factor of a base-isolated 
building given by: 
R= Min| AR; 2 


in which, R is the Response Reduction Factor specified 
in Table 9 of IS 1893 (Part 1) based on the structural 
system of the building above the Base-Isolation System. 


Ductile detailing is required to be provided in the entire 
building. 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


The Minimum Design Lateral Force V; „in along each 
direction of shaking shall not be less than any of the 


following: 


a) The design earthquake base shear force for a 
fixed-base structure of effective seismic weight 
W, and the period equal to T, Pi of the isolation 
system, estimated as: 


V = afs) W, 
R g T 


eff. min 


b 


wm 


The design wind base shear force estimated as per 
IS 875 (Part 3) corresponding to the 1.5 times the 
design wind load; 


c 


wm 


1.5 times the shear force H, required for activation 
of the isolation system, estimated as: 


Nor k 


_ initial, i y,i 
Ay 2 ( 12e ) 
+ Yı 


where 


y, = Distance between the base isolator 7 and 
the center of resistance at the level of base 
isolation, perpendicular to the direction of 
shaking considered; and 


d) Slip threshold of sliding isolation system. 


6.1.7 Distribution of Design Lateral Force along the 
Height of the Building above the base level 


The Design Floor Lateral Forces Q, to be applied at 
floor level i of the building above the base level shall 
be estimated using the Design Earthquake Base Shear 
Force V,, as: 


The summation in the above expression shall include 
the mass of the base slab and the beam grid resting on 
the isolator system (Fig. 1). 


6.1.8 Drift Limits in the Building above the Base Level 
The maximum inter-storey drift in the superstructure 
shall not exceed 0.001 times the storey height, when 


subjected to Design Earthquake Lateral Force V, 
specified in 6.1.6. 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


6.2 Response Spectrum Method 


The Response Spectrum Method (RSM) is a linear 
static analysis procedure, which uses effective stiffness 
and effective damping properties in the modelling of 
base isolators, and more than one mode of vibration 
of the building to participate in the total response. The 
number of modes and their combination shall be as per 
the requirements of IS 1893 (Part 1). The method shall 
be used for design of both the Superstructure and the 
Substructure of buildings that do not meet the conditions 
given in 6.1.1. When this method of analysis is 
employed, the design lateral force as per the Equivalent 
Static Method given by 6.1 shall stand as a lower bound. 


This method of analysis shall be performed 
using a 3-dimensional model of the complete 
soil-foundation-base_isolation-superstructure system. 
Even when a building meets the requirements of 6.1 
of this standard, the Equivalent Static Method may be 
used for the design of the base-isolated building. Soil 
shall be modelled when the soil underneath is soil 
type III, soft as per IS 1893 (Part 1); the modelling of 
soil is not necessary when the soil underneath is soil 
type I or soil type II. 


Effects of earthquake shaking shall be considered 
independently along the three principal orthogonal 
directions of the building, namely: 


a) shaking effect along the plan direction X, 
b) shaking effect along the plan direction Y, and 
c) shaking effect along the vertical direction Z. 


The resultant of the earthquake shaking effect along two 
mutually orthogonal plan directions and along the vertical 
directions shall be combined to determine the net design 
earthquake effect, in line with the requirements of 6.3.4 
of IS 1893 (Part 1), and as per acceptable principles of 
structural dynamics to estimate their combined effects. 


6.2.1 Modelling of Base-Isolated Building 


The structural model of a base-isolated building to be 
used in structural analysis, when using this method, 
shall include four sub-systems of the building, namely: 


a) The lateral force resisting system of the portion of 
the building above the base level, 


b) The base-isolation system, 


c) The lateral force resisting system of the portion of 
the building below the base isolation system, 


d) The soil-foundation sub-system, each elaborated 
as per the provisions of this Standard. 


6.2.1.1 The said model shall employ linearised 
force-displacement characteristics of all structural 
elements of the four sub-systems of the base-isolated 
building. When employing the Response Spectrum 
Method for the purpose of analysis of the base isolated 
building, the maximum displacement of each floor 
and design forces and displacements in the elements 


of the earthquake lateral force resisting system can 
be calculated using a linear elastic model of the 
base-isolated building, wherein: 


a) All elements of the lateral force resisting system 
of the building above the base-level system are 
elastic; and 


b 


ma 


Stiffness properties of the nonlinear components of 
the base-isolation system are linearised using the 
minimum effective stiffness of the base-isolation 
system (as per 7.2 of this standard) and the 
remaining elements (foundation and column stub 
portions) are elastic. 


Also, it shall include, incorporate and account for: 


1) Linearised load-displacement characteristic 
of each base isolator along each of the two 
mutually orthogonal horizontal directions 
in plan, which are developed and verified 
based on prototype test, and including effect 
of vertical load, and/or the rate of loading, 
if force-displacement characteristics of all 
base-isolators are dependent on one or more of 
these attributes. Effective stiffness shall be used 
corresponding to the minimum lateral stiffness 
of the base-isolation system; 


2 


wa 


Spatial distribution of base-isolators in plan of 
the building; 


Lateral displacement along each of the two 
mutually orthogonal horizontal directions in 
plan, and torsion of the building above the 
base-level considering most disadvantageous 
location of eccentric mass; and 


3 


wa 


(4) Overturning and uplift forces arising on 
individual base isolators. 


Further, structural analysis shall be performed by this 
method as per 7.7.5 of IS 1893 (Part 1), using a modal 
damping for: 

i) The fundamental mode of the 
base-isolated building in the direction 
of shaking considered, not greater than 
the smaller of effective damping of the 
base-isolation system or 25 percent of 
critical damping, and 


The higher modes shall be selected 
consistent with those appropriate for linear 
Response Spectrum Method of analysis 
of the part of the building above the 
base-level system, assuming it to be a 
fixed-base building. 


ii 


wm 


For reinforced concrete buildings, the area of the 
members shall be equal to the gross cross-sectional area 
(A,), and the moment of inertia shall be 0.7/, slabs and 
beams, and 0.9/ for columns and structural walls. For 
structural steel buildings, area of the members shall be 
equal to the gross cross-sectional area, and the moment 


of inertia shall be equal to the gross moment of inertia 
of the member. 


6.2.2 Lower Bound Limits on Results of Response 
Spectrum Method 


To avoid possible under-design using Response 
Spectrum Method, limits prescribed in Table 1 shall 
be ensured for various design quantities in terms of 
those obtained from Equivalent Static Method. The 
limits specified in Table 1 are mandatory for buildings 
located in Seismic Zones III, IV and V, and optional for 
buildings for buildings located in Seismic Zone II. 


Table 1 Lower Bound of Various Quantities 
estimated from Response Spectrum 
Method as a Fraction of those 
estimated from Equivalent Static Method 


( Clause 6.2.2 ) 


SI Design Parameter Lower Limit as 
No. Percentage of 
value Computed 
using Equivalent 


Static Method 

a) (2) (3) 
i) Design displacement A,,, of the 90 

base isolation system 
ii) Total design displacement A,, of 80 

the individual base isolator 
iii) Design force of substructure V, 90 
iv) Design force of superstructure V, 80 


6.2.3 Design Earthquake Lateral Force of the 
Components of the Base-Isolation System 


The components of the base-isolation system, column 
stubs and foundation elements below the base-level 
system shall be designed to resist the forces estimated 
in the superstructure considering the building to be a 
fixed-base one without any response reduction factor 
applied in its estimation. 


7 TESTING OF BASE-ISOLATORS 


The design displacements and forces on a base-isolated 
building shall be based on the /force-displacement 
characteristics of the base isolators to be used in 
the project. The force-displacement characteristics 
and damping values of the base isolators used in the 
design and analysis of base isolated buildings shall be 
based on full-scale testing of select samples of base 
isolators. The tests specified herein shall be performed 
prior to design as prescribed herein; they are meant 
for establishing and validating the properties used in 
design of the base-isolation system. 


7.1 Prototype Tests 


Tests shall be performed on prototype base isolators 
to estimate the characteristics of the backbone curve 
of the force-displacement behaviour for use in the 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


design of the base-isolation system. For the purpose 
of this standard, quasi-static cyclic tests shall be 
performed separately on three full-scale specimens of 
predominant type and of each typical size of a Base 
Isolator proposed to be used in the building as part of 
the base-isolation system. The quantitative outcome of 
the test shall be the cyclic force-displacement curve of 
the test specimen in each cycle of test. In the force- 
displacement curves obtained for the type and size of 
a base isolator, a difference in the force values at any 
displacement shall not be more than + 15 percent. 


Prototype tests on isolators can be performed either 
using single isolator or two isolators in back-to-back 
position. For back-to-back testing, the isolators shall be 
of identical type, size and configuration, and the cyclic 
force-displacement curve of each of the two isolators 
shall be extracted considering that the force is shared 
equally by the two isolators. Each back to back test 
shall be considered as a single test. 


7.1.1 Testing Protocol 


The following sequence of tests shall be performed for 
the prescribed number of cycles on a Base Isolator of 
the type and size proposed to be used in the project: 


a) Vertical load equal to the average dead load plus 
one-half of the effect due to imposed load, along 
with 20 fully reversed cycles of loading at a lateral 
displacement corresponding to the effect of design 
wind force; 


b 


ma 


Vertical load equal to the average dead load 
plus one-half of the effect due to imposed load, 
along with 3 fully reversed cycles of loading 
successively at each of the following increments 
of displacement: 0.25A,,, 0.5A4,, and Ap 
corresponding to the effect of earthquake shaking; 


c 


wa 


Vertical load equal to the average dead load plus 
one-half of the effect due to imposed load, along 
with 3 fully reversed cycles at the total design 
displacement /.0A,, corresponding to the effect of 
earthquake shaking; 


Vertical load corresponding to the load 
combination of (/.2 DL + 0.5 LL + EQ), along with 
3 fully reversed cycles of loading successively at 
each of the following increments of displacement: 
0.25A,,, 0.5A4,, and A,, corresponding to the 
effect of earthquake shaking; and 


d 


wa 


e 


wm 


Vertical load corresponding to load combination of 
(0.8 DL — EQ), along with 3 fully reversed cycles 
of loading successively at each of the following 
increments of displacement: 0.25A,,, 0.5A,, 
and A p corresponding to the Earthquake Effect. 
Where (0.8DL — EQ) results in tensile loading on 
the base isolator, the building configuration may 
be reconsidered to ensure no tensile loading on the 
base isolator. 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


7.1.2 Maximum and Minimum Vertical Load 


Base Isolators that carry vertical load shall be tested 
statically for the maximum and minimum vertical 
loads, at the total maximum displacement. In these 
tests, the combined vertical loads corresponding to the 
load case of 1.2DL + 1.0LL + |EQ|,,, shall be taken as 
the maximum vertical load, and the combined vertical 
load corresponding to the load case of 0.8DL — |EQ| nin 
shall be taken as the minimum vertical load, on any 


Base Isolator of a common type and size. 


7.2 Determination of 
Characteristics 


Force-Displacement 


The concepts of effective stiffness and effective 
damping are used to define displacement behaviour of 
base isolators. The force-displacement characteristics 
of the base-isolation system shall be based on the cyclic 
load tests of isolator prototypes as specified in the 7.1. 


The effective stiffness kiy for each cycle of the three 
cycles of loading of base isolator i shall be estimated 


using (Fig. 2): 


Ana 


i 
[ea] + Fo 
ky = 


+ [Anne 


and the effective dampingfor eee each cycle of 
loading (Fig. 2) of base isolator i using: 


Ei 


loop 


a 


A max 


The maximum effective stiffness kiy max and minimum 
effective stiffness Key min Of base isolator i shall be the 


largest and smallest hex values, respectively, estimated 
as given above. And, similarly the effective damping 
Bay of each base isolator i shall be the smallest of the 


three damping values Pe ece obtained from the three 
cycles of testing of the base isolator i. 


7.3 Test Specimen Adequacy 


The performance obtained from a prototype test shall 
be considered as adequate, if the following conditions 
are satisfied: 


a) The typical force-displacement curves obtained 
from all tests (conducted as per 7.1) have a positive 
incremental force-carrying capacity within each 
cycle; 

b 


we 


For each increment of test displacement specified 
in 7.1.1(b), and for each vertical load case 
specified in 7.1.1, the difference is + 15 percent 
or lesser, between the effective stiffness at each of 
the three cycles of test and the average value of 
effective stiffness for each test specimen; 


For each increment of test displacement specified 
in 7.1.1(b), and for each vertical load case 
specified in 7.1.1, the difference is + 15 percent 
or lesser, between the effective stiffness of the two 
test specimens of a common type and size of the 
isolator over the required three cycles of test; and 


c 


ma 


All specimens of vertical load carrying elements 
of the base isolation system remain stable at the 
total design displacement under the static load 
prescribed in the 7.1.1. 


Displacement 


Fic. 2 FoRcE-DISPLACEMENT HYSTERETIC CHARACTERISTIC OF A 
BASE ISOLATOR REPRESENTED BY A BILINEAR IDEALISATION 


10 


7.4 Production Testing for Quality Control 


Production quasi-static cyclic tests shall be conducted 
on all base isolators supplied for a project. The test shall 
be performed under the combined action of compression 
load equal to dead load plus one-half of the effect due 
to imposed load, and shear force corresponding to 
two-thirds of the lateral design displacement of the 
base isolator for at least three cycles. The tests shall be 
conducted to: 


a) Verify the as-built properties of the isolation 
system, and 


b) Verify and monitor the quality and consistency of 
the manufacturing process. 


The mean of the measured properties should not 
vary more than 15 percent from the nominal design 
properties. 


7.5 Design Properties of Isolation System 


The prototype cyclic test shall be carried under constant 
compression, and the cyclic shear and the hysteresis 
loop obtained from the test shall be used to characterize 
the stiffness and damping of the base isolator. The base 
isolation system shall have the design properties given 
in sub-sections below. 


7.5.1 Maximum and Minimum Effective Stiffness of the 
Base-Isolation System 


sp the maximum effective 


At the design displacement A 

stiffness E as and minimum effective stiffness K, PEN 
of the base-isolation system shall be estimated using 
data from the cyclic tests performed as per 7.1, and 


calculated by: 


Nor Nar 
i E 
LE low A a 
_ i=l j=l 
K of max J , and 
SD 
Near Near 
è E 
2, F, min t 2, F; min 
— iF j= 
Koy „min 9 
2A sp 
> 
where 
Nay = Sum of absolute values of 
+ n Pn 
i lee maximum positive forces of 


all individual base isolators at 
a positive displacement A, 
For a given base isolator, the 
maximum positive force at a 
positive displacement A, shall be 
determined by examining each of 
the maximum positive forces that 
occurred during each cycle of the 
prototype test sequence associated 
with displacement Ap and 
selecting the maximum positive 


value at positive displacement Ap; 


11 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


Sum of absolute values of 
minimum positive forces of 
all individual base isolators at 
a positive displacement A, 
For a given base isolator, the 
minimum positive force at a 
positive displacement A,, shall 
be determined by examining each 
of the minimum positive forces 
that occurred during each cycle 
of the prototype test sequence 
associated with displacement A,,, 
and selecting the minimum positive 
value at positive displacement A; 


values of 
forces of 


Sum of absolute 
maximum negative 
all individual base isolators at 
a negative displacement A, 
For a given base isolator, the 
maximum negative force at a 
positive displacement A, shall be 
determined by examining each of 
the maximum negative forces that 
occurred during each cycle of the 
prototype test sequence associated 
with displacement Ap and 
selecting the maximum negative 
value at negative displacement A p; 


and 
Noy = Sum of absolute values of 
p2 7 lei minimum negative forces of. 
I all individual base isolators at 
a positive displacement A,,. 


For a given base isolator, the 
minimum negative force at a 
positive displacement A, shall be 
determined by examining each of 
the minimum negative forces that 
occurred during each cycle of the 
prototype test sequence associated 
with displacement Ap and 
selecting the minimum negative 
value at negative displacement A, 


7.5.2 Effective Damping 


At the design displacement, the effective damping $ „of 
the base-isolation system shall be based on the cyclic 
tests specified in 7.1 and estimated by: 


Nar 


ŽE» 
i=l 


Pa = 3K 


vx 
eff max Ssp 


The energy dissipated £7, in base isolator i shall be 
estimated at test displacements A*,, and AT, which 


max ? 


are equal in magnitude to the design displacement A, 
of the base isolator. 


ax 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


8 INSPECTION AND 
BASE-ISOLATORS 


MAINTENANCE OF 


Two additional test isolators of each type and size shall 
be kept at the site of the base-isolated building subjected 
to the same environmental condition as the isolator 
units of the building. These shall be tested periodically 
to check the impact of aging and deterioration on the 
mechanical properties as per 7.1. The first test shall be 
performed after 15 years of the installation, and then 
3 years thereafter. Should the building experience an 
earthquake, whose intensity at the site of the building 


12 


is comparable to that of the design level earthquake, 
the said test shall be performed immediately after such 
an event. 


If the test indicates that the force values at any 
displacement in the force-displacement curves of the test 
isolators differ by more than + 15 percent of the values 
considered in the original design of the base-isolated 
building, the earthquake safety of the building shall be 
re-certified considering the average force-displacement 
curves as established by the tests conducted on the two 
additional test isolators of each type and size kept at the 
site of the base-isolated building. 


IS No. 
456 : 2000 
800 : 2007 


875 
(Part 1) : 1987 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF CROSS REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 


General construction in steel — 
Code of practice (third revision) 


Code of practice for design 
loads (other than earthquake) for 
buildings and structures: Part 1 
Dead loads — Unit weights of 
building material and stored 
materials (second revision) 


13 


IS No. 
(Part 2) : 1987 
(Part 3) : 2015 


1893 
(Part 1) : 2016 


13920 : 2016 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


Title 


Part 2 Imposed 
(second revision) 


Part 3 Wind loads (third revision) 
Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures: Part 1 


General provisions and buildings 
(sixth revision) 


loads 


Ductile detailing of reinforced 
concrete structures subjected to 
seismic forces — Code of practice 
(first revision) 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


Organization 


India Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Association of Consulting Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 
B & S Engineering Consultants Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, New Delhi 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soils and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants Private Limited, 
Ghaziabad 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-National Geophysical Research Institute, 
Hyderabad 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


D-CAD Technologies, New Delhi 
DDF Consultants Private Limited, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, Lucknow 
Indian Association of Structural Engineers, 
New Delhi 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Pror C. V. R. Murty (Chairman) 


SHRI SANDEEP SHIRKHEDKAR 
SHRI AswaTH M. U. (Alternate) 


SHRI L. R. BISHNOI 
Dr Rostan A. D. (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK BHOWMICK 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVI KUMAR 


DR SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 

SHRI SHARAD GUPTA (Alternate) 
CHIEF ENGINEER (D & DM) 

SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (CIVIL) (Alternate) 
Dr N. P. HONKANDAVAR 

DR MANISH GUPTA (Alternate) 
DIRECTOR (CMDD) (E & NE) 

DIRECTOR (NW & S) (Alternate) 
SHRI AMANDEEP GARG 

SHRI BARJINDER SINGH (Alternate) 
DR NAVJEEV SAXENA 

DR Asay CHOURASIA (Alternate) 


DR SIMANCHAL PADHY 


SHRIMATI R. SREEKALA 
Dr K. SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Dr K. G. BHATIA 


Dr PRATIMA R. BOSE 
SHRI SADANAND OJHA (Alternate) 


Dr G. G. SRINIVAS ACHARY 
DR Supr PauL (Alternate) 
Ms Divya KHULLAR (YP) 


Dr SANDEEP KUMAR SOM 
DR RAMIIVAN SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI VIPUL AHUJA 
SHRI Rasiv AHUJA (Alternate) 


Dr A. R. SANTHAKUMAR 
ProF K. P. Jaya (Alternate) 


PROF Ravi SINHA 
PROF ALOK GoyaL (Alternate) 


14 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, 
Bhubaneswar 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, 
Gandhinagar 


Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Information Technology, 
Hyderabad 


Indian Society of Earthquake Technology, Roorkee 


Ministry of Earth Sciences, National Centre for 
Seismology, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Ballabgarh 


National Disaster Management Authority, 
New Delhi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Nuclear Power Corporation India Limited, Mumbai 
Power Grid Corporation of India Limited, Gurugram 


Research Designs and Standards Organization, 
Lucknow 


Risk Management Solutions Inc, Noida 
SD Engineering Consultants LLP, New Delhi 


Tandon Consultants Private Limited, New Delhi 


Tata Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 
Vakil Mehta Sheth Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 


Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, 
Nagpur 


Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


Representative(s) 
Dr SURESH RANJAN DASH 


Dr Dipti RANJAN SAHOO 
DR VASANT MATSAGAR (Alternate) 


PROF SUDHIR K. JAIN 
PROF AMIT PRASHANT (Alternate) 
Dr HEMANT B. KAUSHIK 
ProF DURGESH C. RAI 
PROF A. MEHER PRASAD 


Dr RUPEN GoswaMI (Alternate 1) 
Dr ARUN MENON (Alternate II) 


PROF YOGENDRA SINGH 
PROF MANISH SHRIKHANDE (Alternate I) 
Pror B. K. MAHESHWARI (Alternate II) 
Dr P. C. ASHWIN KuMAR (YP) 


PROF PRADEEP KUMAR RAMANCHARLA 


PRESIDENT 
VICE PRESIDENT (EDITOR) (Alternate) 


Dr O. P. MISHRA 
Dr H. S. MANDAL (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. OJHA 
SHRI BRIJESH SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI AJAY Kumar (YP) 


JOINT ADVISOR (MP & P) 
DR SUSANTA KUMAR JENA (Alternate) 


DR PRAVEEN KHANDELWAL 
SHRI SAURABH GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
SHRI RAGHUPATI Roy (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. V. M. PRAKASH 
SHRI AKASH SHRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (B & S) 
DIRECTOR (B & S) SB-I (Alternate) 


DR SUSHIL GUPTA 
Ms SANGEETA WIJ 


PROF MAHESH TANDON 
SHRI VINAY K. GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARJUN C. R. 


Ms ALPA R. SHETH 
SHRI R. D. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


ProF O. R. JAISWAL 
ProF R. K. INGLE (Alternate) 


DR RAJESH SHARMA 
DR VIKRAM GUPTA (Alternate) 


15 


IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 


In Personal Capacity (174/2 F, Solanipuram, Dr S. K. THAKKAR 
Roorkee) 


In Personal Capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha SHRI L. K. JAIN 
Road, Nagpur) 


In Personal Capacity (H-102, V V I P Addresses, Dr A. K. MITTAL 
Rajnagar Extn, Ghaziabad) 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 
Apartments, Patparganj, Delhi) 
In Personal Capacity (Row House 4, Sun City Dr I. D. GUPTA 
Housing Society, Vadgaon Budruk, Pune 411051) 
In Personal Capacity, Noida SHRI A. K. SINGH 
BIS Directorate General SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (EXx-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ARUN KUMAR S. 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Composition of The Working Group for IS 1893 (Part 6) 


Organization Representative(s) 
Malaviya National Institute of Technology Jaipur, Pror S. D. BHARTI (Convener) 
Jaipur 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai Dr G. R. REDDY 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai PROF Ravi SINHA 
DR MANISH KUMAR (Alternate) 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai Pror C. V. R. MURTY 
Resistoflex Private Limited, Noida SHRI RATISH JAIN 
R. S. Mandrekar and Associates, Mumbai DR JASWANT N. ARLEKAR 


16 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 39 (15280). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


