**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 12995 (1990) : Process/basic engineering/knowhow packages 
- data sheet [MED 17: Chemical Engineering Plants and 
Related Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



HKdlq *H* 



IS 12995 : 1990 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



3rN>3T$fte 

Indian Standard 

PROCESS/BASIC ENGINEERING/KNOW-HOW 
PACKAGES - DATA SHEET 



UDC 621798:62/69 



© BIS 1991 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

March 1991 Price Group 1 



Chemical Engineering Plants and Related Equipments Sectional Committee, HMD 17 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 26 March 1990, after the 
draft finalized by the Chemical Engineering Plants and Related Equipments Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

Various packages are purchased by the industry depending on the critical nature of the requirement. 

Sometimes, for very critical projects being implemented for the first time in the country, it may be 
required to procure the basic engineering package ( see 2.1,1 ). From the basic engineering package, 
detailed engineering work for which is carried out by an engineering contractor. 

Based on the expertise available in the country, sometimes the purchaser may procure the process 
package ( see 2.1.2 ). The basic engineering of the package and subsequently detailed engineering 
is then carried out by an engineering contractor. 

Where sufficient expertise is available with engineering contractor for projects of repetitive nature, the 
purchaser may develop a fairly good amount of confidence and decide to procure Type III (a) or 
III (b) know-how packages and the process/basic engineering as well as detailed engineering are 
carried out by the engineering contractor. 



£512995:1990 



Indian Standard 

PROCESS/BASIC ENGINEERING/KNOW-HOW 

PACKAGES - DATA SHEET 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the basic engineering 
package, process package and know how packages 
of chemical/petrochemical plants, refineries, fer- 
tilizer plants. 

2 TYPE 

2,1 There are three types of engineering packages: 

a) Type I Basic engineering package 

b) Type II Process package 

c) i) Type III A know-how package 

ii) Type III B know-how package ( cataly- 
tic process ) 

2.1.1 Type I 

Basic Engineering Package 

1) Design basis 

2) Process description 

3) Equipment list 

4) Process flow diagram 

5) Piping and instrumentation diagram comp- 
lete in all respects including utility distribu- 
tion, control valve and safety valve sizes, 
line sizes/number, etc. 

6) Equipment ( process ) data sheet including 
diameter of columns, type of internals, etc. 

7) Plotplan and equipment layout 

8) Catalyst and chemical summary 

9) Effluent summary 

10) Flare load summary 

11) Electrical load list 

12) Emergency power requirements, if any 

13) Electrical area classification 

14) Single line diagram 

1 5) Critical equipment specifications ( detailed 
drawings ) 

16) Utility balancer summary 

17) Piping specification 

18) Line list 

19) Process instrument specification 

20) Thermal rating of beat exchangers and data 
sheets of fired heaters 

21) Building and HVAC information 



22) Functional specification for distributed 
control system if provided 

23) Functional specification for advanced cont- 
rol for specific areas if provided 

24) List of detailed engineering drawings of the 
critical items to be reviewed by the process 
licensor 

25) Supervisory operating manuals 

NOTES 

1 This package is good for carrying out Detailed 
Engineering. 

2 Process Guarantee is by Process Licensor. 

2.1.2 Type II 

Process Package 

1) Design basis 

2) Process flow diagram 

3) Piping and instrumentation diagram for 

process system 

4) Equipment data sheets 

5) Indicative plot plan 

6) Catalyst and chemical summary 

7) Effluent and flare load summary 

8) Equipment specifications 

9) Utility balance summary 

10) Piping specification 

11) Process instrument specification 

12) Line list 

13) List of Detailed engineering drawings to be 
reviewed by process licensor ( optional ) 

14) Supervisory operating manual 

NOTES 

1 Detailed Engineering cannot be carried out based 
on this package alone. Some more efforts/Front 
end engineering is required to be carried out. 

2 Process Guarantee is by Process Licensor. 

2,1.3 Type III A 

Know-how Package 

1) Process flow diagram including heat and 
material balance. 

2) Detailed specifications of critical equipments 

3) Know-how related information like proper- 
ties of fluids, etc. 



IS 12995 : 1990 



NOTES 

1 Detailed Engineering cannot be carried out based 
on this package alone. Process package preparation/ 
Basic Engineering is required to be carried out. 

2 Process Guarantee by Process Licensor. 
2.1.3 Type III B 

Know-how Package ( Catalytic Process ) 

a) Minimum information for catalyst vendor 
like: 

i) No. of reactors, quantity of catalyst in 
each reactor, inter cooler/heater duties, 
etc 

ii) Reactor, effluent composition 



iii) Operating conditions 
iv) Regeneration procedure 
v) Cycle length, etc 

b) Review of complete package prepared by 
consultant, ( based on inhouse develop- 
ment ) by Process Licensor. 

NOTES 

1 Detailed Engineering cannot be carried out based 
on this package alone. Process package preparation 
and basic engineering is required to be carried out. 

2 Process guarantee for the catalytic unit is by 
catalyst vendor. 

3 Process guarantee for the rest of the units is by 
consultant or by catalytic vendor on case to case 
basis. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of 
the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
following reference: 

Doc: No. HMD 17 ( 5218) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams; Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg C33I 01 31 

NEWDELHI 110002 $331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 

Southern : G I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 



Printed at Printweil Printers, Delhi, India 



