Waa HTA IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 
(Superseding IS 3028 : 1998) 
Indian Standard 


Taare aA — Olea aA ERT Me 
al ses — fatorite wet art gf 


WT 1 Ua 2 Ao 


Automotive Vehicles — Noise 
Emitted by Moving Vehicles — 
Specification and Method of 
Measurement 
Part 1 L 2 Category 


ICS 17.140.30 
© BIS 2018 
ada AA À 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© AM FT, 9 gae WEL API, ae feeeit-110002 
wue MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2018 Price Group 8 


Automotive Braking and Steering System, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, 
TED 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Automotive Braking and Steering System, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


The requirements of noise emitted by moving vehicles were earlier covered in IS 3028 : 1998 ‘Automotive 
vehicles — Noise emitted by moving vehicles — Method of measurement (second revision)’. While reviewing 
this standard the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard has decided to revise the 
standard based on latest ECE regulations. As ECE regulations are different for two wheelers, three wheelers 
and other M & N category of vehicles it was decided to split this standard also into parts. 


While this Part (Part 1) covers the requirements of L2 category of vehicles the other parts will cover: 


Part 2 Other than L2 and LS category. 
Part 3 L5 category of vehicles. 


This standard is in-line with the ECE/TRANS/505/Rev. 1/Add.40/Rev 2. 


The noise emitted by stationary vehicles is covered separately by IS 10399 : 1998 ‘Automotive vehicles — 
Noise emitted by stationary vehicles — Method of measurement (first revision)’. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — NOISE EMITTED BY 
MOVING VEHICLES — SPECIFICATION AND 
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT 


PART 1 L 2 CATEGORY 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the method for measuring 
the external noise emitted by vehicles of category L2 
as defined in IS 14272 in moving condition. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards indicated below. 


IS/ISO/IEC No. 
3028 : 1998 


Title 


Automotive vehicles — Noise 
emitted by moving vehicles — 
Method of measurement (second 
revision) 

10278 : 2009 Motorcycles — Measurement of 


maximum speed (third revision) 


11422: 2001 Terms and definitions of weights 
of two wheeled motor 


vehicles (first revision) 


14272: 2011 Automotive vehicles — Types — 


Terminology (first revision) 


14599 : 1999 Automotive vehicles — 
Performance requirements 
(measurement of power, SFC, 
opacity) of positive and 
compression ignition engines — 
Method of test 

Automotive vehicles — Pneumatic 
Tyres for Two and Three Wheeled 
Motor Vehicles and Quadricycles 
— Specification 


15627 : 2005 


ISO 2559:2011 Textile glass — Mats (made from 

chopped or continuous strands) 

—Designation and basis for 

specifications 

ISO 3310-1:2000 Test sieves — Technical 
requirements and testing — Part 1: 
Test sieves of metal wire cloth 


IS/ISO/IEC No. Title 


ISO 10534: 1994 Acoustics — Determination of 
sound absorption coefficient and 
impedance by a tube method 


ISO 10844: 1994 Acoustics — Specification of test 
tracks for measuring noise emitted 
by road vehicles and their tyres 


IEC 60942: 2003 Electroacoustics — Sound 


calibrators 


IEC 61672-1 : 2002Electroacoustics — Sound level 
meters — Part 1: Specifications 


3 DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this standard following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Type Approval of a Motor Cycle, means the 
approval of a motor cycle type with regard to noise. 


3.2 Type of Motor Cycle as Regards its Sound Level 
and Exhaust System, means motor cycles which do 
not differ in such essential respects as the following: 


a) The type of engine (two-stroke or four- 
stroke, reciprocating piston engine or 
rotary-piston engine, number and capacity 
of cylinders, number and type of 
carburettors or injection systems, 
arrangement of valves, rated maximum net 
power and corresponding engine speed). 
For rotary-piston engines the cubic capacity 
should be taken to be double of the volume 
of the chamber; 


b) Transmission system, in particular the 
number and overall ratios of the gears; and 


c) Number, type and arrangement of exhaust 
or silencing systems. 


3.3 Exhaust or Silencing System, means a complete 
set of components necessary to limit the noise 
caused by a motor cycle engine and its exhaust. 


3.4 Component of an Exhaust or Silencing System, 
means one of the individual components which 
together form the exhaust system (such as exhaust 
pipe work, the silencer proper) and the intake system 
(air filter), if any. 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


If the engine has to be equipped with an intake 
system (air filter and/or intake noise absorber) in 
order to comply with the maximum permissible sound 
levels, the filter and/or absorber shall be treated as 
components having the same importance as the 
exhaust system. 


3.5 Kerb Mass — as defined in IS 11422. 


3.6 Rated Maximum Net Power — means the rated 
engine power as defined in IS 14599. 


NOTE — If the rated maximum net power is reached 
at several engine speeds, S is used in this standard as 
the highest engine speed at which the rated maximum 
net power is reached. The symbol P, denotes the 
numerical value of the rated maximum net power 


expressed in kilowatts. 


3.7 Rated Engine Speed, means the engine speed 
(rev/min) at which the engine develops its rated 
maximum net power as stated by the manufacturer. 
The symbol S denotes the numerical value of the 
rated engine speed expressed in revolutions per 
minute. 


3.8 Power-to-Mass Ratio Index, means the ratio of 
the rated maximum net power of a vehicle to its 
mass. It is defined as: 


PMR=[P./(m,,,, + 75)] x 1000 
where m, „1s the numerical value of the kerb mass 
in kg as defined in 3.5. 


The symbol PMR denotes the power-to-mass ratio 
index. 


3.9 Maximum Speed, means the maximum vehicle 
speed as declared by the vehicle manufacturer, 
measured in accordance with IS 10278. 


The symbol v „„ denotes the maximum speed. 


NOTE — The maximum speed as determined by the 
testing body may differ from the values specified by 


the manufacturer by + 5 per cent. 


3.10 Locked Gear, means the control of the 
transmission such that the transmission gear ratio 
cannot change during a test. 


3.11 Engine, means the power source of the vehicle 
without detachable accessories. 


3.12 Tyre Size Designation — (See 3.29 of 
IS 15627). 


4 TERMS AND SYMBOLS 


4.1 Symbols used in this standard are given in 
Table 1. 


4.2 The following indices are used for measured 
engine speeds n and vehicle speeds v to indicate 
the location or rather time of the measurement: 


a) AA' denoting that the measurement 
corresponds to the point in time when 


Table 1 Terms and Symbols 
(Clause 4.1) 


Symbol Units Explanation 
AA' - virtual line on the test track 
Tos m/s? calculated acceleration 

er m/s? prescribed reference acceleration 
ean m/s? prescribed target acceleration 
BB' — virtual line on the test track 
GC — virtual line on the test track 
k = gear weighting factor 
k, = partial power factor 
L dB(A) sound pressure level 
li m pre-acceleration length 
M o kg kerb mass of the vehicle 
m, kg test mass of the vehicle 
n min! measured engine speed 
Nae min! engine speed at idle 

ues min' App» corresponding to fo 
PP’ — virtual line on the test track 
PMR — power-to-mass ratio index 
P. kW rated maximum net power 
S min! rated engine speed 
v km/h measured vehicle speed 
Fiz km/h maximum speed 
Vrest km/h prescribed test speed 


the front of the vehicle passes the line AA’ 
(see D-3.1, Fig. 1); or 

b) PP' denoting that the measurement 
corresponds to the point in time when the front 
of the vehicle passes the line PP’ (see D-3.1, 
Fig. 1); or 

c) BB' denoting that the measurement 
corresponds to the point in time when the rear 
of the vehicle passes the line BB’ 
(see D-3.1, Fig. 1). 


The following indices are used for calculated full 
throttle accelerations a, 
pressure levels L to indicate the gear used for the test: 


„ and measured sound 


a) “(i)” denoting, in the case of a two-gear test, 
the lower gear (that is the gear with the higher 
gear transmission ratio) and otherwise 
referring to the single test gear or gear 
selector position used; or 

b) “(itl)” denoting, in the case of a two-gear 
test, the higher gear (that is the gear with the 
lower gear transmission ratio). 


Measured sound pressure levels Z also carry an index 
indicating the type of the respective test: 


a) “wot” denoting a full throttle acceleration test 
(see B-3.3.1.1); or 


b) “crs” denoting a constant speed test 
(see B-3.3.3.2.); or 


c) “urban” denoting a weighted combination 
of a constant speed test and a full throttle 
acceleration test (see B-4.6.2). 


The index “j” referring to the number of the test run 
that is done, used in addition to the indices mentioned 
above. 


5 APPROVAL OF VEHICLE 
5.1 Type Approval 


If the motor cycle type submitted for approval meets 
the requirements of 6; approval of that motor cycle 
type shall be granted. 


5.1.1 Information to be submitted at the time of 
application for type approval shall be as given in 
Annex A. 


NOTE — In case the details are already submitted during 
first type approval then full details need not to be 
submitted again in subsequent approvals. 


5.2 Modification and Extension of the Approval of 
the Motor Cycle Type or of the Type of Exhaust or 
Silencing System(s) 


Every modification of the motor cycle type or of the 
exhaust or silencing system declared in accordance 
with 5.1.1 shall be intimated to the testing agency; 
testing agency may then consider, whether; 


a) the modifications made are unlikely to have 
appreciable adverse effects, and that in any 
case the motor cycle still complies with the 
requirements of this standard; or 


b) any further test is required. For considering 
whether testing is required or not, guidelines 
given in Annex H shall be followed. 


5.3 Transitional Provisions 


5.3.1 At the request of the applicant, type approvals 
for compliance to this standard shall be granted by 
test agencies from date of adoption in CMVR-TSC. 
Such type approvals shall be deemed for compliance 
to IS 3028. 


5.3.2 At the request of the applicant, type approvals 
for compliance to IS 3028, shall be granted up to the 
notified date of implementation of this standard. 


5.3.3 Type approvals issued for compliance to 
IS 3028 shall be extended to approval of this standard 
subject to verification of Annex B and Annex F as 
applicable. 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


6 SPECIFICATIONS 
6.1 General Specifications 
6.2 Specifications Regarding Sound Levels 


6.2.1 The sound emissions of the motor cycle type 
submitted for approval shall be measured by the 
method described in Annex B. 


6.2.2 The test results obtained in accordance with 
the provisions of 6.2.1 shall be entered in the test 
report. 


6.2.3 The test results for the motor cycle in motion 
obtained in accordance with Annex B and 
mathematically rounded to the nearest integer shall 
not exceed the limits prescribed (for new motor cycles 
and new silencing systems) in Table 2 for the 
category to which the motor cycle belongs. In any 
case, L o shall not exceed the limit value for L by 
more than 5 dB. 


urban 


6.2.4 For routine test, test results shall not exceed: 


a) 1dB more than the limit prescribed in table 
2; and 

b) 3 dB more than the actual type approval test 
results. 

Table 2 Maximum Limits of Sound Levels 


(Clause 6.2.3) 


Category Power-to- Limit Limit 
mass Ratio Value for Value 
Index (PMR) L ban I0 Lit 
dB(A) 
First category PMR < 25 = 73 
Second category 25 < PMR < 50 74 = 
Third category PMR > 50 77» — 


D For motor cycles tested in second gear only in Annex B, the 
limit value is increased by 1 dB(A). 


6.3 Additional Sound Emission Provisions 
(Optional) 


6.3.1 The motor cycle manufacturer shall not 
intentionally alter, adjust, or introduce any device or 
procedure solely for the purpose of fulfilling the 
noise emission requirements of this standard, which 
will not be operational during typical on-road 
operation. 


6.3.2 The vehicle type to be approved shall meet 
the requirements of Annex F. If the motor cycle has 
user selectable software programs or modes which 
affect the sound emission of the vehicle, all these 
modes shall be in compliance with the requirements 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


given in Annex F. Testing shall be based on the worst 
case scenario. 


6.3.3 In the application for type approval or for 
modification or extension of a type approval the 
manufacturer shall provide a statement in accordance 
with Annex G that the vehicle type to be approved 
complies with the requirements of 6.3.1 and 6.3.2. 


6.3.4 Details of Annex F shall be complied with as 
applicable. 


6.4 Additional specifications regarding exhaust or 
silencing systems filled with fibrous material 


6.4.1 Ifthe exhaust or silencing system of the motor 
cycle contains fibrous materials the requirements of 
Annex E shall apply. If the intake of the engine is 
fitted with an air filter and/or an intake-noise absorber 
which is (are) necessary in order to ensure 
compliance with the permissible sound level, the filter 
and/or absorber shall be considered to be part of the 
silencing system, and the requirements of Annex E 
shall also apply to them. 


NOTE — This requirement is not applicable to the air 
filter if made of paper and foam material. 


6.5 Additional prescriptions related to tamperability 
and manually adjustable multi-mode exhaust or 
silencing systems. 


6.5.1 All exhaust or silencing systems shall be 
constructed in a way that does not easily permit 


removal of baffles, exit-cones and other parts whose 
primary function is as part of the silencing/expansion 
chambers. 


6.5.2 Exhaust or silencing systems with multiple, 
manually adjustable operating modes shall meet all 
requirements in all operating modes. The reported 
noise levels shall be those resulting from the mode 
with the highest noise levels. 


7 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL 


The application for approval of a motor cycle type 
with regard to its sound emissions shall be submitted 
by its manufacturer or by his authorised 
representative. 


8 MARKINGS 


The components of the exhaust or silencing system 
shall bear at least the following identifications. Such 
markings shall be indelible, clearly legible and also 
visible, in the position at which it is to be fitted to 
the vehicle. 

a) The trade name or mark of the manufacturer 
of the exhaust or silencing system and of its 
components; 

b) The trade description given by the 
manufacturer,if any; and 

c) Exhaust system with identification (if 
proprietary) or part no (if non- proprietary). 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 5.1) 
INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED BY MANUFACTURER 


A-1 Trade hame ot mark of the motor Cycle? sie. si.cccceeceeseeceecdecdcicicdiidescdes ei darter tea tar tavern AAs 
A-2 Motor cycle type? cc. sseacitidieiesntid vin ia aii danced EEE naib nti EEEE T E E SEER I ESRA RESER 
A-3 Manufacturer's name and address: soridin reiia sien edi ieee ta Aas eee 
A-4 If applicable, name and address of manufacturer’s representative: ...........eeceeeseeeseseeseneeeeeeneeeseerens 
A-5 Engine 

A-5.1 Mainitactiiiere sevice earo e Ero Eo EEr AEE A EE ne EEEo CESR EErEE Ears 
A-5.2 TYPE: deniars Gataavess gb eede vere rane Eo N EE NEAKEN EENE SINE TSEARD EEC EP ENOTNE ENE EEEE NEEE NEEE I vate 
A-5.3 Model, serieen rere aperar rers u Error oE E EEE EP Era N tens E EEr E S rE OESR ene aie enc A E 
A-5.4 Rated maximum Net poWEer: «00... eeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeneeneeeeenes TAE e ousintestesternts shied min! 
A-5.5 Kind of engine (for example positive-ignition, compression ignition, etc) : ........eeeeeeeeeseteeeeeeees 
A-5.6 Cycles: two-stroke/four-stroke 

A-5.7 Cylinder Capacity: sicikisaessGoeshetd ck ansepsieee sales sac a e Erone Eeoa ESEA E E EOE E EN E EEEE SEEE EESE cm? 


A-6 Transmission 


A-6.1 
A-6.2 
A-7 
A-7.1 
A-7.1.1 
A-7.1.2 
A-7.1.3 


A-7.2 
A-7.2.1 
A-7.2.2 
A-7.2.3 
A-8 
A-9 
A-10 
A-11 
A-11.1 
A-11.2 
A-11.3 
A-12 
A-12.1 
A-13 
A-13.1 


A-13.2 
A-13.3 
A-13.4 
A-14 

A-14.1 


A-14.2 
A-14.3 
A-14.4 
A-15 
A-15.1 
A-16 


A-17 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


Type of transmission: non-automatic gearbox/automatic gearbox: «0... ee eeeeeeeeeteeeeeesereeseerseeeereees 
Number Of Sars? jos.ccisc: ccsesohapincs ane eney ruorin reeeo aaeoa apap EEO EE ASE ESSEE ESEE ES E EEOSE EONS 
Equipment 


Exhaust silencer 


Type: in accordance with drawing No. (Drawing of complete exhaust system with identification 
(if proprietary) or part no (if non-proprietary) ..... 2... seceeeeeeeeseceeeeeeceeeeeeeeaeceresseeneeseeeaeseresseeneeeeeenes 


Intake silencer 


INV ea odes cet coh esses cone cscs sce estegesecees edecsae sven vacestsstesaces E e E 
ILO GME go encate revs tee sc teats Se E E E E E ea ctaes oe ees eee eee 
DY PO? isror in accordance with drawing No. .........ececcescesecsseeseeeeecesecerecaeceaeenaeeaeensessesereeas 
Gears used for test of motor Cycle iM MOTION! sizin sr e RER R EEE E EAEE REE 
Final drive ratio(S) 42.04 ice eie ar EAEE shat E TE E acaba a EE EAE SEEE EEs REEE 
Type:approval number of tyre( Sjerp rnEeE E EE E E EEE EE EEEE R Rii 
Masses 

Maximum permissible gross Welg ht: sunean nian e RAA EERE R ERT kg 
Test MASS? ocd E T E E T E E E EE E kg 
Power tomasstatio index (PMR); croinn eise aE E EREE E E RERO EEA 
Vehicleleng thisss uneni E E ea aetna ERN EY m 
Reference length / p: (Actual length or 2 m as declared by Vehicle Manufacturer) .................. m 


Vehicle speeds of measurements in gear (i) 


Vehicle speed at the beginning of the period of acceleration (average of 3 runs) for gear (1): 


A E A cuenssttbegseauassaetaveey E E E iscunestens’ A nant fates deste ET km/h 
Pre-acceleration: lenetmfor gear (1) siipiistis pcenas rea eoe oar a oE eSa AOAR Eeee eA Eear EEES eat m 
Vehicle speed v p (average of 3 runs) for gear (1): sss.i.iessisesssssesresssessresresrestarsttsennsatrebesse stane km/h 
Vehicle speed v (average Of 3 rums) for gear (1): .....cceeceeseeeseteseeeeeseteeeneeseseseeeneeseeneeeeesseneney km/h 


Vehicle speeds of measurements in gear (i+1) (if applicable) 


Vehicle speed at the beginning of the period of acceleration (average of 3 runs) for gear (i+1): 


Pa EO area e Ere I EEE Eo SEET snebsObanesh aegenusnetan senupcevag PAE AR EIEEE IREO ENEE EEO basil seoboueeabapseaveesstesioulees km/h 
Pre-accelération length for geat (IFI): accesses sesbncteteetoesd saloul ou. cus evep vers ndhedecsie shots shasapsneenstvaevabeuec steve m 
Vehicle speed v,,,, (average of 3 runs) for gear (EFL): sssmisrinsmieseessiresossii eieiei km/h 
Vehicle speed v,,,, (average of 3 runs) for gear (141): ...cccceeceeeteeteceeseseseteteteeseseeteteeseseneeey km/h 


Accelerations are calculated between lines 4A’ and BB'/PP' and BB' 

Description of functionality of devices used to stabilize the acceleration (if applicable): ............ 
Lowest possible gear at the highest possible test speed without exceeding either 
75 percent of v „ OT the rated engine speed S at BB’. 


Additional sound emission provisions: 


See manufacturer’s statement of compliance (attached — Annex G) 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEX B 


(Clauses 5.3.3 and 6.2.1) 
METHOD AND INSTRUMENT FOR MEASURING NOISE MADE BY MOTORCYCLE 


B-1 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS 
B-1.1 Acoustic Measurements 
B-1.1.1 General 


The apparatus used for measuring the sound 
pressure level shall be a sound level meter or 
equivalent measuring system meeting the 
requirements of Class | instruments (inclusive of the 
recommended windscreen, if used). These 
requirements are described in IEC 61672-1 : 2002. 


Measurements shall be carried out using the time 
weighting “F” of the acoustic measuring instrument 
and the “A” frequency weighting curve also 
described in IEC 61672-1 : 2002. When using a system 
that includes periodic monitoring of the A-weighted 
sound pressure level, a reading should be made at a 
time interval not greater than 30 ms. 


The instruments shall be maintained and calibrated 
in accordance with the instructions of the instrument 
manufacturer. 


B-1.1.2 Calibration 


At the beginning and at the end of every 
measurement session, the entire acoustic measuring 
system shall be checked by means of a sound 
calibrator that fulfils the requirements of Class 1 
sound calibrators according to IEC 60942 : 2003. 
Without any further adjustment, the difference 
between the readings shall be less than or equal to 
0.5 dB(A). If this value is exceeded, the results of the 
measurements obtained after the previous 
satisfactory check shall be discarded. 


B-1.1.3 Compliance with Requirements 


Compliance of the sound calibrator with the 
requirements of IEC 60942 : 2003 shall be verified 
once a year. Compliance of the instrumentation 
system with the requirements of IEC 61672-1 : 2002 
shall be verified at least every 2 years. All compliance 
testing shall be conducted by a laboratory which is 
authorized to perform calibrations traceable to the 
appropriate standards. 


B-1.2 Instrumentation for Speed Measurements 


The rotational speed of the engine shall be measured 
with an instrument meeting specification limits of at 
least +2 percent or better at the engine speeds 


required for the measurements being performed. 


The road speed of the vehicle shall be measured with 
instruments meeting specification limits of at least 
+0.5 km/h when using continuous measuring devices. 


If testing uses independent measurements of speed, 
this instrumentation shall meet specification limits 
of at least +0.2 km/h. 


B-1.3 Meteorological Instrumentation 


The meteorological instrumentation used to monitor 
the environmental conditions during the test shall 
meet the following specifications: 


a) +1 °C or less for a temperature measuring 
device; 
b) +1.0m/s for a wind speed measuring device; 


c) +5 hPa fora barometric pressure measuring 
device; and 


d) +5 percent fora relative humidity measuring 
device. 


B-2 ACOUSTICAL ENVIRONMENT, 
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS AND 
BACKGROUND NOISE 


B-2.1 Test Site 


The test site shall consist of a central acceleration 
section surrounded by a substantially level test area. 
The acceleration section shall be level; its surface 
shall be dry and so designed that rolling noise 
remains low. 


On the test site the variations in the free sound field 
between the sound source at the centre of the 
acceleration section and the microphone shall be 
maintained to within 1 dB(A). This condition will be 
deemed to be met if there are no large objects which 
reflect sound, such as fences, rocks, bridges or 
buildings, within 50 m of the centre of the 
acceleration section. The road surface covering of 
the test site shall conform to the requirements of 
Annex D. 


The microphone shall not be obstructed in any way 
which could affect the sound field, and no person 
shall stand between the microphone and the sound 
source. The observer carrying out the measurements 
shall take up position so as not to affect the readings 
of the measuring instrument. 


B-2.2 Meteorological Conditions 


The meteorological instrumentation shall deliver data 
representative of the test site, and shall be positioned 
adjacent to the test area at a height representative of 
the height of the measuring microphone. 


The measurements shall be made when the ambient 
air temperature is within the range from 5 °C to 45 °C. 
The tests shall not be carried out if the wind speed, 
including gusts, at microphone height exceeds 
5 m/s, during the noise measurement interval. 


A value representative of temperature, wind speed 
and direction, relative humidity and barometric 
pressure shall be recorded during the noise 
measurement interval. 


B-2.3 Background Noise 


Any sound peak which appears to be unrelated to 
the characteristics of the general noise level of the 
vehicle shall be ignored in taking the readings. 


The background noise shall be measured for a 
duration of 10 s immediately before and after a series 
of vehicle tests. The measurements shall be made 
with the same microphones and microphone locations 
used during the test. The maximum A-weighted sound 
pressure level shall be reported. 


The background noise (including any wind noise) 
shall be at least 10 dB(A) below the A-weighted 
sound pressure level produced by the vehicle under 
test. If the difference between the background sound 
pressure level and the measured sound pressure level 
is between 10 dB(A) and 15 dB(A), in order to 
calculate the test result the appropriate correction 
shall be subtracted from the readings on the sound 
level meter, as given in Table 3. 


Table 3 Correction Applied to Individual 
Measured Test Value 


(Clause B-2.3) 


Background 
Sound Pressure 
Level Difference 
to Measured 
Sound Pressure 
Level, in dB(A) 10 | 11 12 13 | 14| >15 


Correction, in dB(A) | 0.5 | 0.4 | 0.3 | 0.2] 0.1] 0.0 


B-3 TEST PROCEDURES 
B-3.1 Microphone Positions 


The distance of the microphone positions from the 
line CC’, on the microphone line PP’, perpendicular 
to the reference line CC’ on the test track (see 
Annex D, Fig. 1), shall be 7.5 + 0.05 m. 


The microphones shall be located 1.2 + 0.02 m above 
the ground level. The reference direction for free- 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


field conditions (see IEC 61672-1 : 2002) shall be 
horizontal and directed perpendicularly towards the 
path of the vehicle line CC’. 


B-3.2 Conditions of the Vehicle 
B-3.2.1 General Conditions 


The vehicle shall be supplied as specified by the 
vehicle manufacturer. 


Before the measurements are started, the vehicle shall 
be brought to its normal operating conditions. 


If the motor cycle is fitted with fans with an automatic 
actuating mechanism, this system shall not be 
interfered with during the sound measurements. For 
motor cycles having more than one driven wheel, 
only the drive provided for normal road operation 
shall be used. If the motor cycle is fitted with a 
sidecar, this shall be removed for the purposes of 
the test. 


B-3.2.2 Test Mass of the Vehicle 


Measurements shall be made on vehicles at the 
following test mass m,, in kg, specified as: 


+75+5kg 


(75 + 5 kg equates to mass of the driver and 
instrumentation) 


m, E Merb 


B-3.2.3 Tyre Selection and Condition 


The tyres shall be inflated to the manufacturer’s 
specification for the vehicle loading condition during 
the test. The vehicle tyres shall be of the type 
normally fitted to such vehicles by the manufacturer. 
Tyres that have covered only 10 percent or less of 
their expected life shall be fitted on the vehicle. 


B-3.3 Operating Conditions 
B-3.3.1 General Operating Conditions 


The path of the centreline of the vehicle shall follow 
the line CC’ as closely as possible throughout the 
entire test, from the approach to line AA’ until 
the rear of the vehicle passes line BB’ (see Annex D, 
Fig. 1). 


B-3.3.1.1 For full throttle acceleration tests the 
vehicle shall approach the line AA’ at constant speed. 
When the front of the vehicle passes the line AA’ the 
throttle control shall be shifted to the maximum 
throttle position as rapidly as possible and kept in 
this position until the rear of the vehicle passes the 
BB'. At this moment the throttle control shall be 
shifted to the idle position as rapidly as possible. 


Unless specified otherwise the manufacturer may 
choose to use pre-acceleration in a full throttle 
acceleration test for the purpose of achieving a stable 
acceleration between the lines AA’ and BB’. A test 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


with pre-acceleration proceeds as described above 
except for the fact that the throttle control is shifted 
to the maximum throttle position already before the 
vehicle passes the line AA’, namely when the front 
of the vehicle is still at a distance /,,, the pre- 
acceleration length, from the line AA’. 


The approach velocity shall be chosen such that the 
vehicle reaches a prescribed test speed v. when its 
front passes the line PP’. 


test 


B-3.3.1.2 During constant speed tests, the 
acceleration control unit shall be positioned to 
maintain a constant vehicle speed (test speed) 
between the lines 44’ and BB’. 


B-3.3.2 Operating Conditions for Vehicles with 
PMR < 25 


The vehicle is tested in a full throttle acceleration 
test with the following specifications: 


a) The test speed shall be v =40 +1 km/h. 


test 
b) When the rear of the vehicle passes the line 
BB' the vehicle speed shall not exceed 
75 percent of the maximum vehicle speed as 
defined in 3.9 neither shall the engine speed 
exceed the rated engine speed. 


The gear for the test shall be selected in the following 
iterative way: 


The initial test speed shall be as specified above. 
The test speed shall be reduced by increments of 10 
percent of v „(that is 4 km/h) in case the exit speed 
Van exceeds 75 percent of v,, or in case the engine 
speed exceeds the rated engine speed S at BB’. The 
selected gear shall be the lowest one without 
exceeding the rated engine speed S during the test. 
The final test conditions are determined by the 
lowest possible gear at the highest possible test 
speed without exceeding either 75 percent of vp, or 
the rated engine speed S at BB’. 


To save testing time, the manufacturer may provide 
information on the iterative procedure for gear 
selection specified above. 


A flow chart of the test procedure is given in Annex C. 
Here L „1s equal to L 


urban’ 
B-3.3.3 Operating conditions for vehicles with 
PMR > 25 


The vehicle is tested in a full throttle acceleration 
test and in a constant speed test. 


B-3.3.3.1 Full Throttle Acceleration Test 


For the full throttle acceleration tests the test speed 
and the mean acceleration of the vehicle in the test 
track are specified. 


The accelerations are not measured directly but 
calculated from measurements of the vehicle speed 
as described in B-4. 


B-3.3.3.1.1 Test speed 


The test speed v shall be: 


test 
401 km/h for vehicles with a PMR < 50; and 
501 km/h for vehicles with a PMR > 50. 


If, in a given gear, the exit speed v,,, exceeds 
75 percent of the maximum speed v,a of the vehicle, 
the test speed for test in this gear shall be 
successively reduced by increments of 10 percent of 
V oot (that is 4 km/h or 5 km/h) until the exit speed vp, 
falls below 75 percent of v,,, 


B-3.3.3.1.2 Reference acceleration and target 
acceleration 


During the full throttle acceleration tests the vehicle 
shall reach the reference acceleration a defined as: 
a = 2.47 x log(PMR) — 2.52 


wot ref 


for vehicles with a PMR < 50; and 
a = 3.33 x log(PMR) — 4.16 


wot ref 


for vehicles with a PMR > 50 


wot ref 


The results of these full throttle acceleration tests 
are used together with the results of constant speed 
tests to approximate a partial load acceleration typical 
for urban driving. The corresponding target 
accelerationa , is defined as: 


urban 


a yan = 1-37 X log(PMR) — 1.08 
for vehicles with a PMR < 50; and 


a yan 1-28 x log(PMR) — 1.19 
for vehicles with a PMR > 50. 


B-3.3.3.1.3 Gear selection 


The manufacturer shall determine the correct manner 
of testing to achieve the required test speed and 
acceleration. 


B-3.3.3.1.3.1 Vehicles with manual transmissions, 
automatic transmissions, or transmissions with 
continuously variable transmission ratios (CVT’s) 
tested with locked gears 


The selection of gears for the test depends on the 
specific acceleration under full throttle in the various 
gears in relation to the reference acceleration a, stref 
required for the full-throttle acceleration tests 
according to B-3.3.3.1.2. 


The following conditions for the gear selection are 
possible: 


a) If there are two gears that give an 
acceleration in a tolerance band of +10 
percent of the reference acceleration a 


wot,ref’ 


the gear nearest the reference acceleration 
shall be used for the test and shall be 
identified as such in the test report; 


b) If only one specific gear gives an 
acceleration in the tolerance band of +10 
percent of the reference acceleration ee 
the test shall be performed with that gear; 


c) If none of the gears gives the required 
acceleration to within +10 percent of the 
reference acceleration a oep then tests shall 

be performed in two adjacent gears (i) and 

(i+1) chosen such that the gear (i), gives an 

acceleration higher and the gear (i+1) an 

acceleration lower than the reference 

acceleration a 


wot,ref ° 


If the rated engine speed is exceeded in a gear before 
the vehicle passes BB’, the next higher gear shall be 
used. 


If the vehicle has more than one gear the first gear 
shall not be used. Ifa, |, _,.1s achievable in first gear, 


second gear shall be used. 


B-3.3.3.1.3.2 Vehicles 
transmissions, adaptive 
transmissions with variable transmission ratios 


with automatic 


transmissions or 


tested with non-locked gears 


The gear selector position for full automatic operation 
shall be used. 


The test may then include a gear change to a lower 
gear and a higher acceleration. A gear change to a 
higher gear and a lower acceleration is not allowed. 
In any case, a gear change to a gear which is typically 
not used at the specified condition in urban traffic 
shall be avoided. 


Therefore, it is permitted to establish and use 
electronic or mechanical devices, including 
alternative gear selector positions, to prevent a 
downshift to a gear which is typically not used at 
the specified test condition in urban traffic. If such 
devices are used, no pre-acceleration may be applied. 
The functionality of the devices shall be described 
in the communication form. 


B-3.3.3.2 Constant Speed Test 


For the constant speed tests the gears or gear 
selector positions and the test speeds shall be 
identical to those used in the full throttle acceleration 
tests previously performed. 


B-4 DATA PROCESSING AND REPORTING 
B-4.1 General 


At least three measurements for each test condition 
shall be made on each side of the vehicle and for 
each gear. 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


The maximum A-weighted sound pressure level L 
indicated during each passage of the vehicle 
between AA’ and BB' (see Annex D, Fig. 1) shall be 
reduced by 1 dB(A) to account for measurement 
inaccuracy and mathematically rounded to the nearest 
first decimal place (for example XX.X) for both 
microphone positions. If a sound peak obviously out 
of character with the general sound pressure level is 
observed, that measurement shall be discarded. 


The first three valid consecutive measurement 
results for each test condition, within 2.0 dB(A), 
allowing for the deletion of non-valid results, shall 
be used for the calculation of the appropriate 
intermediate or final result. 


The speed measurements at AA’ (v x), BB' (Ypg), and 
PP' (v p) shall be mathematically rounded to the 
nearest first decimal place (for example XX.X) and 
noted for further calculations. 


B-4.2 Calculation of the Acceleration 


Depending on the type of transmission the 
acceleration is either calculated between the lines 
AA' and BB’ or between the lines PP’ and BB' as 
specified below. The method used for the calculation 
of the acceleration shall be indicated in the test report. 


In all of the following cases the acceleration is 
calculated between the lines AA’ and BB’ as specified 
in B-4.2.1: 


a) The vehicle is equipped with a manual 
transmission. 


b) The vehicle is equipped with an automatic 
transmission or with a transmission with 
continuously variable gear ratios (CVT’s) 
but tested with locked gear ratios. 


c) The vehicle is equipped with an automatic 
transmission, an adaptive transmission or a 
transmission with variable gear ratios and 
tested with non-locked gear ratios, and 
electronic or mechanical devices, including 
alternative gear selector positions, are used 
to prevent a downshift to a gear which is 
typically not used at the specified test 
condition in urban traffic. 


In all other cases the acceleration is calculated 
between the lines PP’ and BB’ as specified 
in B-4.2.2. 


B-4.2.1 Calculation of the Acceleration Between 
the Lines AA' and BB' 


The acceleration is calculated from measurements of 
the vehicle speed at the lines AA’ and BB’: 


Bina [Vse / 3.6) — OF as; /3.6)?)/(2 x (20 +7. ə] 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


where 


The index “(i)” refers to the gear used and the 
index “j” to the number of the individual 
measurement. The velocities are expressed in 
units of km/h and the resulting accelerations 
have units of m/s’; 


ls is either the length of vehicle or 2 m, freely 
selectable by the vehicle manufacturer 


B-4.2.2 Calculation of the Acceleration Between 
the Lines PP' and BB' 


The acceleration is calculated from measurements of 
the vehicle speed at the lines PP’ and BB’: 
13.6} — (Vor; /3.6)}]/[2 x (10+7 9] 


Aot = [Vej 
where 


The index “(i)” refers to the gear used and the 
index “j” to the number of the individual 
measurement. The velocities are expressed in 
units of km/h and the resulting accelerations 
have units of m/s’; 


let is either the length of vehicle or 2 m, freely 
selectable by the vehicle manufacturer. 


Pre-acceleration shall not be used. 
B-4.2.3 Averaging of Individual Measurements 


The calculated accelerations from three valid runs 
are arithmetically averaged to give the mean 
acceleration for the test condition: 


Avot (i) = (1 / 3) s (a aiii + Avot, (i),2 + Oty) 


The mean acceleration a „Shall be mathematically 
rounded to the nearest second decimal place (for 


example XX.XX) and noted for further calculations. 
B-4.3 Calculation of the Gear Weighting Factor 


The gear weighting factor k is used only in the case 
of a two-gear test to combine the results from both 
gears into a single result. 


The gear weighting factor is a dimensionless number 
defined as: 


k = (Gene T Aaa / (a — aai 


B-4.4 Calculation of the Partial Power Factor 


The partial power factor k, is a dimensionless number 
used to combine the results of a full throttle 
acceleration test with those of a constant speed test. 


B-4.4.1 For vehicles tested in two gears the partial 
power factor is defined as 


k=1-(a la). 


urban Suan 


B-4.4.2 For vehicles tested in a single gear or with 
the gear selector in one position the partial power 


10 


factor is defined as: 


k, = ]- (a / Ayo) 


urban 


Ifa 


wot,(i) 


is equal to or less than a k, is set to zero. 


urban? 


B-4.5 Processing of the Sound Pressure 
Measurements 


For a given test condition, the three individual results 
of each side of the vehicle shall be averaged 
separately: 

mode,(i),side E (1 / 3) x (L 


mode,(i),side,1 mode,(i),side,2 


mode,(i),side,3 


Where the index “mode” refers to the test mode (full 
throttle acceleration or constant speed), “(i)” to the 
gear and “side” to the microphone position (left or 
right). 


The higher value of the two averages shall be 
mathematically rounded to the nearest first decimal 
place (for example XX.X) and noted for further 
calculations: 


L 


mode,(i) 


= MAX (L 


mode,(i),left ? Pe ctety cee 


B-4.6 Calculation of the Final Test Results 
B-4.6.1 Vehicles with PMR < 25 


Vehicles with a PMR not exceeding 25 are tested ina 
single gear or gear selector position only under full 
throttle. The final test result is the sound pressure 
level L mathematically rounded to the nearest 


wot,(i) 


first decimal place (for example XX.X). 


NOTE — For PMR < 25; L =L 


urban wot 


B-4.6.2 Vehicles with PMR > 25 


If the vehicle was tested in two gears the gear 
weighting factor is used to calculate the test results 
of the full throttle acceleration tests and of the 
constant speed tests: 


L 


wot 


L 


crs 


= L agn + k Š (L 


=L +tkx(L 


crs (i+1) 


wot,(i) Laaa 

ors) T Eers,itt)) 

If the vehicle was tested in a single gear or gear 

selector position no further weighting is necessary: 
L 
L 


wot wot, (i) 


crs crs, (i) 


The sound pressure level L pan representing urban 
driving is finally calculated using the partial power 
factor k : 


L 


urban = De. = k, x (L vot — Loa) 
All sound pressure levels are mathematically 
rounded to the nearest first decimal place (for example 


XX.X). 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEX C 
(Clause B-3.3.2) 


FLOWCHART OF THE TEST PROCEDURE FOR THE TEST OF THE VEHICLE IN MOTION FOR 
VEHICLES OF CATEGORY L2 WITH PMR < 25 


Selection of highest (top) gear (in case of manual transmission) 


Initial test speed Viest = 40 km/h 


Acceleration pre-test with specified vpp and gear 


Reduce vpp by 10 percent 


vae < 0,75 Vinax Shift to next lower gear 
and npp < S 
VBB < 0,75 Vmax 


and ngg < S 
No 


Highest (top) 
gear 


Reduce vpp by 
10 percent 


Acceleration test 
Acceleration test with previous gear 


11 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEX D 


(Clause B-2.1) 
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE TEST SITE 


D-1 INTRODUCTION 


This Annex describes the specifications relating to 
the physical characteristics and the laying of the test 
track. 


D-2 REQUIRED CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 
SURFACE 


A surface is considered to conform to this standard 
provided that the texture and voids content or sound 
absorption coefficient have been measured and found 
to fulfil all the requirements of D-2.1 to D-2.4 and 
provided that the design requirements of D-3.2 have 
been met. 


D-2.1 Residual Voids Content 


The residual voids content, V, of the test track 
paving mixture shall not exceed 8 percent. For the 
measurement procedure, see D-4.1. 


D-2.2 Sound Absorption Coefficient 


NOTE — The most relevant characteristic is the sound 
absorption, although the residual voids content is more 
familiar among road constructors. However, sound 
absorption needs to be measured only if the surface fails to 
conform to the voids requirement. This is because the 
latter is connected with relatively large uncertainties in 
terms of both measurements and relevance and some 
surfaces may therefore be rejected erroneously when the 
voids measurement only is used as a basis. 


If the surface fails to conform to the residual voids 
content requirement, the surface is acceptable only 
if its sound absorption coefficient, a < 0.10. For the 
measurement procedure (see D-4.2). The requirement 
of D-2.1 and D-2.2 is met also if only sound absorption 
has been measured and found to be a < 0.10. 


D-2.3 Texture Depth 


The texture depth (TD) measured according to the 
volumetric method (see D-4.3) shall be: 


TD 2 0.4 mm 
D-2.4 Homogeneity of the Surface 


Every practical effort shall be taken to ensure that 
the surface is made to be as homogeneous as 
possible within the test area. This includes the texture 
and voids content, but it should also be observed 
that if the rolling process results in more effective 
rolling at some places than others, the texture may 
be different and unevenness causing bumps may also 
occur. 


D-2.5 Periodic Testing 


In order to check whether the surface continues to 


12 


conform to the texture and voids content or sound 
absorption requirements stipulated in this standard, 
periodic testing of the surface shall be done at the 
following intervals: 


a) For residual voids content or sound 
absorption: 
When the surface is new; 


If the surface meets the requirements when 
new, no further periodical testing is required. 


For texture depth (TD): 
When the surface is new; 


b) 


When the noise testing starts (NOTE — Not 


before four weeks after laying); 


Then every 12 months. 
D-3 TEST SURFACE DESIGN 
D-3.1 Area 


When designing the test track layout it is important 
to ensure that, as a minimum requirement, the area 
traversed by the vehicles running through the test 
strip is covered with the specified test material with 
suitable margins for safe and practical driving. This 
will require that the width of the track is at least 3 m 
and the length of the track extends beyond lines AA 
and BB by at least 10 m at either end. Figure 1 shows 
a plan ofa suitable test site and indicates the minimum 
area which shall be machine laid and machine 
compacted with the specified test surface material. 
According to B-1.3.1 measurements have to be made 
on each side of the vehicle. This may be made either 
by measuring with two microphone locations (one 
on each side of the track) and driving in one direction, 
or measuring with a microphone only on one side of 
the track but driving the vehicle in two directions. If 
the latter method is used, then there are no surface 
requirements on that side of the track where there is 
no microphone. 


D-3.2 Design and Preparation of the Surface 
D-3.2.1 Basic Design Requirements 


The test surface shall meet following four design 
requirements: 


a) It shall be a dense asphaltic concrete. 

b) The maximum chipping size shall be 8 mm 
(tolerances allow from 6.3 to 10 mm). 

c) The thickness of the wearing course shall 
be > 30mm. 

d) The binder shall be straight penetration 


grade bitumen without modification. 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


/ la 


1 
j CENTRELINE “4 


\ A P B / 


MINIMUM AREA COVERED WITH 
TEST ROAD SURFACE i. e. TEST AREA 
MICROPHONE POSITIONS (HEIGHT 1.2+0.2) 


All dimensions in metres. 


Fic. 1 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR TEST SURFACE AREA 


D-3.2.2 Design Guidelines P (percent passing) = 100 x (d/d,,,.)'” 
As a guide to the surface constructor, an aggregate Where 
grading curve which will give desired characteristics d = square mesh sieve size, in mm, 
is shown in Fig. 2. In addition, Table 4 gives some E 
oi . : i d = 8mm for the mean curve, 
guidelines in order to obtain the desired texture and Fii =O orthel | d 
durability. The grading curve fits the following Mg T COMM Or tae OWT TO erence CUTVE; AN 
formula: daa Z 9-3 mm for the upper tolerance curve. 


a 
eee ee 


Lp M 
Pe T y 
YA 

L P 


% PASSING (BY MASS) 


-0 2.0 4.0 8.0 


; 16.0 25.0 
5.6 11.2 20.0 32.0 


SIEVE SIZE IN mm 
Fic. 2 GRADING CURVE OF THE AGGREGATE IN THE ASPHALTIC MIX WITH TOLERANCES 


13 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


In addition to the above, 
recommendations are given: 


the following 


a) The sand fraction (0.063 mm < square mesh 
sieve size < 2 mm) shall include no more than 
55 percent natural sand and at least 
45 percent crushed sand; 


b) The base and sub-base shall ensure a good 
stability and evenness, according to best 
road construction practice; 


c) Thechippings shall be crushed (100 percent 
crushed faces) and of a material with a high 
resistance to crushing; 


d) The chippings used in the mix shall be 
washed; 


e) No extra chippings shall be added onto the 
surface; 


f) The binder hardness expressed as PEN 
value shall be 40-60, 60-80 or even 80-100 
depending on the climatic conditions of the 
country. The rule is that as hard a binder as 
possible shall be used, provided this is 
consistent with common practice; 


g) The temperature of the mix before rolling 
shall be chosen so as to achieve by 
subsequent rolling the required voids 
content. In order to increase the probability 
of satisfying the specifications of D-2.1 to 
D-2.4 the compactness shall be studied not 
only by an appropriate choice of mixing 
temperature, but also by an appropriate 
number of passings and by the choice of 
compacting vehicle. 


D-4 TEST METHOD 
D-4.1 Measurement of the Residual Voids Content 


For the purpose of this measurement, cores have to 
be taken from the track in at least four different 
positions which are equally distributed in the test 
area between lines AA and BB (see Fig. 1). In order to 
avoid in homogeneity and unevenness in the wheel 
tracks, cores should not be taken in wheel tracks 
themselves, but close to them. Two cores (minimum) 
should be taken close to the wheel tracks and one 
core (minimum) should be taken approximately midway 
between the wheel tracks and each microphone 
location. 


If there is a suspicion that the condition of 
homogeneity is not met (see D-2.4), cores shall be 
taken from more locations within the test area. The 
residual voids content has to be determined for each 
core, then the average value from all cores shall 
be calculated and compared with the requirement 
of D-2.1. In addition, no single core shall have a 
voids value which is higher than 10 percent. The 
test surface constructor is reminded of the problem 
which may arise when the test area is heated by pipes 
or electrical wires and cores shall be taken from this 
area. Such installations shall be carefully planned 
with respect to future core drilling locations. It is 
recommended to leave a few locations of size 
approximately 200 mm x 300 mm where there are no 
wires/pipes or where the latter are located deep 
enough in order not to be damaged by cores taken 
from the surface layer. 


Table 4 Design Guidelines 
(Clause D-3.2.2) 


Sl Quantity Target Values Tolerances 
No. 
by total mass by mass of the 
of mix aggregate 

d) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) Mass of stones, square mesh sieve (SM) > 2 mm 47.6 % 50.5 % +5 
ii) Mass of sand 0.063 < SM < 2 mm 38.0 % 40.2 % +5 
iii) Mass of filler SM < 0.063 mm 8.8 % 9.3 % +2 
iv) Mass of binder (bitumen) 5.8 % N.A. +0.5 
v) Maximum chipping size 8 mm 6.3 - 10 
vi) Binder hardness [(see D-3.2.2 (f)] a 
vii) Polished stone value (PSV) > 50 — 
viii) Compactness, relative to Marshall compactness 98 % - 


14 


D-4.2 Sound Absorption Coefficient 


The sound absorption coefficient (normal incidence) 
shall be measured by the impedance tube method 
using the procedure specified in ISO 10534. 


Regarding test specimens, the same requirements 
shall be followed as regarding the residual voids 
content (see D-4.1). The sound absorption shall be 
measured in the range between 400 Hz and 800 Hz 
and in the range between 800 Hz and 1 600 Hz (at 
least at the centre frequencies of third octave bands) 
and the maximum values shall be identified for both 
of these frequency ranges. Then these values, for all 
test cores, shall be averaged to constitute the final 
result. 


D-4.3 Volumetric Macro Texture Measurement 


For the purpose of this standard, texture depth 
measurements shall be made on at least 10 positions 
evenly spaced along the wheel tracks of the test strip 
and the average value taken to compare with the 
specified minimum texture depth. For the description 
of the procedure see ISO 10844. 


D-5 STABILITY IN TIME AND MAINTENANCE 
D-5.1 Age Influence 


In common with any other surfaces, it is expected 
that the tyre/road noise level measured on the test 
surface may increase slightly during the first 6-12 
months after construction. 


The surface will achieve its required characteristics 
not earlier than four weeks after construction. 


The stability over time is determined mainly by the 
polishing and compaction by vehicles driving on 
the surface. It shall be periodically checked as stated 
in D-2.5. 


D-5.2 Maintenance of the Surface 


Loose debris or dust which could significantly reduce 
the effective texture depth shall be removed from the 
surface. In countries with winter climates, salt is 
sometimes used for de-icing. Salt may alter the 
surface temporarily or even permanently in such a 
way as to increase noise and is therefore not 
recommended. 


D-5.3 Repaving the Test Area 


If it is necessary to repave the test track, it is usually 
unnecessary to repave more than the test strip 
(of 3 m width in Fig. 1) where vehicles are driving, 
provided the test area outside the strip met the 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 
requirement of residual voids content or sound 
absorption when it was measured. 


D-6 DOCUMENTATION OF THE TEST 
SURFACE AND OF TESTS PERFORMED ON IT 


D-6.1 Documentation of the Test Surface 


The following data shall be given in a document 
describing the test surface: 


a) 
b) 


The location of the test track. 


Type of binder, binder hardness, type of 
aggregate, maximum theoretical density of 
the concrete (DR), thickness of the wearing 
course and grading curve determined from 
cores from the test track. 


c) 


Method of compaction (for example type of 
roller, roller mass, number of passes). 


d) Temperature of the mix, temperature of the 
ambient air and wind speed during laying of 


the surface. 


Date when the surface was laid and 
contractor. 


All or at least the latest test results. 
The residual voids content of each core. 


h) The locations in the test area from where 
the cores for voids measurements have been 
taken. 

j) The sound absorption coefficient of each 
core (if measured). Specify the results both 
for each core and each frequency range as 


well as the overall average. 


k) The locations in the test area from where 
the cores for absorption measurement have 


been taken. 


m) Texture depth, including the number of tests 


and standard deviation. 
n) The institution responsible for the tests 
according to D-6.1 and D-6.2 and the type 


of equipment used. 


Date of the test(s) and date when the cores 
were taken from the test track. 


p) 


D-6.2 Documentation of Vehicle Noise Tests 
Conducted on the Surface 


In the document describing the vehicle noise test(s) 
it shall be stated whether all the requirements of this 
standard were fulfilled or not. Reference shall be 
given to a document according to D-6.1 describing 
the results which verify this. 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 6.4.1) 
EXHAUST OR SILENCING SYSTEMS CONTAINING FIBROUS MATERIAL 


E-1 Fibrous absorbent material shall be asbestos- 
free and may be used in the construction of the 
exhaust or silencing system only if suitable devices 
ensure that the fibrous material is kept in place for 
the whole time that the exhaust or silencing system 
is being used and the exhaust or silencing system 
meets the requirements of any one of E-1.1, E-1.2 
and E-1.3. 


NOTE — This requirement is not applicable to the air 
filter if made of paper and foam material: 


E-1.1 After removal of the fibrous material, the sound 
level shall comply with the requirements of 6.2.3. 


E-1.2 If the fibrous absorbent material is not be 
placed in those parts of the silencer through which 
the exhaust gases pass and shall comply with the 
following requirements: 


E-1.2.1 The material shall be heated at a temperature 
of 650 +5 °C for 4h ina furnace without reduction in 
every length, diameter or bulk density of the fibre. 


E-1.2.2 After heating at 650 +5 °C for | hina furnace, 
at least 98 percent of the material shall be retained in 
a sieve of nominal aperture size 250 um complying 
with ISO 3310-1 when tested in accordance with 
ISO 2559. 


E-1.2.3 The loss in weight of the material shall not 
exceed 10.5 percent after soaking for 24 h at 90 + 5°C 
in a synthetic condensate of the following 
composition. 

1 N hydrobromic acid (HBr): 10 ml 

1 N sulphuric acid (H,SO,): 10 ml 

Distilled water to make up to 1,000 ml 


NOTE — The material shall be washed in distilled water 
and dried for 1 h at 105 °C before weighing. 
E-1.3 Before the system is tested in accordance 
with Annex B, it shall be put into a normal state for 
road use by one of the following condition methods: 


E-1.3.1 Conditioning by Continuous Road 
Operation 


E-1.3.1.1 According to the classes of motor cycles, 
the minimum distances to be completed during 
conditioning are: 


NOTE — The running may be carried out by vehicle 
manufacturers and their declaration given. 


Class of motor cycle according toPower- Distance 
to-mass ratio index (PMR) (km) 
Class I < 25 4 000 
Class II > 25 < 50 6 000 
Class III > 50 8 000 


E-1.3.1.2 50 +10 percent of this conditioning cycle 
consists of town driving and the remainder of long- 
distance runs at high speed; the continuous road 
cycle may be replaced by a corresponding test-track 
programme. 


E-1.3.1.3 The two speed regimes shall be alternated 
at least six times. 


E-1.3.1.4 The complete test programme shall include 
a minimum of 10 breaks of at least three hours’ 
duration in order to reproduce the effects of cooling 
and condensation. 


E-1.3.2 Conditioning by Pulsation 


E-1.3.2.1 The exhaust system or components thereof 
shall be fitted to the motor cycle or to the engine. In 
the former case, the motor cycle shall be mounted on 
a test bench. 


The test apparatus, a detailed diagram of which is 
shown in Fig. 3, is fitted at the outlet of the exhaust 
system. Any other apparatus providing equivalent 
results is acceptable. 


E-1.3.2.2 The test equipment shall be adjusted so that 
the flow of exhaust gases is alternatively interrupted 
and restored 2 500 times by a rapid-action valve. 


E-1.3.2.3 The valve shall open when the exhaust gas 
back-pressure, measured at least 100 mm downstream 
of the intake flange, reaches a value of between 35 
and 40 kPa. Should such a figure be unattainable 
because of the engine characteristics, the valve shall 
open when the gas back-pressure reaches a level 
equivalent to 90 percent of the maximum that is 
measured before the engine stops. It shall close when 
this pressure does not differ by more than 10 percent 
from its stabilized value with the valve open. 


E-1.3.2.4 The time-delay switch shall be set for the 
duration of exhaust gases calculated on the basis of 
the requirements of E-1.3.2.3. 


E-1.3.2.5 Engine speed shall be 75 percent of the 
rated engine speed (S). 


E-1.3.2.6 The power indicated by the dynamometer 
shall be 50 percent of the full-throttle power measured 
at 75 percent of the rated engine speed (S). 


E-1.3.2.7 Any drainage holes shall be closed off 
during the test. 


E-1.3.2.8 The entire test shall be complete within 
48 h. If necessary, a cooling period shall be allowed 
after each hour. 


@50+5mm 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


OPTIONAL 


OP TIONAL 


Hand-operated regulating valve. 


Time delay switch. 
Impulse counter. 


Inlet flange or sleeve for connection to the rear of the test exhausts system. 


Compensating reservoir with a maximum capacity of 40 litres. 
Pressure switch with an operating range of 5 kPa to 250 kPa. 


Quick response valve, such as exhaust brake valve 60 mm in diameter, operated by a pneumatic 


cylinder with an output of 120 N at 400 kPa. The response time, both when opening and closing, 


shall not exceed 0.5 s. 
Exhaust gas evacuation. 
Flexible pipe. 

Pressure gauge. 


Fic. 3 Test APPARATUS FOR CONDITIONING BY PULSATION 


E-1.3.3 Conditioning on a Test Bench 


E-1.3.3.1 The exhaust system shall be fitted to an 
engine representative of the type fitted to the motor 
cycle for which the exhaust system was designed, 
and mounted on a test bench. 


E-1.3.3.2 Conditioning consists of the specific 
number of test bench cycles for each class of motor 
cycle for which the exhaust system was designed. 
The number of cycles for each class of motor cycle is: 


Class of Motor Cycle According | Number of 
toPower-to-Mass Ratio Index Cycles 
(PMR) 
Class I < 25 6 
Class II >25 <50 9 
Class III > 50 12 


E-1.3.3.3 Each test-bench cycle shall be followed 
by a break of at least 6 h in order to reproduce the 
effects of cooling and condensation. 


E-1.3.3.4 Each test-bench cycle consists of six 
phases. The engine conditions for and the duration 
of each phase are: 


Phase Conditions Duration of Phase 
in minutes 
PMR < 50| PMR > 50 
1 Idling 6 6 
2 |25% load at 75% S 40 50 
3 50 % load at 75 % S 40 50 
4 100 % load at 75 %S 30 10 
5 50 % load at 100 % S 12 12 
6 |25% loadat 100 % S 2 22 
Total time 2.5h 2.5h 


E-1.3.3.5 During this conditioning procedure, at the 
request of the manufacturer, the engine and the 
silencer may be cooled in order that the temperature 
recorded at a point not more than 100 mm from 
the exhaust gas outlet does not exceed that measured 
when the motor cycle is running at 110 km/h or 
75 percent of S in top gear. The engine and/or motor 
cycle speeds are determined to within +3 percent. 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEX F 
(Clauses 5.3.3 and 6.3.2) 
ADDITIONAL SOUND EMISSION PROVISIONS (ASEP) — OPTIONAL 


F-1 SCOPE 


F-1.1 This Annex applies to vehicles of category 
L2 as defined in IS 14272 with PMR >50. 


This is not applicable to L2 category of vehicle as 
defined in IS 14272 fitted with carburettor or simple 
open loop engine management systems. 


In the case of close loop engine management system, 
vehicle manufacturer may submit a statement of 
compliance as per Annex G alongwith test report as 
per this Annex, if it meets the requirements, shall be 
deem to be in compliance of these requirements. In 
case manufacturer does not submit the compliance 
statement and the test report, the test shall be 
conducted by test agency. 


F-1.2 Vehicles with variable gear ratios or automatic 
transmission with non-lockable gear ratios are 
exempted from the requirements of this Annex, if the 
vehicle manufacturer provides technical documents 
to the type approval authority showing, that the 
vehicle’s engine speed at BB’ does neither exceed 
Ng + 9.05 x (S—n,,,,) nor fall below n,,.—0.05 x (S— 
Na) for any test condition inside the ASEP control 
range defined in paragraph 2.5. below, where npp is 
the average engine speed at BB’ from the three valid 
acceleration tests according to Annex B. 


F-2 ADDITIONAL SOUND EMISSION 
REQUIREMENTS 


F-2.1 Measuring Instruments 


The requirements for the measurement equipment are 
identical to those defined in B-1 for the tests of the 
motorcycle in motion. 


F-2.2 Acoustical environment, meteorological 
conditions and background noise. 


The requirements concerning the acoustical 
environment, the meteorological conditions and the 
background noise are identical to those defined 
in B-2 for the tests of the motor cycle in motion. 


F-2.3 Microphone Positions and Conditions of the 
Vehicle 


The requirements concerning the microphone 
positions and the conditions of the vehicle are 
identical to those defined in B-3.1 and B-3.2 for the 
tests of the motor cycle in motion. 


F-2.4 General Operating Conditions 


The general operating conditions are identical to 
those defined in B-3.3.1 for the tests of the motor 


18 


cycle in motion. 
F-2.5 ASEP Control Range 


The requirements of this Annex apply to any vehicle 
operation with the following restrictions: 


a) v,,,Shall be at least 20 km/h 
b) Vag shall not exceed 80 km/h 
c) n,,,shall be at least 0.1 x (S= 7) + 14, 
d) n,,,,shall not exceed 
0.85 x (S— Nae) F Nise 
for PMR < 66 and 
3.4 x PMR?” x (S— nae) + Niate 
for PMR > 66 


F-2.6 ASEP Limits 


The maximum noise level recorded during the 
passage of the motorcycle through the test track shall 
not exceed: 


wot,(i) (0 x (fip T Aoi) /1 000) +3 
OF Npp S Avoti and 

woti) | (5 x (npp g oot) /1000) +3 
or Npp M ni 


From the date notified by the statutory authority, 
maximum noise level shall not exceed: 

+ (1% (npp )/1000) +3 

an 


wot,(i) 


wot,(i) A t 


or Npp SA 


Loaro + 5 X pp — Mua) / 1.000) + 3 


for np > n 


Aa 
wot, (i) 


where L... and n,,, have the same meaning as in 
wot, (i) PP 


Annex B and n refers to the corresponding engine 


wot, (i) 


speed when the front of the vehicle passes the line 
PP! 


NOTE — When compliance with these limits is checked, 
values for L.,,,,. and Agag Shall not be taken from type 
approval documents but newly determined by 
measurements as defined in Annex B, however using the 
same gear (i) and the same pre-acceleration distance as 


during type approval. 


F-3 TESTING 
MEASUREMENTS 


COMPLIANCE BY 


F-3.1 General 


Manufacturer shall conduct the test as per ASEP 
procedure and submit the result to test agency along 
with the declaration as per Annex G. The test agency 
based on the test results submitted by manufacturer 
shall verify the documents and issue the test report 
for compliance to this standard. 


F-3.2 ASEP Reference Test Conditions 
F-3.2.1 Test Procedure 


When the front of the vehicle reaches AA‘, the throttle 
shall be fully engaged and held fully engaged until 
the rear of the vehicle reaches BB’. The throttle shall 
then be returned as quickly as possible to the idle 
position. Pre-acceleration may be used if acceleration 
is delayed beyond AA’. The location of the start of 
the acceleration shall be reported. 


F-3.2.2 Test Speed and Gear Selection 


The vehicle shall be tested at each of the following 
operating conditions: 


a) Vp». = 50 km/h 


The selected gear (1) and pre-acceleration condition 
shall be the same as those used in the original type 
approval test of Annex B of this standard. 


b) Vg corresponding to 
Npp = 9.85 x (S—n,,,,) +n 


idle idle 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


for PMR < 66; and 

Npp = 3-4 x PMR? x (S-n g) tn 
for PMR > 66 

Vpg: Shall not exceed 80 km/h 


idle 


The selected gear shall be 2nd. If the 3rd gear satisfies 
requirements of n,,,, and v,,,,, 3rd gear shall be used. 
If the 4th gear satisfies requirements of npp and v,,.,,,, 
4th gear shall be used. 


F-3.2.3 Data Processing and Reporting 
The requirements of B-4 shall be applied. 


In addition the engine speed measurements at AA’, 
BB', and PP’ in units of min" shall be mathematically 
rounded to the nearest integer for further 
calculations. For a given test condition the three 
individual engine speeds shall be averaged 
arithmetically. 


The final sound pressure levels for the full throttle 
acceleration shall not exceed the limits specified 
in F-2.6. 


ANNEX G 


(Clause 6.3.3) 
STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE WITH THE ADDITIONALSOUND EMISSION PROVISIONS (ASEP) 


[Maximum format: A4 (210 mm x 297 mm)] 


EEE (Name of manufacturer) makes this statement in good faith, after having performed an 
appropriate evaluation of the sound emission performance of the vehicles. 


Dates A N AE T T A T 
Name of authorized representative: ..........::ceeeees 


Signature of authorized representative: ....... ee 


IS 3028 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEX H 
(Clause 5.2) 


GUIDELINES FOR DECIDING FOR TESTING IN CASE OF MODIFICATION MADE IN ALREADY 
TYPE APPROVED VEHICLE 


SI Modification made in vehicle Testing to be done or not 
No. 
i) | Engine Type [see 3.2 (a)], Capacity, Number | To be tested 
and arrangement of cylinder 
ii) | Change in maximum power To be tested, if the power is increased in excess of 5 
percent 
ii) | Approach speed for test at AA’, due to | To be tested, in case of decrease in excess of 5 
change in parameter such as: Engine rpm at | percent 
peak power, maximum governed rpm 
Intake System 
Air Filter Type To be tested in case of any change 
iv) | Fuel System — Carburettor to FI or Vice versa | To be tested in case of any change 
Turbocharger, supercharger To be tested in case of inclusion and deletion 
v) | Change in Exhaust system such as design of | To be tested in case of any change in design 
silencer, exhaust tube Internal Diameter, Tail 
pipe Internal Diameter and location 
vi) | Type of transmission [see 3.2(b)] To be tested in case of any change 
vii) | Transmission Ratio If the engine rpm at line BB'is affected such that the 
gear in which test is conducted is not same 
viii) | Tyre To be tested if diameter is reducedTo be tested if 


change is from cross ply to radial ply 


20 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, 
of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be 
addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 04 (0932). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amendment No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg e 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 23379120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
22542519, 22542315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


