IS 15000

: 1998

(Reaffirmed - 2012)

Indian Standard

HAZARDANALYSISAND FOODHYGIENECRITICALCONTROLPOINT (HACCP)SYSTEMANDGUIDELINESFOR ITS APPLICATION

KS

67.020

BUREAU
MANAK

OF INDIAN

STANDAR\DS
MARG

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI I 10002

January

1998

Price Group

4

Food Hygiene Sectional Committee, FAD 45

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, in accordance with lO( l)(b) the Bureau of lrldian Stundards Act, 1986 and Rule 8 `Recvgnition of other standards as Indian Standards' of Bureau of
Indian Standards Rules, 1987.

of

This Indian Standard is based on the revision of the Guidelines for the Application of the Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) System CAC/GL 1% 1993 and is identical to it. The revision has now been included as Annex to the third revision of Recommended International Code of Practice - General Principles ofFood Hygiene (CAURCPI) which was adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, at its twenty second session (ALINORM 97/ I3 A). The HACCP system, which is science based and systematic, identifies specific hazards and measures for their control to ensure the safety of food. HACCP is a tool to assess hazards and establish control systems that focus on prevention rather than relying mainly on end-product testing. Any HACCP system is capable ol accommodating change, such as advances in equipment design, processing procedures or technological developments. HACCP can be applied throughout the food chain from the primary producer to final consumer and its implementation should be guided by scientific evidence of risks to human health. Besides enhancing food safety, implementation of HACCP can provide other significant benefits. The application of HACCP system can aid inspection by regulatory authorities and promote international trade by increasing confidence in food safety. Successful application of HACCP requires full commitment and involvement of the management and the workforce. It also requires a multidisciplinary approach; this multidisciplinary approach should include, where appropriate, expertise in agronomy, veterinary health, production microbiology, medicine, public health, food technology, environmental health, chemistry, and engineering according to the particular study. The application of HACCP is compatible with the implementation of quality management systems, such as the IS/IS0 9000 series and is a system choice in the management of food safety within such systems.

of

While the application of HACCP aspects of food quality.

to food safety has been considered here, the concept can be applied to other

Training of personnel in industry, government and academia in HACCP principles and applications, and increasing awareness of consumers are essential elements for the effective implementation of HACCP. As an aid in developing specific training to support a HACCP plan, working instructions and procedures should be developed which define the tasks of the operating personnel to be stationed ;:t each critical control point. Cooperation between primary producer, industry, trade groups, consumer organizations and responsible authorities is of vital importance. Opportunities should be provided for the joint training of industry and control authorities to encourage and maintain a continuous dialogue and create aclimute of understanding in the practical application of HACCP.

IS 15ooo : 1998

Indian Standard

FOODHYGIENE-HAZARDANALYSISAND CRITICALCONTROLPOINT (HACCP)SYSTEMANDGUIDELINESFOR
ITS 1 SCOPE
This standard sets out the principles of the Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) system and provides general guidelines for the application of these principles, while recognizing that the details of application may vary depending on the circumstances of the food operation. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated: IS NO. 2491 : 1972 Title Code for hygienic food processing revision) conditions for units (fir:vf

APPLICATION
3.4 Corrective

Action

Any action to be taken when the results of monitoring at the CCP indicate a loss of control. 3.5 Critical Control Point (CCP) A step at which control can be applied and is essential to prevent or eliminate a food safety hazard or reduce it to an acceptable level. 3.6 Critical Limit A criterion which unacceptability. 3.7 Deviation Failure to meet a critical 3.8 Flow Diagram A systematic representation of the sequence of steps of operations used in the production or manufacture of a particular food item. 3.9 HACCP A system which identifies, hazards which are significant 3.10 HACCP Plan A document prepared in accordance with the principles of HACCP to ensure control of hazards which aie significant in the segment of the food chain under consideration. 3.11 Hazard A biological, chemical condition of, food with adverse health cffcct. 3.12 Hazard Analysis The process ot`collrcting and evaluating into!-lnzltion on harxds and conditions Icading to their presence IO Jccidc which xc significant for i'oocl \;ltety :111cl therdorc should bc addressed in the IIACXY plarl. or physical the potential agent in. OI evaluates and controls for food safety. limit. separates acceptability from

1snso I994

9001 :

Quality systems Model for quality assurance in design, development, production, installation and servicing (fint rahh~)

3 DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this definitions shall apply. 3.1 Control (Verb) To take all necessary actions to cnsurc and maintain compliance with criteria established in the HACCP plan. 3.2 Control (Noun) The state wherein followed and criteria 3.3 Control correct proccdurcs are being met. XI-~ hcing standard, the following

to cause an

Mcasurc

3.13 Monkor
The act ~1' conducting a planned A\ci-v;itionsor measurements ofcontrol nsxes\ whether :I cc'r' i4 under control, sequence of pnriuncIcIx to

Any action and activity that can be UWXIto pxvcnt or eliminate a food safety hazard or reduce it to ill1 acceptable level.

I

IS 15000 : lYY8 3.14 Step
A point, including final 3.15 procedure, raw operation from or
stage

HACCP impact in the food chain production to materials, primary processes product,

system, of

consideration materials, practices, hazards, of

should role of

be given

to the food

raw

ingredients, likely of end-use concern, safety. of

manufacturing

manufacturing the and

to control categories

consumption.

consumers relative HACCP which
m

Validation
evidence that the elements of the HACCP

epidemiological 5.3 The intent at CCPs.

evidence of the

to food system

Obtaining

is to focus should he is

plan are effective.

control identified of methods, in addition with procedures, to tests and to 5.4

Redesign

of the operation must found. applied to Code each of

considered

if a hazard but no CCPs should Indian specific

be controlled

3.16 Verification
The other application evaluations, compliance

HACCP in any for

be

specific given ones Hygienic be of' a

monitoring plan.

operation example Practice, identified

separately. or elsewhere.
;I

CCPs might

identified not

in any

determine 4

the HACCP

Standard application

PRINCIPLES
system consists of the following seven

be the only or might

The HACCP principles:

different 5.5

nature. application changes made should when be any reviewed modification

HACCP

and
is

PRINCIPLE
Conduct

1
analysis.

necessary

a hazard

made in the product, 5.6 When applying

process, HACCP, where

or any step. in
a

PRINCIPLE
Determine

2
control points (CCPs).

given

context, taking

it is into

important the critical account 6 limit(s).

to be tlexible, the nature

appropriate,

and size of the operatioli.

PRINCIPLE
Establish

3

APPLICATION

OF HACCP PRINCIPLES
principles (see Fig. I). consists of the

critical

6.0 Application
following for Application

of HACCP of HACCP

PRINCIPLE
Establish

4
to monitor control of the CCP.

tasks as identified

in the Logical

Sequence

a system

6.1 Assemble PRINCIPLE
Establish monitoring control. the

HACCP Team
operation specific the should knowledge of team. expert this may on site, assure that the

5 6.1.1 The
corrective action to be taken when appropriate is available HACCP plan. by assembling expertise for verification to confirm that be obtained 6.1.2 The food foi product and expertise an effective Where advice such should

indicates

that a particular

CCP is not under

development

Optimally,

be accomplished

PRINCIPLE
Establish the HACCP

6

a multidisciplinary

is not available

procedures system

from other sources.
scope of the HACCP describe plan which should be

is working

effectively. identified. The scope should is involved or only to be addressed
of

PRINCIPLE
Establish and records application.

7
concerning to these all procedures and their

segment classes ot all

documentation appropriate

of the food chain hazards
chsses

and the general selected classes`?).

principles

(for example,

does it cover

haLards

5 GUIDELINES FOR THE APPLICATION THE HACCP SYSTEM

OF

6.2

Describe Product
of the product safety should structure be drawn such up, as

A till description including comnosition. ot water brining, storage act!vity smoking, conditions relevant

5.1 Prior to application
food chain, that sector and io IS Z30 !V;hctice,

of HACCP should Indian I`ood

to any sectorof'the according Icgi'liltion Standards/Codes safety

inf.olmation,

be operating

pllysical/chclni~~ii

1including
frcef.in;g.

1, the appropl-iatc
appropriate

(A,).
exampie. ctc),

pH,

etc /> rn~c~~c~c~tJal/`;t~~lic
heat-trc~:tnlerll. ,luralGlity

t~~atin~nts (f'or

il't~r~vcvr~iotr o/ ~c~utlA~t~it~l.~ltiotl
I'rame~l rhercu n&r).
S.2 Management of haLard commirmcnt an cffectivc in itlentiflcntron.

Art,

I954 and Ku1c.s

packaging,

;IIKI

and method

ol'tlis.ribiltion.

IS necessary HACCI' evaluation. and

for and

6.3

identify

lntrndd

Use

iml,le~i~entation I>ul-ing suhquent

system applying

operations

designing

2

IS 15000 : 1998
cases, vulnerable groups of the population, such as institutional feeding, may have to be considered. 6.4 Construct processing, storage, distribution or other. It should be used for guidance when determining CCPs. This example of adecision tree may not be applicable to all situations. Other approaches may be used. Training in the application ofthe decision tree is recommended. 6.7.2 If a hazard has been identified at a step where control is necessary for safety, and no control measure exists at that step, or any other, then the product or process should be modified at that step, or at any earlier or later stage, to include a control 6.8 Establish measure.

Flow Diagram

The flow diagram should be constructed by the HACCP team. The tlow diagram should coverall steps in the operation. When applying HACCP to a given operation, consideration should be given to steps preceding and following the specific operation. 6.5 On-Site Confirmation

of Flow Diagram

The HACCP team should confirm the processing operation against the tlow diagram during all stages and hours of operation and amend the tlow diagram where appropriate. 6.6 Conduct

Critical

Limits for Each CCP (see

Principle 3) 6.8.1 Critical limits should be specified and validated
if possible for each critical control point. In some cases more than one critical limit will be elaborated at a particular step. Criteria often used include measurements of temperature, time, moisture level, chlorine, and sensory /?H, A,, and available parameters, such as visual appearance and texture. 6.9 Estahlish

a Hazard Analysis (see Principle

1)

6.6.1 The HACCP team should list all the hazards that
may be reasonably expected to occur at each step from primary production, processing, manufacture and distribution till the point consumption.

of

6.6.2 The HACCP team should next conduct a hazel-d analysis to identify for the HACCPplan which hazards are of such a nature that their elimination or Ireduction to acceptable levels is essential to the production of a safe food 6.6.3 In conducting the hazard analysis, possible, the following should be included: wherever

a Monitoring (see Principle 4)

System for Each CCP
nr

6.9.1 Monitoring
observation

is the scheduled measurement of a CCP relative to its critical limits.

a> The likely occurrence of hazards and severity of their adverse health effects; b) The qualitative and/or quantitative evaluation

6.9.2 The monitoring procedures should be able IO detect loss of control at the CCP. Further, monitoring should ideally provide this information in time to make adjustments to ensure control of the process to prevent violating the critical limits. 6.9.3 Where possible, process adjustments should bc made when monitoring results indicate a trend towards loss of control at a CCP. The aci.justments should he taken before a deviation occurs. 6.9.4 Data derived from monitoring should be evaluated by a designated person with knowledge and authority to carry out corrective actions when indicated. 6.9.5 If monitoring is not contindous, then the amount or VI-equency of monitoring should be sufficient to guarantee that the CCP is in control. 6.9.6 Most monitoring procedures for CCPs will need to be done rapidly because they relate to 011 line processes and there will not he time fog- lengthy analytical testing. 6.9.7 Physical and chemical measurements are ol.tcIl preferred to microbiological testing because they may he tl0nc: rapidly and can often indicate microhiologicnl control of the p~~oduct. the

C)

of the presence of hazards; Survival or multiplication of microorganisms of concern; of persistence in foods of toxins,

d) Production e)

chemicals or physical agents; and Conditions leading to the above.

6.6.4 The HACCP team should then consider what control measures, if any, exist which can be applied for each hazard. 6.6.5 More than one control measure may he required to control a specitic hazard(s) and more than one hazard may be controlled by a specified control measure. 6.7 Determine

Critical Control Points (see

Principle 2) 6.7.1 There may be mom-e than one CCP at which
control is applied to address the same hazard. The determination 01' a CCP in the HACCP system can he facilitated by the application ofadecision tree (.Y~Y Fig. 2), which indicates a logic reasoning approac'l~. Application ofadecision tree should he flexible, ,$vcn whether the operation is for production, slilughtcr,

6.9.H All records and documents associated will1 monitoring CCPs must be signed by the pe1.~)1i(4) doing the monitoring and by a responsible revlt:win:: ollicial(\) o.f the coulpany.

IS 15000 : 1998

6.10 Establish Corrective Actions (see Principle 5) 6.10.1 Specific corrective actions must be developed for each CCP in the HACCP system in order to deal with deviations when they occur.
6.10.2 The actions must ensure that the CCP has been Actions taken must also brought under control. include proper disposition of the affected product. Deviation and product disposition procedures must be documented in the HACCP record keeping. 6.11 Establish Verification

6.11.3 Where possible, validation activities should include actions to confirm the efficacy of all elements of the HACCP plan. 6.12 Establish

Documentation ing (see Principle 7)

and Record Keep-

6.12.1 Efficient and accurate record keeping is essential to the application of a HACCP system.
HACCP procedures should be documented. Documentation and record keeping should be appropriate to the nature and size of the operation. 6.12.1.1 a) b) c) Documentation examples are: hazard analysis, CCP determination, and critical limit determination.

Procedures (see

Principle 6)
for verification. procedures Verification and auditing methods, procedures and tests, including random sampling and analysis, can be used to determine if the HACCP system is working correctly. 6.11.2 The Frequency of verification should be sufficient to confirm that the HACCP system is working effectively. Examples of verification activities include: a) b) c) review of the HACCP system and its records, review of deviations and product dispositions, and confirmation that CCPs are kept under control.

6.11.1 Establish

6.12.1.2 Record examples are:
a) b) c) CCP monitoring activities, deviations and associated corrective actions, and modifications to the HACCP system. worksheet is given

6.12.2 An example of a HACCP in Fig. 3 for guidance.

4

IS 15000 : 1998

1.

Assemble the HACCP Team

2.

Describe Product

1
3.
Identify Intended Use

4. 5.

Construct Flow Diagram 1 On-site Verification of Flow Diagram

6.

7. 8.

r

Determine CCPs

r

4
Establish Critical Lit for Each CCP

1
9.
Establish a Monitoring System for Each CCP

10.

Establish Corrective Action for Deviations that may occur

11.

Establish Verification Procedures

12.

Establish Record Keeping and Documentation

FIG. 1 LOGICAL. SEO~JENCE POKAPPLICATION OF HACCP

5

IS 15ooo : 1998 (Answer questions in sequence)

Ql

f

Do cdntrol measure(s) exist?

f 5)
No

s control at this step necessary for safety?

& Yes c5

Q2

Is the step specifically designed to climiiate or ~~~~~I~~0c-e~ofah-d~~

)-,@]

Q3

Could contamination with identified hazard(s) occur in excess of acceptable level(s) or could tbise increase to unacceptable leVels?(+J

Will a subsequent step eliminate idtntified hazard(s) or reduce likely occurrence to an acceptable level?

FIG. 2 I;,xmtu:

0~ DECISION

TIUZ

1-0 IDENTIFY

CCPs

0

IS 15ooo : 1998

1.

1

Describe Product

Diagram Pmcess Flow

r
X3%

1

LIST

:riticnl
hit(s)

SXlCCtiVC

kcold(s)

b2tion(s)

4.

I

Verikation

FG. 3 I%wP~.E or- A HACCP WOKKSHEE~

Bureau of Indian Standards of hldiarl Slartdurds Act, 1986 to
and qtmlity certification of goods and

Copyright

in lhc course ol

Review of Indian Standards
nrc also rcviewcd when such rcvicw indicates of Indian Stirndards up for rcvkicjn. or cdilion hy referring to the Lrtcst issue

(

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

:

Eastern

:

Northern

:

:

:

:

Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi, India

NO. 1 DECEMBER 2001 TO IS 15000:1998 FOOD. HYGIENE -- HAZARD ANALYSIS AND CRITICAL CONTROL POINT (HACCP) -- SYSTEM AND GUIDELINES FOR ITS APPLICATION
( Foreword, para 2, line 4 ) -- Substitute `[Annex to CAC/RCP-1(1969), Rev. 3 (1997)]'~or `(CAC/RCP-1)'.

AMENDMENT

( Foreword, paras 7 and 8 ) -- Delete: ( Page 1, clause 2 ) -- Delete `1S/1S0 9001:1994 Quality systems -- Model for quality assurance in design, development, production, installation and servicing (jirst revision )'.
[ Page 3, clause 6.6.3(d), line 1 ] -- Substitute `or persistence' for `of

persistence'.
( Page 4, clause 6.12.2) `7 TRAINING -- Insert the following new clause 7 after 6.12.2:

7.1 Training of personnel in industry, government and academia in HACCP

principles and applications, and increasing awareness of consumers are essential elements for the effective implementation of EIACCP. As an aid in developing specific training to support a HACCP plan, working instructions and procedures should be developed which define the tasks of the operating personnel to be stationed at each critical control point.
7.2 Cooperation between primary producer, industry, trade groups, consumer organizations and responsible authorities is of vital importance. Opportunities should be provided for the joint training of industry and control authorities to encourage and maintain a continuous dialogue and create a climate of understanding in the practical application of HACCP.'

( Page 6, Fig. 2, Q1 ) -- Substitute `Do control preventive measures exist?' Jor `Do control measure(s) exist?'. ( F>%D 45 )
Reprography Unig BIS, New Delhi, India

