UDC

725.63'056 : 651'926

IS : 11899 - 1987 IS0 2803-1983

Indian

Standard

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

BOOTHS FOR SIMULTANEOUS GENERAL CHARA~CTERISTICS
lationai Foreword

INTERPRETATION AND EQUIPMENT

This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 2603 `Booths for simultaneous interpretaIon - General characteristics and equipment', issued by the International Organization for Xandardization ( ISO), was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on therecommendation f Acoustics Sectional Committee and approval of the Electrotechnical Division Council. In this standard, certain terminology and conventions ndran Standards; attention is specially drawn to the following: Cornma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while is to use point (. ) as the decimal marker. iross Reference In this Indian Standard, the following International n their respective place the following Indian Standards: International Standard Standards are referred to. Please read are not identical with those used in

in Indian

Standards,

the current

practice

Corresponding

Indian Standard

SO 14014, Acoustics - Measurement of sound insulation in buildings and of building elementsPart 4 Field measurements of airborne sound insulation between rooms EC Pub 268-8, Sound system equipment Part 8 Automatic gain control devices -

IS : 9901 ( Part 4 )-I981 Measurement of sound insulation in buildings and of building elements: Part 4 Field measurements of airborne sound insulation between rooms IS : 9302 ( Part 7 )-I987 Characteristics methods of measurements for sound equipment: Part 7 Automatic gain devices and system control

Adopted

15 January 1987

Q February 1987, BIS I
I

Gr 5

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS : ll889 - 1987 IS0 2893- 1983

0

Introduction

Thedimensional requirements apply equally to semi-permanent booths, as defined in 3.3, for which all other requimts shouldapplyasfarasispossible. In addition to structural specifiiions, thii lntemationd Stan-

IS0 2603 was first issued in 1974 and it has found general application. This revised edition is extended in scope to cover facilities for more than six languages and is based on facilities built since that date and evaluated by the Technical Committee of the International Association of Conference Interpreters (AIIC). Interpreters' booths are designed to meet three requirements a) acoustic separation between different

dard specifies those components of typical conference facilities which form the interpreter's working environment.~ An annex concerning public address and simuhaneous interpretation systems is given for information onb.

:

languages

spoken simultaneousty; b) efficient two-way communication between the booths

2

References
Measur-t of sound ikmdatkw in &v-t4 j tWd and of bulding ekwnznts

and the conference hall; cl a comfortable working environment allowing tinter-

IS0 l4Q/4. Acoustics bugdings

measurenwnts of airborne sound insulation between rooms IEC Publication 26B-8, Sound system equimt
Automatic gain contrd &vices.

preters to maintain the intense effort of concentration required by their work. In addition to architects, project engineers, suppliers etc., it is essential to consult conference interpreters experienced in technical consultancy.

-

f?xt 8.

3

Definitions

1

Scope and field of application')

For the purposes of thii International Standard, the-foIlawing definitions apply 3.1

:
: A booth intended for

Thii International Standard lays down basic specifir?ationsto be considered when initial plans are prepared to provide a new or existing ~building with built-in facilities for simultaneous interpretation. It is applicable to all types of built-in booths with built-in or portable equipment. In designing new buildings, booths should be optimally integrated into the structure so that the conference room and booths constitute a well-balanced unit. The requirements of clauses 4 and 5 apply to booths with builtin equipment, as defined in 3.1, and booths with portable equipment, as defined in 32.

booth with built-in equipment

simultaneous interpretati* equipment.

containing buitt-in interpretation

3.2

booth

with

portable

equipment

: A booth intended

for simultaneous interpretation but not containing built-in interpretation equipment.

3.3 semi-permanent booth : A booth not structurally integrated or which it is intended to move within the building.

1) 21

Mobile installationsfor simultaneous interpretation are specified in IS0 4043, Booths and eqwjwnent.

for simultaneous

interpretation

-

Mobde booths -

General

characteristics

Minimum requirements for confe-vencesystems for simultaneous interpretation will form the subject of a future IEC Publication.

2

lS:11889*1987 IS0 289% 1983

4
4.1 4.1 .l

Structural
Siting-in General

requirements

for booths
hall

4.4.2

Minimum for

dimensions

(see figures 1 and 2) the following minimum

relation to the conference

In facilities dimensions

up to 6 languages,

are required

:

-

width height depth

: 250 cm : 230 cm : 240 cm
the first six booths shal! be (4 interpreter positions per

Booths shall be located at the back of the hall, or down one side. However, in larger halls, the furthest distance to the rostrum shall not exceed 30 m (see 4.5). They shall be elevated to afford an overall view of the hall (windows It is particularly important across the full for the interwidth of the booths).

preters and operator to be able to see clearly the speakers, chairman, and all visual aids (projection screens, maps, flipcharts, blackboard, etc). Visibility from the booths should not be impeded by persons standing. However, booths should not be elevated more than the minimum the above requirements. 4.5). The booths shall be grouped to allow visual contact facilitate cabling between them (see 4.9). 4.1.2 and to amount required to satisfy (see Steep angles should be avoided

In facilities for 6 to 12 languages, 250 cm wide (3 interpreter ing booths booth).`) shall be 340 cm wide

positions per booth) and the remain-

To avoid resonance effects, the three dimensions should be different from one another. For the sound control booth, larger width depending

of the booth

it may be desirable to provide a dimensions.

on equipment

Sound control booth
control booth shall be placed communication close to the interand provide the shall have

4.5

Visibility
room, including the prolarge halls, television

The sound preters'

A direct view of the entire conference jection screen, is essential.

booths

to facilitate

For very

operator with a ~good view of the hall. The operator

safe, quick and easy access both to the booths and to the hall.

monitors may be used for visual support. Monitors shall permit convenient viewing with minimum eyestrain. Particular attention shall be given to possible radiation hazards at close viewing distances.

4.2

Doors

Doors shall provide satisfactory acoustic insulation (see 4.7). They shall not interconnect booths through side-walls. An observation port-hole in the booth door is'useful.

4.6

Windows

(seefigures 1 and 2)

Front windows

shall be across the full width of the booth. The

height of the pane shall be 80 cm and its lower edge shall be Assigned languages and channels should be indicated on or adjacent to doors. Side windows Curtains or baffles shall not be used. shall be provided of the same height and shall extend from these for a length of 95 cm along the partition. To ensure maximum viewing angle, thick frames, mullion posts be avoided in the area between flush with the top of the control panel/console.

4.3

Accessibility

The booths shall have easy access through a separate entrance from outside the hall, to avoid the interpreters disturbing the meeting when coming and going. Stairs, if any, should be safe. Emergency exits shall bereadily accessible, and escape routes clearly marked. to the hall. There should be rapid access from the booths

or bearing elements should front and side windows. Front and side windows ing sound-insulation

shall consist of untinted (see IS0 thickness.

glass satisfyIf a single

requirements

140/4).

pane is used, it shall be of adequate avoid acoustic reflexion be flexibly mounted. In double-pane

The (inner) front The panes should

pane should be inclined with its upper edge towards the hall to and mirror effects.

4.4

Size of booths

4.4.1 General
Each booth shall accommodate preters seated in comfort the required number of inter-

constructions, to clean

provision shall be made for conthe inside surfaces and for

venient opening maintenance. side by side (to cater for large teams requiring more than one 4.7 For

with numerous language combinations outgoing language). Each booth shall be sufficiently disturbing wide

Acoustics
normal non-reinforced sound speech not exceeding an

to allow

occupants

to

A-weighted 80 d0,

pressure, level in the conference continuous A-weighted

room of

enter and leave without

one another, volume.

and high and

the equivalent

sound pressure

deep enough to provide adequate

level of the noise inside each booth shall be less than 35 dB.'

1) Existing facilities for more than six languages, built in accordance with IS0 2603-1974 dimensions, may continue to be operated using IS0 2603-1974 as a reference.

and in situations where it is not possible to enlarge booth

3

IS : 11888 - 1887 IS0 2603- 1983

Particular attention booths and towards The booths delegates

should be given to sound-proofing the control booth.

between

The tilting range of the lamp reflector should be limited to avoid glare in adjacent working lighting positions should or into the hall. be controlled by a dimmer

should open onto an area not normally

used by

Overhead

general

or members

of the staff and should not be adjacent

located close to the door inside each booth and readily accessible to the seated interpreter. panes should be avoided. Reflection of overhead lighting in

to any source of noise. Booths and corridor should in any case be carpeted. Reverberation frequencies Reverberation time inside the booth shall not exceed 0.5 s for greater than 125 and up to 4 000 Hz. and sound reflection sound-absorbing shall be reduced materials. by using

Fluorescent

tubes shall not be used tinshielded.

5.2
The

Colours
colour scheme in the booth space. Matt should be suitable for the

suitable anti-static

The A-weighted sound pressure level generated by the airconditioning system (see 4.81, lighting (see 5.1) and other sound sources shall not exceed 35 dB.

restricted

working

finishes should be used for all

surfaces and equipment

in the booth.

5.3 4.8 Air conditioning

Working

surface
surface

(see figures 1 and 2)
be sufficiently documents. covered with shock-absorbing be picked up should have a firm for use as a

The working As booths are occupied tion is required. Air renewal throughout the day, adequate ventilawriting It shall be seven times per hou'r and the carbon dioxshall not exceed between 0.10 %. The temperature shall be 18 and 22 "C by means of an inide concentration shall be controllable dividual regulator between shall

should

table and for perusing be horizontal and

material to deaden by the microphones. smooth finish.

noise which would otherwise The underneath surface

in each booth. The relative humidity

45 and 65 %.

The characteristics positioning

of the working

surface are as follows

:

The air velocity shall not exceed 0,2 m/s. Air inlets and outlets shall be placed in such a way that interpreters are not exposed to draughts.

: beneath the front window;

-

height

: 73 * 1 cm from the floor level of the booth;

4.9

Cable

ducts
control cables and associated con-

-

useful depth : from 35 to 50 cm in relation to the interangle of vision into the hall;

preter's Ducts suitable for looping of cables, the openings Access nectars from booth to booth shall be provided. After insertion

shall be made sound-proof.

leg room 66 cm. Shelving working

: minimum

depth

50 cm,

minimum

height

to ducts should be made easy and should not require

the use of special tools.

or trays for documents surface but preferably

should not be placed under the above the window or on the rear

5 5.1

Booth

interior 5.4 Seating
interpreter and technician, there should be a com-

Lighting
in the booth shall be independent of that in the of

For each fortable the working surface.

The lighting

chair with the following five legs;

features

:

hall, as the latter may have to be darkened films or slides. The main light source is that illuminating Ceiling lights are required for background ing. The working

for the projection

-

adjustable adjustable

height; back-rest;

lighting or for clean-

surface available to each interpreter lighting to produce a uniform

(0.4 rn2) shall intensity of at control give two

have individual preter; levels it should

-

arm-rests;

least 300 lx. The switch shall be within easy reach of the interpreferably give continuous intensity noiseless casters; over a range from 100 to 1 000 lx, or alternatively should be free from

: one in the range 100 to 200 lx, and one better than
radio-frequency or interference.

-

upholstery

of heat-dissipating

material.

300 lx. -Dimmers mechanical

Foot-rests

may be required.

4

lS:11889-1987 180 2603.1983

Dimensions in centimetres

Reserved for console

Reserved for cabling

/

/

\

pI\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\

/

/

56
Figure 1 Schematic

Meeting room floor

layout

for a booth

at elevation

less than

100 cm

(illustrating

a free-standing

console arrangement)

5

-18 I 11889- 1987 IS0 2803 - 1983

Dimensions

in centimetres

Reserved for c

Meeting

room floor

Figure

2 -

Schematic (illustrating

layout

for a booth

at elevation

higher

than

100 cm

a flush-mounted

control panel arrangement)

6

is t i-1888 -1987
ISO 2603 - i a83

6

Facilities for interpreters

7.5

Level control

6.1 Toilets
Separate toiletsshould be available within easy reach of the
booths.

Levelcontrol of the floor channel should preferably be manual. When automatic level control is used, compressor-limiters shall conform to IEC Publication 265-8. Satisfactory-operation of the conference/interpretation equipment depends on observation of electrical and/or magnetic interference requirements. These will form the subject of a future IEC publication.

6.2

Interpreters' room

It is de&able to providenearthe boothsan interpreters' room which interpreters and operatorsmay use when not on immsdiite duty. It shall have daylightand shaltbe sufficiently large to acMwnmodate at least as many personsas thereare working positionsin the booths. It should have a privateentrance.
It is preferable to dii folkwing purposes: a) b) thii room into two areasservingthe

8
8.1

Interpreters' General

control panel/console

study of documents and postingof notices; relaxation and stand-by.

A control panel/console containing individual controls for listening and speaking, together with corresponding indicators shall be provided for each interpreter. In the case of portable equipment, dual control panels are permissible. Control panels shall be mounted between the front window and the working surface (angle of inclination depending on booth elevation vis-a-vis the hall) so as to occupy a minimum area and shall not impede the available working area. Flush mounted control panels and freestanding consoles are equally acceptable. The maximum control panel dimensions (width x height x depth) shall be :

The followky equipmentand furnishings are required :

-

easy chaits. chairs and tables, cloakroom or coat-E&
te@hone~insrdeandlocalou%idelines~; nouceboard (for postingassignments. etc.); indiipigeon-holes.

in the case of a single control panel : 25cm x 15cm x 21cm; in the interpreters'
in the case of a dual control panel :

7 Sound equipment booths"
7.1

40 cm x 15 cm x 21 cm.
The surface of the control panel/console shall be matt and nonreflecting. Indicator lights shall be confined to active functions hnicrophone on, channel selected, channel occupied, etc.). 8.2

Frequency response

Tha overall system (comprising microphone input at the speaker's positkm,amplii stages,Level controls,output terminals and interpreters' controlpanelfor headset) shallcorrectly reproduce audio-frequencies between125and 12 500 Hz. A gnKklalroll-offatthelowerendoftbe!frqwncymsponseis . - _recommended in orderto improvespeechintellrgrbrlrty. 7.2 Amplitude non-linearity

Controls

All selector controls should have positive action; their position should clearly indicate status. On each control panel, controls shall be arranged according to ergonomic criteria into distinct areas as follows : a) the liiing area, containing :

The systemshallbefree of perceptible distortion. -7.3 Noise and hum

Ndbeand hum shallnot noticeably affectspeechintelliiibilii. 7.4

-

selector for incomingchannels, preselector for relaylistening, volumecontrol, tone control;

Cross-talk between channels

Cross-talk from other channels(at the ternrindsfor the interpreter's headphone) shall ba avoided. Damping shall be >55dBatlkHz.

1I For definitions and methodsof measurement,referenceshaulclbe made to IEC Publication 268, Soundsystem equ@ment, quirements to the IEC Publiition on minimum requirements for conference systems(in preparation).

and for minimumre-

7

IS : 11889 - 1987 IS0 2603 - 1983

b)

the monitoring -monitoring

area, containing loudspeaker

(optional)

:

9.6

Monitor

loudspeaker(s)
of the monitor loudspeaker(s) is to allow interand continue

with volume control;

The function preter(s)

to remove their headphone

temporarily

c)

the microphone

area, containirrg

:

to follow the proceedings This loudspeaker

while the booth is silent. the floor channel and shall be in that

-

activating

device, device whereby the channel is

shall reproduce

muted automatically deactivating booth is activated; automatically returned to the floor channel,

as soon as one of the microphones it shall have its own volume control.

d) e)

9.7
muting device; the outgoing channel selection area, containing outgoing channels;

Outgoing

channel

selector
tor selecting at least in the

:

Each controi -panel shall have provision two outgoing channeis. be clearly visible. Selector

The status of the channel selector shall keys shall not be interlocked when the language

keys for selecting

same booth, so as to allow quick take-over spoken in the hall changes.

the call facility area, containing

:

-

If the system is designed for selection of ali language channels, call-channel key to chairman/lecturer/controi interlocking between booths is recommended.

booth,

-

Indicator lights or LEDs shall indicate on the other panels in the call-line key (messenger) (optional). same and adjacent booths when a given channel is occupied (i.e. when a microphone is activated on this channel).

9 ~9.1

Functions incoming

of controls
channel selector

A holder for inserting language symbols shall be provided close to the channel selector keys.

Selectors shall operate smoothly and shall cause no mechanical or electrical noise. No short-circuiting channels when operating shall occur between two these controls.

9.9 Call channel booth)

(to chairman/lecturer/control

In the event of breakdown speak without a microphone

(for example a delegate or other emergency),

starting

to

interpreters

9.2

Incoming

channel

pre-selector
changeover from

shall be able to warn the chairman and/or lecturer discreetly via a special link terminating in a monitor loudspeaker. A special key shall activate this link regardless of the

In order to ensure

safe and instantaneous

floor to relay channel, a toggle (lever) switch shall be provided which normally supplies the original (floor) channel and, in its relay position, the channel set on the selector.

microphone

switch position. also ?o the sound

It is desirable that this warning be transmitted control booth.

9.3

Volume

control 9.9 Call-line key (messenger)
listening levels, potentiometers shall be used which are with logarithmic audibly effective Provision should be made for a key by which a light or bell may be activated to call for documents, etc., from the usher. shall be of high

For adjusting progression throughout quality.

their full range.

Potentiometers

9.10 9.4 Tone xontrols

Colour

code

for indicator

lights
lights or light-

The following emitting

coloursshall

be used for indicator

diodes (LED4

A stepless bass control shall be provided to-attenuate lower frequencies by at least - 12 dB at 125 Hz with respect to 1 kHz. A stepless treble control may also be provided to enhance frequencies 1 kHz. by at least + 12 dB at 8 000 Hz with higher respect to

:
Function
microphone ON microphone OFF

Colour
red No luminant status. should

be used for ir@icating

9.5

Headphone/headset

terminals

red

outgoing tion

channel,

occupa-

For each interpreter, one headphone/headset connector socket is required, suitably placed under the working position in permanent installations or on the interpreter's console in portable installations.

green or yellow

if required, tions.

green

01 yellow

may be used for other func-

8

IS:ll889-1987
I$0 2603.1983

10

Interpreter's

headphones
shall be provided. Headphones

interpreter

can speak into it at a convenient

distance while in a

One headphone

per interpreter

comfortable position. Microphones mounted on a flexible arm are recommended for their mechanical vibration-insulating properties. For portable equipment, used. headset combinations may be

shall have the following

characteristics

:

two earphones, per set. Health requirements should be borne in mind when choosing the material and shape of headphones into-the (the stethoscopic type with earpieces earphones inserted ears, or circumaural range are unacceptabje);

11.2

Microphone

controls

frequency mass

: 125 -

12 500 Hz; 6 250 g for headset,

A control switch and a status light shall be provided. A self-releasing muting key to cut out the booth channel

: < 150 g for headphone,

with the exception

of the cable and connector;

only, without~switching

back to the floor channel,

shall be proon" in-

vided to allow the interpreter

to cough or to clear his throat. the "microphone

-

contact

pressure

: < 2,5 N;
in width and length;

Pressing of this key shall extinguish dicator light.

headband connection

adjustable

Microphones

in the same booth shall not be interlocked.

150

to the~control

set by a lead approximately in a non-locking plug. NOTE Where a common switch assembly activating two is used on dual control panels, this requirement does not

m long and termination

microphones

11 11.1
There

Booth

microphones

wlv.
Switching the microphone "ON" or "OFF" shall make no mechanical or electrical noise perceptible to the delegates.

General
should be one microphone for each interpreter. The

directional

characteristics

of microphones

shall be such that the

When the interpreter's microphone is "OFF", shall be automatically linked to this channel.

the floor channel

9

18 : 11333 - 1337

Annex Public address and simultaneous interp~fetation systems
'

i

I.: -

5!This annex does not form part of the standard.1

Acoustic feedback and echoes in the hall may impair simultaneous interpretetion and, in extreme cases, Mock-the memory processes. Moreover,partofeachaudiencedependsonheadsetreceptionwhichmaybedrownedbyloudspeakerswhenoperatedattheirnormal level; therefore, public address systems shoukf not be operated in combination with simultanecws interpretation. When speech reinfor cement cannot be dispersed with (for example, majority of pe&ipents loudspeaker feedback into microphones @aced in the hail. In u&r to provide for effective control in such situations, simukaneous (multi-channel) svstems and PUMC addresS WgkXhannel) .' listening to conference proceedings in one language), public address systems should be operated at their lowest level and every endeewur should be made to eliminate

systems should

:

-

have separate volume controls alkwing individuaf level adjustment, independent of each other, whereby kwwing tfte p&Iii

address level will not reduce the signal strength available to interpf~,

-

be fed from a single microphonf3 installetii.

Level controls of the two systems should be located close to each other to enabk both levels to be monitoredin the same mom,
preferably by the same operator.

IO

Reprography

Unit,

BIS,

Mew Delhi,

India

