( Reaffirmed 2001 )

1s : 2394 - 19s4

Indian`Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR APPLICATION OF LIME PLASTER FINISH

( Fir& Revision)

,

Flooring and Plastering Sectional Committee, BDC 5
Chairman SHRI 0. P. MITTAL S-252 Panchsila Park New Delhi 110017 . Representing Members National Teat House, Calcutta SHRI S. K. BANERJELE SH~I P. R. DAS ( Altemats) Builder's Association of India Limited, Bombay SHRI N. BORALIN~IAH M/s Arcoy Industries, Ahmedabad SERI DINEEHA. CHOKSEI SHRI RASIKLALA. CHOKBEI ( Altcmatr ) Research, Designs and Standards Organization DEPUTY DIREO~OR ( AROH ) ( Mmistry of Railways ) , Lucknow DEPUTY DIRECTOR (B & S) ( Altematr) Mahgsstrs Engineering Research Institute, DIRECTOR a RESEARCHO~FIOER ( MATERIAL TESTINQ.DIVISION ) ( Alternate ) The Fertilizer ( Planning and Development ) India DR V. S. GVPTA Limited, Sindri ( Bihar ) Indian Oil Corporation Limited, New Delhi SHRI K. V. GURUSWAMY SHRI G. V. PAN~ARKAR(Alternate ) M/s Modern Tiles & Marble, New Delhi SHRI S. C. KAPOOR SHRI A. Cl. KA~OOR ( Altsmatc) The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta BRIMD. R. KATEURIA The Bhor Industries Limited, Bombay SHRI K. E. S. MANI SHRI RAMESH D. PATEL ( Altumutr ) Cen~~o~u~lding Research Institute ( CSIR 1, DR MOHAN RAI DR R. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) Mja Coromandal Prodorite Pvt Ltd, Madma SEEI M. V. MURUQAPPAN SERI R. SRIIVIVAS~ ( Alternate )

(tzmtiJdanpapr2) Q Gyprig& 1984
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTIT&ION Thii publication is protected under the la&m m Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means exeept lmtb written permission of the publiiher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

i

IS : 2394 - 1984
l Contirrutdfrom page 1 ) Represenfing Ministry
( Altcrnntr )

Mmherr SIIKI
SHKI SHRI RANXI Smrr Ii. SINGH A. SUVIIASKAR

of Dcfence

( DRDO ), New Delhi

0. P. I<A,~RA D.B. SEN SHRI S. B. SHIROMANY (A!t8r&C) SHRI J. K. K. SINGHANIA MAJ S. P. SHAHMA (Alternate) SHRI P. SRINIVASAN SHICI G. R. J~SHI ( Altcrnatc) SUPEHIXTICNDIN~ ENGINECR
Ex~:cu~rrv~ EN~IN~:EI~ SWEI~INTIEGT)IKG

National Buildings Organization, New Delhi Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay Engineer-in-Chief's The Concrete Branch, New Delhi

Association

of India, Bombay Government of Tamil ), New

( Alternate j or Central Public Works Department ( CD0 SUIIVEYOH Delhi Wolrlts (CZ ) SITIIVI,:YOK OF WORKS ( cz ) ( Alternate) Director General, IS1 ( Lx-r-ulpicio Member) SIIICI G. R.\ms, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SHRI A. K. AVASTHY Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Public Works Department, Nadu

Cement

Concrete

Flooring and LYorks Subcommittee,

Other Miscellaneous BDC 5 : 7

Corlr~encr
S-252, Panchsila Park Nexv l~elhi110017
SHRI 0. P. kfIT?aL

SIIHI N. B~~I~ALIWOIAII SHI~I s. C. KAPOOR SHRI A. C. KAPOOR DH MOHAN RAI

Builder's Modern
(

Association of India, Bombay Tiles & Marble, New Delhi Research Institute (CSIR ).

Ahrnate

)

SHRI B. S. GUPTA ( Altcrnatc ) SIIIII M. P. PATKAR SUKVI.:YOH OF WC)HKS ( AVN
SlmI SllllI

Central Building Roorkee Central Public

Works Department, of Architects, India Tiles

New Delhi

) ( Alternate )
The

SHRI SARESH
P. N.

G.

c.

SHAIlMA ~O(~IrAR

Indian Institute Northern Delhi

Bombay Corporation, New

( Alternate)

`TALWArt

SJIILIM. G.
SIrI:

S~rtr W. N. TAL\L AIL (Alternate)
VIRMASI

Engineer-in-Chief's ,New Delhi

Branch,

Army Headquarters,

s. K. XI \I,,,<

( "llternnte)

2

Is :2394-1984

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR APPLICATION OF LIME PLASTER FINISH

( First Revision )
0.
0.1 This Indian Standard

FOREWORD

( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 July 1984, after the draft finalized by the Concrete, `Flooring and Plastering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 Lime plaster and allied finishes are commonly used in this country for internal finishes as well as for external renderings. But the practice regarding the selection of materials, preparation, thickness of coats and methods of application vary considerably from region to region and the large experience existing with various construction departments is reflected in the specifications they have developed. It is the object of this standard to cover comprehensively and provide guidance for the practice of lime plaster finish suitable to Indian conditions with respect to availability of materials and equipment and conditions of exposure. The Sectional Committee responsible for formulating this standard has also taken into consideration the various specifications presently being followed by the Centr,al and State Public Works Department, the Military Engineering Service and other construction agencies and reports of the National Buildings Organization. 0.3 This standard was first published in the year 1965. In the present revision use of Portland slag cement conforming to IS : 455-1976* and Portland pozzolana cement conforming to IS : 1489-19767 have been included. Use of fly ash as pozzolana has also been included. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in `. accordance with IS : 2-1960:. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. *Specification for Portland slag cement ( third revi&m ). Wpecification for Portland pozzalana cement ( srwnd reutiirn ). fRules for rounding off numerical values ( rrtisd).
l

3

IS : 2394 - 1984 0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards finishes. Other standards published in the series are: IS : 1661-1972 cement-lime IS : 2402-1963 Code of practice for application plaster finishers (Jirst 7evision ) Code of practice for external covering of plaster and

cement finishes

rendered

1. SCOPE 1.1 This ceilings, receiving standard covers application of columns and similar surfaces lime plaster finish. lime plaster finish to walls, on backgrounds suitable for

1.2 Recommendations are laid down with regard to the preparation of surface to receive plaster and the number of coats to be applied on different surfaces under various conditions, Different materials and their proportioning with lime for preparation of mortar for different coats are also included. 1.3 The plastered application of this standard, is restricted to only those types of finishes in which lime constitutes the main binding material.

2. TERMINOLOGY the definitions 2.0 I'or the purpose of this standard, IS : 10403-1983* and IS : 650%19721 shall apply. 3. NECESSARY INFORMATION of terms given in

3.1 In the selection of materials for plaster and in their mixing and application, information is necessary on the following points and detailed consideration shall be given to them before starting plaster work:

4

Types of surface over which it is proposed to apply plaster so that constructional details may be suitably adopted to them and the amount of subsequent preparation necessary before plastering may be minimized. Al-ea and types of finish required together of the nature of the surface to be plastered. with sufficient and details other

b)
c)

Details of finish at junctions with doors, windows openings, ceilings, linings, etc, and at all corners;
of terms of terms relating relating to building to building lime finishes. lime. 4

*(;lossary $Glossary

IS : 2394 -

1984
of

4 4

Types of cornice, arris and return dado treatment where required;

treatments

desired,

and

Details of scaffoldings ( staging ) for access to work in the correct sequence together with provision for adequate protection of adjacent surfaces during plastering operations, particularly in ceiling work; of fixing accessories to be embedded in the plaster;

f 1 Details EdTypes h)
plaster plaster Rainfall

of surface or decorative finish to be applied over the and detailed information on the compatibility of the with the proposed decorative finish; and and climatic conditions. who and

3.2 All information required in 3.1 shall be made available to those Necessary drawings are responsible for the plastering work. instructions for preparatory work shall also be given.

3.3 Arrangement shall be made for the proper exchange of information between those engaged in plastering and all others whose work will affect or will be affected. 4. PROGRAMME OF WORK IN RELATION TO PLASTERING

4.1 Operations Before Plastering - Building operations, such as construction of brick and block walls, the encasement of steel columns and beams with concrete, etc, requiring subsequent plastering, shall be so programmed that they are sufficiently cured and dry to receive the plaster without subsequent damage to plaster or decoration. conduits, cables, etc, to be embedded in 4.1.1 All service pipes, masonry work and covered with plaster shall be completed and suitably protected against corrosion, where necessary, before plastering is begun and the time of plastering shall be scheduled accordingly. 4.2 Operations During Plastering - Where other building operations are required to proceed simultaneously with plastering, special care shall be taken to programme the work SO as to cause the minimum amount of interference. 4.3 Plastering operations shall be interval between successive coats. so. scheduled as to allow sufficient

4.4 Operations After Plastering - Care shall be taken to ensure that subsequent building operations do not cause damage to the plaster work.

5

a.

IS : 2394 - 1984
This may be achieved by careful programming and by the avoidance last minute alternations in the design or in the sequence of work. 5. MATERIALS, of

TOOLS

AND

ACCESSORIES
to relevant Conforming IS : 712-1973' IS : 1344-1981" IS: 1542-19774 and IS : 3812-19813 to Indian Standards

5.1 The following materials, conforming shown against them, shall be used:
Nume a) Lime b) Pozzolana c) Sand d) Cement e) Wood lath, Timber 5.2 The following materials, wherever Indian Standards shown against them:

IS : 269-19765, IS : 455-19766 IS : 1489-1976' IS : 1331-1971s used shall conform by slaking to the relevant lime with water to

a) Idime Putty -This shall be obtained in accordance with IS : 1635-1975s.

b) Water - The water used for mixing and curing the requirements given in 4.3 of IS : 456-1978lO

shall conform

c) .Nutural Fibres - Natural fibres, such as Mu+, jute, hemp, coconut fibre, hair, if necessary, may be used as admixtures They shall be clean and free from oil. with plasters. 5.3 Tools used IS : 1630-1984lr. for plaster work may be in conformity with

`Specification for building limes ( second revision). 2Specification for calcined clay pozzolana ( second rcuirion ). 5pt:cification for fly ash for use as pozzolana and admixture (i;rsl revision). `Specitication for sand for plaster (jilt revision). 5pecification for ordinary and low heat Portland ct.ment ( third revicivn). %pecification for Portland-slag cement ( third reoision). `Specification for Portland-pozzolana cement (second reoision ). 5pecification for cut sizes of timber ( secondrevision ). Tode of practice for liled slaking of building lime and preparation of putty (f;rsr rcvisivn ) . loCode of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third r&ion ). "Specification for Mason's tools for plaster work and pointing work ( JIrst u&ion).

IS : 2394 - 1984 6. STORAGE OF MATERIALS

6.1 Lime, cement and sand shall be stored as given in IS : 4082-I 977* and IS : 7969-1975t. 7. CARE OF TOOLS AND ACCESSORIES

7.1 Cleanliness of the tools is very important as contamination with set material can seriously affect the performance as well as reduce the affective life of tools. 7.1.1 All tools shall be cleaned by scrapping and washing at the end of each day's work, or after use. Metal tools shall be cleaned and greased All tools shall be examined and thoroughly after each operation. cleaned before plastering is begun. "; 7.2 Scaffoldin'g ( Staging ) - Wooden ballies, planks, trestles and other scaffolding materials shall be sound and in accordance with local building regulations. It shall be thoroughly examined before erection and tested before use. Steel scaffolding, if used shall conform to IS : 2750-1964: and used as in IS : 3696 ( Part I )-1966$. 8. DESIGN 8.1 Suitability CONSIDERATIONS of Lime Plaster

8.1.1 Lime plasters are characterized by high workability and are generally suited for internal surfaces. Lime mixes have a long working time, a slow rate of strength development and reasonable strength. 8.1.2 Lime plastered finishes are not suitable for external surfaces in areas of heavy rainfall, very damp places and in places where extreme water tightness is required. 8.1.3 Plastering mixes, based on hydraulic, semi-hydraulic or fat limes may be successfully used both for- undercoats and finishing coats, provided proper attention is paid to proportioning of various ingredients and workmanship. The plaster hardens by drying and by recarbonation. This is a slow process and during the early stages after application the plaster is rather sensitive to shock and vibration.
( JFfSf rcutiion) .
`Recommendations on stacking and storage of construction materials at site

tSafety code for handling and storage of building materials. SSpecification for steel scaffoldings. fSafety code for scaffolds and ladders: Part 1 Scaffolds.

IS:2394

-1984

8.2 Resistance to Knocks and Abrasion - Resistance of lime plaster to knocks and abrasion is not high but it can be increased by the use of coarser grades of fine aggregate and natural fibres in the plaster mix. Resistance can also be improved by gauging lime plaster with cement. 8.3 Suitability for Surface Finishes - Lime plastered surfaces are specially suitable for receiving finishes, such as white wash, colour wash, distemper, because of better adhesive properties of lime plastered surfaces. However, where cement-based paints are to be applied, lime plastered surfaces are not suitable. 8.4 Corrosive Effect on Metals - Metals in contact with lime plaster However, when lime-cement plaster of rich mix, are liable to corrosion. say 1 : 1 : 6 is used it would have lesser corrosive effect on iron and steel. 8.5 Suitable Combination of Under-Coats, Finishing Coats and Characteristics of Plastering Mixes - As a general rule, any coat of plaster shall not be stronger than the base or the previous coat. Under-coats and finishing coats shall be reasonably related to one another and to the structural background in regard to density and strength on the one hand and as liability to expansion or contraction during setting and drying on the other. 8.6 Number of Coats - For normal backgrounds, one coat is adequate for ordinary finish and two coats for high class finish. However, in special situations or where background is very rough and uneven, three coats may be necessary. 8.6.1 Cases where the nature of location of background choice with regard to the number of coats are as follows: a) Wood lathing normally satisfactory results, b) Three coats of plaster stone masonry, and requires three-coat influences the

plaster

finish for

may

be necessary

for finishing

uneven

c) In case of plastering on ceiling and soffit, generally one coat will be sufficient but for ceilings of floors or roofs constructed with rough stone slabs which are not adequately dressed and where there are undulations in the surface two coats will be necessary. 8

IS : 2394 - 1984 8.6.2 The range are as follows:

of coats normally employed for different backgrounds 1 or2 ) 2 or 3 I or 2 2 or 3 1 or 2

Brickwork ( Internal and external Stonework ( Internal

and external )

Concrete blocks Wood laths Sofhts and ceilings

8.7 Thickness of Plastering -The thickness for plaster work exclusive of key or dubbing out shall generally be as given in Table 1.
TABLE 1 THICKNESS FOR PLASTER WORK

( Clause 8.7 ) SL No. (1)
i) TYPE OB WORK

FIRST COAT (3) mm

S3300ND COAT (4) mm

TEIRD COAT (5) mm

(2) Brick masonry: a) Single-coat work b) Double-coat work (very rough

15 10 15 15 10 10 10 IO

ii) iii)

Stone masonry Stone masonry surface )

8.8 Surface

Finish-

Plasters shall be finished to a smooth surface.

8.9 Effect of Atmospheric Conditions - The ideal conditions for application of plaster are gentle warmth coupled with moderate Extremes of all kinds should be avoided as far as possible. ventilation. The effect of prevailing weather at the time of plastering or during the setting, drying and hardening period is similar for lime plaster as for cement or cement lime plaster (see also IS : 1661-1972*). 9. GENERAL
9.1 Rouhgness PRECAUTIONS IN PLASTERING

plaster.

- The roughness of background improves the bond of This is particularly important in case of soffits and ceilings. A
for application of cement and cement-lime pktcr finishing

*Code of practice urst revision ) .

9

IS : 2394 - I934 smooth surface may be roughened by wire brushing, if it is not hard; or by hacking if it is hard. After roughening the surface care shall be taken to moisten the surface sufficiently before plastering otherwise, the freshly exposed surface may tend to absorb considerable amount of water from the plaster. In case of special backgrounds, wood lath, expanded metal lathing, wire netting, etc, may be fixed to provide key to the plaster. 9.2 Surface Cleaning - The background surface brushed to remove dust, loose particles of mortar, where it has occurred. 9.3 Dubbing very uneven and plastering. The depressions with patches of plaster of plaster would shall be thor&ghly etc, or efflorescence

Dubbing may be necessary where the background is that unevenness cannot be made up in regular courses of process of dubbing consists in filling the holes and mortar of the same mix as for the first coat. The thus done are left rough so that the subsequent coat stick to it.

which the plaster is 9.4 Suction Adjustment - Suction is the forceby held on the surface after it is laid by the plaster's trowel and until it has hardened. Without the aid of suction, plaster would creep and slide down due to its own weight. On the other hand, very strong suction withdraws all moisture from the plaster and makes it weak, porous and friable. Careful adjustment of suction is, therefore, very necessary for good plastering and may be achieved by wetting the backing suitably if it is dry. However, too much water makes it impossible to keep the mortar in position till it sets; therefore, the wall shall not be socked but If the surface becomes only damped evenly before applying the plaster. dry in spots, such areas be moistened again to restore uniform suction. A As far as possible plaster work fog-spray may be used for this work. shall be so planned, that it is done when the surface of the sides of buildings to be plastered are in shade. 9.5 Control of Cracking are as follows: -The main mortar reasons due to for cracking hot weather of plaster low

a) Quick drying of the atmospheric humidity, b) When c) Lack a strong

and

mix has been used on a weak background,

of bond with the background, underneath raking has not undergone of joints, and such work, as change from wall from .clay brick work to to initial shrinkage,

d) Masonry e) Lack

of proper

f) Discontinuity in backgrounds, ceiling from concrete to brick concrete block work, etc.

IS : 2394 - 1984

9.5.1 In case of discontinuity backgrounds, the best treatment would be to separate the two portions by a neat cut through the plaster at the junction. In the case of discontinuity from wall to ceiling;a cornice that would permit slight tioirement without cracking may advantageously be introduced. If it is not proposed to provide a cornice, a straight cut _khrough the plaster or a groove joint at the junction may be provided. 9.5.2 In load bearing construction, cracks are also caused in the top floor partitions due to roof movement by variation in temperature. Development of such cracks shall be prevented by isolating the top of .partition from the roof slab. To achieve this, plastering shall not be carried over the junctions of partition walls with the roof slab. 9.5.3 When plaiter is applied to provide an unbroken surface over board or slab background, the plaster coat bridging the joints is subject to higher stresses and any movement in the background will show by cracks along the Joints. To avoid this, the plaster is reinforced at the joints by fixing jute scrim or suitable wire gauge. This treatment may still be ineffective if large changes in humidity take place and if thin board backgrounds with high moisture movement are used. 9.6 Avoidance of Surface Crazing - Surface crazing is due to excessive shrinkage caused by drying. The mortar tends to shrink on hardening, but is restrained by bond with the background which is practically immune from movement of brick or stone. The restraint to shrinkage causes tensile stress in the plaster which is maximum at the skin. If the shrinkage is great, these failures develop into cracks which exist through the whole depth of the plaster. In order to prevent this formulation, it is necessary to limit the differences in shrinkage and thereby reduce the tensile stress to within safe limits. 9.6.1 Attention a minimum: to the following points and will reduce suitable surface crazing of to

a) Use of well-graded sand ingredients for mortar, b) Thorough grinding constituents,

proportion mixing

various

of mortar

and thorough other

of different the

c) Proper addition of solutions and bending properties of mortar,

materials

to improve

d) Observance of adequate time intervals between successive coats so that each successive coat undergoes a portion of its shrinkage before the next coat is applied and thus reduces the skin tension in the preceding coat, ' 11

IS : 2394 - 1984 e) Proper workmanship and as regards application of different coats,

f) Avoidance of quick drying in initial stages. 9.7 Working Periods with Regard to Setting Properties of Mortars - Plastering work shall be completed before the setting prowss for the mortar has started. All mortars shall be used as soon as possible after grinding, preferably on the same day. If eminently hydraulic lime ( Class A ) is present as an ingredient, the mortar shall be used within 4 h after grinding. Lime pozzolana mortar shall be used within 24 h of grinding. 10. PRELIMINARY WORK

10.1 A preliminary inspection shall be made to ensure that the surfaces are in a suitable condition for plastering, particularly with regard to their evenness and dryness. If dubbing out is necessary, it should be done in advance, so that an adequate time interval may be available before the application of the first undercoat. 10.2 Plastering operations shall not be started until necessary fixtures, such as frames of doors, windows, etc, are completed and all pipes and conduits to be embedded in the wall are installed so that there is no necessity to cut the plaster. 11. PREPARATION OF OF LIME PLASTER BACKGROUND FOR APPLICATION

11.1 For durability of plaster it is vital to obtain a satisfactory bond between the background and the first plaster coat and also to ensure that the bond is maintained subsequently. Necessary preparation of the background shall be done to fulfil the requirements mentioned in 11.2 to 11.4. 11.2 Except for rough and uneven surfaces all joints in the brick masonry on the fair side shall be raked out to depth of not less than 12 mm while the mortar in the joints is atill green. All joints in the brick and concrete block masonry @hall be raked out. 11.3 Roughening and cleaning of the background surface shall be carried out as in 9.1 and 9.2. Where necessary dubbing shall be carried out as explained in 9.3. 11.4 The masonry shall be allowed to dry out for sufficient period SO that initial drying shrinkage is fairly complete and suction adjustment is possible during plastering (see 9,4). The background should be 12

IS : 2394 - 1984 moistened before the application of plaster. Differential movements between the background and the plaster due to moisture change will Major part of such cause cracking of the plaster, as explained in 9.5. movements shall be allowed to set in before the plaster is applied, as for example, by giving in the case of moisture movement sufficient drying interval to the background. In concrete construction backing shall be properly done for good adhesion of the plaster to the background. Hollow concrete blocks and foam concrete blocks shall only be lightly wetted before the application of plaster. 12. PREPARATION

OF LIME

MORTARS

FOR

PLASTERING

- Materials to be used in the preparation of lime mortar shall be measured by volume-gauge boxes. Proportioning of lime shall be done by measurement of volume as lime putty. In case the measurement is done on quick lime or hydrated/dry-slaked lime, their quantity shall be such as to yield the required volume of lime, putty.
NOTE-The lime in mortar mixes is assumed to be measured as lime putty. If it is measured as hydrated dry slaked lime, the proportion of lime in any mix shall be slightly higher than that is indicated, and a suitable adjustment shall be made as indicated in 12.1.`1.

12.1 Proportioning

12.1.1 The actual mass of hydrated be determined by using the following

lime which formula:

a putty

contains

may

where

Mb = mass of dry hydrate,
G = specific M, = gravity of hydrate, and mass of puty. for lime mortars for plaster varies nature

12.1.2 The recommended mix proportions work shall be as given in Table 2.

12.1.3 Qganti~

of Water -The

depending upon the quantity of lime, of aggregates and also the weather.

quantity of water required the proportion of the mix,

12.2 Grinding 12.2.1 Lime put.ty and sand in the specified proportions shall be mixed with or without the addition of water on a dry water-tight mixing platform. The material shall then be fed into the mortar mill with the required addition of water and ground in accordance with lr2.2.3.

IS : 2394 - 1984
TABLE 2 RECOMMENDED MIX PROPORTIONS

( Clause 12.1.2 )
SL
NO. TYPE OF COAT

MIX PROPORTION
By VOLUME

CLASS

OF

LIME
TO

CONFORMING i\PPRNDIX

IN

Is : 712-19731

(`1
i)

(2)
Dubbing and first chat
( both for external S"fand internal faces )

(3) 1 lime: 2 to 3 ind

(4) A and B c C

1 lime: 1 p0orzzolana: 1 to 2 sand 1 lime: 2 FL 3 pozzolana (for first coat in the case of two coat work )

ii)
iii)

Second coat
Necru finishing coat

fo 3 sand

1 lime: 1 pozzolann: 2 sand pro-

C C

Lime and fine ground in equal portions

*Specification

for building limrts ( second revision ).

12.2.2 If dry material is used, the dry-slaked hydrated lime and sand in specified proportions shall be mixed dry first and shall then be fed into the mortar mill with the required additions of water and ground in accordance with 12.2.3.
12.2.3 The mortar shall be raked continuously during grinding, partiWater cularly in the angular edges of the masonry lined mortar mill. may be added during grinding as required but care shall be taken not to add more water than required to bring the material to the required consistency. The mixing shall be done till every particle of aggregate The mortar shall be is coated uniformly with cementitious material. ground for not less than 180 rev in the mortar mill. As 12.2.4 The mortar shall be used as soon as possible after grinding. Lime mortar and a rule, mortar shall be used on the day it is made. lime pozzolana mortar remaining unused for over 7:! and `L4 h respectively All lime mortars after shall be rejected and removed from the site. This grinding shall be kept damp and shall never be allowed to go dry. may be ensured by covering the ground mortar with wet sacks or by Partly set and dried mortar shall not be any other suitable means. reternpered for us'.

IS t 2394 - 1984 12.2.5 Mixing of Lime Poxolana Mortars - Lime either as dry-slaked/ hydrated lime or in the form of putty shall first be mixed with the pozzolana in specified proportion and ground in the mortar mill with addition of required quantities of water. Where specified sand shall then be added to the mix and mixing and grinding repeated till every particle of the aggregate gets uniformly coated with cementitious Lime pozzolana mortar shall be used within 24 h after material. being mixed.
of mortar, gugal (armyres agal may be added to the mortar for the first Also a solution of gur at the rate of 25 g of and second coat when it is being ground. water may also be added to the mortar when it is being worked before plastering.

locha) at the rate of 1.5 kg/m* of mortar

NOTE 1 - To

improve the binding properties

NOTE 2 - Fibrous materials, such as cattle hair, hemp, coconut or vegetable fibre, etc. may also be added at the rate of 1 kg/m' of mortar to improve its adhesive and binding properties which are specially required for undercoats.

13. APPLICATION

OF LIME PLASTER

13.0 General - It is an advantage to plaster the ceiling first and then to plaster the walls starting from the top and working downwards. This will permit the removal of scaffolding as early as possible. 13.1 To ensure even thickness and a true surface, plaster about 150 mm x 150 mm shall be first applied, horizontally and vertically, at not more than 2.0 m intervals over the entire surface to serve as gauges. The surfaces of these gauged areas shall be applied in a unifrom surfaces slightly more than the specified thickness. This shall be beaten with thapies to ensure thorough filling of the joints and then brought to a true surface by working a wooden straight edge reaching across the gauges with small upward and sideways movements at a time. Finally the surface shall be finished off true with a trowel or wooden float to a smooth or a sandy granular texture. Excessive trowelling or overworking the float shall be avoided. During this process a solution of lime putty shall be applied on the surface to make the latter workable. All corners, arrises, angles and junctions shall be truly vertical or horizontal as the case may be and shall be carefully finished. Rounding or chamfering corners, arrises, junctions, etc, shall be carried out with proper templates to the sizes required. 13.1.1 In suspending work at the end of the days, the plaster shall be left cut clean to line both horizontally and vertically. When recommending the plastering the edge of the old work shall be scrapped clean and wetted with lime putty before plaster is applied to the adjacent areas to enable the two to properly joint together. Plastering work shall be closed at the end of the day on the body of wall and not nearer than 150 mm to any corners or arrises. It shall not be closed on the body of 15

IS : 2394

- 1984

ff,::ture siich as plaster bauds and cornices nor at the corners or arrises. `I`here shall be no horizontal joints in plaster work on parapet tops and copings, as these invariably lead to leakages. No portion of the surface shall be left out initially to be patched up later on. 13.1.2 Some times, ends of scaffolding ballies have to be housed in the wall which is being treated with plaster. In such cases, after the ballies are taken out, holes left in the wall shall be filled up with brick and mortar and the patch plastered up true, even and smooth in conformity with the rest of the wall so that no sign of any patch work shows out. 13.2 One Coat Plaster Work

13.2.1 Masonry walls on which plaster is to be applied directly, shall 1)e clean and dry with the joints raked to a depth of at least 12 mm Ijcfore applying the first coat. The surface shall be damped evenly to control suction which is an essential treatment for securing first class work. The plaster shall be of specified thickness and carried out to the full length of wall on to the natural breaking points like doors and windows. 13.2.2 The mortar used for plastering shall be stiff enough to cling and hold when laid; for ceilings the mix is required to be stiffer than that ils-d for walls, on soflits the mortar shall be laid in long even spreads outwards from the operator overlapping each trowel full and using suflicient pressure to force it into intimate contact with the background. On walls the iliortnr shall be laid in long even spreads upwards and across, overlapping each trowel full, using suflicient pressure to force it into intimate contact with the background. 13.2.3 On relatively smooth background the mortar may have to be d;.shed on to ensure adequate bond for it when applied with a trowel. Dashing of the first coat aids in securing intimate bond by excluding air The dashing of \\rhich might otherwise be trapped behind the plaster. the first coat shall be done using a strong whipping motion at right angles to the face of the wall. 13.2.4 The plaster shall be laid in a little more than the required The plaster shall be thickness and levelled with a wooden float. troIvelled hard and tight forcing it into joints to obtain a good bond and s;irf'acc rubbed srtloorh with a plaster's`tiowel. 13.2.5 13.3 Two The plaster Coat shall be water Work shall be in 13.2. cured as described in 14.

Plaster

13.3.1 applied

First Coat -The first coat of the specified thickness in a manner similar to one coat plaster mentioned

IS t 2394 - 1984 Before the first coat hardens its surface shall be beaten up by edges of This helps wooden tapers and close dents shall be made on the surface. the plaster in several ways : the cracks are closed, the mortar is compacted and driven home into the joints and the dents serve as a key to the The subsequent coat shall be applied after this coat subsequent coat. has been allowed to set for 3 to 5 days depending upon weather conditions. The surface shall not be allowed to dry during this period. 13.3.2 First Coat on Wooden Lath and Metal LathingThe mortar shall be stiff enough to cling and hold when laid and shall then be applied by laying and spreading diagonally across the lath work overlapping each trowel full and using sufficient pressure to force it through the lath work to enable it to lap on the other side. The material shall be laid as uniformly as possible. The average thickness shall not exceed 10 mm. This coat shali be allowed to stand to get firm before denting. 13.3.3 Second Coat - The second coat shall be completed to the specified thickness in exactly the same manner as for the first coat. The finshing coat shall be laid with a mason's trowel to an average thickness of 5 mm. 13.3.4 Curing shall be done as described in 14.

13.4 Three Coat Plaster Work,The first two coats shall be applied in a manner as explained in 13.2 and 13.3d The third coat shall be completed to the specified thickness in the same manner as for the second coat and shall be cured as described in 14. 14. CURING 14.1 Curing shall be started 24 h after finishing the plaster. The plaster shall be kept wet for a period of 7 days. During this period it shall be The dates of plaster shall be suitably protected from external damages. legibly marked on the various section of the walls so that curing for the specified period thereafter can be watched. 15. SPECIAL 15.1 Madras FINISHES Plaster -

or more coats to obtain a smooth

This is a special plaster finish applied in three polished surface in places where shell lime and fine sand are easily available. 15.2 First. Coat - The first coat of lime plaster shall be applied to the wall as specified in 13.2. This shall be allowed to set for 2 or 4 days and then the surface scoured thoroughly in diagonal lines crossing, each other. The plaster shall be kept constantly watered till it is nearly set and then the second and third coats may be applied as in 15.3 and 15.4. 17

IS : 2394 - 1984 15.3 Second in 15.3.1 shall wooden floats the undercoat 15.3.1 Coat -One coat, about 5 mm thick, of the mix specified be applied and brought to an exact level surface with long or where required, with curved moulds. The surface of shall be watered, if necessary, before applying this coat.

The mix shall consists of the following:
Parts by Volume

Shell lime (. slaked ) Fine white sand Powdered marble

12 9 1

The sand shall be ground very fine. The marble also shall be ground fine and sifted through muslin. The materials shall be mixed with water and kept in a heap, well wetted for 2 days. 15.4 Third Coat - The same mix as used for the second coat shall be ground on flat stone slabs with stone rollers to the consistency of fine river mud and applied to a thickness of about 2 mm over the second coat, be wetted before hand. The surface of the third coat shall be polished first with trowels and then with very hard smooth stones. While the polishing operation is in progress soap stone powder contained in the muslin bags shall be dusted The operation shall be continued till a high smooth on the surface. polish is obtained. 15.5 Curing shall be done as explained in 14. 16. REPAIRS 16.1 Cutting - The mortar of the patch where the existing plaster has cracked, crumbled and sounds hollow when tapped gently on the surface shall be removed. The patch shall be cut out to a square or rectangular shape at the places marked on the wall. The edges shall be undercut slightly to provide a dove-tailed key for, the patch plaster. masonry joints which become 16.2 Preparation of Surface -The exposed after removal of old plaster shall be racked out to a minimum depth of 12 mm in the case of brick work and 20 mm in the case of stone work. The raking shall be carried out uniformly with a racking tool and loose mortar dusted off. The surface of the masonry shall then be scrubbed with wire brushes to clean it of all mortar. The surface shall then be thoroughly washed with water and kept wet before plastering is ,: 1 commenced. .18

IS : 2394 - 1984 With regard to concrete surfaces the same shall be thoroughly scrubbed with wire brushes after the plaster has been cut out and surface washed and cleaned. method of application shall be as 16.3 Application of Plaster -The described for one coat plaster work ( see 13.2 ). The surface *shall be finished even and flush with the old surrounding plaster.

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units QVABTITY Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substauce SsspplemeBtarF QOMTIYY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Uuits
QUANTITY

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS)

UNIT metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole UNIT radian ' steradian

SYBBOL m kg 1 K cd moJ

units SYXBOL rad sr ::.

.
:

:
DEYINITION

UNIT newton joule watt weber teala hertz siemens volt Pascal

SYUBOL

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress,

JN
J" w

= 1 kg.m/s*

1J
IW 1 Wb IT 1 Hz 1s 1v 1 Pa

-

J N.m

Wb T HZ S V Pa

- 1 J/s = 1 V.s = 1 Wb/ms - 1 c/s (s-1) = 1 A/V = J W/A = J N/m'

