UDC 620.1 _~_._: 629.12.01564 _~ ~_ :.~~

IS _ r 10492___ -_-

1983 ____

m
1 I

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TESTING ANCHOR CABLE STOPPERS

OF

. Scope

Specifies general

requirements

and acceptance

testing

of ships' anchor

cable stoppers. in

!. Terminology - For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions in addition to those given S : 8650-1977' Glossary of Terms and Graphical Symbols for Ship's Deck Machinery ' shall apply. !.I Nominal Size of Stopper - The nominal size )f anchor cable that the stopper will accept. 1.2 Class 2.2.1 Class A stopper-A cable stopper designed and constructed to withstand areaking load of the maximum diameter and highest grade of chain cable for which is derived from the minimum and maximum diameters

80 percent of the nominal it is intended.

2.2.2 C/ass B cable stopper -A cable stopper designed and constructed to withstand 40 percent of the nominal areaking load of the maximum diameter and highest grade of chain cable for which it is intended. 1.3 Handing Hinged bar stoppers may be designed as right hand or left hand stoppers. hand side of

2.3.1 Right hond cable stopper-A cable stopper having a hinge point for the bar on the right :he stopper when observed from the windlass and looking towards the hawse pipe (see Fig. I ). 2.3.2 Left hand cable stopper - A cable stopper itopper when similarly observed (see Fig. I ). having a hinge point

for the bar on the left hand side of the

pH&w3E

P!PEJj)
LEFT HAND STOPPER CABLE RIGHT CABLE HAND STOPPER

I

BAR IN OPEN PosI1IopJ __' BAR IN CLOSED POSlllON I CENTRE CHAIN LINE CABLE OF PIVOTING POINT i - ____ "-1

WINDLASS

~~-~
FIG. I HANDING OF STOPPERS

2.4 Types 2.4.1 Track type stopper - A cable stopper over which the chain cable guide and keep the chain cable in place (see Fig. 2 and 3 ). passes by sliding. It has a track to

may have a shape which

2.4.2 Roller type stopper - A cable stopper fitted with a roller over which the chain cable passes. The roller takes care of the guide function as well as part of the holding function (see Fig. 4). in which both the above mentioned characteristics

2.4.3 Combined track and roller stopper - A cable stopper (2.4.1 and 2.4.2) are incorporated (see Fig. 3 and 5 ).

Adopted

31 January 1983

0 I
INDIAN
MANAK

August 1983, ISI I

Gr 2

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI II0002

IS :10492- 1983
HINGED CLOSED BAR IN POSITION

7RACK

PORllON rCHAIN

OF STOPPER CABLE

CLEARANCE

LCENTRE FIG. 2

LINE

OF CABLE STOPPER FIG.-3 TYPICAL TRACK SECTION

TRACK-TYPE

FIG. 4

ROLLER-TYPE

STOPPER

FIG. 5

COMBINED

TRACK AND

ROLLER STOPPER

3. General

Requirements at anchor. The stopper will

3.1 The function of the cable stopper is to lock the chain when the ship is already thus have to take the full load in the chain cable. The stopper is normally fitted between the cable lifter

and the hawse pipe, or the fairlead.

track-type and combined track, and roller-type stoppers shall comply with the 3.2 Class of Stopper -The performance requirements of Class A or B as required. The roller-type stopper shall comply with the requirements of Class B only. Roller-type stoppers may have cylindrical rollers or rollers of any suitable design. (see Fig. 6) These stoppers shall be so designed as to prevent high bending moments in the cable links. 3.3 Method of Securing - The anchor cable shall be secured by a bar hinged at one end or a pivoting pawl engaging against a vertical link of the anchor cable to restrain the outward movement of the cable. The bar-type stopper produces a line of engagement at right angles to the direction of the anchor cable; the pawl-type stopper involves in line engagement with the anchor cable. 3.3.1 The stopper shall be so designed as to allow the anchor cable to be heaved whilst the bar or pawl is in the closed position, the bar or pawl being lifted by the passage of each vertical link of the anchor cable and dropping back by gravity action into the closed position after each vertical link has passed. Both bar and pawl-type stoppers may be provided with a counterweight arrangement to partially offset the dead weight affect of the bar or pawl as an aid to manual operation and adjustments. 3.3.2 When specified by the purchaser, provision shall be made for secure the bar or pawl in the closed or holding position. 2 a positive form of locking device to

IS : 10492- 1983

FIG. 6

SHOULDER

DIAMETER

3.3.3 Means shall be provided to adequately secure the stopper welding. Alternately, the stopper may be of bolt-on type.

to the deck, bearing

in mind accessibility

for

3.3.4 The cable stoppers may be fitted with a lashing device for holding the anchor tight in its housed position. This lashing shall hold at least a Load equal to twice the anchor weight plus IO m of chain cable. 3.4 The operation of the cable stopper shall be easily understandable. The stopper shall be easy to operate and safe for the operator. Parts which may cause danger to the operator by unintended movements shall be fitted with locking devices. 3.5 Material Stresses - Maximum allowable stress in any part of the stoppers of the 0.2 percent proof stress of the material of that part. On stopperswhere for design purposes that the cable passes through an angle of 90". 3.5.1 If a lashing device is considered 0.4 of the yield stress of the material. part of a chain stopper hall not exceed 90 percent rollers are fitted, it is assumed

the stresses in the lashing device shall not exceed

material used for the construction of the stopper shall be in accordance with the appro3.6 Material -The priate Indian Standard for the materials selected to ensure compliance with 3.5. The material should have an elongation at fracture of a standard test piece of not less than I2 percent. 3.7 Welding - All welding shall be carried metal arc welding of mild steel `. out in accordance with IS : 823-1964 ` Code of procedure for manual

3.8 Lubrication -Adequate and accessible greasing and oiling points shall be provided to ensure that all required surfaces are capable of being properly lubricated. Lubricating nipples shall be in accordance with IS : 4009 (Part I)-1981 ` Button head grease nipples ( first revision ) ' and IS : 4009 ( Part II )-I981 ` Conical head grease nipples ( first revision ) `. 3.9 Protection of Metallic Surfaces burrs or other imperfections, before Surfaces shall be free applying the protective from moisture, oil, grease, finish to metallic surfaces. dirt, weld spatter,

3.9.1 Surfaces shall be primed with an anti-corrosive priming paint adequate to provide a marine environment, as soon as practicable after completion of the surface preparation. 3.10 Information Appendix A. 4. Acceptance from the Porchuser -The information to be provided by the

protection

against

purchaser

is given

in

Tests stoppers shall be subjected to a visual inspection at the place of manufacture to

4.1 Shop Inspection -All ensure: a) correct b) freedom c) quality operation of rotation

of the bar or pawl; of the roller ( if fitted ); and

of workmanship. to between the manufacturer

4.1.1 Shop inspection shall be performed by the manufacturer and if agreed and the purchaser, to be witnessed by a classification society representative. 4.2 On-Board Tests and Inspections

4.2.1 It is recommended that the ship owner should arrange for the following carried out on-board the ship to ensure that the stoppers are fully operable. 3

inspections

and tests to be

IS : 10492. 1983
4.2.2 Primary inspections of the stopper to the deck and its correct alignment relative to the anchor cable; to ensure

4

Check the securement that sufficient'oil lubrication;

b) Check the correct
Cl Ensure
adequate

operation

of the bar or pawl; both oil and grease of the correct type are provided

or grease or

4 Ensure the freedom of rotation of the guide roller ( if fitted ); 4 Ensure that the anchor cable runs freely through the stopper in f 1 Test the bar or paw1 in the closed position for effective operation,
4.2.3 Additional 5. Designation tests -Other tests may be requested by the purchaser

the open including

position;

and device (if fitted).

any locking

at his expense

and convenience.

5.1 Cable stoppers

shall be designated

by:

4 its nominal size; `4 handing ( ` R ' for right hand and 4 Class ( A or B ); 4 Type ( ` T ' for track type, ` C ' for 4 Number of this Indian Standard.
Example:

` L ' for left hand );
combined track and roller type and ` R ' for roller type); and

Designation of a cable stopper stopper shall be: " Cable stopper

of nominal

size 90 and 92 mm left hand, class A, roller

type

90/92 L, A, R, IS : 10492 ".

6. Marking 6.1 All stoppers
The rating shall be permanently plate shall contain marked by means of a rating relevant type plate, prominently including number; displayed.

information

to the stopper and serial

the following:

a) Manufacturer's b) Number c) Nominal e) Handing of this size;

name or trade-mark, Indian Standard;

number

d) Class; and and type Marking of stopper. Details available with the Indian Standards Institution.

6.2 JSI Certification

APPENDIX (Clause 3.10) INFORMATION A-l.
time The purchaser shall provide of the enquiry:

A

TO

BE PROVIDED

BY

THE

PURCHASER
basic information at the

the manufacturer

of the stopper

with

the following

4 Anchor cable stopper to IS : 10492; 4 Nominal size of stopper; 4 Diameter of anchor cable; d) Class A or B; 4 Type ( see 2.4 ); f 1 Handing (see 2.3 ); is required (see 3.3.1 ); g) If counterweight If locking device is required: h) i) If additional tests are to be performed, and k) Additional paints specification as required.
Printed at Manipal Power Press, Manipal, S. India

4

