WAT ATH IS 17938 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


wafer verd ar fares sik fator — 
«fa fear 


Design and Construction of 
Funicular Railway— 
Code of Practice 


ICS 93.100 


© BIS 2022 


Uda Alte SRT 
Ly BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Ve HA NGA, 9 sem MS MHL MM, As fecil - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2022 Price Group 8 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 6 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Continuous 
Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard proposes to cover Funicular Railways for which no applicable standard is available. 


A funicular is a grade-separated fixed guideway transit system powered by a cable traction designed for steep 
inclines. A funicular uses two counterbalanced passenger cars attached to the opposite ends of a cable, which is 
looped over a pulley at the upper end of the track 


Funicular Railways are also useful in regions where the facility in surmounting natural barriers gives them a great 
advantage over conventional railways or roads, both of which may need the heavy civil engineering work to secure 
easy gradient. They are inexpensive to maintain, pollution free, environment friendly, does not affect aesthetics, 
their power demand is modest. Nothing in this standard is intended to contravene any provisions of the statutory 
regulations wherever they are in force. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values’ (second revision). The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17938 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF FUNICULAR RAILWAY — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 


1SCOPE 


This standard covers the design and construction of 
Funicular railways meant for the transportation of 
passengers and goods in separate cabins. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed in Annex ‘A’ contain 
provisions which through reference in the text, 
constitute provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions in addition to those given in IS 7649 shall 


apply. 
3.1 Funicular Railway 


The term funicular derives from the Latin word 
‘funiculus’, the diminutive of ‘funis’, meaning 
‘rope’. 


Funicular Railway is a special form of transportation 
system and falls under ‘Ropeway’ family where 
vehicles (cars) of Funicular railways run on a track 
which is laid on the ground or on rigid structure. 
Vehicles are propelled by means of traction ropes 
which are used to transmit the drive power and 
moves on wheel with simultaneous ascending and 
descending of cars counterbalancing one another. 
This is particularly useful where large no of 
passenger transportation is required and is generally 
not affected by adverse climatic conditions. 


3.1.1 In this type of system, vehicles running along 
rails at ground level and drawn by a rope at one or 
both ends, together with any machinery, equipment 
or plant connected therein. 


3.1.2 Here single or cluster of cabins are placed 
together with the rope and is placed on diametrically 
opposite sides where the system moves from one 
station to another with a particular direction and on 
completion of the journey it reverses its direction of 
movement and the same cycle continues. 


3.2 LINE is defined as a route alignment of the 
railway between two terminals. 


3.3 Inspecting Authority 


Competent authority recognized by the statutory 
regulations to inspect the aerial ropeways 
installation and determine its acceptability or 
otherwise, on the basis of this Standard and 
compliance to prevailing statutory rules and 
regulations. 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Guidelines for Design and Construction 


4.1.1 Each part of the ropeway equipment shall be 
designed and constructed in conformity with this 
Standard. The quality of the materials to be used for 
its construction shall be as per the design. A 
certificate of doing so shall be given by the 
constructor to the purchaser & will be kept till the 
life of the product. 


4.1.2 On the request of the supervising authorities or 
the purchaser, the constructor shall supply a 
certificate of a recognized (NABL/ statutory 
accredited) testing lab as regard to characteristic of 
material used and essential to the safety of the 
installation. 


4.2 Layout 


4.2.1 A Funicular railway shall be routed so that its 
effect on the environment is minimal; this involves 
consideration of noise pollution, unsightly 
construction and any detrimental visual impact on 
the local environment. In the design of the routing 
of a railway, due regard shall be given to existing 
hazards such as vegetation, roads, bridges, electric 
power lines, streams, buildings and slope stability. 


4.2.2 When establishing the course of the line of 
funicular railways, the following shall be taken into 
account: 


a) The transverse acceleration acting on the 
passengers; 

b) The safe support of the rope on the rollers; 

c) The safe guidance of the carriages on the 
track, also taking into account 

d) Any possible load reduction on the 
wheels; 


IS 17938 : 2022 


e) The necessary braking force and the safe 
functioning of the track brake; and 
f) The characteristics of the carriers. 


4.2.3 The transverse acceleration shall not normally 
exceed 0.65 m/s?. It may increase to 1.0 m/s? if a 
transition curve restricts the jerk to maximum 0.8 
m/s). Superelevation of the track to limit the 
transverse acceleration is permissible. 


4.2.3.1 Neither superelevation nor the radii selected 
for curves shall adversely affect the safe guidance of 
the carriages and the effectiveness of the track 
brakes. 


4.2.4 For reasons of safety and comfort during the 
journey, the gradient of the track shall be selected so 
that the actual longitudinal inclination of the carrier 
floor varies at most by + 0.20 radians to the 
horizontal. In case the ground shape does not permit 
this then a mechanism in the carriage should be 
provided to compensate for the same. 


4.2.5 The length of the passing loop shall be 
established so that when the track brakes are induced 
as a result of a ruptured haul rope or if the rope end 
fixings fail, there is no collision between the 
carriers. 


4.2.6 When the track brakes are triggered on 
descending carriers, the following shall be taken into 
account: 


a) Most unfavorable carrier positions; 

b) Reaction time of the on-board brake on 
descending carriers with subsequent 
stopping distances; 

c) Drive stopping distances, coasting of 
ascending carriers; and 

d) Downhill force of the counter rope. 


When the track brakes are triggered on ascending 
carriers, the following shall be taken into account: 


a) Most unfavorable carrier positions; 

b) Position of the ascending carrier after own 
deceleration and application of the on- 
board brake after reverse travel direction; 

c) Position of the descending carrier after 
application of the on-board brake as a 
result of over-speed with subsequent 
stopping distances; and 

d) Downhill force of the counter rope. 


4.3 Profile Limitation 


4.3.1 A longitudinal profile (normally at a scale of 1 
: 500 or 1 : 1000) with an indication of the terrain, 
the position and altitude of the line structures, 
bridges, retaining walls and stopping points. The 
longitudinal profile shall also include — as simple 


lines with names — all crossing points with railway 
lines, roads, paths and other transport routes, 
watercourses, electricity lines and oil, gas and water 
pipelines. 


4.3.2 Cross-sections, in particular for the zones 
where carriers meet and for the zones where 
clearances of the carriers are restricted laterally in 
the stations by buildings, rocks, etc. (for example at 
a scale of 1 : 50 or 1 : 100). 


4.3.3 The following shall be taken into account: 


a) Movement of the carrier in the horizontal 
and vertical planes when travelling round 
curves in the track; 

b) The lateral play of the carrier; 

c) The possible movement of the carrier on 
its suspension in all directions; 

d) The lateral movement of the wheels 
relative to the rails; 

e) The possible dimensional tolerances (e.g. 
On the carrier, on the position of the rails); 

f) The hand area is 1.0 m for all window 
openings and for open carriages. Where a 
window does not open more than 0.2 m, 
the hand area is: 

i) 0.2 m, where the lower edge of the 
open window is at least 1.8 m above 
the floor of the carrier, 

i) 0.5 m, where the lower edge of the 
open window is 1.5 m to 1.8 m above 
the floor of the carrier. 


4.4 Safety Distances Required for Funicular 
Railways 


4.4.1 A minimum safety distance of at least 0.3 m 
shall be provided between the limit profiles of 
carriers of a funicular railway as well as between the 
limit profile of a carrier above and to the side of any 
fixed structure or civil engineering. With the 
exception of parts of the installation which shall be 
arranged more closely for functional reasons (for 
example, track, platform and proximity switch 
equipment). 


4.4.2 Passageways for operating personnel along the 
line shall be located outside of the limit profile 
according to 4.3, whereby the hand area does not 
have to be taken into consideration. The 
passageways shall be at least 0.6 m wide and have a 
minimum clear height of 2.0 m. 


4.4.3 In specific cases (for example in tunnels and 
on bridges), passageways for servicing work when 
the installation is not in operation shall be provided 
on either side of the limit profile; the minimum 
width on one side may be reduced to 0.3 m. 


4.5 Winds, Rainfall and Other Characteristics 


4.5.1 In the calculation of wind action on the cables, 
the surface area to be considered shall be the 
diametric surface of the cable multiplied by the 
factor (Cw) given below: 


Cy «1.1 for snow bound areas 
Cw ~ 0.7 for areas not affected by snow 


4.5.2 Sometimes these Funiculars are subjected to 
the severe winds and rainfall. For that reason, the 
design of any exposed equipment and the selection 
of any materials used in the construction shall give 
due regard to the said factors. Wind may act in any 
direction, including upward direction. As a general 
rule the pressure of the wind Pw (N/n?) on tramway 
and all exposed equipment may be calculated by the 
following empirical formula: 


Pw= Vw7/1.6 N/m? 


where Vy is the maximum expected wind velocity in 
m/s in the vicinity of the line. 


4.5.3 The above empirical formula may be adjusted 
proportionately by any variation in temperature or 
density of the air from the nominal condition of 15°C 
and 1.25 kg/m?. However, even without any 
adjustment, this value is considered appropriate as a 
first approximation. The vehicle shall be designed to 
sustain a minimum wind load of 250 N/m? in 
operation. 


4.5.4 Further, loads due to snow in accordance with 
IS 875 (Part 4) shall also be considered. In addition, 
other special loads in accordance with IS 875 (Part 
5) shall also be considered while designing the 
funicular. 


The ropeway design shall also consider seismic 
loads in accordance with IS 1893. 


4.5.5 It is necessary to ensure that on a Funicular 
railway the rope will be required to keep its normal 
position by the rope guidance devices and supports 
under any condition of operational speed or load 
and, in addition, under the influence of any external 
factor such as wind effects. 


4.5.6 The sheave guides etc., shall be designed to 
accommodate any side thrusts, if applicable. 


4.5.7 When there are crossings with other 
communication paths or with overhead electric 
lines, a minimum clearance shall be maintained in 
order to take into account the requirements of the 
Indian regulation for clearance from roadways, 
powerlines etc. 


IS 17938 : 2022 


4.6 Operating Speed 


4.6.1 The operating speed of a system shall be 
designed taking into account but not limited to: 


a) The safe and steady operation of the 
vehicle; 

b) The operational capability of the braking 
systems; 

c) The condition of the track; 

d) Static and dynamic forces on the vehicle; 
and 

e) Comfort of the ride and passengers. 


4.6.2 Maximum operating speeds of up to 5m/s are 
permitted, provided that: 


a) Alleffects of the higher speed have been 
taken into account; 

b) The track is as reasonably practicable not 
accessible to the general public; 

c) The operating speed is continuously 
adjustable over the whole length of travel; 

d) The whole track, except for cross-over, is 
straight or the radius of any curve (in m) is 
at least 6 x v2 where v is the operating 
speed in m/s; and 

e) The vehicle is equipped with suitable type 
of suspension. 


4.6.3 The maximum operating speed may be 
exceeded under test conditions, without passengers, 
for the purpose of inspecting the over-speed safety 
devices. The test shall be carried out by competent 
and responsible staff and under no circumstances the 
carrying out of the test should prejudice safety. 


4.6.4 In case of system speeds above 3 m/sec, the 
haul rope should be electrically monitored and the 
vehicle shall be brought to stop by a monitoring 
circuit when it comes in contact with roller support 
structures or external flanges of the support rollers. 


4.6.5 When the vehicle is powered by emergency 
supply (not rated for 100 % demand load), the 
operating speed shall be suitably reduced to prevent 
overloading the emergency supply system. The 
emergency supply must be, however, able to drive 
the vehicles to reach either terminal station from any 
location within one hour. Emergency supply system 
may be an emergency generator. 


4.7 Vehicle 


4.7.1 The calculation of the various components 
shall be done, taking into account the weight of 75 
kg per passenger. 


4.7.2 The finite element analysis method shall be 
used to calculate and verify the design calculation of 
the structure and load bearing components of the 


IS 17938 : 2022 


vehicle which shall take into account all anticipated 
static and dynamic forces that will be encountered in 
operation including: 


a) Vehicle own weight plus payload; 

b) Wind effect during operation; 

c) Impact force due to passenger loading and 
unloading; 

d) Braking force of service and emergency 
brake; 

e) Vehicle colliding buffers; and 

f) Rail braking forces. 


4.7.3 All components of the structure of the 
vehicle shall be easily accessible for inspection and 
maintenance. All internal and external surfaces shall 
be protected against corrosion. 


4.7.4 The enclosure of the vehicle shall have the 
following provisions to ensure maximum safety to 
the passengers: 


a) Vehicle shall be provided with body panel 
up to 0.4 m above the seating surface or 1.1 
m above the floor surface for cabin with 
standing passengers. Sharp edges and 
abrupt protrusion inside the vehicle and 
near the door openings shall be avoided. 
Body panel material may be metal or fiber 
glass. 
Enclosed vehicles shall be adequately 
ventilated by means of operable windows 
or mechanical ventilators. Windows shall 
be of non-splintering materials e.g. safety 
glass or synthetic plastic material; 
c) Doors shall be so secured that they can be 
opened only by a purposed action. For 
power operated doors, the closing force 
shall not exceed 150 N. The edges of the 
doors shall be buffered with a soft material. 
In case of power failure, the doors shall be 
kept locked and shall be capable of being 
opened by hand from both inside or outside 
of the vehicle with the aid of a key. Keys of 
this type shall be kept only by responsible 
persons; 

For vehicles which are unattended, all door 

opening mechanisms should be operated 

from the outside and shall not be able to be 
opened from inside; 

e) Folding doors shall be opened only into the 
vehicle. Doors which open outwards shall 
be secured by locking devices and can only 
be opened from the outside; 

f) The Funicular shall not be operated for 
carrying passengers with the vehicle doors 
in the opening position; 

g) An emergency exit door, not on the same 
side as the normal exit door, shall be 
provided to give an adequate means of exit 
from the vehicle direct to the track in case 


b 


— 


d 


wm 


of vehicle/system breakdown. This is 
applicable where entry and exit to the cabin 
is provided from one side only. This is not 
required for cabins that have doors on 
either side of the cabin for entry and exit 
respectively. 

h) In case of cabins that require the presence 
of an attendant in the cabin as per 
requirements in other Indian Standards 
then a separate compartment should be 
provided for the attendant. The attendant’s 
cabin should be on the uphill side of the 
cabin and this would be sufficient if the 
attendant still has a clear line of sight 
towards the downhill side of the track. In 
case such line of sight is not there then a 
separate compartment at both ends of the 
vehicle shall be provided for the attendant. 
Alternatively a CCTV arrangement may be 
provided to give him a clear view of the 
downhill side of the track. 

j) In case of cabins with boarding and de- 
boarding from the same side of the cabin, 
the width of the station embarking 
platforms shall be at least 1 m wider than 
that of the vehicle body. If boarding and de- 
boarding is done from different sides of the 
cabin then the boarding side platform 
should be at least 1.5 m wide and the de- 
boarding side should be at least 750 mm 
wide. 

k) The platform next to the cabin terminal 
location may be used by waiting 
passengers provided there are chains or 
gates operated by attendants at the platform 
edge to prevent passengers stepping off the 
edge of the platform. If so desired then 
automatic synchronized gates may be 
provided that open and close in sync with 
the cabin gates. No attendants are 
mandatory if automatic gates are provided. 
If none of the above are provided then 
waiting passengers should be held at a 
different location and allowed on to the 
platform only after the cabin has arrived 
and stopped. 


4.7.5 The maximum permitted number of persons 
and the live load in kg to be carried by each vehicle 
shall be conspicuously displayed in all vehicles. 


4.7.6 The passenger carrying capacity shall be 
calculated as follows: 


a) For seated passengers: 
Seat width: 0.4m 
Seating pitch: 0.7m 


b) For standing passengers: 
Floor area of 0.25 m? for each standing 
passenger. 


4.7.7 Vehicles that allow standing passengers 
shall be provided with adequate handrails etc. 
Unattended vehicles shall be equipped with a device 
which indicates that there is an overload. This 
should be interlocked with the starting mechanism. 


4.7.8 | All metallic vehicle parts shall be 
equipotentially bonded and effectively earthed. 


4.7.9 If the vehicle has two compartments, they 
shall be connected by a double fastening, each 
having a minimum factor of safety of 6. Each 
compartment shall also be provided with an 
emergency track brake of its own. 


4.7.10 The direction of travel and speed may be 
controlled from the vehicle. The instructions to 
proceed shall be made subordinate to instructions to 
stop and to instructions to reduce speed. 


4.7.11 Vehicles shall be fitted with interior lighting 
and headlamps, and shall be earthed. Flooring shall 
be of non-slippery material. 


4.7.12 Vehicles shall be numbered or colored for 
identification. 


4.7.13 All switches, controllers, meters and lamps 
on the control console in the vehicles shall be clearly 
labelled, in both Local and English languages as to 
their functions. 


4.7.14 The level of each access door with respect to 
the corresponding landing elevation on the platform 
shall be designed to facilitate the passage of elderly 
people with minimal hindrance. 


4.7.45 For all components constituting the 
vehicles, the factor of safety (FOS) shall be at least 
2 measured against the tensile yield strength under 
both static and dynamic conditions. 


4.8 Track 


4.8.1 The track, including rails, switches, 
sleepers, foundation and any bridges, shall be so 
designed, constructed and maintained to absorb any 
forces from the vehicles under the most adverse 
conditions of loading and during emergency 
braking, without undue deflection or permanent 
deformation. 


4.8.2 After every application of the vehicle track 
brakes, the track shall be inspected by experienced 
technical personnel in details, in particular the 50 m 
length on either side of the point of application of 
the track brakes. 


4.8.3 The track shall be kept clear at all times of 
debris, soil and rocks, so allowing free passage of 
the vehicles and causing no impediment to the 
natural drainage along the track. 


IS 17938 : 2022 


4.8.4 The track shall be laid in the straightest 
possible manner and with the most even angle of 
inclination possible. 


4.8.5 Lateral curve radii shall be as large as 
possible. They shall be at least 6 x V? in m, where V 
is the speed of vehicle in m/s, and shall not be less 
than 100 m. 


4.8.6 Means shall be provided to keep the 
haulage rope in touch with the rollers at all times 
even where the track has a concave profile. 


4.8.7 The track shall be protected from 
unauthorized access as far as practicable. 


4.8.8 A walkway shall be provided along the 
whole length of the track. Where this is not practical, 
proper means of emergency evacuation from the 
vehicles shall always be provided. 


4.8.9 At the ends of the track, inspection pits 
shall preferably be provided in which work can be 
carried out by maintenance staff in an upright 
position. In order to protect the safety of staff 
working in the pit, the following safety installation 
shall be provided: 


a) An emergency stop switch inside the pit to 
stop the vehicle through the activation of 
the emergency brake or the service brake; 
or 

b) A master switch within the control panel of 
the vehicle which will be locked off during 
the maintenance work and the key is to be 
kept by staff working at the pit. 


4.9 End Buffers 


4.9.1 The distance between the buffer and the 
normal stopping position of the vehicle shall be at 
least equal to the braking distance with the 
application of the emergency brake. When vehicle 
approaching to the end switches with a permissible 
speed as per 4.9.2. 


4.9.2 The capacity of the buffers shall be 
designed to be capable of absorbing the kinetic 
energy of the vehicle under loaded condition. The 
permissible speed of 0.7 m/s or less, when vehicle 
approaches to the end switches as mentioned in 
4.17.12, shall be used for calculating the kinetic 
energy as well as the braking distance mentioned in 
4.9.1 


4.10 Stations 


4.10.1 According to the climate of the area where the 
funiculars are situated, suitable shelters for 
passengers and personnel shall be provided, as 
agreed by the buyer and the manufacturer. Such 


IS 17938 : 2022 


shelters shall conform to the local statutory 
regulations. 


4.10.2 The station machinery, such as mechanical 
parts of the driving gear, electrical equipment, ropes 
and vehicles shall not be a source of danger to the 
passengers and ropeway personnel. The passenger 
entrance shall not cross the path of the travel of the 
vehicles without ensuring proper safety to avoid any 
possible accident to the passengers. 


4.10.3 The layout and disposition of the stations 
shall be such that the access and exit points are clear, 
even at times of maximum passenger flow. The 
circulation of passengers is, as far as possible, 
unhindered. Sufficient covered space shall be 
provided, under average passenger flow conditions, 
for waiting passengers 


4.10.4 The whole of the driving gear and 
deflection devices shall be protected against bad 
weather. Moreover, care shall be taken to prevent the 
entrance to the machine room of unauthorized 
persons to avoid any possible accident to them. 


4.10.5 Funicular operator shall be located where 
best possible view of the route is possible. Controls 
and communicating devices shall be within 
operator’s reach. 


4.10.5.1 The control panel shall be provided with the 
following: 


a) Speed indicator; and 
b) Fault indicator. 


4.10.6 Fire hazard shall be reduced as far as 
possible. Fire extinguishers as per local area 
regulations guaranteed to function effectively shall 
be kept ready in case of need and installed in places 
which are readily accessible. 


4.10.7 The building structures and facilities shall 
be constructed with reference to the relevant BIS 
Buildings code IS 875. The design of the terminal 
buildings shall take account of all the imposed 
forces, including rope tensions and an earthquake 
loading as indicated in 4.5.2. Lightning protection 
shall be in accordance with IS 62305 (Part 1). 


4.10.8 The width of the station embarking/ 
disembarking platforms in different conditions are 
given in 4.7.4. 


4.10.9 The clearance between the edge of the 
platform and the door opening of the vehicle shall 
preferably not exceed 50 mm. 


4.10.10 Passengers shall not have access to any area 
housing machinery or operational equipment and 
shall be given access only to the boarding and 
alighting areas. 


4.10.11 Notices to the passengers shall be posted in 
conspicuous positions and shall be written in both 
Local & English languages. Signages are allowed. 
Entry and exit points in a station shall be clearly 
illustrated. 


4.10.12 Adequate lighting either natural or artificial, 
shall be provided for public areas, machine room, 
control room and maintenance areas. Emergency 
lighting shall be available from a secure supply. 


4.11 Structures and Support Girders/Bridges 


4.11.1 In designing, the following stress values 
shall be taken into account: 


a) The weight of the trestle and the pressure 
exerted by the ropes; 

b) The whole of the stresses due to friction 
met with during the motion of the moving 
ropes; 

c) Weight of the vehicles travelling with 
maximum load (considered conventionally 
static load); 

d) Wind load or snow load; and 

e) Load imposed by communication cable, if 
provided. 


4.11.2 The metal parts of the structures shall have 
a safety factor defined as the ratio of the ultimate 
strength of the metal to stress in the metal under the 
most unfavorable conditions of not less than 3.0 
when the installation is in service. 


4.11.3 The elastic deformation of the structures, in 
particular those due to torsion which happens during 
normal conditions of operation, shall not be such as 
to endanger the safety of the guides and the stability 
of the ropes. 


4.11.4 The number of trestles, their position, their 
height and their construction are determined by the 
requirements of the route and the layout. 


4.11.5 In case the structures have metallic 
framework, the thickness of the open profile shape 
shall not be less than 5 mm while in the case of 
closed profile; it shall not be less than 2.5 mm. The 
interior of the latter shall be adequately protected 
against corrosion. 


4.12 Foundations 


4.12.1 The foundations shall have a factor of 
safety of1.5 in respect of shifting and over turning. 
Such factor of safety is to be calculated on the basis 
of a conventional assumption that these foundations 
are free, that is, there is no lateral movement of the 
earth. 


4.12.2 All foundations shall be in accordance with 
IS 4091. For the structural safety against sliding, 


overturning and for the footings at different levels 
provisions laid down in IS 1904 shall apply. The 
depth of footings and other provisions shall conform 
to the provisions laid down in the relevant Indian 
Standards depending on the type of foundation [see 
IS 1904, IS 1080, IS 2950, IS 11089, IS 9456, IS 
2911 (Part 1/ Sec 1), IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 2), IS 2911 
(Part 1/Sec 3), IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 4) and IS 2911 
(Part 3)]. 


4.13 Sheaves, Drums and Rollers 


4.13.1 The diameter of deflection pulleys of 
stranded stretch wire rope shall be not less than 40 
times that of the wire rope nominal diameter and 600 
time that of the wire in the outer layer of the wire 
rope. These pulleys shall be provided with linings in 
leather, wood or any other relatively soft material. 


4.13.2. The diameter of the driving sheaves/drum 
shall be not less than 80 times that of the hauling 
rope nominal diameter and 800 times that of the 
wires of the wire rope. 


4.13.3 The maximum load exerted by the hauling 
rope on the rollers shall not be more than 2 kN per 
roller having the groove without soft material lining. 
When the groove has lining, the allowable load may 
be higher (for instance, as regards rubber of good 
quality, such load may reach the value of 4 x d x D, 
expressed in N, when d is the diameter of the rope 
and D the diameter of the roller, both are expressed 
in cm). 


4.13.4 The diameter of the haulage fastening drum 
shall be not less than 22 times that of the hauling 
rope nominal diameter. 


4.13.5 Under normal operating conditions (normal 
service, stopping; emergency stop with drive motor; 
emergency stop with service brake with normal 
functioning brakes) — except when the carriers are 
actually passing — lifting the haul rope from its 
rollers is not permitted. 


4.13.6 Safety devices shall be provided which 
automatically trigger the stoppage of the installation 
if the haul rope is in an incorrect position in relation 
to the line rollers. 


4.13.7 The distance between successive rollers 
shall be designed such that even when it oscillates, 
the haulage rope shall not come into contact with the 
track bed or the sleepers on the track. 


4.14 Wire Ropes 


4.14.1 As far as possible, one single haulage rope 
in single piece with non-rotating construction shall 
be used. 


IS 17938 : 2022 


4.14.2 Before the wire ropes are put into service, 
they shall be checked by a suitable non-destructive 
method, like magneto inductive test, to ensure that 
the requirements in 4.14.8 are fully met. Such tests 
shall be carried out periodically by any Government 
approved lab or test house accredited by 
NABL/statutory regulations. 


4.14.3 Lubricants incorporated in the wire rope 
during manufacturing shall not exert any corrosive 
action on the material of the rope. Lubrication of the 
rope during service shall be done according to the 
specific requirements. 


4.14.4 Care shall be taken to avoid any twisting or 
kinking of the rope during un-reeling the rope or in 
service. 


4.14.5 Stranded wire ropes of fiber or solid plastic 
core are suitable. 


4.14.6 The minimum breaking strength of the 
haulage rope shall be at least 8 times the maximum 
tensile load met with in service. In the calculation of 
the maximum tensile load the most unfavorable 
combination of circumstances shall be taken into 
account. Loads due to atmospheric influence and 
due to wind may be neglected. 


4.14.6 Maximum ‘Factor of Safety’ (FOS) should 
not exceed 15. 


4.14.7 Testing and Acceptance of Ropes shall 
conform to the relevant Indian Standards. 


4.14.8 Generally a rope should be withdrawn from 
service when it is considered that: 


a) The loss of strength in the rope due to wear 
or corrosion or both is approaching one- 
sixth of the original strength; 

b) The loss of strength in the rope due to 
fatigue, surface embrittlement or cracked 
and broken wires of any kind is 
approaching one-tenth of the original 
strength; 

c) The outer wires have lost about one-third 
of their depth as result of any kind of 
deterioration; 

d) The outer wires are becoming loose and 
displaced for any reason; 

e) The rope has become kinked, distorted or 
damaged and the damaged piece cannot be 
removed ; 

f) Examination of the rope leaves any doubt 
as to its safety for reason whatsoever; and 

g) Number of wires rupture in the rope 
exceeds the limit specified in 8.1.6 of IS 
3973. 


IS 17938 : 2022 


4.14.9 For telephone and signaling cables the 
safety factor shall be at least 3.3 times the maximum 
designed axial stress. Cables used for telephone and 
signaling purposes shall not come into contact with 
the haulage ropes under the worst possible operating 
conditions. 


4.14.10 Splicing and Rope Terminations: 


a) Splicing of the haulage rope is not 

permitted; 

The haulage rope fastening to the vehicle 

shall be easily accessible for inspection and 

adjustment; 

c) Reel-type fastening to vehicle shall have a 

safety factor of 4 as measured against the 

greatest traction force in the rope. Other 
types of fastening shall be designed for the 
breaking load of the rope; 

The fixing of the ropes onto the haulage 

drum shall be carried out using a system of 

blocking with wedges, or using at least two 
clamps or any other system of equivalent 
design from the safety point of view. These 
attachments shall be easily accessible for 
inspection and tightening. If the size of the 
drum permits, the rope shall first pass 
through a hole in the drum barrel or flange 
and be secured on the inside of the barrel or 
on the outside of the flange. The 
termination shall be able to resist at least 

80% of the breaking load of the rope; 

e) If end sockets are to be used, they must be 
fitted with care. For this purpose only firms 
who specialize in this technique and can 
prove their experience, both as regards the 
making of the sockets and the choice of 
correct materials shall be employed, unless 
the operating company has its own 
qualified personnel who have proper 
experience in this work. During service the 
rope ends shall be easily accessible for 
inspection; 

f) The sockets shall be fitted with a white 
metal that may be applied at a temperature 
below that of any critical temperature 
which will alter the metallurgical or 
mechanical properties of the wire; 

g) The wires in the cap shall be spread to 
evenly distribute the load and arranged that 
no bending moment is applied to the rope 
as it leaves the socket; 

h) On installation of an end socket a 
transverse reference mark shall be made so 
that any displacement can be readily 
detected visually; and 

j) The end socket shall have strength at least 
that of the parent rope. It shall be protected 
from the ingress of water or any other 


b 


— 


d 


wm 


substance that may be corrosive or affect 
the integrity of the fixing. 


4.15 Drive 


4.15.1 The main drive shall be able to operate under 
any loading condition from rest to any selected 
speed within the design range. As far as practicable 
the speed selected shall be suitably controlled and be 
constant with variation limited to +5 percent of the 
selected value. 


4.15.2 The starting of the motor shall be smooth and 
without jerking regardless of the load. Starting 
acceleration shall be adjusted according to the track 
characteristics, and passenger comfort 
considerations. 


4.15.3 It shall be possible for the motor to drive the 
rope at 0.3 m/s or at such a speed so as to allow the 
entire length of the rope to be inspected. 


4.15.4 For the purpose of calculating the necessary 
drive output of the motor and the rope tension, the 
weight of a person shall be taken as specified at 
4.7.1. 


4.15.5 The running resistance of lined rollers shall 
be taken as at least 3 percent and of unlined rollers 
as at least 1percent of the load exerted on each roller 
when the rollers are provided with anti-friction 
bearings. 


4.15.6 The resistance of rope sheaves shall be taken 
into account in calculating the necessary drive 
output. 


4.15.7 The driving gear shall be provided with an 
emergency system fed by auxiliary power which 
shall be used only for rescue/evacuation operation. 


4.15.8 In the event of power failure, passenger 
transportation shall be forbidden unless hundred 
percent power backup is provided. 


4.15.9 In the case of downward load, the driver itself 
shall exert a continuous braking action. 


4.15.10 Travel with the main motor shall be stopped 
automatically when any brake is on or if any safety 
device operates. 


4.15.11 Rope Adhesion on the Driving Sheave 


The following Co-efficient of friction (p) shall be 
considered for different materials: 


Rubber-lined rollers 3.0 
percent 


Plastic-lined rollers 2.0 
percent 
Sheaves with roller bearings 0.3 
percent 
Sheaves with journal bearings 1.0 
percent 
Steel wheels on carriers without 1.0 
eccentric haul rope connection percent 


Steel wheels on carriers for 2.0 
funicular railways in the case of percent 
horizontal bends or eccentric 

haul rope connection 


Pneumatic tyres on carriers for 1.5 
funicular railways on concrete or percent 
steel girders without eccentric 

haul rope connection 


Pneumatic tyres on carriers for 2:5 
funicular railways in the case of percent 
horizontal bends or eccentric 

haul rope connection 


4.15.12 The contact angle of the rope on the driving 
sheave shall be such as to ensure that in the most 
unfavorable combination of circumstances the 
required power is transmitted to the rope. 


4.16 Brakes 


4.16.1 Two different friction brakes with 
independent source of power shall be used in case of 
electric motor drive to cause both the normal 
stopping and emergency one. 


a) One of these brakes is called 'Service Brake’ 
and it can be fitted on gearbox input shaft 
or on the bull-wheel rim. 


With an electrical main drive motor, the 
service brake shall operate automatically as 
soon as: 

1 The speed controller is brought into 
neutral position, if speed controller 
is installed; 

ii) The electrical braking is almost 
completed; 

ii) The supply power is lost, 
interrupted or the voltage falls 
below a permissible level, or in the 
case of three-phase circuits, the 
supply fails in any one phase; 

iv) The power demand rises above a 
permissible level; 


IS 17938 : 2022 


v) The maximum permissible running 
speed is exceeded by 10 percent; 
and 

vi) Any of the safety devices listed in 
4.17 operates. 


b) The other is ‘Emergency Brake’ and should 
be fitted directly on bull wheel rim. Each of 
such brakes shall be able to ensure the safe 
stopping of the installation's motion under 
most unfavorable conditions of loading. In 
any case, the nominal average deceleration 
shall not exceed 0.5 m/s?. 


c) The emergency brake, without deceleration 
control, shall be set to achieve a retardation 
of at least 0.5 m/s? in the most adverse line 
conditions for full downhill load/empty 
uphill load and a maximum of 1.5m/s? in 
the most adverse line conditions for full 
uphill load/empty downhill load. In all 
cases, the emergency brake, when applied 
at any point during the normal deceleration 
phase during entry to station, must be 
capable of stopping the vehicles before the 
buffers at the terminal stations, irrespective 
of the load. 


d) The emergency brake shall be able to be 
brought into action by hand at the control 
console either mechanically or electrically. 
Emergency stop switch or push button to 
stop the vehicle shall be provided at the 
following locations: 

i) control console in the control room; 

i) on the platforms; 

iii) control panel in the vehicle; 

iv) in the machine room; 

v) in the passenger compartments if the 
vehicle is not attended; and 

vi) in the vehicle inspection pit. 


e) The emergency brake shall come into 
operation automatically under the 
following conditions: 

1) when the maximum permissible 
running speed is exceeded by 15-20 
percent; 

ii) when the vehicle overshoots its 
normal stopping position at the 
driving station; 

li) when the service brake fails; or 

iv) when the pressure in the hydraulic 
or pneumatic circuit for holding 
open the brake drops below the 
specified level. 


4.16.1.1 When the vehicle is to stop in a normal 
manner, the deceleration shall be achieved by means 
of an electrical brake. As far as possible, a constant 
deceleration sufficient to slow down the vehicle. In 
this respect, a deceleration value of at least 0.2 m/s? 


IS 17938 : 2022 


shall be achieved. The deceleration shall be 
monitored by the deceleration monitoring circuit. 


4.16.1.2 For both the brakes, springs shall induce its 
braking effort and its operation shall be carried out 
in a manner that its regular working can be 
automatically and constantly checked. It shall also 
be capable of being released manually. 


4.16.1.3 In the event of overspeed, the emergency 
brake shall operate automatically in both directions 
of travel and shall be fail-safe, i.e. not dependent 
upon the power derived from mains supply or 
batteries. The braking force of the emergency brakes 
shall be produced by compression spring. The 
overspeed governor shall have an accuracy of +5 
percent. Automatic resetting of governor shall not be 
allowed. 


4.16.1.4 When the emergency brake is applied, the 
electrical supply to the drive motor shall be tripped- 
off. When the emergency brake is controlled (held 
open) hydraulically or pneumatically, the hydraulic 
or air pressure shall be completely released 
immediately. To avoid excessive deceleration, the 
operation of the emergency brake may be delayed. 


4.16.1.5 The braking force of all brakes shall be 
easily adjustable. When the brakes are held open 
hydraulically or pneumatically, the corresponding 
pressure shall be capable of being monitored. 


4.16.1.6 The components of the brakes shall be 
designed with a minimum factor of safety of 2.0 as 
measured against the tensile yield strength. 


4.16.1.7 Due consideration shall be given to the 
temperature rises when calculating the dimensions 
and efficiency of the brakes. 


4.17 Safety Devices and Control Circuit 


4.17.1 The control room shall be located in the 
driving terminal and shall be so orientated as to 
afford the best possible view of the line. The 
approaching of vehicle and the boarding and 
alighting of passengers shall be clearly visible in 
front of the control console inside the control room. 
However, the use of CCTV will be accepted as an 
alternative. 


4.17.2 All control and safety circuits/devices shall 
be monitored and annunciated by means of indicator 
lights or audible alarms. All instruments and devices 
required for monitoring of the operation shall be 
housed and made easily accessible in the control 
room. 


4.17.3 All instruments and lamps shall be clearly 
labelled, as to their functions, in both English and 
local language. Signal lamps shall be clearly visible 


10 


when lit. When necessary, the signal lamp can be 
accompanied by audible signal. 


4.17.4 To safeguard the failure of the control system 
at the vehicles, a manual control system shall be 
provided at the control room which makes it 
possible to run the vehicle at a maximum speed of 
2m/s. 


4.17.5 Starting up of the vehicle shall only be 
possible when: 


a) The corresponding start command has been 
initiated from both vehicles; 

b) “door closed" signal(s) from both vehicles; 
and 

c) The corresponding “start” command from 
the control console at the control room" 


4.17.6 Any intended reversal of the direction of 
travel shall be possible only after the vehicles are 
brought to a complete standstill/stop. 


4.17.7 Vehicle position indicator to show the vehicle 
position in meter and with the indication derived 
from the signal of a counting device at a deflection 
sheave of the haulage rope or main haulage drum (in 
case of winch drive) shall be provided. The position 
of all stations and crossing points shall also be 
shown. When two vehicle position indicators are 
provided at different locations, their indication shall 
be synchronized. The vehicle position indicator shall 
automatically correct the position indication in such 
a way that the starting positions are indicated when 
the vehicles are in the termini. 


4.17.8 In particular, the followings shall be 
monitored with indication displayed at the control 
room: 


a) The status of drive, i.e. By main drive or 
auxiliary — drive(in case provided). 
Interlocks shall be provided that both 
drives shall not operate simultaneously; 

b) The position of the brakes; 

c) The condition of wear of the brake shoes 
unless regular maintenance check has been 
properly implemented to avoid wearing of 
the brake shoes exceeding its replacement 
value. 


4.17.9 The Funicular shall be provided with end 
switches and buffers. The end switches shall bring 
about automatic stopping and impose change of 
direction of travel. 


4.17.10 The speed of the vehicle shall be reduced 
gradually to the comfort of the passengers before 
entry to the terminal station. The reduction in speed 
shall be effected by an entry deceleration circuit. 


4.17.11 For Funicular which may be remotely 
controlled, two independent arrival monitoring 
systems shall be provided. 


4.17.12 The arrival monitor shall activate the safety 
circuit to slow down or stop the vehicle if the speed 
of the vehicle has not been reduced to the 
permissible 0.7 m/s or less on its approach to the end 
switches. 


4.17.13 Upon actuation of the arrival monitoring 
circuit, the vehicle must be brought to a complete 
halt in front of the buffers by the emergency brake. 


4.17.14 The speed sensing device for at least one of 
the arrival monitors shall be driven directly by the 
driving drum or deflection sheave. The output signal 
from the speed sensing device shall be continuously 
monitored. 


4.17.15 Additional safety device shall be provided 
after the end switches which will actuate the 
emergency brake. 


4.17.16 For manually controlled railways, the 
approach of the vehicle to the terminus shall be 
indicated by an audible signal in the control room. 


4.17.17 Automatic stopping must occur as soon as 
any breakdown occurs in the safety or control 
circuits. No re-start shall be possible until the fault 
is cleared. The operation of any safety circuit shall 
be clearly annunciated in the control room giving 
information as to the type and location of the fault. 


4.17.18 Emergency stop buttons provided at 
locations under 14.16.1 (b) shall be distinguished by 
color and label. 


4.18 Bridging Circuits 


a) If a fault is occasioned by a breakdown or 
malfunction of the control circuitry it may 
be permissible, under certain 
circumstances, to by-pass that part of the 
circuit component with a bridging circuit. 
Any such devices should be correctly 
engineered and their functions clearly 
described in the design documentation. 
Their use, however, will be restricted to 
responsible staff and | under no 
circumstances must their use prejudice 
safety; 

The bridging circuit shall only be made 
possible by a key switch; and 

c) The travelling speed shall not exceed 2m/s 

during bridging of the control circuitry. 


b 


— 


4.19 Remote Monitoring System 


4.19.1 Remote Monitoring System shall be provided 
to monitor whether the haulage rope is guided along 


11 


IS 17938 : 2022 


the proper positions and check the integrity of signal 
cables. 


4.19.2 If the travelling speed is greater than 3 m/s, 
the haulage rope shall be monitored by a monitoring 
circuit. 


4.19.3 Trackside or overhead signal cables which 
carry information relating to the railway safety shall 
be monitored by a monitoring circuit. 


4.19.4 Stoppage of the Funicular shall be initiated 
whenever the monitoring circuits are interrupted, 
short circuited with other monitoring circuit, or 
earthed. 


4.19.5 Voltages up to 50 volts are allowed in the 
monitoring circuits between circuit and earth, and 
between circuit and circuit. 


4.19.6 The monitoring circuits shall have an 
impedance of not less than 20,000 ohms at a 
minimum testing voltage of 500 volts. 


4.20 Communication 


4.20.1 For manually controlled Funicular with 
relatively straight and short track, one set of 
signaling equipment shall be sufficient. 


4.20.2 A communication system between the driver 
in the driver cabin of the vehicle and the duty 
technician in the control room shall be provided. The 
communication or signaling equipment shall 
continue to work in the event of mains supply 
failure, application of any brakes, tripping of end 
switches or actuation of safety circuits. 


4.20.3 If permanently applied current collectors are 
used for passing signals and instructions, those 
contact points or shoes shall be checked regularly 
for interruptions. They should work on a “fail safe” 
system so that any discontinuity prevents the system 
from working. 


4.20.4 The vehicle shall be provided with a public 
address system that is audible at any point inside the 
vehicle. Annunciation informing passengers on 
action to be taken in the event of the vehicle coming 
to a halt between normal stopping places shall be 
given through the system. For vehicle without 
attendant, an intercommunication system between 
the passenger and the control room shall be 
provided. 


4.21 Evacuation Pathway 


In the case of funicular railways, if passengers are 
evacuated by a pathway alongside the track, this 
pathway shall have a width of at least 0.6 m. If there 
is a risk of lateral fall, the following shall be 
installed: 


IS 17938 : 2022 


a) Handrail on the side opposite the axis of the 

track, if the fall height is at least 1.0 m; 

Railing along the edge, if the fall height is 

over 1.0 m; and 

c) If there are steps, provision shall be made 
for a handrail and rest areas. 


b 


— 


Measures shall be provided to ensure safe departure 
from the carriers, also in the area of passing loops 
and crossing points. 


4.22 Operating Conditions 


The automatic operation of funicular railways 
without the immediate presence of personnel at the 
installation may take place subject to the following 
conditions. 


4.22.1 Operation Monitoring 


It shall be possible to reach the installation within 30 
min in the event of a fault in order to take the 
appropriate action. 


Closed circuit TV monitoring of the platform areas 
shall be provided with a monitor at the monitoring 
position. 


4.22.2 Fencing off the line 


Those parts of the line ofthe funicular railway which 
are accessible by unauthorized persons shall be 
fenced off. 


The fencing shall be at least 1.8 m high. In rural 
environments, this may be reduced to 1.2 m. 


4.22.3 Access to the line 


Any doors in the fencing required in accordance 
with (b) shall be fitted with safety devices. If the 
doors are opened, the installation shall automatically 
be brought to a stop and further operation shall not 
be possible. The further operation of the installation 
may be permitted only after the line has been 
inspected and authorization has been given by the 
personnel. 


When a door is also specified for use for the 
evacuation of passengers, it shall be possible to open 
it from the inside. 


4.22.4 Evacuation 


In the event of a stoppage, it shall be possible for 
passengers to evacuate from the carriers without 
danger by complying with instructions displayed in 
the carrier or communicated by the monitoring 
station. Àn evacuation pathway conforming to 4.21 
shall be provided. It shall be possible to open the 
doors and emergency exits from the inside. 


12 


The passengers shall have at their disposal in the 
carrier an alarm button allowing them to notify the 
monitoring station. 


If it is possible for operating personnel to reach the 
carriers within a short time after a stoppage, other 
evacuation methods may also be used. 


4.22.5 Access to carriers 


During operation, it shall not be possible (except for 
maintenance work) to open a sliding door (or any of 
its leaves) unless a carrier is at rest in the opening 
area of the sliding door. 


If a sliding door (or one of its leaves) is open, it shall 
not be possible to start up the installation. If the 
installation is in motion and a sliding door (or one of 
its leaves) is opened, the installation shall be stopped 
automatically and an automatic restart shall not be 
possible. The further operation of the installation 
may be permitted only after the line has been 
inspected and authorization has been given by the 
personnel. 


4.23 Safety Requirements 


4.23.1 The cabins must be provided with door 
lock, which cannot be opened by the passengers. 


4.23.2. Two separate brakes shall be provided in 
the drive of ropeway system. One brake is provided 
on drive sheave. This will act as emergency brake. 
A second brake is provided on high speed shaft 
which will act as service brake. The brakes must 
come in operation automatically when: 


a) Normal stop/emergency stop push button 
is pressed; 

b) The ropeway speed exceeds by 5 percent 
of the set speed; 

c) The tripping of drive motor due to 
actuation of line and station security 
devices; and 

d) Incase of power failure. 


4.23.3 The vehicle shall be provided with an 
automatic track brake, which acts on the rail in the 
case of breaking or loss or tension in haulage rope. 
This brake shall be capable of manual operation by 
the operator also. It should also be capable of being 
disengaged by the operator after it has functioned. 


4.23.4 Arrangement should be made so that the 
brakes can be released during emergency running of 
the system. 


4.23.5 Standby prime mover is required to run 
ropeway at slow speed, to rescue passengers from 
line in case of failure of main motor or power failure 
or DG set failure. 


4.23.6 Emergency push buttons must be provided 
at all stations to stop the ropeway. 


4.23.7  Anemometer at an appropriate location 
shall be installed to monitor the wind speed and in 
the event of crossing the pre-determined wind speed; 
it will trip the main drive motor. 


4.23.8 A speed control device which 
automatically stops the vehicle when the speed of 
the vehicle approaching the station has not been 
suitably reduced shall be provided. 


4.23.9 Fire hazard shall be reduced as far as 
possible. Fire extinguishers as per local area 
regulations guaranteed to function effectively shall 
be kept ready in case of need and installed in places 
which are readily accessible. 


4.23.10 The entire Funicular system shall be 
provided with suitable protection against lightning. 


4.24 Annual Inspection 


The annual inspection, which shall be performed by 
an approved surveyor by the Owner/Client/ 
Department and shall cover at least the following 
items: - 


a) The normal operating data and general 
condition of the installation; 

b) Checking of main gearbox for lubrication 
and measurement of backlash; 

c) Checking of main haulage drum shaft and 
output shaft for clearance; 

d) Checking of haulage drum and deflection 
sheaves for surface cracks or defects; 

e) Checking of overload protection for motors 
and generator; 

f) Checking of hydraulic circuit for correct 
pressure settings and testing of their 
function; 

g) Checking and testing of safety devices 
installed at terminal including the vehicle 
position indicators and over-travel limit 
switches; 

h) Checking and testing of electrical safety 
circuit; 


13 


IS 17938 : 2022 


j) Checking of rope monitoring circuit; 

k) Checking of arrival monitors and the 
associated control circuit; 

m) Checking of overspeed protection at 10 
percent; 

n) Checking of electrical installation at the 
intermediate stations and along the route; 

p) Checking of lightning protection at 
terminals; 

q) Testing of service brake and emergency 
brake in control room; 

r) Testing of service brake and emergency 
brake upon activation in vehicle with one 
vehicle fully loaded, another empty. 

s) Travelling at rated speed, in both directions 
of travel. Record the braking distance and 
time; 

t) Checking and testing of the track brakes 
installed in both vehicles with the tested 
vehicle fully loaded, another empty, 
travelling at reduced speed at the steepest 
slope of the track. Record the braking 
distance and time for each vehicle; 

u) Checking of haulage ropes by taking 
measurement of the diameter of some 
sections of the rope, visual inspection of the 
condition of the rope, and taking the 
magnetograph reading of the rope; 

v) Checking of vehicle for corrosion, 
deformation or damages; 

1) Checking of tightness of bolts and 
rivets in vehicle; 

2) Checking the condition of the track 
and its structure such as bridges, for 
looseness of bolts, corrosion, and 
deformation; 

3) Checking of rollers along the track 
for wear and misalignment; 

4) Checking the stability of slope, 
embankment and protective walls 
along the track; 

5) Checking of force bearing 
components in stations and machine 
room; and 

w) Recommendations to improve the safety 
standard of the installation. 


IS 17938 : 2022 


IS No. 
IS 802 :Part 1 : Sec 1 
: 2015 
IS 802 : Part 1 : Sec2 
: 2016 


IS 875 (Part 3) : 2015 


IS 875 (Part 4) : 2021 


IS 875 (Part 5) : 1987 


1080 : 1985 


10891 (Part 1) : 2001 


1804 : 2004 
1893 : 1984 


1904 : 2021 


IS 2911 : Part 1 
1:2010 


: Sec 


IS 2911 
2: 2010 


: Part 1 : Sec 


IS 2911 
3 : 2010 


: Part 1 : Sec 


IS 2911 
4 : 2010 


: Part 1 : Sec 


2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


2950 (Part 1) : 1981 
3973 : 1984 


4091 : 1979 


5230 : 2017 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
Title 

Use of structural steel in overhead transmission line towers — Code of practice — 
Part 1 materials, loads and design strengths : Sec 1 materials and loads (fourth 
revision) 
Use of structural steel in overhead transmission line towers — Code of practice — 
Part 1 material, loads and permissible stresses : Sec 2 permissible stresses (fourth 


revision) 


Design Loads (Other than Earthquake) for Buildings and Structures — Code of 
Practice — Part 3 Wind Loads (third revision) 


Code of practice for design loads (Other Than Earthquake) for buildings and 
structures — Part 4 Snow loads (second revision) 


Code of practice for design loads (Other Than Earthquake) for buildings and 
structures — Part 5 Special loads and load combinations (second revision) 


Code of practice for design and construction of shallow foundations in soils (other 
than raft, ring and shell) 


Steel Wire Ropes for Aerial Ropeways- Specification — Part 1 Haulage Ropes (first 
revision) 


Steel Wire Ropes — Fiber Main Cores — Specification 
Criteria for earthquake resistant design of structures 


Code of practice for design and construction of foundations in soils —General 
requirements 


Design and construction of pile foundations - Code of practice : Part 1 concrete piles 
: Sec 1 driven cast in — Situ concrete piles (Second Revision) 


Design and construction of pile foundations — Code of practice : Part 1 concrete 
piles : Sec 2 bored cast in — Situ concrete piles (Second Revision) 


Design And Construction Of Pile — Foundations â€” Code Of Practice Part 1 
Concrete Piles — Section 3 Driven Precast Concrete Piles 


Design and construction of pile foundations - Code of practice : Part 1 concrete piles 
: Sec 4 precast concrete piles in prebored holes (First Revision) 


Code of practice for design and construction of pile foundations under — reamed 
piles 


Code of practice for design and construction of raft foundations 
Code of practice for the selection, installation and maintenance of wire ropes 


Code of Practice for Design and construction of foundation for transmission towers 
and poles 


Code of Practice for To and Fro (Jig Back) Movement Bi-Cable Ropeways 


14 


IS 17938 : 2022 


IS No. Title 
7649 : 1975 Glossary of terms used in connection with aerial ropeways and cableways 
9456 : 1980 Code of practice for design and construction of conical and hyperbolic paraboloid 


types of shell foundations 
11089 : 1984 Code of practice for design and construction of ring foundation 
14329 : 1995 Malleable iron castings 


62305 (Part 1) : 2010 Protection against lightning — Part 1 General Principles 


15 


IS 17938 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 06 


Organization(s) 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 


CSIR — Central Institute for Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


Conveyor and Ropeway Services Private Limited, 
Kolkata 


Desein Private Limited, New Delhi 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 
Labour Institutes, Mumbai 


Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 


Durgapur Steel Plant, Sail Durgapur 


Elecon Engineering Company Limited, Gujarat 
Indian Association of Amusement Parks and 
Industries, Mumbai 


Lepton Projects Private Limited, Ghaziabad 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


Mcnally Bharat Engineering Company Limited, 
Kolkata 


Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, New 
Delhi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


National Mineral Development Corporation, 
Hyderabad 


Phoenix Conveyor Belt India Private Limited, 
Kolkata 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANDEEP MEHRA (Chairman) 


SHRI DEBASHISH BASAK 
SHRI GIRENDRA M. PRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRIS. SHEKHAR CHKRAVARTY 
SHRIKAMAL KUMAR BOSE (Alternate) 


SHRIH K GUPTA 
SHRI ARVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRIG. P. NUALINGAPPA 


SHRI H. M. BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRID. B. NAYAK 
SHRI VIJAY YADAORAO BARAPATRE 
(Alternate) 


SHRISANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI DEEPAK BISWAL (Alternate) 
SHRIC. S. SHAH 


SHRI. K.S. KODIA (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 
SHRI ANIL PADWAL (Alternate) 


SHRISANJAY KUMAR 


SHRI PIYUSH RATHI (Alternate) 


SHRISANJOY BHATTACHAR 
SHRI AMIT PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJOY MAITI 
SHRI SANDIPAN DAW (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL PRUTHI 
SHRI RAMJI SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIO. P. KALIA 


SHRI ALOK KUMAR MEHTA 
SHRI S. SURENDER (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV SHARMA 
SHRI ASOKE KUM. GHOSH (Alternate) 


16 


Organization(s) 


Polo Amusement Park Lmited, Gurugram 


Project and Development India Limited, Noida 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 


Ropeway and Resorts Private Limited, Kolkata 


TRF Limited (A Tata Enterprise), Jamshedpur 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi Mumbai 


Usha Breco Limited, Ghaziabad 


Usha Martin Limited, Ranchi 


In personal capacity (145/4A, South Sinthi Road, 
Kolkata — 700050) 


In personal capacity (BH/VI/SF,VIP Floors Sector 
61, DPS Faridabad, Haryana - 121007) 


In personal capacity (F-7B DDA MIG Flats, Hari 
Nagar, New Delhi - 110006) 


In personal capacity (20 D, Dhakuria Station Road, 
Kolkata - 700031) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 17938 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRISANTOSH CHAWLA 


SHRI NARENDRA SINGH 


SHRI DINESH KUMAR 


SHRI A.K. KINRA 


SHRIN. K. SINGH 
SHRI SUBHASH SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUJOY MATTI 
SHRI SHIREESH S. SWAMI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ PANWAR 


SHRI SANJEEV DHARIWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBRATA DUTTA 
SHRI SANDEEP JAISWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI C. K. KARMAKAR 


SHRI. ASHUTOSH BHADRA 


SHRI S. C. GANDHI 


SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, Scientist 'E' And Head 
(MED) [Representing Director General (Ex-Officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI AMAN DHANAWAT 
Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


17 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (17579). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


