( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 11261( Part 2 ) - 1985

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR ASSESSMENT OF POST-HARVEST GRAIN LOSSES BY RODENTS
PART 2 LOSS DETERMINATION AND ESTIMATION BY POPULATION PROCEDURES
Sectional Committee,

ASSESSMENT
Storage Structures

and Storage Management AFDC 28

Chairman DR K. KRISHNAMURTEY Members

Representing Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies Food ) ( Department of

DR G. K. GIRISH ( Alternate to Dr K. Krishnamurthy ) Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), DR R. A. A~ARWAL New Dell] i DR ( SHRIYATI) S. SINCJR (Alternate) Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Ministry of AURICULTURAL MARKETING Agriculture and Rural Development, Faridabad ;;T;;,To THE GOVERNMENT SHRI A. P. BHATNA~AR ( Alternate ) Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi DR A. ALAM Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana DR A. P. BHATNAQAR Central Public Works Department. New Delhi CHTE~ ENGINEER Defence Materials & Storage Research & DevelopDR C. D. DWIVEDI ment Establishment, Kanpur SHRI V. K. MATRUR ( Alternate 1 QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters ( Ministry of BRIG V. N. KAPOOR Defence ), New Delhi BRIG R. N. VAR~A ( Alternate ) Food Corporation of India, New Delhi SHRI K. PANDITHURAI SHRI P. K. MOORJANI ( Alternate) Planning Commission, Government of India, New SH~I M. V. PAVATE Delhi SHRI RAMESH CHANDRA ( Alternate ) PLANT PROTECTION ADVISER TO Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage, Faridabad THE GOVERNMENTOF INDIA SHRI T. R. SEARMA ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1985 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the -said Act.

IS : 11261( Part 2-) - 1985
(Continued from page 1 ) Members
SHRI K. S. N. RAJU SHRI R. L. GAUR ( Alternate ) SHRI P. R. VISHWAMBHARAM SHRI T. PURNANANDAM,

Representing National Co-operative Development Corporation, New Delhi _ Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio
Secretary

SHRI K. G. MENON ( Alternate ) ( Agri & Food )

Director

Member )

SERI~XATISHA~H~~SAI~EEN Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

Grain
Convener

Storage

Data

Subcommittee,

AFDC

28 : 10

PROF A. P. B~IATNAGA~ Members

Punjab Agricultural

University, Ludhiana

PROF MALVINDER SINGH ( Alternate to Prof A. P. Bhatnagar ) PROB N. G. BHOL~ Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur JOINT DIRECTOR ( WS ) Planning Commission, Government of India, New Delhi SHRI K. V. S. MURTHY Triveni Structurals Ltd, Naini ( Allahabad ) SHRI M. N. PAUL ( Alternate ) DR T. P. OJHA Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal SHRI K. PAND~TRIJRAI Food Corporation of India, New Delhi SHRI P. K. MOORJANI ( Alternate ) SHRI K. T. RAMANATHAN Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. V. GADEKAR (Alternate ) Central Food Technological Research Institute, SHRI M. V. SIIARANGAPANI Mysore G. B. Pant University of Agriculture & Technology, DR B. P.N. SINGE Pantnagar PROF c. K. TECKCHAND.4NI J. N. Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya, Jabalpur SHRI B. K. VE~MA Indian Grain Storage Research Institute, Hapur SHRI S. R. AGAI~WAL ( Alternate )

IS I 11261( Part 2 ) - 1985

lndian Standard
METHOD FOR ASSESSMENT OF POST-HARVEST GRAIN LOSSES BY RODENTS
PART 2 LOSS DETERMINATION AND ESTIMATION BY POPULATION PROCEDURES ASSESSMENT

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Institution on 28 Structures and approved by the Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards February 1985, after the draft finalized by the Storage Storage Management Sectional Committee had been Agricultural and Food Products Division Council.

0.2 Foodgrain losses due to rodents are very high, sometimes ranging as high as 25 to 30 percent. A number of studies and investigations have been carried out to assess these damages. Most efforts at rodent damage Howassessment have been focussed on crops under field conditions. ever, each component namely cropping, handling, transportation, local storage and bulk storage is important in assesseing these losses. 0.3 Although a methodology for assessing post harvest grain losses will not in itself reduce these losses, the methodology is essential to post harvest operational programmes so that priorities for Ioss reduction can In addition to serving as a much, needed assessment be determined. tool, the methodology and other activities proposed can serve as a means to persuade all concerned that change is necessary and that effective techniques to control losses may be utilized.

0.4 This standard

is being

dealt with in the following direct measurement procedures; and

two parts: techniques and and

Part 1 General considerations, biological aspects of survey Part 2 Loss determination procedures.

by population

assessment

estimation has been Grain

0.5 In
taken

the preparation of this standard from the following publication:

considerable

assistance

HARRIS ( Kenton L. ) and LINDBLAD ( Carl J. ). Losses Assesment Methods. 3

Post Harvest

IS : 11261 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) prescribes methods due to rodents primarily for use in grain stores.
for assessment of losses

1.1.1 The aim of the methods is to estimate the weight of the grain consumed by rodents. The other related losses attributable, for example, to contamination, health hazards and damage to sacks must be evaluated by other means.
2. PERSONNEL

AND TRAINING

2.1 The

work, including all practical operations such as placement, setting and checking of traps should be performed by technology experience in the field of rodent graduates, preferably with some control, grain storage or small mammal ecology. 3.

SELECTION OF STUDY SITES AND PRELIMINARY OF INFESTATION

SURVEY

3.0 A preliminary

survey of the study site must always be made as given in method A ( see 3.1 ) along with the detailed techniques, as prescribed under method B ( see 3.2 ) and method C ( see 3.3 ).

3.1 Method A -

Preliminary

Survey

3.1.0 This survey procedure will lead to valid estimate of the quantity of grain lost to rodents only if it is followed up with either the method B ( see 3.2 ) or method C ( see 3.3 ).
3.1.1 Equipment light torch jar the

3.1.1.1 Electric jash

3.1.1.2 Tracking powder, talcum orjineb powdered chalk - A glass with a perforated lid provides a convenient means of dispensing powder. 3.1.1.3 3.1.2 Clipboard and record sheets

Procedure On the first visit record the

3.1.2.1 TWO visits will be required. -following information on a record form: a) b) c) Date of survey; Address of store; stored and quantities Commodities

( by weight

);

d) Nominal

capacity

of the store; 4

18 : 11261 ( Part 2 ) - 1985

4 Expected date of f 1 Estimated annual d Brief description
Storage; and

outward turnover of the

shipment; ( by weight storage ); and conditions features of and structure

h)

A sketch map of the store location of the stored grain.

showing

important

3.1.2.2 During inspection, record the signs of rodent infestation, including burrows, excreta, smears, foot prints, damage to the commodity or structure, etc, on the sketch map as they are found. Whether or not signs of infestation are found, lay tracking patches approximately 200 x 300 mm at intervals along the walls of the store and beside the stacked grain, especially around corners. The tracking patches should be laid at the rate of approximately one per 50 tons of grains, except that in stores of less than 250 tons, not less than 5 patches should be laid. 3.1.2.3 The second visit should be made the presence or absence of rodent tracks on each tracking 3.1.2.4 A simple estimate of the incidence calculated when random sample of stores of surveyed, as follows: Percent Percent 3.2 of stores, infested error = ' = next day and patch recorded. the

of infestation may be a single type has been x loo )

Number ^_.. ___ of stores infested Number of stores surveyed Number

standard B -

( o/o stores infested
to Extinction

x o/o stores not infested of stores surveyed

Method

Trapping

3.2.0 This method is suggested for use in stores with population of up to 200 rodents and would include heavily infested store holding up to 500 tonnes of grains. A complete census of the population is made by trapping all the rodents that have access to the grain and the loss is estimated by multiplying the number of rodents by their daily food requirement. 3.2.1

Equipment
Snap traps, 200 ( rat sizes; striking bar 70-80 mm long ). mm long ).

3.2.1.1
3.2.1.2 3.2.1.3 3.2.1.4 3.2.1.5

Snap traps, Spring Spring Black

200 ( mouse size, striking ( 100 x ( 500 1 g ).

bar 40-50

balance balance board

x 5 g ). trap locations.

chalk

for making 5

IS o 11261 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 3.2.1.6 Bai; of a sticky consistency such as peanut butter, crushed fruit ( banana, oil palm ~pericarp or melon ) or sweetened dough.
3.2.2

Procedure

3.2.21 First make the preliminary survey ( See 3.1 ). The bulk of the rodent population should be caught in the first week and complete trapping done in a period not exceeding 21 days.
3.2.2.2 Traps should be distributed at intervals of 1 m or less in all places where the presence of rodents is suspected. Place the traps in a systematic sequence ( called the `trap round' ), numbering and entering each placement on the record sheet. body 3.2.2.3 Each day check the trap round and record weight of each rodent caught for each trap. Grain Loss Assessment the species and

3.2.3

3.2.3.1 The primary data which should be reported are the numbers The data and the body weight of each species of the rodent trapped. for each species should be divided into two body-weight classes, that is, 50 g or less and more than 50 g. The biomass ( sum of the body weights ) of each weight class should then be obtained for each species. The estimate of the daily grain loss attributable to each species is obtained by multiplying the biomass of the rodents in each weight class by a factor representing the daily grain requirement of a rodent in that weight class, and then adding together the two products.
3.2.3.2 It will generally be adequate to base the calculation on an assumed grain consumption equivalent to 7 percent of body weight for rodents weighing more than 50 g and 15 percent of body weight for rodents weighings 50 g or less. 3.2.3.3 The estimated for example, would be: daily grain loss attributable to species

`A',

( 0.07 a + O* 15 b ) p where a = biomass ( g ) of rodents 50 g, and b = biomass (`g) or rodents of species

`A' weighing

more

than

of species `A' weighing

50 g or less.

3.2.4 The total estimated daily grain loss is then readily determined by adding together the estimates for different species, and should be expressed both as an absolute amount and as percentages of the amount If it can be of grain in the store and of nominal capacity of the store. assumed that the rodent population was reasonably stable, than the loss over a period of time can easily be calculated. 6

IS : 11261 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 3.3 Method Estimation C The Lincoin-Peterson Method of Population

3.3.0 This method is based on the capture, mark and release technique. The application of this method requires that duration of the study should be sufficiently short so that no significant changes occur in the population and the chance of capturing a rodent in the second sample is independent of whether or not it is marked. The first assumption may be satisfied by completing the study in a period not exceeding 21 days. The second assumption may be satisfied by using live capture traps for the first sample and snap traps to collect the second sample, since the behavioural responses of rodents to the two types of traps are relatively independent of one another.
3.3.1 Equipment Live-capture traps, 100 ( rat size ).

3.3J.l

3.3.1.2 Live capture traps, 100 ( mouse size ) of sheet metal of 7 mm or finer wire mesh funnel-type multiple catch trap with a horizontal counter-poised dier operated by the weight of the rodent as it approaches the holding compartment, and the single catch trap with a door-closing mechanism operated by a treadle. 3.3.1.3 3.3.1.4 3.3.2 Restraining Dissecting device scissors, ( simple ) to hold live rodents 2 pairs. for marking.

Procedure ( see 3.1 ), the

3.3.2.1 After completing preliminary summary operation is carried out in two steps as follows:

a) Stage 1 lasts 10 days. In this stage capture, mark and release Distribute, bait and set the liveas many rodents as possible. capture traps, recording the trap round as in Method B. An average density of one-rat size and one mouse-seized trap per 9 mz is suggested. Every morning, each newly caught rodent must be marked by clipping off the middle digit of the right hand foot. Newly marked rodents should be released at the point of capture and their numbers and species recorded beside the trap entry on the record sheet. b) Stage 2 trap as under absence 3.3.3 also lasts 10 days during which the objective is to snapmany rodents as possible, using the procedure described Method B. The body weight, species, and presence or of mark should be recorded for each rodent trapped.

Population Estimates and Grain Loss Assessment 3.3.3.1 a) The The primary data which species should marked 7 be reported in stage 1, is as follows:

numbers

of each

IS : 11261 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 b) The numbers of marked rodents stage 2, c) The numbers of unmarked rodents stage 2, and 3.3.3.2 The population of each of each species species trapped trapped in in

d) The species and body weight of each rodent trapped in stages 2. estimate ( P ) for each species is:
P+-

where a = number marked in stage 1,
n = total number caught in stage 2, and

r = number of marked rodents caught in stage 2. 3.3.3.3 For estimating daily grain consumption it is necessary to determine the weights and relative sizes ofthe two body-weight classes by reference to the sample of rodents trapped in stage 2. Thus, where in the absence of data from captive rodents it is assumed that the daily grain consumption figures for animals greater than 50 g and for smaller rodents are respectively 7 and 15 percent of body weight, the daily grain loss attributable to species A will be:

P [ 0'07 a6 + O-15 ( 1 where

a ) c] g

P = the population estimate for species A,
a = the proportion

of~rodents of species A,

b = the mean body weight ( g ) of rodents of species A weighing more than 50 g, and c = the mean body weight weighing 50 g or less
NOTE -

( g ) of the rodents
from

of species A

The parameters

a, b and c must be calculated

sample trapped in

stage 2.

