Indian Standard

IS : 4913.1968 ( Reaffirmed 2001 )

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF TIMBER DOORS AND WINDOWS ( ThirdReprint MAY
1W6 )

UDC 69.028.1/.2:691.11:69.001.3

@ Copyright 1969 BUREAU OF INDI*AN STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 Gr 3

March 1969

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF TIMBER DOORS AND WINDOWS
Doors, Windows and Shutters Sectional Committee, BDC 11
Chainnan SFIR~T. S. NARAYANA RAO 9 Mahatma Gandhi Road, Banaalore and the Institution of Engineers-( Ind& ), Calcutta

MfdWS
SHRI l3. D.

Representing

National Buildings Organization ARUJA SHRI P. C. SHAH ( Al&mate ) Anand Industries Ltd, New Delhi SHRI H. S. ANAND SHRI P. N. ANAND ( Altmnate ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SHRI D. P. CAATTERJEE Indian Aluminium Co Ltd. Calcutta SHRI R. M. CHAUDHRI SHRI J. K. ANAND ( Alternate) Ministry of Railways ( Railway Board ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS S(.$g=gF"A-; Albion Plywood Co Ltd, Calcutta . . J & K Industries Ltd, Srinagar SH~I GEUL~ QADIR 1 Dmm~ MANAGER ( Al tmate , Indian Metal Window Manufacturers Association, HONORARYSECRETARY Bombay Godrej & Boyce Mfg Ltd, Bombay SHBI N. J. J~L SHRI G. K. DATAR ( Alternate) Builders' Assc+ion of India, Bombay SH~I G. R. JOLLY Cenka~orkBddmg Research Institute ( CSIR ), I)R JOSEPHGEORQE SHRI T. N. GUPTA ( Alternate ) Andamans Timber Industries Ltd, Calcutta B. K. KHAITAN Jayanand Khira & Co Private Ltd, Bombay A. N. KEIRA SHRI K. VENU~OPAL I Alkmate~ . _. _ SH~I L. S. KUMAWAT * ncnneerm Chief's Branch. New Delhi SIiRI K. S. LAULY In&an Plywood Manufackring Co Ltd, Dandeli MANAQINODIRECTOR Hindustan Housing Factory Ltd, New Delhi SHBI K. G. SALVI ( Altmnate ) SHRI N. J. MASANI Forest Research Institute and Colleges, Dehra Dun SHRI J. S. MATHARU Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi ( Continued on @age 2 )

Sam S-1

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 MARC

BHAVAN,

NEW WLHI

( Continued from page 1 ) Members SHRI G. M. MEHTA Repxenting Standard Rolling Shutters h Engineering Ltd. Bombav Works Pvt

SHRI R. L. CRADHA ( Altcmate) . . Hopes Metal Window ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. K. MULLICK SHRI S. K. BHAI~QAVA( Altemak) Federation of Plywood Industry, New Delhi SHRI M. K. NAP SHRITIIO~~AB PAUL ( Ahmate ) Mysore Commercial Union Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. B. PAREKK Indian Plywood Manufacturers Research Association, SHRI A. K. RAMACHANDRA Bangalore SHRI N. VENK~TARAUA~ ( Al&mate ) Central Public Works Department SENIOR ARCXITECT B ( 1 ) Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay SERI J. D. SHASTRI SHRI C. D. SHARMA ( Altematc ) Man Industrial Corporation Ltd, Jaipur SHRI G. R. SUNDERAM SRRI K. R. ANANTHASWA?.~Y( Ahma& ) Plywood Products, Sitapur SHRI H. THOMSON S-I G. W. M. WRI~LE ( Alternate ) Dian;al~ll.$g Shutters and Engineering Works, SHRI S. V. VISWANATHAN Soar R. NAQARAJAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-O&O Member )

SERI J. VBNKATARAMAN Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

2

IS:4!#13-1968

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF TIMBER DOORS AND WINDOWS
0. FOREWORD

0.1This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards

Institution on 12 December 1968, after the draft finalized by the Doors, Windows and Shutters Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 Doors and windows require properselection to suit the,use and skilled workmanship in installation and fitment of accessories like hinges, fittings, etc, and unless the necessary care is exercised it ispossible that even a wellmanufactured quality door does not give good service in use. Therefore, as an adjunct to the various specifications laid down for timber doors and windows this code for selection, installation and maintenance is formulated. The method of fixing the frames and door shutters has not been rationalized. There are varied practices in different regions by different users. The user is often likely to make a wrong choice about the type of shutters he should buy for a certain use. This standard is based on the practices followed in the country and is intended to guide the user regarding-selection, installation and maintenance of timber door and window shutters and frames and with a view to aiding the developing door and window manufacturing industry. 0.3 Quite often doors which are factory-made have to -be adjusted with regard to the dimensions for fitting in the openings. This wasteful practice has been eliminated by suitable dimensional co-ordination between the size of opening and the size of doors based on the principle of modular coordination and the height and width of the door is now related to the basic Installation practices have opening sizes allowing for suitable tolerances. also to be suitably adjusted so as to achieve satisfactory work within the tolerances which have been allowed for. This code provides guidance in this respect also. 0.4 Every door and window installation presents its own problems and different surround details may require different techniques for installation. Where doors with special arrangements like louvres, vision panels, etc, are to be fixed, a careful study of the drawings and specialized training and The work needs to be carried out by qualiskill are called for installation. Close adherence to the practices detailed in fied and skilled craftsman. this code will greatly assist in getting the job correctly done. 3

IS : 4913 - 1968 0.4.1 This code of practice represents a standard of good practice therefore takes the form of recommendations. and

0.5 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS : 2-I 960*. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This code covers the selection, installation and maintenance of timber doors, windows and ventilator frames and shutters for residential buildings, schools, hospitals and other non-industrial buildings. 1.2 This code does not cover industrial doors and windows. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this code, definitions given in the relevant standards for materials and also those given in IS : 707-1968t and IS : 1081-1960: shall apply. 3. MATERIALS AND GUIDANCE FOR SELECTION 3.1 General -For permanent door frames Grade I timber or pressed steel For temporary and portable type of door door frames shall be used. frames the timber may be of Grades I or II. 3.2 Frames -Timber door, window -and ventilator frames for residential buildings shall conform to IS : 4021-1967s. Pressed steel door frames shall conform to IS:4351-196711 ( see also 3.1 ). 3.3 Timber Pane&d and Glazed Shutters -Timber panelled and glazed door and window shutters shall conform to IS : 1003 ( Part I )- 19667 and IS: 1003 (Part II)-1966**.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). tGlossary of terms applicable to timber and timber products (jkr revision ). $Code of practice for fixing and glazing of metal ( steel and aluminium ) doors, windows and ventilators. ~Specification .for timber door, window, and ventilator frames. IjSpecification for steel door frames. lJSpecification for timber panelled and glazed shutters : Part I Door shutters (first reaisioa ). **Specification for timber panelledand glazed shutters : Part II Window and ventilator shutters (fist revision ).

doors and windows. and fire-proof

4

IS : 4913 - 1968 3.3.1 The thickness selected for door shutters shall be not less than 40 mm for permanent installations. The thickness may be reduced for temporary installations. These, however, would require additional care in maintenance. 3.3.2 For aesthetic and decorative purposes in high class buildings, The most commonly decorative type of door shutters may be used. used decorative surface timber is teak ( Teclona grandis). These require polishing and waxing as against painting required for commercial door shutters. 3.3.2.1 The user may specify one bee decorative and one face com1' mercial ( non-decorative ) panel door as required for the colour scheme in the room and based on other aesthetic considerations. 3.4 Wooden Flush Door Shutters -These (Part I)-1966,* IS:2191 (Part II)-19667, IS : 2202 (Part II)-19664. 3.4.1 cellular cellular shall IS:2202 conform to IS : 2 191 (Part I)-1966: and

For permanent buildings wooden flush doors of the solid core or or hollow core type are recommended. For temporary buildings, or hollow core type of flush door shutters may be used.

3.4.2 For aesthetic and decorative reasons in high class buildings, decoThe user shall specify the timber rative type of door shutters may be used. for the face of the shutter. 34.3 mercial room. The user may also specify one face decorative and one face comfor the flush door depending on his need for colour scheme in the hardware shall

3.5 Door and Window Hardware -Door and window meet the requirements of relevant Indian Standards.

$5.1 Selection and Fixing of Hardivare -Each wooden door shutter shall have a minimum of three door hinges and two fastenings like tower bolt, Floor door stoppers and handles are hasp and staple, mortice lock, etc. optional. Swing-damping type of arrangements like hydraulic door closers may be fixed as an optional item. Push plate, name plate, kick plate, etc, mare also optional fittings depending on the choice and requirement of the user. *Specification for wooden flush door shutters ( cellular and hollow core type ): Part I Plywood face panels (/irsr reui&n ). tSpecification for wooden flush door shutters ( cellular and hollow core type ) : Part II Particle board face panels (firsl m&m ) SSpecification for wooden flush door shutters ( solid core type ) : Part I Plywood face panels (first feuisiun). @$ecification for wooden flush door shutters ( solid core type ) : Part II Particle board and hard board face panels (/irst revLion ) .

5

IS : 4913 - 1968 3.5.2 Each window shutter shall have a minimum of three hinges, and one fastening like tower bolt and one handle for opening and closing. Additional fastenings or tower bolts may be provided as optional items. 3.5.3 Selection of door and window hardware shall depend on the economy desired and the climatic conditions. In coastal towns the hardware should be selected keeping in view the resistance of hardware to salty sea. winds. For specially heavy doors, additional hinges specially made shall be provided. 3.5.4 The meterial for hardware may be mild steel, brass, oxidized iron, anodized aluminium, etc, and the user has to carefully choose the material to suit his requirements. 3.6 Paints and Varnishes - White lead primer paint, aluminium or other primer, wood filling putty, ready mixed paints, varnishes and polishes and all other materials used for painting and finishing of door and window shutters shall conform to the relevant Indian Standards. 3.7 Glass -Sheet glass used for glazing shall conform to IS : i761-1960*. The user may also specify the type of glass to be used, such as frosted glass, wired-glass and coloured glass and the requirements for them. 4. INFORMATION REQUIRED

4.1 When placing order for door, window and ventilator frames and shutters, the purchaser (or user) shall give full information to the manufacturer as prescribed in the various specifications for the materials. This also applies to hardware and paint and finishing materials.
NOTE-The follotiing points will determine windows to be ordered:
b) Climatic conditions of the place of use; c) Archrtectural consideration and other special requirements vision panels; d) IKeed for standard sizes and modular consideration; e) Availability of materials. and iitc louvres and the type of material for doors and or portable;

a) The type and nature of buildings whether permanent,

temporary

4.1.1 Where special louvres, vision panels, or other special fixtures are required on the shutters, full details shall be given of the same in the order and preferably the drawings should also be provided. 5. SELECTION 5.1 General -For permanent buildings, timber door, window and ventilator frames of Grade I' timber or pressed steel door frames shall be used. The shutters for these type of buildings shall also be of Grade I timber.
*Specification for transparent sheet glass for glazing and framing purposes.

6

IS : 4913 - f968
For temporary buildings, ed shutters of Grade frames of Grade or Grade II

I

I or Grade timber or

II timber and panellflush door shutters of buildings and

cellular

or hollow

core type may be used. for pcrmancnt

5.2 All windows shall be of Grade I timber Grade II timber for temporary buildings.

5.2.1 For high class buildings and when required for architectursl and aesthetic reasons Grade I type of frames and decorative type of panelled doors or flush doors may bc used. `or all general purpose buildings nondecorative type door shutters are recommended. 5.3 Choice of Type of Shutter -The choice bctwcen panelled doors, glazed doors and flush doors is primarily based on considerations of Where glazing is aesthetic and functional requirements and economy. desired, the shutters may he fully glazed or partly panclled and parlly glazed. 5.4 Choice of Type af Fittings-The choice of fittings may be determined by considerations of economy, durability, aesthetic and architectural consideration and also serviceability (see also 3.5.1). 5.5 Selection of Sizesconform to the standard The sizes of frames and shutters sizes covered in the relevant Indian selected shall Standards.

5.6 Choice of Timber-The choice of timber for door frames and doors may be according to the taste of the purchaser from any of the species specified in the relevant Indian Standards. For termite and insect affected areas and permanent type of buildings durable timbers like teak shall preferably be used for door frames and panelled doors. Timbers treated with preservatives in accordance with IS : 401-1967* may also be used. 5.6.1 For temporary buildings, non-durable timbers and non-decorative It may not be necessary to specify any particular finishes may be used. species of wood as it may increase the cost without any corresponding class will be equally advantage. All timbers of the particular satisfactory. 6. HANDLING AND STORAGE

6.1 General - While unloading, shifting, ~handling and stacking of timber door and window frames and shutters care shall be taken that the material is not dragged one over the other as it may cause damage to the surface of the material particularly in the case of decorative shutters. The material should be lifted and carried preferably tlat tind avoiding damage of corners of sides.
*Code of practice for preservation of timber ( second revision ).

7

IS : 4913 - 1968

6.2 Storage -

All wooden frames and shutters shall be stored in a dry and The storage clean covered space away from any infestation and dampness. shall preferably be in well ventilated dry rooms. The frames shall be stacked one over the other in vertical stacks with cross battens at regular distances to keep the stack vertical and straight. These cross battens should be of uniform thickness and placed vertically one over the other. The door shutters shall be stacked in the form of clean vertical stacks one over the other and at least 8 cm above ground on pallets or suitable beams or rafters. The top of the stack shall be covered by a protecting cover and weighed down by means of scantlings or other suitable weights. The shutter stack shall rest on hard and level ground (see also IS:4082-1967*). 6.2.1 Separate stacks shall be built up for each size, each grade and When materials of different sizes, grades and each type of material. types are to be stacked-in one stack due to shortage of space, the bigger Suitable pallets size shall be stacked in the lower portion of the stacks. or separating battens shallbe kept in between the two types of material. 6.2.2 If any material becomes wet during transit, it shall be kept separate from the undamaged material. The wet material may be dried by stacking in shade with battens in between adjacent boards with free of dry air generally following the guidance laid down in access IS : 1141-19587. 6.2.3 Metal hardware, glass panels, glazing bars and other material shall be stored as recommended by the supplier to avoid any damage to the same by moisture or any other adverse weather conditions. 7. INSTALLATION OF WOODEN DOOR AND WINDOW FRAMES

7.1 Timber door and window frames shall be installed either by ` built-inin 7.2 and 7.3. method ' or `prepared opening method ' as described Installation into prepared openings shall be preferable, the advantage being that the frame is less liable to distortion and moisture changes.
7.2 Built-in-Method

7.2.1 Door Frames-Frames shall be installed at the required place and each door frame shall be provided with three holdfasts on either side-on at the top, one at the bottom ( 30 cm away from the top and bottom edge) and one in the middle. Masonry or concrete in the wall shall be built after installation of the doors so that holdfasts and pins at the bottom are well anchored into them. Before construction of masonry, the outside of the frames coming in contact with masonry shall be given a thick coat of coal tar or other water proofing paint. Suitable arrangements shall *Recommendations on stacking and storage of construction materials at site. tCode of practice for seasoning of timber ( tentatiuc ). 8

IS : 4913 - 1968 be made to hold the frames in rectangular shape during construction. Usually one cross batten at the middle and one cross batten at the bottom ( where no sill is provided for the door ) and two cross battens diagonally will be necessary to hod the frame rectangular. 7.2.2 Window Frames-Window frames shall also be installed in the same manner as door frames except that at least two holdfasts shall be provided on either side to anchor them in position. The size of the opening shall first be checked and cleaned including the place of the holdfasts of all obstructions. The position of the unit in the reveal shall be taken off the drawings and a vertical chalk line shall be marked on the reveal at the jambs, using a plumb line at the correct distance from the face of the wall. The chalk line shall also be run along the head and sill of the opening. 7.2.3 Fixing Datum- To ensure that all units are set at the appropriate heights in their openings, the datum line for the sill of the door, window or ventilator shall be taken from a fixed point on the wall or from finishes flooror ceiling with the help of a level. This datum level shall be given by the builder to the fixer. 7.3 Prepared Opening MethodIn this method the fixing in the opening may be flush or rebated as given in the drawings. The clearance between the frame and opening shall be kept depending on whether the opening is externally rendered or fair faced. The frame shall be checked before fixing in the positions that the same is square and in the proper position. The holdfast opening and the bottom pin shall then be grouted. Plastering of the sides shall be done and allowed to dry before the door, window or ventilator shutters are fixed. 7.3.1 Cleaning the Surroundings - After the plaster and grouting have dried, all splatter and marks of cement shall be removed and the frames cleaned. 7.4 Other Precautions -Precaution shall be taken to fix the door frame so as to take care of the final floor level and also the following points: a) Whether the shutters are inside the opening or outside the opening; and b) Whether the frames are for exterior use or interior use and in the case of latter direction and position of water carriers, slopes, etc. 8. INSTALLATION OF DOOR AND WINDOW SIXUTTERS

8.1 Before installation it shall be ascertained that all materials, that is, the shutters, hardwares, etc, are at site and of the correct size and quality. The size of openings and the door frames shall be checked and also the verticality of the side frames and the level position of the floor and the wall. Any adjustment necessary shall be made before installation of the The shutters shall be installed only after the walls on either shutters. side have dried. Good ventilation at the time of installation is necessary. 9

IS : 4913 - 1968
8.2 The size of the shutters shall be checked before installation. Usually adjustments will be possible by plamling the sides, top and bottom to the extent of 6 mm. It is not ncccssary to cut any door shutter by more than 9 mm unless agreed to by the supplier of the shutters. The door shutters s11all 1~ ntljustcd and fixed with two screws on each hinge ( blank tittitlg ) bcforc the polishing of the trrraao and similar type ,`uc 11 s 1mttcrs slrall then be rcmovcd the terrazo of floorings is t~lli~`ll lip. 5 flooring polished and the shutters refixed in position with all screws. 8.3 During installation the shutters shall be carefully lifted, carried and fixed. Dragging of shutters particularly decorative shutters one over the other or on ground is likely to scratch and damage the surfaces. 8.4 Any special instruction by the door and window manufacturers regarding the-position of hinges, aldrops and locks shall be noted and complied with during installation. 8.5 Any transit defects or storage defects in a shutter should be rectified. Any crack should be filled up with a good putty. Any damaged surface veneer particularly in decorative shutter may be rectified by inserting a matching veneer and use of suitable glue and pressing by use of `C' clamps Any corner-opening may be rectified hy the use or other suitable device. Any damage to moulding or glazing of glue and pressing by ` C ' clamps. bars or other fixtures shall be done at site by use of similar material. 8.6 Unless otherwise specified, door shutters shall be fixed to the frames with 100 mm long hinges and width to suit the thickness of the door and The hinges shall be fixed one at the centre using suitable wood-screws. and the other two at 25 cm each from the top and bottom of the shutter. In the case of window shutters each shutter shall be fixed to its frame. with 80 mm hinges at suitable places preferably at quarter height from up and When driving the screws it is advisable that in case of hard down. timbers pilot holes are drilled before fixing the screw. The screw shall be The ventilator shutters shall be fixed with driven tight fit and straight. two hinges per shutter on sides or at top as required and with the same precautions as for fixing window shutters. 8.7 Checking after Fixing-The door and window shutters shall be checked again after fixing for proper location, alignment and swinging. Any rectification necessary shall be done. 8.8 Indlation locks, tower bolts, as required. The shall be followed. name plates, vision

of Fixtures -The shutters shall then be fixed with handles and other fixtures like floor stoppers and aldrops manufacturer's instructions for fixing these hardware The shutters may also, if required, shall be fixed with panels, louvres, etc.

8.8.1 After all the fixtures have been fitted the shutter shall be tried for proper closure, handling and movement and shall then be prepared for painting or finishing. 10

IS : 4913 -1969 8.9 Fixing of Glazed Panels - Glass panels, where desired should be fixed taking precautions that correct type and correct size of glass panels and glass fixtures are used. The opening at the edges shall be filled up with glass fixing putty or beading. 8.10 Installation of Composite Doors, Windows and VentilatorsWhere combination of doors, windows and ventilators is ~desired, care shall be taken that the symmetry of the combination both as to the dimension, colour and fixture is preserved. 8.11 Flush doors for bath room shall preferably be avoided. However, when flush doors are used in such situations, suitable water protection at bottom of the door shall be provided with 15 cm high plate of aluminium or plastic. 8.12 Special fixtures for doors where provided shall be according drawing or specifications of the builder. 9. PAINTING, POLISHING, WAXING OR OTHER to the

FINISHING

9.1 The site finishing of timber doors, windows and ventilators shall ensure protection from weather as well as of decoration. 9.2 Site finishing of the frames and shutters shall consist of preparation of the surface by sanding or otherwise smoothening, filling with putty in depression, application of an undercoat.and a finishing coat of paint or varnish Any touching up necessary shall be done or wax or lacquer as required. finally. 9.2.1 -Preparation of Surface - Timber surface shall be well sanded to smoothness and any patch requiring filling shall be so done with wood putty. The surface shall then be prepared by use of a suitable filler or primer paint of white lead or a suitable aluminium primer or varnish filler and allowed to dry and again sanded smooth. The door frame shall also be [See also IS:2338 similarly prepared for final painting or varnishing. (Part I)-1967* and IS : 2338 ( Part II)-1967t.l 9.2.2 The two surfaces of a door shutter shall be prepared and given the primer coat and paint or varnish simultaneously. 9.3 Finishing Coat -Two coats of suitable desired paint or varnish shall be given as a finishing coat on either side of the shutters. Such a finish shall be given to the &ame and all other exposed wood work. The colour and the type of paint and finish shall be as desired by the user. In case the doors are required to be varnished or polished this will be carried out with the material and to a finish as desired by the user.
*Code of practice for finishing of wood and wood based materials : Part I Operationr and workmanship. *Code of practice for finishing of wood and wood based materiala : Part II Schedules

11

IS : 4913 - 1968
9.4. Usually all commercial door and window shutters are painted and all decorative panels are eith*er varnished or polished with french polish 01 wax polish. Further finish shall bc don<, only in consultation and as per the instructions 01' the supplic,r of doors, winclows, etc. 9.5 The edges of shnttcrs shall bc given cithcr a protective paint or pro`l'his particularly applies tective varnish in the same way as the srlrlilc.cs. to bottom edge which is likely to come in contact with moisture Tom floor. 9.6 Precautions shall be taken to protect the glass surface when painting by the use of a suitable protector and the glass surf`ace, cleaned thereafter. 9.6.1 Care shall be taken of fixtures like name plates and hardware during finishing and these shall be finished to the colour and smoothness suitably rectified and well tiilishetl.

10. INSPECTION 10.1 After installation, the doors, windows and ventilators, shJ1 ed with rega.rd to proper and correct installation, accessories, and smooth working.
be inspectclearances

11. SEQUENCE OF BUILDING OPERATIONS IN RELATION TO FIXING OF DOORS, WINDOWS, VENTILATOR FRAMES AND SHUTTERS 11.1 Before starting door fixing operations it should be examined whether the frames have been correctly installed and the margin of adjustment of The clearance with regard sizes for frame and shutters would be possible. to~openings and frames and also the tolerances in the sizes of door shutters are already covered in the relevant Indian Standards and it will be advantageous to stick to these sizes. The shutter shall open freely when a clearance not exceeding 3 mm is provided and the fittings shall fit easily and smoothly. Painting and finishing work, glazing work, etc, shall be When finishing is done at site, the door should done wherever -necessary. be left clean and free from dirt, putty and other adhering material after the work is over. 12. MAINTENANCE 12.1 The timber
door, windows and ventilators shall be inspected cally and repainted or revirnished at least once in two years damage noted shall be rectified suitably. 12.2 Any damage by insects heat or chemical sterilization ed to rectify them. periodiand any

should be promptly taken note of and suitable and other protective methods shall be adopt-

12

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquartere: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 8375.323 9402 Fax : 91 11 3234062,Sl 11 3239399 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Central Laboratory : Plot No. 20/S, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 ~wrr~~ I *icea: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 *Eastern 8-77 00 32 Telephone 323 76 17 337 86 62 60 30 43 235 23 15 832 92 95

: l/l4 UT Scheme VII M, Y.I.P. Road, Manildola, CALCUlTA 700054

Northern : SCD 335-336, Sector 34-A. CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 tWestem : Manakalaya, E9. Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), MUMBAI 400093 Branch OiYices:: `Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur,AHMEDABAD SPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 46?003 Plot No. 21. Satyanagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751007 380001

550 13 40 839 49 55 554021 403627 21 0141 8-28 88 01 8-71 1996 541137 20 10 83 37 29 25 21 6876

Kalaikathir Bulldings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZlABAD 201001 53/5 Ward No.29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-&56C, L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampalty Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 E-52, ChiinjawMarg, C-Scheme, JAl~U~_302001

117/418 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 20's& Sefh Bhawan. 2nd Floor, LUCKNOW 226001 Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road,

238923 26 23 05

Pat&!&a Industrii Estate, PATNA 800013 T.C. No. 14/1421, University P. 0. Palayam, THlRUVANANTHAPURAM InepecZion Of&es (Wii Sale Point) : 695934

621 17

Pushpanjali, 1st floor, 205-A. West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, 52 51 71 NAGPUR 440010 lnsfftu%n of Engineers (India) Building 1332 Shlvaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 323635

%ales Dfflos isat 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep !%eet, CALCUTTA 700072 tSales Office is at Novelty Chambers. Grant Road, MUMBAJ 400007 *Sales Dffice is at P Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja Square, BANGALORE 560002

27 10 85 309 65 28 222 39 71

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

