**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 4011 (1997) : Methods of test for safety evaluation of 
cosmetics [PCD 19: Cosmetics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 4011 : 1997 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 



(fstffo Frftm) 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF TEST FOR 

SAFETY EVALUATION OF COSMETICS 

(Second Revision ) 

First Reprint JULY 2008 

(Including Amendment No. I & 2) 

ICS 7 1. 1 00.40 



< ! HIS l'><>7 

B 1 1 K K A I i OK INDIAN S I A N I) A K I) S 

MANAk MIL-WAN. ') H A II AIM R SHAH /.AFAR MARG 

NIW DM III I 1 0002 

•(/•/•// 1907 Price Group 4 



Cosmetics Sectional committee, PCD 19 

FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft 
finalized by the Cosmetics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related 
Products Division Council. 

Cosmetics are used almost universally on a regular basis. Safely in cosmetics and toiletries is of prime 
importance, as only safe products should be allowed to be used by consumers. This Indian Standard was 
initially published in 1967 and first revised in 1982 and covered the methods for dermatological tests only. 
Subsequently the committee responsible for the preparation of the standard felt further revision was 
needed to enlarge the scope of the standard to cover the methods of test for safety evaluation of cosmetics 
and fall in line with the international trends in cosmetics safety testing with minimal use of animals without 
any compromise on safety of the consumer. 

All cosmetic products should be formulated conforming to the restrictions imposed by IS 4707 
(Part 1 and 2) and the lists of CTFA (Cosmetics, Toiletries and Fragrance Association, USA), EEC 
(European Economic Community) and the guidelines of IFRA (International Fragrance Association) as 
updated from time to time. Cosmetic products formulated on the above lines arc likely to be safe and 
such products may not warrant any safety testing. However, any cosmetic preparation formulated using 
the ingredients indicated above, may be subjected to safety evaluation using animals, as stipulated in this 
standard, if the manufacturer feels it necessary. Any formulation not tested on animals may bear the lable 
The product has not been tested on animals for safety". Whereas products which contain novel 
ingredients which are not under the purview of the above documents would require safety testing using 
the guidelines provided in this standard. 

In this revision, the standard has been divided into two sections. Section 1 provides guidelines for safety 
testing of cosmetics and section 2 covers general information on contact hypersensitivity and photo 
sensitization. It includes tests to enable the diagnosis of contact allergy and photosensitization in the event 
of a problem in the market place. 

Depending upon !he effect of various chemicals on the skin, these may be classified inio the following 
(bur categories: 

a) Cauterizing agents — Such as strong acid or alkalis which will char the skin of almost every 
individual exposed to the agent; 

b) Primary irritants — Such as croton oil which will produce dermatitis on the skin following the very 
first application; 

c) Repeated-insult irritants — Such agents would produce irritant dermatitis only alter repeated 
application; and 

d) Contact allergens — Which include substances which are capable of producing adverse im- 
munological response on the skin resulting in the manifestation of allergic cutaneous reaction 
(hypersensitivity) such as itching, erythema, scaling, papules, vesicles, bullae, etc. 

Sometimes the same substance can act as a cauterizing agent, a primary irritant, a repealed insult irritant 
or a contact allergen depending upon the concentration of the substance in the finished product. 

Adequate National/Regional facilities and expertise for safety testing of cosmetics are to be established 
lor proper conduct of the tests. And the tests are recommended to be conducted as per GLP (Good 
Laboratory Practice) in order to make the result internationally acceptable. It is hoped that the 
formulation of this standard and the use of the methods prescribed therein would ensure good 
manufacturing practices and safety of the cosmetics in use. 

In reporting the result of the test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : I960 'Rules for rounding off 
numerical values (revised)'. 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 NOVEMBER 2007 

TO 

IS 4011 : 1997 METHODS OF TEST EOF* SAFETY 

EVALUATION OF COSMETIC S 

( Second Revision ) 
(Page 2, clause 4.3.1) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 
'4.3.1 Skin Irritation Test 

4.3.1.1 Principle 

Irritants are substances that may damage the skin. The damage will depend 
upon the nature, concentration and duration of exposure. Irritation is 
manifested as inflammatory responses such as trytheina (redness), oedema 
(swelling), vesiculation and finally to an intense suppurate reaction without »he 
involvement of immune system. The irritation potential of a substance can be 
assessed in human patch test. This patch test is carried out on human volunteers 
in the manner given below. 

4.3.1.2 Procedure 

Apply the neat cosmetic product sample as such on the upper arm oi human 
subjects, under occlusive patch for duration o r 24 h. In ease oi nr.se off 
products, rinse the treated sites with water to remove any residue However, if 
the volunteer experiences unbearable discomfort with an\ of the patches, the 
volunteer is instructed to remove such patches ary time prior to (he targeted 21 
h contact. Mark such sites with a blue/black marker to faciln.rie evaluation 
later. The volunteer is also requested to note down the signs and symptoms o^ 
the discomfort and the time of removal of the patch and hand it over to the 
investigator. Assess the skin reactions subjectively using the Pravc scale, given 
in Table 1, 24 h after removal of the patches, follow u^ the reactions it any, 
one week later to confirm recovery. 

4.3. 1 .2. 1 Human subjects 

Select 24 healthy adult human subjects, preferably equal number of niaks and 
females who do not have any previous history of adverse j-km conditions and 
are not under any medication likely to interfere with the results. Pregnant ladies 
and breast feeding mothers should be excluded. Fxplain the test procedure to 
volunteers and obtain a signed informed consent from each of them. 

1 



Amend No. 2 to IS 4011 : 1997 

4.3.1.2.2 Test patches for topical treatment 

Ideally use ready-made standard test patches (Finn Chambers) measuring about 
I cm diameter. Fix three such test patches on a transparent porous surgical 
adhesive tape of sufficient length (approximately 14 cm) and breadth, lake 0.04 
ml of the sample using a micropipette on the patch and apply the patch on the 
upper arm as mentioned in 4.3.1.2. Alternatively if such patches are not 
available, use 1 cm diameter discs made out of chromatography paper 
(Whatman No. 3) taken on a slightly bigger polythene sheet having about 
0.25 cm hole punched al the centre and fixed on the adhesive tape. Keep about 
2.5 cm distance between the two adjacent test patches (filter paper discs). 

4.3.1.2.3 Positive control 

Use sodium lauryl sulphate (SLS), analytical grade, at 3 percent (w/w) 
concentration in distilled water as the positive control. 

4.3. 1 .3 Observation and scoring 

Assess the skin reaction under a constant artificial daylighi: source, 24 h after 
the removal of the patches. Score the reactions, namely, erythema (including 
dryness, scaliness and wrinkles) on a 0-4 point scale and oedema on another 0-4 
point scale as per the Draize Scale given in Table 1 . 



Table 1 Draize Scale for Scorning the Treatment Sites 

(C7«!/.vi'4.3.1.3) 



Score fur 


Reaction 


Score for 


Reaction 


Erythema/ 




Oedema 




Dryness/ 








Wrinkles 








(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 





No reaction 





No reaction 


1 


Very slight erythema/dryness 


1 


Very slight oedema 




with shiny appearance 






2 


Slight erythema/dryness/ 
wrinkles 


2 


Slight oedema 


3 


Moderate erythema/dryness/ 
wrinkles 


3 


Moderate oedema 


4 


Severe erythema/wrinkles/ 
scales 


4 


Severe oedema 



Amend No. 2 to IS 4011 : 1997 
43 A. 4 Result 

The combined mean scores and standard deviation of the 24 subjects are 
calculated: 

a) Positive control must give a combined score of greater than 4. If it is 
less than 4, then the test need to be repeated on another group of 
newly recruited volunteers. 

b) A combined mean score of 2.0/8.0 will mean that product i* non- 
irritant. 

c) Usage of cosmetic product with a score up to 4.0' 8.0 which is mildly 
irritating may be reviewed by manufacturer for safety of the 
formulation. 

d) No cosmetic product should be marketed which has irritation score 
above 4.0/8.0. 

[Puge 3, clause 4.3.4.1 Eye Irritancy Test {Draizc Test in Kabhits)\ — 
Delete. 

NOT1-: 

I Driu/c test is not permitted by (invcrnmctit oflniiia. 



(PCI) 19) 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 MARCH 2002 

TO 

IS 401 1 : 1997 METHODS OK TEST FOR SAFETY 

EVALUATION OF COSMETICS 

( Second Revision ) 

( Foreword, para 3, line 7 ) — Delete the following sentence: 

Any formulation not tested on animals may bear the lahle The product h;is no! 
been lesteil on animals for safety." 



PCL> 19 ) 



IS 4011 .1997 



Indian Standard 

METHODS OF TEST FOR 
SAFETY EVALUATION OF COSMETICS 



( Second Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 



This standard covers methods of test for safety 
evaluation of cosmetics. 

2 NORMATIVE REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards contain provision 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publica- 
tion the editions indicated were valid. All standards 
are subject to revision and parties to agreements 
based on this standard are encouraged to inves- 
tigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below: 



IS No. 



Title 



11601 Synthetic detergents — safety 

(Part 2) : 1992 evaluation — methods: Part 2 
Method of test for skin sensitiza- 
tion potential of synthetic deter- 
gents (guinea pig maximization 
test) 

13424 : 1992 Safety evaluation of bathing bars 
and toilet soaps — methods of test 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definition and explanations shall apply. 

3.1 Allergic Reactions 

Symptoms/signs caused by exposure to allergens. 

3.2 Bullae 

Bullae arc blisters on the skin each of which is more 
than 5 mm in diameter. These may be of any colour 
and shape. 

3.3 Cauterizing Agents 

Chemical substances which burn the skin on local 
application. 

3.4 Cauterizing Reaction 

The changes in the skin produced by the local 
application of a cauterizing agent. 



3.5 Cross Sensitization 

Sensitization to a primary allergen spreading to one 
or more allergens which arc of such closely similar 
chemical constitution to the primary allergen that 
the sensitized cells are unable to distinguish be- 
tween them. This has to be distinguished from false 
cross sensitization which occurs when the same 
chemical substance is present in different products. 

3.6 Dermatitis 

Inflammation of the skin. 

3.7 Epidermal Barrier 

Epidermal barrier pertaining to the most super- 
ficial layer of the skin (stratum corneum) which 
allows only certain substances to enter the skin 
from outside. 

3.8 Erythema 

Redness of the skin due to dilation of the blood 
vessels. 

3.9 Exudation 

The discharge of fluids (serum or pus) on the 
diseased skin surface, 

3.10 Fissuring 

Cracks on the surface of the skin. 

3.11 Hyperaemia 
Increased blood circulation. 

3.12 Hypersensitivity (Sensitization) 

A process by which an individual develops the 
capability of reacting in an abnormal (allergic) 
manner to an external agent. 

3.13 Miliaria 

A papular or vesicular eruption on the skin which 
accompanies profuse sweating and is due to the 
blockage of the ducts of the sweat glands. 

3.14 Necrosis 

Death of a portion of a tissue. 



1 



IS 4011: 1997 



3.15 Occlusion Area 

An area of skin which is isolated from the environ- 
ment. 

3.16 Papules 

A small circumscribed solid elevation of the skin 
not larger than 5 mm in diameter. It may be of any 
shape and colour. 

3.17 Percutaneous Absorption 

Transfer of an agent (usually a chemical) through 
the skin from outside. 

3.18 Photopatch Test 

A test where the skin is exposed to sunlight or any 
other equivalent source of light after contact with 
a particular chemical agent. 

3.19 Pustular Reaction 

A reaction in the skin characterized by appearance 
of several lesions (eruptions) containing pus. 

3.20 Repeated-insult Irritant 

An agent which causes an irritant reaction only 
after repeated applications to the surface of the 
skin. 

SECTION 1 SAFETY TESTS 

4 GENERAL 

4.1 Raw Material Purity 

The purity of raw materials used in a formulation 
must be established by physicochcmical analysis 
and specifications established for use, before the 
products containing them are subjected to safety 
testing. 

4.2 Facilities 

The testing should be carried out by the manufac- 
turer in-housc or in reputed laboratories both 
national and international, which maintain high 
standards such as compliance to GLP required for 
safety testing. 

The housing, environmental conditions-relative 
humidity, lighting, temperature, clean filtered air, 
feed, water, etc, are prescribed in IS 13424. 

The tests should be carried out by trained personnel 
under the supervision of toxicologists (for example 
qualified biochemists, zoologists, pharmacologists, 
veterinary or medical scientists with experience in 
this discipline) 

4.3 Tests 

The type of tests to be performed for particular type 
of cosmetics are given in Table I. 



Table 1 Tests to be Carried Out on Different 
Types of Cosmetics 



SI No. Test 

i) Skin irritation test 

ii) Oral toxicity limit test 



Type of Product 



Skin and hair products 
and lip products. 
Dentifrice, mouth wash 
and lip products, 
iii) Mucous membrane irritancy 
test: 

a) Rye irritancy test I lair care products and 
and mucous membrane eye area cosmetics 
irritancy test 

b) Oral mucous irritancy test Dentifrice, and mouthwash 

Currently this test is not allowed to be carried out as per 77ie 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1960 and the rules therein. 

Additional data may be generated on skin sensitiza- 
tion, if the produet contains any suspect ingredient 
which are above the recommended levels that arc 
indicated by the international agencies (see 
foreword). 

Carcinogenicity testing may not be necessary. 
Human carcinogens identified by IARC 
monograph 1992 (and updated later) must never be 
directly added into the cosmetic formulations. 
Naturally occurring chemicals also need to be safety 
tested. 

4.3.1 Skin Irritation Test (Droize Test in Rabbits) 

4.3.1.1 Principle 

Irritants are substances that damage the skin by 
direct toxic action. The damage will depend upon 
the nature of the irritant, its concentration and 
duration of exposure. Irritation is manifested as 
inflammatory responses such as erythema (red- 
ness), oedema (swelling), vesiculation and finally to 
an intense suppurate reaction without the involve- 
ment of immune system. The Draizc 24-hour patch 
test in rabbits is the most widely used animal test 
for primary irritants. 

4.3.1.2 Procedure 

The method utilizes a patch test technique on the 
intact skin of the albino rabbit. A set of 6 rabbits is 
used for testing each material. The hair is clipped 
from the back and flanks at least 1 day prior to 
application of the product. Animals should be 
without any skin blemishes and the hair on the 
treatment sites should not be in the active phase of 
growth (anagen) so that it will not impede the 
observation of irritant manifestation. 4 areas of the 
back spaced approximately 2-3 cm apart are desig- 
nated for the position of the patches and 3 products 
and 1 positive control can be simultaneously tested 
on one animal. Patch measuring approximately 10 
cm 2 consisting of 12 ply surgical gauze is placed on 
a slightly smaller thin polythene sheet which in turn 
is placed on a suitable surgical adhesive plaster 



IS401l:1997 



tape. The material to be tested is introduced on the 
surgical gauze - 0.5 ml ( in case of liquids) or 0.5 g 
in case of solid or semisolid. Solids should be mois- 
tened with distilled water/suitable vehicle before 
application. Each test material should be placed on 
a preselected area. Using sodium lauryl sulphate at 
different concentrations (say 2 to 20 percent - 
approximately 5 percent for 24 h patch and 20 
percent for 4 h patch on active ingredient basis) 
identify before - hand a particular concentration 
which will give a score greater than 5. The con- 
centrations thus identified should be applied as a 
positive control on each animal in an identical 
fashion as the test product. Holding the patches in 
their respective sites is reinforced by wrapping the 
whole trunk with a suitable cloth/ canvas bandage. 

Products which come in contact with the skin only 
for a short duration such as shampoos should be 
tested only for a short duration say not more than 
4 h and since such products are diluted before use, 
a test concentration of 8-10 percent is recom- 
mended. 

4.3.1.3 Observation 

The patches are removed after 24 hours and the 
skin sites are scored then (0 h) and 48 h later using 
the following scale: 

Erythema and Eschar Formation 

No erythema 

Very slight erythema (barely perceptible) 1 

Well defined eiythema 2 

Moderate to severe erythema 3 

Severe erythema (beet redness) to slight 4 
eschar formation (injuries in depth) 

Total possible erythema score 4 

Oedema 

No oedema 

Very slight oedema (barely perceptible) 1 

Slight oedema (edges of area well defined 2 

by definite raising) 

Moderate oedema (raised approx I mm) 3 

Severe oedema (raised more than 1 mm and 4 

extending beyond area of exposure 

Total possible oedema score 4 

The total erythema/eschar and oedema score for 
each site at and 48 h are added and averaged from 
the 6 animals to give the primary irritation index 
(p.1.1) that is the total score of 6 animals (a) divided 
by total number of animals (6) multiplied by num- 
ber of observations (2) that is [a/12]. 



4.3.1.4 Conclusion 

On the basis of the P.1.1 (see 4.3. L3) the products 
could be classified as mild irritant (score up to 2) 
moderate irritant (score > 2 to 5) and severe ir- 
ritant (score > 5). 

Under the conditions of the test the positive con- 
trol should produce a primary irritation score of 5 
or more. 

Cosmetic products should not produce moderate 
irritancy response. 

Alternatively the human patch test described in 
IS 13424 may be carried out. 

4.3.2 Skin sensitization Test (Mangusson and 
Kligman Guinea Pig Maximization Test) 

The principle and test methodology are given in 
IS 11601 (Part 2). 

Alternatively the Buehler test described in IS 13424 
may be carried out. 

4.3.3 Oral Toxicity Limit Test (Rats) 

4.3.3.1 Principle 

Oral toxicity bioassay is mainly intended to confirm 
that the product does not have any overt acute 
toxicity potential even under certain misuse. 

4.3.3.2 Method of Test 

The test shall be carried out on albino rats weighing 
about 100-120 g. Six animals (preferably equal 
number of males and females) are selected and 
starved overnight. The animals are then ad- 
ministered the cosmetic product at the highest pos- 
siblc concentration as solution/suspension/ 
emulsion by gavage (stomach intubation) at a dose 
of 5 ml/100 g body weight. All the animals are given 
feed and water ad libitum after the administration. 

4.3.3.3 Observation and Conclusion 

The animals are observed daily for one week after 
intubation for any abnormality and mortality. 
Cosmetics which produce LD50 5±1 g/kg body 
weight should be viewed with caution. 

4.3.4 Mucous Membrane Irritancy Tests 
4.3.4.1 Eye Irritancy Test (Draize Test in Rabbits) 

4.3.4.1.1 Principle 

Eye irritancy potential or a substance is evaluated 
on the basis of its ability to cause injury to the 
cornea, iris and conjunctivae when the substance is 
applied to the eye. 

4.3.4.1.2 Procedure 

The lest is carried out on adult albino rabbits 
(weighing about 1.5 - 2 kg). 0.1 ml of 1 percent 



IS 4011: 1997 



solution of the substance is instilled into one of the 
eyes while the other eye is kept untreated to serve 
as control A series of 6 animals are used for testing 
one substance. In 3 animals the treated eyes are 
washed with 20 ml of luke warm water (at body 
temperature) 2 seconds after the instillation. In the 
second group, the treated eyes are washed with a 
similar amount of luke warm water 4 seconds after 
instillation of the test substance. 

4.3 A 1.3 Observation 

Ocular reactions are read with the unaided eye. 
Readings are made at 24, 48 and 72 hours and at 4 
and 7 days after treatment or as long as injury 
persists. 

A preparation which elicits corneal and iris lesions 
which have not cleared by the seventh day is con- 
sidered as a severe eye irritant. 

4.3.4.1.4 Scoring 

The cornea is scored on the basis of density of 
opacity and total area involved. The iris is scored 
on the intensity or degree of inflammation ex- 
hibited, and the conjunctiva is scored on the extent 
of chemosis, redness and discharge. The Draizc 
scale for scoring ocular lesions is given below: 

Scale of Scoring Ocular Lesion (Draize Method) 

1) Cornea 

A) Opacity-degree of density (area most dense taken 
for reading) 

No Opacity 

Scatter or diffuse area, details of 1 

iris clearly visible 

Easily discernible translucent areas, 2 

details of iris slightly obscured 

Opalescent areas, no details of iris 3 

visible, size of pupil barely discernible 

Opaque, iris invisible 4 

B) Area of cornea involved 

One quarter (or less) but not zero 1 

Greater than one quarter but less than half 2 

Greater than half, but less than three 3 

quarters 

Greater than three quarters, up to whole area 4 

Scores A x B x 5 Total maximum = 80 

2) IRIS 

A) Values 

Normal 

Folds above normal, congestion, swelling, 1 
circumcorneal injection (any or all of these 



or combinations of any thereof) iris still 
reacting to light (sluggish reaction is positive) 
No reaction to light, haemorrhage, gross 2 
destruction (any or all of these). 
Scores A x 5 Total maximum « 10 

3) Conjunctivae 

A) Redness (refers to palpebral and bulbar conjuc- 
tivae excluding cornea and iris) 

Vessels normal 

Vessels definitely injected above normal 1 

More diffuse, deeper crimson red, individual 2 
vessels not easily discernible 

Diffuse beefy red 3 

B) Chemosis 

No swelling 

Any swelling above normal (includes 1 
nictitating membrane) 

Obvious swelling with partial evcrsion of lids 2 

Swelling with lid about half closed 3 

Swelling with lid about half closed to 4 
completely closed 

C) Discharge 

No discharge 

Any amount different from normal (does not 1 

include small amount observed in inner 

canthus of normal animals) 

Discharge with moistening of the lids and 2 

hairs just adjacent to lids 

Discharge with moistening of the lids and 3 

hairs, and considerable area around the eye 

Score (A + B + C)x2 Total maximum = 20 

The total possible score would be 1 10. The critical 
score is about 30. Score exceeding 30 tend to repre- 
sent irreversible damage. Scores less than 30 tend 
to clear away leaving no visible sign of damage. 

The total score for the eye is the sums of all scores 
obtained for the cornea, iris and conjuctivac. A 
preparation eliciting more than mild reaction 
which lasts for more than 2 days on the ocular 
mucosa should not be considered safe as an eye area 
cosmetic. 

Alternatively the test for the primary irritation of 
mucous membrane can be carried out using the 
guidelines given in IS 13424. 

4.3.4,2 Oral Mucosal Irritation Test in Rats 

4.3.4.2.1 Principle 

Evaluation of oral mucosal irritation potential of 
products like dentifrice, mouth wash which come 
into contact with oral mucosa is necessary. 



IS 4011: 1997 



4.3.4.2.2 Procedure 

The method employed involves daily treatment of 
the oral cavity of albino rats (6 per group) of 24-28 
days old (body weight of about 35-40 g) with the 
product. 

The animals are treated two times daily for four 
days. Each treatment consists of a 30 seconds swab- 
bing of the interior of the mouth - say the pocket- 
like region between the inner lower lip (labial 
mucosa) and outer lower gum (incisor gingiva), the 
so-called lip-gum recess with 0.05 ml in case of 
tooth paste or 0.05 ml of a 50 percent aqueous 
slurry of tooth powder in distilled water or 25 
percent solution of mouthwash in distilled water 
using an artbrush. 

4.3.4.2.3 Observation 

The oral mucosa of each animal is examined daily 
with a final examination three days following cessa- 
tion of treatment. Irritation is scored as follows: 



(A) Oral Mucosa 

No reaction 

Discoloration, slight sloughing 
Sloughing in several areas 
Ulceration 

(B) Lahinl Junction 

No reaction 

Slight redness, sloughing, dryness 
Skin rough and brittle, small sores 
Cracking and bleeding 




1 

2 
3 



1 
2 
3 



Irritancy scores are calculated by averaging the 
combined daily ratings for the oral mucosa and 
labial junction. Results are interpreted as follows: 

0-0.4 Very mild 
. 0.5-1.0 Mild 

1.1-2.0 Moderate irritant 

2.1 and above — Severe irritant 
Dentifrice and mouth wash should not produce 
moderate irritancy response. It is desirable to 
include in this test an acceptable commercial for- 
mulations as a reference standard. 

4.4 Use Test 

4.4.1 After the cosmetic has passed the ap- 
propriate tests, 15 human volunteers shall be asked 
to use the cosmetic as normally used lor 15 days. If 
there is no adverse reaction, the cosmetic may be 
released for consumer tests. 

4.5 Restricted Consumer Test 

4.5.1 The cosmetic may be then released into the 
market on a limited scale and should be closely 



monitored for any adverse consumer response. It 
is customary to release between 5 000 and 10 000 
units of the cosmetic. In case adverse reactions are 
reported/collected during this period, they should 
be studied adopting appropriate tests. 

NOTES 

1 It is important to realize that all tests are experimental 
laboratory based and therefore, the results cannot be con- 
sidered to represent exactly what is likely to happen wheifthe 
cosmetic is actually released for mass use. It will, therefore, 
be necessary to keep a watch on the reactions if any, which 
may occur following general release of the cosmetics when 
the agent is used by a much larger number of individuals and 
for much longer periods. 

2 It is also known that there are some differences in the 
reactivity of the skin of various racial groups, the two sexes 
and various age groups. It will, therefore, be appropriate to 
perform the above mentioned tests on the same type of 
individuals who are targeted to be the main consumers of that 
particular cosmetics. 

SECTION 2 

5 GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT 
CONTACT HYPERSENSITIVITY 

5.1 Before an individual can manifest an allergic 
reaction to a locally applied agent, he normally 
develops hypersensitivity to the agent. In biologi- 
cal terms, this means that some lymphocytes in the 
blood acquire the capability of recognizing and 
reacting with the same chemical whenever and 
wherever that chemical is applied on the skin. An 
individual may start developing hypersensitivity 
following the very first exposure but generally it 
docs not happen this way. Nevertheless, every ex- 
posure to the allergen has a chance of sensitizing 
the individual. Therefore, the more the number of 
exposures the greater the chances of developing 
hypersensitivity. This also means that an individual 
develops allergy to only those agents which he or 
she has already been using for several days, months, 
or even years. Once, however, an individual be- 
comes allergic to a substance he is likely to develop 
a reaction following every subsequent exposure 
provided the exposure is adequate. 

5.2 If an individual is exposed to a chemical agent 
for the first time, he is not likely to be allergic to 
that agent and, therefore, he cannot develop an 
allergic reaction. Sometimes, however, if the in- 
dividual had already been allergic to another 
chemical agent, whose chemical structure 
resembles that of the present chemical, when even 
the so called first exposure will be able to produce 
an allergic reaction. This is called a reaction of 
cross-sensitivity. It is, however, important to be 
aware that many times, a person may get exposed 
to an agent without being aware of it. Thus he may 
become allergic during one such exposure and 



IS 4011: 1997 



develop an allergic reaction during the subsequent 
exposure. 

5.3 Some substances may cause sensitization more 
easily than others. The chemical basis of this char- 
acteristic of these agents is not known, but such 
substances are considered to be more potent sen- 
sitizers than the others. 

5.4 Startum corneum, the most superficial layer of 
skin is a very selective barrier which allows only 
some substances to pass through. It is quite ob- 
vious that if a substance cannot penetrate this bar- 
rier and enter the skin, it cannot cause contact 
allergy. In case, however, this barrier is defective 
due to disease or injury, there is a greater change of 
an allergic reaction. 

5.5 The process of sensitization takes a minimum 
of 5 days during which there are no clinical signs or 
symptoms. Thus even if an individual starts 
developing hypersensitivity following the very first 
exposure, there will be no clinical signs or 
symptoms during the first 5 days. However, after 
the individual has become allergic, a subsequent 
exposure will result in signs and symptoms within a 
day or two. 

6 CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS 

6.1 The earliest indication of an allergic reaction 
is itching. This is soon followed by redness. If the 
reaction is mild, it may subside soon, but generally, 
because of continued exposures, the reaction 
progresses through papules, papulovesicles, 
vesicles and bullae, exudation and crusting. These 
reactions are called acute reactions. Subacute reac- 
tions generally result in erythema and scaling, while 
chronic reactions due to continued exposures may 
lead to darkening and thickening of the skin. On 
the lips and palms, the reaction frequently 
manifests as scaling and Assuring. 

6.2 The reaction is generally limited to the area 
where the causative substance is applied. Some- 
times, however, the agent may get applied on the 
other areas of the body by means of the fingers, 
clothes, pillows, etc. In such instances, the reaction 
will be sent at other areas as well. 

6.3 If further applications of the agent are con- 
tinued, the reaction keeps on increasing in severity 
and extent, but in case further applications are 
stopped, the reaction tends to subside even without 
any treatment. 

6.4 The degree of allergy varies in different in- 
dividuals. Some individuals are more severely al- 
lergic and, therefore, they will react to even smaller 
amounts of substance. Moreover, an allergic in- 
dividual will develop a severe reaction if exposed to 
a larger amount of substance. Conversely, an aller- 



gic individual may not develop any signs or 
symptoms if he is not exposed to an adequate 
amount of the substance. 

6.5 Photocontact Dermatitis 

Some agents, particularly dyes and perfumes, cause 
dermatitis only after the skin area on which they 
have been applied is exposed to sunlight or 
ultraviolet rays. Sunlight along or the agent along 
(without exposure to sunlight) does not result in 
dermatitis. This type of reaction often consists of 
darkening of the skin, though in acute cases, itch- 
ing, papular, papulovesicular or scaly lesions may 
also be present. 

7 DIAGNOSTIC TESTS FOR CONTACT 
HYPERSENSITIVITY 

7.1 Patch Test 

7.1.1 This test is based on the principle that in an 
allergic individual , the whole skin is capable of 
reacting with the allergen. Therefore, if the sub- 
stance is applied on the skin on any part of the body, 
it will result in dermatitis at the test site. Although 
this test is simple, yet a little experience is essential 
for accurate interpretation of results. 

7.1.2 The test should not be applied if the patient 
is already having acute dermatitis because there is 
a risk of aggravation of the dermatitis and occur- 
rence of false positive reactions. The test should 
also be postponed if the patient is being given 
systemic corticosteroid or other immunosuppres- 
sive drugs, such as cyclophosphamide, 
methotrexate, azathioprine, etc, because these 
drugs can suppress the reaction and lead to false 
negative results. 

7.1.3 The substance to be used as allergen for patch 
test may be either the finished product as such or 
preferably each of the suspect ingredient used in the 
product. 

7. 1 .4 When using ingredients, it is important to use 
each agent in a specified concentration and also in 
a specified vehicle (or base). This is necessary to 
avoid false positive or false negative results, be- 
cause if the concentration of the agent is too high, 
it may result in irritant dermatitis at the test site, 
while if the concentration is too low, it may not 
evoke any reaction. Similarly, if the vehicle used for 
dissolving the agent does not allow the agent to 
penetrate the epidermal barrier, it may result in a 
false negative reaction. In the case of cosmetic, it 
will be especially useful if agents which may be used 
as substitutes of the standard ingredients are also 
included for patch tests. This will help the industry 
to know the substitutes which may be employed in 
the manufacture of the cosmetic in place of the 
ingredient causing contact dermatitis. 



IS4011:1997 



7.1.5 Normal saline (0.9 percent aqueous solution 
of sodium chloride) or any other agent used as a 
vehicle for dissolving the ingredients, should also 
be applied as controls for the patch test. It is 
necessary to ensure that the controls do not 
produce any reaction at the site of patch test. 

7.1.6 In some countries, ready-made patches arc 
available for patch tests. In case they are not avail- 
able, the same may be prepared as follows: 

Cut out an approximately 4 cm square piece of 
adhesive plaster and fix on its center, a 2.5 cm 
square piece of cotton gauze. The gauze piece 
should be 4 to 8 layers thick. In the center of this 
gauze piece, place a small piece of cotton wool or a 
1 cm square piece of thick filter paper. The gauze 
piece, cotton wool or the filter paper should be 
clean chemically. 

7.1.7 The suspected allergen is smeared on or 
soaked into the central piece of cotton wool/filter 
paper. In case the substance is a liquid or an oint- 
ment, 0.05 ml of the same is sufficient. In case the 
substance is a solid, it should be powdered and 
wetted with 0.05 ml distilled water (for volatile 
substances, see 7.3). 

7.1.8 Various allergens should be incorporated 
into different patches and all these patches should 
be applied on the skin of the patient so that the 
allergen is in direct contact with the skin. Various 
patches should be numbered and an accurate ac- 
count of the allergens put on these patches should 
be entered into a register for records. 

7.1.9 The patches are generally applied on the 
back, but in case the skin on the hack is not suitable, 
the upper arm may also be used. The skin should 
essentially be non-hair)* and free from any type of 
skin lesions. In case the back is hairy, the hair can 
be cut off by clipper or shaver before applying the 
patches. 

7.2 Timing and location of the Patch Test 

7.2.1 The patches arc left in place lor approximate- 
ly 48 hours. The individual is instructed to ensure 
that the patches do not get removed during this 
period and to avoid wetting them during bathing. 
After 48 hours the number of the patch should be 
marked on the adjoining skin and the patches 
removed. The sites where the allergens were ap- 
plied on the skin should be encircled for identifica- 
tions and the individual should be instructed to 
avoid scratching these areas. Hall an hour alter 
removal of the patches, the sites of the patch lest 
should be inspected for evidence of dermatitis. 
Presence of dermatitis at any of the test sites indi- 
cate that the individual is allcrcic to the substance 



applied at that site. The patch test reactions are 
generally graded as follows: 

Description and Symbol 

No reaction — 

Erythema only + 

Erythema with papules + + 

Papulovesicular reaction + + + 

Ulceration or necrosis + + + + 

7.2.2 Reactions produced by solid substances are 
generally milder, as the amount of the allergen that 
can enter the skin is usually much less. Thus even 
milder reactions produced by solid agents should 
be considered significant. 

7.2.3 Sometimes, when the hypersensitivity in a 
patient is very mild, there may be no reaction at the 
patch test site after 48 hours, though next day, there 
may be evidence of dermatitis. It is, therefore, 
preferable to take anulhei reading alter 
approximately 72 hours. 

7.2.4 Sometimes, the patient shows evidence of 
dermatitis 5 days after application of the patch test. 
This indicates that the patient was not allergic to 
the chemical earlier, but the patch test has sen- 
sitized him. 

7.2.5 Some individuals develop dermatitis reac- 
tion to the adhesive plaster which may spread to 
involve the entire test site, making it difficult to 
observe any reaction to the allergen. In such an 
instance the patch tests can be applied on the upper 
arm using only small strips of adhesive plaster or 
suitable hypo allergic plaster. 

7.2.6 Sometimes particularly in summer, the 
patient may develop a miliaria (prickly heal) - like 
reaction at the patch test site due to occlusion. This 
reaction is not reproducible and, therefore, it 
should be regarded as false positive reaction. 

7.2.7 Some chemicals particularly nickel sulphate 
can at times lead to a pustular reaction which also 
is non-specific. 

7.3 Testing with Volatile Substances 

7.3.1 Volatile substances can act as primary ir- 
ritant if test by the standard occluded patch test 
technique. Such agents should, therefore, be tested 
by the cup technique. In this method, the volatile 
agent is soaked into a small piece of absorbent 
cotton filler paper which is placed at the bottom of 
specially designed (see Fig. t). This cup is inverted 
on the forearm-skin of the individual and 
bandaged. One should be taken to ensure that the 
piece of filter paper remains sticking to the bottom 
of the cup and does not fall on the skin, and the skin 
is exposed only to the vapors of the agent. 



IS 4011 : 1997 




Fig. 1 Antigen Cup 

7.3.2 If a finished product containing volatile sub- 
stances is to be tested, the agent should be painted 
on the skin and left exposed for 30 minutes to allow 
the volatile substance to evaporate. After this, the 
area is occluded as for the standards patch test. 

7.4 Open Patch Test 

7.4.1 Some substances such as shampoos, 
shaving creams, tooth pastes and other similar 
cosmetics may produce a glazed reaction by the 
occluded standard patch test which may be mis- 
taken for a positive reaction. Such agents 
should preferably be tested by the open patch test 
method as follows. 

7.4.2 The agent is applied on the skin and left as 
such for a minimum of 24 hours. The results are 
read 48 hours after the application as for the 
standard patch test. 

NOTF, — A report of a natch test is not complete unless it 
mentions the following data: 

a) Concentration of the chemical/agent; 

b) Amount used; 

c) Area of skin contacted; 

d) Site of application; 

e) Number of days and patch was left on the skin; and 

f) Period after removal of the patch that the readings were 
made. 

7.5 Exposure and Withdrawal lest 

7.5.1 Hypersensitivity of an individual to an agent 
can also be confirmed by asking the individual to 



stop using the suspected agent for a week or so. If 
the reaction subsides during this period, it suggests 
that the agent was probably responsible for the 
dermatitis. Then the individual should be asked to 
used the agent again. In case the reaction reappears 
within the next 2-3 days, it is suggestive of the causal 
relationship of the dermatitis with the agent. For 
confirmation, withdrawal of the agent and exposure 
can be repeated. In case multiple agents are 
suspected, it will be necessary to re-expose to these 
agents one by one and to add every new substance 
after an interval of atleast 2 or 3 days and preferably 
after 7 days. 

7.6 Photopatch Test 

7.6.1 In case a substance is considered to produce 
dermatitis by photocontact-sensitivity, it will be 
necessary to undertake photopatch tests rather 
than the standard patch tests. For this, each sub- 
stance is applied in duplicate patches in the same 
manner as for standard patch tests, but after 24 
hours, one of the patches in each pair is removed 
and the skin at the test site is exposed to sunlight 
for 30 minutes or an appropriate source of 
ultraviolet light. These patches are covered again. 
The other patches in each of the pairs is left undis- 
turbed. One additional site in the adjoining skin is 
exposed to sunlight or ultraviolet light for the same 
period to act as a control for the ultraviolet ex- 
posure. After a further period of 24 hours, all the 
patches are removed and the test sites are examined 
for evidence of dermatitis. The photopatch test is 
considered to be positive if there is no reaction at 
the site of the standard patch test (not exposed to 
light), but the site of the exposed patch test shows 
evidence of dermatitis. The skin area taken as 
'control* and exposed only to sunlight or ultraviolet 
light should also not develop any dermatitis. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This docs not preclude the free use, in course of implementing 
the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Fnquirics relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. PCD 19 (1234). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amendment No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OI : INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NHWDHLHI 110 002 

[•astern : 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme Vll M, V.I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOI, K ATA 700 054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 



Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHl-NNAI 600 113 



Western : Manakalaya, F.9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (Hast) 
MUMBAI400 093 



Telephones 

( 2323 7 
1 2323 3 



2323 7617 
841 



( 2337 8499,2337 8561 
t 2337 8626,2337 9120 

( 260 3843 
\ 260 9285 

/ 2254 1216,2254 1442 
( 2254 2519,2254 2315 

( 2832 9295,2832 7858 
\ 2832 7891,2832 7892 



Branches: AHMHDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANI SHWAR. COIMBA K)Ri:. I ARIDABAI). 
CHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NACiPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNK. RAJKOT. TIIIRUVANANTIIAPl JRAM VISAKIIAPATNAM. 



Printed bs the Manager. Govt, of India Press. I aridabad 



