Is 130s2 :3991
( Reaffirmed 1997) m?ih m%

f%=nt WITwc

*?&

�

WT1'$

wiwwi7

Indian Standard
IRRIGATION EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEMS � EVALUATION OF FIELD IRRIGATION EFFICIENCIES -- GUIDELINES

UDC

631'67"001"4( 026)

BUREAU
MANAK
June 1991

OF lND IAN STANDARDS
NEWDELHI110002
9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG Price Group 7

BHAVAN,

Irrigation

Equipment

and Systems Sectional Committee,

FAD 35

.

FOREWORD This Tndian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized 9 the Irrigation Equipment and Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. V Evaluation of the performance of irrigation Irrigation efficiencies are used to: system is made in terms of irrigation efficienciek

- determine how effectively the system is operating and can be operated; - obtain information, that will assist in designing other systems; - enable comparison of various systems and operating procedures as a basis for economic decisions. Many a time the terms used in irrigation technology have multiple meanings. In view of this, the terminology used in irrigation efficiencies as well as their evaluation procedure have been defined in this standard. Jn the preparation of this standard, assistance has been obtained from Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal and Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).' The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 13062 : 1991

Indian Standard
IRRIGATION EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEMS EVALUATION OF FIELD IRRIGATION EFFICIENCIES - GUIDELINES
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down the guidelines evaluation of field irrigation efficiencies respect of the following irrigation methods: i) Border strip, ii) Check basin, iii) Furrows, iv) Sprinkler, and v) Drip. This standard also includes the terminology field irrigation efficiency, characteristic characteristic irrigation time moisture, characteristic irrigation curve that are used evaluating irrigation efficiency. 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard ing definitions shall apply. 2.1 Soil Moisture Characteristics 2.1.0 The following terms shall be used to describe the soil moisture status or soil moisture characteristics. 2.1.1 Soil Moisture Soil moisture may be expressed as a percentage of dry mass of soil, percentage of volume of soil or equivalent surface depth of water per unit depth of soil. Generally depth of water per unit depth of soil is the most convenient measurement for irrigation evaluation and management. 2.1.2 Field Capacity ( FC ) It is defined as the moisture remaining in a soil following wetting and natural drainage until free drainage has practically ceased. It is also referred as field moisture capacity, normal field capacity, normal capacity, capillary capacity, maximum field carrying capacity, or effective water holding capacity. 2.1.3 Wilting Point ( FVP ) The moisture content of soil after the plant can no longer extract moisture at a sufficient rate to demand. The meet its evapotranspiration wilted leaf cannot recover overnight or when placed in a saturated environment. It is also known as permanent wilting percentage or wilting coefficient. 2.1.4 Available Soil Moisture Capacity (,AMC j It is defined as the moisture that can be held in the soil between field capacity and wilting point for a given crop root zone. the followfor in 2.1.5 Available Soil Moisture ( SM ) It is the difference between the actual soil moisture content in the root zone soil and the wilting point at any given time. 2.1.6 Soil Moisture Deficit ( SMD ) It is the difference between field capacity and the actual moisture in the soil at any given time for a given crop root zone. on soil and for 2.1.7 Management Allowed Deficit ( MAD ) It is defined as the desired soil moisture at the start of irrigation. MAD is expressed as a percentage of the ,4MC or as the corresponding SMD. It is related to the desired soil moisture stress for the crop-soil-watar-weather system. Irrigation is generally scheduled when SMD equals M4D. 2.2 Irrigation Characteristic Time Curves Characteristics and

2.2.1 Application Time ( Ta ) It is duration of time water otherwise applied to an area. 2.2.2 Advance Time ( T av)

flows into or is

It is the duration of time required for the water front to flow from the upstream end to the downstream end of a field after water is turned on. 2.2.3 Rate of Advance
It

is the distance water front traverses particular time after water is turned on.

in

a

2.2.4 Advance Curve
It is a plot of time after water is turned on versus the distance the water front traverses.

2.2.5 Recession Time It is the duration of time required for water to disappear from the entire field surface after the water is turned off. 2.2.6 Rate of Recession It is the distance from which water front disappeared from the field surface after water was turned off in a particular time after water is turned on. 2.2.7 Recession Curve It is a plot of time after water was turned on to the time the water disappeared from the 1

IS13062:1991
field surface disappeared. versus the distance water front
NOTE The FIE is a geueral term, useful for describing the effectiveness of irrigation on a single field, when used for beneficial purpose especially other than satisfying the SMD. The amount of water used for leaching to maintain the salt balance of the root zone is also considered to be beneficially used.

2.2.8 Lag Time It is the duratjon of time required for water to disappear from the upstream end of a field after the water was turned off. 2.2.9 Opportunity Time of time water is on the soil surface with opportunity to infiltrate. It is equal to the time interval between the recession curve and advance curve. 2.2.10 Advance Ratio
It is the ratio of time it takes a water stream to advance to the downstream end of a field to the time water is at the downstream end. It is the duration

2.3.2 Application Eflciency

( AE)

It is the ratio of the average depth of the irrigation water stored in the root zone to the average depth of irrigation water applied. It can be expressed as: Average depth of water stored in the root zone AE = x 100 Average depth of water applied 2.3.3 Application Eficiency Absolute Low
( AELA )

2.2.11 Infiltration Characteristics See 2.2.11.1 to 2.2.11.6. 2.2.11.1 Instantaneous infiltration rate

of

Soil -

It is the rate at which water enters into

the soil

at a particular

time after initial wetting.

2.2.11.2 Accumulated or cumulative infiltration It is the depth of water entering into the soil at the end of a given time after initial wetting. 2.2.11.3 Basic infiltration rate It is approximately rate at a prolonged wetting. constant value of infiltration period cf time after initial

It is the actual efficiency achieved with a given system and is expressed as a ratio of the minimum depth of water stored in the root zone to the average depth of water applied. It can be expressed as: Minimum depth of water stored in the root zone AELA = x 100 Average depth of water applied 2.3.4 Application Eficiency of Low Quarter

(AELQ)

2.2.11.4 Infiltration rate curve It is a plot of the instantaneous infiltration versus elapsed time after initial wetting. 2.2.11.5 Cumulative infiltration depth curve It is a plot of cumulative infiltration versus elapsed time after initial wetting. 2.2.11.6 Infiltration depth distribution curve It is a plot of the depth of cumulative infiltration at specified location in a field strip. The depth of infiltration is taken from a cumulative infiltration depth curve corresponding to the opportunity time of the specified location for surface irrigation. In sprinkler irrigation, it is a plot of depths caught on equal areas arranged in a sequence of descending depths. 2.3 Field Efficiency ( FE ) 2.3.1 Field Irrigation Eflciency
( FIE )

It is the ratio of the average low quarter depth of irrigation water infiltrated and stored in the root zone to the average depth of irrigation water applied. The average low quarter depth infiltrated is the average of the lowest onefourth of the measured or estimated values where each value represents an equal area of the field. It can also be expressed as: Average low quarter depth of water infiltrated and stored in the root zone AELQ = x 100 Average depth of water applied 2.3.4.1 When the average low quarter depth of water infiltrated, exceeds SMD, the AELQ may be expressed as: SMD AELQ = Average depth of water applied 2.3.5 Potential Application
Low ( PELA ) EfJiciency Absolute

It is defined as the ratio of the average depth of

irrigation water which is beneficially used to the average depth of water applied. FIE = Average depth beneficially Average depth applied to of water used of water field x 100

It is a measure of how well a system performs under reasonably good management when the desired irrigation is applied. It is expressed as a ratio of the minimum depth infiltrated ( when equal to MAD ) to the average depth of water applied: Minimum depth infiltrated which is equal to MAD PELA = x 100 Average depth of'water applied When SMD = MAD, then PELA = AELQ

IS 13062: 1991 2.3.6 Potential

Application Quarter ( PELQ )

Eficiency

Low

depth. It is used in conjunction with the distribution uniformity and application efficiency: Average depth stored in the root zone SE = Average storable depth in x the root zone 3 EVALUATION PROCEDURE of field irrigation

performs under reasonably good management when the desired irrigation is applied. It is expressed as a ratio of the average low quarter depth infiltrated ( when equal to MAD ) to the average depth of water applied: Average low quarter depth of water infiltrated which is equal to MAD PELQ = x 100 Average depth of water applied when MAD just satisfied
NOTE The difference between PELQ and AELQ is that the AELO is a measure of the management oneratkns and-PELQ is a measure of the design-low PELQ values indicate design problems whereas low AELQ indicate operation problems.

It is a measure of how well a system

10

3.0 The procedure for evaluation irrigation efficiencies for different methods shall be as follows.
3.1 Border Strip Method 3.1.1 Test Equipment

The following test equipments
4

shall be used: to

A 30 m tape, stakes and a hatchet derive the stakes, '

2.3.7 Disrribulion Uniformity ( DU ) It is the uniformity of infiltration ( for application in case of sprinkler and trickle irrigation ) throughout the field and is expressed as a ratio of the average depth infiltrated in the lowest one-quarter of the area to the average depth of infiltrated ( or caught ): Average low quarter depth of water infi!trated ( or caught) x 100 DU = Average depth of water infiltrated ( or caught ) 2.3.8 Uniformity Coeficient ( UC ) It is a statistical representation of the uniformity of sprinkler or trickle irrigation. It is expressed as the ratio of average depth of water caught ( or infiltrated) minus the average deviation from this depth, divided by the average depth caught or infiltrated: Average depth caught Average numerical deviation from the average depth caught x 100 UC = Average depth caught OR UC ( approx ) = 100 - 0.85 where a = standard deviation, X = average catch.
It

b) A stop watch, c) Soil moisture measuring devices, set, d) Cylinder/infiltration Flow measuring devices such as a Parshall e) Flume, weirs or flow meter, etc, and f! A surveying level. 3.1.2 Procedurz for Collection of Field Data The following sequence of activities shall be followed for the collection of field data and observations shall be recorded as given in Annexes A and B. Select a typical site which tive of soil. is representa-

Select 3 strips which may be adjacent but preferably be alternate ones. Measure the width of each strip.

cl Measure the longitudinal and cross slope 4 e) Set the flow measuring
strip. of the strips. Set 6 or more stakes at 10 m interval. device

at each

f) Estimate

and

the soil moisture deficit ( see 2.1.6) and record the value in Annex A. Compare the soil moisture deficit ( SMD) with management allow deficit ( MAD ) ( see 2.1.7 ). infiltrometers

id Set four or more cylinder
in typical location.

2.3.9 Emission Uniformity ( EU )
is the uniformity of emission from trickle irrigation emitter throughout a field and is expressed as a percent of the minimum rate of discharge to .the average rate of discharge per plant.

h) Record the cumulative
at different Annex A. time at

infiltration depth each location in

3 introduce a constant stream of usual size
in one border strip and a larger and smaller stream in the other two strips. Record the time of start and shut off.

2.3.10 Storage Eficiency ( SE ) is the ratio of the av:rage depth of water stored in the root zone to the average storable
It

k) Record the width of the wetted portion.
3

Is 13062 : 1991 m) Record the time when each stream reaches the respective station in Annex B ( Rate of advance ). n) Record the time when water disappears from respective stations in Annex B ( Rate of recession ). p) Check the adequacy of the application a day or two after, the irrigation of soil auger or probe. 3.1.3 Evaluation of Irrigation Esciency
and

infiltration rate, relocate the stakes to obtain more uniform rate. of k) Record the depth and uniformity penetration using a soil probe and test the adequacy of irrigation. 3.2.3 Evaluation of Irrigation Eficiency From the field data recorded compute the following: a) Opportunity time at different stations and infiltration depth distribution ctirve.

3.1.3.1

From the field data recorded in Annex A B draw the following characteristics curves: infiltration depth curve,

b) Depth applied by the formula:
Depth applied = Jnflow stream x Duration Area

a) Cumulative

b) Advance curve, c) Recession curve, d) Opportunity time, and e) Infiltration depth distribution a) Distribution uniformity and UC ( see 2.3.8 ), curve.

cl

Uniformity ( DU ) - Since Distribution there is no run off in check basin, compute distribution efficiency by the formula:

3.1.3.2 Form the graph compute the following: ( DU ) ( see 2.3.7 )

Average depth applied - Average depth ponded when only oneeighth-of the area is exposed DU = Average depth applied

b) Potential application efficiencies ( PELA > ( see 2.3.5 ) and PELQ ( see 2.3.6 ), c) Application efficiencies ( AELA ) ( see 2.3.3 ) and AELQ ( see 2.3.4 ), d) Actual duration of irrigation, and e) Actual stream size. 3.2 Check Basin Method 3.2.1 Test Equipment Same as given in 3.1.1. 3.2.2 Procedure for Collection of Field Data The following sequence of activities shall be followed for the collection of field data and the observations shall be recorded as given in Annexes A and B. Select one or two identical basins.

d) e)

Potential Application Eficiencies

-

PELA

( see 2.3.5 ) and PELQ ( see 2.3.6 ).
Actual Application Eficiencies - AELA ( see 2.3.3 ) and AELQ ( see 2.3.4 ).

3.3 Furrows Irrigation Method 3.3.1 Test Equipment Field Data

same as given in 3.1.1.

3.3.2 Preparation of Test Plot and Collection of Select a typical test plot and prepare the same in the following manner. Record the observations in Annex C and D. a) Select three or more alternate test furrows. b) Measure furrows. c) Measure furrows. shape, size and spacing of the gradient of the

a>

b) Draw a map of the basin. Measure width
and length.

longitudinal

4 Check the soil moisture deficit (see 2.1.6) 4 Record
Set e>

at several locations and compare it with management allowed deficit ( see 2.1.7 ). the time of start, shut off time and rate of inflow of stream.

d) Set stakes along the furrows at 10 m intervals. There should be a minimum of 6 stakes. e) Install flow measuring device at zero station on all test furrows and record the size of stream in Annex C. f) Record items 1 to 10 of Annex C and calculate the soil moisture deficit ( see 2.1.6 ) and compare it with management ailowed deficite ( see 2.1.7 ). g) Set at least three but preferably four constant flow streams of all possible range in stream sizes. If flow rates vary during test, the change should be noted. The largest stream size in litres per second should be equal to 0*6/S, where S is
4

stakes at 10 metres interval. Record the time when stream reaches each f) station ( rate of advance ). d Mark the position of the receding water front at several places as the water level recedes after the stream flow has been shut off ( rate of recession ). h) Measure the rate of infiltration. j) Observe variations in infiltration rate within the basins. In case of non-uniform

IS 13062 : 1991

h) j)

k) d Observe the furrow for errosion or over
flowing and estimate the maximum stream. usable

longitudinal gradient of the furrow in percent. Record the size of stream flowing through in the station. zero in each furrow Annex C. Record the time when stream reaches each station in Annex C ( rate of advance curve ). Record the infiltration as in Annex D.

discharge, pressure and wetted diameter and recommended operating pressure; and f) A set of drill bits rangiqg in size from 0'4 mm to 12'5 mm in Increments of 0'4 mm to act as feeler gauge to check nozzle wear. 3.4.2 Preparation of Test Plot and Collection of
Field Data

4 Observe the run off at the lower end of
furrow, if any. P) If water is present in the furrow for an appreciable time after the stream is turned off, it should be noted.

Select a typical site so that there is no obstruction from trees or buildings, The minimum clearance should be 30 H where H is the height of obstruction. Prepare the test plot in the following manner. Record the observations as in Annex E. It a) Choose a location along the lateral. may be either a single location at which pressure is typical for the entire system ( at about 40 percent of the distance from the inlet to the terminal end ) or two locations near the ends of a lateral to permit study of the effects of differences in pressure. b) Set at least 24 collectors on a grid having spacing not exceeding 2 x 2 m. The catch containers pattern should be laid to cover two adjacent areas between three sprinklers since sprinklers may not be applying water at precisely uniform rate. c) Determine the soil texture profile and management allowed deficit, then estimate the available moisture capacity in the root zone and check the soil moisture deficit in the catch area on the side of lateral that was not irrigated during the previous set. d) Check and record the make and model of the sprinkler and the diameter of the nozzle. e) Obtain the normal sprinkler spacing, duration and frequency of irrigation and record them. f) Read and record the rated sprinkler discharge, pressure, the computed average design application rate from the system design data and nianufacturer's sprinkler catalogue. g) Check and record the size and slope of the lateral pipe and height and errectness of the risers. h) Before starting the test, stop the rotation of the sprinklers at the test site to prevent water from entering the containers. Turn on the water to fill the laterals, when the test lateral is full, turn the pressure slowly to observe the trajectory, break up of drops and effect of wind at different pressures. Then set the pressure at the desired value for the test. Measure and record the pressure at sprinklers at several locations. Pressure should be checked at 5

q) Record the depth of water penetration and lateral spread using a soil probe or auger. 3.3.3 Evaluation of Irrigation Eficiency From the field data compute the following: b) Infiltration c) Opportunity recorded ( see 3.3.2 )

a) Advance and recession curves. rate curve. time at different stations.

d) Depth of water infiltrated at different point. e) Distribution uniformity ( DU ) ( see 2.3.7 ) and uniformity coefficient ( UC ) ( see 2.3.8 ). f) Application efficiencies AELA (see 2.3.3) and AELQ ( see 2.3.4 ). g) F;lt) . . 3.4 Sprinkler This procedure lateral. Irrigation
. Irrigation Method

Efficiency

( FIE ) ( see

is applicable for

single sprinkler

3.4.1 Test Equipment The following test equipments shall be used, in addition to the equipments specified in 3.1.1: a) A pressure gauge with pitot tube attachment; b) 50-100 containers of known volume; c) A measuring stick to measure depth or a 500-ml graduated cylinder to measure volume of water caught in containers; d) A 1'5 m long flexible hose pipe having diameter appreciably larger than the outside diameter of the nozzle; e) Manufacturers chart showing sprinkler performance relationship between

IS 13062:1991
both, the beginning and end of the test. When measuring sprinkler pressure the pitot tube must be centered in the jet which impinge directly into its tip. The tip may be rocked slightly. Record the highest pressure reading while the pitot tube is being held about 3 mm from the sprickler nozzle. Record how long it takes each sprinkler to fill the large container of known volume. Do this by slipping the short length of hose pipe over the sprinkler nozzle and collecting the flow in the container. Measure the nozzle output several times to compute average discharge. Often the measured discharge is more than what is specified by the manufacturer. This occurs because sprinkfer nozzle often erodes during the use and becomes enlarged or because the hose pipe fits too tightly and creates a syphon action. The nozzle erosion can be checked with a drill bit that has the diameter specified for the nozzle.
application at different points estimated priate overlap. by appro-

a) Average Catch Rate ( ACR ) - It is the average depth of water caught in the collectors in a unit time and is expressed in cm/hr. ACR = Total catch at all grid points/ grid points. b) Average Low Quarter Rate ( ALQR > - It is the average catch rate of the lowest 25 percent values and is expressed in cm/hr. ALQR = Total of lowest 25 percent catch l/4 ( grid points ).

cl

Rate of Application ( RA ) -

The average rate of application in cm/h is computed from sprinkler discharge in litres/hour and sprinkler and lateral spacings in metre. Measured

3

Note the wind speed and direction.

the test, start the test by all sprinklers surrounding the test site so that they are free to rotate, and note the starting time. d Set outside the catchment area a container holding the anticipated amount of catch water and note the volume of water lost by evaporation. 4 While the test is in progress, check the sprinkler pressure at 20 to 40 systematically selected locations ( for example at the two ends and quarter point along each lateral ). On other laterals, record the maximum, minimum and the average pressures. P) Terminate the test by either stopping the sprinklers surrounding the test site in a position such that the jets do not fall into the containers or by deflecting the jets to the ground. Note the time. Check and record the pressure and turn off the water. The most desirable duration for the test is equal to the duration of an irrigation to get the full effect of wind and evaporaThe ideal minimum duration of tion. test should be to collect an average of about 1'5 cm In the container, and q) Measure the depth of water in all containers. 3.4.3 Evaluation of Irrigation Eficiency From the field data recorded pute the following: ( see 3.4.2 ) com-

k) Empty all catch containers before starting

sprinkler nozzle discharge RA= Sprinkler spacing x Lateral spacing x 10 d) Total Average Depth (D) - The total average depth of water application shall be computed as product of average application rate ( RA ) and the time of application ( T ). D=RAXT

e) Moisture

Stored in the Root Zone ( Ds ) -

It is computed as the product of soil moisture holding capacity ( SMC ) in cm, root zone depth ( RD ) in cm, and deficit management allowed moisture ( MAD ) in fraction. Ds = SMC Y RD x MAD

f)

E@ciency Reduction due to Change Pressure ( ER ) 0'2 ( Ma.ximum m-essure -

in

ER =

1~-.tiinimum p&sure ) Average system pressure
ALQR

Distribution Ungormity ( DU )
D(, = ACR

x 100

h)

Uniformity Coefficient ( see 2.3.8 >. Potential Application Eficiency Quarter ( PELQ ) - ( see 2.3.6 ). Low

9
k)

System Potential Application Esciency Low Quarter ( SPELQ ) - The ratio of

NOTE This test shall be conducted for single lateral. Before further evaluation the lateral spacing, should be decided and the depth of water 6

the average low quarter sprinkler discharge to the average sprinkler discharge approximately equals ( I'O-ER ). Therefore, the system PELQ shall be computed by: SPELQ = ( 1'0 - ER > x Test PELQ

IS 13062 : 1991

m)

Application ( AELQ ) -

Eficiency

Low

Quarter

Whenever irrigation exactly satisfies the SMD, in the least watered areas, AELQ equals PELQ, but when excess water is applied, then the AELQ is computed as the ratio of moisture stored in the root zone ( Ds ) and total average depth ( D ): AELQ = $$Method

number of blocks is the total number of manifolds divided by the number of manifolds in operation at any one time. g) For laterals h aving individual emitters, measure the discharge at two adjacent emission points ( denoted as A and B in item 15 of Annex F at each of four different trees or locations on each of the four selected test laterals. Collect the flow for a number of full minutes ( 1, 2, 3, etc. ) to obtain a volume between 100 and 250 ml for each emission points. Convert each reading to millilitre per minute before entering in item 15 of Plnnex F. The above steps will produce eight pressure readings and 32 discharge volume at 16 different plant locations for individual emission points used in widespread crops with two or more emission points per plant. For perforated hose pipe or porous tubing, use one meter trough and collect discharge readings at each of the 16 locations described above. Since these are already averages of 2 or more outlets, only one reading shall be recorded at each location. h) Measure and record in item 17 of Annex F the water pressure at the inlet and down stream end of each lateral tested in item 17 of Annex F under normal operation. On the inlet end this requires disconnecting the lateral hose, installing the pressure gauge and reconnecting the hose before reading the pressure. On the down stream end, the pressure can be read after connecting the pressure gauge. j) Check the percentage of the soil that is wetted at one of the three locations ou each test lateral and record in item 18 of Annex F. It is desirable to select a tree at a different relative location on each lateral. Use the probe, soil auger or shovel for estimating real extent of the wetted zone at 15 to 30 cm below the surface around each tree. Determine the percentage wetted by dividing the wetted area by the total surface between four trees. k) If an interval of several days between irrigation is being used, check the SMD in the wetted volume near a few representative trees in the next block to be irrigated and record in item 20 of Annex F. the minimum lateral inlet ml Determine pressure ( MLIP ) along each of the operating manifolds and record in item 21 of Annex F. For a level or uphill manifolds, the MLIP, will be the far end of the manifold. For down hill manifolds it is often about two-thirds down at manifold. For the manifold on undulating terrain, it is usually on a knoll or high point. 7

3.5 Drip or Trickle 3.5.1

Irrigation

Test Equipment

The following test the test equipments used:

equipments in addition to specified in 3.1.1 shall be

a) Pressure gauge with `T' adopters or the temporary installation at either end of the lateral hoses. b) Graduated cylinder of 250-ml capacity. c) Funnel with lo-15 cm diameter. d) Manufacturer's emitter performance charts showing the relationship between discharge and pressure and recommended operating pressures and filter requirements.

4 Sheet metal or plastic trough 1 m long

for measuring the discharge from several outlets in a perforated hose simultaneously or the discharge from 1 m length of porous tubing ( A piece of 2 or 4 cm diameter PVC pipe cut in half lengthwise, makes a good trough ).

3.5.2 Preparation of Test Plot and Collection of
Field Data

Select a typical site and the following manner. as in Annex F. The evaluating systems with or porous laterals. Record a>

prepare the test plot in Record the observations procedure is suitable for emitters and perforated

the soil and crop characteristics in items 4 and 5 of Annex F.

b) Calculate

the duration, frequency of allowed irrigation, management and deficit. Record the observations in item 6 of Annex F.

4 Record the pressure at the inlet and outlet of the filter in item 7 of Annex F.

d) Record 4

f)

the emitter and lateral hose characteristic in items 8, 9, 10 and 11 of Annex F. Locate four emitter laterals along an operating manifold; one should be near the inlet and two near the third points and the fourth near the outer end. Record the system discharge rate and the number of manifolds and blocks. The

IS 13062:1991 n) Determine the discharge correction factor ( DCF ) in item 22 of "Annex F to adjust the average omission point discharges for the tested manifolds. This adjustment is needed if the tested manifold happens to be operating with a higher or lower MLIP then the average system MLIP. P) Determine the average and adjust average emission point discharge according to the equations in item 23 and 24 of Annex F. 3.53
Evaluation sf Eficiency

From the field data recorded pute the following:

( see 3.5.2 ) com-

properly set, the overall system potential application efficiency will be lower than test potential application efficiency. Estimate the efficiency reduction factor from the minimum lateral inlet pressure ( MLIP ) along each manifold by: Average MLIP i- 1'5 X Minimum MLIP i) ERF = 2'5 x Average MLIP Minimum MLIP " ii) ERF = Average MLIP where n = emitter discharge exponent.

1

a) Average application depth ( DW ) - The average depth per irrigation to the wetted area shall be useful for estimating management allowed deficit and shall be computed by:
D B" = NQH

e) Emission uniformity ( E, ) Adjusted average low quarter emission point discharge rate per plant E, = --~_ x 100 Adjusted average system emission discharge per plant
NOTE The average of the lowest quarter ( Item 23 of Annex F ) shall be used as the minimum for each of the four emitters per plant.

10 A

where
D,, N= Q= = average

depth per irrigation, in cm; number of emission points per tree; adjusted average emission point discharge for system as estimated in item 24 of Annex F, in 1 ph; hours of gation; operation per irri-

f ) Potential application eficiency ( PELQ ) - When irrigation

low quarter

H= A-_

average wetted area, item 18, of Annex F, in sqm per tree.
It

is applied every day, estimate soil moisture deficit from weather data or information derived from evaporation devices. In order to provide for under estimates, as a general rule, 10 percent more water than the estimated SMD or evapo-transpiration should be applied to the least watered areas. The PELQ under full irrigation shall be estimated by: PELQ = 0'9 E, System PELQ = ERF X Test PELQ

b) Overall

shall be computed by substituting the plant spacing for wetted area in the formula given in 3.5.3 (a):
Da =. NxQxH

average depth ( Da ) -

d

10 [ Total area ( Row spacing, m X plant spacing, m ) ]

4

Volume of water required per day per plant - The average volume of water

required in litres per hour per day per plant shall be computed from the average discharge in litres per day, at each emission point, the number of emission point per tree, the number of hours of operation per irrigation, and the irrigation interval in days. Average daily requirement per tree
= Irrigation NQH

The effectiveness of a drip system shall be estimated by how much of the applied water is stored in the root zone and is available for consumptive use by the plants. Since there are essentially no opportunities for losses due to evaporation or drift, for inadequate irrigation in which the least watered areas are under-irrigated. System AELQ = ERF X Test & However, if excess water is applied in the least watered areas: System AELQ SMD in wetted areas x 100 = Average depth applied to wetted area ( Dav )

Application (AELQ)--

efficiency

low

quarter

of water,

lpd,

interval in
factor ( ERF ) -

d) Eficiency reduction the manifold inlet

N
If not 8

Overall minimum depth

applied

( Dn ) -

pressures

are

The overall average depth applied to the total area ( Ds ) multiplied by system

IS 13062:1991
PELQ ( or AELQ ) shall be computed by: D = Ds x System PELQ ( or AELQ 1 n 100
minimum depth applied, D,, NOTE - Overall shall be used-in irrigation scheduling. Use AELQ for under irrigation or when AELQ > PELQ.

4 IRRIGATION REQU1REMENT

EFFICIENCY

4.1 The major physical requirements and potential application efficiency of different irrigation techniques shall be as given in Table 1.
of the Low

Table 1 Irrigation Method

Major Physical Requirements and Potential Application Eiikiencies Quarter for the Basic Irrigation Techniques
Physical Requirement at Site ---.----_-_-------_-_*_-____-____-_-_--__~ Soil Infiltration Ground Water Rate Uniformity Slope SUPPlY

r

Labour Intensity (6) High at frequent intervals High at infrequent intervals -doHigh at infrequent intervals High to very low dally8 Very low daily

(1)
Basin Basin check Border strip Furrow or corrugation Sprinkler

(2)
Uniform within each basin Uniform within each basin Uniform within each strip Uniform along each furrow Soils may be intermixed Soil may be intermixed

(3) Any All but extremes -doAll but very rapid All but very slow' Any

(4) Level, or graded Mild & smooth -doMild or contour Any formable slope Any formable slope for control

(5) Large intermitent -do-doMedium to large intermitent Small continuous Small continuous

Potential Applii cation Efficiency PELQ (7) 60-85 60-801 70-851 70-751 65-85 depending on crops raised 75-90

Trickle ( drip or sub-surface

)

NOTE-This

table makes no allowance

of salinity

and micro-climate. that have medium and

*Values of 90 percent can be attained under ideal conditions if runoff water is reused. `Except for centre pivot and travelling sprinkler, which are best suited to use on soils high intiltration rates. `Labour inputs range from high intensity sprir,kle irrigation system. for hand move, moderate for mechanical

move, to low for

automatic

ANNEX

A

( Clauses 3.1.2, 3.1.3.1 and 3.2.2 )
BORDER STRIP IRRIGATION INFILTRATION EVALUATION

1 Location
2 Observer

7 Soil texture
8 Available moisture,

3 4 5 6

Date Crop Root zone depth, m Management allowed deficit, cm Infiltration

cm/m

9 Soil moisture deficit, cm A 10 Crop history 11 Infiltration Readings Cumulative Time (6) Depth (7) Difference (8) ~~Cumulative Time (9) measurement

Station-A
Sl

No. (1)

Time, min (2)

Injiltration, cm (3)

Watch (4)

Difference (9

12 Remarks 9

IS 13062 :1991

ANNEX B ( Clauses 3.1.2, 3.1.3.1 and 3.2.2 )
BORDER .STRIP IRRIGATION WATER ADVANCE AND RECESSION EVALUATION
1 Location

2 3 4 5 6 7 8

Observer Date Crop and condition Border condition , Border: soaking depth, m Strip width, m Wetted width, m Distance in m from upstream end of strip

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

Slope, percent lrrigation duration, h Frequency Water spread Strip No. Stream size Application time, T and advance time, Taav Measurement of opportunity time: Cumulative infiltration depth

Station No.

(1)

(2)

Opportunity Rate of Advance Rate of Recession A----.7 r-___h__-__ time, r---Watch time Duration of Watch time Duration of ( Tadv-TxfTr) when stream time after when water time after reaches resdisappears the water the water pective u'as turned from respec- was turned station tive stations on, Tx 08, Tr (5) (3) (4) (7) (6)

(8)

ANNEX C ( CkLwe 3.3.2 )
FURROW IRRIGATION 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Location Observer Date Crop Root zone depth, m Row spacing, cm Length, m Soil texture Available moisture, cm/m Distance in m from upstream end of strip

'

WATER ADVANCE EVALUATION Soil moisture deficit, cm Irrigation duration, h Frequency, days Management allowed deficit, cm and percent Furrow No. Stream size Application time ( T) and advance time, ( Taav ) 17 Measurement of opportunity time: Cumulative Infiltration ) Depth 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

Station No.

(1)

(2)

Rate of Recession Opportunity Rate of Advance r_-.-_h----~ T_---~----~ time, Watch time Duration of Watch time Duration of ( Tad"-TX-/-T, time after when water when stream time after the water disappears reaches resthe water was turned from respec- was turned pective station tive stations on, TX o.K Tr (6) (5) (7) (3) (4)

(8)

10

IS 13062 : 1991

ANNEX D ( Clause 3.3.2 )
. FURROW INFILTRATION EVALUATION

1 2 3 4

Location Observer Date Furrow a) Identity b) Shape

c) Condition 5 Soil texture 6 Moisture, percent 7 Slope, percent 8 Measurement of flow intake rate:
Cumulative, Min Station A Flow Rate, litres per second ( lps ) Station u Flow Rate, Intake

Time Watch

1Diflerence, Min

lps (7)

lps/lO m (8)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-

9 Accuracy range 10 Remarks

ANNEX E ( Clause 3.4.2 )
PROFORMA FOR DATA COLLECTION RELATING IRRIGATION EVALIJATION TO SPRINKLER

1 Location
2 Observer 3 Date 4 Crop 5 Root zone depth, m 6 Management 7 Management -8 Soil

allowed deficit, percent allowed deficit, cm

a) Texture b) ,4vailable moisture c) Moisture depth, cm
Sprinkler Location No. of Test Lateral (1) Initial Pressure,

9 Sprinkler a) Make b) Model c) Nozzle 10 Sprinkler spacing, cm II Irrigation duration, h 12 Rated sprinkler discharge, lpm at kg/cm" giving cm/h 13 Lateral: diameter I4 Slope, percent 15 Riser height, cm 16 Actual sprinkler pressure and discharge rates:
Final Pressure, Catch Volume,

kg/cm"
(2)

kg/cm2
(3)

litres
(4)

( min or set )
(5)

Catch Time

Discharge, Ipm (6)

17 Wind direction Initial

relative During

to container Final Final

grid:

18 V&Ad spepd (rKi@n )r Initial During

19 Container grid test data a) Units of volume/depth, ml/cm bj Coat&cK~ g<<d qstiG%g 2 m by 2 m c) Test: Started at, Stopped at, Duration, 11

Min

IS 13062:1991

20 Evaporation from container: 21 Sprinkler pressure: 22 Remarks
.

lnitial
Max,

Final
kg/cm2,

Loss, cm Average, kglcrna

ANNEX F ( Clause 3.5.2 )
PROFORMA FOR DATA COLLECTION RELATING TRICKLE IRRIGATION EVALUATION 1 2 3 4 Location Observer Date Crop a) Type b) Age, years c) Spacing, m d) Root depth, m e) Percent area covered or shaded, percent 5 Soil a) Texture b) Available moisture, cm/m 6 Irrigation a) Duration, h b) Frequency, day c) Management allowed deficit, percent d) Management allowed deficit, cm 7 Filter pressure a) Inlet, kg/cm2 b) Outlet, kg/cm2 TO

c) Loss, kg/cm2 8 Emitter a) Make b) Type c) Point spacing, m 9 Rated discharge per emission kg/cm2 points per plant, 13 Emission litres per plant per day 11 Hose a) Diameter, cm b) Material, c) Length, m d) Spacing, m

point

lph at

discharging,

12 System layout a) General topography b) Test locations System discharge, lph 13 Number of manifolds and blocks 14 15 Discharge test volume collected in one minute

Outlet Location on Lateral

r---------Inlet End r__A_+T

Lateral Location of the Manifold ______A-~-_-~----__---_~ 213 Down l/3 Down -A__r--h--7 r-

Far End r--h__7

~

(1) ~ Inlet End A B Average A B Average A B Average A B Average

ml (2)

lph

1Ph

(3)

(ii;

(5)

ii

lph (7)

;,'

lph (9)

1/3 Down 213 Down Far End 16 17 18 19

Pressure Pressure Wetted Wetted

in Lateral inlet in closed end area ( average) area per plant 12

kg/cm2 kg/cm2 m2 Percent

kg/cm2 kg/cm2 m2 Percent

kg/cm% kg/cm2 m2 Percent

kg/cm2 kg/cm2 me Percent

IS 13062:lWI.
20 Estimated average soil moisture deficit in 23 Average test manifold emission point discharges at kg/cmZ wetted soil volume, cm 21 Minimum lateral inlet pressure ( MLTP ) on a) Manifold ( lph ) all operating manifolds: = Sum of all averages. Iph a) Manifold tested at: Number of averages A B C D E F G Average b) Low l/4 ( Iph ) b) Pressure: kg/cm2 Sum of low l/4 averages, lph 22 Discharge correction factor, DCF, for the = Number of low l/4 averages system: 2.5 x ( Average MLTP, kg/cm" ) . 24 Adjusted average emission point discharges DCF = (Average MLIP, kg/cm2 ) f 1'5 at kg/cm' x ( Test MLIP, kg/cm2 ) a) System ( lph ) ' or, if the emitter discharge exponent n is = ( DCF ) X ( Manifold average, lph ) known b) Low l/4 ( Iph) DCF = ..4verage MLIP, kg/cm2 n = ( DCF ) x (Manifold low l/4, Iph ) Test MLIP, kg/cm' ) 1

13

Gtaodard Mark

by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. The use of the Standard Mark is governed
Standards Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations

Boreao of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Inditm Standardr Act, 1986 to ptomoto marking and quality certification of harmonious development of the activities of standardization, goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
.

Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type os grade designations, Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. Revision of Indiao Standards Indian Standards are issued from possession of the to BIS giving the are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent latest amendments or edition. following reference :

Dot : No. FAD 35 ( 2676 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New;[Delhi: 110002 Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Ofices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75

37 86 62 53 38 43 2350216

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

6 32 92 95

Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi. India

