NAT Alan IS 17482 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Waster sarah At Metered Torre — gT 
Waser aai Gar o fore sae 


Drinking Water Supply Management 
System — Requirements for Piped 
Drinking Water Supply Service 


ICS 13.060.01, 13.060.20, 93.025 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2020 Price Group 8 


Public Drinking Water Services Sectional Committee, SSD 14 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Public 
Drinking Water Services Sectional Committee had been approved by the Service Sector Division Council. 


Potable water constitutes a worldwide challenge for the 21st century, both in terms of the management of available 
water resources and the provision of access to drinking water. The provision of safe and adequate drinking water 
to the burgeoning Indian population is a major challenge. The lack of safe drinking water could undermine the 
health and wellbeing of the people. Water provided should meet the minimum drinking water quality as stipulated 
in IS 10500 and should be readily and conveniently accessible to consumers at all times and in all situations 
without any compromise to drinking water quality. As water is considered a “social good” and activities related 
to water services support the three aspects (economic, social and environmental) of sustainable development: it is 
desirable that the management of water utilities be transparent and inclusive of all stakeholders. 


This standard lays down the requirements of a water utility/service provider including but not limited to, the 
processes involved in the procurement of raw water, its treatment and distribution, the quality of the water provided 
and guidelines on how to ensure the same, and the requirements/responsibilities of the management. 


The aim and objectives of water utilities is to offer water services to everybody in the service area of the water 
utility, and to provide users with a continuous supply of drinking water. Water utilities are expected to meet the 
requirements of a person or a society or an organisation as per the specifications issued by the responsible bodies 
in conjunction with the other stakeholders. 


The following documents published by the Central Government are referred in this standard. 


a) Manual on Operation and Maintenance of Water Supply System, published by CPHEEO, Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs. 


b) Manual on Water Supply and Treatment, published by CPHEEO, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. 


c) Guidelines to Regulate and Control Ground Water Extraction in India issued by Central Ground Water 
Authority, Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation. 


d) Service Level Benchmark as performance indicator published by the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs, Govt of India. 


In the standard, reference has been provided to ISO 19011 : 2018 ‘Guidelines for Auditing Management 
Systems’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


This standard is applicable to and can be implemented by all such organizations which are either directly 
providing service to society at large or to those organizations which through their policies, directives, regulations 
etc, indirectly affect the services to be/being provided. The public service organizations may not necessarily be 
in the Government sector only. The use and implementation of this standard by public service organizations, are 
expected to benefit the public the consumer through increased customer satisfaction levels and the organizations 
through their increased efficiency and effectiveness. 


IS 17482 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


DRINKING WATER SUPPLY MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEM — REQUIREMENTS FOR PIPED 
DRINKING WATER SUPPLY SERVICE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the requirements for 
management system of drinking water supplier/utility 
and for the assessment of piped drinking water supply 
services where the water supplier/utility, 


a) needs to demonstrate its ability and performance 
to consistently provide drinking water and related 
utility services while ensuring compliance to 
applicable statutory and regulatory guidelines. 


b) aims to ensure continuous supply of piped 
drinking water conforming to the acceptable limit 
of IS 10500. 
NOTE — This Indian Standard is applicable to all water 


utilities and does not favour any particular ownership or 
operating model. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, all editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below 


IS No. 
10500 : 2012 


Title 


Drinking Water — Specifications 
(second revision) 


16633: 2017/ Activities relating to drinking 
ISO 24512: water and wastewater 
2007 services — Guidelines for the 

management of drinking water 
utilities and for the assessment of 
drinking water services 

IS/ISO 9000: Quality management systems — 
2015 Fundamentals and vocabulary 

(fourth revision) 
3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS/ISO 9000 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Authority — A person or society or organization 
having political or administrative power or right to 
issue order, make decision and enforce obedience. 


3.2 Complaint — Expression of dissatisfaction made 
to a water supplier/utility related to, its service, the 
water supply or the complaints-handling process 
itself, where a response or resolution is explicitly and 
implicitly expected. 


3.3 Customer — A person, or a group or a society 
or an institution/organization that benefits from water 
utility for piped drinking water supply management 
services. 


3.4 Customer Service — Interaction of the water 
supplier/utility with the customer throughout the life 
cycle of a service. 


3.5 Customer Satisfaction — Customer’s perception 
of the degree to which the customer’s expectations 
have been fulfilled. 


3.6 Code of Conduct for Meeting Customer 
Satisfaction — Promises, made to customers by the 
water supplier/utility concerning its behavior, that are 
aimed at enhanced customer satisfaction and related 
provisions. 


3.7 Conformity — Fulfillment of a requirement. 


3.8 Customer Point of Distribution — The point 
where water supplier/utility supplies the piped water to 
the individual/ individual household/gated community/ 
institutions/organizations after water meter in piped 
water supply network. 


3.9 Disaster — A sudden or unexpected or calamitous 
event or a natural catastrophe that causes huge or 
massive losses to community or society or human or 
property or material or economic or environment. This 
can be natural or anthropogenic. 


3.10 Disaster Management — A society or an 
organization dealing with management of resources 
and responsibilities for handling the disaster in terms 
of preparedness, measures, response, and recovery. 


3.11 District Metered Area (DMA) — It is sub-zone 
of a water distribution network zone covering a defined 
number of water connections for the purpose of water 
audit and further improvement in water supply service 
system. 


3.12 Drinking Water — Water intended for human 
consumption for drinking, cooking or domestic 


IS 17482 : 2020 


purposes from any safe and secure source including 
treated water supplied for human consumption. 


3.13 Feedback — Opinions, comments and 
expressions of interest of customer on the piped water 
supply or on services or a complaint handling process. 


3.14 Infrastructure — System of facilities, structures, 
installations, equipments and services needed for the 
operation and management of the piped water supply 
constructed and managed by the water supplier/utility. 


3.15 Inspection — Determination of conformity to 
specified requirements. 


3.16 Management System — Set of interrelated or 
interacting elements of the water supplier/utility to 
establish policies, and objectives and the processes to 
achieve those objectives. 


3.17 Monitoring — Determining the status of a system 
or a process or a product or a service or an activity. 


3.18 Non-Conformity — Non fulfillment of a 
requirement. 


3.19 Policy — Intentions and direction of the water 
supplier/utility as formally expressed by its top 
management. 


3.20 Objectives — Result to be achieved. 
3.21 Risk — Effect of uncertainty. 


3.22 Risk Management — Coordinated act of decision 
on action to direct or control an action by the water 
utility with regard to risk associated with the services. 


3.23 Relevant Authority — Public body entitled to set 
general act, or rules, or policies, or plans or guidelines or 
requirements, or to check compliance with these rules, 
concerning all the water suppliers/utilities included in 
its area of jurisdiction. 


3.24 Requirement — Need or expectations that is 
stated, generally implied or obligatory. 


3.25 Responsible Body — A society or an organization 
or a public body that has the overall legal responsibility 
for providing drinking water services for a given 
geographic area. 


3.26 Service — Output of water utility/supplier with 
at least one activity necessarily performed between the 
water supplier/utility and the customer. 


3.27 Service Area — Local geographic area where 
the water supplier/utility has the legal or contractual 
responsibility to provide the service. 


3.28 Stakeholder — A person or a group or a society 
or an organization having an interest and concerns 
and involved in the services or performance of water 
supplier/utility. 


3.29 Sustainability — The state in which components 
of ecosystem and their functions are maintained in 
view of conservation of the resources for the present 
and future generations 


3.30 Test — Determination of quality of 
products/services according to requirements for a 
specific intended use or application. 


3.31 Top Management — Person or group of people 
who directs and controls water supplier/utility at the 
highest level. 


3.32 Water Utility — Whole set of a society or a 
body or an organization dealing with water and has 
processes, activities, means and resources necessarily 
for abstracting, transporting, treating, distributing the 
drinking water and providing the associated services 
including risk and disaster management. 


3.33 Utility Services — The services provided by 
the water supplier/utility which includes extracting, 
transporting, treating, and distributing drinking water 
to the customer meeting the specified requirements. 


3.34 Water Audit — A water audit is the assessment 
of quantity of the total water losses and leakage in 
transmission and distribution of water. 


4 PIPED DRINKING WATER 
SERVICE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


SUPPLY 


4.1 Understanding the Water Utility/Supplier and 
its Context 


The water supplier/utility shall determine external 
and internal issues that are relevant to its purpose 
(including the sustainability of its resources) and its 
strategic direction and that affect its ability to achieve 
the intended result(s) of its management system. 


The water supplier/utility shall monitor and review 
information about these external and internal issues. 
NOTES 
1 Issues can include positive and negative factors or conditions 
for consideration. 
2 Understanding the external context can be facilitated 
by considering issues arising from legal, technological, 
competitive, market, cultural, social and economic 


environments, whether international, national, regional or 
local. 


3 Understanding the internal context can be facilitated by 
considering issues related to values, culture, knowledge and 
performance of the water supplier/utility. 


4.2 Understanding the Needs and Expectations of 
Interested Parties 


The water supplier/utility shall identify, 


a) the interested parties including statutory and 
regulatory bodies that are relevant to the piped 
drinking water supply service management 
system; 


b) the requirements and feedback of the stakeholders 
that are relevant to the piped drinking water supply 
service management system; and 


c) mechanism for sustainability of the resources. 


4.3 Determining the Scope of the Piped Drinking 
Water Supply Service Management System 


The water supplier/utility shall determine the boundaries 
and applicability of the piped drinking water supply 
service management system to establish its scope. 


When determining this scope, the water supplier/utility 
shall consider, 


a) the external and internal issues related to services 
referred to in 4.1, and 


b) the requirements of relevant stakeholders referred 
to in 4.2. 


The scope of the water supplier/utility management 
system shall be available and be maintained as 
documented information. The scope shall state the 
types of services covered, and provide justification 
for any requirement of this standard that the water 
supplier/utility determines is not applicable to the scope 
of its management system. 


4.4 General Requirements 


The water supplier/utility shall establish, implement, 
operate, maintain and continually improve a piped 
drinking water supply service management system, 
including the processes needed and their interactions, 
in accordance with the requirements of this standard. 


The water supplier/utility shall, 


a) ensure an installed and functional water intake 
works at the source of water; 


b) ensure transmission of the water from intake 
works to the water treatment plant; 


c) ensure water treatment at water treatment plant, 
and safe disposal of residues, adopting appropriate 
methods and/or processes; 


d) ensure that the treated water conforms to the 
acceptable limits of IS 10500; 


e) ensure water storage, and distribution to the 

customer at a specified pressure as per applicable 
norms/guidelines; 
NOTE — The nominal pressure of water at household level 
may be referred from the Manual on Water Supply and 
Treatment, published by CPHEEO, Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs as well as the guidelines issued by the State/UT 
government from time to time. 

f) establish a Management Information System 
(MIS); 


g) determine the resources needed for 
processes and ensure their availability; 


these 


h) assign the responsibilities to the concerned for 
these processes; 


IS 17482 : 2020 


j) address the risks and opportunities; 


k) evaluate these processes and implement any 
changes needed to ensure that these processes 
achieve their results, efficiently as per the 
prescribed norms; and 

m) improve the piped drinking water supply service 
management system. 


4.5 Records 
To the extent necessary, the water supplier/utility shall, 


a) maintain documented information to support the 
operation of its processes; 


b) retain documented information to have confidence 
that the processes are being carried out as per 
planned scheduled; 


c) maintain the records of the workforce employed 
and needed, as per schedule; and 


d) maintain records to establish traceability of water/ 
processes causing major/minor non-conformity. 


5 LEADERSHIP 


5.1 Leadership and Commitment 


5.1.1 General 


Top management shall demonstrate leadership and 
commitment with respect to the drinking water supply 
services management system by, 


a) taking accountability for the effectiveness of the 
piped drinking water supply services management 
system as per this standard; 


b) ensuring that the policy and objectives are 
established and are compatible with the context 
and strategic direction of the water supplier/utility; 


c) promoting the use of the process approach and 
risk-based thinking; 


d) ensuring that the resources needed for the 
piped quality of drinking water supply services 
management system are available; 


e) ensuring that the drinking water supply services 
management system achieves its intended results; 


f) communicating the importance of effective 
management and of conforming to the management 
system requirements; 


g) engaging, directing and supporting persons to 
contribute to the effectiveness of the management 
system; and 


h) promoting improvement through 
up-gradation and resources enhancement. 


system 


5.1.2 Customer Focus 


Top management shall demonstrate leadership and 
commitment with respect to customer focus by ensuring 
that: 


IS 17482 : 2020 


a) customer and applicable statutory and regulatory 
requirements are determined, understood and 
consistently met to satisfy the customer; 

b) the risks and opportunities that can affect 
conformity of products and services and the ability 
to enhance customer satisfaction are determined 
and addressed; and 

c) the focus on enhancing customer satisfaction is 
maintained. 


5.2 Policy 


5.2.1 Establishing the Policy for Piped Drinking Water 
Supply Services 


Top management shall establish, implement and 
maintain a policy that, 


a) is appropriate to the purpose and context of the 
water supplier/utility and supports its strategic 
direction; 


b) provides a framework for setting objectives; 


c) includes a commitment to satisfy applicable 
requirements; and 


d) includes a commitment to continual improvement 
of the quality of piped drinking water supply 
service management system. 

5.2.2 Communicating the Policy 
The policy shall, 


a) be available and be maintained as documented 
information; 

b) be communicated and understood and applied 
within the water supplier/utility; 

c) be available to interested parties, as appropriate; 
and 


d) be displayed on the water utility’s website. 


5.3 Organizational Roles, 
Authorities 


Top management shall ensure that the responsibilities 
and authorities for relevant roles are assigned, 
communicated and understood within the water utility. 


Responsibilities and 


Top management shall assign the responsibility and 
authority for, 


a) ensuring that the piped drinking water supply 
service management system conforms to the 
requirements of this standard; 


b) ensuring that the processes are delivering their 
intended outputs; 


c) reporting on the performance of the piped drinking 
water supply service management system and on 
opportunities for improvement in particular to top 
management; 


d) ensuring the promotion of customer focus 
throughout the organization; 


e) ensuring that the integrity of the system is 
maintained when changes to the drinking 
water supply service system are planned and 
implemented; 


f) ensuring the plan of action in case of emergency 
for repairing or restoring the normal services 
within 24 h to 36 h, or as per the charter of the 
water utility; and 


g) ensuring the plan of action in case of disaster 
(anthropogenic or natural) (see Annex A). 


6 PLANNING 


6.1 Actions to Address Risks and Opportunities 


6.1.1 When planning for the piped drinking water 
supply services management system, the water supplier/ 
utility shall consider the issues referred to in 4.1 and 4.2 
and determine the risks and opportunities that need to 
be addressed to, 


a) give assurance that the piped drinking water 
supply management system can achieve it’s 
intended result(s); 


b) enhance desirable effects; 
c) prevent, or reduce, undesired effects; and 


d) achieve improvement. 


6.1.2 The water supplier/utility shall plan, 


a) actions to address these risks and opportunities; 
and 


b) how to integrate and implement the actions into 
its management system processes and evaluate the 
effectiveness of these actions. 


Actions taken to address risks and opportunities shall be 
proportionate to the potential impact on the conformity 
of product and services. 
NOTE — Options to address risks can include avoiding risk, 
taking risk in order to pursue an opportunity, eliminating the 


risk source, changing the likelihood or consequences, sharing 
the risk, or retaining risk by informed decision. 


6.1.3 Disaster Management 


The water supplier/utility shall have a documented 
disaster management plan for implementation. 


Guidance may be taken from Annex A. 


6.1.4 Plan for Emergency 


In case of emergencies that may arise due to power 
failure, breakdown in water supply system units, 
vandalism, strikes by workforce, etc, an emergency 
response plan shall be prepared well in advance to 
meet such incidents/exigencies including associated 
documents (like, shut off check list, contact information, 
notices to public, individual responsibilities etc) and 
shall be periodically rehearsed. Records of mock drills 
shall also be kept in record. 


6.2 Objectives 
Supplier/Utility 


for the Drinking Water 
6.2.1 General 


The Water supplier/utility shall establish objectives 
at relevant functions, levels and processes needed for 
the piped drinking water supply services management 
system. 


The objectives shall, 
a) be consistent with its policy; 
b) be measurable with respect to specified standards; 
c) take into account applicable requirements; 
d) be monitored; 
e) be communicated; and 
f) be updated as appropriate. 


The water supplier/utility shall maintain documented 
information on the objectives of piped drinking water 
supply services. 


6.2.2 When planning to achieve its objectives, the water 
supplier/utility shall determine, 

a) the present status; 

b) the goal to achieve; 

c) action plan; 

d) resources required; 

e) responsible persons; 

f) timeline for completion; and 

g) methodology for evaluation of results. 


6.3 Planning of Changes 


When the water supplier/utility determines the need for 
changes to the management system, the changes shall 
be carried out in a planned manner. 


The water supplier/utility shall consider, 
a) the need for the change and the expected gain; 


b) the purpose of the changes and their potential 
consequences on the drinking water quality and 
related services; 


c) the integrity of the management system; 
d) the availability of resources; and 


e) the allocation or reallocation of responsibilities 
and authorities. 


7 SUPPORT 


7.1 Resources 


7.1.1 General 


The water supplier/utility shall determine, and 
provide the resources needed for the establishment, 
implementation, maintenance and continual 
improvement of the drinking water supply service 
management system. 


IS 17482 : 2020 


The water supplier/utility shall consider, 
a) the available internal resources and constraints; 
b) the resources required; and 
c) what needs to be obtained from external providers. 


7.1.2 People 


The water supplier/utility shall determine, and provide 
the persons necessary for the effective implementation 
of its drinking water supply service management 
system and for the operation and control of its processes. 


7.1.3 Infrastructure 


7.1.3.1 The water supplier/utility shall determine, 
provide and maintain the infrastructure necessary for 
the operation of its processes and to achieve conformity 
of drinking water as per the acceptable limits of 
IS 10500. 


NOTE — Infrastructure can include, 

a) buildings and associated utilities; 

b) equipment, including hardware and software; 
c) transportation resources; and 


d) information and communication technology. 


7.1.3.2 Maintenance 


In order to keep the plant, equipment, structures and 
other related facilities in optimum working order, the 
water supplier/utility shall prepare risk assessment and 
mitigation plan. This plan shall contain procedures/work 
instructions for routine tasks, checks and inspections at 
intervals viz. daily, weekly, quarterly, semi-annually or 
annually. In addition to this, the individual plans shall 
be prepared for all units and the required component 
of equipment. Checklists may be prepared, if required, 
to ensure that the actions indicated in the operation 
and maintenance plan are carried out promptly and 
properly. 

A well-organized stores unit having requisite number 
of workforces, machines and material for restoration 
and maintenance shall be available, and accessible at 
all times. 


The water supplier/utility shall have record system 
including the following minimum information, 
wherever required, or in accordance with the 
requirement of each equipment manufacturer, to ensure 
the required maintenance of the equipment: 


a) Name of equipment and location of equipment; 
b) Number of equipment available or installed; 

c) Serial number of the equipment; 

d) Type and class of the equipment; 

e) Date of procurement/installation of the equipment; 


f) Name of manufacturer with address and telephone 
No.; 


g) Name of servicing firm with address and telephone 
number; 


IS 17482 : 2020 


h) Service manuals; 
j) Calibration records, wherever applicable; 


k) Major overhauls: Details of date, nature of cost; 
and 


m) Due date of next overhaul. 


The records of all maintenance performed shall be 
maintained. 
NOTE — Manual on Water Supply and Treatment, published 
by CPHEEO, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs may be 
referred while preparing the risk assessment and mitigation 
plan. 


7.1.4 Environment for the Operation of Processes 


The water supplier/utility shall determine, provide 
and maintain the environment as well as hygienic 
condition necessary for the operation of its processes 
and to achieve conformity of drinking water as per the 
acceptable limits stipulated in IS 10500 till customer 
point. 


The water supplier/utility shall ensure the safety of 
its manpower and shall periodically assess the safety 
measures. 

NOTE — A suitable environment can be a combination of 

human and physical factors, such as: 

a) social (non-discriminatory, calm, non-confrontational); 


b) psychological (stress-reducing, burnout 


emotionally protective); and 


prevention, 


c) physical (temperature, heat, humidity, light, airflow, 
hygiene, noise). 

These factors can differ substantially depending on the 

products and services provided. 


7.1.5 Monitoring and Measuring Resources 


7.1.5.1 General 


The water supplier/utility shall determine and provide 
the resources needed to ensure valid and reliable results 
when monitoring or measuring is used to verify the 
conformity of services to requirements. 


Physical security measures of water supplier/utility 
shall be planned. Adequate measures for surveillance of 
drinking water quality during storage and distribution 
system shall be instituted. 


The water supplier/utility shall ensure that the resources 
provided, 
a) are suitable for the specific type of monitoring and 
measurement activities being undertaken, and; 
b) are maintained to ensure their continuing fitness 
for their purpose. 


The water supplier/utility shall retain appropriate 
documented information as of fitness for purpose of the 
monitoring and measurement resources. 


7.1.5.2 Measurement traceability 


When measurement traceability is a requirement, or 
is considered by the water supplier/utility to be an 
essential part of providing confidence in the validity of 
measurement results, measuring equipment shall be: 


a) Calibrated or verified, or both, at specified 
intervals, or prior to use, against measurement 
standards traceable to international or national 
measurement standards; when no such standards 
exist, the basis used for calibration or verification 
shall be retained as documented information; 


b) identified in order to determine their status, and; 


c) safe guarded from adjustments, damage or 
deterioration that would invalidate the calibration 
status and subsequent measurement results. 


The water supplier/utility shall determine if the validity 
of previous measurement results have been adversely 
affected when measuring equipment is found to be unfit 
for its intended purpose, and shall take appropriate 
action as necessary. 


7.2 Competence 
The water supplier/utility shall, 


a) determine the necessary competence of person(s) 
doing work under its control that affects the 
performance and effectiveness of the piped 
drinking water supply service management 
system; 

b) ensure that these persons are competent on 
the basis of appropriate education, training, or 
experience; 


c) where applicable, take actions to acquire 
the necessary competence, and evaluate the 
effectiveness of the actions taken; and 


d) retain appropriate documented information as 
evidence of competence. 
NOTE — Applicable actions can include, for example, the 
provision of training to, the mentoring of, or the reassignment 
of currently employed persons; or the hiring or contracting of 
competent persons. 


7.3 Awareness 


The water upplier/utility shall ensure that the workforce 
under the water supplier/utility’s control are aware of, 

a) their policy; 

b) relevant objectives; 

c) their contribution to the effectiveness of the 
management system, including the benefits of 
improved performance; and 

d) the implications of not conforming with the 


requirements of drinking water managements 
system. 


7.4 Communication 


The water supplier/utility shall determine the internal 
and external communications relevant to the piped 
drinking water supply service management system, 
including, 


a) on what it will communicate; 
b) when to communicate; 

c) with whom to communicate; 
d) how to communicate; and 


e) who communicates. 
7.5 Documented Information 


7.5.1 General 


The water supplier/utility’s management system shall 
include, 
this 


a) documented information 


standard; and 


required by 


b) documented information determined by the 
water supplier/utility as being necessary for the 
effectiveness of piped drinking water supply 
service management system. 


7.5.2 Creating and Updating 


When creating and updating documented information, 
the water supplier/utility shall ensure appropriate, 


a) identification and description (for example, a title, 
date, author, or reference number); 


b) format (for example language, software version, 
graphics) and media (for example paper, 
electronic); and 


c) review and approval for suitability and adequacy. 
7.5.3 Control of Documented Information 


7.5.3.1 Documented information required by the piped 
drinking water supply service management system and 
by this standard shall be controlled to ensure, 
a) the availability and suitability for use, wherever it 
is needed; and 
b) that it is adequately protected (for example, from 
loss of confidentiality, improper use, or loss of 
integrity). 


7.5.3.2 For the control of documented information, 
the water supplier/utility shall address the following 
activities, as applicable, 


a) distribution, access, retrieval and use; 

b) storage and preservation, including preservation 
of legibility; 

c) control of changes (that is, version control); and 

d) retention and disposition. 


IS 17482 : 2020 


Documented information of external origin determined 
by the water utility/supplier to be necessary for the 
planning and operation of the piped drinking water 
supply service management system shall be identified 
as appropriate. 


Documented information retained as evidence of 
conformity shall be protected from unintended 
alterations and be controlled. 
NOTE — Access can imply a decision regarding the 
permission to view the documented information only, or the 


permission and authority to view and change the documented 
information. 


8 OPERATION 


8.1 Operational Planning and Control 


The water supplier/utility shall plan, implement and 
control the processes (see 4.4) needed to meet the 
requirements for the provision of quality of drinking 
water and related services, and to implement the actions 
determined in 6, by: 
a) establishing criteria for, 
1) the processes; 
2) the acceptance of products and services; 
b) determining the resources needed to achieve 
conformity to the quality of drinking water and 
related services requirements; 


c) implementing control of the processes in 
accordance with the criteria; and 


d) determining, maintaining and retaining 
documented information to the extent necessary, 


1) to have confidence that the processes have 
been carried out as planned; and 


2) to demonstrate the conformity of products and 
services to their requirements. 


8.2 Requirements for Piped Drinking Water and 
Related Services 


8.2.1 Customer Communication 


8.2.1.1 Communication with customers shall include, 
a) providing information relating to piped drinking 
water and associated services; 
b) handling; 
c) available provisions for registering complaints 
about the piped water supply services; 


d) obtaining customer feedback relating to piped 
drinking water and associated services, including 
customer complaints; and 


e) details of establishing specific requirements for 
contingency actions, when relevant. 


IS 17482 : 2020 


8.2.1.2 The water supplier/utility shall maintain 
documented information on redressal of complaint 
with specified timelines. 
The complaint and request methods may include, 

a) telephone/IVRS; 

b) e-mail or sms; 

c) facsimile; 

d) written or verbal by visit or otherwise of the user; 


e) written or verbal by visit of employees of the 
water utility; 


f) social media; and 


g) water utility’s own app 


NOTE — Any event which may adversely affect the services, 
along with the appropriate timeline for resumption of the 
service shall be communicated to the customer through print 
media or any other means. 


8.2.2 Determining the Requirements for Piped Drinking 
Water Quality and Related Services 


When determining the requirements for the piped 
drinking water and related services to be offered to 
customers, the water supplier/utility shall ensure that, 
a) the requirements for the drinking water and related 
services are defined, including, 
1) any applicable 
requirements; and 


statutory and regulatory 


2) those considered necessary by the water 
supplier/utility; 


b) the water supplier/utility can meet the claims for 
the products and services it offers. 


8.3 Changes to Requirements for Drinking Water 
Quality and Related Services 


The water supplier/utility shall ensure that relevant 
documented information is amended, and that relevant 
persons are made aware of the changed requirements, 
when the requirements for drinking water quality and 
related services are changed. 


8.4 Control of Externally Provided Processes, 
Products and Services 


8.4.1 General 


The water supplier/utility shall ensure that externally 
provided processes, products and services conform to 
requirements. 


The water supplier/utility shall determine the controls 
to be applied to externally provided processes, drinking 
water and related services when, 


a) piped drinking water and related services from 
external providers are intended for incorporation 
into the water supplier/utility’s own drinking 
water and related services; 


b) piped drinking water and related services are 
provided directly to the customer(s) by external 


providers on behalf of the water supplier/utility; 
and 


c) a process, or part of a process, is provided by an 
external provider as a result of a decision by the 
water supplier/utility. 


The water supplier/utility shall determine and apply 
criteria for the evaluation, selection, monitoring of 
performance, and re-evaluation of external providers, 
based on their ability to provide processes or products 
and services in accordance with requirements. The water 
supplier/utility shall retain documented information of 
these activities and any necessary actions arising from 
the evaluations. 


8.4.2 Type and Extent of Control 


The water supplier/utility shall ensure that externally 
provided processes, drinking water and related services 
do not adversely affect the water supplier/utility’s 
ability to consistently deliver conforming drinking 
water and related services to its customers. 


The water supplier/utility shall, 


a) ensure that externally provided processes remain 
within the control of the piped drinking water 
service management system; 


b) define both the controls that it intends to apply to 
an external provider and those it intends to apply 
to the resulting output; 


c) take into consideration: 


1) the potential impact of the externally provided 
processes, drinking water and related services 
on the water supplier/utility’s ability to 
consistently meet customer and applicable 
statutory and regulatory requirements; and 


2) the effectiveness of the controls applied by the 
external provider. 


d) determine the verification, or other activities, 
necessary to ensure that the externally provided 
processes, drinking water and related services 
meet requirements. 


8.4.3 Information for External Providers 


The water supplier/utility shall ensure the adequacy 
of requirements prior to their communication to the 
external provider. 


The water supplier/utility shall communicate to 
external providers its requirements for, 
a) the processes, drinking water quality and related 
services to be provided; 
b) the approval of, 
1) drinking water 
services; 


quality and associated 
2) methods, processes and equipment; and 


3) the release of drinking water and related 
services. 


c) competence, including any required qualification 
of persons; 

d) the external providers’ interactions with the water 
supplier/utility; 


e) control and monitoring of the external providers’ 
performance to be applied by the water supplier/ 
utility; and 

f) verification or validation activities that the water 
supplier/utility, or its customer, intends to perform 
at the external providers’ premises. 


8.5 Production and Service Requirements 


8.5.1 General 


The water supplier/utility shall implement production 
and service provision under controlled condition. 
The related activities and responsibilities of the water 
supplier/utility are listed below, 


a) operations, including, extraction, transmission, 
treatment and distribution of water; 


b) maintain operational efficiency; 


c) inspection, repairing, 
rehabilitation; 


leak management and 


d) Monitoring of the quality and quantity of source 
water, treated water and residue; 


e) troubleshooting (during and outside normal hours 
of work); 


f) the safe transportation and disposal/reuse of 
residues; 


g) supply and demand gap assessment; 


h) ensuring that the non-revenue water (NRW) shall 
only be up to 20 percent; and 


j) providing alternate supply of water in case of 
disruption in regular piped water supply service 
beyond 36 h. 


A documented procedure shall be maintained for 
collection, treatment and distribution of water. This 
documented procedure shall include criteria of 
acceptance of drinking water and related services, 
routine tasks, checks and inspections at specified 
intervals and locations. 


8.5.2 District Metering Area (DMA) 


District Metering Area (DMA) concept may be 
adopted for continuous supply of piped drinking water 
(see Annex C for details on the size and design of 
DMA). 


8.5.3 Water Source 


The quality of water at source/intake shall be monitored 
by the water supplier/utility and in case of significant 
adverse changes found in the raw water quality, with 
respect to the designed parameters, necessary corrective 
actions shall be taken by the water supplier/utility, and 
the documented information shall be retained. 


IS 17482 : 2020 


Major source of water may be groundwater or surface 
water. Surface water sources include streams, rivers, 
lakes or reservoirs. Groundwater is water contained 
within the geological formations accessed by springs, 
wells or boreholes. Other possible sources of water are 
seawater, and rainwater. 
NOTE — In case of ground water, the compliance of 
“Guidelines to Regulate and Control Ground Water Extraction 
in India’ issued by Central Ground Water Authority, or the 
guidelines issued by the State/UT government from time to 
time shall be ensured. 
Whenever, the quality of treated water is found to 
be not in conformity with the acceptable limit of 
IS 10500 for the tested parameters, the water at source 
shall be checked again for such parameters to decide 
the necessary controls to be exercised for ensuring the 
conformity of processed water to the acceptable limits 
of IS 10500. 


In case non-conformity is observed for radioactive 
substances, the source of water shall be abandoned and 
necessary action shall be taken immediately. 


8.5.4 Intake of Raw Water and its Transportation 


The water supplier/utilities shall have the water intake 
system which normally requires pumping stations to 
abstract water from the ground, or surface as source, 
and to transmit the water to the water treatment facility, 
if any. Instead of pumping, use of gravity fed transport 
systems should be preferred, wherever feasible. 


The transmission mains shall have in-system storage 
reservoirs at the treatment facility. To protect the water 
from microbiological contamination, disinfection 
systems shall be used. 


8.5.5 Treatment of Raw Water 


The water supplier/utility shall plan and carry out the 
water treatment in such a manner that the drinking 
water after the necessary treatment shall conform to 
the acceptable limits of IS 10500 and documented 
information shall be retained. The water treatment plan 
and its implementation shall be documented. 

NOTE — Manual on Water Supply and Treatment, published 

by CPHEEO, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs as well 

as the guidelines issued by the State/UT government from time 


to time may be referred while planning and designing water 
treatment plant. 


8.5.6 Storage, Transportation and Distribution 


The storage, transportation and distribution system shall 
be planned and operated in such a manner that it shall 
not contaminate (physical, chemical, bacteriological 
or biological, heavy metals or pesticides) the drinking 
water. Disinfection boosting or dosage enhancing 
facilities shall be installed to ensure the safety of the 
drinking water to be delivered. 


The distribution system shall have storage reservoirs 
located at key points to take advantage of natural 
physical topography, or for reasons of balancing 


IS 17482 : 2020 


supply and demand or for emergency situations. In the 
absence of an advantageous natural topography, critical 
points shall be selected in a given distribution system 
for monitoring of pressures by installation of pressure 
recorders and gauges. These pressures are either 
measured manually and transmitted to the control 
station or automatically measured and transmitted 
by telemetry to control station. Pumping stations or 
booster, if necessary, shall be provided to maintain 
adequate pressure throughout the distribution system. 
Valves and meters and other appurtenances shall be 
installed throughout the distribution system as control 
devices and for water audit. 


Water supplier/utility shall maintain a documented 
procedure for the same. 


NOTES 


1 Water supplier/utility shall ensure cleaning of storage and 
service reservoir as per the procedure laid down in the Manual 
published by Central Public Health and Environmental 
Engineering Organization (CPHEEO), Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs, Govt of India 


2 Emphasis may be given to operate the systems on automation 
mode with SCADA application. 
The water supplier/utility shall ensure that water 
supplied to the people, after the necessary treatment 
shall conform to the acceptable limits specified in 
IS 10500 and documented information shall be retained. 


8.5.7 Water Audit 


Water audit shall be conducted annually and 
documented. The report shall be submitted to top 
management for review and further necessary action. 


The effort shall be made by the water supplier/utility 
to bring down the non-revenue water (NRW) up to 20 
percent of the water supplied in the piped water supply 
system. All components of the water balance shall 
be quantified over the same designated period, and 
expressed in KLD or MLD. 


A guideline for conducting the water audit has been 
given at Annex B. 


NOTE — The requirement of water audit may not be 
applicable where metering is not provided. 


8.5.8 Metering 


The water supplier/utility shall provide bulk water 
meters in the water distribution system to ensure water 
audit. Provision may also be made to have a functional/ 
automatic/smart meter at household level, which shall 
support in water audit. Automatic/smart meters shall be 
preferred over conventional meters for DMA. 


8.6 Release of Piped Drinking Water and Sampling 


8.6.1 The water utility/services shall plan and 
implement control and monitoring systems, at 
appropriate stages, to ensure that the drinking water 
shall conform to the acceptable limits of IS 10500 at 
customer point of distribution. 


10 


8.6.2 The water supplier/utility shall prepare and 
implement the schedule for frequency and monitoring 
of water quality systems, at appropriate stages 
including at production site, at distribution system and 
at the customer point to ensure that the drinking water 
being supplied conforms to the acceptable limits of 
IS 10500 at customer end. Wherever contamination of 
water is suspected, random sampling shall be done by 
water supplier/utility or on demand by the customer. 
The details of control being exercised by water utility/ 
services shall be documented. The Advisory/Guidelines 
issued by the Government of India from time to time 
shall be followed by the water supplier/utility. 


8.6.3 The release of drinking water to the customer 
shall not proceed until the control points have been 
satisfactorily completed, unless otherwise approved by 
a relevant authority and, as applicable. The authority 
for such approval shall be designated by water 
supplier/utility. 


9 PERFORMANCE OF WATER SUPPLIER/ 
UTILITY 


9.1 Monitoring, Measurement, Analysis and 
Evaluation 
9.1.1 General 
The water supplier/utility shall determine, 
a) what needs to be monitored and measured; 
b) the methods for monitoring, measurement, 


analysis and evaluation needed to ensure valid 
results; 

c) when the monitoring and measuring shall be 
performed; and 


d) when the results from monitoring 
measurement shall be analyzed and evaluated. 


and 


The water supplier/utility shall evaluate the performance 
and the effectiveness of the drinking water supply 
service management system. 


The water supplier/utility shall retain appropriate 
documented information as evidence of the results. 
NOTE — The monitoring of the water utility system may be 


followed as per the Manual on Operation and Maintenance of 
Water Supply System, published by CPHEEO. 


9.1.2 Customer Satisfaction 


The water supplier/utility shall monitor customers’ 
perceptions of the degree to which their needs and 
expectations have been fulfilled. The water supplier/ 
utility shall conduct surveys, obtain feedback on the 
service provided, meetings with customer to monitor 
customers’ perceptions of the degree to which their 
needs and expectations have been fulfilled. The water 
supplier/utility shall determine the procedure for 
obtaining, monitoring and reviewing this information. 


The general feedback obtained from the customer may 
include the following points: 


a) Whether supply is continuous or intermittent; 


b) Whether adequate pressure is being provided or 
not; 


c) Whether maintenance service is regular or not; 


d) Whether adequate warning is being provided in 
case of disruption of service or not; 


e) Average time taken to resume service; 
f) Quality of water; 


g) Behaviour of the workforce with the customer; 
and 


h) Efficiency of compliant handling/redressal. 
9.1.3 Analysis and Evaluation 


The water supplier/utility shall analyze and evaluate 
appropriate data and information arising from 
monitoring, measurement and evaluation. 


The results of analysis shall be used to evaluate: 


a) Conformity of drinking water quality and related 
services; 
b) Degree of customer satisfaction; 


c) Performance and effectiveness of the piped 
drinking water supply service management 
system; 


d) Effective implementation of planning; 


e) Need for improvements to the piped drinking 
water supply service management system; and 
f) Effectiveness of actions taken to address risks and 
opportunities. 
The water supplier/utility shall document performance 
indicators to assess and improve the services. 


NOTE — Service Level Benchmark as Performance Indicator 
published by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Govt. 
of India or any relevant guidelines issued by the State/UT 
government may also be referred. 


9.2 Internal Audit 


9.2.1 The water supplier/utility shall conduct internal 
audits at planned intervals to provide information on 
whether the management system: 


a) conforms to, 


1) the water supplier/utility’s own requirements 
for its management system; and 


2) the requirements of this standard; 
b) is effectively implemented and maintained. 


9.2.2 The water supplier/utility shall, 


a) plan, establish, implement and maintain an audit 
programme(s) including the frequency, methods, 
responsibilities, planning requirements and 
reporting, which shall take into consideration the 


IS 17482 : 2020 


importance of the processes concerned, changes 
affecting the water supplier/utility, and the results 
of previous audits; 


b) define the audit criteria and scope for each audit; 


c) select auditors and conduct audits to ensure 
objectivity and the impartiality of the audit 
process; 


d) ensure that the results of the audits are reported to 
relevant management; 


e) take appropriate correction and corrective actions 
without undue delay; and 


f) retain documented information as evidence of the 
implementation of the audit programme and the 
audit results. 


NOTE — ISO 19011 may be referred for guidance 


9.3 Management Review 


9.3.1 General 


Top management shall review the water 
supplier/utility’s services at planned intervals, to ensure 
its continuing suitability, adequacy, effectiveness and 
alignment with the strategic direction of the water 
supplier/utility. 

9.3.2 Management Review Inputs 


The management review shall be planned and carried 
out considering the following: 


a) Status of actions from previous management 
reviews; 


b) Changes in external and internal issues that 
are relevant to the piped drinking water supply 
management system; 


c) Information on the performance and effectiveness 
of the management system, including trends in: 


1) customer satisfaction and feedback from 
relevant interested parties; 


2) the extent to which their objectives have been 
met; 


3) process performance and conformity of 
products and services; 


4) nonconformities and corrective actions and 
measures; 


5) monitoring and measurement results; 

6) audit results; and 

7) the performance of external resources; 
d) Adequacy of resources; 


e) Effectiveness of actions taken to address risks and 
opportunities; and 


f) Opportunities for improvement. 


9.3.3 Management Review Outputs 


The outputs of the management review shall include 


IS 17482 : 2020 


decisions and actions related to, 
a) opportunities for improvement; 
b) need for reform to the management system; and 
c) resource needs. 


The water supplier/utility shall retain documented 
information as evidence of the results of management 
reviews. 


10 IMPROVEMENT 


10.1 General 


The water supplier/utility shall determine and select 
opportunities for improvement and implement any 
necessary actions to meet customer requirements and 
enhance customer satisfaction. 


These shall include, but not limited to, the following: 


a) Improving services to meet requirements as well 
as to address future needs and expectations of 
piped drinking water supply service management 


system; 

b) Correcting, preventing or reducing undesired 
effects; 

c) Risk assessment for reducing undesired effects; 
and 

d) Improving the performance and effectiveness 


of the piped drinking water supply service 
management system. 


10.2 Non-Conformity and Corrective Action 


10.2.1 When a non-conformity occurs, including any 
arising from complaints, drinking water supplier/utility 
shall, 


a) react to the non-conformity, as applicable. 


1) 


take immediate action to control and correct it; 


2) contain, or suspend the provision of drinking 
water; 
3) inform the customer as well as the top 


management; 


12 


4) obtain authorization for acceptance under 
concession; and 
5) provide alternate source of water 
b) evaluate the need for action to eliminate the 
cause(s) of the non-conformity, in order that it 
does not recur or occur elsewhere, by: 
1) reviewing and analyzing the non-conformity; 


2) determining the causes of the non-conformity; 
and 

3) determining, if similar non-conformities exist, 
or could potentially occur; 

implement the required action needed; 

d) review the effectiveness of corrective action 

taken; 


update risks and opportunities determined during 
planning, if necessary; and 


e) 


make changes to the management system, if 
necessary. Corrective actions shall be appropriate 
to the effects of the non-conformities encountered. 


10.2.2 The water supplier/utility shall 
documented information as evidence of, 


retain 


a) the nature of the non-conformities and any 
subsequent actions taken; and 


b) the corrective actions adopted and their result. 


The water utility shall identify the authority deciding 
the action in respect of the non-conformity 


10.3 Continual Improvement 


The water supplier/utility shall continuously make 
efforts to improve the suitability, adequacy and 
effectiveness of the piped drinking water supply service 
management system. 


The water supplier/utility shall consider the results 
of analysis and evaluation, and the outputs from 
management review, to determine the needs or 
opportunities that shall be addressed as part of continual 
improvement of the services, workforce, equipment 
and machineries. 


IS 17482 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 6.1.3 ) 
DISASTER MANAGEMENT 


A-1 DISASTER PREPAREDNESS 


The natural disasters may occur due to earthquake, 
floods, cyclone, draught, tsunami, landslides and 
avalanches; and anthropogenic disasters such as 
nuclear, chemical, biological, explosions, act of 
sabotage and terrorism. Consequence of such disasters 
could be life threatening and debilitating in the long 
run. Also, anthropogenic or natural disasters can trigger 
combined form of progressive disasters. 


A-2 APPROACH 


The approach to disaster mitigation and management 
should be holistic and integrated with emphasis on 
prevention, mitigation and preparedness rather than 
being relief centric. The approach should emphasize 
on preparedness through planning, protection, training 
and partnership measures with associated stakeholders. 
These efforts are aimed to protect and conserve existing 
development and also to minimize losses to lives, 
livelihood, infrastructures and property with clear cut 
focus on protection of environment. 


The risks due to disaster management should be a 
part of design development, construction practices 
and management, operation and maintenance of 
infrastructures. The required awareness should be 
achieved through multi-stakeholder based planning, 
awareness, displays, mock drills and adequate training 
to both aged and young. 


The disaster mitigation should also comprise 
identification of risks during construction, occupancy 
stages/operations and preparing disaster preparedness 
plan. 


A-3 DISASTER RISK ASSESSMENT 
MITIGATION 


AND 


The formulation of disaster preparedness plan for any 
location should comprise the following steps: 


a) Step 1 — Identify the geomorphology; river, 
coastal and cyclonic proximity; and climatic zone 
related disasters risks. 


b) Step 2 — Identify population, business related 
disasters and vulnerabilities. 


c) Step 3 — Carry out risk assessment through 
Hazard Analysis (HAZAN) and Hazard and 
Operability (HAZOP) study and vulnerability 
analysis including possible combining effects 
of multiple hazards. Also include the effect on 
micro-climate and environment biodiversity. 
Coastal zones which are falling in high cyclonic 
flood zone, tsunami, seismic zones of high 


13 


intensity and landslide sensitive areas should 
receive special attention. 


d) Step 4 — Identify the socio-economic, socio- 
political hazards and vulnerabilities attributed to 
anthropogenic disasters. 

e) Step 5 — Prepare a disaster risk mitigation plan 
supported with sufficient budgetary provisions. 

f) Step 6 The disaster resistant building 
construction and infrastructure development 
features shall form part of the submittal to the 
authority for statutory approvals. 


Step 7 — Nominate a senior person/safety 
officer as controller for regulating, planning and 
monitoring disaster preparedness plan for entire 
system/project. Carry out all constructions, 
installations and operations in line with the disaster 
resistant features for each of the vulnerabilities. 


g) 


h) Step 8 — Prepare an evacuation plan and have 
mock drills at regular intervals for creating 
awareness and response preparation amongst 
stakeholders involved. 

j) Step 9 — Prepare operation manual for post- 
construction operation and up keep of disaster 
resistant features and equipment. The basic 
action plan shall focus on capacity building 
amongst stakeholders involved, communication, 
co-ordination, role of information technology, 
role of every individual working at site and role of 
emergency response cell in conjunction with the 
mitigation plans of local/state level authorities. 
The possible after-effects on human and natural 
habitats and mitigation plan shall form integral 
part of disaster preparedness plan for least damage 
to human life, built environment and related 
eco-systems. 


A-4 POST DISASTER ACTIONS 


a) Line up and schedule emergency operations; 

b) Notify State and Central Agencies of location and 
telephone numbers of the emergency operating 
center or control command centre for the utility; 
c) Necessary alternate arrangement to be made for 
emergency water supply, if necessary; 

d) Notify and set up clear lines of communication 
with local authorities, such as police and fire; 


e) Make arrangements with the local power utility 
to be prepared to disconnect power to the plant 
and to restore power after disaster as quickly as 
possible as a primary customer; 


IS 17482 : 2020 


f) Make necessary arrangements with local 
companies to repair the damaged machineries 
in the system immediately so as to ensure water 
supply at the earliest; 


g) Make arrangements with local companies to 


ensure that the plants are safe and put in operation 
as soon as possible; and 

h) To arrange adequate inventory of requisite 
workforce material and equipment reserved to 
meet the exigencies. 


ANNEX B 


( Informative only ) 
( Clause 8.5.7 ) 
GUIDELINES FOR CONDUCTING WATER AUDIT 


B-0 A water audit has two components: 1) system B-2 WATER BALANCE CALCULATION 


appraisal, and 2) water balance calculation. 


B-1 SYSTEM APPRAISAL 


The purpose of the system appraisal is to review, 


a) Country/Regional characteristics (like influencing 
factors, components of water loss); 

b) Current practice and methodologies; 

c) Level of technology (accuracy and reliability of 
meters/equipment in place, need for temporary 
meters, placement of valves, pipeline materials, 
pump and motors, etc); 

d) Skills and capabilities of staff; and 

e) The company’s data and methodology for the 
water balance calculation. 

The system appraisal shall include, 

1) Discussions with top management on current 
management practice, perceptions, financial 
and political constraints, influences, and future 
planning; 

2 


wa 


Discussions with operational staff on system 
features and practice, including: 


i) physical data (population, demands, 
topography, supply arrangements); 
ii) drawings and records, billing data; 
iii) estimates of total water loss; 


iv) estimates of leakage and other water loss 
components (illegal connections); 


v) current practice (staffing structure, staff 
numbers and skills); 


vi) techniques and equipment; 
vii) repair programme; and 
viii) economic data (cost of production, etc). 
3) Field visits to appraise current practice and 


skills; and 
4) Selection of a suitable pilot area for a future 
project to demonstrate techniques and 


equipment, gather results and show benefits, 
and train staff. 


14 


This is the measurement of distribution input and water 
consumed. 


a) Distribution input — This step identifies all 
water sources and quantifies the water supplied. 
Measurement is by one or more of the following: 
1) 


existing production (bulk) meters, after 


checking for accuracy; 


2) summation of zone flows where there are 
existing zone meters; 
3) reservoir drop tests; 
4) checking of pump curves; and 
5) insertion meters at points where there are no 
meters. 
b) Measured use — Billing records are used to 


quantify measured outputs (water quantity) from 
the system: 

1) identify all non-household customers including 
commercial, institutional, industrial, etc; 


2 


xw 


identify all non-metered customers including 
above; and 

3) 
Unmeasured use — This step identifies unmetered 
households and other authorized unmeasured use: 


identify all household customers. 


c) 


1) estimate use by unmetered households. 
Monitor a sample of households by meter, or 
estimate the per capita consumption; 


2 


xw 


identify and estimate unmeasured use by 
authorized users, for example, municipal 
buildings, parks, fire services, stand-post, 
tankers; 

identify and estimate unmeasured supplies to 
peri-urban areas (slum areas, squatters, etc); 
and 


3 


w 


4 


wa 


identify and estimate water used by the 
company for operational purposes, for 
example, mains cleaning and flushing. 


d) Unauthorized use — This step identifies and 
estimates illegal supplies and theft, 


IS 17482 : 2020 


2) estimate the number of broken or by-passed 
meters in the same way; 


1) estimate the number of illegal connections 3) use per capita consumption estimates to 
from past records and anecdotal evidence of calculate the volume used; 
inspectors, or by a house-to-house survey of a 4) leakage from reservoirs; 
sample zone (check that each connection has a i 
ats . 5) overflows from reservoirs; 
billing reference); n ; 
6) leakage from transmission mains; and 
7) leakage in the distribution system. 
ANNEX C 


( Clause 8.5.5 ) 
SIZE AND DESIGN OF DISTRICT METERED AREA (DMA) 


C-1 SIZE OF DMA 


DMA size is expressed in the number of properties. 
The size of a typical DMA in urban areas varies 
between 500 and 3 000 properties/metered connections. 
However, some DMAs designed around old ‘waste 
meter zones’, are smaller than 500 properties/metered 
connections and others, designed around reservoir 
zones or in rural areas, are larger than 3 000 properties/ 
metered connections. The size of an individual DMA 
may vary, depending on a number of local factors and 
system characteristics, such as, 


a) the required economic level of leakage; 


b) geographic/demographic factors (like, urban or 
rural, residential, commercial, industrial areas, 
etc); 


c) previous leakage control technique (like, ex-waste 
meter districts); 


d) individual water company preference (like, 
discrimination of service pipe bursts, ease of 
location survey); and 

e) Hydraulic conditions (like, limitations of closing 


valves in the current network, and the need to 
maintain standards of service). 


C-2 DMAs in dense urban areas, like, inner cities, may 
be larger than 3000 properties/metered connections, 


15 


because of the housing density. In the rural areas 
it is also difficult to lay down sizing guidelines, as 
rural DMAs may consist of a single village, or may 
encompass a cluster of villages (a small number of 
properties in a large geographical area). 


If a DMA is larger than 5000 properties/metered 
connections, it becomes difficult to discriminate small 
bursts (like, service pipe bursts) from night flow data, 
and it takes longer to locate. However, large DMAs 
can be divided into two or more smaller DMAs by 
temporarily closing the valves so that each sub-area is 
fed in turn through the DMA meter for leak detection 
activities. In this case, any extra valves required shall 
be taken into account at the DMA design stage. The 
record of location of valves and meters shall be properly 
maintained. 


C-3 DESIGN OF DMA 
Several factors shall be taken into account when 
designing a DMA, such as, 

a) the required economic level of leakage; 


b) size (geographical area and the number of 
properties); 
c) variation in ground level; and 


d) drinking water quality considerations. 


IS 17482 : 2020 


ANNEX D 


( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Public Drinking Water Services Sectional Committee, SSD 14 


Organization 


Representative(s) 


National Water Mission, Department of Water SHRI SUNEEL KUMAR Arora (Chairman) 


Resources, RD & GR, Ministry of Jal 
Shakti, New Delhi 


All India Institute of Hygiene & Public 
Health, Kolkata 


Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board, 
Bengaluru 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Central Public Health & Environmental 
Engineering. Organisation, Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply & 
Sewerage Board, Chennai 


CSIR — Indian Institute of Toxicology 
Research, Lucknow 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 
Delhi Jal Board, Delhi 


Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, 
Ministry of Jal Shakthi, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, Gurugram 


Gujarat Water Supply & Sewerage Board, 
Gujarat 


Guwahati Metropolitan Drinking Water and 
Sewerage Board, Assam 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
Roorkee 


Indian Water Works Association, New Delhi 


Jal Nigam, Uttar Pradesh 


Krishna Bhagya Jala Nigam Limited, 
Karnataka 


Maharashtra Jeevan Pradikaran, Thane 
Military Engineer Services, New Delhi 


Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, New Delhi 


Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, 
New Delhi 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Suri Rasiv K. N. 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr RAMAKANT 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Ms PREETI CHATURVEDI 
Dr SATYAKAM PATNAIK (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri V. K. Gupta 
SHRI VIRENDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR KUMAR 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr ARUN KUMAR 
Dr ARYA VIJAYANANDAN (Alternate) 


Dr ZULFEQUAR AHMAD 
Dr K. S. Hari Prasan (Alternate) 


SHRI KANWARJIT SINGH 
Suri R. S. Tyaai (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI PADMANABH MANIYAR, IDSE 


Dr DHARMENDRA KUMAR GUPTA 
Dr BHAWNA SINGH (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


16 


Organization 


Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, 
Mumbai 


National Environmental Engineering Research 
Institute, Nagpur 


National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Public Health Engineering Department, Bihar 


Public Health Engineering Department, 
West Bengal 


Public Health Engineering Department, 
Rajasthan 


Quality Council of India, New Delhi 


Saviram Engineering Consultants Pvt Ltd, 
Noida 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, 
New Delhi 


Tata Consultancy Services, Mumbai 


The Energy and Resources Institute, 
New Delhi 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Delhi 
Uttarakhand Jal Sansthan, Dehradun 
VIMTA Labs, Hyderabad 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of 
Consumer Education (VOICE), New Delhi 


WAPCOS Limited, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (718, Farmers Society, 
Sec 13 , Rohini, Delhi - 110085) 


In personal capacity (C/o “A” Mess, Near Div 
Chowk, Durpin Dhara, Kalimpong, 
West Bengal) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr Pawan LABHASETWAR 
Dr Pranav NAGAR Naik (Alternate) 


Dr MUKESH KUMAR SHARMA 
Dr RajJesH SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr S. N. BANDYOPADHYAY 
Dr A. B. Monpat (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI HEMANTA KOLEY 
SHRI SOUMITRA CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Ms APARNA DHAWAN 
Ms AnuJA ANAND (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH MISHRA 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI J. C. SINGHAL 
Ms NEELIMA GARG 


SHRI JAGADEESH KODALI 
Suri M. JANARDHAN (Alternate) 


Suri B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
Suri K. C. CHoupury (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAT JAIN 
Suri V. K. GUPTA 


CoL A. K. CHAUBEY 


SHRI S. K. KANOGIA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (SERVICE SECTOR Dept IT) 


IS 17482 : 2020 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms Divya S. 


SCIENTIST ‘C? (SERVICE SECTOR Dept II), BIS 


17 


IS 17482 : 2020 


Panel for drafting standard on Piped Drinking Water Supply Service, SSD 14/P2 


Organization Representative(s) 


Central Public Health & Environmental Engineering Organisation, | Dr RAMAKANT (Convener) 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, New Delhi 


CSIR — Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow Ms PREETI CHATURVEDI 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee Dr ZULFEQUAR AHMAD 
Indian Water Works Association, New Delhi Suri R. S. TYAGI 
Management System Department, Bureau of Indian Standards, Ms SNEH LATA 
New Delhi 
Military Engineer Services, New Delhi SHRI PADMANABH MAntyar, DSE 
National Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur Dr PAWAN LABHASETWAR 
Quality Council of India, New Delhi Ms APARNA DHAWAN 


BIS Internal Working Group 


Designation Representative(s) 
Head, Management System Certification Department Suri U. S. P. Yapay (Chairman) 
Head, Management and System Department Ms SNEH LATA 
Head, Service Sector Department - II Suri S. K. KANoGIA 


18 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: SSD 14 (15827). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


