(Reaffirmed 2004)

IS : 1671- i973 ( Amalgamating
IS : 239 - 1951)

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF YARN STRENGTH PARAMETERS OF YARNS SPUN ON COTTON SYSTEM

( First Revision )
Physical
Chairman SHRI T. V. ANANTHAN Vice-Chairman DR V. SUNDARA~~ Cotton Technological ( ICAR ), Bombay Research Laboratory The Bombay Bombay

Methods

of Test Sectional

Committee,
Representing Textile

TDC

1

Research

Association,

Members SHRI M. RADHAKRISHNAN ( Alternate to Shri T. V. Ananthan ) DR V. G. MUNSHI I Alternate to Dr V. Sundaram ) M A R sc E T IN u Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry AGRICULTURAL of Agriculture ), Faridabad ADVISER TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA SERI S. JAYARAMAN ( Alternate ) Indian Jute Industries Research Association, DR B. L. BANERJEE Calcutta DR U. MUK~OPADHAY ( Alternate ) Office of the Jute Commissioner, Calcutta SERI K. K. CHATTEBJEE Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SRRI G. N. CHATTERJI SHRI J. N. MISRA (Alternate) Indian Jute Mills Association, Calcutta DR D. B. DAS Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay SHRI DHARAM DEV SHRI S. P. GHOSAL ( Alternate) Central Silk Board, Bombay SHRI A, R. S. GCPALACHAR Ahmadabad Textile Industry's Research AssociaDR B. V. IYER tion, Ahmadabad SNRI A. RAJAGOPALAN (Alternate) SHRI S. V. JIGJINNI The National Rayon Corporation Ltd, Bombay SHRI D. S. NADKARNI ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 @ Cofiyright 1978 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

)

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

I$ : 167i - hi7
( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Members SHRIMATI A. KAPLASR Representing The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Bombay Textiles Committee, Bombay Association,

DR B. R. MANJUNATHA SHRI V. VENUCOPAL ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI R. K. MEHRA SHRI N. K. NAGPAUL ( Alternate) The Raymond Woollen Mills Ltd, Bombay DR M. G. NARSIAN SHRI K. P. RAMAERISHNA PILLAY The South India Textile Research Association, Coimbatore Directorate General of Supplies 5% Disposals REPRESENTATIVE ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi Wool Research Association, Bombay SHRI R. R. SHANBAGH M. Best Cotton Rope Manufacturing Co, Bombay SHRI M. G. THANAW~LA Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member ) SHRI S. M. CHAKRABORTY, Director ( Tex ) Secretary SHRI D. R. KOELI Deputy Director ( Tex ), IS1

Subcommittee
Convener

for Physical

Methods

of Test for Cotton,

TDC

1: 1

DR V. SUNDARAX Members

Cotton Technological ( ICAR ), Bombay

Research

Laboratory

Dn V. G. MUNSHI (Alternate to Dr V. Sundaram ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI P. C. AGRAWAL SHRI R. C. CRAKRAVARTI ( Alternate ) Madura Coats, Madurai SHRI A. CHELLARAJ Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI H. D. GUPTRUP SHRI B. P. SEN ( Alternate ) Ahmadabad Textile Industry's Research AssociaDR B. V. IYER tion, Ahmadabad SHRI A. RAJAGOPALAN ( Alternate ) SHRI P. S. JAIN The Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co Ltd, Delhi SHRI V. S. JAYARA~~ The Mafatlal Pine Spg & Mfg Co Ltd, Bombay DR B. R. MANJUNATHA Textiles Committee, Bombay SHRI V. VENUGOP~L ( Alternate ) SHRI M. RADHAKRISHNAN The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombav SHRI V. S. RISBUD Victoria Jubilee Technological Institute ( Central Technological Institute, Maharashtra State), Bombay PROF D. B. AJGAONKAR ( Alternate ) SHRI K. G. SETHURA~~ The Century Spinning & Mfg Co Ltd, Bombay. SHRI MAHESH SHARMA ( Alternate ) SHRI K. S. SHANKARANARAYANA The South India Textile Research Association, Coimbatore SHRI M. N. UPPONI Shree Ram Mills Limited, Bombay

IS : 1671.1977

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF YARN STRENGTH PARAMETERS OF YARNS SPUN ON COTTON SYSTEM

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 November 1977, after the draft finalized by the Physical Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council, 0.2 The standard for determination of lea breaking load and count strength product of cotton yarns, namely, IS : 239-1951* was prepared in 1951. After the introduction of metric system in the country, IS : 167119607 was prepared which prescribed the method for determination of breaking load of yarn of metric skeins, tenacity and yarn strength index. This standard also prescribed conversion factors for conversion of lea breaking load to skein breaking load in metric system and was intended to supersede IS : 239-1951*. However, as the cotton count system is still in use in the industry, these standards have been combined and up-dated on the basis of the experience gained during their use and the developments which have taken place after the publication of these standards. 0.3 To familiarize the industry with International System of U$ts (SI Units ) the basic SI Units as well as the recommended SI Units for use in the textile industry are given in Appendix E. 0.4 In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-196O$.
*Method for determination of lea breaking load ( strength ) of cotton yarn and its count-lea-strength product. iMethod for determination of skein breaking load ( strength ), tenacity and yarn strength index of cotton yarn ( by constant-rate-of-traverse machine ) ( metric system ). IRules for rounding off numerical values (revised ).

3

IS : 16711. SCOPE

1977

1.1 This standard prescribes methods for determination of yarn strength parameters of yarns spun on cotton system using cotton count and tex system. 1.1.1 In cotton count system, determination of lea breaking load and count strength product ( CSP) have been prescribed and in the metric system, determination of skein breaking load, yarn strength index ( YSI ) and skein breaking tenacity ( SBT ) have been prescribed.

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply and for definitions of other terms IS : 232-1966* may be referred. 2.1 Breaking LoadThe maximum load ( or force ) supported by a specimen in a tensile test carried to rupture. It is commonly expressed in grams or kilograms. 2.2 Cotton Count - The linear density expressed as number hanks per 453.6 g ( 840 yd hanks/lb ) of yarn. of 768-l m

2.3 Count Strength Product ( CSP ) - The product of the breaking load in pounds of a lea of yarn and its count ( cotton count ). 2.4 Skein - A continuous length of yarn in the form of a coil made on a reel of known girth. Usually 109.73 m ( 120 yd ) skein made on l-372 m ( 1.5 yd ) girth reel is in use in cotton count system and is called c lea `; while skeins of 100 and 50 m made on 1 m girth reel are in use in tex system. 2.5 Skein Breaking Tenacity( SBT ) - The breaking load, in grams, of a 50 m skein divided by the linear density of unstrained yarn in tex and number of strands in the skein, that is, 100. It is expressed in grams per tex. 2.6 Yarn Strength Index ( YSI ) - The breaking load, in grams, of a 100 m skein divided by the linear density of unstrained yarn in tex. 2.7 Tex - The linear density expressed as number of grams per kilometre of yarn. This is a primary unit in a system (see Note ) of units for expressing the universal count of yarn.
NOTE -This system is also intended to be used for expressing the mass per unit length of fibres, yarns and other textile products like ropes and rovings. The following multiple and sub-multiple units may be used to avoid large numbers and small fractions, respectively: 1 ktex ( kilotex ) 1 mtex (millitex) 1 dtex ( decitex ) *Glossary of textile terms natural = 1 000 tex = 0.001 tex = O-1 tex

fibres (/irst revision).

4

IS : 1671 - 197? 3. SAMPLING 3.1 The
samples shall be drawn down in IS : 3920-1966*. in accordance with the procedure laid

4. ATMOSPHERIC

TESTING

CONDITIONS

FOR CONDITIONING

AND

4.1 The samples shall be conditioned
atmosphere of 65 f 2 percent (see also IS : 6359-1971t ). 4.2 The test shall be carried relative

to moisture equilibrium in standard humidity and 27 & 2�C temperature atmosphere ( see 4.1 ).

out in the standard

-- a skein breaking load testing machine working on constant-rate-of-traverse ( CRT ) principle. Its rate of traverse shall be 300 f 15 mm/min and the load range of the machine shall be such that the observed values would lie between 10 and 90 percent of the full scale load. The permissible error in the machine at any point in this range shall not exceed fl percent. 5.1.1 The machine
shall be provided with the following arrangements:

5. APPARATUS 5.1 Testing Machine

a) Two pulleys or hooks for holding the skein with sufficient space to allow the even distribution of threads without much overlapping. b) Means for adjusting distance between the pulleys or hooks. C) A scale or dial or autograph
give load in kilograms. recording chart graduated

so as to

5.2 Wrap-Reel - having a girth of l-372 m ( 1.5 yd ) or 1 m and capable of reeling known length of yarn ( see Appendix A ). 5.3 Yarn Tensioning Device - an adjustable tensioning device capable of giving a reeling tension that will result in skeins of the specified length when measured on a skein gauge. The adjustment in reeling tension may be made, for example, by making more than one wrap around thread guides or by passing the yarn around tensioning bars. The reeling tension shall be the same at all reeling positions and may be checked as follows: The yarn is wound from the same package at different reeling positions. The length of the skeins when measured on a skein gauge shall not differ by more than 0.1 percent. 5.4 Skein Gauge - a gauge for checking the length of the skein under a load of 0.5 gf/tex ( 5 mN/tex ) and expressing the length as a plus or minus deviation from the nominal length. The sensitivity of the skein gauge shall be sufficient to permit rejection of skeins falling outside
*Methods for sampling of cotton yarn for determination tMethod for conditioning of textiles. of physical characteristics.

5

is : 1971- 1977
The skein-gauge .length may be adjustable or f0.25 percent tolerances. non-adjustable. A non-adjustable skein gauge can be used when its nominal length differs by no more than O-4 percent from the measured perimeter of the reel.
NOTE For details of skein gauge, see Appendix B.

6. PREPARATION 6.1 Prepare
following 6.2

OF TEST SPECIMENS

skeins of 109.73 m ( 120 yd ), 100 m or 50 m as required, the procedure as described in Appendix A. at least 30 test specimens and condition them as in 4.

Prepare

7. PROCEDURE

7.1 Bring pulleys or the hooks of the testing machine to the zero nosition. Take the conditioned skein of yarn and fix it on the pulleys 0; hooks. Carefully separate the yarn on the pulleys or hooks to avoid the individual strands overlapping each other.
7.2 Start the machine and breaking load in kilograms chart. carry the test to rupture. as indicated on the scale, Record the skein dial or recording

7.3 Determine the mass in grams of the broken skein and calculate the linear density of yarn in cotton count or tex system ( as the case may be ) (see IS : 1315-1977* ). 7.4 Determine the skein breaking load and linear density of yarn remaining specimens following the procedure as laid down in 7.3. 8. CALCULATIONS of the

8.1 Calculate
the observations

the average breaking load and average taken ( see 7.2, 7.3 and 7.4 ). the coefficient of variation

linear density

of all

8.1.1 Calculate load values taken. 8.2

( CV ) of all the breaking

Cotton Count System 8.2.1 Count Strength Product ( CSP) -Calculate
the count strength count, correct to a

product or count strength product corrected to nominal whole number, from the following formulae: a) CSP
*Method for determination
revision ) .

=L,
of linear

x Jv,
density of yarns spun on cotton system (first

6

fS : l&71- 19i3 b) CSP where Lr = average breaking (see 8.1 ); load, in pounds ( kg x 2.2 ), of the lea ( Corrected ) = L1, x Jv,'

J% = average cotton count ( see 8.1 ); load, in pounds ( kg x 2.2 ), corrected Lr, = average breaking to nominal count ( see Appendix C ); and .Nz = nominal 8.3 Tex System CalcuIate the tenacity or tenadensity, correct to one decimal cotton count.

8.3.1 Skein Breaking Tenacity ( SBT) city of yarn corrected to nominal linear place, by the following formulae: a) SBT b) SBT where L, = average breaking linear in grams ( Corrected per tex = ) = tx2x50= `L

L, x 1000 x 10

L2 x 10
t

t'
load of 50 m skein, in kg ( see 8.1 ); of yarn, in tex ( see 8.1 ); in kg, corrected C ); and to

t

= average

density

Lg, = average nominal

breaking load of 50 m skein, linear density ( see Appendix linear density, in tex.

t'

= nominal

8.3.2 Tarn Strength Index ( 231) - Calculate the yarn strength index or yarn strength index corrected to nominal linear density, correct to a whole number by the following formulae: a) YSI b) YSI where L3 = average breaking linear load of 100 m skein, density of yarn, in kg ( see 8.1 ); to ( Corrected = ) =

LB x 1000 t
LCjC x 1 000 t,

t

= average

in tex ( see 8.1 );

LaC = average nominal

breaking load of 100 m skein, in kg, corrected linear density, ( see Appendix C ); and linear density, 7 in tex.

t'

= nominal

IS : 1671- 1974
NOTE It has been found that for a given yarn, the Yarn Strength Index and Count Strength Product are numerically the same for all practical purposes. However, to calculate the yarn strength index of a skein from the count strength product of a lea ( or vice versa ), the specified, observed or calculated breaking load value of the skein shall be converted into breaking load value of a lea ( or vice versa ), using the formula given in Appendix D.

9. REPORT 9.1 The report shall include
a) Type of material; of specimens tested; m ( 120 yds ) 50 m or 100 m 1; to nominal count/linear load values; product ( CSP ) number ); density; load of skein [ 109.73 b) Number c) Breaking Breaking d) Coefficient the following information:

OR
load of skein corrected of variation ( CV ) of breaking

e) Count strength product ( CSP )/Count strength corrected to nominal count ( correct to a whole

OR
Yarn strength index ( YSI )/Yarn strength index ( YSI ) corrected to nominal linear density ( correct to a whole number );

OR
Skein breaking tenacity corrected to nominal number ) . ( SBT )/Skein breaking tenacity ( SBT ) linear density (correct to a whole

APPENDIX

A

( Clauses 5.2 and 6.1 )
PREPARATION A-l. A-l.1 APPARATUS OF SKEINS

A wrap reel having a girth of l-372 m ( 1.5 yd ) or 1 m shall be used to reel off the skeins. The wrap reel shall be fitted with thread guides fixed on a horizontal bar which has a traverse of about 25 mm. The wrap reel shall also be provided with a counting device to indicate

8

IS : 1671- 1977 the length of yarn reeled out and a bell to ring just before the last revolution or a reel that automatically stops after the required number of revolutions. A-2. PROCEDURE A-2.1 Mount a test package on the wrap thread guides taking care that the yarn tension to avoid kinks, curls and slack in stretch on the other ( see Note ) and lead
NOTE -If guide. necessary,

reel. Pass the end through the shall be kept under sufficient the yarn on the one hand and it to the reel.
the thread

the yarn may be wound full one turn around

Running it at uniform speed, reel out a skein A-2.2 Start the wrap reel. of required length. Cut and tie the trailing end of the skein to its leading end.

APPENDIX

B

( Note under clause 5.4 )
SKEIN B-l. APPARATUS B-l.1 The gauge consists essentially of two round metal pegs of about 1.25 cm diameter and 5 to 6 cm long, located in the same vertical plane. One of the pegs is fixed to the rigid frame of the instrument and the other is carried on the lever of a simple loading system, the fulcrum of which is a low-friction bearing, which is also carried on the frame. At least one of the pegs should be free to rotate about its axis. GAUGE

IS : 1671-1977 B-2. PROCEDURE B-2.1 Place the skein without
bunching, around the two pegs, and apply the appropriate load, for example, by hanging a weight on the end of the lever arm or by moving a &ding weight along the lever arm. The girth of the skein is indicated on a scale attached to the frame of the instrument, by a pointer attached to the lever arm or by an index line on the end of the lever arm. If L is the actual girth of the wrap reel, d the diameter of the pegs, and D the distance between the axes of the pegs when the indicator registers on the scale the actual girth of the wrap reel, then:

L D =- *-$

APPENDIX

C

( Clauses 8.2.1, 8.3.1 and 8.3.2 )
CORRECTION FOR NOMINAL YARN COUNT/LINEAR
to nominal

DENSITY
yarn count

C-l. To obtain the average breaking load corrected or linear density, use the following procedure. C-l.1
Arrange the values of linear density ing load of all the observations as obtained of the yarn count/linear density. Find the average linear density

and the corresponding in 7, in the ascending

breakorder

C-l.2

and the average

breaking

load of:

Indirect System

Direct System __-~-7 50m 100 m skein skein
h

The first three The All the skeins

skeins

-h NC2

Ll'

last three skeins

L,"
L1

t2 t

L2' L2"
L2

L3' LB"
L3

Ne

10

fs : 1671C-1.3 Calculations

1977

L,' - Ll" LzR =-ipy-L," l/h

b) I$

( 50 m skein )

L,'
l/t2

c) X3 ( 100 m skein ) =

I~,'
1/t,

C-l.4 Find the average breaking nominal count Ne' or to nominal formulae: a) Ll, = L1 b) Lzc = L2 -

load corrected linear density

( L, Lzc or L3, ) to t', by the following

Kl ( Ne' - Ne )
II, ( l/t l/t' )

c) L,, = L, - Ii-3(+-

--+)

APPENDIX

D

(Note under clause 8.3.2 )
CONVERSION OF BREAKING LOAD VALUES

D-l. To convert observed breaking load value, in lb, of a lea of 109.73 m ( 120 yd ) into breaking load, in kg of a skein ( 100 m ), use the following empirical formula:

L1 = 0,584 8 L2 + O-500 0
where

L1 = breaking
L2 = observed reel.

load,

in kg, of skein made load, in

on a l-m reel; and on a l$yd

breaking

lb, of lea made

NOTE -The formula has been derived from the data collected at the Cotton Technological Research Laboratory ( ICAR ), Bombay on 77 samples of yarn of various counts ranging from 14s to 120s.

11

iS : i67i

- i974

APPENDIX ( Clause 0.3 )
SI UNITS

E

TABLE 1

INTERNATIONAL

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

Base Units QUANTITY Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance
UNIT SYMBOL

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

m kg
S

A K cd mol

Supplementary
QUANTITY

Units
UNIT SYMBOL

Plane angle Solid angle

radian steradian

rad sr

Derived Units
QUANTITY UNIT SYMBOL CONVERSION

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Pressure, stress

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens Pascal

N

1N

=O.l01972kgf

J
W Wb T HZ s Pa

1J
1W IT 1s 1 Pa

= lN.m
= lJ/s = 1 Wb/ma = IA/V = lN/ma

1 Wb = 1V.s 1 Hz = lc/s (s-1)

.

12

TABLE SL No. (1) 1) Length

2

RECOMMENDED

SI UNITS SI UNIT

FOR

TEXTILES APPLICATION

CHARACTERISTIC
r

Unit

Abbreviation' (5) Fibre Samples and test specimens (as appropriate ) ropes and Yarns, cordages, fabrics Narrow fabrics Other fabrics Samples and test specimen ( as appropriate ) Carpets, druggets, durries ( as appropriate ) Delicate fabrics fabrics, Other carpets, felts Yarns Fibres Filament and filament yarns Slivers, ropes and cordages Fibres Yarns, ropes, dages Ropes, cordages cor-

(2)
Millimetre Millimetre, centimetre Eg, cm

Metre 2) Width `Millimetre Centimetre Millimetre, Centimetre,

m mm cm mm, cm cm, m

centimetre metre

3)

Thickness

Micrometre Millimetre Tex Millitex Decitex Kilotex

( micron )

pm mm tex mtex dtex ktex

4)

Linear

density

5)

Diameter

Micrometre Millimetre Millimetre

( micron )

pm mm mm

6) 7)

Circumference Threads a) Length b) Width in cloth:

Number per centimetre Number per decimetre Number per centimetre Number per decimetre in Number per centimetre

ends/cm ends/dm picks/cm picks/dm ends/cm

Woven fabrics ( as appropriate )

8)
9)

Warp threads loom Stitches

Reeds Knitted fabrics ( as appropriate )

in cloth: Number per centimetre Number per decimetre Number per centimetre Number per decimetre Millimetre courses/cm courses /dm wales/cm wales/dm mm

a) Length b) Width

10)

Stitch

length

Knitted fabrics Made-up fabrics ( Continued )

1s: 1631- 1977
TABLE SL No. 2 RECOMMENDED T---_Unit (3) Grams per square metre Grams per metre g/me gm turns/cm turns/m mm, cm SI UNITS FOR TEXTILES Contd APPLICATION

CH~~RAOTERISTIC

SI UNIT ------7 Abbreviation (4)

(1)
11) 12) 13) 14)

(2)
Mass per unit area Mass per unit length Twist Test or length Breaking gauge

(5) Fabrics Fabrics ropes ( as Yarns, appropriate ) Fibres, yarns and fabric specimens ( as appropriate ) delicate Fibres, yarns ( skeins or individual ) Strong yarns ( individual or ropes skeins ) , cordages, and fabrics Yarns

Turns per centimetre Turns per metre Millimetre, centimetre

15)

load

Millinewton Newton

mN N

16) 17)

Breaking Tenacity

length

Kilometre Millinewton per tex x

km mN/tex

18)

Twist factor or t w i s t multiplier Bursting strength

Turns per centimetre square root of tex Turns per metre x square root of tex

Fibres, yarns (individual or skeins ) turns/cm Tif/tex Yarns (as appropriate ) turns/m .q" N/cm2 Fabrics Fabrics appropriate Carpets Pile carpet ( as

19) 20)

Newton per square centimetre Millinewton Newton

Tear strength

mN N mm g/ms/mm pile height

)

21) 22)

Pile height Pile density

Millimetre Mass of pile yarn in grams per square metre per millimetre pile height Millinewton per tex per unit deformation

23)

Elastic

modulus

mN/tex/unit deformation

Fibres, strands

yarns,

14

