NAT HIAF IS 16979 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


sìxaìu sit ARa hT STANT 
ard BU siờe agor & amta gia 


Guidelines for Visual Inspection 
Using Borescopes and Videoscopes 


ICS 19.100; 77.040.20 


© BIS 2018 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SERE TH AMT, ay freh - 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2018 Price Group 6 


Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee, MTD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Non- 
Destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 


Visual Inspection, one of the oldest non-destructive testing methods, has gained a lot of importance in recent past 
because of its ability to detect surface flaws, which are more severe than subsurface flaws of similar type. Earlier, 
magnifying lenses and microscopes were the simple tools used for visual inspection. Later borescope gave an 
added advantage to inspect hard-to-reach areas such as inside surface of tubes and pipes having straight passage. 
With the advent of fiber optics another variant of rigid borescope known as ‘Flexible Fibrescope’ came into 
existence, for the inspection of curvilinear passage. 


Development in the electronics of imaging technology has made it possible to display the image on a monitor 
of an object situated at a far distance. This has reduced the eye strain and fatigue normally encountered while 
using borescope. In a fibrescope, image of an object near distal end is transmitted through relay lenses housed 
in an image guide bundle. Optical image transfer suffers from loss in transmission resulting in poor quality of 
the image at eye piece. However, in a videoscope, image quality is far superior due to electronic transmission of 
an image signal from a charge-coupled device (CCD) imaging sensor at the distal tip to a monitor. State of the 
art videoscope consists of facilities such as 360° articulation of the distal tip, stereoscopic depth measurement, 
dimensional measurement, image recording and processing, image transfer, under water inspection etc. 


Videoscopic examination of long tubes has become an essential requirement along with other non-destructive 
testing methods used for health monitoring of heat exchanger and steam generator tubes during in-service 
inspection campaign. 


This document provides complete guidelines for visual inspection using borescopes and videoscopes. For better 
understanding, it highlights the construction details, type of borescope and working principle of videoscope. 
It also defines certain terminologies related to visual inspection, which will be helpful for equipment selection. 
Though, simple in use, yet videoscopes are associated with hazards and considering this a paragraph giving details 
of safety measures to be exercised while using borescopes, has been also included in this document, under the title 
‘General Precautions’. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16979 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR VISUAL INSPECTION USING 
BORESCOPES AND VIDEOSCOPES 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard is intended to provide general 
guidance for the use of borescope and videoscope for 
visual examination or visual inspection of surfaces 
inside narrow tubes/pipes or difficult-to-reach chambers 
in order to detect the presence of imperfections or to 
assess condition and texture. 


1.2 This standard specifies theory, working principle, 
functions and definitions of borescopes and related 
terms which will be helpful for conducting visual 
examinations using appropriate borescope. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements, based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 13805 : 2004 General standard for qualification 
and certification of non- destructive 
testing personnel — Specification 
(first revision) 


3 WRITTEN PROCEDURE REQUIREMENTS 


Visual inspection using borescope and videoscope shall 
be performed in accordance with a written procedure, 
which shall, as a minimum, contain the requirements 
listed in the referencing code. If required referencing 
code or involving measurements of dimensions of 
discontinuities, procedure shall be qualified. 


4 PERSONNEL QUALIFICATION 


The personnel performing borescopic inspection shall 
have adequate and sound knowledge of the technique. 
If required by the referencing code, visual inspection 
shall be carried out by certified personnel with level of 
competence confirming to IS 13805. 


5 INTRODUCTION 


5.1 Visual inspection is non-destructive testing method 
that provides means of detecting and examining a variety 


of surface flaws, such as corrosion, contamination, 
surface finish and surface discontinuities on joints (for 
example, welds seals, solder connection and adhesive 
bonds). 


5.2 Visual inspection is also the most widely used 
method for detecting and examining surface cracks, 
which are particularly important because of their 
relationship to structural failure mechanisms. Even 
when other nondestructive techniques are used to 
detect surface cracks, visual inspection often provides 
a useful supplement. 


5.3 Visual testing is the oldest and most economical 
form of non-destructive testing. The use of optical 
instruments in visual testing is beneficial for two 
purposes: 


a) to magnify discontinuities that cannot be detected 
by the unaided eye, and 


b) to permit visual checks of areas not accessible to 
the unaided eye. 


6EQUIPMENTUSEDFORVISUALINSPECTION 


6.1 Magnifier as an aid to vision is used for evaluating 
surface finish, surface shapes (profile and contour 
gauging) and surface microstructures. It is also used 
for comparing two surfaces. Reader lens is the simplest 
form of magnifier having 15 X magnifications. 


6.2 Flexible or rigid borescopes for illuminating and 
observing internal, closed or otherwise inaccessible 
areas. 


6.3 Image sensors for remote sensing or for the 
development of permanent visual records in the form 
of photographs, videotapes or computer-enhanced 
images. 


7 MAGNIFYING LENSES 


7.1 The object is placed close to the lens in order to 
obtain as great a magnification as desired. The distance 
from lens to object is adjusted until the object is in the 
lens depth of field and is in focus. The simplest form of 
a microscope is a single converging lens, often referred 
to as a simple magnifier. 


7.2 Magnifiers can be grouped into four broad 
categories: 


a) Conventional magnifier and reader; 


IS 16979 : 2018 


b) Low power microscopes; 
c) Medium power microscopes; and 
d) High power microscopes. 


8 BORESCOPE 


8.1 A borescope is a long tubular optical device used 
for the visual inspection of surfaces inside narrow 
tubes/pipes or difficult-to-reach chambers. In its most 
basic form, borescope consists of four main units: 


a) Light Source, 

b) Objective lens at distal tip, 

c) Eyepiece lens at viewing end, and 
d) Relay lens in middle section. 


Insertion tube, which may be rigid or flexible, connects 
objective lens at one end to the eyepiece lens on the 
opposite end through relay lenses. Inspection area of an 
object is illuminated by the light source and its image 
captured by the objective lens is transmitted through 
relay lenses to an eyepiece for viewing the area at a 
distance (see Fig. 1). 


8.2 The objective is an arrangement of prisms and 
lenses mounted closely together. Its design determines 
the angle of vision, the field of view and the amount of 
light gathered by the system. 


Function of the middle lenses is to conserve the 
light entering the system and conduct it through the 
borescope tube to the eyepiece with a minimum loss 
in transmission. The middle lenses are achromatic, 
each lens being composed of two elements with 
specific curvatures and indexes of refraction. This 
design preserves sharpness of the image and true 
color values. 


FIELD OF 
VIEW 


OBJECTIVES 


\ 


RELAY LENSES 


STAINLESS 
STEEL TUBE 


NSERTATION POINT: 


8.3 The image formed at eyepiece is not real but an aerial 
image formed in the air between the lenses. Hence it is 
possible to provide diopter correction for the observer 
and distance correction for the object (focusing). 
Focus control at the viewing end provides adjustment 
for sharpness of the image and compensation for the 
eyesight variation of the inspectors. It also greatly 
expands the depth of field as compared to non-focusing 
or fixed focus design borescope. 


A contact ring, through orbital scan control at the 
viewing end, permits rotation of the borescope through 
360 degrees for scanning the object space without 
entangling the electrical cord. 


8.4 Types of Borescope 


Mainly borescope can be classified as rigid and flexible 
borescope, depending upon the design of the insertion 
tube. 


8.4.1 Rigid Borescope 


Objective, relay and eyepiece lenses are mounted in a 
rigid tube. Can be used only for limited applications 
with straight passage between observer and the area to 
be inspected (see Fig 2). (This type retains its original 
name that is, borescope.) 


8.4.2 Flexible Borescope 


Objective, relay and eyepiece lenses are mounted in a 
flexible tube. Mainly used in applications those do not 
have a straight passageway between observer and the 
area to be inspected. Flexible borescope can be further 
subdivided into two types namely: 


a) Flexible Fiberscope — Light transmission through 
a bundle of optical fibers inside a flexible tube. A 
typical fiberscope consists of a light guide bundle, 


CONTROL 
SCETION 


EYE PIECE 
LENS 


TO LIGHT 
SOURCE 


Fic. 1 CONSTRUCTION OF BORESCOPE 


b 


` 


an image guide bundle, an interchangeable 
objective lens, viewing heads and remote controls 
for articulation of the distal tip (see Fig. 3). 


Videoscope — Electronic transmission of image 
signal from a charge-coupled device (CCD) 
imaging sensor at the distal tip to a monitor, 
through wiring inside a tube (normally flexible). 
A typical videoscope consists of a light guide 
bundle, signal bus, an interchangeable objective 
lens, video monitor and remote controls for 
articulation of the distal tip. 


IS 16979 : 2018 


Borescopes under 38 mm diameter are often made 
in pieces with the objective section 1 or 2 m in 
length. The additional sections are 1, 2 or 3 m 
long with threaded connections. These sections 
may be added to form borescopes with lengths up 
to 15 m for diameters under 37 mm (see Fig. 4). 
Flexible models are available in diameters from 
1.4 to 13 mm and in lengths up to 12 m as single 
piece. 


Borescope can also be classified as direct, right 
angle, forward oblique and retrospective vision 


Fic. 2 A COMPLETE SET OF BORESCOPE 
( INSET — INSERTION TUBE AND VIEWING HEADS ) 


FIELD OF 


DISITAL END 


IMAGE GUIDE 


BENDING 


OBJECTIVE SECTION 


LENS 


CONTROL 
SECTION 


a A aN 


FLEXIBLE 
PORTION 


LIGHT GUIDE 


LIGHT GUIDE 
CONNECTOR 


EYEPIECE 


t+— 
—=—== 


EYEPIECE 
LENS 


CC TC TT TT SSS 


II 


Fic. 3 CONSTRUCTION OF FIBRESCOPE 


IS 16979 : 2018 


Fic. 4 LARGER DIAMETER BORESCOPE WITH EXTENSION PIECE 


oORBR 


Fic. 5 BORESCOPE WITH EXTENSION PIECES AND DIFFERENT VIEWING HEADS 


borescopes based on the design of the objective 
lens (see Fig. 5). 


1) Direct Vision Borescope — The direct vision 
instrument provides a view directly forward 
with a typical visual area of about 19 mm at 
25 mm distance from the objective lens. The 
light carrier is removable so that the two parts 
can be passed successively through a small 
opening. 

2 


` 


Right Angle Borescopes — The right angle 
borescope is usually furnished with the light 
source positioned ahead of the objective lens. 
The optical system provides vision at right 
angles to the axis of the borescope and covers 
a working field of about 25 mm diameter at 
25 mm from the objective lens. 


3 


`— 


Forward Oblique Borescopes — The forward 
oblique system is a design that permits 
the mounting of a light source at the end of 
the borescope yet also allows forward and 
oblique vision extending to an angle of about 
55 degree from the axis of the borescope. A 
unique feature of this optical system is that, by 
rotating the borescope, the working area of the 
visual field is greatly enlarged. 


4 


` 


Retrospective Borescope — The retrospective 
borescope has an integral light source mounted 
slightly to the rear of objective lens. For a 
bore with an internal shoulder whose surface 
must be accurately profiled, the retrospective 


borescope provides a unique method of 
accurate visual inspection. 


Desirable properties ofborescopic systems are large field 
of vision, no image distortion, accurate transmission of 
colour values and, adequate illumination. 


The brightest images are obtained with borescopes of 
large diameter and short length. As the length of the 
borescope is increased, the image becomes less brilliant 
because of light losses from additional lenses required 
to transmit the image. Lenses are typically coated with 
anti-reflecting layers which provide maximum light 
transmission by minimizing the losses. 


9 VIDEOSCOPES 


Videoscopes with charge coupled device (CCD) probes 
involve the electronic transmission of color or black 
and white images to a video monitor. 


9.1 Video Borescope Components 


A video borescope has four main components: 


a) a probe, with a charge coupled device embedded 
in the distal tip, which is located at the end of a 
insertion tube; 


b) a video processor, to communicate signals to the 
monitor; 

c) amonitor, black and white or color; and 

d) an alphanumeric keyboard for entering 
identification references onto the display or into a 
permanent record. 


9.2 Working Principle of Video Borescope 


9.2.1 Video borescopes transmit images in the following 
way: 
a) First, light is sent to the test area by fiber optic 
light guides or by light emitting diodes; 
b) Fiber optic lighting can be used for either color or 
black and white imaging; and 


c) Light emitting diodes are used only for black 
and white imaging, because they cannot transmit 
multicolored light. 


9.2.2 The distal end of electronic videoscopes contains 
CCD chips, which consists of thousands of light- 
sensitive elements arrayed in a pattern of rows and 
columns. Once the light has reached the test area, the 
objective lens in the tip of the probe gathers reflected 
light from the test area, directs and focuses the image 
of an object on the surface of the CCD. Here light is 
converted to electrons that are stored in each picture 
element, or pixel of the CCD device. The image of 
the object is thus stored in the form of electrons on 
the CCD device. At this point a voltage proportional 
to the number of electrons at each pixel is determined 
electronically for each pixel site. This voltage is then 
amplified, filtered and sent to the input of video monitor 
(see Fig.6). 


9.2.3 Video borescopes feature includes; remote four 
way steering control, right angle adapter for 90 degree 
viewing and the ability to measure accurately what is 
seen in the borescope image. 


FIELD OF VIEW 
DISTAL END 


OBJECTIVE LENS 


SECTION 


TO LIGHT SOURCE 
LIGHT GUIDE 
CONNECTOR 


FLEXIBLE 
PORTION 


CONNECTOR 


IS 16979 : 2018 


9.2.4 Video borescopes are easily coupled with such 
accessories as standard video recorders, telephone 
modems, electronic hardcopy devices or computer 
enhancement equipment. 


9.2.5 With electronic videoscope, it is possible to: 
a) Obtain electronic zooming of the image; 


b) Adjust the brightness, colour, noise, contrast and 
sharpness of the image; 


c) Record and retrieve still and moving image; 
d) Record audio with the movie and still image; and 
e) Transfer the image to a computer for viewing it on 
a monitor. 
9.2.6 Videoscope with stereo optical adapter can 
perform following measurements: 
a) Distance between two points; 
b) Perpendicular distance between a point and a line; 
c) Distance between two parallel lenses; 
d) Depth and height of a point with respect to a 
reference plane; 
e) Area of a profile; and 


f) Distance between the distal end of the optical 
adapter and the subject. 


9.3 Advantages of Videoscope Over Rigid Borescope 


9.3.1 Rigid borescopes can cause eye strain and often 
require the operator to adopt awkward position to see 
through the eyepiece. Video borescopes eliminate these 


SIGNAL BUS 

TV MONITOR 
CONTROL 
SECTION 


CONTROL UNIT 
FOR INDUSTRIAL 
VEDEOSCOPE 


Fic. 6 CONSTRUCTION OF VIDEOSCOPE 


IS 16979 : 2018 


problems by allowing the inspector to sit comfortably 
in front of a monitor. 


By eliminating the time consuming task of refocusing, 
video borescopes with automatic focusing, make 
remote visual testing more efficient and less tiresome. 


9.3.2 Video borescopes also allow multiple views of 
the same image, making evaluations more reliable 
and facilitating training. In fact, a given image can be 
transmitted simultaneously to any number of monitors 
at the site or by modem or satellite, to remote locations. 


10 GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR USING 
BORESCOPE 


10.1 Depending upon the diameter of the tube selection 
of borescope shall be done. A minimum clearance of 
5 mm is recommended between the object and 
borescope for easy insertion and removal. 


10.2 Based on the distance of the location to be 
inspected from the open end, borescope of appropriate 
length shall be selected. In case borescope of sufficient 
length is not available, extension piece shall be 
attached to obtain the required length of the borescope. 
Care must be exercised to screw the extension piece 


properly. 


10.3 Check visually that the external finish of the 
complete length of the scope is free from any damage 
and deformation. 


Functional check of the borescope shall be done before 
carrying out the inspection. 


10.4 If both ends of the tube are open and accessible 
then it shall be ascertained that internal area is free 
from any obstruction which will hinder the movement 
of insertion tube. 


10.5 Initially for general examination, borescope with 
direct view shall be used. Before insertion, light shall 
be switched on and borescope insertion tube shall be 
inserted slowly inside the object. 


10.6 In case, prior inspection of tube to check the 
presence of any obstacle has not been performed, 
borescope movement shall be done in steps and at each 
step inner area shall be viewed through the eye piece. 
Eye piece shall be focused to obtain a sharp image. 


10.7 Distance marking on the insertion tube at regular 
interval is always helpful in locating the desired area. 


10.8 Borescope position for inspecting the region of 
interest shall be confirmed by the marking made on 
the insertion tube. Once located, the region of interest 
shall be inspected all around by giving one full rotation 
to the insertion tube. While viewing, image shall be 
focused properly to obtain a sharp image. 


10.9 In case more detailed information is required, 
suspected area in the side wall can be subsequently 
reexamined using right angle view borescope. 


10.10 If the manufacturing history and service 
condition of the product is known, to some extent, type 
of surface imperfections or discontinuity can be judged 
by the visual examination. Further, its location can be 
reported with the help of some marking on the insertion 
tube for length and angular position. 


10.11 While withdrawing the borescope, light can be 
switched off. 


11 GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR USING 
VIDEOSCOPE 


11.1 Optical adaptor shall be firmly attached to the 
distal end of the scope and this can be confirmed by 
switching on the light. The illumination light will not 
light if it is not correctly attached. 


11.2 The illumination light shall be turned on during 
insertion into the object being examined. 


11.3 Scope shall be inserted slowly while observing 
the monitor screen to confirm the correctness of the 
insertion direction. Angulations operation as required 
can be performed during insertion to view the side 
walls. 


11.4 Insertion tube shall be kept as straight as possible 
to get the best operations from the instrument. During 
insertion, application of excessive pushing force, 
twisting or tension to the insertion tube shall be avoided. 


11.5 The brightness of the image can be controlled either 
by gain adjustment or contrast correction. Brightness 
shall be adjusted as per the requirement. 


11.6 Higher gain gives higher brightness but with 
increased noise. Vertical noise bands may appear for 
extremely bright area. 


11.7 When contrast is higher than the normal it can be 
corrected by increasing the image brightness. Similarly 
when contrast is lower than the normal, it can be 
corrected by decreasing the image brightness. 


11.8 Scalar measurement is done by using an object 
in the observation screen that has a known length as a 
reference length and then using that value to measure 
the length of the test object. 


11.9 For high accuracy, reference length shall be 
correct. Further both reference and test objects 
shall be positioned with the same optical axes and 
perpendicularity. 


11.10 Before withdrawing the scope its angulation shall 
be unlocked. 


12 GENERAL PRECAUTIONS 


a) Light source shall be turned off before attaching or 
detaching the optical adapter. Touching the distal 
end immediately after having turned off light 
source may cause burn on the skin; 


b) Light emitted from the distal end may cause injury 
to eye; 

c) Always the light button shall be turned off when 
insertion tube is inside the object and not in use, 
otherwise the light emitted from the scope may 
heat a nearby object and cause fire ignition. For 
the same reason the instrument shall never be used 
in a flammable atmosphere; 


d 


The instrument shall not be used in an environment 
filled with fine particles such as metal dust; 


wa 


e) Only the insertion tube, of any instrument 
designed for under water inspection is water 
resistant. Therefore except for the scope insertion 
tube, the instrument shall not be used or stored in 
any location where its control unit, video monitor, 
light source, power unit might be submerged in 
water. Otherwise an electric shock may result; 


f) In case of water proof instrument the insertion 
tube should not be brought in contact with a liquid 
other than water, saline, machine oil and light oil. 
Any other liquid corrosive in nature may damage 
the instrument; 


a 


If the O-ring at the tip or inside the optical adapter 
is positioned incorrectly, water can get into the 
joint area between the scope and optical adapter 
which may cause malfunction or damage. No dirt 
or water shall be present on the objective lens and 
the electrodes of the scope distal end otherwise it 
may cause damage to the optical adaptor or the 
scope distal end. Lens shall be cleaned by lens 
cleaning fluid using cotton swab to remove water 
or dust shall; 


h) The amount of screen noise may increase under 
high ambient temperature. Generally high 
temperatures warnings are displayed on the screen 
in case temperature around the scope increases the 
designed limit; 


8 


` 


Scope shall not be withdrawn while its angulation 
is locked, otherwise the scope and/or observation 
target may be damaged; and 


j 


k) The instrument shall never be used in observation 
inside human and animal cavity. The human body 


or animal may be injured. 


` 


13FACTORSAFFECTINGTHEPERFORMANCE 
OF BORESCOPES 
13.1 Test Object 


Objective distance, object size, discontinuity size, 
reflectivity, entry port size, object depth and direction 


IS 16979 : 2018 


of view are all critical aspects of the test object that 
affect the visual test. 


13.2 Environment 


Most of the scopes can operate at temperatures from 
-34°C to 66°C. Water proof scopes can be used 
at pressures above ambient as specified by the 
manufacturer. Radiation can cause the multi-component 
lenses and image bundles to turn brown. In radiation 
atmosphere, use of quartz fiberscope is preferable. 
Only explosion proof scopes shall use in gaseous 
environment to minimize the potential of an accidental 
explosion. 


14 APPLICATIONS 
BORESCOPE 


OF INDUSTRIAL 


14.1 Borescope are widely used during manufacturing, 
maintenance and in-service inspection in industry. 
Borescopes are also useful for locating discontinuities 
such as cracks or blowholes in casting and forgings. 


14.2 In production machine operations, borescopes of 
various sizes and angles of view are used to examine 
internal holes, bored holes, threads, internal surface 
finishes. Borescopes are used to inspect cylinders for 
internal surface finish after honing. Specific examples 
are, visual tests of machine gun barrels, riffle bores, 
cannon bores, machine equipment and hydraulic 
cylinders. 


14.3 Engine cylinders can be examined through 
spark plug holes without removing the cylinder 
head. Inaccessible areas of hydraulic systems, 
small pumps, motors and mechanical or electrical 
assemblies can be visually tested without dismantling 
the engine. 


14.4 In power plants, borescopes are used for visual 
tests of boiler tubes or steam generator for pitting, 
corrosion, scaling or other discontinuities. 


15 TERMINOLOGIES AND GUIDELINES FOR 
EQUIPMENT SELECTION 


15.1 Lighting 


Placement of light source with respect to viewing 
object for proper illumination. In general, orientation 
of the light source is an important first consideration. 
Where ever possible, lighting should originate from the 
top of the object. Lighting should originate from one 
direction on most three-dimensional objects to avoid 
ambiguity in relief, if more light is required, it should 
be slightly weaker and more diffuse than the main light 
source. 


15.2 Illumination 


The act of illuminating any object for making it visible. 
The required intensity of the light source is determined 


IS 16979 : 2018 


by the reflectivity of the surface, the area of surface 
to be illuminated and the transmission losses over the 
length of the scope. At working lengths greater than 
6 m rigid borescopes with clamp at the distal end 
provide the greatest amount of illumination over the 
widest area. However, the heat generated by the light 
source may deform rubber or plastic materials. Fiber 
optic illumination in scopes with working lengths less 
than 6 m is always brighter and is suitable for heat- 
sensitive applications, because filters can remove 
infrared frequencies. 


Because the amount of illumination depends on the 
diameter of the light guide bundle, it is desirable to use 
the largest diameter possible. 


15.3 Magnification 


15.3.1 Increase in the size of the image relative to 
the object size, when viewed through a lens system. 
Magnification (M), of a single lens is inversely 
proportional to its focal length and it is determined by 
the equation: 


M = 250/f (‘f? in millimeters) or, 
M = 10/f (‘P in inches) 


Where, 
M = Magnification, and 
F = focal length of the lens, in millimeters/inches. 


15.3.2 In this equation f is the focal length of the lens 
in millimeters (or inches) and 250 (or 10) is constant 
that represents the average minimum distance at which 
objects can be distinctly seen by the unaided eye. Using 
the equation, a lens with a focal length of 125 mm 
(5 in.) has magnification of two widths or is said to be a 
two power (2X) lens. 


SIDE VIEW 
BORESCOPE 


15.3.3 Selection of a magnifier with the proper field 
of view is important. For example, if the test object is 
large, it takes too much time to use a 20X magnifier 
(focal length= 250/20=12.2mm) with a field of view 
slightly greater than 10 mm. The proper procedure is 
to use a low magnifier first for marking questionable 
areas and then to inspect questioned areas with a higher 
powered magnifier. 


15.3.4 Magnification of borescopes optical system is 
given by the relation, M =m, x m, x m,, where m, m, 
and m, are the magnifications of the objective, middle 
and ocular lenses respectively. The total magnification 
of borescopes varies with diameter and length but 
generally ranges from about 2 to 8 for all common 
borescopes in use. 


15.4 Objective Distance 
15.4.1 Distance of the Object from the Lens 


It is important in determining the illumination source, 
as well as the required objective focal distance for the 
maximum power and magnification (see Fig. 7). 


The linear magnification of a given borescope 
changes with working distance and is about inversely 
proportional to the object distance. A borescope with 
2X magnification at 25 mm working distance therefore 
will magnify 4X at 13 mm distance. 


15.5 Entry Port Size 


15.5.1 Size of an Opening in an Object for Inserting the 
Borescope 


It determines the maximum diameter of the instrument 
that can be used for the visual test (see Fig. 8). 


TEST OBJECT 


Fic. 7 OBJECTIVE DISTANCE “X” 


DIRECT VIEW N | 


(| BORESCOPE | 


V 


ENTRY PORT SIZE 


IS 16979 : 2018 


TEST OBJECT 


Fic. 8 ENTRY PORT SIZE 


15.6 Objective Size 


The dimensions of the object to be viewed. Objective 
size together with objective distance, determines lens 
angle or field of view required to observe entire test 
surface. 


15.7 Object Depth 
15.7.1 Object Thickness Perpendicular to the Focal 
Plane in Front of the Lens System 


It affects focusing. If portions of the object are in 
different planes, then borescope must have sufficient 
focus adjustment or depth of field to visualize these 
different planes sharply (see Fig. 9). 


15.8 Discontinuity Size 


15.8.1 Size of Imperfection on the Object 


It determines the magnification and resolution required 
for visual testing. For example, greater resolution is 


o0o00000 


OBJECT 
DEPTH 


Fic. 9 OBIECT DEPTH 


required to detect hairline cracks than to detect undercut 
(see Fig. 10). 


15.9 Field of View 


15.9.1 The field of view is the area seen through the 
magnifier (see Fig. 11 and Fig. 12). With a simple 
magnifier, the diameter of the field of view is less than 
its focal length. 


15.9.2 There is an inverse relation between the total 
magnification and the diameter of field of view, as 
magnification increases the diameter of the field of view 
decreases in proportion. Specifically, the magnification 
increases when either the field of view or the lens-to- 
object distance decreases. 


15.9.3 A wide field of view reduces magnification 
but has greater depth of field. A narrow field of view 
produces higher magnification but results in shallow 
depth of field (see Fig. 13). Field of view directly varies 
with the viewing angle and objective distance. 


OBJECT 
DEPTH 


Fic. 10 Discontinuity SIZE 


IS 16979 : 2018 


4 


o 
DIRECT view [f 6 
Ì_ Borescope \V i FIELD OF 
o WIEW Y' 
o 
ENTRY PORT 
TEST OBJECT 


Fic. 11 FIELD oF VIEW For DIRECT VIEW BORESCOPE 


0000000 O 


FIELD OF VIEW 


70 80 99 80 79 


DIRECTION 
OF VIEW 


Fic. 12 FIELD oF VIEW FOR SIDE VIEW BORESCOPE 


LARGE DEPTH 


OF FIELD 
J SMALL 
VIEWING LARGE 
ANGLE VIEWING 
K ANGLE 
SMALL DEPTH 
OF FIELD 
(a) HIGH MAGNIFICATION (b) LOW MAGNIFICATION 


Fic. 13 FIELD oF VIEW, MAGNIFICATION AND DEPTH OF FIELD 


10 


15.10 Focusing 


The act of adjusting the position of a viewed object 
relative to a lens system for obtaining a distinct image 
of the object as seen through the lens system. If portions 
of long objects are at different planes, the scope must 
have sufficient focus adjustment to achieve an adequate 
depth of field. If the scope has a fixed focal length, the 
object will be in focus only at a specific lens-to-object 
distance. 


15.11 Depth of Field 


The range of Distance in Focus or Tickness of the 
Plane of Focus 


Denotes the distance magnifier can be moved toward 
or away from a subject with the subject remaining in 
good focus (sharply defined). It can also be defined 
as the range of distance over which borescope gives 
satisfactory definition, when its lens is in the best focus 
for a plane, known as principal plane of focus at certain 
specific distance. At other distances, the subject is out 
of focus and not sharply defined. Depth of field varies 
with the power of lens and is comparatively greater in 
lower power magnifiers. It decreases as the power of 
the lens increases (see Fig. 14). 


15.12 Automatic Focusing Feature 


The depth of field so much expanded that focusing 
becomes unnecessary. Since no mechanism is 
actively adjusted, this feature is called automatic 
focusing. In a videoscope the expanded depth of field 
is attributable to both the proximity of the lens to the 
charge coupled device and the small diameter of the 
lens aperture. 


LENS DIAPHRAGM 


PRINCIPAL 
a PLANE OF 
fm 
| - 
OISHI 
an7 | 
a ef | Ly SMALL DEPTH 
A A OF FIELD 


LENS DIAPHRAGM 


PRINCIPAL 
ef PLANE OF 
FOCUS 
ee mm 


a 
_ 
_ 


LARGE DEPTH 
B B OF FIELD 


Fic. 14 DEPTH oF FIELD 


IS 16979 : 2018 


15.13 Direction of View 


15.13.1 Viewing Direction with Respect to the long Axis 
of the Borescope 


It determines positioning of the borescope, especially 
with rigid borescopes. Viewing direction also contributes 
to the required length of the borescope. The selection of 
a viewing direction is influenced by the location of the 
access port in relation to the object to be observed. 


15.13.2 The most common types of borescope head 
with different direction of views are: 

a) direct, 

b) right angle, 

c) forward oblique, and 

d) retrospective view. 


15.13.2.1 The forward viewing head permits the 
inspection of the area directly ahead of the viewing 
head. 


15.13.2.2 Forward oblique heads bend the viewing 
direction at an angle to the borescope axis permitting 
the inspection of corners at the end of a bored hole. 


15.13.2.3 The right angle (side) viewing head permits 
the inspection of internal wall of cylinders. 


15.13.2.4 The retrospective viewing head bends the 
cone of view at a retrospective angle to the borescope 
axis, providing a view of an internal shoulder for its 
detail surface inspection (see Fig. 15). 


DIRECT 
VIEW 
———+ 
SIDE VIEW 
(b) LIGHT 


FOR WARD OBLIQUE VIEW 


(c) LIGHT 
RETROSPECTIVE VIEW 
(d) LIGHT 


Fic. 15 DIRECTION OF VIEW 


IS 16979 : 2018 


15.14 Viewing Angle 


It is the maximum angular distance in degree in the 
direction of view in which object can be viewed. 


15.15 Angle of Vision 


It is the angle of obliquity for the central ray of the 
visual field, with respect to the forward direction of the 
borescope axis 


Each of direction of view is further characterized by 
its angle of view. For example, a borescope having 
retrospective direction of view may have 135 degree 
angle of vision, which means its central ray makes angle 
of 135 degree with forward direction of the borescope 
axis (see Fig. 16). 


15.16 Reflectivity 


The ratio of reflected wave energy to incident wave 
energy, also known as reflectance. 


It is another factor affecting illumination. Dark surfaces 
such as those coated with carbon deposits require 
higher levels of illumination than bright surfaces do 
(see Fig. 17). 


15.17 Resolution 


System’s ability to show two nearby points istinctly 
often, measured by resolving a pair of adjacent parallel 
lines. 


15.17.1. To allow the observation of surface detail at 
a desired size, the optical system of a borescope must 
also provide adequate resolution and image contrast. 


VIEWING 
ANGLE 


o 
80 90 80 
TAN | 
fN 


30 

20 BORESCOPE 
10 AXIS 

0 —— 
FORWARD 
DIRCTION 


ANGLE OF 
VISION 


Fic. 16 ANGLE OF VISION 


12 


If resolution is adequate but contrast is lacking, detail 
cannot be observed. 


15.17.2 For fiberscope, the resolution is dependent on 
the accuracy of alignment and the diameter of the fibers 
in the image bundle. Smaller-diameter fibers provide 
more resolution and edge contrast when combined with 
good geometrical alignment of the fibers. 


15.17.3 In general, the optical quality of a rigid 
borescope improves as the size of the lens increases; 
consequently, a borescope with the largest possible 
diameter should be used. 


15.18 Borescope Circumferential 


Are designed for the inspection of tubing or other 
cylindrical structures. A centrally located mirror 
permits right-angle viewing of an area just scanned by 
the panoramic view. 

15.19 Borescope Panoramic 


Scanning mirror is mounted in front of the objective 
lens and its rotation can be adjusted at the viewing end 
to scan in forward oblique, right angle and retrospective 
directions. 

15.20 Working Length 

Total length of the borescope used for visual inspection 


In addition to the obvious need for a scope of sufficient 
length, the working length can sometimes dictate the 
use of a particular type of scope. 


DARK SURFACE 


DIRECT VIEW 
BORESCOPE 


ENTRY PORT / 


BRIGHT TEST OBJECT 


SURFACE 


Fic. 17 REFLECTIVELY OF THE SURFACE 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 21 (05214). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


