9770777 Wah IS 1893 (Part 3) : 2014 
Indian Standard ыны 


asi ch че feast 
e» AMES 
aT 3 че se епн өтей Әт 


Criteria for Earthquake Resistant 
Design of Structures 
Part 3 Bridges and Retaining Walls 


ICS 91.120.25 


© BIS 2014 


ada res em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
"IW чая, 9 етте WAL ni, ae Кеей-110002 
lim МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in ^ www.standardsbis.in 


August 2014 Price Group 11 


Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 3) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Himalayan-N agalushai region, Indo-Gangetic Plain, Western India, Kutch апа К athiawar regions are geologically 
unstable parts of the country, and some devastating earthquakes of the world have occurred there. A major part of 
the peninsular India has also been visited by strong earthquakes, but these were relatively few in number occurring 
at much larger time intervals at any site, and had considerably lesser intensity. T he earthquake resistant design of 
structures taking into account seismic data from studies of these Indian earthquakes has become very essential, 
particularly in view of the intense construction activity all over the country. It is to serve this purpose that 
15 1893: 1962 ‘Recommendations for earthquake-resistant design of structures’ was first published in 1962 and 
subsequently revised in 1966, 1975 and 1984. 


Further, with a view to keep abreast with the rapid development and extensive research that has been carried out 
in thefield of earthquake-resistant design of various structures, the Committee has decided to cover the provisions 
for different types of structures in separate parts. Hence 15 1893 has been split into the five parts. The other parts 
in the series are: 


Part 1 General provisions and buildings 

Part2 Liquid retaining tanks - elevated and ground supported 
Part4 Industrial structures including stack like structures 
Part5 Dams and embankments 


This standard (Part 3) contains provisions for the design of new bridges and for seismic evaluation of existing 
bridges in the process of their seismic upgradation and retrofitting. Unless otherwise stated, this standard shall be 
read necessarily in conjunction with 15 1893 (Part 1), which contains provisions that are general in nature and 
applicable to all types of structures. 


For the purpose of determining design seismic forces, the country is classified into four seismic zones as per 
Fig. 1 of IS 1893 (Part 1). 


This standard has been formulated to ensure that bridges possess at least a minimum strength to withstand 
earthquakes. The intention is not to prevent damage to them due to the most severe shaking that they may be 
subjected to during their lifetime. Actual forces that appear on different portions of bridge during earthquakes 
may be greater than the design seismic forces specified in this standard. However, ductility arising from material 
behaviour, detailing and over strength arising from the additional reserve strength in them over and above the 
design force are relied upon to account for this difference in actual and design lateral loads. 


The reinforced and pre-stressed concrete components shall be designed to be under reinforced so as to cause a 
tensile failure. Further, they should be suitably designed to ensure that premature failure due to shear or bond 
does not occur. Ductility demand under seismic shaking is usually not a major concern in bridge superstructures. 
However, the seismic response of bridges is critically dependent on the ductile characteristics of the sub-structures, 
foundations and connections. Provisions for appropriate ductile detailing of reinforced concrete members applicable 
to sub-structures and foundations and connections for bridges are given in Annex B. 


Some of the major and important modifications made in this revision as compared to 15 1893 : 1984 are as 
follows: 


a) Seismic zone factors аге the same as included in 15 1893 (Part 1) : 2002. Four methods, namely seismic 
coefficient method, response spectrum method, time history method and non-linear push over analysis 
are given for estimating design forces which recognizes the flexibility of bridges. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 1893 (Part 3) : 2014 


Indian Standard 


CRITERIA FOR EARTHQUAKE RESISTANT DESIGN 
OF STRUCTURES 
PART 3 BRIDGES AND RETAINING WALLS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 The standard (Part 3) deals with the assessment of 
earthquake forces and design of new bridges on 
highways, railways, flyover bridges, pedestrian bridges, 
submersible bridges, utility bridges and aqueducts. The 
earthquake effect on retaining walls and bridge 
abutments are also covered. The hydrodynamic effect 
of water on submerged sub-structure and method of 
assessment of liquefaction potential of soil is also 
included. The methodology of estimation of seismic 
forces given in this standard may be employed for 
seismic evaluation of the existing bridges and 
retrofitting of such structures. 


1.2 This standard deals with the earthquake resistant 
design of regular bridges in which the seismic actions 
are mainly resisted at abutments or through flexure of 
piers, that is, bridges composed of vertical pier- 
foundation system supporting the deck structure with/ 
without bearings. However, for all special and major 
bridges, detailed dynamic studies shall be undertaken. 


1.3 This standard does not deal with the construction 
features relating to earthquake resistant design of 
bridges. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed at Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated at Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


The definitions given in 3 of IS 1893 (Part 1) and the 
following shall apply. 


3.1 Active Tectonic Fault — A seismotectonic fault 
18 considered to be active when there is an average slip 
rate of at least 1 mm/year and topographic evidence of 
seismic activity with in Holocene times (Past 11 000 
years). 


3.2 Asynchronous Motion — The spatial variability 
of the seismic action means that the motion at different 


supports of the bridge is assumed to be different and 
as a result, the definition of the seismic action shall 
not be based on the characterization of motion at a 
single point, as is usually the case. 


3.3 Base — It shall be the base of pier or top of well 
in case of well foundation, base of pier or top of pile 
cap in case of pile foundation and base of pier in case 
of open foundation. 


3.4 Capacity Design — The design procedure used іп 
structures of ductile behaviour to secure the hierarchy 
of strengths of the various structural components 
necessary for leading to the intended configuration of 
plastic hinges and for avoiding brittle failure modes. 


3.5 Dynamic Analysis Method — A seismic analysis 
method in which the dynamic behaviour of a structure 
during an earthquake is obtained considering dynamic 
characteristics of the structure and characteristics of 
the ground motion by solving the equations of motion 
of the structure. 


3.6 Design Seismic Displacement — The 
displacement induced by design seismic actions. 


3.7 Effects of Earthquake — The effects of 
earthquake motion that shall be considered in seismic 
design of bridge include inertial force, displacements, 
earth pressure, hydrodynamic pressure and liquefaction 
of soil. 


3.8 Isolation Bearing — A bearing support used for 
a bridge with seismic isolation device having a function 
to appropriately increase the natural period of the 
bridge with the controlled damping results in decrease 
of forces in the structure and displacements in the 
bearing for better overall performance. 


3.9 Special Regular Bridge — The bridges specified 
under regular bridges but single span more than 120 m 
or pier height measured from founding level to the top 
of pier cap to be more than 30 m. In case of pile 
foundation pier height shall be considered from the 
point of fixity. 


3.10 Modal Analysis — A dynamic analysis method 
in which response is calculated by combination of 
response in various modes of vibration. 


3.11 Retrofitting — It is upgrading the strength of 


IS 1893 (Part 3) : 2014 


existing structure in order to increase its capacity to 
withstand effect of future earthquakes by addition of 
structural elements, dampers or similar devices. The 
retrofitting may be required for, (a) seismically 
deficient structure; (b) earthquake damaged structure; 
and (c) due to modifications made to increase live load 
capacity of structure. 


3.12 Regular Bridge — A regular bridge has no 
abrupt or unusual changes in mass, stiffness or 
geometry along its span and has no large differences 
in these parameters between adjacent supports 
(abutments excluded). A bridge shall be considered 
regular for the purpose of this standard, if 


a) itisstraight or it describes a sector of an arch 
which subtends an angle less than 90? at the 
center of the arch; 

b) the adjacent piers do not differ in stiffness by 
more than 25 percent (Percentage difference 
shall be calculated based on the lesser of the 
two stiffness); and 

с) girder bridges, T-beam bridges, truss bridges, 
hammer head bridges, bridges having single 
or multiple simply supported spans with each 
span less than 120 m and pier height above 
foundation level less than 30 m. 


3.13 Seismic Coefficient Method — А seismic 
analysis method in which seismic force equal to the 
weight of the structure/component multiplied by design 
acceleration coefficient is applied statically at the centre 
of mass of the structure/component. 


3.14 Seating Width — The distance between the end 
of the girder to the top edge of a sub-structure to prevent 
the girder from being dislocated in the event of an 
unexpectedly large relative displacement between 
super and sub-structure. 


3.15 Seismic Links — Restrainers through which part 
or all of the seismic action may be transmitted. Used 
in combination with bearings and they are usually 
provided with appropriate slack so as to be activated 
only in case when the design seismic displacements is 
exceeded. 


3.16 Special and Irregular Types of Bridges — The 
bridges with innovative designs and bridges such as 
suspension bridge, cable stayed bridge, arch bridge, 
bascule bridge and irregular bridges such as skew 
bridge of angle 30? and above with span more than 
60 m shall be categorized under these types. 


3.17 Unseating Prevention System — А structure 
installed to prevent a superstructure from unseating due 
to an earthquake. It may comprise of an adequate seat 
length, devices to prevent excessive displacement, 
jumping and preventing structure from dislodging from 


supports. It may be in various forms such as; stopper, 
cable restrainer, bolts, clamps, etc. 


4 GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND DESIGN 
CRITERIA 


4.1 General Principles 


4.1.1 All components of the bridge, that is, 
superstructure, sub-structure, bearing, foundation and 
soil are susceptible to damage in the event of strong 
ground shaking. The earthquake resistant design shall 
consider the effect of earthquake motions on each 
component of the bridge following the provisions of 
this standard. 


4.1.2 The design shall ensure that seismic resistance 
of the bridge and its components are adequate to meet 
the specified design requirement so that emergency 
communication after an earthquake shall be maintained 
for the design basis earthquake. 


4.1.3 Masonry and plain concrete arch bridges with 
spans more than 10 m shall not be built in the seismic 
Zones IV and V. 


4.1.4 Box, pipe and slab culverts need not be designed 
for earthquake forces. Bridges of total length not more 
than 60 m and individual span not more than 15 m 
need not be designed for earthquake forces other than 
in Zones IV and V. 


4.1.5 Seismic forces on aqueduct structures and 
flyover bridges shall be calculated as for any other 
bridge. The effect of inertia force of flowing water mass 
in aqueduct shall be calculated on the basis of 
assumptions in 6.5. 


4.1.6 Hydrodynamic pressure on walls of water trough 
in case of aqueduct shall be considered on the basis of 
provision of IS 1893 (Part 2). 


4.1.7 The liquefaction potential of foundation soil shall 
be investigated where necessary shall be according to 
21. 


4.1.8 When relative movement between two adjacent 
units of a bridge are designed to occur at a separation/ 
expansion joint, sufficient clearance shall be provided 
between them, to permit the relative movement under 
design earthquake conditions to freely occur without 
inducing damage. Where the two units may be out of 
phase, the clearance to be provided may be estimated 
as the square root of the sum of squares of the calculated 
displacements of the two units under maximum elastic 
seismic forces. 


4.1.9 Special design studies shall be called for the 
following cases: 


a) Consideration of asynchronous ground 


motion when, (1) geological discontinuities 
or marked topographical features are present; 
and (2) single span is greater than 600 m, even 
if there are no geological discontinuities. 

b) In case of bridges over potentially active 
tectonic faults, the probable discontinuity of 
the ground displacement shall be estimated 
and accommodated either by adequate 
flexibility of the structure or by provision of 
suitable movement of joints. 

c) Bridge located in near field, that is, within 
10 km near fault area of known active tectonic 
fault. 


4.2 Design Criteria 
4.2.1 Site Specific Spectrum 


For special bridges as defined in 3.9 and 3.16 in seismic 
Zones IV and V where soil conditions are poor 
consisting of marine clay or loose fine sand and silt 
(for example where the soil up to 30 m depth has SPT 
(N values - uncorrected) equal to or less than 20 and 
for bridges located near a known fault (near - field) or 
the area is known for complex seismotectonic 
geological setting, detailed investigations shall be 
carried out to obtain the site specific spectrum. Site 
specific spectrum is also required for bridges with spans 
greater than 150 m. Such a spectrum shall be used for 
design in place of code spectrum subject to minimum 
requirements specified in this standard. 


4.2.2 Seismic Safety of Bridge in Longitudinal and 
Transverse Directions 


The design of the bridge shall be made for the effect of 
earthquake motions occurring in the traffic direction 
(longitudinal direction), across traffic direction 
(transverse direction) and vertical direction. The 
simultaneous action of the motions shall be considered, 
where necessary according to provisions of this standard. 


4.2.3 Elastomeric Bearing 


Elastomeric bearings shall generally be used to transmit 
vertical loads, rotations and horizontal forces other than 
those due to seismic. In case, in-plane horizontal 
seismic forces are to be transmitted using these 
bearings, they shall be checked using minimum 
dynamic frictional value and minimum vertical load, 
including combined effects of horizontal and vertical 
components of earthquake. The bearings shall be 
suitably anchored in the sub-structure and 
superstructure. Suitable devices for preventing 
dislodgement of superstructure need to be incorporated. 
In such cases, for design of foundation, value of R is 
to be taken as 1. Bearings should be tested for cyclic 
loadings for which specialist literature should be 
consulted. 


IS 1893 (Part 3) : 2014 


4.2.4 Effect of Soil-Structure-Interaction 


This standard specifies design of bridges founded on 
rock and medium soil, which do not liquefy or slide 
during the ground shaking. For bridges founded on 
soft soils and in cases where deep foundations are used, 
detailed studies of soil structure interaction are 
required. The soil structure interaction may not be 
considered for open foundations on rocky strata. 


Soil flexibilities included in modelling sub-structure and 
foundation of the bridge for soil structure interaction, 
generally lead to longer natural period and hence lower 
seismic forces. However on the other hand, 
consideration of soil flexibilities shall result in larger 
lateral deflections. Soil parameters, like, elastic 
properties and spring constants shall be properly 
estimated. In many cases one obtains a range of values 
of soil properties. In such cases, the highest values of 
soil stiffness shall be used for calculating natural period 
and lowest value shall be used for calculating deflection. 


4.2.5 Design for Strength and Ductility 


The earthquake resistant design of bridge shall be based 
on both strength and ductility. Reinforced and pre- 
stressed concrete members shall be suitably designed 
to ensure that premature failure due to shear or bond 
does not occur, subject to the provisions of IS 456 and 
IS 1343 and as per relevant codes of Indian Roads 
Congress or Indian Railways Code. 


4.2.6 Inter Linking of Spans 


The interlinking of spans to prevent it from being 
dislodged off its bearings is desirable alternatively 
continuous construction should be encouraged. The 
greater redundancy and energy dissipation capacity in 
the structure are desirable features for better 
performance in earthquake. 


4.2.7 Capacity Design 


The design seismic force in this standard for bridges is 
lower than the maximum expected seismic force on 
them. However, to ensure good performance at low 
cost, the difference in the design seismic force and the 
maximum expected seismic force shall be accounted 
for through additional safety provisions. The capacity 
design provisions shall be applicable to important 
bridges in seismic Zone III and to all bridges in seismic 
Zones IV and V. These provisions are meant for bridges 
having reinforced concrete sub-structures; however, if 
steel sub-structures are used in high seismic zones, 
reference should be made to specialist literature. Annex 
B describes the detailing procedure for Reinforced 
Concrete Structures. 


4.2.8 Earthquake Damaged Bridges 


For seismic retrofitting of earthquake damaged bridges, 


IS 1893 (Part 3) : 2014 


seismic evaluation should be carried out following the 
methods of seismic analysis recommended in this 
standard taking into consideration the reduced stiffness 
and capacity due to cracking and damage. 


4.2.9 Retrofitting of Existing Bridges 


Seismically deficient bridges should be evaluated using 
the provisions of this standard to determine the need 
of retrofitting. The prioritization of bridges for 
retrofitting should be based upon seismicity, age, 
deterioration and importance of the bridge. The 
retrofitting of bridges shall consist of upgrading the 
strength to meet the requirement of this standard. 


5 DESIGN PHILOSOPHY 


5.1 Serviceability Limit State 


The design of bridge should meet the serviceability 
limit state under design basis earthquake (DBE). The 
parts of the bridge intended to contribute to energy 
dissipation shall undergo minor damage without giving 
rise to need for reduction of traffic or immediate repair. 
Specialist literature to be consulted for limit state 
analysis using MCE (involving non-linear analysis and 
time history method). 


5.2 Ultimate Limit State 


The design of bridge should meet non-collapse 
requirement that is, ultimate limit state under maximum 
considered earthquake (MCE). While designing as per 
IS 456, DBE may be considered. The bridge shall retain 
its structural integrity and adequate residual resistance, 
although considerable damage may occur in some 
portions of the bridge. The structure should be able to 
sustain emergency traffic, inspections and repair could 
be performed easily after the earthquake. 


The bridge superstructure however shall in general be 
protected from the formation of plastic hinges and from 
unseating due to extreme seismic displacements under 
MCE. 


5.3 Ductile Behaviour 


The reinforced and pre-stressed concrete components 
shall be designed as under-reinforced so as to cause a 
tensile failure. Further, they should be suitably designed 
to ensure that premature failure due to shear or bond 
does not occur. Stresses induced in the superstructure 
due to earthquake ground motion are usually quite 
nominal. Therefore, ductility demand under seismic 
shaking has not been a major concern in the bridge 
superstructures during past earthquakes. However, the 
seismic response of bridges is critically dependent on 
the ductile characteristics of the sub-structures. 
Provisions for appropriate ductile detailing of 
reinforced concrete members given in Annex B shall 


be applicable to sub-structures. Bridges shall be 
designed such that under severe seismic shaking plastic 
hinges form in the sub-structure, rather than in the deck 
or foundation. 


NOTE - Specialist literature to be consulted for asynchronous 
ground motion. 


6 ASSUMPTIONS 


The following assumptions shall be made in the 
earthquake analysis of bridges: 


a) The seismic forces due to design basis 
earthquake (DBE) should not be combined 
with design wind forces. 


b) The scour to be considered for design shall 
be based on mean design flood. In the absence 
of detailed data, the scour to be considered 
for design shall be 0.9 times the maximum 
design scour depth (see Note). 

NOTE — The designer is cautioned that the 


maximum seismic scour case may not always govern 
in design condition. 


c) The earthquake accelerations should be 
applied to full mass in case of submerged 
structures and not on buoyant mass. 

d) The seismic force on live load in bridges 
should not be considered in longitudinal 
direction. The seismic force on live load 
should be considered in transverse direction 
as explained in the 7.1. 

e) The seismic force on flowing mass of water 
in the longitudinal direction in case of 
aqueducts should not be considered, however 
seismic force on this water mass be considered 
in transverse direction. The hydrodynamic 
action of water on the walls of water carrying 
trough shall be considered according to the 
provisions of code on liquid retaining 
structures. 


f) The earthquake accelerations on embedded 
portion of bridge foundations should be 
reduced as explained in 9.3. 

g) Thevalue of static elastic modulus of material, 
where required, may be taken for dynamic 
analysis unless a more definite value is 
available for use in seismic condition. 


7 LOAD COMBINATIONS 


When earthquake forces are combined with other 
forces such as dead load and live load, the load factor 
for plastic design of steel structures and partial safety 
factors for limit state design of reinforced concrete 
structures and pre-stressed concrete structures shall be 
considered. Load factors may be used as in IRC/IRS 
codes with the provision that when earthquake load 


(EL) and dead load (DL) are combined, load factor 
shall be minimum 1.5; and when seismic load is 
combined with all other loads, load factor shall be 
minimum 1.2. 


7.1 Seismic Force on Live Load 


The seismic force due to live load shall not be 
considered when acting in the direction of traffic, but 
shall be considered in the direction perpendicular to 
traffic. 


The live load on the bridges for highways shall be 20 
percent of design live load, 0 percent for rural roads 
and 30 percent of design live load for railway bridges 
without impact. 


NOTE — The bridge owner authorities can modify these 
percentages on the basis of location of bridge and intensity of 
traffic. 


7.2 Seismic Load Combinations 


7.2.1 The seismic forces shall be assumed to come 
from any horizontal direction. For this purpose, two 
separate analysis shall be performed for design seismic 
forces acting along two orthogonal horizontal 
directions. The design seismic force resultant (that is 
axial force, bending moments, shear forces, and 
torsion) at any cross-section of a bridge component 
resulting from the analyses in the two orthogonal 
horizontal directions shall be combined according to 
the expressions below: 


a) EL, +0.3EL, 
b) +0.3EL, + EL, 
where 
EL, = force resultant due to full design seismic 
force along x direction, and 
EL, — force resultant due to full design seismic 


force along y direction. 


When vertical seismic forces are also considered, the 
design seismic force resultants at any cross-section of 
a bridge component shall be combined as below: 


1) +51, +0.3Е1, +0.3ЕІ, 
2) #0.3Е1 + ЕГ +0.3ЕІ, 
3) 303ЕГ,%03ЕІ, + EL, 


where EL, and EL, аге as defined above and EL, is ће 
force resultant due to full design seismic force along 
the vertical direction. 


As an alternative to the procedure given above, the 
forces due to the combined effect of two or three 
components can be obtained on the basis of square 


root of sum of square (SRSS), that is JEL? + EL? 


IS 1893 (Part 3) : 2014 


or JEL,’ + EL,’ + EL . 


7.3 Vertical Component of Seismic Action 


7.3.1 The effect of the vertical seismic component on 
sub-structure and foundation may, as arule, be omitted 
in Zones II and III. The vertical accelerations should 
be specially considered in bridges with large spans, 
those in which stability is the criteria of design and in 
situations where bridges are located in near field. 
However the effect of vertical seismic component is 
particularly important in the following components/ 
situations and needs to be investigated: 


a) Pre-stressed concrete decks; 
b) Bearings and linkages; and 
c) Horizontal cantilever structural elements. 


7.3.2 The seismic zone factor for vertical ground 
motions, when required may be taken as two-thirds of 
that for horizontal motions given in Table 2 of IS 1893 
(Part 1). However, the time period for the superstructure 
has to be worked out separately using the characteristic 
of the superstructure for vertical motion, in order to 


; S, ; ) , 
estimate та for vertical acceleration. The natural time 


period of superstructure can be estimated using 
appropriate modelling and free vibration analysis using 
computer. However, for simply supported 
superstructure with uniform flexural rigidity, the 
fundamental time period T for vertical motion can be 
estimated using the expression: 


p -2p |” 
T EI 


m = mass per unit length; and 


where 


| 2 span; 


EI = flexural rigidity of the superstructure. 


8 CALCULATION OF NATURAL PERIOD OF 
BRIDGE 


8.1 Simply Supported Bridges 


Where the vibration unit of sub-structure can be 
idealized as a single cantilever pier carrying the 
superstructure mass, resting on well, pile or open 
foundation, the fundamental period shall be calculated 
from the following equation: 


rem. 
g 


6 - horizontal displacement at the top of pier due 
to horizontal force (2 mg) 


where 


IS 1893 (Part 3) : 2014 


where 


m = lumped mass at the top of pier. 


In general pier shall be considered fixed at the 
foundation level. However, in case of soft soil or deep 
foundations, soil flexibility may be considered in the 
calculation of natural period as per 5.2.4. 


8.2 Other Types of Bridges 


Where idealization by a single cantilever pier model is 
not possible, the natural periods of vibration may be 
calculated by free vibration analysis of an appropriate 
mathematical model of bridge superstructure, bearing, 
sub-structure, foundation and soil. 


9 METHOD OF CALCULATING SEISMIC 
FORCES 


9.1 The following methods of seismic analysis may 
be employed for calculation of seismic forces in 
bridges: 


a) Seismic coefficient method (SCM); 
b) Response spectrum method (RSM); 
c) Time history method (THM); and 

d) Nonlinear pushover analysis (NPA). 


The recommended method of analysis for different 
category of bridges and earthquake level is given in 
Table 1. The linear analysis considering elastic 
behaviour is required for DBE. 


9.2 Seismic Coefficient Method 


The seismic force to be resisted by bridge components 
shall be computed as follows: 


F-AW 
where 


F = horizontal seismic force to be resisted; 


W = weight of mass under consideration ignoring 
reduction due to buoyancy or uplift; and 


A, = design horizontal seismic coefficient as 
determined from 9.4.1. 


9.3 For embedded portion of foundation at depths 
exceeding 30 m below scour level, the seismic force 
due to foundation mass may be computed using design 
seismic coefficient equal to 0.5A, 


For portion of foundation between the scour level and 
up to 30 m depth, the seismic force due to that portion 
of foundation mass may be computed using seismic 
coefficient obtained by linearly interpolating between 
A, at scour level and 0.5 A, at a depth 30 m below 
scour level. 


Table 1 Method of Seismic Analysis of Bridges 
(Clause 9.1) 


Earthquake Category of Bridge Type 
Level Regular Special Special 
Regular Irregular 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
DBE SCM RSM RSM 
THM THM 
NPA 


NOTE - In case of M CE, non-linear analysis and Time History 
M ethod shall be adopted for regular, special regular and special 
irregular bridges. 


9.4 Response Spectrum Method (RSM) 
The following steps are required in RSM: 


a) Formulation of an appropriate mathematical 
model consisting of lumped mass system 
using 2D/3D beam elements. The 
mathematical model should suitably represent 
dynamic characteristics of superstructure, 
bearings, sub-structure, foundation and soil/ 
rock springs. In rock and very stiff soil fixed 
base may be assumed. 

b) Determination of natural frequency and mode 
shapes following a standard transfer matrix, 
stiffness matrix, finite element method or any 
other standard approach. 

c) Determine total response by combining 
responses in various modes by: (1) by mode 
combination procedure such as SRSS, CQC, 
etc, or (2) time-wise superposition of 
responses using ground motion time 
history(s). In 9.1 (a) and 9.1 (b), A, shall be 
computed as explained below. 


9.4.1 Horizontal Seismic Coefficient, Ақ 


The design horizontal seismic coefficient, A, shall be 
determined from following expression of 6.4.2 of 
151893 (Part 1). 


NIN 


1 Da 

ru 

Provided thatfor any structure with T « 0.1 s, the value 
of A, shall not be taken less than Z/2, whatever be the 
value of ПК. 


where 


Z = zone factor; 

I < importance factor (see Table 2); 

К = response reduction factor (see Table 3); and 
5 


а 


Р = average acceleration coefficient for rock or 


soil sites as given in Fig. 1. 


Spectral Acceleration Coefficient (5,/0) 


1.0 1.5 


IS 1893 (Part 3) : 2014 


Type ! (Rock, or Hard Soil 
Туре Il (Medium Soil) 
Type lil (Soft Soil) 


2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 


Period(s) 


Fic.1 RESPONSE SPECTRA FOR ROCK AND SoiL SITES FOR 5 PERCENT DAMPING 


9.4.2 Design Vertical Seismic Coefficient, А, 


The design vertical seismic coefficient may be adopted 
as in 7.3.2. 


9.4.3 Design Seismic Coefficient for Different Soils 
and Damping 


M athematical expressions of 5.4.2 of IS 1893 (Part 1) 
can be used to compute Sg for different soil/rock 
types. Table 3 of 15 1893 (Part1) can be used for 
damping other than 5 percent. 


9.4.4 Importance Factor, I 


Bridges are designed to resist design basis earthquake 
(DBE) level, or other higher or lower magnitude of 
forces, depending on the consequences of their partial 
or complete non-availability, due to damage or failure 
from seismic event. The level of design force is 
obtained by multiplying (Z/2) by factor ‘7’, which 
represents seismic importance of the structure. 
Combination of factors considered in assessing the 
consequences of failure, and hence choice of factor 
“Г, include inter alia. 


Importance factor depends upon the following: 
a) Extent of disturbance to traffic and possibility 
of providing temporary diversion; 
b) Availability of alternative routes; 


c) Cost of repairs and time involved, which 
depend on the extent of damages, minor or 
major; 


d) Cost of replacement, and time involved in 
reconstruction in case of failure; and 

e) Indirect economic loss due to its partial or full 
non-availability. 


Importance factors are given in Table 2 for different 
types of bridges. 


9.4.5 Response Reduction Factor, R 


The response reduction factor for different components 
is given in Table 3. 


9.5 TIME HISTORY METHOD (THM) 


The dynamic analysis of a bridge by time history 
method may be carried out using direct step-by-step 
method of integration of equations of motion. А least 
three spectrum compatible time histories shall be used, 
when site-specific time histories are not available. The 
spectrum used to generate these time histories shall be 
the same as used for the modal analysis. Their duration 
shall be consistent with their magnitude and source 
characteristics of design basis earthquake. The total 
duration of time history shall be about 30s of which 
the strong motion part shall be not less than 6s. This 
analysis can be carried out using a standard software 
package. 


9.6 Non-linear Pushover Analysis (NPA) 


Itis a static non-linear analysis carried out to determine 
lateral load versus displacement at control point in the 
structure for the purpose of determining capacity of 


IS 1893 (Part 3) : 2014 


Table 2 Importance Factor 
(Clause 9.4.4) 


SI Seismic Class Illustrative Examples of Bridges Importance 
No. Factor ‘T 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Normal bridges All bridges except those mentioned in other classes 1 
ii) Important bridges a) River bridges and flyovers inside cities 12 
b) Bridges on national and state highways 1.2 
c) Bridges serving traffic near ports and other centres of economic activities 1. 
d) Bridges crossing railway lines 1.2 
iii) Large critical bridgesin a) Long bridges more than 1 km length across perennial rivers and creeks 1.5 
all Seismic Zones b) Bridges for which alternative routes are not available 1.5 
iv) Railway bridges a) All important bridges irrespective of route. 1.5 
b) Major bridges on group A, B and C routes (Route classification as per IRP way manual) 15 
с) Major bridges on all other routes. 1.25 
d) All other bridges on group A, B and C routes 1.25 
е) All other bridges 1.0 


NOTE — While checking for seismic effects during construction, the importance factor of 1 shall be considered for all bridges in all 


zones. 


Table 3 Response Reduction Factor R for Bridge Components 
(Clause 9.4.5) 


SI Structure, Component or Connection R 


(1) (2) 


i) Superstructure 
ii) Sub-structure: 


M asonry piers (un reinforced) cantilever type, wall type 


Steel framed construction 

Steel cantilever piers 

Steel trussed arch 

Reinforced concrete arch 

A butments of mass concrete and masonry 
) R.C.C. abutment 

Integral frame with ductile detailing, and 

Integral frame without ductile detailing 


coooss 


Zas; 


3 


ez 


p 
Bearings (Elastomeric, pot, knuckle, roller-rocker) 


Stoppers in bearings 
Foundations (well, piles or open). 


Reinforced concrete piers with ductile detailing cantilever type, wall type 
Reinforced concrete piers without ductile detailing*, cantilever type, wall type 


Reinforced concrete, framed construction in piers, with ductile detailing, columns of RCC bents, RCC single column piers 


) 

iv) Expansion joints and connections within a span of structure, hinge 
) 
) 


ЕТ 
о|-- 


ге 


BERE 


Wt 


eS O DJ PINO жар. 


NOTE — Response reduction factor, В should be taken as 1.0 for calculating displacements. 


the structure. The analysis can be performed using a 
standard software package. The method can be 
employed for design of special bridges and to 
determine capacity of existing structures for the 
purpose of retrofitting. 


10 HYDRODYNAMIC FORCE ON 
STRUCTURE 


SUB- 


10.1 The hydrodynamic force on submerged portion 
of pier and foundation up to mean scour level shall be 
assumed to act in a horizontal direction corresponding 
to that of earthquake motion. T hetotal horizontal force 
is given by the following formula: 


Fez С.А М 


where 


C, = coefficient (see Table 4); 
A, = design horizontal seismic coefficient; 
W, = weight о the water in the enveloping cylinder, 
-р,ла?Н, see 10.3; 
Py = unit weight of water; 
H - height of submerged portion of pier; and 
а = radius of enveloping cylinder. 


10.2 Hydrodynamic Pressure Distribution 


The hydrodynamic pressure distribution on submerged 
portion of bridge pier is given in Fig. 2. The coefficients 
С, С, C, and C, are given in Table 5. The pressure 
distribution, Fig. 2, along the height of pier is drawn 
by assuming the value of C,from 0.1 to 1.0 in Table 5; 


Table 4 Values of C, 
(Clause 10.1) 


SI No. На С, 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) 1.0 0.390 
ii) 2.0 0.575 

ili) 3.0 0.675 
iv) 4.0 0.730 


Fic. 2 DiacRAM SHOWING HYDRODYNAMIC PRESSURE 
DISTRIBUTION 


this implies selecting a point on the vertical axis with 
origin at top, then other coefficients are read 
horizontally from the table to generate the pressure 
curve and determine other coefficients mentioned on 
the curve. 


DIRECTION OF 
SEISMIC FORCE 


IS 1893 (Part 3) : 2014 


Table 5 Coefficients C,, С, C, and C, 
(Clause 10.1) 


SI C, С; С, С, 
Хо. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) 0.1 0.410 0.026 0.934 
il) 0.2 0.673 0.093 0.871 
iii) 0.3 0.832 0.184 0.810 
iv) 0.4 0.922 0.289 0.751 
v) 0.5 0.970 0.403 0.694 
vi) 0.6 0.990 0.521 0.639 
vii) 0.8 0.999 0.760 0.532 
viii) 1.0 1.000 1.000 0.428 


10.3 Typical cases of submerged portions of piers and 
the enveloping cylinders are shown in Fig. 3. 


10.4 The earth pressure on the back of abutments, wing 
walls and return walls of bridge shall be calculated as 
given in 22 (see also Note). 
NOTE — The hydrodynamic suction from the water side and 
dynamic increment in earth pressures from the earth side shall 


not be considered simultaneously. The water level on earth 
side may be treated as the same as on the river side. 


11 SUPERSTRUCTURE 


11.1 The superstructure shall be designed for the 
design seismic forces as specified in 9 plus other loads 
required in design load combinations. 


11.2 Under simultaneous action of horizontal and 
vertical accelerations, the superstructure shall have a 
factor of safety of at least 1.5 against overturning under 
DBE condition. 


11.3 The superstructure shall be secured, when 
necessary to the sub-structure in all zones through 
bearings possessing adequate vertical holding down 
devices and/or unseating prevention system for 
superstructure. These devices should be used for 
suspended spans also with the restrained portion of 
the superstructure. However, frictional forces in the 
devices should not be relied upon for preventing 
dislodging and jumping of superstructure. 


Ғіс. 3 CASES оғ ENVELOPING CYLINDER 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


12 BEARINGS 


12.1 The fixed bearings should be designed to 
withstand the horizontal and vertical seismic forces, 
which are expected to transmitthese forces in the event 
of ground motion. 


12.2 Inthecaseof movable bearings, the bearings shall 
be able to accommodate designed displacements. The 
displacements beyond design values shall be restrained 
by stoppers. 


12.3 Any out of phase motion of piers, if envisaged, 
shall be considered in working out design seismic 
displacement in bearings. 


12.4 The bearings that are permitted to move in 
longitudinal direction but restrained in transverse 
direction shall be designed for estimated design seismic 
force in transverse direction. 


13 VERTICAL HOLD-DOWN DEVICES 


13.1 Vertical hold-down devices shall be provided at 
all supports (or hinges in continuous structures), where 
resulting vertical force U due to the maximum elastic 
horizontal and vertical seismic forces (combined as per 
7) opposes and exceeds 50 percent of the dead load 
reaction D. 


13.2 Where vertical force U, due to the combined 
effect of maximum elastic horizontal and vertical 
seismic forces, opposes and exceeds 50 percent, but is 
less than 100 percent, of the dead load reaction D, the 
vertical hold-down device shall be designed for a 
minimum net upward force of 10 percent of the 
downward dead load reaction that would be exerted if 
the span were simply supported. 


13.3 If thevertical force U, dueto the combined effect 
of maximum horizontal and vertical seismic forces, 
opposes and exceeds 100 percent of the dead load 


reaction D, then the device shall be designed for a net 
upward force of 1.2 (U-D); however, it shall not be 
less than 10 percent of the downward dead load reaction 
that would be exerted if the span were simply 
supported. 


14 SEATING WIDTH 


The bearing seat width Sẹ, in mm, between the end of 
girder and edge of sub-structure, Fig. 4 and minimum 
Sg between the ends of girder at suspended joint should 
be not less that the following values: 


Sg = 203+1.67 L+6.66 Н for seismic Zones II and 111 
Sg = 305+2.50 L 410.0 H for seismic Zones IV and V 
where 


L length of the superstructure to the adjacent 
expansion joints or to the end of 
superstructure. In case of bearings under 
suspended spans, itis the sum of the lengths 
of two adjacent portions of the 
superstructure. Іп case of single span bridges, 
itis equal to the length of the superstructure, 
in m. 

average height of all columns or piers 
supporting the superstructure to the next 
expansion joint, for bearings at abutments, 
in m. It is equal to zero for single span 
bridges. For bearings at column or piers, it 
isthe height of column or pier. For bearings 
under suspended spans, it is the average 
height of two adjacent columns or piers. 


15 ANTI-DISLODGING ELEMENTS IN THE 
HORIZONTAL DIRECTION 


A nti-dislodgement el ements shall be provided between 
adjacent sections of the superstructure at supports and 
at expansion joints. A nti-dislodgement elements like 


=. SE L — 


Fic. 4 BRIDGE SEATS ON PIER TOP OR АТ SUSPENDED JOINT 


10 


reaction blocks and seismic arrestors shall be designed 
for, at least twice the seismic force. 


Thelinkages, if provided, shall be designed for atleast, 
elastic seismic acceleration coefficient, A, times the 
weightof the lighter of thetwo adjoining spans or parts 
of the structure as in the case of suspended spans. 


If the linkage is at locations where relative 
deformations are designed to occur, then sufficient 
slack must be allowed in the linkage so that linkages 
start functioning only when the design relative 
displacement at the linkage is exceeded and linkage 
becomes effective, after overcoming the designed slack 
in the linkage. 


W hen linkages are provided at columns or piers, the 
linkage of each span may be connected to the column 
or pier instead of to the adjacent span. 


16 SUBMERSIBLE BRIDGES 


For submerged superstructure of submersible bridges, 
the hydrodynamic pressure shall be determined by the 
following equation: 


p=8.75A, Ну 
where 


p = hydrodynamic pressure, in kPa; 


А, = design horizontal seismic coefficient as given 
in 9.4.1; 


H =height of water surface from the level of 
deepest scour (see 4.5.2) іп m; and 


y = depth of the section below the water surface, 
inm. 


The total horizontal shear and moment per meter width 
about the centre of gravity of the base at any depth y, 
due to hydrodynamic pressure are given by the 
following relations: 


V, = 2/3 py 
where SOME 
V, - hydrodynamic shear, in kPa; and 
M, - hydrodynamic moment, in kPa-m. 


17 SPECIAL DUCTILITY REQUIREMENTS 
FOR BRIDGES 


17.1 General Requirement 


The bridge shall be designed so that its behaviour under 
design seismic action is ductile. The capacity design 
provisions shall be applicable to regular, special and 
irregular types of bridges in Zones 111, IV and V. 


The intended plastic hinges shall be provided with 


11 


IS 1893 (Part 3) : 2014 


adequate ductility measures to ensure the required 
overall structure ductility. 


17.2 Detailing for Ductility 


The compliance with provisions of Annex B should 
be made in general to ensure the availability of 
adequate local and overall structure ductility. 


18 DETAILING 
DISPLACEMENTS 


In addition to ensure overall ductility, structural and non- 
structural detailing must ensure satisfactory behaviour 
of the bridge under design seismic displacement. 


FOR CONTROL OF 


The design value of the displacement d, under seismic 
condition for providing clearances in critical 
components shall be determined as follows: 


дер Е de t dg + dis 
where 


ағ = design seismic displacement determined from 
linear analysis considering R + 1; 


dg = displacement due to permanent and quasi- 
permanent action measured in long term such 
as shrinkage, creep and post-tensioning; 


ар = displacement due to thermal movements = 
0.4 ар; and 


d, -design displacement due to thermal 
movement. 


19 SEISMIC RETROFITTING OF BRIDGES 


19.1 General Provision 


The decision to retrofit shall be based on the overall 
consideration of seismicity, vulnerability and 
importance of the bridge. 


The need to retrofit shall be determined on the basis of 
one of the standard procedures such as capacity- 
demand ratio method, non-linear pushover analysis and 
time history method. 


The objective of retrofitting should be to meet at least 
the requirement of present seismic code considering 
residual life of the structure. 


19.2 Retrofit Techniques 


19.2.1 On the basis of deficiency observed after 
seismic evaluation, suitable retrofit techniques should 
be selected. Some retrofit techniques for various 
components are given below. 


19.2.2 Superstructure 


Horizontal or vertical motion restrainers, inter linking 
of spans, pre-stressing, using dampers. 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


19.2.3 Sub-structure 


Concrete jacketing, steel jacketing, carbon fiber 
winding, composite jacket of fibre glass and other 
composites. 


19.2.4 Bearings 


Replacement of bearings by new bearings that could 
accommodate displacements, provision of stoppers, 
clamps/vertical holding down devices, replacement of 
bearings by isolation devices. 


19.2.5 Foundation 


Strengthening of existing foundation by enlargement 
of size, increasing number of piles, jacketing. 


19.3 Effectiveness of R etrofit Techniques 


Theretrofit structure should be analyzed and re-designed 
to check its effectiveness following standard procedures. 
The experimental methods of testing effectiveness of 
techniques may be carried out on components/models 
by quasi-static testing or on shaking table. 


20 SPECIAL EARTHQUAKE PROTECTION 
AND RESISTANT DEVICES 


20.1 Seismic Base Isolation 


Seismic base isolation devices can be designed and 
introduced on the top of piers to increase fundamental 
period of bridge and thus reduce the seismic forces in 
sub-structure. Seismic base isolation devices can be 
used in place of traditional bearings. The devices may 
comprise of elastomeric bearings, high damping rubber 
bearing, lead rubber bearing and friction- pendulum 
system. In addition to isolation bearing a damping 
device in the form of a damper is also provided. The 
isolation device shall be useful when natural period of 
bridge is less than 2 s. 


20.1.1 The isolation system should be designed 
following the standard procedure. The choice of 
characteristics of future ground motion is important in 
this design approach. 


20.2 Shock Transmission Units (STU) 


In the case of bridge spans with continuous 
superstructure, the seismic force developed at deck 
level can be distributed uniformly to various piers by 
providing special devices such as STUs. The design is 
made such that these units permit slow movements, 
while under severe shaking these devices restrain the 
movement and engage various piers in sharing the shear 
forces. The STUs may consist of viscous dampers or 
such similar devices installed between sub-structure 
and superstructure. The STUs should be designed 
following a standard literature. 


12 


20.3 EARTHQUAKE RESISTANT DESIGN 
WITH SPECIAL FEATURES 


The bridges with typical site conditions can be designed 
with special earthquake resistant features. The 
earthquake force generated in the superstructure can 
be resisted by one or more specially made abutments, 
the earthquake force in superstructure can be resisted 
by one or more piers with fixed bearings, while other 
supports may be provided with movable bearings. A 
balance should be maintained between the strength and 
the flexibility requirements of the horizontal supports. 
High flexibility reduces the level of design force but 
increases movement at the joints and moveable 
bearings and may lead to high second order effects. 


21 FOUNDATIONS 


21.1 Liquefaction may occur in the case of saturated 
cohesion-less soil during earthquake vibrations. The 
liquefaction potential of sites liable to liquefy should 
be estimated by specialist literature. 


21.2 The remedial measures for liquefaction should be 
undertaken, if necessary. T he structural design of bridge 
may be modified if required to account for such effects. 


21.3 Safety against overturning/sliding shall be 
checked as per relevant IRC/IRS Codes. 
22 RETAINING WALLS 


22.1 This clause is applicable to ф soil only. The 
reference may be made to 25 for soil with cohesion. 


22.1.1 Dynamic Active Earth Pressure Due to Backfill 


Figure 5 shows a wall of height л, inclined with an 
angle a with vertical, retaining dry/moist cohesionless 
earth fill. The dynamic active earth pressure exerted 
against the wall shall be: 


1 
(Poa dan = af a 
where 
(Payayn = dynamic total active earth pressure, in kN/m 
length of wall; 
y = unit weight of soil, in KN/m3; and 
h = height of wall, in m. 


(1+А,) cos’ (ф-А-о:) 


x 
cos A cosa cos (б-о--2) 


a 


1 


біп (648) sin (6—i-2X) |> 
Tas (a-i) cos КЕТ! 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


COHESION LESS 
BACKFILL у, 0 


Fic. 5 Cross-Section or RETAINING WALL 


where 


A, 7 vertical seismic coefficient — its direction 
being taken consistently throughout the 


stability analysis of wall and equal 02A, Е 


ф = angle of internal friction of soil; 


X stant} An 
LEA 
о = angle with earth face of the wall makes with 
the vertical; 


i = slope of earthfill; 
ё = angle of friction between the wall and 
earthfill; and 
A, 7 horizontal seismic coefficient. 


The expression of (C,)ayn gives two values depending 
on the sign of A,. For design purpose higher of the two 
values shall be taken. 


22.1.1.1 The active pressure may be determined 
graphically by means of the method described in 
Annex C. 


22.1.1.2 Point of application 


From the total earth pressure computed as above 
subtract the static active pressure obtained by putting 
A, =A, =A = 0 іп the expression given in 22.1.1. The 
remainder is the dynamic increment. The static 
component of the total pressure shall be applied at an 
elevation h/3 above the base of the wall. The point of 
application of the dynamic increment shall be assumed 
to be at an elevation 0.5 h above the base. 


13 


22.1.1 Dynamic Passive Earth Pressure Due to Backfill 


The dynamic passive earth pressure against the walls 
shall be given by the following formula: 


1 


(ele то! h? C, 
where 
(Poy)dyn = dynamic passive earth pressure length of 
wall, in kg/m; and 
ска (14 A, )cos? (ф+о А) 


P cosà cosa cos (804A) 


2 


1 


біп (ф--6) sin (+i-A) |; 
E: (о-1) cos hier 


For design purposes, the lesser value of C, shall be 
taken out of its two values corresponding to +A ,. 


22.1.2.1 The passive pressure may be determined 
graphically by means of the method described in 
Annex D. 


22.1.22. Point of application 


From the total passive earth pressure computed as 
above subtract the static earth pressure obtained by 
putting A, =A, =A =0 in the expression given in 22.1.2. 
The remainder is the dynamic decrement. The static 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


component of the total pressure shall be applied at an 
elevation h/3 above the base of the wall. The point of 
application of the dynamic decrement shall be assumed 
to be at an elevation 0.5 л above the base of the wall. 


22.13 Active Pressure Due to Uniform Surcharge 


The active pressure against the wall due to a uniform 
surcharge of intensity g, KN per unit area of the inclined 
earthfill surface shall be: 


(Prag ШЕ 


22.1.3.1 Point of application 


| qhcosa 
cos(a-i) ° 


The dynamic increment in active pressure due to 
uniform surcharge shall be applied at an elevation of 
0.66 h above the base of the wall, while the static 
component shall be applied at mid-height of the wall. 


22.14 Passive Pressure Due to Uniform Surcharge 


The passive pressure against the wall due to a uniform 
surcharge of intensity q per unit area of the inclined 
earthfill shall be: 


(P, | = 


22.1.4.1 Point of application 


ghcosa 


cos(a-i) ° 


The dynamic decrement in passive pressure due to 
uniform surcharge shall be applied at an elevation 
of 0.66 л above the base of the wall while the static 
component shall be applied at an elevation 0.5 above 
the base. 


23 EFFECT OF SATURATION ON LATERAL 
EARTH PRESSURE 


23.1 For saturated earthfill, the saturated unit weight 
of the soil shall be adopted as іп the formulae described 
in 22.1. 


23.2 For submerged earthfill, the dynamic increment (or 
decrement) in active and passive earth pressure during 
earthquakes shall be found from expressions given in 
22.1.1 and 22.12 with the following modifications: 


The value of 8 shall be taken as % the value 
of 6 for dry/moist backfill. 
The value of à shall be taken as follows: 


a) 
b) 


Ys x Аһ 
Ү.-10 1A, 


ul 


where 
y, = saturated unit weight of soil, in kN /m*; 


A, = horizontal seismic coefficient (see 
10.4.1); and 


14 


A, 7 vertical seismic coefficient which is 


24 Ay. 
Buoyant unit weight shall be adopted. 


From the value of earth pressure found out as 
above, subtract the value of static earth 
pressure determined by putting A, —A, 2. =0. 
The remainder shall be dynamic increment. 


23.3 Hydrodynamic pressure on account of water 
contained in earth fill shall not be considered separately 
as the effect of acceleration of water has been 
considered indirectly. 


24 PARTIALLY SUBMERGED BACKFILL 


24.1 The ratio of the lateral dynamic increment in 
active pressure due to backfill to the vertical pressures 
at various depths along the height of wall may betaken 
as shown in Fig. 6a. 


The pressure distribution of dynamic increment in 
active pressures due to backfill may be obtained by 
multiplying the vertical effective pressures by the 
coefficients in Fig. 6a at corresponding depths. 
NOTE — C, is computed as in 22.1.1 for dry, moist and 
saturated backfills and с” is computed as in 22.1.1 and 23.2 
for sub-merged backfills. 


К, = value of C, when А = А, = А = 0 

K; = value of c' when A, =A, =2 =0 

h’ = height of submergence above the base of the wall 
Lateral dynamic increment due to surcharge 
multiplying with g is shown in Fig. 6b. 


24.2 Concrete or masonry inertia forces due to 
horizontal and vertical earthquake accelerations are the 
products of the weight of wall and the horizontal and 
vertical seismic coefficients respectively. 


25 ACTIVE EARTH PRESSURE DUE TO с-ф 
SOIL 


25.1 Active earth pressure due to с-ф soil as backfill. 
Fig. 7 shows a section of retaining wall retaining с-ф 
soil as backfill which also carries a uniform surcharge 
of intensity 4. 


25.2 AFCD is cracked zone in с-ф soil, CD being ‘H? 
given by following expression: 


H, = 4 IN, = nH 
Y 
where 


No = tan? (45° 0/2): 
n =Non-dimensional factor describing the depth 
of tension crack; and 
y =Dry or moist unit weight of soil. 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


| /|3(Ca-Ka),, сова 


hc: h Wins 
; p h cos(a - i) 


LATERAL DYNAMIC INCREMENT Due ro BACKFILL WITH HEIGHT оғ WALL 


Fic. 64 DISTRIBUTION OF THE RATIO = 
VERTICAL EFFECTIVE PRESSURE 


2(Са-Ка) , cosa 
h’ cos(a - i) 


= LATERAL DYNAMIC INCREMENT DUE TO SURCHARGE WITH HEIGHT OF WALL 


Fic. бв DISTRIBUTION OF THE RATIO 
SURCHARGE INTENSITY 


15 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


Q(1tav) 


Watay) SIT 

com 
NR EN 
AN 


Y 2 


Fic. 7 Forces ACTING ом FAILURE WEDGE IN ACTIVE STATE FOR SEISMIC CONDITION IN с-ф SOIL 


25.3 The general expression of computing dynamic 
active earth pressure is given as: 


1 
(РА) ауп 7 VE (Nam Jays *4H (Ма) шы 


dyn acm Jayn 


where (Naym) ayr (Nagm)dyrr and (Аас) ду» are dynamic 
earth coefficients which depend on 9, о, i, 6, А, А, 
and n. 


25.4 For static case (A, = A, = 0), earth pressure 
coefficients are designated as (Nam)st, (Nagm)st and 
(Мл) For various values of parameters ф, о, i and n, 
these earth pressure coefficients are shown in Figs. 8 
to 12. It may be noted that (Nem) is given in Fig. 8 for 
i 2 0 and n =0 case. For other values of i and n, these 
curves can be used by multiplying the obtained values 


of (Nam) by the factor: 


16 


n cos i COS о 
1 
| cos (а-і) | 
For i = 0 and n = 0 values of (N4,,) and (№), are 
same and shown in Fig. 9 a. 


For intermediate value of $, о, i and n linear 
interpolation may be done. 


It was further found that (Л...) ayr is independent to A, 
and A,. Therefore the value given in Fig. 8 may be 


adopted as (Nam) уп: 


26 Values of (Л...) ауп and (Nayy)ayn may be obtained 
by multiplying the values of (Мот): and (Nayy)st OY Non- 
dimensional factors А, and A, respectively. T heir values 
are given in Table 5 for some selected values of ф, о, 
n, iand A,. For intermediate values of these parameters, 
linear interpolation may be done. 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


ф (Deg.) 


FIG. 8 (N scm) 5: VERSUS ф FoR n = Q, i = 0? 


9 (Deg.) 


ЗА (Nags versus f for n = 0, i = 0° 


0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 


% (Deg.) 


9B (№...) versus f for n = 0.2, і = 0° 


17 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


0.8 


0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
$ (Deg.) 


9C (№...) versus f for n = 0.4, і = 0° 


Fic. 9 EARTH Pressure СокғғісіЕкт (naqm)st for 0° 51 оре 


(М.ат)ы 


% (Deg.) 


10А (N sam) st VERSUS ф ron n =0,i = 10° 


1.0 
0.8 
+ 06 
E 
Z 04 a20 
= ML 10° 
0.2 асе 
ol ~ 20° 
“гез, Еа 


ф (Deg.) 


VERSUS ф FoR n = 0.2, i = 10° 


108 (М 


ат) st 


18 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
ф (Deg.) 


10с (№ sam) st VERSUS ф ron n = 0.4, i = 10° 


aqm 
Fic. 10 EARTH Pressure СоЕғЕІСІЕМТ (naqm)st ron 10° SLope 


0.8 
0.6 


0.4 


(Naym)st 


0.2 


0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
ф (Deg.) 


11А (Nam) st VERSUS  FORN 20.2, i = 0° 


(Naym)st 


$ (Deg.) 


118 (N,,.), VERSUS ф ron n = 0.4, i = 0° 


Fic. 11 Елвтн Pressure СОЕЕР!СЕМТ (naym)st for 0° Slope 


19 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


1.5 


1.0 


(Naym)st 


0.5 


(Naym)st 


ф (Deg.) 


128 (Nan) VERSUS ф ron n = 0.2, i = 10° 


(Naym)st 


% (Deg.) 


12c (Nam) st VERSUS ф ron n = 0.4, i = 10° 


Fic. 12 EARTH Pressure COEFFICIENT (naym)sr ron 10° 510РЕ 


20 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


Table 5 Values of ^, and A, 
(Clause 26) 


п= 0,1= 0°, A, =A. 


n=0,i= 10°, А, = А, 


= 0.10 
Се ее [ow [ow [aw [ow [ow [ae low 
1.193 1.153 1.136 1.435 1.345 1.313 1.773 1.618 1.574 
1.206 1.151 1.128 1.441 1.323 1.276 1.712 1.52 1.449 
1.254 1.168 1.137 1.542 1.356 1.292 1.869 1.566 1.466 


n=0.4,1= 0°, А 


wee [ow [ow [er Dow [ow [er ЕСС 


1.206 1.117 1.073 1.44 1.247 1.154 1.709 1.393 1.246 
1.259 1.133 1.086 1.554 1.279 1.182 1.887 1.438 1.286 
1.382 1.155 1.101 1.827 1.327 2.336 1.513 


п-0.4,і- 104) 


A,= 0.05 A, = 0.10 A, = 0.15 
КЕЛЕТ ЕСЕТ Ler low [ow lor [ow | 


n=0.4,1=0°, А 


Rajo Lee ee ar oe ee са 


1.169 1.117 1.09 1.356 1.247 1.192 1.57 1.393 1.307 
1.205 1.133 1.102 1.433 1.279 1.214 1.684 1.438 1.337 
1.156 1.116 1.575 1.327 1.243 1.917 1.513 1.382 


n= 0.4, i = 10°, А, 


"pee Den Dem m [oe em em Len Te 


1.211 1.153 1.127 1.478 1.345 1.292 1.854 1.618 1.536 
1.226 1.151 1.122 1.488 1.323 1.262 1.425 
1.287 1.168 1.619 1.357 1.277 1.997 1.566 1.442 


21 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


АММЕХА 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 
— Specification (fourth revision) 
1893 Criteria for earthquake resistant 


design of structures: 

General provisions and buildings 
Liquid retaining tanks — Elevated 
and ground supported 


(Part 1) : 2002 
(Part 2) : 2014 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword, Clauses 4.2.7, 5.3 and 17.2) 
DUCTILE DETAILING 


IS No. Title 

456 : 2000 Code of practice for plain and 
reinforced concrete(fourth revision) 

1343 : 2012 Code of practice for pre-stressed 
concrete (first revision) 

1786 : 2008 High strength deformed steel bars 
and wires for concrete reinforcement 

B-0 GENERAL 


The detailing rules given have been chosen with the 
intention that reliable plastic hinges should form atthe 
top and bottom of each pier column, or at the bottom 
only of asingle stem pier under horizontal loading and 
thatthe bridge should remain elastic between the hinges 
(see Fig. 13). The aim is to achieve a reliable ductile 
structure. R epair of plastic hinges is relatively easy. 


Design strategy to be used is based on assumption that 
the plastic response shall occur in the sub-structure. 


B-1 SPECIFICATION 


B-1.1 Minimum grade of concrete should be M 25 
(fx = 25 MPa). 


B-1.2 Steel reinforcement having elongation more 
than 14.5 percent and conforming to other requirements 
of IS 1786 shall be used. 


B-2 LAYOUT 


a) The use of circular column is preferred for 
better plastic hinge performance and ease of 
construction. 

Thebridge mustbe proportioned and detailed 
by the designer so that plastic hinges occur 
only at the controlled locations (for example 
pier column ends) and not in other 
uncontrolled places. 


b) 


B-3 LONGITUDINAL REINFORCEMENT 


The area of the longitudinal reinforcement shall not 
be less than 0.8 percent and not more than 6 percent of 
the gross cross-section area A,. Splicing of flexural 
region is not permitted in the plastic hinge region. L ap 
shall not be located within a distance of 2 times the 


22 


maximum column cross-sectional dimension from the 
end at which hinge may occur. The splices should be 
proportioned as a tension splice. 


B-3.1 Curtailment of longitudinal reinforcement in 
piers due to reduction in seismic bending moment 
towards top. 


B-3.1.1 The reduction of longitudinal reinforcement 
at mid-height in piers should not be carried out except 
in tall pier. 


B-3.12 In case of high bridge piers such as of height 
equal to 30 m or more, the reduction of reinforcement 
at mid height may be done. In such cases thefollowing 
method should be adopted: 


a) Thecurtailment of longitudinal reinforcement 
shall not be carried out in the section six times 
the least lateral column dimension from the 
location where plastic hingein likely to occur. 
The interval between hoop ties is specified to 
be less than 150 mm in a reinforcement 
position. Theinterval between hoop ties shall 
not change abruptly, the change must be 
gradual. 


b) 


B-4 TRANSVERSE REINFORCEMENT 


Thetransverse reinforcement for circular columns shall 
consist of spiral or circular hoops. Continuity of these 
reinforcements should be provided by either [see Figs. 
14 (a) and 14(b)]: 


a) Welding — The minimum length of weld 
should be 12 times the bar diameter, and the 
minimum weld throatthickness should be 0.4 
times the bar diameter. 


b) Lapping — The minimum length of lap 


EARTHQUAKE A — 
ҒОКСЕ 


POTENTIAL PLASTIC 
HINGE REGIONS 


IS 1893 (Part 3) : 2014 


~—-» EARTHQUAKE 


Ж 


PILE CAP 


A> 


ELEVATION 


VALE 


S 


SECTION AA 


a) SINGLE COLUMN OR PIER TYPE SUBSTRUCTURES 


EARTHQUAKE А — 
FORCE 
L COLUMN CAP ----- EARTHQUAKE 
N 
X POTENTIAL PLASTIC 
\_HINGE REGIONS _ 
/ 4 
РА b 
PILE | | 
А -»і 
ELEVATION SECTION AA 


b) MULTI-COLUMN OR FRAME TYPE SUBSTRUCTURES 


Fic. 13 Ротемтілі. LOCATION or PLASTIC HINGES IN SUBSTRUCTURES 


should be 30 times the bar diameter and each 
end of the bar anchored with 135? hooks with 
a 10 diameter extension into the confined core. 
Splicing of the spiral reinforcement in the 
plastic hinge region should be avoided. 


In rectangular columns, rectangular hoops may be used. 
A rectangular hoop is a closed stirrup, having a 135? 
hook with a 10 diameter extension at each end that is 
embedded in the confined core Fig. 14 (c). When hoop 
ties arejoined in any place other than a corner the hoop 
ties shall overlap each other by a length 40 times the 
bar diameter of the reinforcing bar which makes the 
hoop ties with hooks as specified above. 


Joint portion of hoop ties for both circular and 
rectangular hoops should be staggered. 


B-5 DESIGN OF PLASTIC HINGE REGIONS 


B-5.1 Seismic Design Force for Sub-structure 


Provisions given for the ductile detailing of RC 
members subjected to seismic forces shall be adopted 
for supporting components of the bridge. Further, the 
design shear force at the critical section (s) of sub- 
structures shall be the lower of the following: 


M aximum elastic shear force at the critical 
section of the bridge component divided by 


a) 


23 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


a) WELDING IN CIRCULAR HOOPS 


7 


/ O10. d 


CONTINNOUS BAR 
“ОҒ DIAMETER d 


“135° BEND 


b) LAPPING IN CIRCULAR HOOPS 


m 


lo 


o 


c) RECTANGULAR HOOPS 


Fic. 14 TRANSVERSE REINFORCEMENT IN COLUMN 


the response reduction factor for the 
components as per Table. 

M aximum shear forcethat develops when the 
sub-structure has maximum moment that it 
can sustain (that is the over strength plastic 
moment capacity as per B-5.2) in single 
column or single-pier type sub-structure, or 
maximum shear force that is developed when 
plastic moment hinges are formed in the sub- 
structure so as to form a collapse mechanism 
in multiple column frame type or multiple- 
pier type sub-structures, in which the plastic 
moment capacity shall be the over strength 
plastic moment capacity as per B-5.2. 

In a single-column type or pier type sub- 


24 


structure, the critical section is at the bottom 
of the column or pier as shown in Figs. 13(a). 
And, in multi-column frame-type sub- 
structures or multi-pier sub-structures, the 
critical sections are at the bottom and/or top 
of the columns/piers as shown in Figs. 13 (b). 


B-5.2 Over Strength Plastic M oment C apacity 


The over strength plastic moment capacity at the 
reinforced concrete section shall be taken as 1.3 times 
the ultimate moment capacity based on the usual partial 
safety factors recommended by relevant design codes 
for materials and loads, and on the actual dimensions 
of members and the actual reinforcement detailing 
adopted. 


B-5.3 Special Confining Reinforcement 


Special confining reinforcement shall be provided at 
theends of pier columns where plastic hinge can occur. 
This transverse reinforcement should extend for a 
distance from the point of maximum moment over the 
plastic hinge region over a length /,. T he length г, shall 
not be less than, 1.5 times the column diameter or 1.5 
times the large cross sectional dimension where 
yielding occurs, 1/6 of clear height of the column for 
frame pier (thatis when hinging can occur at both ends 
of the column), 1/4 of clear height of the column for 
cantilever pier (that is when hinging can occur at only 
one end of the column) or 600 mm. 


B-5.4 Spacing of Transverse R einforcement 


The spacing of hoops used as special confining 
reinforcement shall not exceed 1/5 times the least 
lateral dimension of the cross-section of column or 6 
times the diameter of the longitudinal bar or 150 mm. 


The parallel legs of rectangular stirrups shall be spaced 
not more than 1/3 of the smallest dimension of the 
concrete core or more than 300 mm centre to centre. If 
the length of any side of the stirrups exceeds 300 mm, 
across Не shall be provided. А Iternatively, overlapping 
stirrups may be provided within the column. 


B-5.5 Amount of Transverse Steel to be Provided 


B-5.5.1 The area of cross-section, А, of the bar 
forming circular hoops or spiral, to be used as special 
confining reinforcement, shall not be less than 


А 
А, = 0.09SD, ЕЕЕ 
А. Íy 
As, = 0.024$D, " 


Y. 


Or, 


whichever is the greater 
where 


А, = area of cross-section of circular hoop; 
S < pitch of spiral or spacing of hoops, in mm; 
D, = Diameter of core measured to the outside of 
the spiral or hoops, in mm; 
fa, = characteristic compressive strength of concrete; 
f, = yield stress of steel (of circular hoops or 
spiral); 
A, = gross area of the column cross-section; and 


A, = Area of the concrete core = zP | 


B-5.5.2 Тһе total area of cross-section of the bar 
forming rectangular hoop and cross ties, A,, to be used 
as special confining reinforcement shall not be less than 


25 


IS 1893 (Part 3) : 2014 


Aw = ozas лов 
А, ў 
or, A,, = 0.09681 79 
vy 
where 
h = longer dimension of the rectangular confining 
hoop measured to its outer face; and 
A, = area of confined core concrete in the 


rectangular hoop measured to its outer side 
dimensions. 
NOTE — Crossties where used should be of the same diameter 
as a peripheral hoop bar and A, shall be measured as the overall 
core area, regardless the hoop area. T he hooks of crossties shall 
engage peripheral longitudinal bars. 


B-5.5.2.1 U nsupported length of rectangular hoops 
shall not exceed 300 mm. 


B-5.5.3 For ductile detailing of hollow cross-section 
of pier, special literature may be referred. 


B-6 DESIGN OF COMPONENTS BETWEEN 
THE HINGES 


Once the position of the plastic hinges has been 
determined and these regions detailed to ensure a 
ductile performance, the structure betw een the plastic 
hinges is designed considering the capacity of the 
plastic hinges. The intention here is, 


a) toreliably protect the bridge against collapse 
so that it shall be available for service after a 
major shaking. 

to localize structural damage to the plastic hinge 
regions where it can be controlled and repaired. 


b) 


The process of designing the structure between the 
plastic hinges is known as ‘capacity design’. 


B-6.1 Column Shear and TransverseR einforcement 


To avoid a brittle shear failure, design shear force for 
pier shall be based on over strength moment capacities 
of the plastic hinges and given by: 


V, „Хм 
h 


where 


XM? = sum of the over strength moment capacities 
of the hinges resisting lateral loads, as detailed. 
In case of twin pier this would be the sum of 
the over strength moment capacities at the top 
and bottom of the column. For single stem 
piers the over strength moment capacity at the 
bottom only should be used. 


h = clear height of the column in the case of a 
column in double curvature; height to be 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


calculated from point of contra-flexure in the 
case of a column in single curvature. 


Outside the hinge regions, the spacing of hoops shall 
not exceed half the least lateral dimension of the 
column or 300 mm. 


B-7 DESIGN OF JOINTS 


В eam-column joints should be designed properly to 
resist theforces caused by axial load, bending and shear 


forces in the joining members. Forces in the joint 
should be determined by considering a free body of 
the joint with the forces on the joint member boundaries 
properly represented. 


The joint shear strength should be entirely provided 
by transverse reinforcement. Where the joint is not 
confined adequately (that is where minimum pier and 
pile cap width is less than three column diameters) the 
special confinement requirement should be satisfied. 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 22.1.1.1) 
GRAPHICAL DETERMINATION OF DYNAMIC ACTIVE EARTH PRESSURE 


C-1 MODIFIED CULMANN’S GRAPHICAL 
CONSTRUCTION (see Fig. 15) 


Different steps in modified construction for 
determining dynamic active earth pressure are as 
follows: 


a) Draw the wall section along with backfill 
surface on a suitable scale. 

b) Draw BS at an angle (6 — yw) with the 
horizontal. 

c) Draw BLatan angle of (90 -a -— ô- y) below 
BS. 

d) Intercept BD, equal to the resultant of the 
weight W, of first wedge A BC, and inertial 
forces (+W,a, апа W,a,). The magnitude of 
this resultant is W, 


Wi = WA(1x o, ) +02 


e) Through D, draw D, E, parallel to BL 
intersecting BC, at Е. 

f) Measure D, E, to the same force scale as BD,. 
The D, E, is the dynamic earth pressure for 
trial wedge. 

g) Repeat steps (d) to (f) with ВС,, BC, etc, as 
trial wedges. 

h) Draw a smooth curve through E, Е, and Е. 
This is the modified Culmann’s line. 


j) Draw a line parallel to BS and tangential to 
this curve. The maximum coordinate in the 
direction of BL is obtained from the point of 
tangent and is the dynamic active earth 
pressure (Рл) у. 


2(C;,- Ka) M 


MODIFIED 


сова - i) 


E 


CULMANN'S LINE 


і 
/ 


L 


/90-(а%5%ш) 


Fic. 15 Мопінер CULMANN’S CONSTRUCTION FOR DYNAMIC ACTIVE EARTH PRESSURE 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 22.1.2.1) 
GRAPHICAL DETERMINATION OF DYNAMIC PASSIVE EARTH PRESSURE 


D-1 MODIFIED CULMANN'S GRAPHICAL (90 — о — ё – y) below BS. The other steps for 
CONSTRUCTION construction remain unaltered (see Fig. 16). 


For determining the passive earth pressure draw BS Effect of uniformly distributed load and line load on 
at (6 — y) below horizontal. Next draw BL at the backfill surface may be handled in the similar way 
as for the static case. 


Та MODIFIED 


CULMANN'S LINE 


ASSUMED PLANE 
OF RUPTURE 


/ 


S (4-90-(4%5%ш) 
MINIMUM PASSIVE _\ 
PRESSURE VECTOR 


Fic. 16 Моріғєр CULMANN’S CONSTRUCTION FOR DYNAMIC Passive EARTH PRESSURE 


27 


IS 1893 (Part 3): 2014 


ANNEXE 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


Chairman 
Da A. S. А вул (up to 6 September 2010) 
Building M aterials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Da D. K. Paut (after 6 September 2010) 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Organization Representative(s) 


Association of Consulting Engineers, Bangalore SHRI Umesh B. Rao 
Suni B.V. Ravinpra Natu (Alternate) 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, M umbai Dr P.C. Basu 
Suri RosuaN A. D. (Alternate) 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi SHRI Ravi KUMAR 
Dr C. КАМЕЅНМАВА Rao (Alternate) 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi SHRI |. К. PRASAD 
SHRI Pankaj Gupta (Alternate) 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee SHRI NAVJEEN SAXENA 
Suri Ajay CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI BHAGWAN SINGH 
SHRI S. P. LoKHANDE (Alternate) 


Central Soils and Materials Research Station, New Delhi SHRI №. P. HONKANDAVAR 


бна S. L. Gupta (Alternate) 


Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune SHRI |. D. Gupta 

SHRI S. С. CHAPHALKAR (Alternate) 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi Director, Смор (E 6 Ne) 

Director, EMBANKMENT (Alternate) 
DDF Consultants Pvt. Ltd, New Delhi Dr (SuniMATI) Pratima R. Bose 
Delhi College of Engineering, Delhi SHRI ALOK VERMA 
Department of Atomic Energy, Kalpakkam SHRI S. RAMANUJAM 

Suni К. C. Jain (Alternate) 
Directorate General of Border Roads, New Delhi SHRI А.К. Dixit 
Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, New Delhi Bric. B. D. PANDEY 

Suri Ravi Sinha (Alternate) 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi SHRI Vinay KUMAR 

Ms Ita Dass (Alternate) 
Gammon India Limited, M umbai Suni V. N. HAGGADE 

SHRI J. N. Desai (Alternate) 
Geological Survey of India, Lucknow SHRI HARSH GUPTA 

Dr Kiran Mazumpar (Alternate) 
Housing & Urban Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRIMATI BINDU J ESWANI 

SHRI SURINDER GERA (Alternate) 
ndian Concrete Institute, Chennai DR А. R. SANTHAKUMAR 
ndian Institute of Technology Bombay, M umbai Dr Ravi SINHA 

Dr ALok Goyat (Alternate) 
ndian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Hyderabad Da C. V. R. Murty 
ndian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur Dr DurcesH C. Ral 
ndian Institute of Technology M adras, Chennai Dr A. MEHER PRASAD 
ndian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee PROF ASHOK JAIN 
ndian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar, Da S. K. Jain 


28 


Organization 


ndian M eterological Department, New Delhi 


ndian Road Congress, New Delhi 


ndian Society of Earthquake Technology, Roorkee 


aharashtra Engineering Research Institute, Nasik 


inistry of Road Transport and Highways, New Delhi 


ational Council for Cement and Building, Ballabgarh 
ational Geophysical Research Institute (CSIR), Hyderabad 


ational Highway Authority of India, New Delhi 
ational Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 


uclear Power Corporation India Limited, M umbai 


Public Works Department, M umbai 
Research, Design and Standards Organization, Lucknow 


RITES Limited, Gurgaon 
School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 


Tandon Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 

Tata Consulting Engineers, M umbai 

Vakil-M ehta-Sheth Consulting Engineers, M umbai 
Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, Nagpur 


Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun 
In personal capacity (174/2 F, Solanipram, Roorkee) 
іп personal capacity ( 
( 
In personal capacity (K-L / 2 Kavi Nagar, Ghaziabad) 
BIS Directorate General 


36 Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Raod, Nagpur) 
In personal capacity (C-2/155, West Enclave, Pitam Pura New Delhi) 


IS 1893 (Part 3) : 2014 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SuryA BALI JAISWAR 
Suri Rajesh PRAKASH (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
Director (Alternate) 
Рвоғ D. К. PauL 
Prof Н. R. Wason (Alternate) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (EartH Dam) 
Executive Director (Елвтн Dam) (Alternate) 
SHRI R. К. PANDEY 
SHRI VIRENDRA Kumar (Alternate) 
SHRI V. V. ARORA 


Dr M. Ravi Kumar 
Dr М. PunaNcHADRA Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH KUMAR Puri 


Dr PRAVEEN KHANDELWAL 
SHRI SAURABH GuPrA (Alternate) 


SHRI U. S. P. VERMA 
SuniMATI Mini K. PauL (Alternate) 


SHRI M. M. KHAN 


SHRI Ріүу5н AGARWAL 
Suri R. K. Goet (Alternate) 


SHRI К. №. SREENIVASA 
Dr V. THIRUVENDGADAM 


Dr К. MUTHUMANI 
Suri №. GOPALAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Dr MAHESH TANDON 
SHRI Vinay K. Guera (Alternate) 


SHRI K. V. SUBRAMANIAN 
SHRI C. K. RAVINDRANATHAN (Alternate) 


s ALPA R. SHETH 
Suni R. D. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


Da 0. R. JAISWAL 
Dr R. K. INGLE (Alternate) 


Dr бивни Kumar 
Dr 5. К. THAKKAR 
SHRI L. К. JAIN 
Da К. С. BHATIA 
Dr А.К. Мита: 


SHRI А.К. Saini, Scientist “Е” & Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI S. CHATURVEDI 
Scientist “Е” (Civil Engg), BIS 


29 


(Continued from second cover) 


k) 


The concept of ductility and over-strength is brought in the draft explicitly, by introducing the response 
reduction factors. 


Different response reduction factors have been proposed for the different components of the bridge, 
depending on the redundancy, expected ductility and over-strength in them. 


The design force level for bridge has been raised from the existing level and broughtin line with IS 1893 
(Part 1) : 2002. 


The concept of capacity design is introduced in the design of connections, sub-structures and foundations. 


The soil-foundation factor is dropped. The effect of soil on response is represented in the response 
spectrum. 


Provision for dislodging of girders in the bearings is introduced. 

Use of vertical hold-down devices, stoppers, restrainers and horizontal linkage elements to account for 
the large displacements generated during seismic shaking is recommended for preventing falling of 
spans. 

A minimum width of seating of superstructure over sub-structures to avoid dislodging of spans from 
atop the sub-structure is required for all bridges. 

The method of computing earth pressures for c— soil is included in the section on retaining walls. 


Intheformulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to international coordination among the standards 
and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating itto the practices in the field in this country. 


The units used with the items covered by the symbols shall be consistent throughout this standard, unless specifically 
noted otherwise. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of atest or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
*Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : M onthly A dditions'. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 39 (7739). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text A ffected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


H eadquarters: 
M anak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar M arg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central |: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar M arg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. SchemeVII М, V. I. P. Road, K ankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-А, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : С..Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, M arol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HY DERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


