( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 4407 - 1967

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR REED WALLING
Building Construction
Chairman
SHRI N. G. DEWAN

Practices Sectional

Committee,

BDC

13

Repesenting Chief Engineer, CPWD

Members ADDITIONALDIRECTORSTANDARDS Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) ( ARCHITECTURE ), RDSO DEPUTY DIRECTORSTANDARDS RGHITECTURE ), RDSO ( Alternate ) Builders' Association of India, Bombay SHRI $ "v APTE S&I K. J. SAPRA ( Alternate) Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay SHRI J. P. J. BILIMORIA CHIEF ARCHITECT AND TOWN Central Public Works Department PLANNER National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd, CHIEF ENCXNEER New Delhi Public Works Department, Government of Rajasthan CHIEF ENGINEER EXECUTIVE. ENCINEER ( DESIGN AND SPECIFIC DIVISION ) ( Alternate ) In personal capacity ( M-60 Cusrow Bag, Bombay I ) SHRI B. K. CHOKSI Institute of Surveyors, New Delhi SHRI V. S. DEVDHAR Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), PROP DINESHMOHAN Roorkee Engineering Research Department, Hyderabad DIRECTOR Atomic Energy Commission, Bombay; and Brick and SHRI C. M. GOVEA~ Tile Floor and Roof Construction Subcommittee, BDC 13 : 11, IS1 hlasonry Construction Subcommittee, BDC 13 : 7, SHRI HARISH CHANDRA IS1 S. B. Joshi & Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. B. JOSHI SHRI R. N. JOSHI ( Alternate ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, New Delhi SHRI V. S. IL4kf.4~ Public Works Department, Government of Punjab; SHRI KEWAL KRISHAN BDC and Soil Construction Subcommittee, 13:8, IS1 Fore;;$esea;;\efnstitutc .& Colleges, Dehra Dun; SHRI N. J. MASANI Engmeermg Subcommtttcc, BDC 13:4, ISI Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI T. R. MEHANDRU ( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH 1 ZAFAR MARG

Is:4407-1967
( Continued from page 1 ) Members SHR~ K. K. NAMBIAR Representing Concrete Association of India; Bombay; and Concrete Construction Subcommittee, BDC 13 : 9, IS1 SHRI B. T. UNWALLA ( Alternate ) Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI C. B. PATEL National Buildings Organization ( Ministry of Works & Housing ) ; and Expansion Joints Subcommittee, BDC 13 : 14, IS1 SHRI B. D. AHUJA ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization ( Ministry of Works & Housing) SHRI D. J. PATEL Hindustan Housing Factory Ltd, New Delhi SHRI M. L. RAHEJA Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI H. V. MIRCHANDANI ( Alternate ) SHRI N. S. L. RAO Covering, Veneering and Glazing Subcommittee, BDC 13: 10, IS1 SHRI J. D. SHA~TRI Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi SHRI T. N. SIJBBARAO Gammon India Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. M. APTE (Alternate ) SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER ( PLAN- Public Works Department, Government of Madras NINGAND DESIGNS ) EXECUTIVE ENGINEER(BUILDING CENTRE DIVISION ) ( Alternate ) SHR~ R. NAGARAJAN, Director General, ISI ( Ex-o@cio Member ) Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SHRI S. P. RAMAN Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Covering, Veneering and Glazing Subcommittee,
Convener

BDC 13 : 10

SHRI N. S. L., RAO Members SHRI K. C. BANERJEE SHRI K. BARUA DR BHAN BHUSHAN

Central Public Works Department

Surveyor & Valuer, Calcutta Public Works Department, Government of Assam Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute ( CSIR ), Calcutta Martin Burn Limited, Calcutta SHRt M. BHATTACHARYYA The Concrete Association of India, Calcutta SHRI J. DATT Government of West EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (DESIGN Public Works Department, Bengal DIVISION No. II ) William Jacks & Co Ltd, New Delhi SHRI R. S. GODBOLE SHRI R. K. G. NARAYAN ( Alternate ) Calcutta Municipal Corporation, Calcutta SHRI P. GUHA Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun SHRI N. J. MASANI Ballardic, Thompson & Matthews, Calcutta SHRI M. V. PRADHAN SURVEYOR OF WORICS ( CALC~JTTA Central Public Works Department, Calcutta CENTRAL CIRCLE 1I ) Balmer Lawric & Co Ltd, Calcutta COL H.C. VIJH

2

IS:4407-1967

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR REED WALLING
0. FOREWORD

0.1This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution

on 26 September 1967, after the draft finalized by the Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 Reed walling is a traditional construction in certain parts of India; in Punjab ` SARK'A.NDA reed' is used, whereas in Assam ` EKRA ' and c &AL ' are used. In addition to these, machine-made reed boards are also now being manufactured in this country for use in constructions. In these boards, reeds are considerably strengthened by binding together with galvanized wire. Reed walling and roofing have advantages like thermal insulation and light weight and are found specially suited for earthquake resistant construction, where a flexible light weight material is needed for walling. Use of reed boards will facilitate the additional advantages of prefabricated construction particularly suited for panel filling, partitions and roof construction. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded off IS : 2-1960". value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular

1. SCOPE 1.1This standard covers the use of reeds and reed boards in the construction of walls and roofs in buildings. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. *Rulea for rounding off numerical values ( revised ) . 3

ISr4407-

1967

2.1 Reed Board -A machine-made board in which dried reeds are bound together at close spacing by galvanized wire so as to form a rigid structural board. 2.2 Running shown in Fig. Wire1. A wire which runs at right angles to the reeds as

2.3 Hook Wire -Wires wires on the two opposite 3. DESIGN

going through the board faces of the board.

to secure the running

CONSIDERATIONS

3.1 Size and Selection of Boards - Reed boards are generally supplied in three different thicknesses 24, 4 and 5 cm. Preferred widths from the point of view of dimensional co-ordination will be 1 m and 2 m.
NOTEThe width that is generally manufactured now is l-5 m.

3.1.1 Reed boards situations as follows:

of various Use

thicknesses

are generally

used in different

Thickness, cm
2.5 4

For door and window panelling, for wall facing, for partitions and for ceiling For sloping and gabled roof, for weather board partition walls, for fencing, for wall insulation, etc For panel walls for exterior use, for slope and gabled roofs, for weather boards, CHAJJAS, etc

5

3.1.2 The lengths of cut boards commonly supplied are 180, 240, 300 and 360 cm and that any other size specified by the purcha.ser may also be supplied by the manufacturer. 3.2 Structural Strength as non-load bearing walls,

3.2.1 Reed board shall generally be treated the load being taken by the framework.

3.2.2 Where reed board is used for roof, the reed board shall not be less than 4 cm thick, and shall be supported by purlins, spaced not more For ceiling, the thickness of board shall not than O-5 cm centre to centre. be more than 2.5 cm. 3.3 Fire-Resistance - A 5 cm thick reed board with 20 mm thick cement-sand plaster on each face will have normally a fire-resistance grading of half-an-hour ( see IS : 1641-1960* ).
*Code grading. of practice for fire safety of buildings ( general ): general principles and fire

4

Is:4407-1967
- Reed board plastered on both sides with cement mortar Where termite is sufficiently durable except in heavy rainfall localities. infestation is present, the normal precautions for termite resistance construction will apply ( see IS : 3632* ). The reeds should also be treated with preservatives before manufacture into reed board. 3.4 Durability

3.5 Thermal Insulation about 4 R cal cm/m2h"C.

The thermal insulation of reed board shall be

3.6 Suitability of Further Finishing - Generally reed boards will take all forms of plaster on account of its rough surface which facilitates bonding of the plaster with the background ( see IS : 1661-1960t ). 3.6.1 In applying the cement plaster the following points shall be taken care of to avoid development of minor hair-cracks:

4 b)

The mix shall be generally cement mortar 1 : 6 applied in two coats. The application of excessively wet mixes shall be avoided. Plain plaster applied in two coats shall not be more than 15 mm thick and rough-cast plaster applied in two coats shall be not more than 20 mm thick. Proper curing of plaster shall be arranged. In area of heavy rainfall both the coats of plaster for exposed walling shall be waterproofed.

3.6.2 Lime plaster shall be of mix 1 : 3 using Class C lime and applied in two coats, the thickness of coats being the same as in 3.6.1(b). 3.6.3 Mud plaster shall be stabilized mud plaster ( see IS : 21 IO-1962$ ), and the minimum thickness for lime plaster and mud plaster shall be the same as for cement plaster. 3.6.4 In the case of reed board roofing, the waterproofing may be carried out with bitumen felt in the same manner as for cement concrete roof (see IS : 1346-1966s ) but before application of the felts a coat of cement plaster shall be applied to reed board to give a smooth surface. 3.7 Dimensional Co-ordination - For minimizing cutting and wastage of reed board the dimensions of the building and the dimensions of openings shall preferably be done in accordance with IS : 1233-1958!/. The sizes of reed boards also shall be so chosen as to suit the planning module chosen for the construction. 3.8 Fixing to Frames - Reed board should not be fixed into a groove in wall framing but should be fixed on to the wall frame directly using nails
*Code of practice for anti-termite measures ( under preparation). tCode of practice for cement and cement-lime plaster finishes on walls and ceilings. $Code of practice for in situ construction of walls in buildings with soil-cement. $Code of practice for waterproofing of roofs with bitumen felts. j(Recommendations for modular co-ordination of dimensions in the building industry.

6

IS:4407-1967 or screws with diamond 35 x 35 mm plate washersobtained from sheets of I.3 to 1.6 mm thick. 4. MATERIALS 4.1 Reeds for in situ Walling species: a) EXRA b) c) d) e) The reeds may be of one of the following in the plains.

( Erianthus ravennae ) -found

EKRA ( Arundonaria khasiana ) - found in the hills. KHAGRA ( Neyrandiana reynaudiana ) NAL ( Phragmites karka ) SARKANDA

4.1.1 Reed shall be cut from mature plant, which have their sheaths firmly attached. The reed shall be cut to required length and spread out in sun until all the moisture is dried out. 4.2 Reed BoardThe reed board shall be manufactured from EKRA, .NAL or SARKAJVDA reeds. The binding wire used shall be galvanized steel wire or aluminized steel wire. 4.3 Storage and Handling - Reed boards shall preferably be stored in covered shed and resting off the ground. The ground shall be sprinkled with insecticide powder before stacking the reed board. Excessively long storage shall be avoided. 4.3.1 Reed board shall not be dragged one over the other as this will result in the running wire or adjacent board being pulled out of the position. 5. PRELIMINARY WORK ON REED BOARDS

5.1 Cutting of Reed Boards 5.1.1 Cutting Along the Reed follows: Cutting of reed boards shall be done as hook wire

a) Cut each running wire half way between the required and the next one as indicated in Fig. 1; b) After the running wire is cut, bend the respective hooks; c) Remove the reeds which are left between exposing the running wire on the underside d) Place the boards, erect and cut the running in the same manner as in (a); and

ends tightly over the the two hook wires of the board; wire on the other side

e) Bend the cut ends back over the hook wire as in (b). 7

Is:4407-1967 5.1.2 Gutting Across the Reed - This may be done with the use of a saw or sharp board chisel. Cutting shall not be done near the running wire and at least 25 mm of the board shall be left to cover as edge beyond the running wire.

5.1.3 For cutting diagonally or in shapes, a combination of the methods specified in 6.1.1 and 6.1.2 may be used taking care not to blunt the cutting instrument when any wire is cut. 5.2 Joining
of Reed Board 5.2.1 With the reeds vertical,

4

the joining shall be done as follows: The edges shall be straight; b) Cut out with chisel one reed from each board exactly opposite to each other and the cut shall be made about 4 to 5 cm inside the second running wire; and C>Cut a single piece of reed to the length equal to the length of Sharpen one empty channel formed by the two pieces as above. end and hammer gently into position, so that it passes under the first and second running wires of each of the boards.

The treatment specified in (a) to (c) shall be continued at regular intervals of every 60 cm along the joints. The other side of the board shall also be dealt with similarly and the jointing reed shall be set at spaces so as to stagger with the jointing reed on the other side. Finally lace wire across the joint in a similar manner as illustrated in Fig. 2.
WIRE

LACING

WIRE

Fro. 2

DETAILS OF J.OININO OF REED BOARD

5.2.2 Where side jointing is required with the reeds vertical, it shall be done as follows: a) Place the edges together and thread a galvanized wire of diameter not less than O-6 mm through both sides of the running joint wire, 8

IS:4407-1967 b) Tighten the jointing twist wire tie, and wire to draw the two edges together and

c) Repeat similar joining on the other side of the board. 6. FIXING OF REED BOARD

6.1 Fixing as Partitions - Reed board shall be fixed with reeds vertical to horizontal runner spaced at about one metre centre. The adjacent boards shall be butt-jointed and the joint shall be located at the centre of The fixing to wooden runners shall be done with wood screws the runner. and diamond shaped washer and the spacing of the screws shall be not more than 30 cm centre to centre. In the case of mild steel runners, J-hooks and washers may be used instead of screws. While fixing to frames the boards shall not be fixed into a groove ( see 3.8 ). While locating the doors and windows openings, care shall be taken to plan the work SO as to keep cutting and wastage to the minimum ( see also 3.7 ). 6.1.1 For fixing reed board of window sill the board shall be so cut that it covers half the frame runners at all sides. Cement plaster 15 mm thick shall be applied at the sill, head and jambs formed by reed boarding when finishing so that there is no leakage of water (see Fig. 3A ). As a better precaution a notch may be cut in the timber frame and then cement plaster may be applied. An alternative method of fixing reed boards to cover window sill is illustrated in Fig. 3B and 3C. 6.2 For roof construction reed board shall be used only on pitched roof and not on flat roof ( see Fig. 4 ). Each board shall be placed in such a manner that it has a purlin to support it at the middle and its edges are resting on adjacent purlins. The minimum bearing of the edges on purlins shall be 25 mm. Adjacent boards shall be butt-jointed. The boards shall be fixed on to `the purlins with wood screws in the case of the wooden purlins or J-hooks in the case of steel purlins. 7. FIXING OF REEDS FOR IN SITU WALL CONSTRUCTION

7.1 Grooves shall be made in the timber frame to a width of not less than 15 mm and the reeds shall be slipped into the grooves one by one. 7.1.1 The reed walling so formed shall be stiffened by means of double bamboo slips 25 mm wide and not less than 6 mm thick, spaced at intervals of not more than 40 cm apart. One slip shall be attached on each side of the reed and tied together by means of cane slip. One stiffening slip shall be placed within a distance of 8 cm of all the battens. 7.2 In the case of temporary or unimportant construction, reeds may be attached od one side of the batten by means of single bamboo slip nailed to the batten with 6 cm long wire nail spaced at 30 cm centres.
9

.
-TOP MEMBER OF WINDOW FRAME

/

RfMl2ONlAl MEMI)LR OFWINDOW FRAME

ROUGH

CAST

PLASTER

I\
38
c 0

-5Omm

THICK

REED

EOARD

/
LVERTICAL

HORIZONTAL OF WINOOW PLASTER ROUGH

NEWIER FRAME FINISHED WOOTH PLAIN GALVANIZED FOR SHEET WINTED PROTECTION

I

CAST

PLASTER

50mm

TMICK

REED

BOARD

ROUGH

CAST

PLASTER

TIMBER

POST

50mm AL TIMBER

THICK POST

REED

BOARD

3A

3c

FIG. 3

DETAILS OF CONSTRUCTION FOR THE REED WALLING

IS:440701967

FIG. 4

REED BOARD RIDGING FOR ROOF

7.3 Reeds shall preferably be fixed with just sufficient space of one centimetre between each other so that the mortar applied on one side for finishing penetrates to the other side to form a key for plaster. All vertical timbers in the walling shall be recessed with grooves 4 cm wide and I.5 cm deep and the plaster forced into the groove so that there is no gap between the groove and the plaster when the plaster sets and dries. 7.4 Use in Roof - Use of reeds without assembly into boards is not Reed may, however, be used as recommended for roof construction. thatching. 8. FINISHING 8.1 Reed board walling may be given a plaster pebble-dash or rough cast finish after fixing. The reed board shall be relatively dry prior to the application of plaster. This is essential as wetting causes reeds to swell and subsequent shrinkage on drying causes cracks to appear in the plaster. The plaster shall be applied not less than two coats for walling work. The recommended mixes and thickness shall be as in 3.6. The first coat shall be applied rough and allowed to stay and harden for 24 hours and subsequent The plaster shall be cured for a minimum coat shall be applied later. period of seven days. Application of cement plaster shall conform to IS : 1661-1960* or IS : 2402-1963t. *Code of practice for cement and cement-limeplaster finisheson walls and ceilings. jCode of practice for external rendered finisher. 11
I

IS : 4407 - 1967 8.2 In the case of roofing, the top surfaee shall be finished with cement sand rendering, the mix being 1 : 6 cement sand. The thickness of the rendering shall be sufficient to cover the corrugations and it shall be done Both the plaster coats shall be waterproofed in the case of in two coats. external finishes in the areas of heavy rainfall. Waterproofing treatment shall be done by the application of bitumen felt and the treatment shall be a light one with not more than two layers so that the weight of the roof finish is not excessive. 8.3 Termite Protection - Normally plaster finish will give a fair but where extra precaution is of protection against termite, treatment with a suitable preservative may be necessary. Reed At plinth level the shall never be left in direct contact with soil. of the reed board shall be painted with insecticide or hot bitumen fixing into groove of concrete or masonry. 8.4 Paint Finish-Where shall preferably be applied colour or paint by spraying. finish is required, degree needed, boards cut end before

the finish

12

