NAT ATTF IS 1925 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


atest — fates 


( UAT QRIB) 


Bidis — Specification 
( Fifth Revision ) 


ICS 65.160 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM eat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay feeett— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2022 Price Group 4 


Tobacco and Tobacco Products Sectional Committee, FAD 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Fifth Revision) was adopted bv the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
bv the Tobacco and Tobacco Products Sectional Committee had been approved bv the Food and Agriculture 
Divisional Council. 


Bidis are hand rolled smoking articles sold both in branded and unbranded form. There being great variation in 
the bidis, it is necessarv to lav down certain qualitv criteria, the broad objective of which will be to enable the 
consumers to get a standard product. 


This standard was first published in 1961. Subsequently, the first revision was issued in 1970 incorporating 
cylindrical bidis, tolerances on declared values of length and mass of 1 000 bidis to ensure uniformity in production 
and procedure for identification of Tendu and Ashitri leaves. The requirements for arsenic and lead were deleted 
for they increase the cost of quality control without any proportionate utility. In the second revision issued in 
1974, the proportion of wrapper was increased to 55 + 5 percent, requirement for chloride content deleted and a 
more practical test for burning quality was prescribed in the revision. In the third revision issued in 1992, various 
requirements of nicotine content, packing, marking and sampling were updated to bring the standard in line with 
the then existing manufacturing and trade practices. A machine smoking method for bidis was introduced as an 
amendment in 1999. During the fourth revision in 2016, the description of bidi, nicotine content of the tobacco 
mixture, packing, marking, sampling, testing conditions, and bidi smoking method were modified. 


This fifth revision is being carried out for incorporation of an International method for the analysis of bidi smoke 
and a method for testing burning quality of bidis by using a linear smoking machine. Packing and marking clause 
has also been modified by removing ‘month and year of packaging’ and removing the specification of number of 
bidis to be packed in a packet or bundle as per Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodity) Rules, 2011. 


The composition of the technical committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given at Annex G. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1925 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


BIDIS — SPECIFICATION 
( Fifth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and the 
methods of sampling and tests for bidis. 


1.2 This standard does not cover the requirements for 
flavour and aroma of bidis. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS/ISO No. Title 

1070 : 1992 Reagent grade water — 
Specification (third revision) 

4905 : 2015/ Random sampling and 

ISO 24153: 2009 randomization procedures 
(first revision) 

5643 : 2019 Tobacco and tobacco 
products — Methods of test for 
tobacco (third revision) 

9978 : 2021 Tendu leaf — Specification 
(second revision) 

16121: 2013 Tobacco and tobacco 
products — Atmosphere for 
conditioning and testing 

ISO 17175:2017  Bidis — Determination of 


total and nicotine-free dry 
particulate matter using a linear 
routine analytical smoking 
machine 


3 REQUIREMENTS 


3.1 Description 


Bidis are smoking articles made by rolling the tobacco 
filler mixture solely by hand in a Tendu leaf or Ashitri 
leaf. Tobacco filler mixture consists of air cured, sun 
cured and/or other suitable tobaccos. Bidis shall be 
either conical or cylindrical in shape. 


Conical bidis shall be completely closed at the broad 
end and only partly closed at the narrow end. The 
narrow end is flattened and secured with cotton thread 
to prevent unfolding of the wrapper and falling off of 
tobacco and also to make puffing easier. 


Cylindrical bidis have a filter plug inserted for the 
purpose of filtering smoke. The other end of a filter bidi 
shall be completely closed by folding the wrapper leaf 
to prevent falling of tobacco. 


3.2 Wrapper 


The wrapper used in the manufacture of bidis shall be 
tender leaves of Tendu (Diospyrus sp.) as prescribed 
in IS 9978 or Ashitri (Bauhinia sp). These leaves can 
be identified by their characteristics before being used 
as wrapper (Annex A). The wrapper shall not exceed 
60 percent by mass of the bidis when tested according 
to the method prescribed in Annex B. 


3.3 Length per Piece and Mass of Tobacco per 
1 000 bidis 


Theaverage length (mm) per bidi and mass of tobacco (g) 
per 1 000 bidis shall be declared by the manufacturers. 
On checking, each of these characteristics shall vary 
not more than + 5 percent. The length of the bidi and 
the mass of tobacco shall be determined by the method 
given in Annex B. 


3.4 Freedom from Mould Attack 


Bidis shall be free from mould attack when examined 
visually. 


3.5 Freedom from Tobacco Beetle Attack 


The bidis shall be free from tobacco beetle attack when 
examined by the method prescribed in Annex C. 


3.6 Tobacco Filler in Bidis 


A minimum of 60 percent of the tobacco mixture 
contained in the bidis shall be in the form of flakes of 
size not capable of passing through a sieve made of wire 
of not more than 0.560 mm diameter and containing not 
less than 18 uniform apertures per linear distance of 
25 mm. 


3.7 Burn Additives 


No burn additives shall be used in tobacco mixture or 
wrapper leaf for improving the burning quality of bidis. 


IS 1925 : 2022 


3.8 Burning Qualitv 


Bidis shall burn evenly when tested by the method 
prescribed in Annex D or Annex E. In case of any dispute, 
the method in Annex E will be the referee method. 


3.9 The filler contained in the bidi shall also comply with 
the requirements given in Table 1. 


3.10 Smoke Analysis 


If bidis are to be analyzed quantitatively for their 
smoke emission level, then the machine smoking 
method prescribed in ISO 17175 can be employed. 
ISO 17175 specifies machine smoking method for 
the determination of total particulate matter as well 
as other methods for the subsequent determination of 
nicotine-free dry particulate matter present in the smoke 
of bidis generated and collected under strictly controlled 
set of parameters using a routine linear analytical 
smoking machine. The machine smoking method is 
useful for product evaluation in terms of smoke emission 
levels and product development. 


4 PACKING 


The bidis may be packed in bundles or packets of paper 
or other alternative packaging material. These bundles 
or packets in turn may be packed in boxes (pudas). The 
boxes (pudas) may then be packed in a bulk container as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the vendor. Packing 
of bidis shall comply with the applicable provisions 
contained in rules of the Legal Metrology (Packaged 
Commodity) Rules, 2011. 


5 MARKING 


The following particulars shall be legibly and indelibly 
marked on each bundle/packet and box (puda) in 


addition to the declarations as required under various 
applicable statutory Rules and Regulations: 

a) Name of the trade mark, 

b) Name and address of the manufacturer, 

c) Description of contents, 

d) Net quantity, 


e) Any other marking required under the Legal 
Metrology (Packaged Commodities Rules, 2011), 
and 


f) Statutory health warnings in the manner and 
in accordance with the provisions of the Rules 
framed under Cigarettes and Other Tobacco 
Products Act, 2003 (COTPA). 


6 SAMPLING FOR TEST PURPOSES 


The method of drawing representative samples of the 
material and the criteria for conformity shall be as 
prescribed in the Annex F or as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the vendor. 


7 TESTS 


7.1 The relative humidity shall be 60 + 5 percent and 
the temperature 22 + 2 °C inside the laboratory where 
the tests are to be carried out as given in 3.2 to 3.6, 3.8 
and col 4 of Table 1. 


7.1 Quality of Reagents 
Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and distilled 
water (see IS 1070) shall be employed in tests. 


NOTE — ‘Pure Chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities which affect the test results. 


Table 1 Requirements for Tobacco Mixture Contained in Bidis 
( Clause 3.9 ) 


SI No. Characteristics Requirement Method of Test, Ref to Clause of IS 5643 
(1) (2) G) (4) 
i) Loss on heating, percent bv mass, Max 12.0 6 
ii) Total alkaloids as nicotine (on drv basis) percent bv mass, Max 5.0 8 
iii) Total ash (on drv basis) percent bv mass, Max 23.0 10 
iv) Acid insoluble ash (on drv basis), percent bv mass, Max 5.0 11 


IS 1925 : 2022 


ANNEXA 
( Clause 3.2 ) 
IDENTIFICATION OF TENDU AND ASHITRI LEAVES 


A-1 TENDU (Diospyrus sp.) LEAVES 


Leaves are simple, up to 20 cm long and 9 cm 
wide, elliptical, with narrow base or if broad, with a 
decurrence on the petiole. Young leaves are hairy, 
mature glaborous above, hairy beneath, coriaceous 
nerve and reticulation raised above, secondary nerves 
impressed as broad furrows give the leaves wrinkled 
and thickened look. 


A-2 ASHITRI (Bauhinia sp.) LEAVES 


Leaves are simple, short petioled, broader than longer, 
up to 10 cm wide and 7.5 cm long, mostly clefted, 
divided or little less than half way down into two 
rounded lobes, entire, obtuse, coriaceous, clothed more 
or less densely beneath with grey pubescence, base 
usually carbate, main nerves 7 to 9 with distinct pattern 
of reticulation. 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 3.3 ) 


DETERMINATION OF AVERAGE LENGTH AND MASS PER BIDI AND ALSO PERCENT MASS OF 
TOBACCO AND WRAPPER LEAF IN BIDIS 


B-1 PROCEDURE 


Take 100 bidis and condition as prescribed in IS 16121. 
Weigh the 100 conditioned bidis and record the mass 
(g). Then measure the length of each bidi in mm using 
a standard scale (suitable for measuring to the nearest 
0.5 mm) and record. Carefully open these bidis, one by 
one, and separate the tobacco contained in them from 
the wrapper leaf. Separately weigh and record the mass 
(g) of tobacco and wrapper, so obtained. 


B-2 CALCULATION 


From the length and mass so recorded from 100 bidis 
(B-1), estimate the average length and mass per bidi, 
average mass of tobacco and wrapper contained in 
1 000 bidis and the mass (percent) of tobacco and 
wrapper leaf per bidi. 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 3.5) 
EXAMINATION FOR FREEDOM FROM TOBACCO BEETLE ATTACK 


C-1 PROCEDURE 


C-1.1 Take 5 bidis and visuallv examine the surface 
of each for the presence of anv holes/borings bv the 
tobacco beetle. Cut open these bidis, one by one, on a 
clean white sheet of paper. 


C-1.2 Examine the material carefully for the presence 
of tobacco beetle (Lasioderma serricorne) in all stages, 
that is larval, pupal and adult (alive or dead), by naked 
eye (corrected for abnormal vision). A hand lens 
(magnification of 10 X) may also be used. In case a 
larger magnification is used, this fact may be stated in 
the test report. 


IS 1925 : 2022 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 3.8) 
TEST FOR BURNING QUALITV 


D-1 PROCEDURE 


D-1.1 Ten randomly selected bidis from a production 
batch shall be tested for burning qualitv without 
selection and conditioning. 


D-1.2 Light the bidi thoroughly by puffing. The bidi 
shall burn continuously and evenly if puffed for 2 s at 
30 s interval. The colour of the ash shall not be black. 


D-2 REPORT 


The sample shall be deemed to have satisfied the test for 
burning quality, if all the bidis tested burn continuously 
up to 80 percent of their lengths. 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 3.8 ) 
TEST FOR BURNING QUALITY OF BIDIS USING A LINEAR SMOKING MACHINE 


E-1 DESCRIPTION 


The method allows bidis to be tested for their burning 
quality on a linear smoking machine under controlled 
set of parameters 


E-2 PROCEDURE 


E-2.1 Laboratory Sample for Burning Quality Test 


E-2.1.1 A representative samples of the bidis shall be 
drawn as prescribed in the Annex F or as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the vendor. 


E-2.1.2 Representative sample bidis shall be 


conditioned as prescribed in IS 16121. 


E-2.1.3 Bidis will be selected on mass basis (mean 
mass + 30 mg), the mean mass having been determined 
as per the method prescribed in Annex B. 


E-2.1.4 The bidis selected on mass basis (E-2.1.3), 
shall be further selected on length basis (mean length 
+2 mm), mean length having been determined as per 
the method prescribed in Annex B. 


The bidis selected on the basis of mass and length will 
form the laboratory sample and 10 bidis will be used 
for conducting burning test. 


E-2.1.5 Marking Special Butt Length 


The bidis (E-2.1.4) shall be marked at one fifth 
(20 percent) of its length from the mouth end by a 
soft pen and a line will be drawn around the bidi at 
the marked spot without damaging the bidi. The mean 
length of selected bidis (E-2.1.4) shall be used to locate 
the spot for marking this special butt length. In no case, 
the marking shall be less than 11 mm from the mouth 
end. 


E-3 TEST METHOD 


E-3.1 The test shall be carried out under ambient 
conditions as prescribed in IS 16121. 


E-3.2 Smoking Machine 


A linear smoking machine equipped with a bidi holder 
shall be used to determine the burning quality of bidis. 
The smoking machine, smoking regime and smoking 
process shall comply with the requirements prescribed 
in ISO 17175. However, the bidi smoking plan and 
process will be as per E-3.3. 
NOTE — Fitting of the filter holder with a Cambridge filter 
pad is optional but it is highly advisable to smoke with the 
filter pad fitted in the filter holder. If smoked without the filter 
pad, the particulate matter will condense in the tubes inside 
the machine. It will be very difficult to clean the tubes and the 
machine performance will be adversely effected. 


E-3.3 Smoking Plan and Process 


Ten marked bidis (E-2.5) will be smoked one by one 
only on one channel fitted with a bidi holder. Bidi will 
be inserted in the bidi holder and smoking started as 
prescribed in ISO 17175 (puff volume 35 ml, puff 
duration 2 s and puff interval 30 s). Maximum two bidis 
will be smoked on one filter pad as the filter pad will be 
blocked due to deposition of particulate matter. Used 
filter pad will be replaced with a new filter pad. The 
tester will observe the smoking process and note down 
his observations for all the 10 bidis. 


E-4 REPORTING 


The sample shall be deemed to have satisfied 
the test for burning quality if all the bidis tested 
burned continuously up to the butt mark under test 
conditions. 


IS 1925 : 2022 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 6 ) 
SAMPLING OF BIDIS FOR TEST PURPOSES 


F-1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
SAMPLING 


FOR 


F-1.1 In drawing, preparing, storing and handling 
samples, the following precautions and directions shall 
be observed. 


F-1.2 Precautions shall be taken to draw the samples, 
so as to protect from loss or gain of moisture and from 
adventitious contamination. 


F-1.3 The samples shall be placed in clean and dry 
receptacles. The receptacles for sample shall be sealed 
hermetically and marked with full details of samples as 
given under 5. 


F-1.4 Sample shall be stored in such a manner that the 
conditions of storage do not unduly affect the quality of 
the material. 


F-1.5 The sampling shall be done by a person agreed to 
between the purchaser and the vendor in the presence 
of the purchaser (or his representative) and the vendor 
(or his representative). 


F-2 SCALE OF SAMPLING 


F-2.1 Lot 


All the bulk containers in a single consignment of the 
material pertaining to the same brand shall constitute a 
lot. If the consignment is declared to consist of different 
brands, the bulk containers belonging to the same brand 
shall be grouped together to constitute separate lots. 


F-2.2 The samples shall be tested for each lot for 
ascertaining conformity of the materials to the 
requirements of this specification. 


F-2.3 The number of bulk containers to be chosen from 
a lot shall depend on the size of the lot and shall be in 
accordance with Table 2. 


Table 2 Number of Bulk Containers 
to be Chosen for Sampling 


( Clause F-2.3 ) 


SI No. Lot Size No. of Bulk Containers to be Chosen 

N n 

(1) (2) (3) 

i) Below 5 2 

ii) 6 to 10 3 

iii) 11 to 20 4 

iv) 21 to 50 5 

v) 51 to 100 6 

vi) Over 100 7 


F-2.4 These bulk containers shall be chosen at 
random from the lot and for this purpose random 
number table (see IS 4905) as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the vendor shall be used. In case such 
a table is not available, the procedure given in F-2.4.1 
shall be adopted. 


F-2.4.1 Arrange all the bulk containers in the lot, in one 
order and count them as 1,2,3 up to r, in a systematic 
manner, where r is equal to the integral part of the 
value N/n, N being the total number of containers in 
the lot and n the number of containers to be chosen 
(see Table 2). Every r container thus counted shall 
be separated until the requisite number of containers 
is obtained from the lot to give the sample for test. If 
r comes out to be a fractional number, its value shall 
be taken as equal to the integral part of it. 


F-3 PREPARATION OF SAMPLES 


F-3.1 Individual Samples 


Enough boxes (pudas) shall be taken out at random 
from each selected bulk container of the lot to give 
1 000 bidis. Out of these, randomly selected 100 or 
more bidis will be kept aside properly packed and used 
for making composite sample of bidis (see F-3.2.2) 
for conducting smoking tests (3.10, Annex D and 
Annex E). 


From the remaining bidis, 100 bidis shall be first 
tested for mass of tobacco contained in them and the 
mass of wrapper leaves (see Annex B), 5 for freedom 
from mould attack (see 3.5) and 5 for freedom from 
tobacco beetle attack (see 3.5). If these tests are found 
satisfactory, the remaining bidis shall be opened, 
the tobacco so obtained shall be mixed together 
thoroughly and then divided into three parts each of 
about 25 g. Each part shall constitute an individual 
sample representing the bulk container and shall 
be transferred immediately to thoroughly clean and 
dry receptacles and sealed air-tight. The receptacles 
shall be labelled with the necessary particulars 
given in 5. 


F-3.1.1 The individual samples of the tobacco 
mixture, extracted from the bidis from each bulk 
container (see F-3.1) so obtained from the lot, shall 
be divided into three sets in such a way that every set 
has an individual sample representing each selected 
bulk container. One of these sets shall be marked for 
the purchaser, another for the vendor and the third for 
the referee, and all the three sets shall bear the seals 
of the purchaser and the vendor. 


IS 1925 : 2022 


F-3.2 Composite Sample 
F-3.2.1 Tobacco 


From the portion of the tobacco left over after preparing 
the individual sample (see F-3.1.1), equal quantities of 
tobacco mixture shall be taken for each selected bulk 
container and mixed together well to form a composite 
sample of about 150 g for the lot. 


F-3.2.2 Bidis 


The 100 bidis, kept aside from each bulk container 
(see F-3.1), will be mixed together to form a composite 
sample for the lot to be used for smoking tests 
(see 3.10, Annex D and Annex E). All the conditions of 
the following clauses relevant to composite sample will 
be equallv applicable to the composite sample of bidis. 


F-3.2.3 The composite samples shall be divided into 
three equal parts, one for the purchaser, another for the 
vendor and the third for the referee, and all the three 
sets shall bear the seals of the purchaser and the vendor. 


F-3.3 Referee Sample 


Referee sample shall consist of a set of individual 
samples (see F-3.1) and composite samples (see F-3.2), 
marked for this purpose and shall bear the seals of the 
purchaser and the vendor. These shall be kept at a place 
agreed to between the two. 


F-4 TESTS 


F-4.1 Tests for the determination of loss on drying and 
nicotine shall be conducted on each of the individual 
tobacco samples in a set (see F-3.1). 


F-4.2 Tests for the determination of the remaining 
characteristics shall be conducted on the composite 
tobacco sample (see F-3.2.1). 


F-4.3 Tests for burning quality and smoke analysis 
shall be conducted on the composite bidi sample 
(see F-3.2.2) as per the methods prescribed in 3.10, 
Annex D and Annex E. 


E-5 CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 


F-5.1 The lot shall be declared as conforming to the 
specification, when: 


a) Each of the test results for loss on heating and 
nicotine satisfies the corresponding requirement 
specified in Table 1. If, however, one or more 
test results do not satisfy the corresponding 
requirement, the conformity of the lot shall be 
ascertained in accordance with F-5.1.1; and 


b 


wm 


The test results on the composite sample for the 
remaining characteristics satisfy the corresponding 
requirements specified in Table 1. 


F-5.1.1 In case one or more of the test results do 
not satisfy the requirements for loss on heating, and 
nicotine, the following procedure shall be adopted for 
determining conformity of the material in respect of 
these characteristics: 


The mean (x) and the range (R) of the corresponding 
test results shall be calculated as: 


Mean (x) = Sum of the test results/Number of the test 
results 


Range (R) = Difference between the highest and 
the lowest values obtained for the test results. The 
appropriate expressions as shown in col 6 of Table 3 
shall be calculated. 


Table 3 Criteria for Conformity 
( Clause F-5.1.1 ) 


SI No. Characteristics Test Results 1,2,3 ... n Average Range Criterion for Conformity 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Loss on heating, percent by mass = Xx R, X, + 0.4 R < 12.0 
ii) Nicotine, percent by mass = X, R X,+0.4R,<5.0 


NOTE — If the values of these expressions satisfy the relevant conditions as given in col 6 of Table 3, the lot shall be deemed to have satisfied the 


requirements for loss on heating and nicotine. 


IS 1925 : 2022 


ANNEX G 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Tobacco and Tobacco Products Sectional Committee, FAD 04 


Organization 


Central Tobacco Research Institute, Rajahmundry 
Central Tobacco Research Institute, Rajahmundry 


Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University, 
Hyderabad 


All India Bidi Industry Federation, Pune 


Consumer Education and Research Centre, 
Ahmedabad 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 
Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 


FICCI Research and Analysis Centre, New Delhi 
Godfrey Phillips India Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


National Institute of Cancer Prevention and Research, 
Noida 


ITC Limited, Bangaluru 


National Institute of Occupational Health, 
Ahmedabad 


Smokeless Tobacco Association, New Delhi 


Smokeless Tobacco Federation (India), Delhi 


The Association Chambers of Commerce and 
Industries of India (ASSOCHAM), New Delhi 


The Indian Tobacco Association, Guntur 
The Tobacco Institute of India, New Delhi 


Tobacco Board, Min of Commerce and Industry, 
Guntur 


VST Industries Ltd, Hyderabad 


In personal capacity 
DS Group, Noida 


National Tobacco Testing Laboratory, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr D. DAMODAR REDDx (Chairman) 
Dr C. CHANDRASEKHARA RAO 


Dr J. MANJUNATH 
Dr K. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ARJUN KHANNA 


Ms Do ty A. JANI 
SHRI HARARAYTRIPATHI (Alternate) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
DR M. S. KAMATH (Alternate) 


Dr MOHD SHAUKAT 
Dr L. SWASTICHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI AKHILESH KUMAR PANDEY 


DR BISWAJIT DEB 
SHRI PRANAM NAGARE (Alternate) 


DR YOGESHWER SHUKLA 


DR ROOPA HARIPRASAD 


DR KAMAL KUMAR TVAGI 
DR PARAG VILAS NAIK (Alternate) 


DR VASUMATI N. GOKANI 


SHRI C. K. SHARMA 
Ms NAVNEET KAUR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAV BECHAN 


SHRI SURAJIT GHOSH 
DR MADHAVAN SRIDHARAN (Alternate) 


DR P. SRINIVAS 
Hon Secretary (Alternate) 


SHRI SHARADTANDAN 
Dr P. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN, TOBACCO BOARD 
Suri P. MANOJ Reppy (Alternate) 


SHRI C. VIJAYA KUMAR 
SHRI J. NAGESHWARA Rao (Alternate) 


Dr. C. V. N. Rao 
SHRI C. K. SHARMA 


DR RAMAN MOHAN SINGH 
Dr K. V. SATYANARAYANA (Alternate I) 
DR SOBIA GHANI (Alternate II) 


IS 1925 : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 


National Tobacco Testing Laboratory, Guwahati DR PRASENJIT SAHA 
SHRI SANJIB KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST 'E' AND HEAD (FAD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio)) 


Member Secretarv 


SHRIMATI NAVITA VADAV 
SCIENTIST 'D' (FAD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutorv institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 04 (16475). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalava, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


