NAT HA IS 17180 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


PUR IEEE ES 
LATAS eh TART EA APTA 


Guidelines for Using Infrared 
Thermography for Condition 
of Rotating Components 


ICS 77.040.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF Wea, 9 FETTE SHC HM, as fret- 110002 
Ve Y MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2020 Price Group 2 


Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee, MTD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Non-Destructive 
Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 


Infrared thermal imaging is used for nondestructive, non-contact detection of non-uniform temperatures as part 
of condition monitoring of compressors, motors, fans, pumps, and other rotating components in engineering 
industry. Early detection of temperature changes especially, hot spots, due to possible degradation, damage or 
flaws in rotating components using infrared thermography will enable prevention of failures and accidents. 
Periodic monitoring using infrared thermography helps in minimizing the down time of plant components. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17180 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR USING INFRARED 
THERMOGRAPHY FOR CONDITION 
OF ROTATING COMPONENTS 


1 SCOPE 


This guideline covers application of infrared thermal 
imaging method to detect non-uniform temperature 
and also to detect adverse distribution of heat during 
service, by mapping isotherms. Compressors, motors, 
fans, pumps, vacuum sets, conveyors etc, generally 
referred to as mechanical equipment. They have rotating 
components such as motor, shaft, pump, bearings, 
casings, couplings, v- belts, pulley, chain drives and 
gearboxes which are designed to transfer mechanical 
energy with minimal losses through friction. This 
guideline is applicable for condition monitoring of 
these components to detect hot spots. This guideline 
may involve use of equipment and materials in the 
presence of heated, moving or electrically energized 
equipment or all of these. 


2 TERMINOLOGIES 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
terminology shall apply: 


2.1 End User — The person responsible for using the 
information provided by an infrared examination. 


2.2 Infrared Examination — The use of an infrared 
imaging system to provide thermal data about a 
structure, system, object or process. 


2.3 Inventory List — A list of the equipment by the 
infrared thermographer. 


2.4 Qualified Personal — Person provided and 
authorized by the end user to perform the tasks 
required by the infrared thermographer. He/she shall 
be knowledgeable of the operation and history of the 
equipment to be examined and of all safety practices 
and rules of the end user. 


2.5 Qualitative Infrared Inspection — An infrared 
examination that provides images of exceptions but not 
temperature data. 


2.6 Quantitative Infrared Inspection — An infrared 
examination that provides both images of exceptions 
and temperature data. 


2.7 Absorptance — The ratio of radiant flux absorbed 
by a surface to that incident upon it. 


2.8 Apparent Temperature — The temperature of 
an object as determined solely from the measured 
radiance, assuming an emissivity of unity. 


2.9 Blackbody — An ideal thermal radiator 
(emissivity = 1.0) that emits and absorbs all of the 
available thermal radiation at a given temperature. 


2.10 Emissivity — The ratio of the radiance of a body 
at a given temperature to the corresponding radiance of 
a blackbody at the same temperature. 


2.11 Field of View (FOV) — The shape and angular 
dimensions of the cone or the pyramid which define the 
object space imaged by the infrared imaging system. 


2.12 Infrared Imaging System — An apparatus that 
converts the two dimensional spatial variations in 
infrared radiance from any object surface into a two- 
dimensional thermogram of the same scene, in which 
variations in radiance are displayed in gradations of 
gray tone or in color. 


2.13 Infrared Reflector — A material with areflectance 
in the infrared region as close as possible to 1.0. 


2.14 Infrared Sensing Device — One of a wide 
class of instruments used to display or record, or both 
information related to the thermal radiation received 
from any object surfaces viewed by the instrument. The 
instrument varies in complexity from spot radiometers 
to two dimensional real time imaging systems. 


2.15 Infrared Thermographer — The person qualified 
or trained to use infrared imaging radiometer. 


2.16 Infrared Thermography — The process 
of displaying variations of apparent temperature 
(variations of temperature or emissivity or both) 
over the surface of an object or a scene by measuring 
variations in infrared radiance. 


2.17 Reflected Temperature — The temperature 
of the energy incident upon and reflected from the 
measurement surface of a specimen. 


2.18 Thermal Resolution — The smallest apparent 
temperature difference between two black bodies that 
can be measured by an infrared sensing device. 


IS 17180 : 2020 


2.19 Thermogram — A visual image which maps the 
apparent temperature pattern of an object or scene into 
a corresponding contrast or colour pattern. 


3 METHODS OF TEST 


The following methods are generally used on thermally 
generated electromagnetic energy by infrared radiation 
in non-contact mode. 


3.1 Non-Contact Method 


Non-contact method involves the use of TV/PC 
compatible infrared imager to continuously monitor 
the temperature distribution over a visible surface. 
A sudden but uncertain change in temperature of the 
surface is induced by brief exposure to a high power 
heat source or by contact with another material at a 
different temperature. Sub-surface flaws, such as de- 
laminations, inclusions and voids affect the diffusion 
of the heat through the material, producing variations in 
surface temperature. The changing surface temperature 
patterns are scanned with an infrared imager and 
displayed on a computer screen, and the results are 
recorded on computer HDD/ removable disk for further 
analysis or image enhancement. The method is rapid 
with flaw detection time as short as a few seconds. The 
development of this inspection method is supported by 
extensive experimental and theoretical work on flaw 
detectability and imaging. 


4 TECHNIQUES 
THEROGRAPHY 


OF INFRARED 


4.1 Infrared thermography is considered either passive 
or active depending upon the technique employed. 


4.2 In passive thermal imaging technique, no externally 
heat or cool the object under investigation to obtain a 
thermal profile. Presence of flaw is indicated by an 
abnormal temperature in the vicinity of a flaw. 


4.3 Greater the impedance of the material to heat 
flow better will be the detection of the flaw present. 
Higher resistance to heat flow changes temperature 
more slowly under fixed thermal input. Greater the 
temperature is observed near a surface flaw. 


4.4 The objects that are examined using heating or 
cooling effects inherent in normal service are considered 
active. The purpose of examining active objects during 
service is usually to detect and measure harmful hot 
spots, rather than to detect only flaws. 


5 CALIBRATION AND CHECKING 


The system for direct measurement of temperature has 
to be calibrated with black body calibration. Later for 
determining exactly the temperature of object under 
investigation, 1t should be compared with contact 
temperature measuring instruments like thermocouple, 


resistance temperature detectors (RTD) etc. especially 
in a process plant for inputting the exact emissivity of 
the object. 


6 SIGNIFICANCE AND USE 


This guideline can be used by an end user to specify 
the condition monitoring of rotating components using 
infrared thermography method: 

a) This guideline gives the combined responsibilities 
of the end user and the infrared thermographer 
when using infrared thermography method. 

b 


= 


The aim of an infrared thermography inspection is 
to identify and document the flaw locations during 
condition monitoring of rotating components. 


c) In mechanical systems, hotspots are usually 
created by friction caused by improper lubrication, 
misalignment, worn components or mechanical 
loading anomalies. Cool exceptions are usually 
caused by failed components. 


d 


wm 


Infrared thermography inspections give data about 
equipment at the time of examination only. 


e) Infrared thermography inspection is not a solution. 
It can give the status of the components inspected. 


7 PROCEDURE 


This guideline can explain the procedure for operation 
and history of the equipment to be examined: 


a) The infrared thermography personal shall develop 
an inventory list of the equipment to be examined 
in a logical, efficient and safe route through the 
facility. 

b 


== 


The infrared thermography personal shall perform 
a calibration test(s), before each quantitative 
infrared examination, to ensure that all temperature 
measuring equipment is within the manufacturers’ 
standard specifications for accuracy. 


c) When examining the components, the 
thermographer will comply with all safety rules, 
regulations and practices of the end user. 


d 


wm 


The infrared thermography personal shall make 
examinations when the environmental and 
physical circumstances, such as wind, surface 
and atmospheric moisture and heat transfer are 
satisfactory to acquiring accurate data. 


8 REPORT 


The infrared thermographershall provide documentation 
for all infrared inspection. The following information 
shall be included in a report to the end user: 


a) The name, organization, address, and telephone 
number of the infrared thermography personal 
and his/her certification level and number, if 
applicable. 


b) Name and details of the end user. 


c) Details of infrared imaging system used such as 
manufacturer, model and serial number. 


d) The date(s) of the inspection and when the report 
was prepared. 


e) For performing the qualitative measurement of 
infrared thermal imaging data, the personal should 
note down the ambient temperature and the sky 
conditions at the time of the examination. 


f) The time at which the experiment was conducted. 


g) Hardcopies of the thermal images with detail 
temperature scale and the corresponding normal 
photographic image. 


h) 


» 


k) 


IS 17180 : 2020 


Field of view of the infrared camera lens, and 
any zoom settings that could affect the accuracy, 
reliability, or repeatability of the inspection data. 


While performing quantitative infrared 
inspections, the infrared thermographer shall note 
down the distance of the object from the infrared 
camera, the reflected temperature, emissivity 
and transmission values used to calculate the 
temperature(s) of the object. 

The actual temperatures of surfaces having low 
emissivity may differ from corrected radiometric 
measurements. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 21 (5313). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


