INATA Ah IS 17918 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Mechanical Vibration and Shock — 
Resilient Mounting Systems — 
Technical Information to be 
Exchanged for the Application of 
Isolation Systems 


ICS 17.160 
© BIS 2023 
anda Ae Sat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
es WH, 9 ETL Me HHL MM, ag Ree - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 9 


Mechanical Vibration and Shock Condition Monitoring Sectional Committee, MED 28 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Mechanical 
Vibration and Shock Condition Monitoring Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 


This Indian Standard is limited to the consideration of resilient devices. 


Some suppliers of shock and vibration isolators (resilient mounts) have experience covering a wide variety of 
applications. In most instances, they are willing to use this background information for solving the user’s problem 
with isolators. However, it is frequently difficult for the supplier to provide this service, because the customer, the 
user, or the producer of the vibration sources or receiver has not furnished sufficient information regarding the 
information. 


On the other hand, the user is sometimes restricted applying isolators because the supplier does not furnish 
sufficient technical information. Consequently, the user must conduct their experimental evaluation of the isolator 
and may unknowingly duplicate work already carried out by the supplier. 


With some vibration sources or receivers, the producers provide the isolating system. To do that, the producer 
needs all the information from the customer relating to the future application, site, and environment. 


This Indian Standard is intended to serve as a guide for the exchange of technical information between the 
customer, the supplier of resilient devices, and the producer of vibration sources or receivers, as required for their 
proper application. 


This standard is based on ISO 2017-1 : 2005 ‘Mechanical vibration and shock — Resilient mounting systems — 
Part 1: Technical information to be exchanged for the application of isolation systems’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in the Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules 
for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded- 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Indian Standard 


MECHANICAL VIBRATION AND SHOCK — RESILIENT 
MOUNTING SYSTEMS —TECHNICAL INFORMATION TO 
BE EXCHANGED FOR THE APPLICATION OF ISOLATION 

SYSTEMS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Indian Standard establishes requirements 
to ensure the exchange of information for effective 
isolation of the equipment/structural system 
between the following: 


a) Customers; 
b) Producers (vibration producer); 
c) Manufacturer (vibration receiver); 


d) Suppliers (supplier of isolation devices); 
and 


e) Designer (system designer). 


1.2 Vibration receivers can be machines, buildings, 
structures, sensitive equipment, or people subjected 
to vibrations and shocks generated by vibration 
sources transmitted through the ground. Vibration 
sources can be machines and/or structures 
generating vibrations that is, machines, railways, 
road traffic, and other external and internal sources. 


1.3 This standard is applicable to the use of new 
products (source or receiver), and can also be 
applied to previously installed products when the 
user wishes to solve a newly arisen vibration 
problem. It is not to be considered as a manual of 
an isolation system. Examples of elements of 
vibration isolation are shown in Annex A (for 
information only). 


1.4 This standard intends to provide appropriate 
responses to questions highlighted by the producers 
and customers, for example, ‘why’, ‘what’, ‘when’ 
and ‘how’ to isolate mechanical systems. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 


investigate the 


IS No./Other 
Standards 


ISASO 2041 : 
2018 


IS/ISO 5349-1 : 


2001 


IS/ISO 5349-2 : 


2001 


IS 15593 
(Part 1) : 2005/ 
ISO/TS 10811- 
1 : 2000 


ISO 9688 
1990 


ISO 10846-4 : 
2003 


IS 17918 : 2023 


possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of these standards. 


Title 


Mechanical vibration, shock and 
condition monitoring — 
Vocabulary (first revision) 


Mechanical vibration — 
Measurement and evaluation of 
human exposure to hand 
transmitted vibration: Part 1 


General requirements (first 
revision) 
Mechanical vibration — 


Measurement and evaluation of 
human exposure to hand 
transmitted vibration: Part 2 
Practical guidance for 
measurement at the workplace 
(first revision) 


Mechanical vibration and shock 
— Vibration and shock in 
buildings with sensitive 
equipment: Part 1 Measurement 
and evaluation 


Mechanical vibration and shock 
— Analytical methods of 
assessing shock resistance of 
mechanical systems — 
Information exchange between 
suppliers and users of analyses 


Acoustics and vibration — 
Laboratory measurement of 
vibro-acoustic transfer properties 
of resilient elements — Part 4: 
Dynamic stiffness of elements 
other than resilient supports for 
translatory motion 


IS 17918 : 2023 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purposes of this document, the terms and 
definitions given in IS/ISO 2041, ISO 9688, and 
ISO 10846-4 and the following apply. 


3.1 Resilient Device 


Flexible element or system used between an 
equipment (with/without inertia block) item and its 
supporting structure to attenuate the transmission of 
shock or vibration from the equipment to the 
structure or from the structure to the equipment. 


3.2 Vibration Source 


Simple or multiple solid, liquid, or gaseous bodies 
causing vibration in its environment such as 
machinery, traffic, explosions, wave loading, wind 
loading, earthquake loading etc. 


3.3 Vibration Receiver 


All structures or elements of structures responding 
to vibration energy emitted by an internal or external 
source. 


3.4 Customer 


User or purchaser of a product (building, machine, 
etc). 


3.5 Manufacturer 


Party constructing or manufacturing a product that 
needs to be isolated from internal or external 
vibration. 


3.6 Producer 


Party constructing or manufacturing a product that 
generates vibration within the plant. In certain cases 
the producer may be located outside the plant that is, 
neighboring plant and in certain cases the producer 
may be railways-roadways and airways etc. 


3.7 Supplier (Isolation Supplier) 


Party responsible for providing and/or installing an 
isolation system which will meet the requirements to 
reduce vibration as agreed upon with the customer. 


3.8 Designer (System Designer) 


Party responsible for isolation system design for 
equipment/machinery - on isolated foundation; and 
on structure with or without inertia blocks using 
isolation devices to achieve desired vibration 
isolation of the equipment, machinery, and the 
structure in line with the requirements of the 
customer/producer/supplier. 


NOTES 
1 In certain cases, the manufacturer and the producer 
may be the same party. 


2 In certain cases the manufacturer, the producer, the 
supplier, and the designer may be the same party. 


3 In certain cases the customer and the designer may be 
the same party. 


4 The customer, the manufacturer, the designer, the 
producer or the supplier may each mandate 
subcontractors to execute the work or to purchase 
elements. From a legal point of view, all five remain 
responsible in the case of failure of the project. 


4 PURPOSE OF VIBRATION ISOLATION 


The purpose of vibration isolation is to protect the 
mechanical and structural systems, including people 
(operating/administration staff), from vibrations and 
shocks by taking action on the source or the receiver 
of vibrations. 


The purpose may include assurance of the 
following: 


a) The safety of the industrial building 
containing the vibrating equipment itself; 


b) The safety and comfort of the operators of 
the vibrating machine; 


c) The safety and comfort of bystanders near 
the vibrating machine; 


d) The security of a building located close to 
a source of vibration, such as an industrial 
plant or railway; 


e) The comfort of people in temporary or 
permanent habitations that may be subject 
to vibration excitation; 


f) The security of sensitive equipment in 
buildings; 

g) The correct operation of the isolated 
equipment; and 


h) Meeting regulatory requirements. 


5 APPLICABILITY OF VIBRATION 
ISOLATION (WHEN TO ISOLATE 
STRUCTURES OR MECHANICAL 
SYSTEMS) 


A vibration isolation mounts may be used for 
isolation of mechanical as an additional feature (in 
addition to the design measures for reducing 
vibration) and not as a substitute to design measures. 
It may be applied as follows: 


a) When vibrating machines are installed on 
independent foundations at ground level; 


b) When vibrating machines are installed 
directly on the structure; 


c) When vibrating machines are installed on 
inertia block at superstructure level; 


d) When constructions, installations, or 
buildings containing vibrating machines 
are designed or modified; 


e) When vibrating sources are displaced or 
modified; 
f) When structure-borne noise occurs; 


g) When designing and constructing 
buildings, especially sensitive ones in the 
neighborhood of railways, airports, or 
high-traffic roads; 


h) When designing or ordering sensitive 
equipment; 

j) When receiving complaints from people 
working or living in the area of vibration 
sources; and 


k) When the limiting values specified in 
legislation for vibration are exceeded. 


6 MEASUREMENT AND EVALUATION OF 
VIBRATION CONDITIONS 


6.1 In order to choose the correct isolation mounting 
system, it is necessary to make prior measurements 
and evaluations of source vibration at the site. 


6.2 Measurements shall be made under the 
environmental conditions relevant to the location of 
the source or receiver. The measurements and 
analysis should help to provide an understanding of 
the origin of the problem and possibly give an 
indication of the solutions. Measurements shall 
be made in accordance with IS/ISO 5349-1, 
ISMSO 5349-2, or IS 15593 (Part 1)/ISO/TS 
10811-1. 


6.3 The measuring position shall be defined in a 
contract, and the mounting points of transducers and 
the directions of measurements shall be reported. 


6.4 These measurements shall include time history 
monitoring over a sufficiently long period to cover 
the working cycle of the source of vibration. If the 
vibration from the source to receiver travels through 
soil media, these measurements shall also include 
the influence of seasonal variation of groundwater 
table over transmitted vibrations. 


6.5 For source measurements, analysis of frequency 
responses for the structures that transmit and receive 
vibration will help to avoid coincidence between 
dominant frequencies of the source and the natural 
frequencies of these structures/machinery. 


6.6 For receiver measurements, determination of the 
background vibration shall be carried out in order to 
know the inherent level below which no solution is 
normally necessary. 


IS 17918 : 2023 


7 INFORMATION LEADING TO THE 
CHOICE OF ISOLATION DEVICE 


Isolation is feasible either at vibration source or at 
vibration receiver or both at source as well as at 
receiver ends. The main vibration sources to be 
considered in this part of this standard are machines. 


7.1 Whether one adopts source isolation or receiver 
isolation depends upon a several parameters of both 
source as well as the receiver. Prime contributor is a 
vibration source that defines the characteristics of 
vibration signals that is, vibration amplitudes with 
associated frequencies. In addition, it also depends 
upon the dynamic characteristics of the vibration 
receiver including its support system. 


7.2 The choice of the isolation system shall take into 
consideration not only the static characteristics of 
the isolated structure but also the dynamic 
characteristics of its surrounding structure (and 
other sources). 


7.3 The information to be exchanged is different in 
the case of source-isolation or receiver-isolation. In 
order to select appropriate isolators and to correctly 
fit the isolation, an exchange of information is 
needed amongst the manufacturer, the producer, the 
supplier, the customer, and the designer. Thus, the 
type of isolation and choice of isolation for either 
source or receiver is the responsibility of the 
isolation designer, who is responsible for carrying 
out the isolation design. Thus, all the required 
information by the concerned agencies needs to be 
exchanged/shared/provided to the designer. It may 
be noted that the system designer (designer) could 
be a specialist agency either belonging to or hired by 
the customer/the manufacturer/the producer or the 
supplier. 


8 INFORMATION EXCHANGE FOR SOURCE 
ISOLATION 


The purpose, in this case, is the protection of the 
environment in the vicinity of a vibrating source by 
modifying the vibration output at the source level 
itself. Source isolation may not be feasible for all 
vibration sources as the vibration source may or may 
not lie within the project complex. The information 
exchange for source isolation would be different 
depending upon the source location and vibration 
severity. 


8.1 When Vibration Source is within the Project 
Complex 


When machines-producing vibrations are located in 
the same project, complex-source isolation is 
feasible using isolation mounts. Information shall be 
provided to the designer by the producer, the 
supplier, and the customer. Details of the 


IS 17918 : 2023 


information to be provided by each agency are as 
under. 


8.1.1 Information to be Provided by the Producer 


8.1.1.1 Machine data — Necessary drawings shall 
be furnished giving salient details as under: 


a) Machine mass (stator and rotor) for drive 
machine and driven machine, its operating 
speed, speed range if any, machine balance 
grade, machine unbalanced dynamic 
forces, allowable amplitudes, etc. The 
outline and installation of the machine with 
foundation outline, if appropriate; 


b) The overall dimensions; 


c) The total mass and the location of the 
centre of gravity (rotational inertia shall 
also be included); 


d) Specifications of bolt sizes and special 
connectors for securing the machine; the 
location of attachments, tapped holes, 
tolerances, and any special material 
considerations shall be indicated on the 
drawing; 

e) Identification and direction of the three 
mutually orthogonal axes of origin; 


f) The normal machine orientation with 
respect to the vertical axis, the direction of 
the major shock or vibration shall be 
indicated; and 


g) Feasible structural attachment points (these 
points frequently determine the isolation 
system in relation to orientation, centre of 
gravity, etc). 


8.1.1.2 Vibration excitation 


The vibration excitation of the machine 
characterized by its exciting forces and couples as a 
function of frequency, or in the form of time history, 
shall be described in detail necessary to ensure the 
safe installation and operation of the machinery on 
the designed isolation system. The information shall 
include the following: 


a) Dynamic forces and couples with 
associated rotational frequencies; 


b) Forces and couples caused by reciprocating 
masses with associated frequencies; 


c) Torque reaction couples; 


d) Amplitude and/or frequencies of fluid 
pulsation phenomena; 


e) Frequencies of aerodynamic phenomena 
for example, for fans); 


f) Electromagnetic forces and frequencies 
associated with electrical rotating 


machines or transformers; 


g) Dynamic characteristics of the isolation 
system on which the mechanism has been 
tested; 


h) Distribution of vibration (in three 
directions) over the surface of the 
mechanism mounting and where electric 
cables and pipes may be mounted; and 


j) Factors ensuring that the isolation system 
does not introduce specific vibration levels 
that are detrimental to the machine. 


8.1.1.3 Special requirements 


Special features peculiar to equipment 3 shall be 
covered in the machine description and by drawings. 
Examples of such special features are as follows: 


a) Electrical connectors, tubing, ducting, or 
piping, which might modify the 
mechanical response of the mounting 
system (type, size, stiffness, etc); 


b) Externally applied forces and moments; 
c) Required access areas; 


d) Minimum clearance required for cooling 
airflow, any temperature gradients which 
might adversely affect isolator operation 
shall be shown on the drawing and the 
expected temperature range shall be given; 


e) Maximum clearance between the 
equipment and the foundation, where 
applicable; and 


f) Alignment requirements for shafts. 
8.1.1.4 Electrical features 


Provisions for grounding and applicable 
specifications shall be indicated in a note on the 
drawing. 


8.1.1.5 Special requirements for mechanical 
stability 


Special requirements for mechanical stability shall 
be given. For example, special care is needed where 
equipment with a high or variable centre of gravity 
is supported by isolators located below the centre of 
gravity, or where uncompensated side thrust exists. 


8.1.2 Information to be Provided by Customer 
a) Details about machine support system: 


1) Foundation details if machine is 
supported on isolated foundation; and 


2) Structural configuration of support 
structure (strength/stiffness) in case 


the machine is mounted directly on the 
structure or supported on the structure 
through inertia block, etc. 


b) Details about building/structure: 


The customer (through the designer and 
constructor of the building/structure) shall 
supply the following information to the 
designer: 


1) Necessary drawings of the structure 
dealing in nature, dimensions and the 
position of the bearing elements (steel, 
concrete, combined); 


2) Category of the foundation expected to 
be used (shallow, deep); 


3) Position of the foundation in relation 
to tunnels or traffic roads; 


4) Position of any underground water 
table; and 


5) Function of the future building 
(offices, laboratories, habitation, 
manufacturing of particular 
equipment); 


8.1.3 Information to be Provided by Supplier 


Supplier shall provide complete engineering 
data/catalogue to enable the designer to choose the 
type of isolation device to achieve the targeted 
isolation. 


a) For spring-damper type isolator: 


1) Load ranges/load capacity of the 
mounts; 


2) Load vs deflection table; 

3) Vertical stiffness (static as well as 
dynamic); 

4) Lateral stiffness (static as well as 
dynamic); and 


5) Associated damping. 


b) For pad type of isolators: 


1) Load ranges/load capacity of the pad 
type of mounts; 


2) Load vs deflection curve; 

3) Elastic modulus (static/dynamic); 
4) Vertical stiffness; 

5) Lateral stiffness; 

6) Associated damping; and 


7) Non-linearity limits of load deflection 
curve. 


IS 17918 : 2023 


8.2 When Vibration Source is Outside the Project 
Complex 


This includes two types of vibration sources: 


a) When machine producing vibrations is 
located in the  adjacent/adjoining 
complexes; and 


b) When vibration transmission takes place 
from rail/road traffic adjacent to the project 
complex or blasting/mining operation at a 
distance sufficient to transmit sizeable 
vibrations at the project site. 


Source isolation for both these cases is considered to 
be difficult as the source is beyond the bounds of the 
current project battery limit and the only feasible 
option is to resort to receiver isolation. Further to 
reduce the influence of such vibration on the 
receiver, it may however be advisable to resort to 
indirect isolation techniques like digging trenches in 
one’s complex and filling these with sand or other 
anti-vibration material may be adopted. Such an 
effort should be in addition to receiver isolation. 
Such indirect isolation shall result in a reduction in 
the vibration intensity at the receiver end but may 
not guarantee the desired/targeted isolation. 


9 INFORMATION EXCHANGE FOR 
RECEIVER ISOLATION 


Such isolation is adopted where source isolation is 
impossible/impractical or where source isolation has 
proved to be unsatisfactory. The purpose, in this 
case, is the protection of the environment in the 
vicinity of a vibrating source by modifying the 
vibration input at the receiver end. Receiver 
isolation, therefore, depends upon the vibration 
characteristics of the source as well as that of the 
receiver. Two cases are considered: 


a) When the receiver is also the source; and 

b) When the receiver static body may be machine 
or structure housing the sensitive non-vibrating 
equipment etc. 


Isolation of such systems may include: 


a) Applying isolation to the support of the 
sensitive equipment (laser tables, computer 
discs, electronic microscopes, machine 
operator's workstation etc); 


b) Applying isolation to the machine itself; and 


c) Applying isolation to the building/structure 
(base isolation). 


IS 17918 : 2023 


The following cases are considered for receiver 
isolation. 


9.1 When Vibration Receiver is also the 
Vibration Source 


For vibration isolation of the receiver, which is also 
the vibration source, isolation of the receiver 
becomes a complex task. The isolation in such a case 
has to account for vibration parameters of external 
vibration source as well as vibration parameters of 
receiver machine that is also the source. The 
following cases are considered for receiver 
isolation: 


a) Where the receiver (the machine) is directly 
mounted on an isolated foundation — 
Vibration isolation may be applied to the 
machine itself; 


b) Where the receiver (the machine) is mounted 
on an isolated foundation through inertia 
block — Vibration isolation may be applied 
to its inertia block; and 


c) Where the receiver (the machine) is mounted 
on a support structure through an inertia 
block, vibration isolation may be applied to 
its inertia block. 


Information shall be provided to the designer by the 
producer, the manufacturer, the supplier, and the 
customer. Details of the information to be provided 
are as under. 


9.1.1 Information to be Provided by the Producer 


Such information is to be provided by the producer 
only in case the external vibration source is within 
the project complex and the vibration source is not 
isolated. 


The information to be provided by the producer shall 
be: 


a) Dynamic forces and couples with 
associated frequencies; and 


b) Forces and couples caused by reciprocating 
masses with associated frequencies. 


9.1.2 Information to be Provided by the 
Manufacturer 


Since the machine to be isolated is also the vibration 
source, the information to be provided by the 
manufacturer to the designer shall be same as that 
given in 8.1.1. 


9.1.3 Information to be Provided by Customer 


a) Details of support system of the machine to 
be isolated: 


1) Foundation details if machine is 
supported on isolated foundation; and 


2) Structural configuration of support 
structure (strength/stiffness) in case 
the machine is mounted directly on 
the structure or supported on the 
structure through inertia block; etc. 


b) Vibration measurement data (from all 
external sources) with frequency contents 
like Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) analysis 
at the foundation level of the receiver. 


9.1.4 Information to be Provided by Supplier 


The information to be provided by the supplier shall 
be same as that given in 8.1.3. 


9.2 When Vibration Receiver is Sensitive 
Equipment (which is not the Vibration Source) 


Vibration isolation of such sensitive equipment may 
include applying isolation: 


a) Toamachine operator's workstation; and 


b) To the support of sensitive equipment 
(laser tables, computer discs, electronic 
microscopes, etc). 


The information to be provided by the 
producer/manufacturer/supplier/customer to the 
designer (for isolation design) shall be as under. 


9.2.1 Information to be Provided by the Producer 


Such information is to be provided by the producer 
only in case the external vibration source is within 
the project complex and vibration source is not 
isolated. The information to be provided by the 
producer shall be: 


a) Dynamic forces and couples with 
associated frequencies; and 


b) Forces and couples caused by reciprocating 
masses with associated frequencies. 


9.2.2 Information to be Provided by the 
Manufacturer 


a) Equipment mass; 


b) Equipment centroid (in all three directions) 
with respect to any reference point; 


c) Support details with specific reference to 
operational constrains, if any; 


d) Permissible amplitudes (in all the three 
directions) at the base of the equipment; 


e) Overall dimensions; 


f) Feasible structure attachment points (three 
points frequently determine the isolation 
system); and 

g) Natural frequency to be avoided at the 
equipment base, if any. 


9.2.3 Information to be Provided by the Customer 


a) Details about equipment support system; 


b) Foundation details if equipment is 
supported on isolated foundation; 


c) Relevant dynamic soil properties, if 
required; 


d) Structural configuration of support system 
(strength/stiffness) in case the equipment is 
mounted on the elevated structure; and 


e) Vibration measured data with FFT analysis 
at the foot of the support/sensitive 
equipment (combined data from all 
external vibration sources). 


9.2.4 Information to be Provided by the Supplier 


The information to be provided by the supplier 
shall be same as that given in 8.1.3. 


9.3 When Vibration Receiver is not a 
Machine/Equipment but the Structure 


Isolation of such structures is feasible using base 
isolation techniques. Such isolation is out of the 
scope of this code. Readers may refer to specialist 
literature on base isolation. 


10 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION TO BE 
SUPPLIED BY THE CUSTOMER 


10.1 Information to be Supplied by the User of 
the Source 


10.1.1 Technical Information on the Surrounding 
Structure of the Machine 


A brief description, sufficient for understanding the 
technical details of the proposed arrangement, shall 
be provided. The following information should be 
included. 


a) Type of structure in which the machine is 


IS 17918 : 2023 


to be mounted (for example, ship, steel 
building, concrete building, and power 
plant) and its dynamic characteristics (for 
example, resonance frequency, modes, and 
damping); 

b) Location in the structure (for example, 
engine room, main deck, and roof); 


c) Data on the supporting structure (ground 
conditions, such as the permissible load of 
the ground, groundwater level versus the 
floor, natural frequencies, and input 
mechanical impedance of the supporting 
structure); 


d) Isolation criteria or user’s criteria for 
acceptance (neighborhood, such as 
residential area, industrial area, type of 
neighboring machines, such as testing 
machines, punching machines; and 


e) Possible seismic activity level. 


10.1.2 Vibration and Shock Evaluation of the 
Surrounding Structure 


The vibration and shock evaluation of the 
surrounding structure before the installation of the 
machine shall be described with respect to the three 
axes in terms of the magnitude (displacement, 
velocity, or acceleration), corresponding 
frequencies, and the duration over which this will 
occur. Time history, spectral analysis, and other 
descriptive parameters shall be included. 


10.1.3 Environment 


The user shall supply, as applicable, the following 
information on the climatic environment: 


a) Upper and lower temperature limits; and 


b) Humidity, presence of water, sand or dust, 
salt spray, ozone, oils, solvents, radiation, 
etc. 


10.2 Information to be Supplied by the User of 
the Receiver 


10.2.1 Existing buildings are the main receivers of 
vibration, but it is often economically impractical to 
isolate the building except for certain important 
projects where the cost is deemed acceptable. In this 
case, only the substructure isolation (box in the box) 
technique may be applied. 


10.2.2 The receiver isolation mainly concerns 
sensitive equipment or machine operator work 
stations. The isolation system may be designated by 
the producer or by the supplier of isolation 
according to users’ demands. 


IS 17918 : 2023 


10.2.3 A brief description, sufficient for a complete 
understanding of the technical details of the 
proposed system, shall be provided. The following 
information should be included: 


a) Type of equipment to be isolated; 


b) Type of structure in which the equipment is 
mounted; 


c) Location of the equipment in the structure; 


d) Data on the supporting structure (for 
example, natural frequencies, dynamic 
stiffness, coupling with the vibration 
isolation system); 


e) Criteria for acceptance of isolation 
efficiency; 

f) Description of vibration conditions in the 
surrounding structure, with respect to the 
three orthogonal axes, by amplitude, 
frequencies, and duration; and 


g) Information on environmental conditions 
(for example, temperature, humidity). 


11 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION TO BE 
PROVIDED BY THE SUPPLIER OF THE 
ISOLATION SYSTEM 


11.1 Physical Data of the Isolation System 


The supplier of the isolation system shall provide the 
following detailed information on the characteristics 
of the isolation system: 


a) Type of isolation system; 

b) Materials of the isolation system; 

c) Mass of the isolation system; 

d) Leveling features; 

e) Maximum and minimum weight forces 
(expressed in newton’s) under the 
operation conditions of the machine; 

f) Dimensions, structure, mass, location, and 
orientation of the isolation system (for 
example, drawing), including any 
intermediate structure; 

g) Any creep of the isolators relative to load 
and time; 

h) Special requirements for air-mounted 
systems; 

j) Chemical, sunlight, and _ oil-resistant 
isolator materials; and 


k) Maximum stress and strain relationships 
(non-linear characteristics). 


11.2 Dynamic Behavior 


The supplier shall describe the translational and 
rotational dynamic behavior of the isolation system 
in terms of dynamic stiffness. The environmental 
conditions and the rate of loading under which the 


load-deflection data were obtained shall be 
described and tolerances shall be given. However, 
where necessary, as an alternative the supplier may 
describe the dynamic behavior by transmissibility 
characteristics measured in a test set-up that is fully 
described. Dynamic behavior may be related to 
variations in the following input parameters: 


a) Frequency response as a function of load; 

b) Amplitude; 

c) Temperature; and 

d) Damping: dynamic stiffness and damping 
for direction (for details of orientation and 


frequency range of interest, see ISO 10846-1, 
ISO 10846-2, and ISO 10846-3). 


The supplier shall describe the performance of the 
isolation in the three principal directions, indicating 
applicable frequencies and internal resonance. 


11.3 Durability 


The supplier shall present information on the 
durability and anticipated changes in physical 
characteristics during the life of the material, such as 
the following: 


a) Endurance limit associated with repeated 
deflections and shocks; 


b) Creep (permanent deformation) data, 
where applicable, and how the data were 
obtained; 


c) Ageing effects due to storage in specified 
environment, including maximum and 
minimum temperatures; and 


d) Maximum permissible displacement before 
restraint is required. 


11.4 Environmental Data 


The supplier shall supply the following information 
on the isolators, as necessary to ensure proper use: 


a) Upper and lower temperature limits beyond 
or below which the isolator under rated 
loads will not properly perform its function 
or will undergo permanent changes in 
characteristics; 


b) Ability of the isolator to with stand 
corrosion or deterioration caused by such 
factors as humidity, water, salt spray, 
fungus, ozone, oils and fuels, corrosive 
vapors, or sunshine; 


c) Ability to perform under adverse 
conditions, for example, in an atmosphere 
loaded with sand or dust; and 


d) Permissible storage environment. 
11.5 Maintenance Data 


The supplier shall supply details of any 
maintenance, periodical inspection, and service 
requirements. 


12 GUIDELINES FOR THE VALIDATION OF 
ISOLATION PERFORMANCE 


Normally, the supplier of isolated machines or the 
supplier of isolating systems has contractual or 
guarantee requirements to prove the performance of 
the vibration isolation after it is installed in the 
surrounding structure of the source or of the receiver 
itself. This performance shall be evaluated by an 
experimental method. Where machines are made by 
mass production, such evaluation may be performed 
under nominal installation conditions, and that 
information may be used in qualifying the installed 
vibration performance. In such cases, the 
manufacturer shall provide information on the 
installation conditions that have been used for the 
evaluation. If relevant, the following requirements 
apply: 


a) Measurement and evaluation of vibration 
shall be made by the independent party 
specialist before installation, it shall be 
performed in predetermined measurement 
locations and under the environmental; 
operating conditions expected for the 
future machine; 


b) After installation, measurements shall be 
made at the same locations and conditions, 


IS 17918 : 2023 


using the measurement method specified 
and the processing and analysis of the 
result; 


c) Measurement positions and the 
measurement results shall be reported; 


d) Acceptable values shall be communicated 
to the machine supplier (or machine/ 
isolator supplier); 


e) Limit values accepted by the supplier shall 
be specified in the contract; and 


f) Values measured shall be compared with 
the contractual limit values. 


In the case of correction of an existing situation, the 
measurements should be made under the same 
conditions as given in 7 in defined positions. These 
positions should be the positions of the disturbed 
subjects (operator’s or worker’s positions, office 
floors, neighboring building, etc). As in 7, 
acceptable limit values should be defined 
contractually between the user and the supplier. 
After correction, measurements should be carried 
out as described in 7. The results should be 
compared to the contractual values. In more 
complex situations, more detailed measurements 
will be required. 


IS 17918 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Informative) 


ELEMENTS FOR VIBRATION ISOLATION 


A-1 OBJECTIVE 


This informative annex has the objective of helping 
the user to understand the different functions of 
isolation systems. It does not represent an 
exhaustive survey of isolation systems and should 
not be used as guidance for the choice of an isolation 
system. 


A-2 SPRINGS 
A-2.1 General 


Springs are used to provide elastic vibration and 
shock isolating support for machines, that is, they 
are construction elements which deform, 
predominantly , elastically. Ideal springs cannot be 
realized in practice since each spring shows a certain 
amount of mass and damping. While for the 
calculation of vibration in the frequency range of 
interest in this standard, the mass of the spring may 
be ignored, the damping is strongly dependent on the 
spring material. 


A-2.2 Elastomer Springs 


Because of its elastic deformability and its small 
Young’s Modulus, elastomers are appropriate 
materials for springs. Compared to metal springs, 
elastomer springs have larger material damping. 
Deformation characteristics, such as stiffness and 
damping, on the choice of basic material and the 
components of the material mixture, as the shape of 
the spring. They are also affected by environmental 
conditions such as temperature. The long-term 
creeping depends strongly on the composition of the 


material. The material has visco-elastic properties. 
Usually, the static and dynamic stiffness of 
elastomer springs are different, the dynamic 
stiffness is greater than the static. The natural 
frequencies of the isolated system should be 
calculated only from the dynamic stiffness. With 
elastomer springs, vertical natural frequencies can 
be between 6 Hz and 20 Hz. In general, the load- 
deflection curve is nonlinear but, in practice, for 
operational loading it can be linearized. 


The following factors are important for the load 
capacity and the durability of elastomer springs: 


a) Material, additions and hardness; 
b) Design of the spring; 
c) Static load and dynamic load; and 


d) Vibration amplitude and frequency of the 
vibrating system. 


Because of their flexible design, connection with 
metal parts, and the wide range of possible material 
combinations, these springs may be adapted to a 
wide range of applications. Elastomer springs may 
be used as single elements or as distributed plates or 
mats. The detailed design of elastomer springs is 
determined by the type of loading (compression 
forces, shear forces, torsion moments, bending 
moments, or combinations thereof). Fig. 1 shows 
some examples of elastomer springs. For large, 
distributed compression loads, elastomer springs in 
the form of plates or mats are common. The vertical 
natural frequencies are usually higher than 12 Hz for 
these installations. 


onthe tatet 
Sele 


SLPLLLLLLL NEE PLES STEED 
N 4 


LELTETLLLL) AIII IIIIIIL, 


IS 17918 : 2023 


TERY 


A 


AF 


LED 
WE 


Fic. 1 EXAMPLES OF ELASTOMER SPRINGS 


A-2.3 Metal Springs 


Metal springs are not sensitive to large temperature 
differences and they are resistant to most organic 
substances. For the vibration isolation of machines, 
it is preferable to use metal springs that are made 
especially for this purpose from spring steel in the 
form of wire strings, plates and rods. There is no 
significant difference between the static and 
dynamic stiffness of metal springs. Depending on 


11 


the type and design of the spring, the load- 
deflection curve can be linear, progressive or 
digressive. With metal springs, vertical natural 
frequencies of 1.5 Hz to 8 Hz can be achieved. 
Metal springs have the ability to store high 
deformation energies at large deflection 
amplitudes. Their spring characteristics do not 
change with age Fig. 2 shows examples of different 
types of metal springs and their load-deflection 
curves. 


IS 17918 : 2023 


F 
) 
N 
F F F 
a) HELICAL SPRING b) SPIRAL SPRING c) FLEXURAL SPRING d) CONICAL SPRINGS 
F 
t F 
N A 
hit=2 
F F F F 
1.25 
04 
S S S S 
e) DISC SPRING COLUMN OF f) DISC SPRING COLUMN OF g) LAMINATED LEAF h) RING SPRING 
SINGLE DISCS SPRING PACKETS SPRING 

Key 
F— Load; 


S — Deflection in the direction of load; and 


h and t are dimensions. 


NOTE — The hatched areas indicate hysteresis due to friction damping. 


FIG. 2 METAL SPRINGS AND THEIR LOAD-DEFLECTION CURVES CHARACTERISTIC 


The helical compression spring is the metal spring 
generally used for the vibration isolation of 
machines. Because of its largely linear 
characteristics over a wide deflection range (load- 
deflection curve) and the wide choice of spring 
stiffness available, for all axes, this type of spring 
is particularly well suited for application to the 


12 


resilient mounting of machines of most types. The 
transverse or horizontal spring constant of a helical 
compression spring can be varied over a wide 
range, relative to the vertical spring constant, by an 
appropriate choice of spring dimensions. Fig. 3 
shows an example of a spring unit made of helical 
compression springs. 


IS 17918 : 2023 


FiG.3 TYPICAL SPRING UNIT MADE OF HELICAL COMPRESSOR SPRING 


A-2.4 Air Springs 


In principle, an air spring consists of a closed gas- 
filled volume with elastic sides (see Fig. 4). When 
the load changes the spring deflects, by deflection of 
the elastic side causing a change of volume which 
results in a change of pressure. This applies to 
pistons in cylinders as to the various bellows designs 
that are manufactured. The deflection characteristics 


of air springs depends on the balance between the 
external load and the pressure difference between 
the internal pressure and external pressure (for 
example, atmosphere) multiplied by the effective 
area depending on the inter gazed. The static and 
dynamic stiffnesses can be different. For level 
control, air springs are supplied in non-controllable 
and controllable designs. 


FIG. 4 EXAMPLES OF AIR SPRINGS 


IS 17918 : 2023 


A-3 DAMPERS 


Dampers are used to limit the movement of 
elastically supported systems while passing 
through resonance in the case of periodical 
excitation or in cases of shock or random 
excitation. They are mounted in parallel with the 
spring units and convert mechanical energy to heat. 
They are divided into dampers which utilize 
damping between rigid bodies (friction dampers, 
see Fig. 5) and dampers which utilize energy 
exchange in liquid (liquid dampers, see Fig. 5) or 
gaseous media. The force-velocity characteristics 
can be made independent of velocity, progressive, 
linear or digressive. Attention should be paid to the 


ANAANANS) ANRANNANRAAN | NNAANEN 
gi | IIIIESEEEESA | % 
IHI IHI 


7 
| ee 
AA OZZZZZZZX 


Á 
yF 


N k LA | Annans ANu 


Wf 


Key 


1 Friction lining 
2 Adjustment screw 
3 Compression spring 


risk of structure-borne noise problems when using 
friction dampers. The most important types of 
dampers for the vibration isolation of machines 
used in combination with spring units are liquid 
viscous dampers. Viscous dampers are particularly 
suitable for large vibration amplitudes at low to 
medium high frequencies. They consist of a 
damper casing, damping medium, and piston. The 
piston immersed in the damping medium can 
move in all directions (vertical and horizontal) up 
to a limit set by the casing of the damper. The 
damper is, therefore, able to reduce vibration in all 
six degrees of freedom. 


NNN 
hio 


in 
= 


NANT! 


4 Piston 
5 Casting 
6 Liquid medium 


FIG. 5 DESIGN OF FRICTION AND VISCOUS DAMPERS 


IS 17918 : 2023 


Ui wal 


Key 

1 Spring 5 Drilling 

2 Piston 6 Load volume 

3 Liquid 7 Interface plate 

4 Damper volume 8 Membrane 

FIG. 6 COMBINATION OF SPRINGS AND DAMPERS 

A-4 COMBINATIONS OF SPRINGS AND d) For the stabilization of machines and 
DAMPING systems which must be resiliently mounted 


on foundations of inadequate mass for 


Damping, as an important part vibration isolation . i 
technical or economic reasons; and 


system, either in the form of material damping or 


in the form of integrated dampers (see Fig. 6), is e) To secure a rapid decay of shock-induced 
required: vibration. 
a) Inall cases where as increase of vibration A-5 ACTIVE VIBRATION ISOLATORS 
amplitude on passing through resonance 
frequencies must be avoided; This standard deals with passive vibration isolation 
b) For most rotating machines whose operating system only (consisting of springs and dampers). 
Sasa gould. gime ise uy napalanice In special case it may be possible to reduce vibration 


by using dynamic vibration absorbers of active 
c) For absorption of short-circuit torque tuned mass dampers. 
transients produced by electrical machines; 


IS 17918 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Mechanical Vibration and Shock Condition Monitoring Sectional Committee, MED 28 


Organization 
Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi 


Abro Technologies Private Limited, New Delhi 


Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Bharat Dynamics Limited, Hyderabad 
Bharat Electronics Limited, Bengaluru 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi 


CSIR - National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


CSIR - National Aerospace Laboratories, Bengaluru 


CSIR - Central Mechanical 
Institute, Durgapur 


Engineering Research 


Consumer Voice, New Delhi 


D-Cad Technologies, New Delhi 


Defence Research and Development Organization, 
Research Centre Imarat, Hyderabad 

Electrical Research and Development Association, 
Vadodara 


Gas Turbine Research Establishment, Bengaluru 


Hella India Automotive Private Limited, Gurugram 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Bengaluru 


Representative(s) 
SHRI MANISH AGRAWAL (Chairperson) 


SHRI ATUL NATH 
SHRI ASHISH NATH (Alternate) 


SHRI V. V. SHINDE 
SHRI PRASHANT R. PAWAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI NIKHIL R. BAKAL (Alternate II) 


SHRI A. RAMA RAO 
SHRI ANIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SREENIVASA RAO 

SHRI V. NARENDRA 

Ms CLARA TOPPO 
SHRI M. C. GUPTA (Alternate I) 
SHRI PULAK MUKHERII (Alternate II) 


SHRI ANKIT AGRAWAL (Alternate IID) 


DR MAHAVIR SINGH 
DR KIRTI SONI (Alternate) 


DR SOUMENDU JANA 
DR SADANAND S. KULKARNI (Alternate) 


DR S. K. LAHA 


SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 


DR K. G. BHATIA 
SHRI NAKUL JOSHI (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK KUMAR BAJPAI 


SHRI RAVINDRA KUMAR MISRA (Alternate) 


DR VINOD GUPTA 
SHRI T. N. SURESH 

DR S. RAMACHANDRA (Alternate) 
SHRI HARI PRAKASH 


SHRI M. MURALI 
SHRI A. V. VAITHEESWARAN (Alternate) 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Hyderabad 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Space Research Organization - Vikram Sarabhai 
Space Centre, Thiruvananthapuram 
Indra Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 


Inteva Products 
Bengaluru 


India Automotive Private Limited, 


Maruti Udyog Limited, Gurugram 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Naval Science and 


Visakhapatnam 


Technological Laboratory, 


Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Resistoflex Private Limited, Greater Noida 


Sampoorna Rotor Dynamics Consultancy, Mechanical 
Engineering Department, Bengaluru 


Saraswati Dynamics Private Limited, Noida 


Schenck Rotec India Limited, Noida 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


Volvo Construction Equipments India Private Limited, 


Bengaluru 


In Personal Capacity (7, Ushaprabha Terreces, Tejas 
Nagar, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra-41 1038) 


In Personal Capacity (House No. 80, HIG 2, Ushodaya 
Enclave, Madinaguda, Miyapur, Hyderabad-500049) 


IS 17918 : 2023 
Representative(s) 
SHRI V. KARTIK 
SHRI M. RAMJI 
PROF N. S. VYAS 
SHRI SESHADRI SEKHAR 


DR MANISH SHRIKHANDE 
DR ANIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VASUDEVAN UNNIM 
SHRI BALAMURALI A. G. (Alternate) 


DR B. K. SREEDHAR 


SHRI AASHISH BHATIA 
SHRI SANJAY KATARIA (Alternate) 


SHRI MUGUNDARAM R. 
SHRI JOYDEEP CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI A.K. SEHGAL 
SHRI R. K. KAUL (Alternate) 


SHRI Y. DHANANJAY 
SHRI ANGAD VERMA (Alternate) 


DR V. RAMA KRISHNA 
SHRI K. UDAYANAND (Alternate) 


SHRI BRAJ KISHOR RAI 
SHRI RITUJIT HAZARIKA (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHISHEK SHUKLA 
SHRI S. N. BAGCHI (Alternate) 


DR V. BHASKARSARMA 
SHRI ARJUN GOEL 
SHRI SANJEEV ARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANURAG KUMAR 
SHRI RAJESH KHATTAR (Alternate) 


SHRI M. N. AMBARDEKE 
SHRI ROHIT VAIDYA (Alternate) 


SHRI V. R. SAI PRASAD POLIPALLI 
SHRI K. RAGHURAMAN (Alternate) 


SHRI NAGESH V. KARANTH 


SHRI UPPULURI SRIDHAR 


IS 17918 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


In Personal Capacity (43, Vatika Chs Ltd, Behind Dutta SHRI A. RAMA RAO 
Guru Society, Deonar, Mumbai-400088) 


In Personal Capacity (A-125, Brotherhood Apartment, H- DR ANIL KUMAR SINGH 
Block, Vikaspuri, New Delhi-110018) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA SCIENTIST ‘F’/ 
SENIOR DIRECTOR AND HEAD 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI PRASOON YADAV 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 28 (17803). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


