Inda HAF IS 17737 (Part 1) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


maga Raga mat 


qrt 1 Tata 


Mobile Device Security 


Part 1 Overview 


ICS 01.040.33, 01.040.35 


© BIS 2021 


anda Ara aa 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SENAR TH Ari, ay freh 110002 


en arie MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2021 Price Group 6 


Information Systems Security and Privacy Sectional Committee, LITD 17 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
Information Systems Security and Privacy Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and 
Information Technology Divisional council. 


There is no ISO/IEC Standard on this subject. 

This standard is one of the series of Indian Standards on Mobile device security. Other parts in this series are: 
Part 2 Security reguirements 
Part 3 Security levels 
Part 4 Assessment and evaluation 


As mobile based services especially, financial services are gaining popularity, focus on the security of data and 
content on mobile devices is obvious. Mobile devices need additional protection because their extensive mobility 
(portability) and always on connectivity (generally using untrusted public network) places them at higher exposure 
to threats than other client devices, such as desktop and laptop devices which are normally used only within the 
organization’s facilities and on the organization’s networks. 


It requires a totally different approach and strategy to address security of mobile devices as compared to normal 
computer based systems and applications. Mobile devices uses mobile ecosystem that involves various subsystems 
and components to provide an environment to enable the operations and connectivity of mobile devices and 
information systems. Therefore, security of mobile needs to be addressed at different layers (subsystems and 
components) of the mobile ecosystem covering mobile device technology stack (including firmware, embedded 
components, operating system, pre-installed applications like mobile browser, device management software 
agent, VPN client, Email client, etc.), Third party mobile applications, networks and communication interfaces 
(including cellular, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, NFC), mobile infrastructure (including mobile app store and services) and 
enterprise mobile support/ monitoring services (Enterprise Mobility Management [EMM]/ device management 
software and Mobile Application Management [MAM]). All these components of the mobile ecosystem 
shall be considered for defining and assessing the security of mobile devices to meet the common security 
objectives-confidentiality, integrity and availability. 


This series of standards is applicable to the following: 
a) Organizations designing, developing, and manufacturing mobile devices; 
b) Customers seeking confidence in the security of mobile devices used by them; 
c) Organizations seeking confidence in the security of mobile devices used by them; and 
d) Organizations performing security assessment of mobile devices. 
The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


IS 17737 (Part 1) : 2021 


CONTENTS 
Page No. 
0 INTRODUCTION ne 1 
1 SCOPE sah 3 
2 TERMINOLOGY we 3 
ANNEX A COMMITTEE COMPOSITION m 8 
BIBLIOGRAPHY oe 11 


LIST OF FIGURES 


Fig.l | Mobile Device Technology Stack an. 
Fig.2 Mobile Ecosystem x 5 


iii 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


IS 17737 (Part 1) : 2021 


0 INTRODUCTION 


Mobile devices like smartphones, tablets, and other mobile devices with similar features and capabilities have 
become computing platform for both personal and enterprise level usage. The following hardware and software 
characteristics collectively define the baseline for the purposes of this series of standards on mobile device security: 


a) A small form factor, 


b) At least one wireless network interface for network access (data communications). This interface uses Wi- 
Fi, cellular networking, or other technologies that connect the mobile device to network infrastructures 
with connectivity to the Internet or other data networks, 


c) Local built-in (non-removable) data storage, and 


d) Applications available through multiple methods (provided with the mobile device, accessed through 
web browser, acguired and installed from third parties). 


The list below details other common, but optional, characteristics of mobile devices. These features do not define 
the scope of devices included in the publication, but rather indicate features that are particularly important in terms 
of security risk. This list is not intended to be exhaustive, and is merely illustrative of common features of interest. 


a) Network and communication services: 
1) One or more wireless communication interfaces, such as Bluetooth or near-field communications; 
2) One or more wireless network interfaces for voice communications, such as cellular; and 
3) Global Positioning System (GPS), which enables location services. 
b) One or more digital cameras/video recording devices 
c) Microphone 
d) Storage: 
1) Support for removable media; and 
2) Support for using the device itself as removable storage for another computing device. 


e) Built-in features for synchronizing local data with a different location (desktop or laptop computer, 
organization servers, telecommunications provider servers, other third party servers, etc.) 
This standard is intended to help in understanding the terms and definitions in order to be able to effectively and 


efficiently implement and assess the security of mobile devices. It will help organizations and interested parties to 
improve communication through a common understanding of the vocabulary used. 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


IS 17737 (Part 1) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


MOBILE DEVICE SECURITY 
PART 1 OVERVIEW 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) describes the terms and definitions 
of mobile device technology and ecosystem. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply: 


2.1 Assessment — Systematic examination carried 
out against a defined set of requirements, goals or 
objectives. 


2.2 Audit — An independent examination of a work 
product or set of work products to assess compliance 
with specifications, standards, contractual agreements, 
or other criteria. 


2.3 Availability — Property of being accessible and 
usable on demand by an authorized entity. 


2.4 Bluetooth — Wireless technology standard for 
exchanging data over short distances. 


2.5 Confidentiality — Property that information 
is not made available or disclosed to unauthorized 
individuals, entities, or processes. 


2.6 Consequence — Outcome of an event affecting 
objectives. 


NOTES 

1 An event can lead to a range of consequences. 

2 A consequence can be certain or uncertain and can have 
positive or negative effects on objectives. 

3 Consequences can be expressed qualitatively or quantitatively. 


4 Initial consequences can escalate through knock-on effects. 


2.7 Containerization — Application container 
technologies, also known as containers, are a form 
of operating system virtualization combined with 
application software packaging. Containers provide 
a portable, reusable, and automatable way to package 
and run applications. 


2.8 Denial of Service — Prevention of authorized 
access to a system resource or system operations 
and functions, with resultant loss of availability to 
authorized users. 


2.9 Eavesdropping — Unauthorized interception and 
interpretation of information-bearing emanations. 


2.10 Evaluation — Systematic determination of the 
extent to which an entity meets its specified criteria. 


2.11 Event — Occurrence or change of a particular set 
of circumstances. 


NOTES 


1 An event can be one or more occurrences, and can have 
several causes. 


2 An event can consist of something not happening. 


3 An event can sometimes be referred to as an “incident” or 
“accident”. 


4 An event without consequences can also be referred to as a 


“near miss”, “incident”, “near hit” or “close”. 


2.12 External Context — External environment in 
which the organization seeks to achieve its objectives. 


NOTE — External context can include: 


1 The cultural, social, political, legal, regulatory, financial, 
technological, economic, natural and competitive environment, 
whether international, national, regional or local; 


2 Key drivers and trends having impact on the objectives of the 
organization; and 


3 Relationships with, and perceptions and values of external 
stakeholders. 


2.13 Integrity — Property of accuracy and 
completeness (Absence of unauthorized modification). 


2.14 Internal Context — Internal environment in 
which the organization seeks to achieve its objectives. 


NOTE — Internal context can include: 


1 Governance, roles and 


accountabilities; 


organizational structure, 


2 Policies, objectives, and the strategies that are in place to 
achieve them; 


3 The capabilities, understood in terms of resources and 
knowledge (for example, capital, time, people, processes, 
systems and technologies); 


4 Information systems, information flows and decision-making 
processes (both formal and informal); relationships with, and 
perceptions and values of, internal stakeholders; 


5 The organization’s culture; 


6 Standards, guidelines and models adopted by the organization; 
and 


7 Form and extent of contractual relationships. 


2.15 Jailbreaking — Manipulation by which the user 
of a mobile device gains access to privileged operating 
system administration rights. 


NOTE — Jailbreaking is also known as rooting. 


IS 17737 (Part 1) : 2021 


2.16 Likelihood — Chance of something happening. 
NOTES 
1 In risk management terminology, the word “likelihood” is 
used to refer to the chance of something happening, whether 
defined, measured or determined objectively or subjectively, 
gualitatively or guantitatively, and described using general 
terms or mathematically (such as a probability or a freguency 
Over a given time period). 
2 The English term “likelihood” does not have a direct 
eguivalent in some languages, instead, the eguivalent of 
the term “probability” is often used. However, in English, 
“probability” is often narrowly interpreted as a mathematical 
term. Therefore, in risk management terminology, “likelihood” 
is used with the intent that it should have the same broad 
interpretation as the term “probability” has in many languages 
other than English. 


2.17 Malware — Malicious software designed 
specifically to damage or disrupt a system, attacking 
confidentiality, integrity and/or availability. 


NOTE — Malware is also known as Malicious Code. 


2.18 Man-in-the-Middle An attack on the 
authentication protocol run in which the attacker 
positions himself or herself in between the claimant and 
verifier so that he can intercept and alter data traveling 
between them. 


Stack 


> 
60 
Ke, 
Oo 
a 
ie 
D 
| 
u 
= 
> 
D 
O 
ic 
DO 
Oo 
= 


2.19 Mobile Application — Software application 
installed and run on a mobile device, such as a 
smartphone or tablet computer. 


Mobile apps are classified as: 


a) Pre-installed application/bundled/stock/preloaded 
— Mobile apps which comes bundled/preinstalled 
with mobile device. 

b) Third Party Application: Mobile apps which are 
downloaded from app store or web. 

NOTE — Mobile application is also known as Mobile App. 


2.20 Mobile Device — A portable handheld device 
with inbuilt capability for voice, SMS (short messaging 
service) communication through a cellular network 
(for example, 2G/3G/4G/5G) with possibly other 
communication capabilities, such as WiFi, Bluetooth, 
NFC; The Device may have data communication 
capability. Example: Mobile phone, smartphone, tablet. 


NOTE — This definition should be read in conjunction with 
the introduction of this standard 


2.21 Mobile Device Integrity — Absence of 
unauthorized or unintended changes in the hardware, 
firmware and software of a mobile device. 


APPLICATION 
3rd Party Apps/Library 
Pre-installed Apps/Libraries 
Data 


Permissions, Exposed Services 


OPERATING SYSTEM 
Application Sandbox 
Kernel 
Media Services 


Runtime Environment 


FIRMWARE 
Initialization code 
Boot Loader 


Device Drivers 


HARDWARE 


Application Processor and Memory 


Baseband Processor and Memory 


Security Modules 


Peripherals , SIM , Camera, etc 


FıG.1 MOBILE DEVICE TECHNOLOGY STACK 


4 


Gg 


SIM Mobile Device 


IS 17737 (Part 1) : 2021 


Internet 


Fic. 2 MOBILE ECOSYSTEM 


2.22 Mobile Device Technology Stack — A set of 
components or layers that constitute a mobile device. 
Mobile device is considered to be consisting of 
following components of mobile technology stack: 


a) Mobile device hardware (processor, storage, 
execution environment), 

b) Mobile firmware, 

c) Mobile operating system, and 

d) Pre-installed (Bundled) apps. 


2.23 Mobile Ecosystem — A mobile ecosystem is an 
interconnected, interdependent set of various systems 
that combine to create and operate products and 
services. 


Mobile ecosystem consists of the various core 
components which include: 


a) Mobile device technology stack, including the 
hardware, the operating system, and embedded 


mobile device components (for example, baseband 
radio, sensors, bootloader, isolated execution 
environments, Subscriber Identity Module [SIM] 
card). 


b) Mobile applications. 


c) Networks and communication interfaces (for 
example, cellular, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, NFC) and 
services provided by network operators. 


d 


— 


Vendor mobile infrastructure, including mobile app 
stores and updates and backup services provided 
by the mobile device vendor or operating-system 
vendor. 


e 


— 


Enterprise mobile services and infrastructure, 
including Mobile Device Management Software, 
enterprise mobile app stores, and Mobile 
Application Management (MAM). 


IS 17737 (Part 1) : 2021 


2.24 NFC (Near Field Communication) — 
Contactless communication interface defined through 
a set of standard communication protocols. 


2.25 Process — Set of interrelated or interacting 
activities which transforms inputs into outputs. 


2.26 Risk — Effect of uncertainty on objectives. 
NOTES 


1 An effect is a deviation from the expected — positive and/or 
negative. 


2 Objectives can have different aspects (such as financial, 
health and safety, and environmental goals) and can apply at 
different levels (such as strategic, organization-wide, project, 
product and process). 


3 Risk is often characterized by reference to potential events 
and consequences, or a combination of these. 


4 Risk is often expressed in terms of a combination of the 
consequences of an event (including changes in circumstances) 
and the associated likelihood of occurrence. 


5 Uncertainty is the state, even partial, of deficiency of 
information related to, understanding or knowledge of an 
event, its consequence, or likelihood. 


2.27 Risk Analysis — Process to comprehend the 
nature of risk and to determine the level of risk. 


NOTES 


1 Risk analysis provides the basis for risk evaluation and 
decisions about risk treatment. 


2 Risk analysis includes risk estimation. 


2.28 Risk Assessment — Overall process of risk 
identification, risk analysis, and risk evaluation. 


2.29 Risk Criteria — Terms of reference against which 
the significance of a risk is evaluated. 


NOTES 


1 Risk criteria are based on organizational objectives, and 
external and internal context. 


2 Risk criteria can be derived from standards, laws, policies 
and other requirements. 


2.30 Risk Evaluation — Process of comparing the 
results of risk analysis with risk criteria to determine 
whether the risk and/or its magnitude is acceptable or 
tolerable. 


2.31 Risk Identification — Process of finding, 
recognizing and describing risks. 
NOTES 


1 Risk identification involves the identification of risk sources, 
events, their causes and their potential consequences. 


2 Risk identification can involve historical data, theoretical 
analysis, informed and expert opinions, and stakeholder’s 
needs. 


2.32 Risk Source — Element which alone or in 
combination has the intrinsic potential to give rise to 
risk. 

NOTE — Arisk source can be tangible or intangible. 


2.33 Risk Treatment — Process to modify risk. 


NOTES 
1 Risk treatment can involve: 


i) Avoiding the risk by deciding not to start or continue with 
the activity that gives rise to the risk; 


ii) Taking or increasing risk in order to pursue an opportunity; 
iii) Removing the risk source; 

iv) Changing the likelihood; 

v) Changing the consequences; 


vi) Sharing the risk with another party or parties (including 
contracts and risk financing); and 


vii) Retaining the risk by informed decision. 


2 Risk treatments that deal with negative consequences are 


sometimes referred to as “risk mitigation”, “risk elimination”, 


“risk prevention” and “risk reduction”. 


3 Risk treatment can create new risks or modify existing risks. 


2.34 Security Controls — Management, operational 
and technical controls (that is, safeguards or 
countermeasures) prescribed for an information system 
to protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability 
of the system and its information. 


2.35 SE (Secure Element) — Tamper-resistant 
platform in the mobile device capable of securely 
hosting and executing applications and associated 
confidential and cryptographic data (for example, key 
management). 


2.36 Secure Environment — System that implements 
the controlled storage and processing of information in 
order to protect personal and/or confidential data. 


2.37 Security Testing — Type of testing conducted to 
evaluate the degree to which a test item, and associated 
data and information, are protected so that unauthorized 
persons or system s cannot use, read, or modify them, 
and authorized persons or systems are not denied 
access to them. 


2.38 Sensitive Data — Data which is required to be 
protected by security controls. 


Example: Authentication credentials, payment and banking 
credentials, cryptographic keys. 


2.39 Stakeholder — Person or organization that can 
affect, be affected by, or perceive themselves to be 
affected by a decision or activity. 


NOTE — A decision maker can be a stakeholder. 


2.40 Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) — 
Aspect of the mobile device comprising hardware 
and/or software which provides security services to the 
mobile device computing environment, protects data 
against general software attacks and isolates hardware 
and software security resources from the operating 
system. 


2.41 Testing 


1) Setofactivities conducted to facilitate discovery 
and/or evaluation of properties of one or more 
test items. 


2) The process of operating a system or 
component under specified conditions, 
observing or recording the results, and making 
an evaluation of some aspect of the system or 
component. 


2.42 Threat — Potential cause of an unwanted incident 
that may result in harm to a system or organization. 


IS 17737 (Part 1) : 2021 
2.43 Vulnerability — Weakness in the security of a 
system that can be exploited or triggered by a threat. 


2.44 Vulnerability Assessment — Process of 
identifying and guantifying vulnerabilities. 


IS 17737 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Information System Security and Privacy Sectional Committee, LITD 17 


Organization 


Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Bharat Electronics Limited, Bengaluru 


Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, 
Pune 


Centre for Internet and Society, Bengaluru 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Data Security Council of India, Noida 


Defence Research Development Organization, 
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


HCL, Noida 
ISI Calcutta 


Indian Cellular and Electronics Association, 
New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Infosys Technologies Limited, Bengaluru 


KCPL 
Lady Shri Ram College for Women, New Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Science and Technology, Department of 
Science & Technology, New Delhi 


Narnix Technolabs Private Limited, New Delhi 


National Accreditation Board for Certification 
Bodies, New Delhi 


National Payments Corporation of India, Mumbai 


Oxygen Consulting Services Private Limited, Pune 


Patanjali Associates Private Limited, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
SHRI ARVIND KUMAR (Chariman) 


Ms SANGEETHA MANGAL 
SHRI DEVESH KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr M. Sasi KUMAR 
SHRIMATI P. R. LAKSHMI ESWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL ABRAHAM 
SHRI AMBER SINHA (Alternate I) 
SHRI GURSHABHAD GROVER (Alternate IT) 


Cor SUHAIL ZAIDI 
SHRI RAMESH KARWANI (A/ternate) 


SHRI ADITYA 


Ms NOOPUR SHROTRIYA 
SHRI G. ANIL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV CHHABRA 
PROF BIMAL Roy 


SHRI RAJESH SHARMA 
Ms Arpita DE (Alternate) 


PROF ANIL PRABHAKAR 


SHRI SRINIVAS POOSARLA 
SHRI RAJEEV THYKATT (Alternate 1) 
Ms Aswatny AsoK (Alternate IT) 


DR V. K. KANHERE 
Ms SUSHILA MADAN 


Suri N. SATHYAN 
SHRI TIRUMALA Rao K. (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. NEHRA 
SHRI RAKESH MAHESHWARI (Alternate I) 
SHRI SANTOSH SONI (Alternate II) 
DR SOMNATH CHANDRA (Alternate III) 
SHRI TARUN PANDEY (Alternate IV) 


SHRI SUJIT BANERJEE 
DR RAJEEV SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI KISHOR N. NARANG 


SHRI A. S. BHATNAGAR 
MS ANAJNA JAIN (Alternate) 


MR SATYA KANUNGO 
SHRI SATEESH PALAGIRI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIV KUMAR AGARWALA 
SHRI SACHIN PRAKASH JADHAV (Alternate) 


SHRI KANTI MOHAN RUSTOGI 


IS 17737 (Part 1) : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 
Qualcomm India Private Limited, Bengaluru Dr Vinosu BABU JAMES 
Reserve Bank Information Technology Private SHRI PRASHANT LOTLIKAR 
Limited, Mumbai SHRI DEEPNARAYAN TIWARI (Alternate) 
Smart Chip Private Limited, Noida Ms NISHA CHAUHAN 


SHRI PANKAJ AGARWAL (Alternate I) 
SHRI ANKIT GUPTA (Alternate ID) 


Standardization Testing and Quality Certification Suri A. K. SHARMA 
(STQC) Suri A. K. Upapuyaya (Alternate I) 
SHRI NAKUL AGGRWAL (Alternate II) 


Tata Consultancy Services Limited, Mumbai SHRI SATEESH SRINIWSAIAH 
SHRI NATARAJAN SWAMINATHAN (Alternate 1) 
SHRI ABHIK CHAUDHURI (Alternate II) 
SHRI ANUPAM AGRAWAL (Alternate III) 


Telecommunication Engineering Center, New Delhi SHRI S. SRIDHAR 
SHRI ARVIND CHAWLA (Alternate) 


The Perspective, New Delhi SHRI RAHUL SHARMA 

WYSE Biometrics System Private Limited, Pune SHRI YOGENDRA D. WADASKAR 

In personal capacity SHRIMATI AMUTHA ARUNACHALAM 

In personal capacity, Kolkata DR GARGI KEENI 

BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI REENA GARG, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND Heap (LITD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI KSHITIY BATHLA 
Scientist ‘C’ (LITD), BIS 


IS 17737 (Part 1) : 2021 


Mobile Security Standards Panel, LITD 17 P4 


Organization 


Standardization Testing and Quality Certification 


(STQC) 


Telecommunication Engineering Center, New Delhi 


Apple India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Cellular Operators Association of India, New Delhi 


Fime India, Bengaluru 


Google India, Bengaluru 
HCL, Noida 


Indian Cellular and Electronics Association, 
New Delhi 


KCPL 
Pavone Technologies, New Delhi 


Samsung India, Gurugram 


Sony India, Mathura 


Transsion India Limited, Noida 
UL India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


VIVO Mobile India Private Limited, Delhi 


Vincular Testing Labs India Private Limited, 
Bengaluru 


Xiaomi Corporation, Bengaluru 


10 


Representative(s) 
Suri A. K. UPADHYAYA (Convener) 


Suri P. K. SINGH (Co-Convener) 
Mr JUNAID A. SIDDIQUEE 
SHRI ROHIT SINGH 


Suri ANGAJ BHANDARI 
SHRI HARDIK MIRANI (Alternate) 


Ms TUHINA JOSHI 
SHRI SANJEEV CHHABRA 


SHRI RAJESH SHARMA 
SHRI TARON MOHAN (Alternate) 


DR V. K. KANHERE 
SHRI ABHINAV SHARMA 


Suri BAPPA MONDAL 
SHRIMATI Noor KHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR GUPTA 


SHRI RAHUL GAUR 
SHRI VINOD KUNDRA (Alternate) 


Suri ASHISH MATHUR 
Suri AJAY JAIDKA (Alternate) 


SHRI PAIGHAM DANISH 


SHRI VISHAL TOMAR 
SHRI SACHIN Duir (Alternate) 


Ms SuRBHI JAIN 
SHRI MANISH JAIN (Alternate) 


IS 17737 (Part 1) : 2021 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1) IS/ISO 31000 : 2018 Risk management — Guidelines. 
2) ISO 12812-1 : 2017 Core banking — Mobile financial services — Part 1: General framework. 


3) ISO/TS 12812-2 : 2017 Core banking — Mobile financial services — Part 2: Security and data protection 
for mobile financial services. 


4) ISO/IEC/IEFE 29119-1 : 2013 Software and systems engineering — Software testing — Part 1: Concepts 
and definitions. 


5) ISO/IEC/IEEE 29119-3 : 2013 Software and systems engineering — Software testing — Part 3: Test 
documentation. 


6) IEEE Std 610.12-1990 (R2002) Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology. 


7) NIST Special Publication 800-124 Revision 1; Guidelines for Managing the Security of Mobile Devices 
in the Enterprise, June 2013. 


8) NISTIR-8144 Assessing Threats to Mobile Devices and Infrastructure: the Mobile Threat Catalogue, 
September 2016. 


9) NIST Special Publication 800-190 Application Container Security Guide September 2017. 


10) Draft NIST Special Publication 800-53 Revision 5 Security and Privacy Controls for Information 
Systems and Organizations. 


11) Study on Mobile Device Security, Department of Homeland Security (DHS), April 2017. 
12) https://www.cio.com/article/2383123/mobile/geofencing-explained.html. 
13) https://www.techopedia.com/definition/2953/mobile-application-mobile-app. 


11 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 17 (14996). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


