**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 6968 (1973) : Code for hygienic condition for PAN (Betel 
leaf) stalls and vendors [FAD 15: Food Hygiene, Safety 
Management and Other Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



I5:696B-|?73 

(Reaffirmed 2005) 



Indian Standard 



CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 
PAN (BETEL) STALLS AND VENDORS 



L D<_! t.33-792 : 7^5*2 19-2 : 613-6 




® Copyright 1973 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MAiVAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR- SHAH 2AFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI I J 000] 



Dectmbcr 1973 

*5 ^d??Gp 1 



IS : 6968 - 1973 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 
PAN (BETEL) STALLS AND VENDORS 



Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis Sectional 
Committee, AFDG 36 

Chairman Representing 

Maj-Gen M. S. Boparai Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical 

Services, New Delhi 

Members 
Agricultural Marketing Adviser Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Faridabad 
to the Government of India 
Dr J. S. Pruthi ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. N. Amble Institute of Agricultural Research Statistics ( IGAR ), 

New Delhi 
Shri K. S. Krishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Balasubramanian Public Analyst, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras 

Shri D. S. Ghadha Central Committee for Food Standards, New Delhi 

Dr G. C. Das Corporation of Calcutta 

Dr P. K. Datta All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Shri Sukumar De National Dairy Research Institute (ICAR ), Karnal 

Dr C. A. Mulay ( Alternate) 
Director Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta 

Executive Health Officer Bombay Municipal Corporation 

Municipal Analyst ( Alternate ) 
Health Officer Corporation of Madras 

Dr ( Smt ) S. Khosla Department of Health & Family Planning, 

Government of Punjab, Chandigarh 
Dr P. K. Kymal Food and Nutrition Board ( Ministry of Agriculture ), 

New Delhi 
Dr R. C. Sinha {Alternate) 
Shri Y. N. Lakshman Defence Food Research Laboratory [ Ministry of 

Defence (R&D)], Mysore 
Dr G. M, Verma ( Alternate) 
Shri F. G. T. Menezes Directorate of Sugar & Vanaspati ( Ministry of 

Agriculture ), New Delhi 
Public Analyst ( Food and Government of West Bengal, Calcutta 
Water ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1973 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 6968 -1973 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Dr T. N. Ramachandra Rao 



Representing 

Central Food Technological Research Institute 
(CSIR), Mysore 
Shri C. T. Dwarkanath ( Alternate ) 
Col M. C. Sanyal Quarter Master General's Branch, Army 

Headquarters 
Lt-Col O. P. Kapur ( Alternate ) 
Dr Ranjit Sen Serologist to the Government of India, Calcutta 

Senior Commercial Officer Chief Catering Officer, Northern Railway, New Delhi 

( Catering ) 
Dr B. N. Singh Indian Standards Institution, New Delhi 

Dr S. B. Singh Public Analyst, Government of Uttar Pradesh, 

Lucknow 
Health Department, Municipal Corporation of Delhi 



Lt-Col O. N. Tyagi 

Dr A. G. Ajwani ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. C Vin 
Dr Hari Bhagwan, 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 



The Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi 
Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shri S. K. Sud 

Assistant Director { Agri & Food ), ISI 



Hygienic Codes Subcommittee, AFDG 36 : 5 



Convener 
Maj-Gen M. S. Boparai 

Members 

Director ( Health ) 

Deputy Director ( Family 
Planning ) ( Alternate ) 
Health Officer 
Health Officer 
Prof N. Mazumdar 

Dr D. V. Parulekar 
Dr B. Ranganathan 
Dr D. V. S. K. Rao 
Secretary 

Senior Marketing Officer ( FP ) 
Deputy Senior Marketing 
Officer ( FP ) ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. C. Sinha 

Shri P. C. Vin 



Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical 
Services, New Delhi 



Ministry of Railways 



Corporation of Calcutta 
Corporation of Madras 
All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Bombay Municipal Corporation 
National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnal 
Britannia Biscuit Co Ltd, Bombay 
Central Committee for Food Standards, New Delhi 
Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Nagpur 



Food and Nutrition Board ( Ministry of Agriculture ), 

New Delhi 
The Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi 



IS: 6968-1973 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 
PAN (BETEL) STALLS AND VENDORS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 23 April 1973, after the draft finalized by the Food Hygiene, Sampling 
and Analysis Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 PAN ( betel ) offered for sale is prepared from betel leaves, areca nuts, 
KATHA, lime, certain spices and a number of sweetening and flavouring 
agents. Chewing tobacco is also widely used in PA N. 

0.2.1 PAN chewing is a common habit in India. The rapid growth of 
PAN shops and stalls for catering to the needs of large number of customers 
has resulted in unhygienic maintenance of such shops and stalls and also 
preparation and sale of PAN by persons lacking preliminary knowledge of 
hygiene. Therefore, with a view to providing guidelines on basic hygienic 
conditions for PAN shops and stalls, this standard has been formulated. 

0.3 This code is subject to the provisions in the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act, 1954, and the Rules framed thereunder as amended 
from time to time. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code prescribes the hygienic conditions required for establishing 
and maintaining PAN ( betel ) shops or stalls where prepared PAN is sold, 
and for vendors. 

2. SHOPS AND STALLS 

2.1 A PAN shop or stall shall be established at a place approved by the 
health authorities. For this, adequate space shall be provided. It is 
recommended that the space should be not less than 1*50 x 1*50 m. 

2.2 There shall be a platform not less than 25 cm in height above the 
sitting arrangement for keeping betel leaves. 

2.3 The platform shall be covered with an impervious material and shall 
be sloped in such a way as to drain out the waste water at one end 
through a pipe into a bucket hung below. 



IS 16968-1973 

2.3.1 The waste water shall be disposed of in a place properly connected 
to a drain. In the absence of such a place, the water shall be disposed of 
in such a manner as not to cause any nuisance. 

3. HANDLING AND OTHER ASPECTS 

3.1 The prepared PAN or betel leaves on the platform shall be kept in a 
glass cupboard with an opening on one side. 

3.2 The ingredients used in preparing PAN shall be of good hygienic 
quality and stored in containers with proper lids. 

3.2.1 All receptacles used for storing various ingredients shall be 
periodically washed thoroughly with suitable detergents and potable water. 

3.3 All the utensils used in the shop or stall shall preferably be of stainless 
steel. Chinaware, or utensils made of aluminium, brass or any other 
suitable material which is non-corrosive and easily cleanable, may also be 
used. The utensils shall be free from dents, pitting, cracks, chips or any 
other form of deterioration on the surface. In case brass utensils are used 
they shall be properly coated with tin. The utensils shall be maintained 
clean at all times. 

3.4 A water receptacle of a sufficient size with a tight-fitting lid and a tap 
shall be provided in the PAN shop or stall. The receptacle shall be 
completely emptied and thoroughly cleaned every day before filling. The 
water stored in the receptacle shall be fit for potable purposes and shall be 
changed frequently during the day. 

3.5 A clean cloth shall be provided for customers to clean their hands. 

3.6 Persons employed in the PAN shop or stall shall keep their nails 
trimmed and shall wear clean clothes. 

3.6.1 No person suffering from any skin disease or any infectious or 
contagious disease shall be engaged on the shop or stall in any capacity. 

3.6.2 No person below 14 years of age shall be engaged on a shop or 
stall in any capacity. 

3.7 The sitting arrangement for the vendor in the shop or stall shall be 
such as to prevent contact of his legs with any ingredients or betel leaves. 

3.8 A dust-bin of an approved pattern shall be kept hanging below the 
PAN shop or stall or kept at a convenient place for depositing cuttings of 
betel leaves, etc. 

3.9 A suitable spittoon containing sand or slaked lime or both shall be 
provided near the PAN shop or stall. 

3.10 The shops authorized for sale oiPAN shall not keep for sale any house- 
hold insecticides or any other item injurious to the health of the consumer. 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

FOOD HYGFEtfE, SAMPLING AND ANALYSIS 

IS: 

249 M 972 Cod*; for hygienic condiUoru for Awd piDttuing units { first resiwn 1 

50M-19#3 Dodfe-for hygienic condition* for large seal ft hitcuLr manufacturing wnU add 
bakery unit* 

5S'37-I9Ti'l l'j-kr!c Tor liyg . : - for c ofr drink? nianufaeturiilK uulm 

5B3ENiy/0 Code foe hyjjlenti: ■ on ,! irii>iis fl;i oiamdkf rure h ftinragc mid Kilr ctf icr-crca m> 

^540-1^72 On I' I"; liv^rfTiic cotidiiiont Tor miiuvirauiurc an<J handling of ice for hum^n 
CsaAumpttBIl 

G!i4l-lFT#!i r^e for hv^Ienic conditions fur cstablisLjiR-ut and maintenance of mid- 
school meal programme 

*j542-l"72 Code far hvgie&ic conditions for fruit and vegetable canning until 

096B-1573 Code El n In gicnic conditions for PAX { betel ) sulla ami veudpfn 

<«1973 Code for hygienic candidal]) ll»r hjudjing and *ak of refrigerated drinking 

7003-1973 Code fei I iv a icnie conditions for sage {SABOODANA j mpnufcctu ring units 
7liJ3- 1973 Code for hygienic (mi id ilium lt*i* prtxluC«c}» P processing, transportation and 

:i of indll 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Mnnak Bhavjn, 9 Bahadur Shafl Zafflf Mara. MEW DELHI 110001 

Tttltphnrie : 27 t>1 31 l 2B llneil T«l*gr**n» : M«n<ih«Anatrin 

enact, 00ns: TaHptum* 

■ Sadlnifl ', NurmOhamed Shaisri NlaCQ. Krianour. AHMEDABAD 350G01 2 03 01 

F BlocK-Limry Bldu- Narasimhafaja ijfjuafit, HANGALQRE 560002 2 76 49 

634 Sard*! Vallflbnbhai Rami Road- BOMBAY 400007 3fi 69 44 

5 C IIOWrMiah-a Appj roanh. CALCUTTA 7000 1 3 53 -OS 03 

*-9-2Ul/2-A ( First Flour J, Chirafl AJr Una, HYDERABAD E0Q0Q1 3 44 36 

117/418 a Sacvcdaya Naaar. KAN PUR 208005 *2 

54 General ^flar* fioad. ftflAD RAS 800002 8 72 78 



