IS13407(Part2):1995

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

m2

wi.qlrl;f

Indian Standard

TECHNIQUES OF WORK STUDY
PART 2 WORK MEASUREMENT

UDC 65-015'14

0 BIS 1995

BUREAU OF INDIAN MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR
NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARC;

Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 4

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Management and Productivity Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council. The aim of this standard is to promote the use ofwork measurement techniques in all fields of agricultural, industrial, commercial, service activity, etc, and thereby increase productivity. Work Measurement is the application of techniquks designed to establish the time for a qualified worker to carry out a specified job at a defined level of performance. Work Measurement provides the management with a means of measuring the time taken in the performance of an operation or series of operations in such a way that ineffective time is separated from effective time. Work Measurement is a tool to be used to set standard times for carrying out the work. Figures 1,2 and 3 taken from the book `Introduction to Work Study' 3rd edition, International Labour Organization, illustrates the total time for an operation under the existing conditions indicating the basic work content and excess work content added due to different reasons graphically. Work content means, the amount of work `contained in' a given product or process measured in man-hours or machine-hours. Work measurement techniques may be applied to: a) manufacturing and allied services like maintenance, stores, etc; b) process industries; c) offices; and d) service organizations like banks, hospitals, hotels, transport, etc. It is directly or indirectly applicable to industries, business, government and all other walks of life. The time standards developed by the application of work measurement can be used for: a) efficient comparisons (equipment and manpower), b) work distribution/ manning of equipment, c) operation planning, scheduling and control, d) utilisation (equipment and manpower) including assembly/ production line balancing, e) capacity calculations, f) cost estimation of tenders/ contracts/ quotations, etc, and standard costs, g) project/ activity duration estimation, h) wage payment and incentive schemes, j) economic justification of new machines and equipments, k) method evaluation, m) make or buy decision, and n) manpower planning and forecasting. The application of work measurement can also result in the improvement of methods and working conditions. Method study should always precede work measurement to avoid certifying/justifying ongoing inefficient method. Study must be conducted with full knowledge of concerned persons including the operator being studied. The work measurement helps the Organization in improving its productivity to achieve leadcrship and a competitive edge in its own field. Part I of this standard deals with the various techniques used in method study along with their methodology. In preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following publications: International Labour Organization, Geneva, Introduction to Work Study [Third (revised) Edition]. Kargcr D.W. and Bayha Franklin H., Engineered Work Measurement (Second Edition). Karger D.W. and Hancock H.A., Advanced Work Measurement. Maynard H.B., Industrial Engineering Handbook. L,itrlcficld CL., Management of Office Operations. Zandin K.B., MOST Work Measurement System (Third Edition). The committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex H. In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (ueu&d)`.

Indian Standard

TECHNIQUES
1 SCOPE

OF WORK STUDY
d) He should possess the following essential
attributes: 9 He must be open to new ideas/suggestions and willing to share the information collected about the job with the concerned persons. ii) Objective in his observations, judgment and analysis, he must be able to resist pressures from the management and union which go against his professional judgment. iii) He should not be biased. iv) Sincere and punctual so as to set an example for the employees. v) Power to convince. vi) Interpersonal skills and teamwork. vii) Inquisitive and innovative skills, viii) High degree of initiative. 4.1.2 Record Record all the relevant data relating to the circumstances in which the work is being done, the methods and the elements of activity in them.

PART 2 WORK MEASUREMENT

This standard (Part 2) describes the methodology and basic techniques used in Work Measurement and also the method of establishing Standard Time. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts to this standard. IS No. 787 : 1956 6363 : 1972 Title Guide for interconversion of values from one system of units to another Glossary of terms in work study

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 6363 : 1972 shall apply. 4 PROCEDURE 4.1 a) b) c) d) e) f) The basic steps of work measurement are: Select, Record, Examine, Measure, Compile, and Define.

4.1.3 Examine
Examine the recorded data and the detailed breakdown critically to ensure that the most effective method and set of motions are being used and that unproductive and foreign elements are separated from productive elements. 4.1.4 . Meanrre Measure the quantity of work involved in each element, in terms of time, using the appropriate work measurement technique. 4.1.5 Compile Compile the standard time for the operation, which in the case of stop-watch time study will include time allowances to cover relaxation, personal needs, etc. 4.1.6 LIefme Define precisely the series of activities and method of operation for which the time has been compiled and issue the time as standard for the activities and methods specified.
1

4.1.1 Select 4.1.1.1 Selection of job for work measurement can be done as per the following guidelines: a) New jobs. b) Job not covered by work measurement techniques or there is a change in method. Jobs having complaints about loose or tight Cl time standards. d) Incentive scheme is to be introduced. e) Comparison is to be made between different methods. 4.1.1.2 Selection criteria for work measurement engineer

a) He must bequalified in Industrial Engineerb) Cl
ing. He should be well versed in practice of work study with experience in relevant areas. He must be fully lrained in rating and other important aspects of the work measurement such as allowances, etc.

All the above listed steps are required if a time is to be published as a standard If the work measurement is being used only as a tool of investigation of ineffective time before or during a method study, or to compare the effectiveness of alternative methods, only the first four steps are likely to be needed. 5 IMPLEMENTATION OF WORK MEASUREMENT RESULTS
5.1 On completion

5.2.13 According to research findings the learning process is broken down into two parts: a) Threshold learning, and b) Reinforcement learning. In threshold part, the individual is learning the sequence of activities he has to do, whereas in reinforcement part (when he already knows the sequence), repetition improves his skill and ability to perform the task. 5.2.1.4 It has been found through studies that there is a substantial change in the number of times the eyes are used while the operators are learning. The number of eye fixations at the beginning is, on the average, 2.5 times the number which occurs after the person has attained the Methods Time Measurement (MTM) standard times. The leaming curve equation after incorporating the concept of use of eyes is generally defined as: TN =KxTs x N-a

of the work measurement, it calls for its implementation or installation. Installation can be divided into: 4 gaining acceptance of the change by the departmental supervisor/management. gaining acceptance of the change by the b) workers involved and their representatives. C) retraining, if required, of the workers to acquaint them about the new methods. close monitoring of the (4 maintaining progress of the job until satisfied that it is running as intended. 5.2 The extent to which the workers require training or retraining will entirely depend on the nature of the job. The concept of Learning Curve, the details for which are as given below, can be used in deciding about the level of training or retraining. 5.2.1 Learning Curve 5.2.1.1 Introduction

TN = 2.5 ": Ts x N-" where TN = time for the Nth cycle, Ts = standard time in TMU, N = cycle number, and = learning curve exponent. The Glue of `u' can be calculated as a = E (K= 2.5)

The performance of worker carrying out an assigned task does not automatically proceed at the optimum rate as established by different work measurement techniques. He goes through distinct learning phases before achieving that rate. He needs to be informed in advance the performance expected according to the set standards. Encouragement and guidance by supervisor and/or the method of payment also help in accelerating the learning process. 5.2.1.2 Learning is defined as the improvement in performance (reduction in cycle time) resulting from practice in the reinforcement region. Predicting the rate at which employee learns a task so that he can perform and give necessary output at the desired pace, is made easier by the application of learning curve theory. Learning Curve equations generally take the form of Y= where Y x KandA = time for the Xth cycle, = the cycle number, and = a constant for any given situation, thevalue ofwhich is determined by the learning rate. 2 KX -*

where Ns = number of cycles needed to attain the standard time. A typical learning curve is given in Fig. 4. Here the standard time and the number of cycles needed to attain the standard time have been determined by use of M'IM, a Predetermined Motion Time Study (PMTS) technique. 5.2.1.5 Learning curve application

a) In case of new product introductions

b)
Cl

or design/method changes, the learning time can be estimated. Learning curve can be used as a tool in selection of operators and monitoring their performance. In job shop situations, where batch yuantities are low, learning curve concept can be used for predicting the actual time taken.

6 ROLE OF COMPUTERS IN WORK MEASUREMENT 6.1 The person involved in establishing time standards spends most of his time analyzing and developing work standards. The time he spends in

the shop making studies is rather short. Not too many improvements can be made m this part of his work, except for planning the work to be studied so that it progress& without breaks or interruptions. However, on the clerical side, electronic aids can do the job faster, more accurately, and more eumomitally. Statistical analysis can also be done easily with electronic aids. Making studies the electronic way requires a "work study machine" and a computer. To be universally useful, the work study machine should: a) be applicable to stop-watch time study, predetermined time system-based standard data, work sampling, and the group timing technique. b) eliminate the studyperson's calculating job. Cl give rapid and reliable records of useful information on a data storage media like floppy, tape, etc, to be used on computer. d) be easy to use in all kinds of location and easily portable. e) be reliable with regard to function and accuracy of measurement. f-l be simple to operate and capable of being used correctly with a reasonable amount of training. 6.2 Devices meeting these characteristics are available and being used by a few organizations. The portable work study machine has the facility to store information using different push-buttons in the shop floor, which is transferred to computer for further analysis and calculation of results. 7 TECHNIQUES The techniques of Work Measurement covered under this standard are: a) Time study (unrestricted and restricted work), b) Production study, `. c) Work sampling/Rated work sampling, d) Group timing technique, e) Predetermined Motion Time Systems (PMTS), f) Maynard Operation Sequence Technique (MOST), g) Standard data, h) Analytical estimation, and j) Time ladderflime log. 7.1 Time Study 7.1.1 Time study is a work measurement tcchniquc for recording the time and rates of working for the elements of a specified job carried out under

specified conditions, and for analyzing the data so as to obtain the time necessary for carrying out the job at a defined level of performance. 7.1.2 Time study may be applied to determine the work content and standard time for a job and also to help in method improvement. 7.1.3 The exact procedure used in making time studies may vary somewhat depending upon the type of operation being studied and the use that is to be made of the data obtained. However, the steps that are generally required to complete a time study are given below. 7.1.3.1 Secure and record information
It is required to obtain and record all the information available about the job, the operator and the surrounding conditions, which is likely to affect the execution of the work The information to be obtained may be grouped as follows: a) Information to enable the study to be located and identified quickly when needed giving serial number, year, product, studyperson, etc. b) Information to enable the product or part being processed to be identified accurately. C> Information to enable the process, method, plant or machine to be accurately identified. 4 Information to enable the operator to be identified. e) Duration of the study. 0 Working conditions.

7.1.3.2 Break the job into elements and check the method Timing an entire job as one element is seldom satisfactory. Thus the job must be broken into different elements An element is defined as a distinct part of a specified job selected for convenience of observation, measurement and analysis. Sequence of different elements required to perform a job or yield a production unit forms a work cycle. The studyperson records a complete description of the method, breaking down the operation into elements and examines the detailed breakdown to ensure that the most effective method and set of motions arc being used to carry out the job. There arc broadly eight different types of elements, namely, repetitive, occasional, constant, variable, manual, machine, governing, and foreign elements. They are defined as: a) A repetitive element is an element which occurs in every work cycle of the job.

IS13407(Part2):1995

b) An occasional element is an element which

b)

Cl 4

e)

f) g)

h)

does not occur in every work cycle of the job, but which may occur at regular or irregular intervals. A constant element is an element for which the basic time remains constant whenever it is performed. A variable element is an element for which the basic time varies in relation to some characteristics of the product, equipment or process. A manual element is an element performed by a worker. A machine element is an element automatically performed by a power-driven machine (or process). A governing element is an element occupying a longer time than that of any other element which is being performed on machine tools. A foreign element is an element observed during a study which, after analysis, is not found to be a necessary part of the job.

Cl

4

e) f)

Elements should be short as can be conveniently timed by a trained observer. Preferably the duration of an element should be between 6-30 centi-minutes. As far as possible, elements particularly, manual ones, should be chosen so that they represent naturally unified and recognisably distinct segments of the operation. Manual elements should be separated from machine elements. Constant elements should be separated from variable elements. Occasional and foreign elements should be timed separately.

It is a good practice that the elements should be checked through a number of cycles before timing begins. 7.1.3.3 Calculation of number of cycles required to be timed The sample size (number of cycles to be timed) can be decided either by the use of statistical method or the conventional method. In the statistical method, after taking a number of preliminary readings to arrive at the value of n `, the following equation is used to calculate the sample size for 95.45% confidence level and a margin of error of k 5% (commonly used values).

The breakdown of the job into elements is necessary: a) to ensure that productive time is separated from unproductive time. b) to permit the rate of working to be assessed more accurately than would be possible over an entire cycle as the operator may not be able to work with the same tempo throughout the entire cycle. c) to enable different types of elements to be identified d) to enable elements involving a high degree of fatigue to be isolated and to make the allocation of fatigue allowances more accurate. e) to facilitate the checking of the method so that the subsequent omission or insertion of the elements may be detected quickly. to enable time values for frequently recurr) ring elements to be extracted and used in the compilation of standard data. g) to enable a detailed work specification to be produced. There are some general rules concerning the way in which the job should be broken down into elements: 4 Elements should be easily identifiable, with definite beginning and ending and, if possible, the element may have start/stop of sound or light for easy identification.
4

n=

4042'xx2--[a)2

I

L

where
n n'

sample size we wish to determine, number of readings taken in the preliminary study, zz = sum of values, and x = value of the readings of elements. The statistical method of determining the sample size is valid to the extent that the assumptions made in deriving the formula are valid, in other words, the observed variations in the readings are due to mere chance and are not made intentionally by the operator. The statistical method can be cumbersome, since a given work cycle is composed of several elements. As the sample size will vary with the readings for each element, we can arrive at different sample sizes for each clement within a given cycle, unless of course the elements have more or less the same average. As a result, we may have to calculate the sample size, in the case of cumulative timing, by basing it on the clement that will call for the largest sample size.

= =

iS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995

Many companies, for ease of calculations adopt a conventional guide as given below for the number
Minutes

of cycles to be timed, based on the totai number of minutes per cycle: to 10.0 to
20.0 8

per cycle Number of
cycles recommended

upto 0.10
200

to 0.25 100

to 0.50 60 40
30 20

to
40.0 5

Over
40 3

15

10

If consistency is observed in the readings, the number of cycles could be reduced. This can be confirmed by drawing cumulative average basic times for a constant element against cumulative number of observations. When the cumulative average basic time reaches a constant figure, it indicates that enough observations have been made. Here, it shall also be considered that extreme values of observations are excluded for better accuracy. 7.1.3.4 Observe and record the time taken
Once the elements have been selected and written down, measuring of the elements with a timing device (usually a stop-watch) and recording the time taken by the operator to perform each element of the operation can start. However, at this stage, once again, it shall be ensured that the concepts of qualified worker and rating are rightly understood for their right application. It is essential due to the fact that an inexperienced studyperson may get misled by a large number of rapid movements into believing that an operator is working at a high rate or may underestimate the rate of working of the skilled operator whose apparently slow movements are very economical of motion. Therefore, it is required that the persons who do time study shall undergo regular training in rating.

In carrying out the time study the question arises, which worker should be taken for study. Different jobs require different human abilities. Some demand alertness, concentration, visual acuity; others, physical strength, most, some acquired skill or special knowledge. The worker to be selected shall be a qualified works which is defined as the one who is accepted as having the necessary physical attributes, the required intelligence and education, and has acquired the necessary skill and knowledge to carry out the work in hand to satisfactory standards of safety, quantity and quality. The experienced worker, as against inexperienced worker, achieves smooth and consistent movements; acquires rhythm; responds more rapidly to signals; anticipates difficulties and is more ready to overcome them, carries out the task without giving the appearance of conscious attention, and is therefore more relaxed.
5

Even the selection of a qualified operator is made for a time study as people do not work consistently from day to day or even from minute to minute and the studyperson has to have some means of assessing the rate of working of the operator and relating it to standard pace. This process is known as rating and is defined as "the assessment of the worker's rate of working relative to the observer's concept of the rate corresponding to standard pace". Standard performance is in turn defined as `the rate of output which qualified workers will naturally achieve without over-exertion as an average over the working day or shift, provided that they know and adhere to the specified methcd and are motivated to apply themselves to their work". This performance is generally accepted as equivalent to the speed of motion of the limbs of a man of average physique walking without a load in a straight line on level ground at a speed of 6.4 kllometres per hour (4 miles per hour). This is a brisk businesslike rate of walking, which a man of the right physique and well accustomed to walking might be expected to maintain, provided that he took appropriate rest pauses every so often. Again when one talks of rating, it is the effective speed with which the operator carries out the work which is rated. Judgment of effective speed can only be acquired through experience and knowledge of the operations being observed. In order that a comparison between the observed rate of working and the standard rate may be made effectively, it is necessary to have a numerical scale against which to make the assessment. There are several scales of rating m use, the most wmmon of which ale those designated the 100-133 scale, the 60-80, the 75-100, and the British standard scale used (essentially a rtitatement of the 75-100 scale) which is the O-100 scale. In India, most of the companies use the 100-133 scale, where 100 wrresponds to the speed of the motion of the limbs oT a man of average physique walking without a load in a straight line on level ground at a speed of 4.8 kilometres per hour (3 miles per hour) and is wnsidered to be a standurdpeformance. It is the usual practice to round off ratings to the nearest multiple of five on the scale.

IS 13407( Part 2 ) : 1995 Basic requirements for doing a time study call for equipments like a stop-watch, a study board, time study forms, calculator, measuring instruments, etc. Sample sheets of study forms which may be used are given in Annex A. The timings are generally recorded by the use of stop-watch. These watches have graduations in one hundredth of a minute, that is in centi-minutes. The following methods of timing with the stopwatch are in practice: a) Cumulative timing-In cumulative timing, the watch runs continuously throughout the study. It is started at the beginning of the first element of the first cycle to be timed and is not stopped until the whole study is completed. At the end of each element the watch reading is recorded. The times for individual elements are obtained by successive subtractions after the study is completed. The purpose of this procedure is to ensure that all the time during which the job is observed is recorded in the study. b) FZybacktiming--In flyback timing, the hands of the stop-watch are returned to zero at the end of each element and are allowed to start immediately, that is, at the beginning of the next element and the time for each element being obtained directly. The mechanism of the watch is never stopped and the hand immediately starts recording the time of the next element. c) LXfferential riming---This is the third method of timing which is employed for short-element short-cycle work, and which may indeed be the only way of getting accurate timing with a stopwatch, for elements which are so very short that there is not enough time for the studyperson to read his watch and make a recording in his study sheet. With differential timing, elements are timed in groups, first including and then excluding each small element, the time of each element being obtained subsequently by subtraction. The most commonly used method of stop-watch timing is the cumulative timing method for the following reasons: Experience suggests that reasonable accuracy is achieved by the use of this method. It does not matter if element times are occasionally missed by inexperienced observers, the overall time of the study will not be affected. In assessing the working pace of'the operator, it is less easy to fall into the temptation to adjust the rating to the time taken by the element than with the flyback method, since only watch readings and not actual times are recorded.
6

4

Workers and their representatives are likely to have greater faith in the fairness of time studies if they can see that no time could have been omitted.

However, in all the methods it is usual to take an independent check of the overall time, that is, elapsed time of the study using mostly the wristwatch. 7.1.3.5 Extending observed times to `basic times'
The basic time represents

the time the element would take to perform (in the judgment of the observer) if the operator were working at the standard rate, instead of the faster or slower ones actually observed. It is calculated as, Basic time = (Observed time) x (rating/standard rating) If the studyperson's ratings were always impeccable, then the result should be [(observed time) x (rating)] = a constant. However, in actual practice, the multiple [ (observed time) x (rating)] very rarelyworks out to be exactly a constant when taken over a large number of readings for various reasons such as variations in the work content of the element; inaccuracies in noting and recording observed times; inaccuracies in rating variations due to rating to the nearest five points. 7~1.3.6 Determining the allowances The determination of allowances, a compensation in the form of time to meet and fulfil personal needs, environment and work requirements, is probably the most controversial part of work measurement. It is not easy to determine precisely the allowances needed for a given job. Therefore, attempt should be made for an objective assessment of the allowances that can be consistently applied to various elements of work or to various operations. There are different types of allowances which are applied in different situations. The allowances which are most commonly applied are relaxation allowances, contingency allowances and policy allowances. Relaxation allowances are generally made up of two components, fixed allowances, which in general include allowances for basic fatigue and personal needs, andvariable allowances which are given for different factors like stress, strain and environment. The tables to calculate relaxation allowances as given in Annex B may be referred to as an illustration to arrive at the relaxation allowances and not as a strict guideline. Each organization should develop its own scheme of relaxation allowance, taking into consideration the factors given in the example as an illustration.

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995 Basic times calculated with lot of efforts should not
be spoiled by the hasty or ill-considered additioh of a few percentage points as allowances and neither shall the allowances be used as `loosening' factors. 1.1.3.7 Determining the standard time for the operation Once the basic time is calculated and a decision on allowances is taken, it is possible to obtain a complete picture of the standard time for a straightforward manual job or operation. The standard time for the job will be the sum of the standard times for all the elements ofwhich it is made up of, due regard being paid to the frequency with which the elements recur plus the allowances. In other words, standard time is the total time in which a job should be completed at standard performance. 7.1.4 Advantages a) b) c) d) e) Single operators/machines and short cycle repetitive work can be easily studied; Time study permits an extremely fine breakdown of activities and delays; An aid in impro ding methods; A high degree of reliability in data is obtained; and High level of acceptance by the management and union.

f) Studyperson shall be well trained and experienced in conducting time study. The person shall undergo regular training to keep himself/herself up-to-date with the rating concepts. A relatively new person shall conduct the studies under the guidance and supervision of an experienced person. 7.1.7 Unresm'cted and Restricted Work 7.1.7.1 Time standards can be compiled for all jobs in which the operator works with hand tools or with power tools which he himselfmanoeuvers, as distinct from machines which perform part of the operation automatically. Such work is known as unrestricted work, because the output of the worker is limited only by factors within his control. The work in which the output of the worker is limited by factors outside his control is known as restricted work A wmmon example of restricted work occurs when an operator is running a single machine and the machine works automatically for part of theworkcyclc. Other examples of restricted work occur when: One or more operators are running several machines; b) Operators are in control of process, their principle duty being to observe the bchaviour of the process or instruments recording their behaviours and to take action only in response to change in behaviour, state or reading; and Two or more operators are working as a cl team, dependent on one another and it proves impossible to completely balance the work load of each, with the result that some workmen are left with periods of idleness within the work cycle.

a>

7.1.5 Disadvantages For each and every operaltir to be studied at a time, a separate studyperson is required; b) Extremely rigorous process and hence time consuming and costly; c) Changes of day-to-day or week-to-week variations not easy to account; and d) It is necessary to use trained studyperson as rating calls for experience and accurate judgment. a) 7.1.6 Precautions It must be ensured that the method is right and at any one time reference should be made to only one specific method; b) Studies must be taken on qualified workmen; c) On no account should any attempt bc made to time the operator without his knowledge, from a concealed position or with the watch in the pocket; All the information must bc rccordcd while d! taking observations. The recording may be made using pencil or pen or ballpcn; Allowances shall be decided judiciously and c) consistently; and a)

7.1.7.2 The period during which the machine is working is known as the `machine controlled time'. However, the operator may carry out part of his manual work while the machine is stopped, and part while it is running. Thcsc parts are called `outside work' and `inside work', rcspcctively. Finally, there is the time during which the operator is waiting for the machine to complcle the work, that is, his `unoccupied time'. 7.1.7.3 In order to set time standards for such operations, which are considered to bc part of rcstrictcd work, it is necessary to apply somewhat different methods in cxtcnsion of the above men tioned basic time procedures. a) In restricted work, II ia csscnlial that the personal needs allow;lnce and the fatigue allowance bc ~alcula~ccl scparatelv. This ih because personal needs arc calculated not on the clcmcnt:, of manual work alone hut

1S13407(PaIt2):1995 on the whole of the cycle time. Fatigue allowance, on the other hand, is calculated only for elements of manual work If the work cycle is a very long one, and there are lengthy periods of unoccupied time within it (say 10 to 15 minutes), where the operator can also leave his workplace, it may be possible in certain circumstances for the whole of the personal needs allowance and the fatigue allowance to be taken within the cycle. Short periods (say 1.5 minutes or longer) of unoccupied time can be used for recovery from fatigue, provided that the operator during that period can freely relax and is not required to be constantly on the alert or to give attention to the machine, and also that he has a seat nearby. Four cases can be distinguished which affect the way in which relaxation allowances must be treated for restricted work based on the length of the cycle and the manner in which any inside work occurs. 0 All the personal needs allowance and all the fatigue allowance must both be taken outside the working cycle. ii) The personal needs allowance must be taken outside the cycle, but the fatigue allowance can be taken within it. iii) The personal needs allowance and some of the fatigue allowance must be taken outside the cycle, but the rest of the fatigue allowance can be taken within it. iv) All the personal needs allowance and all the fatigue allowance can be taken within the working cycle. more machines (or processes) attended by one worker. Similar circumstances arise in team work. 7.1.7.5 Thus the overall cycle time in which the job shall be completed at standard performance in case of restricted work will be made up of outside work at standard pace, machine controlled time and any portion of the relaxation allowance which has to be allowed outside the machine controlled time, contingency allowance, and interference allowance. 7.2 Production Study A production study is a time study carried out over a specified period of time, usually at least half-a-day or one shift, for the purpose of: a) ascertaining the frequency and duration of activities; b) ascertaining ineffective time of irregular or infrequent occurrence; and c) checking an existing time standard. The purpose of production study is to make sure that nothing that occurs during the working period is overlooked. They are especially concerned with interruptions; work of an occasional nature and ineffective time due to any cause which is not likely to, appear in ordinary time studies; set-up time for the machines of longer duration; allowances, etc. Same forms as used for time study can be used for production study. The elements are rated and the standard rime is calculated as in time study. 7.3 Work Sampling 7.31
Definition

b)

Cl

7.1.7.4 In case of multiple machine working or team working (with or without machines), the work studyperson has first to examine the methods of working by drawing multiple activity charts, with the object of devising a sequence of operations which will result in the best balance and thus the least interference, and then to use time study techniques to measure the amount of interference which will occur even when the best sequence has been determined. The concept of interference/ machine interference is defined as the queuing of machines (or processes) for attention, for example, when one worker is responsible for attending to more than or~e machine. Similar circumstances arise in team work where random delays at any point may affect the output of the team. To cover this time, interference allowance is defined as an allowance of time for production unavoidably lost through synchronization of stoppages on two or

Work sampling is a technique used to measure and analyze the work without the use of a stop-watch. The technique is based on the law of probability and was introduced in England by L.H.C. Tippett in 1934. The technique works because it is statistically confirmed that a smaller number of chance occurrences tend to follow the same distribution pattern which a larger number produces. The simple cxample used to illustrate this point is that of tossing a coin. In this exercise, greater the number of tosses, better is the chance of arriving at a figure of 50% heads and SO% tails or in other words, greater the number of tosses, lesser will bc the error or magnitude of unccrtainity. This technique is also known by other names like ratio-delay study, activity sampling, random obscrvation method, snap-reading method, ohscrvation ratio study.

IS13407(Part2):1995

7.3.2 Application To study time utilization or ineffective time in a job of one or more resources. b) To determine the work content and standard time for a job. The technique can be used for manufacturing, service or office operations. 7.3.3 Procedure The procedure for work sampling should broadly follow the steps which are given below. 7.3.3.1 Lkfme the problem Before making actual observations it is important to decide the objective of work sampling. This could range from simply determining if the machine is working or idle or to get further details on each or few of the factors under working or non-working category. 7.3.3.2 Prepare an observation recording form for thejob The form to be used for recording the observations for work sampling study has to be designed depending on the type of job to be observed. Its design will depend upon the number of work stations or people to be observed and the classification of the activities upon which it is desired to obtain data. A typical format is attached as Annex C, 7.3.3.3 Select thefrequency of observations Three factors need to be kept in mind while deciding the frequency of observations: Nature of the operation-If the job is of shortcycle operations in which all the desired elements occur frequently, the observations can be spread out over a period of time. If it is a non-repetitive operation or one where some elements occur infrequently, it is better to make more observations per day. This improves the chances of getting better details. Physicallimits--If the route to be followed for taking observations is going to be long and there is just one observer to make the observations, he will be able to make relatively few observations in a day. Total number of observationsrequired and rhe time limit--If 1 000 observations are needed and there arc only 10 working days to make them, it is evident that an average of 100 observations a day will be needed. 7.3.3.4 Determine time of mps Trips can be determined based on random basis or on a fixed interval basis. Deciding on random 9 a)

samples which follow no set pattern is often difficult. The safest way is to use a table of random numbers (a random table as an example is given in Annex D) because the human mind has a tendency to follow a set pattern. Various types of random tables exist and can be used in different ways. Help of computers may also be taken in generating random samples. 7.3.3.5 Estimate the number of observationsneeded This information is critical to plan the frequency, number of observers and length of the study. The number depends on how accurate the answers need to be. There are mainly two the number of obmethods used to preestimate servations needed to give the practical accuracy required, namely, Statistical method and Nomogram method. In order to calculate the number of observations in both the methods, it is required to decide on two of the parameters, that is confidence level and margin of error. The basic assumption made in both the methods is that the observations follow normal probability distribution. To describe these curves, two attributes that is average as measure of central tendency and the deviation from the average, referred to as standard deviation are used.

a)

Confidence level -In the example of tossing of coin, it has been observed that the larger the size of the sample, the more accurate or representative it becomes with respect to the original `population', or group of items under consideration. It can therefore be visualized as a scale where, at one end, there can be complete accuracy achieved by continuous observation and, at the other end, very doubtful results derived from a few observations only. The size of the sample is therefore important, and we can express the confidence in whether or not the sample is representative by using a certain confdence level.
It can be said that if we take a large sample at random we an be confident that in 95% of the cases our observations will fall within + 1.96 times standard deviation, and so on for the other values.

b) Marginof error--As well as defining the confidence level for our observations we have to decide on the margin of error that we can allow for these observations. We must be able to say that for 95% of the times this particular observation is correct within ? 5% or f. 10% or whatever other range of accuracy we may decide on.

IS 13407( Part 2 ) : 1995 Statistical Method The formula used in this method is

s = 4p (100-p) N where = standard error of proportion, P = percentage of occurrence, and number of observations. N= Before we can use this formula, however, we need to have at least an idea of the value ofp. The first step is therefore to carry out a preliminary study taking number of random observations in the working area to calculate approximate value of p. Having the approximate value ofp and in order to determine the value of N, it is required to find out the value of standard error of proportion. If we choose a confidence level of 95% with a 5% margin of error, the standard error of proportion will be: 1.96 s = 5 or s = 2.5 (approx) (for a Normal Distribution Curve) It can seen from the formula that by reducing or increasing the margin of error the sample size can be increased or reduced.
Nomogram Method

of determining the length of the study. When the variation from day-to-day is reduced to the dcsircd level for the element chosen to control the study, it can be assumed that enough observations have been gathered. 7.3.3.8 Compile results, implement, maintain wd
improve

s

A summary table for the entire study shall be prepared. This gives an overall picture. The analysis of results can be calculated readily on the record sheet. It is possible to find out the percentage of effective time compared with that of delays, to analyze the reasons for ineffective time and to ascertain the percentage of time spent by a workman, group of workmen or a machine. on a given element. 7.3.4 Advantages a) Helps oblain facts at a lower cost than that of continuous observation. A simultaneous work sampling study of several operators or machines may be made by a single observer. Does not require observers with special skill and training. Require little observer training. However, the observer should be familiar with the type of work to be observed. Causes fewer complaints from individuals under study than continuous observation. Causes less distortion in the individuals normal work route than continuous observation. Observations may be taken over a period of days or weeks, thus decreasing the chance of day-to-day or week-to-week variations affecting results. A work sampling study may be intcraffecting rupted at any time without results and are less fatiguing and less tedious to make. No stop-watch or other timing device is needed for work sampling studies.

b)

To facilitate faster computations, John M. Allderige, in his article "Work Sampling Without Formula", recommends the use of alignment charts to determine the number of observations to meet the needed precision requirement. A sample of this chart is enclosed as Annex H 7.3.3.6 Make the observations It should be clear at the beginning of thestudy what information is required and why. Ambiguity in classifying activities should be avoided. The recording itself consists simply of making a stroke or tally mark in front of the appropriate activity on the record sheet in each observation round. 7.3.3.7 Check the accuracy of data at the end of each
day It has been observed that the activity under con-

c) d)

c)

r)

g)

7.3.5 Disadvantages
It is not economically fcasiblc to USC work sampling on short-cycle and highly rcpclitive jobs because in these cases traditional methods can usually develop job standards less expensively. "b1 An extremely large number of observations will have to be taken to achieve a dcslrcd accuraq as work sampling follows the laws of probability. Hence such studies takes :I considerable length of Lime.

a)

sideration tends towards a constant value as the number of observation are increased, provided stable conditions in the work place prevail, This canbe seen by drawing a control chart of percent of occurrence on day-to-day basis. The stability analysis may also be carried out with accumulated observations on day-to-day basis. This chart may also be used as an empirical method 10

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995

cl Work sampling is essentially a passive technique based on recording what an observer ObSeNeS. It lacks the aggressive attitude towards methods and does not enforce constructive method study as do Predetermined Time Standards (PTS) such as Methods Time Measurement (MTM). The inter-relationship among the operator, machine and material are not easy to identity. Management and workmen may not understand statistical work sampling as readily as they do time study. There is a tendency on the part of some observers to minimize the importance of following the fundamental principles of work sampling, such as proper sample size for a given degree of accuracy, randomness in making observations, instantaneous observations at the preassigned location, and carefully defining the elements or sub divisions of work or delay before the study is started. !_9 The operator may change his work pattern upon the sight of the observer. If this happens, the results of such a work sampling is of little value.
7.3.6 Precautions a) b)

7.4 Group Timing Technique

7.4.1 Group timing technique (GTT) is a work measurement procedure for multiple activities that enables one ObseNer using a stop-watch to make a detailed elemental time study on two to fifteen men or machines at the same time. Continuous elemental observations are made at predetermined fmed intervals and are recorded as tally marks on a form listing the elements of the job. Elements that will vary in time because of operator performance may be levelled. Either or both elemental time values and percentage allowances, including fatigue, may be established from a single group timing technique study or series of studies. 7.4.2 The proper interval size is primarily dependent on the number of operators or objects and their locatiOn. The intervals that an Observer can use comfortably during the study are given below:
Number of Workers in Group Interval Measured on StopWatch (Decimal Minute Watch)

1 2 3-6 7-10 11-15 Over 15

Use time study or MTM 0.5 minute 1.0 minute 2.0 minutes 3.0 minutes Use 2 or more observers

Trips must be made at random. The objective of the work sampling study must be clearly defined. The technique must be explained to the perCl sons concerned before the study.

7.4.3 Several factors influence the length of the study. The minimum number of total observations or ObSeNatiOnS for the critical activity can be computed using the statistical formulae as given below:
N= 6400xixtxCa rT:xt? 6400xixCn rTi x ta

7.3.7 Rated Work Sampling

Many times the personnel being sampled through work sampling are performance rated. In these cases, the activities are not only considered as working/non-working but they are also rated. This is done to ensure that the working time is calculated as near as possible to the actual time. This method is employed to measure work and establish norms in situations where other techniques are difficult to use or are not economically viable. The time in this case is calculated as: Standard Time = [(Actual hours in study) x (% utilized) x (average rating)j

Na =

where total length (time) of study, total time for activity a, time for one work cycle, time for one occurrence of activity u, total number of observations, total number of observations for activity a, c, = number of occurrences during one work cycle for activity 0, i = interval size, and rTa = relative error for Ta at the 95% confidence level. Continuous check on the daily and accumulated values of one or more critical activities by plotting
T= To = t = t&j = N= Na =

To these elements are added the unrated elements or allowances, which may be adjusted according to policy decisions relating to personnel and idle time, allowable instruction time, and the like.

11

IS13407(Part2):1995 of diagrams such as shown below should be helpful in determining the stability of conditions and evaluating the necessary duration of the study. elemental times using basic Gilbreth developments are for motions rather than for elements of specific operations. Well-known techniques using this approach are called: a) Methods Time Measurement (MTM), b) Work Factor (WF), c) Motion Time Analysis (MTA), and d) Basic Motion Time Study (BMT). However amongst all the above techniques MTM is widely used in developed countries.

T 1

-------_Accunwlalcd
Daily

CtL
Days ofohscn~~Iions;---. 7.4.4 G'IT studies look so much like work sampling studies that they could easily but mistakenly pass as such. In both cases, samples are taken that permit drawing certain conclusions about the nature of the population from which they are taken. The apparent difference of fixed versus random observation intervals, relates the two methods to entirely different statistical mathematical models and thus the formulae for the computation of number of observations in each method are different. Generally, for the same level of accuracy and all other features being equal, G'IT normally calls for a considerably smaller number of observations than work sampling.

7.5.2 Definitions PMTS is a procedure in which all manual motions are analytically subdivided into the basic elements required for their performance and predetermined time values are assigned to the basic elements: 4 Motion is the movement of human body or any of the body member. b) Manual element is a distinct, describable and measurable subdivision of a workcycle or operation performed by one or more human motions that are not controlled by process or machine. C> Basic element is the smallest element of human activity or inactivity used in any particular system of motion analysis. 7.5.3 Applicability Some of the important areas where use of PMTS is found to be very useful in reducing cost through better methods are: a) Developing effective methods in advance of beginning production; b) Improving existing methods; Cl Establishing time standards; d) Estimating; e) Guiding product design; 0 Developing effective tool design; l9 Selecting effective equipment; h) Operator training; j) Settling grievances; and k) Training supervisors to become methodconscious. 7.5.4 Selection Criteria In order to analyze a method with one of predetermined time systems, the study of each motion involved in the performance of operator's method is required. In PM'IS, cycle time can be reduced by reducing the number of motions and/or degree of control required to perform the motions. These reductions in motion help in: a) increasing the operators safety;
12

7.4.5 This technique is also known as `systematic activity sampling', `fixed interval sludy' and the like. 7.5 Predetermined 7.51 Genesir Motion Time Study (PMTS)

Frederick W. Taylor, the father of time study, wrote in the latter part of the nineteenth century that, to establish an operation standard, it was necessary to subdivide the operation into the elements of work, write a description of each element of work, time each element of work with a stop-watch and add certain allowances to cover unavoidable delays and fatigue. Several years after Taylor began his work with time study, Frank B. Gilbreth, the father of motion study began his technique of using motion picture camera to study the motions required to perform certain tasks. Gilbreth subdivided the Taylor elements in to basic motions which he called therbligs. These therbligs were used to build up the operation standard in much the same way that Taylor used his elements to build up an operation standard. The expansion of Taylor and Gilbreth methods has resulted in predetermined elemental times for a great many factory operations. Predetermined

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995 b) c) increase in operators comfort; and reduction in physical effort and fatigue. 7.6.2 Features
7.6.2.1 High application speed

7.5.5 Methodology
7.5.5.1 Procedure

By visualizing the movements necessary to perform

the operation effectively: Determine the best workplace layout; b) Determine the type and position of tools; c) Develop the instruction sheet for training the operator in best method; and 4 Whcrc machine time is necessary it is added to the motion time to get cycle time per unit.

a>

MOST is much faster than other techniques because of its simpler construction. Predetermined motion time systems are traditionally based on assigning selected time values to minute human motions. MOST does not require that operation be broken down into such details. Instead, MOST groups together the basic motions that frequently occur in sequence. Sequence models are preprinted on the analysis form, leaving the analyst with the task of filling in only the variable index numbers. It is found that MOST is 4 to 40 times faster than the other PMTS techniques. 7.6.2.2 Accuracy
The accuracy principles that apply to MOSTare the

7.5.5.2

Format

Workplace layout and MTM analysis sheet are given in Annex F.
7.5.5.3 Tools

same as those used in statistical tolerance control. MOST time values are based on calculations that ensure the overall accuracy of the final time standard.
7.6.2.3 Reduced documentation

a)

b)

MTM card, giving time values in TMU (Time Measuring Units). 1TMU = 10m5 h. An example is given in Annex G. Calculator, etc.

7.5.5.4 Precaulion Person applying PMTS techniques should know how to refer MTM cards and should be able to distinguish between various motions.
7.5.5.5 Personal etigibiMy

Reduced paperwork is one of the major advantages of MOST. While reducing paperwork, MOST retains the clarity of definition of the method describing the activity in clear, concise and plain language. 7.6.2.4 Method sensitivity MOST sharply recognises the sensitivity of a time standard to the method used, hence it is possible to quickly revise a standard in cases where methods are proposed to be changed. MOST highlights elements which arc more time consuming indicating scope for method improvement. 7.6.2.5 Consistency Through the use of the sequence model approach, analysts are aided in making the correct decisions. The result is smaller deviations among analysts compared to other predetermined motion time systems. MOST concentrates on the movement of objects. 7.6.3 The Basic Sequence Models
7.6.3.1 The general move sequence

This technique should be used only by `MTM Practitioners Card Holders' given by MTM Association for Standards and Research, 16-01, Broadway, Fair Lawn NJ 07410.
7.6 Maynard Operation Sequence Time (MOST) 7.6.1 Introduction

MOST is the latest work measurement technique, which aims at simplification of the Industrial Engineer's task of analyzing and estimating work content. MOST stands for Maynard Operation Sequence Technique. Adequate accuracy, combined with high application speed and simplicity arc some of the advantages of MOST. For the overwhelming majority of work there is a common factor from which work can bc studied that is the displacement of objects. MOST, thercfore, concentrates on the movement of objects.

For the free movement of an object in space through air under manual control. This sequence model generally follows a fixed sequence of sub aclivities idenlified by following
steps:

a>Reach

with one or two hands a distance to the object(s), tither directly or in conjunction with body motions.

IS13407(Part2):1995 b)

c) d)

Gain manual control of the object. Move the object in a temporary or final position. Return to workplace.

The sequence model is having three distinct phases: GET, MOVE or ACTUATE, RETURN. The MOSTanalyst should strictly adhere to this 3-phase breakdown. The sequence is: ABGMXIA is (ABG) (MXI) is is (A) A B G M X I = = = = = = GET. MOVEor ACTUATE. RETURN.

Thesequence model is having three distinct phases: GET, PUT and RETURN. The MOST analyst should strictly adhere to this 3-phase breakdown. The sequence is: A (ABG) (ABP) (A) B G A is GET is PUT is RETURN B P A

The alphabets/letters are the subactivities parameters of the sequence model. A B G P = = = = Action distance Body motion Gain control Place

or

Action distance Body motion Gain control Move controlled or actuate Process time Align

A controlled move sequence model after assigning index values looks like: A6 BO G3 M3 X0 I6 A0

Indexing of the parameters or attaching time value is strictly in accordance with the work content involved in performing the subactivity or parameter. The MOST analyst will have to refer the data-cards available to assign the correct index value. A general move sequence model after assigning index values looks like:

To calculate the time required to perform above task add all the index values and multiply by 10. 6+0+3+3+0+6+0=18 18 x 10 = 18oTMus. 7.6.3.3 The tool use sequence

For the use of common hand tools. The tool use sequence is composed of subactivities from the general move sequence along with specialAl BO Gl Al BO P3 A0 ly designed parameters describing the actions performed with hand tools or in some cases the use of To calculate the time required to perform above certain mental processes like: task add all the index values and multiply by 10. 1+0+1+1+0+3+0=6 6 x 10=6OTMUs. Fasten Loosen Cut Surface Treat Measure Record Think (F) (L) `(:; \:; (T)

7.6.3.2 The controlled move sequence For the movement of an object wtien it remains in contact with a surface or is attached to another object during the movement. The controlled move sequence follows a fixed sequence of subactivities identified by following steps: a> Reach with one or two hands a distance to the object(s) either directly or in conjunction with body motions. Gain manual control of the object. Move the object over a controlled path. Allow time for a process to occur. Align the object following the controlled move or at the conclusion of the process time. Return to workplace. 14

The tool use sequence follows a fixed sequence of subactivities identified by following steps: a) Get object or tool. b) Place object or tool in working position. c) Use tool. d) Put aside object or tool. e) Return to workplace. The sequence is: A rz? (?) (ABP) (A) B G is is is is is A B P ? A B P A get object or tool. place object or tool. the appropriate parameter for use tool aside object or tool. return.

IS13407(Part2):1995

A controlled move sequence model after assigning index values looks like: Al BO Gl Al BO P3 F16 Al BO Pl A0

To calculate the time required to perform above task add all the index.values and multiply by 10. 1+0+1+1+0+3+16+1+0+1+0=24 24 x 10 = 240 Th4Us. 7.6.4 Special Sequences in MOST Three more special sequences have been developed for analyzing work content involved in moving heavy objects by material handling equipments. a) Manual Crane Sequence, b) Powered Crane Sequence, and c) Truck Sequence. 7.7 Standnrd Data 7.7.1 Introduction

7.7.2.4 Users ' needs Standard data is to be built with due regard to users' needs which vary considerably depending upon the purpose (among them production planning, cost estimation, incentive payments and budgetary control). 7.7.3 Developing the Standard Data The following steps should be taken to develop standard data: a) Decide the extent of coverage; b) Break the job into elements through job analysis; 4 Decide the type of reading, for example, previous studies or PMTS or combination of both; 4 Determine the major factors that are likely to affect the time, for example, shape and size, weight handled, distance moved, force applied, etc; and e) Measure the time from direct. observations. Decide elemental time values for various values of above factors. The studyperson can choose arbitrary distances and times taken by various workers to cover and then take average. The studyperson will then find it more appropriate to draw a curve to indicate the relationship between the time and distance covered. For example, the average time for walking the distance from 10 m to 40 m is arrived at as follows: A graph or nomogram can be plotted for elemental time v/s different values of the factor. The time for an element `Pick up part', for example, can be plotted for different weights of the part. A formula can also be developed foi different weights of the part. A formula also can be developed for this purpose. Create appropriate document to facilitate easy reference and use of the data so developed. The data is then used for building up time standards. Continuously update the standard data bank to include: i) new elements, and ii) refine existing clcmcntal times through larger number of obscrwtions.

Many operations in a given plant have several common elements. The job of work studyperson would be much easier if he had at his disposal a set of data from which he could readily derive standard times for these common work elements without necessarily going into elements and then referring to the standard data bank to derive the normal times for each element, one would calculate the total time needed to perform this new job and determine its standard time by adding the appropriate allowances in the usual way. 7.7.2 Major Considerations Following considerations developing standard data.
7.7.2.1

are important

while

Coverage

It may be difficult to cover the entire range of operations simultaneously. In practice it is better to restrict the number of jobs normally to one or more departments in a plant, or to all the processes involved in manufacturing certain products. In this way the coverage becomes more manageable. 7.7.2.2 Reliability The reliability of the data can be increased if: a) sufficient data is collected for each element, and b) as many common elements as possible are grouped together. 7.7.2.3 Source of elemental time data The source of time data could be: a) Previous time studies, or b) PMTS (Predetermined Motion Systems).

h)

7.8 Analytical Estimation 7.8.1 Time Introduction

In this technique, the time required to carry out elements at a defined rate of working is estimated

IS134@7(Part2):1995

partially from knowledge and practical experience of the work concerned and partially from data available from historical records. 7.8.2 Methodology For those elements, where elemental time data is available, it is used straight away and for other elements, time is assessed or estimated analytically using knowledge and practical experience of the work concerned. The craftsmen, skilled and experienced in the work concerned, should be engaged as estimators. Basic orientation In work study is necessary. For this purpose analysis of historical records concerning work outputs, time taken and various variations thereof may be undertaken to arrive at time standards. 7.8.3 Need for use ofAnalytical Estimation
The setting of reasonably accurate time standards for non repetitive work has always been a problem in industry. It is often quite uneconomical to use time study to do so.

a) Develop definitions of the activities that the

b)
cl

4

employees are to record and codify; Explain how the study is to be conducted, what record must be kept and how long the study is to continue; Design the forms to be used in collecting the data. A typical time log form is shown in Annex A. The table shows the workday divided into minutes and the activities are recorded as and when they occur. In order to record the time spent on various work categories, the employee simply draws a line across the duty column of the time log, whenever a change is made from one activity to another. He then inserts the proper activity code and the number of units processed; and Summarize the recorded times and units processed and develop time standards for each activity.

7.9.3 Advantages a) b) It is easy to explain and administer; Employees generally are stimulated to higher performance by knowing that some effort is being made to keep the score; It is less expensive; and It is likely to meet favourable response from employees as compared to other techniques.

However, analytical estimation can be extensively used in field of plant maintenance, repair work and project work. It can also be used in jobbing shops for estimating production time. The result can be used for the same purpose as those derived from other techniques of work measurement. 7.9 Time Ladder/ Time Logl Activity Logging
7.9.1 Introduction

c) d)

7.9.4 Disadvantages lt sets standards by averaging the times obtained in past performance, but not based on what could or should be done. 7.9.5 Precautions Even past performance data derived from time logs can be refined. This might be done by relying more upon that of average workers by adjusting average figures before setting time standards, and by maintaining records of production experience and method changes, through which higher standards might later be justified.

This may be used by asking office staff to maintain a record (log) of the details of the activities at a regular time interval throughout and for a sufficiently long period along with output of each activity. This gives the time estimates for each activity. The technique can be used for setting office standards. 7.9.2 Methodology Following steps are involved in setting time standards using this technique:

1f,

\

Basic Work Content of product and/or operation

Total
Work content Work Content Added by defects in design or specific&i on of product

Total lime of Operation under Existing Conditions

,
Work Content Added by inefficient methods of manufacture or Opel-atIon

1

I

Total Ineffective Time

ineffective Time due to shortcommgs of the management

,
Ineffective wlthm the control
Of

Time

the worker

In the B. S. Glossary the terms `work content' and `ineffective time' arc accorded precise technical meanings which differ slightly from those used here. The Glosrruydefinitions are intended for use in apptying work measurement techniques, and are not strictly relevant to the present discussion. In this chapter and the next, `workcontent'and `ineffective time'are uaedwith their ordinary common meanings as defined in the text. NOTE! -

FIG. 1

How

MANUFACIVKING

TIME IS MADE

UP

17

LSl3407(Part2):1995

Total Work Content of the
prO"mt8

use Of processes

Product

most economic

~_

___

._

\. 2.
Total Work Content
L. 4.

lack

of

Standardlutlon of processes

--T

prevants us*
high-productIon

Work Content Added by defects in design or specification of the product

Design demands removal of

WWl#J
Machins

I. 2.

Process

Not Operated
Correctly

or in bad condltlons 3. 3.

Work Content Added by inefficient methods of manufacture or operation

3. 4.

Bad Layout caus*ng wasted movement

_I
ANDPROCESSES

ii. Inei Time (see figure 4)
f!_

FIG.~

WORKCONTENT DUE'I`OTHEPHODUC~ 18

IS13407(Part2):1!395

Work

6
u

Content

Time of Operation Total Time of Operation Under Existing Conditions within the Control of the Management

c.

1.

Excessive Product Variety

c. 2.

Lack of Standardioation add\ lrllv ,,rne due 10 short runs Design Changes

c. 3.

add inrffucflve ffrn~' due 10 sfnpfmgcb and rework c. 4. Bad Planning UI work and orders adds Kfle lime of n,en and ,,,.Kh,WS

Ineffective Time due to shortcomings of the management

C. 6. Bad Working Conditions add lneffecfrvr hmt' ,hrouyh furcmy workers 10 1~61

c. 9.

Accidents add ,nt,ffur.i,ve

,,n,e

D. 1.

Absence, Lateness and Idleness

Ineffective Time withln the control of the worker

272

t; t;
h

e
3

238
N ..

204

z
Y= 276 x -XI85261

Is:

17c

13f

.--e-v
10

-------_-__-----Ml M STANDARD e 110.4 TMU

I

61

3

t 663 1326

6

1
3315 3978 4641

i

1989
No. OF CYCLES (N) --4

2652

5304

FIG 4

LEARNING CURVE OPERATION: BIMETAL WIRE CUTTING AND LOOPING

ANNEX A (Clause 7.1.3.4)
A-l
r

TIME LOG SHEET
PAPER OFFICE DIVISION

TIME

STUDY FORMS
DATE PER SON POSITION : : : 0.5.08.91 SHRI. S. LAL SECRETARY

' DEPT

I SECr'oN

TIME (h) UNITS' ACTIVITY CODE TIME (h) UNITS* ACTIVITY CODE Activity Code SUMMARY Units Time (Min)

0800-08

15

08 15-0830 0830-0845

1

A

12cO-1215 12151230 1230- 1245 1245-1300 1300-1315 13151330 1330-1345 1345-1400

5

D

h)

0845-0900 O!XO-0915 091.50930 0930-0945 0945-loo0 Iwo-1015 1015-1030 10~0-1045 1045-l 100

3

C

2 1 .B

C

A B C D E F G TOTAL

135 30 105 30 30 90 60 480

1

E

F

A

, *Units is
a value

of quantified

output like number of vouchers processed,

letters typed, files handled,

etc.

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995 A-2 GENERAL-PURPOSE TIME STUDY TOP SHEET

TIME STUDY TOP SHEET
DEPARTMENT: OPERATION: PLANT/MACHINE: TOOLS AND GAUGES: NO.: MATERIAL M.S. NO.: NO.:

I

STUDY NO.: SHEET NO.: TIME OFF: TIME ON: ELAPSED TIME: OPERATIVE: CLOCK NO.: ----__ STUDIED BY: DATE: CHECKED:

OF

PRODUCT/PART: DWG. NO.: wJALITY: N.B. Sketch the WORKPLACE ELEMENT DESCRIPTION

LAYOUT/SET-UP/PARTon R. W.R. S.T. B.T.

the reverse, or on a separate ELEMENTDESCRIPTION

sheet and attach. 1 R. / W.R. I S.T. B.T.

I

-._ ._

-~~~ ~-t

--

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995
A-3

CONTINUATION

SHEET FOR GENERAL-PURPOSE
ITIME STUDY CONTINUATION /

TIME STUDY (FRONT)
SHEET/ ) SHEET NO.: R. / W.R.

STUDY NO.: ELEMENTDESCRIPTION

1 R. 1 W.R. 1 S.T. 1 B.T.

ELEMENTDESCRIPTION

I-

-_

23

X-4 SHORT ----pDATE

CYCLE STUDY FORM
OF STl_`D\r TIME TIME

(FRONT)
~~ ___ PART NAME BASIC CYCLE TIME Ill," _~~ ____~

FINISHED STARTED TI>lE

SHORT

CYCLE

STUDY

SHEET

DEP4RT.\IENT

DWG. SPEED. TOOLS USED:

NO

PART

NO.:

mill

~
NO :~ .AL'TOn FOOT

mm

j

hl.4CHINE OPERATED hlATER

AND

q

HAND

0

Ic-min

I AL TO CHECK ESTB. STANDARD 17 STANDARD TIME PER PIECE

DESCRIPTIONOFMETHOD

I
t

REMARKS: I ~ I I I I
I

II

A-5 SHORT

CYCLE STUDY FORM Ti51E

(BACK)

STARTED Tl'vIE ~ _~~

SHORT CYCLE

STUDY

SHEET
OF -NAME OF OPERATIVE SHEETS

EL;\PSED ELEhiENT SO.

OBSERVED APPROVED FOREIGN

BY BY ELEMENTS

SYMBOL

DESCRIPTION

0
P __

Q
R s-i

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995 A-6 TIME STUDY FORM
SHEET OF

STUDY NO.:

4

DEPARTMENT OPERATOR

MATERIAL MACHINE SPEED

TOTAL

NORMAL

CYCLE TIME

ALLOWANCES STANDARD STANDARD TIME IN TIME IN

ROUGH

SKETCH AND BRIEF DESCRIPTION

OF PRESENT AND PROPOSED

METHOD

26

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995 A-7 SNAP BACK/CONTINUOUS WATCH METHOD TIME STUDY DETAILS
SHEET NO.

FOREIGN ELEMENTS
FROM TO ELAPSED TIME -~~ DESCRIPTION FROM TO ELAPSED TIME DESCRIPTION

27

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995 A-8 STUDY SUMMARY SHEET
DEPARTMENT: OPERATION: SECTION: MS. NO.: STUDY NO. SHEET NO. DATE: TIME OFF: PLANT/MACHINE: NO.: TIME ON: ELAPSED TIME: CHECK TIME: TOOLS & GAUGES: PRODUCT/FART: DWG NO.: QUALITY: OPERATIVE: WORKING M/F CONDITIONS: CLOCK NO. NO.: MATERIAL: NET TIME: OBS. TIME: UNACC. TIME: U.T. AS 76 STUDIED BY: CHECKED BY: OF:

Sketch and Nota, on back of Sheet 1 EL. NO. ELEMENT DESCRIPTION B.T. F. Ohs.

-

H

--

I

N.B.

B.T. = Basic Time F. = Frequency of occurrcncc per cycle Obs. = No. of observations

I

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995

ANNEX B (Clause 7.1.3.6)
EXAMPLE OF TABLES USED TO CALCULATE RELAXATION ALLOWANCES B-O This Annex is based on information supplied by Peter Steele and Partners (United Kingdom). Similar tables have been developed by various institutions, such as REFA (Federal Republic of Germany) and by other consulting firms.

B-l Relaxation allowances may be determined by means of the tables of comparative strains and the points conversion table reproduced in this appendix. The analysis should proceed as follows: a) For the element of work under consideration, determine the severity of the strain imposed under each sub-heading of the table of strains below, by rcfcrcnce to the tables of comparative strains. Allocate points as indicated and determined the total points for the strains imposed by the performance of the element of work. Read off from the points conversion table the appropriate relaxation allowance.
STRAINS from the Nature

a) Medium stress i) Where the work is primarily concerned with carrying or supporting loads; and ii) Shovelling, swinging hammers and other rhythmical movements. This category covers most operations. b) Low stress i) Where the weight of the body is transferred in order to exert force, forexample foot-pedal operation; pressing an article, with the body, against a buff; and ii) supporting or carrying well balanced loads strapped to the body or hung from the shoulders; arms and hands free. Table 1
Points Allocated for Various Strains: Summary (Clause B-2.1.1)
severity ,
Low Medium High

b)

`I'ypeof Strain

c)

\

A. Physical strains resulting f?om nature of work

B-2 TABLES OF COMPARATIVE
B-2.1 Physical Strains Resulting of the Work B-2.1 .I Averuge Table l)] Force Ehrted

1. Average force exerted
2. Posture

O-85

o-113

o-149

[Strain A

(see

3. Vibration 4. Short cycle 5. Restrictive clothing B. Mental strains 1. Concentration/anxiety 2. Monotony 3. Eye strain 4. Noise

O-5 o-4 o-3 o-4 o-4 o-2 O-5 O-2

6-11 5-10 4-6 5-12 5-10 3-7 6-11 3-7

12-16 11-15 7-10 13-20 11-16 8-10 12-20 B-10

Consider the whole of the element or period for which the relaxation allowance is required and determine the average force exerted.
Example:

C. Physical or mental strains resulting from nature of working conditions

Lift and carry a weight of 40 lb (time 12 seconds) and return empty-handed (time 8 seconds). In this example, if the relaxation allowance is to apply to the full 20 seconds, the "average force exerted" should be calculated as follows:
(40x8) + (0x$) =24lo.

1. Temperature Low humidity Medium humidify High humidity 2. Ventilation 3. Fumes 4. Dust 5. Dirt 6. Wet

O-5 O-5 O-6 o-3 o-3 o-3 o-2 O-2

6-11 6-14 7-17 4-Y 4-8 4-8 3-6 3-6

12-16 15-26 18-36 10-U Y-12 9-12 7-10 7-10

NOTE - The values given in the above example are m pounds (lb), which may be converted into kilogram by using the following conversion factor: 1 lb = 0.453 592 4 kg

NOTE - Allocate points for each strain indepcndcntly, h-respective of what has been allowed for other strains. If any strain occurs for only a proportion of the trme, allocate a similar proportion of the points. For example : High concentration = 16 pomts, 25 percent of the tirnc; Low concentration = 4 pomts, 75 percent of the time; Allocate 16 x 0.25 = 4 points plus 4 x 0 75 = 3 points, whrch gives a total of 4 + 3 = 7 points.

I kg = 2.;;4 622 lb as given in IS 787 : 1Y56

The number of points allocated for the average force exerted will depend upon the type of stress involved. Stresses are classified as follows:
29

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995 c) High stress

Where the work is primarily concerned with lifting; ii) Exerting the force by continued use of certain muscles of fingers and arms; iii) Lifting or supporting loads in awkward attitudes, manipulation of heavy weights into awkward positions; and iv) Operations in hot conditions, hot metalworking, etc.
Tnble 2
lb. 0 10 20 30 40 50
60

i)

Relaxation allowances should be awarded in this category only after every endeavour has been made to improve facilities which will make the physical task lighter.
A study should be made of the elements in relation

to low, medium and high stress conditions. The points to be allocated, according to the type of stress and the average force applied, are set out in Tables 2 to 4.

Medium Stress: Points for Average Force Exerted (Clause B-2.1.1)
2 0 17 27 36 44 51 59 65 72 79 86 93 98 102 109 3 0 18 28 31 45 52 59 66 73 79 86 94 98 102 110 4 3 19 29 38 46 53 60 67 73 80 87 9.5 99 103 110 5 6 20 30 39 46 54 61 68 14 80 88 95 99 104 111 6 8 21 31 39 47 54 61 69 74 a1 88 96 99 105 112 7 10 22 32 40 48 55 62 70 75 82 88 96 100 106 112 8 12 23 32 41 49 56 63 JO 76 82 89 97 100 107 112 9 14 24 33 41 50 56 64 71 16 83 90 91 100 108 113

0 0 15 25 34 42 50 51 64 72 77 84 91 97 101 109

1 0 16 26 35 43 51 58 65 72 78 85 92 98 101 109

70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140

Table 3

Low Stress: Points for Average Force Exerted (Cfause B-2.1.1)
2
0

lb. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140

0 0 11 19 26 32 38 43 48 54 58 63 68 72 77 81

1
0

3 0 14 21 27 34 39 44 50 55 60 65 69 73 78 82

4 3 14 22 28 34 40 45 50 55 60 65 69 74 78 83

5 6 15 22 28 35 41 46 51 56 60 66 70 74 78 83

6 7 16 23 29 35 41 46 51 56 61 66 71 75 79 84

7 8 16 23 30 36 42 47 52 51 62 66 71 75 80 84

8 9 17 24 31 36 42 47 52 58 62 67 71 76 80 84

9 10 18 25 31 37 43 48 53 58 63 67 72 76 81 85

I2 19 26 32 38 43 49 54 59 63 68 73 77 82

13 20 21 33 39 44 50 54 59 64 68 73 77 82

30

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995 Table 4 High Stress: Points for Average Force Exerted

(Clauses B-2.1.1 and B-4)
lb.
0

0
0

1
0

2
0

3 3 24 37 48 59 69 78 88 96 105 113 121 129 137 144

3-4 6

4 8 25 38 49 60 70 79 88 97 105 114 122 130 137 145

5 11 27 39 50 61 71 80 89 Y8 106 115 123 130 138 146

6 13 28 40 51 62 72 81 90 99 107 115 124 131 139 147

7 15 29 41 52 63 73 82 91 100 108 116 124 132 140 148

8 17 30 43 54 64 74 83 92 101 109 117 125 133 141 148

9 18 32 44 55 65 75 84 93 101 110 118 126 134 142 149

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140

20 33 45 56 66 76 85 94 102 110 119 127 135 142

21 34 46 57 67 76 86 94 103 111 119 128 136 143

22 35 47 58 68 77 87 95 104 112 120 128 136 143

Example: If the weight carried is 25 lb: i) determine the type of stress involved (medium, low or high); ii) in the left-hand column of the table for the type of stress (Table 2,3 or 4), find the line for 20 lb; iii) on this line, move across the table to the right, to co1 5; iv) read off the points allocation for 2.5 lb carried, which is : Table 2, medium stress : 30 points; Table 3, low stress : 22 points; and Table 4, high stress : 39 points. B-2.1.2 Posture (Strain A. 2)

Points Constant bending, lifting, stretching or throwing Coalmining with pickaxes, lying in a low seam B-2.1.3 Vibration (Strain A.3) 12 16

Consider the impact of the vibration on the body, limbs or hands and the addition to mental effort due to it, or to a series of jars or shocks. Points Shovelling light materials Power sewing-machine Power press or guillotine if operative is holding the material i Cross-cut sawing Shovelling ballast Portable power drill operated by 1 one hand Pickaxing 4
6

1 2

Consider whether the worker is sitting, standing, stooping or in a cramped position and whether a load is handled easily or awkwardly. Points Sitting easily Sitting awkwardly, or mixture of sitting and standing Standing or walking freely Ascending or descending stairs unladen Standing or walking with a load Climbing up or down ladders, or some bending, lifting, stretching or throwing Awkward lifting, shovelling ballast to container 0 2 4 5 6 8 IO

Power drill (two hands) Road drill on concrete B-2.1.4 Short Cycle (Highly Repetitive) (Strain A. 4)

8 15

In highly repetitive work, if a series of very short elements form a cycle which is continuously repeated for a long period, award points as indicated below, to compensate for the lack of opportunity to vary the muscles used during the work.
31

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995

Average cycle time (centi-minutes) 16-17 15 13-14 12 10-11 8-9 7 6 5 Less than 5 B-2.1.5 Restrictive Clothing (Strain A.5)

Points 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Points 8 Buffing and polishing Guiding work by hand on sewing-machine Packing assorted chocolates, memorising pattern and selecting accordingly 10 Assembly work too complex to become automatic Welding parts held in jig 1 Driving a motor bus in heavy traffic or fog Marking out in detail with high accuracy t 15 B-2.2.2 Monotony (Strain B.2) Consider the degree of mental stimulation and if there is companionship, competitive spirit, music, etc. Points 0 Two men on jobbing work Cleaning own shoes for half an hour on one's own Operative on repetitive work Operative working alone on t non-repetitive work Routine inspection Adding similar columns of figures One operative working alone on highly repetitive work B-2.2.3 Eye Strain (Strain B.3) 3
5

Consider the weight of the protective clothing in relation to effort and movement. Consider also whether ventilation and breathing are affected. Points Thin rubber (surgeon's) gloves Household rubber gloves t Rubber boots Grinder's goggles Industrial rubber or leather gloves Face mask (for example, for paint-spraying) Asbestos suit or tarpaulin coat Restrictive protective clothing and respirator B-2.2
B-2.2.1 Mental Strains

1 2 3 5 8 15 20

6 8 11

Concentration/Anxiety (Strain B.1)

Consider what would happen if the operative relaxed his attention, the responsibility carried, the need for exact timing of movements, and the accuracy or precision required. Points Routine simple assembly I Shovelling ballast Routine packing, labourer washing vehicles Wheeling trolley down clear gangway Feed press tool; hand clear of press t Topping up battery Painting walls Assembling small and simple batches, performed without much thinking Sewing machine work, automatically guided Assembling warehouse orders by trolley Simple inspection Load/unload press tool, hand feed into machine 1 Spray-painting metal work Adding up figures I Inspecting detailed components
I

Consider the lighting conditions, glare, flicker, illumination, colour and closeness of work and for how long the strain is endured. Points Normal factory work Inspection of easily visible faults Sorting distinctively coloured articles by colour 1 Factory work in poor lighting Intermittent inspection for detailed faults Grading apples t Reading a newspaper in a motor bus Arc-welding using mask Continuous visual inspection, for example cloth from a loom Engraving using an eyeglass B-2,2.4 Noise (Strain B.4) Consider whether the noise affects concentration, is a steady hum or a background noise, is regular or occurs unexpectedly, is irritating or soothing. (Noise has been described as "a loud sound made by somebody else".) Points Work in a quiet off&, no distracting noise Light assembly factory n
0

2

0 1 2 3 4 5

4 8 10 14

6 7 32

IS13407(Part2):1995

Work in a city office with continual traffic noise outside Light machine shop Office or assembly shop where noise is a distraction Woodworking machine shop Operating steam hammer in forge Rivetting in a shipyard Road drilling
the Nature of the Working Conditions

Points 1 2 4 5 9 10 Moulder procuring metal and filling mould B-2.3.4 Lbst (Strain C.4) Consider the volume and nature of the dust.

Points 10

Points
OffiCe

Normal light assembly operations Press shop

0 I 1 2 4 6 10 11 12

B-2.3 Physical or Mental Strains Resulting from
B-2.3.1 Temperature and Humidity (Strain C.1)

Grinding or buffing operations with good extraction Sawing wood Emptying ashes Linishing weld Running coke from hoppers into skips or trucks Unloading cement Demolishing building B-2.3.5 Dirt (Strain C.5)

Consider the general conditions of atmospheric temperature and humidity and classify as indicated below. Select points according to average temperature within the ranges shown: Humidity Temperature > r (Percent) Up to 75OF* 76O to 90�F* Over 90�F' up to 75 76-85 Over 85 0 1-3 4-6 6-9 8-12 12-17 12-16 15-26 20-36

*lo F = 0.555 555 6�C or 1�C = 1.8"F B-2.3.2 Ventilation (Strain C.2) Consider the quality and freshness of the air and its circulation by air-conditioning or natural draught. Points Offices Factories with "office-type" conditions Workshop with reasonable ventilation but some draught Draughty workshops Working in sewer B-2.3.3 Fumes (Strain C.3) Consider the nature and concentration of the fumes: whether toxic or injurious to health ; irritating to eyes, nose, throat or skin; disagreeable odour. Points Lathe turning with coolants Emulsion paint Gas cutting Soldering with resin 1 Motor vehicle exhaust in small commercial garage Cellulose painting 0 1 1 0 1 3 14

Consider the nature of the work and the general discomfort caused by its dirty nature. This allowance covers "washing time" where this is paid for (that is, where operatives are allowed three minutes or five minutes for washing, etc). Do not allow both points and time. Points Office work Normal assembly operations Office duplicators Dustman Stripping internal combustion engine Work under old motor vehicle Unloading bags of cement Coalminer Chimney-sweep with brushes B-2.3.6 Wet (Strain C.6) Consider the cumulative effect of exposure to this condition over a long period. Points Normal factory operations Outdoor workers, for example, postman Working continuously in the damp Rubbing down walls with wet pumice block Continuous handling of wet articles
0

I

0 1 2 4 5 7 I 10

1
2 4 5 10

5 6 33

Laundry wash-house, wet work, steamy, floor running with water, hands wet

B-3 POINTS CONVERSION

TABLE

B-3.1 If the total number of points allocated for the various strains is 37: a) in the left-hand column of Table 5, find the line for 30; b) on this line, move across the table to the right, to co1 7; read off the relaxation allowance for 37 C) points, which is 18 percent. B-4 EXAMPLES OF CALCULATION OF RELAXATION ALLOWANCES (See Table 4) B-4.1 Power Press Operation As press guard opens automatically,

press with foot. Simultaneously, with right hand reach to tote bin, grasp blank and orient it in hand, move blank near guard and wait for guard to open. On 20-ton press. Maximum reach 50 cm (20 in.). Posture somewhat unnatural; seated at machine. Noisy department, adequate lighting. B-4.2 Carry 50 lb. Sack up Stairs Lift sack on to bench 90 cm (3 ft.) high; transfer to shoulder, carry up stairs, drop sack on floor. Dusty conditions. B-4.3 Pack Chocolates In three layers of 4 lb. box, according to pattern for each layer, average 160 chocolates. Operative sits in front of straight shelves bearing 11 kinds of chocolates in trays or tins; he must pack the chocolates according to a memorised pattern for each layer. Air-conditioned, good light.
for Total Points Allocated

left hand, grasp piece-part, left hand move piece-part hand places new blank in right hand, while left hand
Table 5

reach in with and disengage it. With to tote bin, while right press tool. Withdraw closes guard. Operate

Percentage

Relaxation Allowance (Clause B-3.1)
3 4 5

Points

0

1

2

6

7

8

9

120 :z

1: 116

1:; 118

1;: 119

92 :g

93 107 122

95 :!z

% :;s

1:; 126

99 128 113

100 130 115

Table 6
Type of Strain

Calculation

of Relaxation Allowances (Clause B-4)
' ' Power Press Operation

: Examples

Job Carrying 50 lb. Sack `Stress Points50 6 t 3tress Packing Chocolates Points ' '

stress
L k -

Point;

A. Physical strains 1.. Average force (lb.) 2. Posture 3. Vibration 4. Short cycle 5. Restrictive. clothing B. Mental strains 1. Concentration/anxiety 2. Monotony 3. Eye strain 4. Noise (1. Working conditions 1. Temperature/humidity 2. Ventilation 3. Fumes 4. Dust 5. Dirt 6. Wet Total points Relaxation allowance, including tea breaks (pcrccnt)

4 2 10 -

I, -

1 -

ii -

T 3x 18

L/L

II I>
L

1

IA I

1 20 13

Jr
68 35

34

IS 13407( Part 2 ) : 1995

ANNEXC
(Clause 7.3.3.2)
WORK SAMPLING RECORD SHEETS

C-l EXAMPLE OF A SIMPLE WORK SAMPLING RECORD SHEET

I

Date:

Observer:

Study No.: Total 62 Percentage 82.7

Number of observations: 75 Machine running

LwlL+tllMlLHlLkilwLHlLktlLHl Lktl Lktl u-i-l II

Machine idle

L&t-l Ll-tl Ill 13 17.3

C-2 WORK SAMPLING RECORD SHEET SHOWING MACHINE UTILISATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF IDLE TIME

Date:

Observer:

Study No.: Total Percentage

Number of observations: 75 Machine running LJ+u-nu-tllJ-llL#lw-rL+tl l-+-tl L+tl Icn Repairs Supplies Machine idle Personal Idle
1r

L+tl L#tl II

62 2 6
1

82.7 2.7 8.0 1.3 5.3

lJ+l 1
1

III1

4

C-3 WORK SAMPLING RECORD SHEET SHOWING DISTRIBUTION OF TIME ON TEN ELEMENTS OF WORK PERFORMED BY A GROUP OF FOUR WORKERS DateObserver: Study No.:

Number of observations: Elements of work 1 Worker No. 1 Worker No. 2 Worker No. 3 Worker No. 4 2

3141

5

6

7

8

9
i

10

-l__i!!-I

IS13407( Part 2):1995

ANNEX D (Clause 7.3.3.4)
TABLE OF RANDOM NUMBERS
49 57 16 78 09 54 24 95 64 41 43 5s 55 56 27 54 06 67 07 96 82 88 19 82 54 17 77 98 52 49 37 04 10 42 11 93 74 50 07 46 23 47 11 44 09 78 67 75 38 62 87 21 12 15 90 35 76 86 51 52 20 33 73 00 84 % 50 58 13 77 43 25 07 42 27 84 83 44 99 08 26 92 39 66 02 34 12 52 02 73 91 06 38 79 43 64 76 79 54 28

44 84 82 50 83

17 16 97 92 39

16 07 77 26 50

58 44 77 11 08

09 99 81 97 30

79 83 07 00 42

83 11 45 56 34

86 46 32 76 07

19 32 14 31 %

62 24 08 38 88

06 20 32 80 54

76 14 98 22 42

50 85 94 02 06

03 88 07 53 87

10 45 12 53 98

55 10 93 86 35

23 93 85 60 85

64 72 79 42 29

05 88 10 04 48

OS 71 15 53 39

40 96 88 33 50

33 83 42 27 27

20 50 95 14 89

38 87 45 34 87

26 75 72 09 19

13 97 16 45 20

89 12 64 59 1s

51 25 36 34 37

03 93 16 68 00

74 47 00 49 49

17 70 04 12 52

76 33 43 72 85

31 24 18 07 66

13 03 66 34 60

04 54 79 45 44

07 97 94 99 38

74 77 77 27 68

21 46 24 72 88

19 44 21 95 11

30 80 90 14 80

55 59 48 66 68

74 29 55 37 49

30 97 90 32 69

77 68 65 20 10

40 60 72 30 82

44 71 96 77 53

22 91 57 84 75

78 38 69 57 91

84 67 36 03 93

26 54 10 29 30

04 33 46 09 52 13 58 18 24 76 96 46 92 42 45 10 45 65 04 26 34 25 20 57 27

68 15 97 11 40

07 54 60 04 48

97 55 49 % 73

06 95 04 67 51

57 52 91 24 92

83 06 33 42 96

62 09 32 38 44

64 19 51 97 33

11 74 26 01 49

12 66 38 SO 13

67 02 79 87 34

19 94 78 75 86

00 37 45 66 82

71 34 04 81 53

74 02 91 41 91

60 76 16 40 00

47 70 92 01 52

21 90 53 74 43

29 30 56 91 48

68 86 16 62 85

02 38 02 48 27

02 45 75 51 55

37 94 50 84 26

03 30 9.5 08 89

31 38 98 32 62

64 75 33 97 15

05 73 96 51 06

71 88 02 40 15

95 05 75 14 93

86 90 19 02 20

11 52 07 04 01

05 21 60 02 90

65 09 68
41 62 33 10 14 93 31 75 86 55 08 06

76 22 59 39 40

83 98 33 54 78

20 12 82 16 18

37 22 43 49 89

90 08 90 36 62

57 07 49 47 02

16 52 37 9s 67

00 74 38 93 14

11 9s 44 13 11

66 80 59 30 33

22 09 54 58 87

35 98 87 37 59

85 42 66 78 36

15 99 47 80 22

33 64 54 IO 41

92 61 73 42 26

03 71 32 10 78

51 62 08 50 63

59 99 11 67 06

77 15 12 42 55

59 06 44 32 13

56 51 95 17 as

78 29 92 55 27

06 16 63 85 01

83 93 16 14 50

52 58 29 94 15

91 05 56 44 29

05 77 24 67 39

70 09 29 16 39

74 51 48 94 43

71 23 31 31 94

41 52 04 99 58

61 23 49 73 28

50 33 69 68 41

72 12 96 68 36

12 96 10 35 45

41 93 47 81 37

94 02 48 33 59

% 18 45 03 03

26 39 88 76 09

44 95 27 36 07 02 18 36 13 41 43 89 2430124860 90 35 57 29

99 07 20 12

02 25 91 18 82

96 99 17 99 62

74 32 14 10 54

30 70 49 72 65

83 23 17 34 60

36

IS 13407( Part 2 ) : 1995

ANNEX

E

(Clause 7.3.3.5)
NOMOGRAM FOR DETERMINING NUMBER OF OBSERVATIONS

Percentage occurrence

( accuracy

Error required

)

(P)

Number of observations (n) -2000 4000-

l-99

_+ 7

0.5%

35003000-_' 2500-

-1 -1

600 500

4oo 1 300 -1 200 -1 100

2000--1000 Z--98 -I,0 15003 --97 1300-_ 1200-I 1 loo-_ 4 -96 5 --95 700 -6--94 7--93 E--92 g--91 VI--90 II--69 12--88 -::---z z-16--z! 20--880 z--75 30-70 07 -6.0 7.0 -100 9.0 200 -90 80 70 60 300 -4.0 400 -5.0 3.0 600-z 300 2.0 1 COO-900 - 800-_ 400 5oo =600 900 800 700

500-_ 200

-8.0 -10 -11 -12 -13 -14 -15

40--60 5050

loo-

50

99.80/y 95% confidence level

37

ANNEX F (Clause 7.5.5.2)
WORKPLACE F-l y, Job No.: ASSEMBLY METHOD DEPT.: Job Description: DETAILS
DESCRIPTION LOCATION ON W/P LAYOUT SL NO. LEFT HAND

LAYOUT SHEETS SHEET OF: No.: Fixture: INSTRUCTIONS
REMARKS_ RIGHT HAND

SHEET

I

Operation

No.:

Operation:

Fixture

COMPONENT
SL NO I COMPONENT NO. COMPONENT

ASSEMBLY
DESCRIPTION I

I
1

I

, I
I

I

WORK (800 x

TABLE I 200 mm)

I

I

I

I

PREPARED DATE:

BY.

CHECKED DATE :

BY

APPROVED DATE

BY.

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995 F-2 MTM ANALYSIS SHEET

ELEMENT ANALYSIS JOB: STUDY NO.: DATE: OPERATOR:

SHEET NO.:

I

I

STUDIED

BY:

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995

ANNEX

G

(Clause 7.5.5.3)
MTM-APPLICATION G-l TURN-T DATA IN TMU

G-2 BODY,

LEG AND FOOT MOTIONS
TMU ht$ of Motion Dtxription

Symbol

F-M

8.5 19.1 7.1 0.5

FMP LM

Up to 10 cm Up to 15 cm For each cm additional

Foot-Motion Foot-Motion with heavy pressure Leg-Motion

Side

step: Side displacement of body axis. The side step ends, when leading leg contacts floor.

SS-Cl

17.0 0.2

Upto3Ocm For each cm additional Upto6Ocm For each cm additional

Case1

SS-c2

34.1 0.2

Case2

Lagging leg must contact floor before next motion can be. made.

Turn body 45' to 90�-Right TB-Cl TB-C2 18.5 37.2 Case1 case2

or Left

Complete when leading leg contacts floor. Lagging leg must contact floor before nex motion can be made.

B.S. KOK AR. AS. AKOK KRK AKBK SIT STD W-P W-PO W-PL G-3 CRANK C

29.0 31.9 69.4 76.7 34.7 43.4 15.0 17.0 17.0 Per. pace Per. pace Per. pace

Bend, Stop, Kneel on one knee Arise Kneel on both knees Arise Sit Stand Walk Walk-Obstructed Walk-With load --

__-.
Crank + in cm TMU/RevoIution Crank 8 in cm TMU/Revolution

..~__
2 8.2 22 13.9 4 9.2 24 14.2 6 10.0 26 14.5 8 10.7 28 14.8 10 11.3 30 15.0 12 11.9 35 15.5 14 12.4 40 16.0 16 12.8 45 16.4 18 13.2 50 16.7 20 >50 Move Value for Retardation 5.2 TMU 13.6 Acceleration and

The values do not include time for acceleration and retardation

40

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995 G-4 MTM

NORMAL TIME VALUE CARD

Do not attempt to use this chart or apply methods-Time measurement in any way unless you understand the proper application of the data. This statement is included as a word of caution to prevent difficulties resulting from misapplication of the data. Time uflirs
I-MU
SCCOlld

Minute

Hour o.voo uI

The normal time values .of this card are current for basic motions which are performed with normal degree of effort ( 100%) G-5 SIMULTANEOUS MOTIONS

I
27.8

0 0%
I

0 0006 I

I 666.7 IO0000

I

1 Reach

1 Move

tI,<en'gnge

0

=
= =

Easy Pm&cc Difficuh

q n

Within

the arca of normal vision.

Outside the area ot normal vision Ewy to handle. to handle the above talk.

IIifticult

Motions not included in
T =

Turn: Normally easy with all motions except when turn is contmlled or with disengage Apply Pressure: l3ch case 10 hc analysctl Posiliorl: Alway\ thffirult difficult.

At' P3 LU RI.

= = = =

Disengage: Normally Rclcasc. Alw:ly< e:,vy.

EYE-TRAVELET
NORMAL TIME VALIIE IN TMlJ

I I

I

I'M11

I

/JP vi `,`,,`I,",,

IS 13407( Part 2 ) : 1995 G-8 REACH-R I
NORMAL TIME IN `IMU I

Reach to object in tiied location or to object in other hand or on which other hand rests.

E

Reach to single object in location which may vary slightly from cycle to

C

Reach IO object jumbled with other objects in a group so that search and select occur. Reach to a very small object or where accurate grasp is required.

D

tion to get hand in position for body balance or next motion or out of

G-9 GRASP-G

G-10 RELEASESymbol RI.1 TMU 2.0 Descriplion Symbol TMU Description

Release by opening fingers

RL2

0.0

Cantact release

42

IS 13407 ( Part 2 ) : 1995 G-11 MOVE&M

A

Move object to other hand or against stop.

Move object to approximate or definite

C

Move object to an exact location.

No pressure required

Light pressure required

Heavy pressure required

I

I

I

41.8

1

53.4

I

G-13 APPLY-PRESSSURE-AP
Symbol TMU
DCSC?@iO?l Symbol

TMU

Description

Symbol

TMU

Lkscription

APl

16.2

With regrasp

AF'2

10.6

Without regrasp

AF'3

5.4

Dwell (unofficial)

G-14 DISENGAGE -D
Symbol Classof Fit Lk.wi>tion To Handle Easy Difficult 4.0 5.7

Dl
D2

Loose
Close

Very slight effort - minimum recoil Normal effon-slight recoil up to 10 ems Considerable effort-Marked recoil over 10 ems

7.5 22.9

11.8 34.7

D3

Tight

43

IS 13407( Part 2 ) : 1995

ANNEX H (Foreword )
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 4
Chairman
SHRI T. K GUFTA

Repwmuing Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, New Delhi Bajaj Auto Limited, Pune Indian Statistical Institute, New Delhi Oil & Natural Gas Commission, Dehradun G. Management Services Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Straw Products Limited, New Delhi National Productivity Council, New Delhi Directorate General Factory Advice and General/L.&our Institute, Ministry of Labour, Bombay
Larsen & Toubm Limited, Bombay Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co Ltd, Dehradun

Members

SHRI N. C. AGRAWAL

SHR~ M. L. KATYAL (&ate ) SHRIS. C. CHAUUBORTY SHRI V.K. CHATURVEDI SHRI P. K. BAHL(Al@rmze ) BRIGM. L. GAKG,AVSM, KIRTICHAKU SHRIB. P. BAJPAVEE ( Alremare ) SHRI0. P. GOYAL SHR~KG. GOPALAIWSHNAN( Afremare) SHRI0. P. GLJ~TA SHRIB. P. DHAKA (Alremre ) SHRI S. C. GU~TA SHRIE. LAXMINARAYANA ( Altemare )
SHRI P. R. K~~HARI

SHRIA. A. KIJRLEKAR SHRIS. P. SARKAR (Alremate ) CDR D.D. LOOMBA
SHRtR.P.S.umZR DR J.M.MAHAUN

Naval Headquarters, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi Engineers India Limited, New Delhi Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi Indian Institution of Industrial Engineering, Bombay National Institute for Training in Industrial Engineering, Bombay The Associated Cement Companies Limited, Thane

SHRIA D. GLJ~~A ( Afremure ) DRTHOMASMATHEW` SHRI M. V. NARAYANAN ( Alremutc) PROF THOMAS MATHEW DRB.S. MOULIK SHRI V. J. AN-A BRIGLJ. S. NARLJLA (Altcmare )

Deputy Directorate General of Management Studies, Army Headquarters, New Delhi
Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, Calcutta

COL P. K C~~OPRA (AImtare )
SHRIS.PALlT

SHRIG. CHATTERII (AWnare ) SHWDAYAPRAKA~H SHR~ D. I. SHRIVA~~AVA (Alremre )
SHRlJ.K.PURl

Ordnance Factory Board, Calcutta The Institute of Cost and Works Accountants
College of Defence Management, of India, New Delhi

SHRID. C. BAJAJ (Akmure ) COL L. RAMRAKHIANI CDR I. MATHEW ( Akfnare ) SHRIE. R. BA-~L~~AU( Alrernme ) PROP R. K SACHDEVA SHRtM. P. SEtHY SHRIS. VENKATESAN (Almnare ) SHFU D. L. SHAFUA SHRIJ.S. SHARMA SHRI G. C. SOFAT (A&Yt#e ) SHRI R.C. SURI SHIUV. K DEVGAN ( Ahemate ) SHR~KM.THOMAS . ' SHKIS. C. AGNIHOTRI (Almute ) SHRI S.S. VENKATARAMANAN SHRI A. S.V~SWANATHAN SHRIs. s. JASWAL (Alremate ) SHRI D. S. AHLUWALIA. Director (MSD)
SHKlP.S.RAO

Ministry of Defencc, Secunderabad

Piece Electronics and Electricals Limited (Philips), Bombay Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi Institute of Secretariat Training and Management, New Delhi All India Management Association, New Delhi Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), NRH Delhi Defence Institute of Work Study, Mussoorle Ministry of Railways, Vadodara Venconvave Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Siemens Limited, Thane Director General, BIS {Er-officio Member) Mrmba-Secreq SHRIMATI RENUGUWA Assistant Director (MSD), BIS

Panel for `Techniques of Work Study (Part 2) : Work Measurement' (MSD 4/P-l) converter
SHRI S. S. JASWAL

Siemens Limited, Thane Bajaj Auto Limited, Aurangabad National Institute for Training in Industrial Engineenng, Bombay Larsen & Toubro Limited, Bombay 44

ME?l?lbers SHRIA V. BADAVE SHRIIC.M. MADRECHA SHRIP. H. SAKHALKAR

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau uflndiun Sfandards Acr, lY86 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary &tails, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Stnndards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also rcvicwcd periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are necdcd; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. MSD 4 (0064)

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affcctcd

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 0131,323 83 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17 323 48 41 1 37 84 99,37 85 61 37 86 26,37 9120 603843 { 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 1 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 5X 8327891,8327892

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

{

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

BOMBAY 400093

BANGALORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAI-IATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. -_
Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

