IS 13964 : 1994

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard

METHODS OF MEASUREMENTOF TRANSFORMER AND REACTOR SOUND LEVELS

UDC

621'314'21

+ 621'318'43'534'61

0

BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH 11ooO2 Price Group 6 ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW May 1994

DELHI

Transformers

Sectional

Committee,

ET 16

FOREWORD This Indian Standard wasadopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by by the Electrotechnical Division the Transformers Sectional Committee had been approved Council. In reporting the results of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. In the preparation of this `Measurement of transformer Commission. standard, assistance has been derived from IEC and reactor sound levels' issued by the International Pub 551 ( 1976 ) Electrotechnical

IS 13964 : 1994

Indian Standard

METHODS OF -MEASUREMENT OF TRANSFORMER AND REACTOR SOUND LEVELS
1 SCOPE
1.1 This standard defines the methods by which the sound levels of transformers, reactors and their associated cooling plant shall be measured in the manufacturer's works so that compliance with any specification requirements may be confirmed and the characteristics of the noise emitted in service determined.

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.1 For the purpose of this standard, ing -definitions shall apply. 3.2 Sound Pressure Level The reading given by a sound complying with IS 9779 : 1981.
3.3 Sound Power Level

the follow-

level

meter

1.2 This standard is intended to apply to measurements made in the manufacturer's works as, when measurements are made on site, conditions may be very different due to proximity of other objects, extraneous noises, etc. Nevertheless, the same general rules as given herein may be followed when site measurements aremade. 1.3 In those cases where sufficient power is available in the factory to permit full energisation of reactors, the methods to be followed are in same as for transformers. Such measurements shall be by agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser. Alternatively, measurements may be made on site where conditions are suitable. 1.4 The methods defined are applicable to transformers and reactors of all types covered by IS 2026 (Part 1 ) : 1977 and IS 5553 series respectively without further limitation as regards size or voltage and when fitted with their normal auxiliary equipment, in was much as it may influence the measurement result. 1.5 Although the following test refers only to transformers, it is equally applicable to reactors provided that it is recognised that current taken by a reactor is dependent on the voltage applied and, consequently, that a reactor cannot be tested at no-load. 1.6 This standard gives a basis of calculation of sound power level which permits comparison of transformers of different types and, with certain hypothetical assumptions, the evaluation of the probable sound level at a distance. In view of this for the purpose of measurement of noise level of transformers/reactors only sound pressure level shall be measured. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts to this standard:
IS' No. Title

The sound power level is equal to 10 logl#/F'u dB where P is the sound power, in watts, and POis the reference sound power of lo-la W. 3.4 Principal Radiating Surface A hypothetical surface surrounding the transformer or cooling equipment which is assumed to be the surface from which sound is radiated. the principal ( The method for determining radiating surface for particular equipment is given in 6.2 ).
3.5 Prescribed Contour

A horizontal line, spaced at a definite distance from the principal radiating surface, along which the measurement points are located. ( The method for determining the prescribed contour for particular equipment is given in 6.2 ). 3.6 Effective Surface A hypothetical surface on which measurements are assumed to have been made and which is used to calculate the sound power radiated by the equipment.
3,7 Background Noise

The noise picked up at the measuring points with the exclusion of that produced by the equipment the sound level of which is being measured. It includes the noise from all other apparatus necessary for the measurement process. 4 CONDITIONS FOR MEASUREMENT

4.1 Criteria for Adequacy of the Test Environment Ideally, the test environment should be free from reflecting objects other than a reflecting floor so that the equipment under test radiates into a free field over a reflecting plane. 1

1 ) : 1977 Power transformers : Part 1 General (Jirst revision ) 5553 series : Reactors 9779 : 1981 Sound level meters 2026 (Part

IS 13964: 1994

Test environments that are suitable for measurements according to this standard are those which ~meet the qualification procedures of Annex A. 4.2 Operating conditions of equipment during measurement for measurements made on the transformer with or without its auxiliary cooling plant, the transformer shall be on no-load and excited at rated voltage of sinusoidal or practically sinusoidal waveform and rated frequency with the tap-changer (if any ) on the principal tapping. The voltage shall be measured according to 8.5 of IS 2026 ( Part 1 ) : 1977. If the transformer is fitted with reactor-type onload tap-change equipment and the reactor may, on czrtain tap-change positions, be permanently energized, the measurements shall be made with the transformer on a tapping which involves this condition and as near as possible to the principal tapping. The excitation shall be appropriate to the tapping in use.
that where tap-changing is NOTE - It is assumed referred to in this subclause, the method of voltage variation will be such as to maintain constant flux in the core. f;or other methods of voltage variation, the tailping chosen and the excitation voltage shall be the subject of agreement between the manufacturer and th: purchaser.

If the background level is such that the difference, in dB(A), between the mean combined level of the equipment plus the background and the mean background alone is less than 9 dB(A) the corrections shown in Table 1 shall be applied. In such cases, the background level shall be determined at every measuring position where the total number of measuring positions is 10 or less and at not less than 10 positions reasonably evenly distributed round the equipment when the total number of measuring positions exceeds IO. If the difference is less than 3 dB(A) the test will not be accepted unless the combined level of the background and transformer or reactor noise is less than the guaranteed value. In such case, lower values For this difference will be accepted, but the test report shall record this condition and the determined value as the upper limit of the sound power level of the equipment. The height(s) of the microphone(s) during the background measurements shall be the same as for measurement of the noise from the equipment and the background measurements shall be taken at points on the prescribed contour(s). Table 1 Correction Factors for the Sound Level Measurements ( Cluus~ 6. I )
Difference, in dB(A) Between the Mean Combined Level of the Equipment Plus the Background and the Mean Back-Background 3 4-5 6-8 dB(A) to be Subtracted from the Mean Combined Level of the Equipment Plus the Background ( Factor Y) 3 2 1

4.3 Quantities to be Measured Transformer/reactor and background noise level shall be determined as a weighted surface sound pressure level LPA or correct mean sound level on the dB(A) weighting. To avoid measurement errors due to disturbing influences, the fast response iudication of the meter shall be used. 5 INSTRUMENTS Measurements shall be made using a sound level meter. The operating instructions given by the manufacturer of the sound level equipment should always be followed in order that the greatest degree of precision is achieved. In particular, instructions concerning the minimum proximity of the observer to the microphone, necessary to avoid errors arising from reflections, shall be met. An acoustic check of the measuring equipment using a calibrated noise source is to be made immediately before and after the measurement sequence. 6 MEASUREMENT METHODS

Although the difference between the background noise level and that resulting From the combination of the equipment and background levels may be small, every effort should be made to obtain a difference at least equal to 7~dB(A) and if possible, to 9 dB(A) but should it be necessary to apply the correction of 3 dB(A), the corrected level is to be indicated ( on the report ) in inverted commas. The mean levels ( equipment plus background or background alone ) shall be taken as the arithmetic average of all readings obtained on the equipment unless the difference between the extreme measured values is equal to or greater than 5 dB(A), when the quadratic mean value shall be used ( see 7.1 ) and Annex B. 6.2 Transformer/Reactor
Measurement Sound Pressure Level

6.1 Measurement of Sound Pressure Levels Background noise levels shall be measured immediately before and after the measurements on the equipment. If the background noise level is clearly very much lower than the combined level of the equipment and background [ difference not less than 9 dB(A) I, measurement of background noise need be made only at one of the measuring positions and no correction of the measured sound level of the equipment is necessary.

The following methods of equipment sound level measurement cover the different types of cooling employed depending on whether the radiators are less than or more than 3 m away from the principal radiating surface. They also permit the sound power level of the complete equipment and the sound level at a distance from the equipment to be calculated by the methods detailed in 7.3 and 7.4 respectively:

IS 13964 : 1994

a)

Transformers having no forced air coating auxiliaries or with forced air cooling au?ciliaries mounted on a separate structure spaced not ltss than 3 m away from the principal radiating surface of the main tank Measurements on the transformer only are to be made in accordance with this subclause; those on any forced air cooling auxiliaries in accordance with 6.2 (c) below. The principal radiating surface is the surface obtained by the vertical projection from the top of the transformer tank cover ( excluding bushings, turrets and other projections above the tank cover, see Fig. 1 ) to the base of the tank, of a string contour encircling the apparatus. The principal radiating surface shall include cooling equipment attached to the tank, tank stiffeners and such auxiliary equipment as cable boxes, tap-changer, etc. and exclude any forced air cooing auxiliaries. Projections such as bushings, oil pipework, oil conservators, tank underbase, valves and other secondary elements shall also be excluded. The prescribed contour shall be spaced 0'3 m away from the principal radiating surface as defined above. For transformers with a tank height less than 2'5 m the prescribed contour shall be on a horizontal plane at half the tank height. For Iransformers with a tank height equal to or greater than 2'5 m, two prescribed contours shall be used which are on horizontal planes at one-third and two-thirds of the tank height. Because of the distance between the prescribed contour and the forced air cooling auxiliaries, no account need be taken of the proximity of such auxiliaries when arranging the measuring positions. Any oil circulating pumps and forced air cooling equipment shall he out of service during the measurements on the transformer. The measuring positions shall be at approximately equally spaced intervals not more than 1 m apart with a minimum number of six (see Fig. 1 ).

The principal radiating surface is the surface obtained by the vertical projection from the top of the transformer tank cover ( excluding bushings, turrets and other projections above the tank cover, see Fig. 1 ) to the base of the tank, of a string contour The principal encircling the apparatus. radiating surface shall include the fcrced air cooling auxiliaries, tank stiffeners and such auxiliary equipment as cable boxes, tap-changer, etc. Projections such as bushings, oil pipework, oil conservators, tank or cooler underbases, valves, control cubicles and other secondary elements, shall be excluded. For the purpose of measurements (I) the prescribed contour shall be sraced 0'3 m away from the principal radiating surface. For the purpose of measurements (2) the prescribed contour shall be spaced 2 m away from the principal radiating surface. For transformers with a tank height less than 2'5 m the prescribed contour shall be on a horizontal plane at half the tank height. For transformers with a tank height equal to or greater than 2'5 m, two prescribed contours shall be used which are on horizontal planes at one-third and twothirds of thd tank height. The measurement positions approximately equally spaced more than 1 m apart, with number of 10 ( see Fig. 2 ). shall be at intervals not a minimum

NOTE -Where the transformer is designed and intended for enclosure and the cooler, external to the enclosure; is spaced less than 3 m away from the transformer, then the procedure given in 6.2 (a) and 6.2 (c) shall be followed. c) Force air cooling auxiliaries or water cooling

equipment mounted on a separate structure spaced not less than 3 m away from the principal radiating surface of the transformer/ reactor These measurements are in addition to those made on the main equipment. They shall be made with the transformer unenergised and with all forced air cooling equipment and oil circulating pumps in operation. The measurements shall be regarded as additional requirements, unless otherwise specified, since it is often not the practice to erect separate cooling equipment except when temperature-rise tests are being made on the main equipment.

b) Transformers having forced air cooling auxiliaries either mounted directly on the tank or on a separate structure spaced less than 3 m awav from the principal -radiating surface of the main tank Two sets of measurements shall be made, both with the transformer energized:

1) with
any and

the forced air cooling -equipment and oil circulating pumps out of service; and

2) with

the forced air cooling equipment any oil circulating pumps in service.

The principal radiating surface is the surface obtained by the vertical projection from the top of the cooler structure to the base of the active parts ( see Fig. 3 ) of a string contour encircling the apparatus but framework, ~excluding oil conservators, pipework, valves and other secondary elements. The prescribed contour shall be 3

IS `13964: 1994 spaced 2 m %w$$y from\% (`the, $rincip;l radiating surface `as : defined ,above. cooler structures with an ,overall' height less thati 4 m ( edcluding oil conservators, pipework, etc ) the prescribed contour shall be on a horizontal plane at half the height. For cooler Structures with an overal" height ( excluding oil conservators; pipework, etc ) equal to or'greater than 4 tn;two prescribed contours $hall' be used which are on horizontal planes at one-third an'd twothirds of the height. The ~measuritig positions shall be at approximately equally spaced interval3 not &ore than 1 m apart, with a minimum number of I'0 (see Fig. 3 ). , d) For dry type transformers and reactors It is under consideration. i AND IN&RPR&TIBN :: x `I )8 at 0'3 m awayfrsh the prhic@al radiating surface. The area S of the effective surface, expressed in sqtiare metrcs, is calculated by `the formula: " `S 2'1'25 hpm . .. (2) ,wher;e 1 h ' = hkight of thk transformer tank, and &, 4 le,h-gth"of the prescri!ed contour. > l-25 is an empirical facbor intended:to take account of the sound energy radiated by the upper part of the transformer or coolers:~

" -. 1 ' '
1

7 CALCULATtONS OF RESULTS' 7.1 C&ulations

I/ 1 , of Corrected Mean Sound Level

A m-an value &,(A) shall be calculated .from the measured values of the A-weignted sound level &(A) by using the following equation: :! i where -b(A) quadratic mean sound,level A ( that is. A-weighted surface sound level ) in decibels-Reference 20 PPa; A-weighted surement, 20 PPa;. = total number = correction = correction according sound .level from ith meain decibles -`Reference , , of measurements; constant; level for microphone /

' * `,b) tieasuremeits on transformers efiergized w&h forced a$ cpoling auxiliaries also energisefi, as indicated in 6.2 (b) (2) also on forced air cooling .auxiliaries mounted sepa,rately :from the transformer, as indicated \n 6.2 (c) pade at 2 m away from the principal ;@iating s,u,rface. The area S of the effectlve surface, expressed in square metres, is calculated by the formula: !3 s = -47;-P"" ..(3)
I ,

' where F', -T' I:n$`th of the prescribed contour 3/4n is an empirical f::ctor derived from the equivalent hemisphere of the coolers plus the transformer, takil:g account of the combined sound energy radiated. oi A-Weighted Sound Power level sound

`7.3 Calculation Level

&I(A)=

N X Y Z

To derive the A-weighted sound power Lw( A) fi.orn the measured equipment level, the following formula is used: , `Lw(,,) where ' Lw(`.)
LP(A)

= Lp( A) = 10 log 10 s I =
=

. ..( 4 )

for background to 6.1; and

= environmental correction to account for the influence of reflected sound. ranges reverof this of the

weighted decibels,

sound power level, in with respect to lO_`"W; of measured surface square

The environmental correction Z typically from 0 dB, to more than 10 dB in highly berant rooms. However, for the purpose standard, the maximum allowable value environmental correction Z is 7 dB. The procedures of Annex

mean level, in dB (") sound levels; and

.'

s

= area of the effective ( see 7.2 ) expressed in metres.

A. are used to calculate
correction Z.

the value

of the environmental

7.4 Calculation the Equipment

of Sound Level at a Distance `

from

NOTE - When the range of values of Lpi(R) does not exceed 5 dB a simple arithmetic average may be used as an acceptable approximation to the quadrati.c mean. This average will not dilTer by mbre than 0'7 dB from the value calculated using equation (I).

7.2 Calculation

of the Area of the EffectivesSurface

4 Measurements

on transformers energized and forced air cooled auxiliaries ,unenergised, as indicated in 6.2 (a) and (b) (I), made 4

If the sound radiation of the equipment is assumed to be uniform in all directions, the equipment can. be represented as a source of spherical waves as fiar as its distant sound level is concerned. With this assumption, the weighted sound power level of. the equipment may * be calculated from the measure'd equipment sound level ( see 6.2 ) and from this: a) the sound derived; level at 4 1 a distance may be

IS 13964 :1994

b) comparisons

may be made between equipment of similar electrical characteristics but of different design or construction. The sound level LR at a distance R (R> about 30 m ) from the geometrical centre of the equipment is calculated from:
10 lOplo Sh `- (5)

ducted with the transformer energised and any forced air cooling auxiliaries unenergised, as indicated in 6.2 (a) and 6.2 (b) (1).

S is calculated from equation (2) ( 7.2 a ) and Lp( A ) is the mean value of all dB( A )
sound level measurements these conditions. made under

LR = by

where LR = sound level in dBt A ) and
S,, = 2nR2 = area of the surface hemisphere of radius R m. of a

b) If the sound level measurements

If there are two sources of sound power such as a transformer and its separate cooling auxiliaries, the individual weighted sound power level of using such source should first be derived equation ( 4 ). Equation ( 5 ) can then be applied to find the sound level of each source ( considered independently ) at the distant point under consideration and the two sound levels combined as shown in Annex B. 7.5 Application of the Calculation of Sound Level at a Distance to Specific Arrangements

are conducted with the transformer energised and any forced air cooling auxiliaries also energised, as indicated in 6.2 (b) (2) or on the forced cooling auxiliaries alone when these are mounted at a distance greater than 3 m away from the transformer, as defined in 6.2(c), S is calculated from equation (3) ( 7.2 b ) and &(A) is the mean value of all dB(4) sound level measurements made under these conditions. To determine the combined sound level of a ~transformer ~measured in accordance with 6.2 (a) and its forced air cooling auxiliaries measured in accordance with 6.2 (c) the method indicated in 7.4 for two sound sources shall be followed.

4

a) If the sound level
STIFFENERS JACKING _-me. . -. .
ILKIIAKY

measurements

are

con-

LUG

AND _&__-+i!`Jd-

- &(;;$;DUiING

A

TRANSFORhiZR

TANK

L.V.

BUSHINGS

-PRINCIPAL RADIATING SURFACE

VIEW NOTE -

c
FIG.

VIEW

A

VIEW

B

D = Not to exceed 1 m.
ON 1 TYPICAL MICROPHONEPOSITIONS FOR Norse MEASUREMENT

TRANSFORMERS EXCLUDING COOLING EQUIPMENT 5

IS 13964:1994

II II Ii II!1
TRANSFORMER

TURRET

\

L

VERTICAL

FORCED

AIR

NOTES 1 Distance x is 0'3 m or 2 m, see 6.2 (b). 2 D Not to exceed1 m.

FIG. 2 TYPICAL MICROPHONEPOSITIONS FOR NOISE MEASUREMENT ON TRANSFORMERS HAVING FORCED AIR COOLING AUXILIARIESEITHER MOU~~TEDDIRECTLY ON THE TANK OR ON A SEPARATE STRUCTURESPACEDLESS THAN 3 m AWAY FROM THE PRINCIPAL RADIATING SURFACEOF THE~TRANSFORMER TANK

PRINCIPAL
RA.DIATING

SURFACE

_

_

PRESCRIBED CONTOUR

HORIZONTAL FORCED ' AIR

NOTE -D=Nottoexceedlm. FIG. 3 TYPICAL MICKOPHONB POSITIONS FOR NOISE MEASUREMENT ON FORCED AIR COOLING AUXILIARIESMOUNTED ON A SEPARATESTRUCT~JRE SPACED NOT LESS THAN 3 m AWAY FROM THB PRINCIPALRADIATING SURFACEOF THE TRANSIORMERTANK

6

IS 13964 : 1994 8 PRESENTATION OF RESULTS

h) The mean values of sound level for the
following operating conditions: 1) transformer fully equipped with its auxiliaries out of service 2) transformer fully equipped with its auxiliaries in service 3) cooling equipment in service with transformer energised.

The report shall include such of the following information as is applicable to the equipment of which the sound level has been measured:

a) Reference to the measurement specification. W A description of the transformer giving

rated power, voltage and voltage ratio, connections, etc. 4 The name of the transformer maker and the place of manufacture. 4 Details of instrument and method of verification of its acoustical calibration. This information shall include the serial numbers of the instrument, of the microphones and of the calibration source. 4 A dimensioned sketch showine the position of the transformer with res&ct to other objects in the measurement area and the measuring positions. f 1 The results of the sound level measurements at each measuring point, 8) The results of background level measurements and the relevant points of measurements.

3 The mean values of background

measurement for (l), (2) or (3) above corrected for background, microphone constant and environmental conditions. for the for the

k) The area of

the effective surface measurements at 0'3 m away from principal radiating surface. The area of the effective surface measurements at 2 m away from principal radiating surface.

n) The A-weighted sound power level(s) for the operating conditions (h) (l), (h) (2) and (h) (3) above.
NOTE - A typical form for presentation given in Annex C. of results is

ANNEX
TEST ENVIRONMENT A-I GENERAL An environment providing an approximately free field over a reflecting plane shall be used for measurements made according to this standard. The environment may be provided in an ordinary test room if the requirements given in this Annex are satisfied. Reflecting objects should be removed maximum extent possible from the vicinity equipment under test with the exception reflecting plane. A test room should provide prescribed contours which lie: to the of the of the ideally

A

( Clauses 4.1 and 7.1 )
QUALIFICATION PROCEDURE

NOTE - When the reflecting surface is not a ground plane or the floor of the test room, care shall be taken to ensure that the reflecting surface does not radiate any appreciable sound energy due to vibrations.

A-2.1 .l Shape and Size The reflecting surface shall be larger than the area enclosed by the projection of the prescribed contour on the plane. A-2.1.2 Sound Absorption Coe$Fcient The sound absorption coefficient of the plane shall be less than 0'1 over the frequency range of interest. Wooden and tile floors are permitted. A-2.2 Reflecting Objects No reflecting objects that are not part of the source under test shall be located inside the projection of the prescribed contour. A-3 QUALIFI-CATION PROCEDURE AN REQUIREMENTS FOR TEST ROOMS A-3.1 Test Procedures The environmental correction Z in equation ( 1 ) of 7.1 accounts for the influence of undesired sound reflections from room boundaries and/or reflecting objects near the source under test. The magnitude of this environmental correction 2 depends principally on the ratio of the sound 7

by reflections from nearby objects and the room boundaries, and b> outside the near field of the sound source under test. For the purposes of this standard, the prescribed contour is considered to lie outside the near field if the measurement distance from the source under test is equal to or greater than 0'3 m. A-2 ENVIRONMENTAL A-2.1 Properties CONDITIONS

4 inside a sound field essentially undisturbed

of Reflecting Plane plane is

For indoor measurements, the reflecting usually the-floor of the room.

IS 13964 : 1994

absorption of the test room A to the area of the effective surface S. The magnitude does not depend much on the location of the source in the test room. In this standard, the environmental correction 2 is obtained from Fig. 4 by entering the abscissa with the appropriate value of A/S. The area S of the effective surface is calculated from equation ( 2 ) or ( 3 ) given in 7.2. Two alternative methods are given to determine the total sound absorption A of the test room. A-3.1.1 Estimate of the Sound Absorption A The mean sound absorption coefficient of the surfaces of the test Toom ( walls, floor and ceiling ) is estimated by using Table 2. The value of A is then calculated from: . .. A = aSv (IA) where sv = area of the surface of the test room, in square metres; and a = mean sound absorption coefficient ( see Table 2 ). A-3.1.2 Experimental Absorption A Determination of the Sound

A-4 QUALIFICATION TEST ROOMS For the effective -satisfactory for requirements of shall be equal to

REQUIREMENTS

FOR

surface in a test room to be measurements according to the this standard in ratio A to S or greater than 1, that is $21

If the above requirement cannot be satisfied, the ratio A/S may be increased by introducing additional sound absorbing materials into the test room and then redetermining the value of the ratio A/S under these new conditions. If the requirements of this clause cannot be satisfied for any effective surface which lies outside the near field of the source under test, the particular environment cannot be used for measurements on the source under test according to the requirements of this standard.
Table 2 Approximate Values of the Mean Sound Absorption Coefficient of a Room ( Clause A-3.1.1 )
Mean Sound Absorption Coefficient 0'05 Description

of the Room

The sound absorption A may be determined by measuring the reverberation time of the test room, excited by broad-band noise, with A-weighting on the receiving system. The value of A is then: A = 0'16 + . . . (2.4)

0'1 0'15
0'2 0.25

where V = volume of test room, in cubic metres; and T = reverberation time of test room, in seconds.
Z=lO

Nearly empty rooms with smooth hard walls made of concrete, brick, plaster or tile Partly empty rooms, rooms with smooth walls Rectangular machinery rooms, rectangular industrial rooms Irregularly shaped machinery rooms or industrial rooms Machinery or industrial rooms with a small amount of acoustical material on ceiling or walls ( for example, partially absorbent ceiling 1 47

log
10

1+[
(

$)

1

10
9

8 7 6
Z(dB) 5 4 3 2

1 0'

FIG.

4

ENVIRONMENTAL CORRECTION FACTOR 2, 8

IN DECIBELS

ANNEX B ( Clauses 6.1 and 7.4 )
CALCU&ATlQN Given two sound defined as: levels La and Lb, La being OF QUADRATIC larger than or MEAN to Lb, the equa;

IS a3964 : 1994

quantity

Cca, b) is

L(ab) = IO log10( loO'lLa+ 10�" L ) .. . (1B) The curve below shows the evaluations of the quantity: AL = L(a b) La as a function of the difference of La and Lb. It permits the rapid evaluation of L(a, b) from Is and &,. &a. b) = La +
AL

. . .

(2B)

where AL
X

= 10 log IO ( 1 + 1OO.l x )
=

Lb -La

3

1

L

0

1

2

3

4

5'6

7

8

9

101112

La+=+ (d
FIG. 5 CALCULATION OF QLJADRATIC MEAN

In order following
LC1,2) = L(1,2,3) =

to determine the quadratic mean quantities are `successively calculated
10 loglo (IOO" 10 loglo [IOO" G + 103" 4) + L(,,,)

LI)cA)of n sound using the, curve:

levels Lpi(n) as referred

to in 6.1, the

100'l L,]
n-l
=

u1,2,3 . . .n) =

10 log10 [IO@ I&,,$)
LPh)

+

lO"l 411 . . . 14 -10 * log10 n 9 ., (3B)

From

this, the quardratic

mean is de&mined:
L(1,2,8

IS 13964

: 1994

ANNEX C [ Clause 8 ( Note ) ]
RECORD OF SOUND LEVEL MEASUREMENT

Contract

number

and

site Place of measurement Measurement MVA instrument: Type Serial No. Microphone serial NO.
.________~

Manufacturer Place of manufacture Details of transformer: Serial No. Tapping range Details of measuring Make Microphone Calibration type data of instrument

Date of measurement specification _ Connections

Voltage

radio

and microphone

Test conditions: Excitation
Background Plan position

voltage
noise levels

_ Frequency

Hz

Tap position

_..__
-

Sound level meter reading:

de(A)

I -----

At start of measurements At conclusion
of measurements Mean (arithmetic/quadratic)

Measured

sound

levels:

i) Transformer without coolers ii) Transformer with coolers iii) Coolers without transformer
Y-

1 k Delete as appropriate J
dB(A) Plan position

-- _dBiA)

Plan position

dB(A)

Plan position 13 14 13 IC 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

WA) --

Plan position 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 3L 33 34 35 ------SF---

_ - .___
-.___ -__ -___

---.-

$3 44 45 46 47 ----x-Total ---___

8 9

I I

IO
II

1.L

I I----

.

- .

-

Mean of sound level meter readings (aritmetic/quadratic): Correction Correction Environmental for microphone for background correction constant level (if any) (X) = (Y) = (Z) = Total correction Mean sound Area of effective surface: a) for measurements b) for measurements A-weighted
Note -

I

I

I -.~---

X + Y -I Z = with note)

level (rounded

in accordance radiating surface surface

I-___ /
m2 m2 whole

as 0'3 m away from the principal

sound

at 2 m away from the principal dB power level

radiating

number,

The mean sound level and decimal values of 0'5 dB-and

sound power level above being rounded 10

should be rounded to the nearest to the next higher whole number.

IS 13964:1994

Plan of transformer, indicating measurement positions with respect to the H.V. bushings proximity of nearby sound reflecting surfaces, e.g. equipment, walls, etc, and positions of background noise level measurement.

metres. and Height of microphone(s) above ground Remarks, additional results, etc (including details of any significantly high sound levels at positions other than the measurement positions):

Persons present during sound level measurements:

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau -of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote of goods harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all Its publicattons. the free use, in the any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade course of implementing the standard, Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BTS. designations. Revision of Indian Standards periodically of Indian and revised, -when necessary Standards should ascertain and amendments, if any, are that they are in possession of

Indian Standards are reviewed issued from time to time. Users the latest amendments or edition. This Indian Standard

has been developed

from Dot : No.

ETD

16 ( 3488 1

Amendments Amend No.

issued Since Date of lssue

Publication Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavaa, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31. 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Ceritral

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

331 01 31 1 331 13 75 Maniktola s 37 84 99, I 37 86 26, 53 38 43, i 53 23 84 235 02 16, { 235 15 19, 632 92 95, 1 632 78 91, 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Eastern

: l/14 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M. V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446. Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol, MADRAS Andheri

Northern Southern Western

160036 600113

: C. I. T. Campus,

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

( East )

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COIMBATORE. JAIPUR. KANPUR.

Prmted at Printrade. New Delhi, India

