( Reaffirmed 1999 )

Is: 4110-1967

IindianStandard
GZ'OSSARY OF TERMS USED IN HIGH VACUUM TECHNOLOGY
Chemical Engineering Sictional Committee, EDC 57
&than DR A. NA~ARAJARAO *esenling Planning Cdmmhsion

ddanbws Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Bombay SHRrJ. D. AD&A Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR), Hydmtiad DR AS~~AR HLXWN SHRI K. S~~~A~IWWUL~ (Al&mute ) Indian Institute of Chemical Engineers, Calcutta SHIUJ. M. AYAN DoYr DR D. C. T&ADAR ( Alt~&a) Associated Cement Companies Ltd, ,flombay SHRI H. N. BAWERJEA DR V. C. THAICAR ( Altcmatc) bansons Privite Ltd, Bombay SRRI N. N. BANERJEE DR R. KRWSNASWAMYJ ( Al+yma& i mperi~lri~tiemical Industrics ( India) Private Lt& SHRI S. D. &LMIN
SHRI P. K.

SARI P. K.

BHATTA~ELARYA

CHAKRAVAR~

Sxiru K..S. CHARI

(AZ&ma&) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals (Miniatry of Supplyz Technical Development 8 Mate@+ PJquuag) Centralralesp & Engmeering Unit ( CSIR `1. New

Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Bombay SHRZG. &DD SARI A. K&PATRICK ( Al&ma& ) Chemida ( India), Bombay SHRI FRANIXS RAYMOND CRUZ SHRIT. K. RAO ( Altmufe ) Dire&orate General of Ordnance Factories ( Ministry SK-W $. C. DASGUPTA of Defence ), Calcutta SHRI C. S. GO~TRISHANK+.RAN Esso Stan&d Refining Co of India Ltd, Bombay SHRI 6%%% S&x \i. H. PANDYA (Alternate) The Fertilizer Corporatiti of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI R. S. KACHWAHA SHRl H. H: JETH~ANDANI ( Albnra& ) Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay PROP N. R. Kr;srA'lXI SHRI K. A. NAIX ( Althnate ) SHRI J. P. KAF-UK Indii `Chemical Manu&ictureral'Awciation, Calcutt8 DR R. K. GUPTA ( Ahwtc ) DR 0. P. -~RBANDA Lamen & ToubFo Ltd, Bombay SHRID. L. PRADWAN (A&nuts ) DR M.' C. KRISHNA Indian Institute of Pct&letim ( C?R 1, Del16 Dun DR J. S. AHLUWALIA (~lfanab) I cbn(kwd

oaju&r2.)

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
MAR0

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW IkLHI llOiJO2

M&rs PROFN. R. K~LOOR DR D. S. V&ANATH ( Alcn~te SHRXB. B. Mxrsiuu SXRXK. C MO~XAN SHRIJ. P. M-jre

Reprem tin,?

Indian

INtitUtC

of Science, Bangalcre

)
The Delhi Cloth & General Millr Co Ltd, Delhi Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi Waichandun~ Industries Ltd, Walchandnagar, District Poona

Dn R. S. DCBEY ( .4l@rnute) National C&mica1 Laboratory ( CSIR j, Poona DR M. U. PAI S~lu R. V. K-ARM ( Afternata ) Tata Chcmicais Ltd, Mithapur Siim R. PRAS~UUR Sang A. P. NARAYANAN ( &nab) Indian Institute of Technologv, Kharagpur DR M. N. RAO Thi K.C.P. Ltd,,Madras SHIU v. M. P%Ao S,iiiu K. SATYNGARAYANA ( Altarnate) Indian Refineries Ltd, New Delhi SR~UT.L.SNGKARAN Indo-Berolina Industries Private Ltd, Bombay Smu M. T. SHAH sxlu P. V. S. NAXBOOTHlRIPM
SliRlP(~~~

J. B. &LIIC (Ahmate SHRE s. P. Suwzi &I

Burmah-Shell
j

Retineries Ltd, Bombay

Directorate General of Technical Devebrpment, Department of Technical Development ( Ministry of Supply, Technical Development & Materials Planning ) The A.P.V. Engineering Oil ~A~;io&l * * Co Private Ltd, Calcutta Institute, Anantpur

!&RI P. K. Saw ( .4f&rtt~fe) SXIU N. TFZANDAVM Sruu : C.B$z&;tit# ) stu?+l s. d Siw B. A. R. !bMAYAJVLU Sum M. V. PAT~KAR, Directoc( Mccb Ehgg)
(

Research

.41tern&)

`Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&cio Member)

Secw~ SHIUM. G. KRISHNA RAO Deputy Directur ( Me& Engg ), ISI Standards Subcommittee, EDC 57.: 1

Basic Chemical PROP N. R. K-R

Engineering

Indian Institute

of Science, Bangalore

M#mbsra &RI J. M, AYAN Durr DRD.C.TAPADAR (Akmafe)

Indian Institute of' Chemical Engineers, Calcutta Association, Calcutta

pn H. E. EDuLp

Indian Chcmic?i Manufacturers' !&RX SUBOD~KUVAR MUXHZRJEE

rouJh.`kut SHinrP.C.SlurcarA(A~) auB.B.MATxuR Lat K=,C. Mow

HPIdX_I

- BurmabSh4 National
2

Chemical

Laboratory ( CSIR ), POOM Refineries Ltd, Bombay

The D&i cloth t General Mills Ltd, D&i Hidustan St4 Limited, Ranchi

fS t 4110 - 1967
CONTENT'S PAGE 0, FOREWORI~ .-. 1. SCOPE . .. .. . ..~ ... . .. . .. . .. ... .. . ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 5

2. DEFINITIONS
SECTION

5
5 13 15 24 30 36 41 43 44 45

1

GENERAL TERMS VACUUM OPERATIONS

. ..
.. . .*. ...

...
.. . . .. . ..

SECTION 2 SECTION3 SEOTION 4 SECTION 5 SECTIO+6 APPENDIXA APPENDIXB TABLE 1 INDEX

PUMPSAND ASSOCIATED TERW MANOMETERS AND GAUGES

VACUUMSYSTEMS AND THEIR COMPONENTS ( OTHER THAN PUMPSAND GAUGES) ... .. . LEAK DETECTION . .. ... ... ..* .. . ... ... . .. ...

SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS! UNITS OF PRESSURE .. .

CONVIZRSION TABLE OF CERTAINPPRWJREUNITS ... . .. . .. . ..

3

wr4110-1967

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY. OF TERMS USED IN HIGH VACUUM ,TEC.HNOiOGY
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This-Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution `on 24 April 1967, after `the draft finalized by the.Chemical Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 0.2 This glossary has been prepared for the guidance of the workers, in the. rapidly growing field of vacuum technology, to assist them in the correct interpretation ofthe comnion termsused in this field. 0.2.1 This glossary contains terms'of general application without regard to the use `or purpose of the vacuum system. A separate standard is'being prepared which will include terms relating to particular vacuum applications. 0.3 There are many cases in this glossary where more than, one term has been used in respect of a particular definition.. Where an alternate' term has been given, it appears `in italics and the preferred term continues to to be in bold type. 0.4 This standard has been divided into six sections as given below:. Section Section Section Section Section Section 1 General terms 2 Vacuum operations 3. Pumps and. associated terms 4 Gaugesand manometers 5 Vacuum systems and their components 6 Leak detection

0.4.1' Bach term has been assigned to it a three digit number. The first digit represents the number of the Section and the last two digits renresent the serial number of the definition. 6.5 Symbols and abbreviations used in the standard are listed in Appendix A. Appendix B gives the relationship between the units of pressure recommended in this standard and certain other commonly used units of pressure. To facilitate easy reference an .alphabetical index is included at the end. 0.6 This glossary is based on Dot: 66123500 "Draft British Standard glossary of terms used in vacuum technology, rbision` of B.S. 2951 : 1958 Part I : Terms of general application ' issued by the British Standards Institution. 4

IS,4110-1967

1. s;COPE
1.1 This glossary coven definition of terms commonly vacuum technology. SECTION VACWJh4 101. Vacuum I -GENERAL used ia the tie&i of

TERMS OF VACUUM

AND RANGES

The ranges of pressure below atmospheric pressure.
NOTE-The points of change in ths ranges of vacuum in 102 to 105 arc not the sank iIt the two units 19 ~rcssure, since il is snore important that they iw: indicated by conwnient round numbers.

102. Rough Vacuum 103. Mediunn Vacuum 104. High vacuum 105. UltraXigEi Vacuum PRESSURE 106. Pressure
ary Surfml? ) Totid Pressure

760 to I torr 1 to 10-3 torr lo-* to 10-s torr Below 10-O torr .( SYMBOL

lo" to 10s N/ms
lO* to 10-l N jms

10-l to 10-s Sjm* Below 1W6 Njm*

: p )

( on a Bound-

The hormal component of tte force cxerted by a gas on an area of 3 real surface* clivided b that area (the orientation ;! of the sur.ace relative to the mass flow vector being specified if there is a net mass fiow of gas ) .

107. Pressure ( at ~1Specifi- The rate of transfer of the normal component of momentum, osrociated with cd Position in a Car ) the passage of molecules in both dire+ Total Pressure tions, throu h a .smail arti of a otnt c specified position, dikdcd located at t % by that area (the ortentation of the lane relative to the mass ibw vectot g eing specified if there is a net mass flow ofgas). Ncnx I- The tcnn ' pr~.urc: ' when used alone rcks to the pre~urc in a gas at roIt or the static ~WISUW in a tp tlutving ~ciu Stcady~rtatr ccx:c!itim~.
5

NOTE 2 -The term ` total pressure' is often used to d&note the sum of all the partial pressures of the constituents of a gas mixture in contexts where the shorter term ` prepsure ' might not clearly distinguish between the individual partial pressures and their sum. 108. .Par&l

Pressure ( of a Molecular Species )

SpeciSed

The pressure due to the specified molecular species among those exerting force on the real surface ( see 106 ) or crossing the plane ( see 107 ! *The pressure with respect to a `stationary s&face tangential -to the mass-flow velocity vector; or the pressure with respect to ,a surface translated with a velocity equal to and parallel to the mass-flow velocity. The pressure with respect to an imaginary stationary surface whose positive normal is parallel to the mass-flow velocity vector. The difference between dynamic pressure and static pressure.

109. Static Press&

110. Dynamic

Pressure

Kinetic Pressure III.
Velocity pressure

Vdocity Head UNITS
112. Newton

OF PRESSURE

( see also APPENDIX

B )

per Square Metre Unit symbol : N/m*.

The unit of pressure. of the International System ( SI )* derived from the SI unit of force, the newton, that is that force which when applied to a body having a mass of one kilogramme, gives j t an acceleration of 1 m/9. The ' unit of pressure defined following exact relationships: by the

113. Torr

760 torr = 1 standard atmosphere (atm) = 101 325 N/m2 = 1 013 250 dynjcm2
l h : IS 3616.1966

Recommcndationa on the InternationalSptem ( SI ) unita. 6

IS : 4110 - 1967 MOLECULAR 314. DENSITY

MoItcul~r Density ( at a *c&d Position in a Gns)

The instantaneous

value of the number of molecules present in a small volume at the speciikd position, divided by that volume.

115. Partial Molecular Dtasjty t of a Spec&d Molecular Specien, at a Specified Pouition
ioRC&S)

The instantaneous value of the numb& of molecules of the specitied species present in a small volume at the specified position divided by that volume.

C;A!%OUS 116. Gao

STATE

Matter in which the moleculw are virtually unrestricted by intermolecular forces so that they are. free to occupy any space within an enclosure.
NOTE - Unks the context requires othcrwise, in thia gbsary the word ` gas' inch&r non-condensable gas and \.apours.

117. Ptrftct

Gas

A

gas

which

obeys

kyle's

law

and

J&e Gus
118. Noa-condensablt Gas
A

Charles' law.
gas which cannot be liquefied by increase of pressure alone, that is, one whose temperature is above its critical temperature.

119. Vapowr

A gas which can be condensed to the liquid state .x to the solid state by increase of pressure. alone, that is, one whose temperature is below its critical temperature. A vapou which is in equilibrium solid or liquid phase. with it

120. SarPrwtd Vapour 121. Saturation V-tar PrtrjNWe Vaponr

The pressure exerted by a vapour whr in quilibrium with its solid or liqr PhA vapour which exerts a pryure than ita saturation vapour prtmrc. 7

122. WnsaturamI

rsr4110- 1967 123. Suptrsaturated'Vapour 124. Degree of Satyation
A vapour

which exerts a pressure greater than its saturation vapour pressure.

The ratio of the pressure exerted by. a vapour to its saturation vapour pressure. PHENOMENA IN GASES

TRANSPORT 125. Mean Free Particle ) 126. DUbsion

Path ( of a

The average distance which a particle in a gas travels between successive collisions with other particles. A phenomenon .in the course of which adjacent layers of a substance tend towards uniformity of concentra'tion.

127. Di&sion Di&itity

Coe&Ecient

The coefficient relating diffusion flow `to the concentration gradient of the diffusing substance in accordance with the relationship:

Symbol:

D

3=
where

-DG

8z

3

is the quantity of the diffusing substance passing per unit time through a small area of a plane perpendicular to the direction of flow divided by that area ( unit: quantity of substance per square metie ), D is the difikiti coef%ent ( unit: ms/s ), c is the concentration of the substance ( unit: diffusing quantity of substance per cubic metre ), and x is measured in the direction of flow ( unit: m ).

tity of sutitance

unita are apecifiqd for the quanin this definition since a number of units may be used provided 3 and c xrerxpressed in the same unit. Ckann, moles, numbex%of molecules and prusure-volume units are typiiral of those which may be used.

NOTE1 -No

8

16 : 4110 - 1967 the relatkwhip NOTL 2 i- Alternatively, be cxprcmed indqcnddining D may dently of any co-ordinate ryrtem: Dgradc J-here J and grad Garc -&e vectora deSn+g !he dcwkdwzoncentrat gradient of the d&lung 128. Molecular Eftksion . The passage of gas through an opening in a thin lamina under conditions such that the largest dimension of the opening is smaller than the mean fi.ee path. The passage of a gas through a tube under conditions such that the largest internal dimension of a transverse section of the tube is smaller than the mean fke path. The passage of a gas through a pipe 01 system under conditions such that the mean free path is very small in comparison with the smallest internal dimension of a transverse section of the pipe or system, the Bow being therefore de endenr on the viscosity of the gas. flow may be laminar or ( Y&e turbulent. ) The particular case of laminar viscous flow through a long pipe of circular section. The flow of gas through a pipe or system under conditions intermediate between laminar viscous fiow and molecular flow. The passage of gas, under molecular flow conditions, through a connection batween two kssels due to a difference in the temperatures of the vessels which results in a pressure gradient when gas transfer equilibrium is reached. OF GASES The pressure of a gas at a specified tcmperature in a given volume multiplied by that volume.

129. Molecular Flow

130. Vi8coas

Flow

131. Poiseuille 132. Knllataen

FIow Flow

133, Thermal Transpiratiqn

FLOW 134. Q~urntity of Gas ( in Pressure-Volume units ) Symbol : jv Unit: torr litre* or newton, metre (Nm)

*The litte for the purposa nf this standard is exactly qua1 to one cubic decimctre.
9

IS : 4110 - 1967 135. Molewl8r Flow of lIzEulz= The algebraic sum of the numbers of gas inolecules crossing a specified surface in an inter&l of time divided by that ti&e. ( II&W hwing a V&city CPtbfronent in the S&me directioh as the ndlnal to the stiace at the point of crossing are counted as positive and those having a velocity component in the ppposite direction are counted as negative. ) The quantity of gas ( in presswe-volume units.1 at a specified temperature flowing in unit time across a specified open cross-section.
NOTE -The throughput is sometimes onl! concerned with one of the constituents of a gas and in that cast the relevant pressure is the partial pressure of that constituent.

136, Throughput Symbol: Q

,Unit : torr litre per second or newton metre per second
(N m/s>

137. Mass

Throughput Unit : gram per second

The mass of gas flowing in a unit time across a specified open cross-section.

(f&J

138. Volumetric Put

Through.I,

The volume of gas, at specified temperature and pressure, flowing in unit time across a specified open cross-section.

Unit : litre per second

139. Conductance

Symbol:

U

Unit : Iitre per second (I/s)

Measured between two specified crosssections, is the ratio of the throughput Q of gas under steady-state conditions to the difference in measured pressures, P, and P,, at the two specified crosssections.

10

IS 84110- 1967 140. Intrinsic Conductance
(ofa Duct)

I'he cond.uctance measuredwhen the duct is placed between two vessels, large compared with the entrance and exit of the duct, one of which is connected to a supply of gas and the other to a pump so as to" establish a pressure. difference between. the ,two_ *vessels. The intrinsic conductance u ihe throughput ( under steady-state conscrv&e conditmns ) divided by rhe dilferencc in pressure between the vessels. The reciprocal ot` the conductance.

14 1. Resistance lmpdance

Symbol: M Unit : second per litre
( sjl >

w=-:
LIQUIDS. AND SOLIDS of gas from a The deliberate material. The sponuineous material. The taking liquid. removal

INTER-ACTION 142. De-gassing 143. Out-Gassing 144. sorption 145. Sorbent 146. Sorbate 147. De-sorption 148. Adsorption

OF GASES WITH

cvylrltion of gas From a

up. of gas by a solid ot a

Material which takes up gas by sorption. Gas taken up by the sorbent in sorption. The process of removing sorbed gas Sorptionin which the gas ( the adsorbacc ) is retained at the surface of the solid or liquid ( the adsorbent ). Now- Adsorption may ix tnklug pfacc at
the same ume.

149. Physical Adsorption
Ph_vsi.swption

Adsorption in which no definite chrmical binding occurs. Adsorption involving formation of surface compounds by chemical reaction.

150. Chemical Adsorption Chemisorption

Is t 4110- 1967 I5 1. Abrorption

Sorption in which the gas ( the abaorbate ) diEuses into the bulk of the solid or liquid ( the absorbent ). N~TB - Ab&$tion may be taking plakat the same time. Sorption due to pores throughout the bulk of a substance which, arising from its crystalline structure, are of a substantially uniform size slightly greater than that of the molecules of the sorbate. The retention of a solid.
Co&-

152. Persorption

153. Occlusion 154. Condensation
dent

of gas in the interior voids

The ratio of the rate at which molecules condense on a surface to the rate at which they arrive at that surface..
NOTE- This term is distinct from and should not be confused with `the term ` condensation coefficient of heat transfer' which is sometimes used in heat transfer calculations to denote the corfficient of heat trqnsfer of condensativn.

155. ACe6-&~*.tiOlB Symbol a

Co-

The ratio of the mean energy actually transferred between impinging gas molecules and a surface to the mean energy which would have to be transferred for the impingin'g molecules, to return from the surface having reached ,complete thermal equilibrium with the surface. Thus,&-&=a (E,-A?$) wnere E, = mean energy of incident molecular stream, E, =. mean energy of, sef&ted or re-emitted molecular stream, and
E, = mean

energy of molecular stream in tnetmal equilibrium with the surface.

12

ls:4110=1s7 In copditions in which the mean crier@ of the as molccula mrry be indic&crd by d eir temperature, & - 7,----a ( T4- 1,) where l-1 5 tempcr8ture incident tiect$tf strepma `I; -=. temperature of reHected or. reemittcd molecular stream, and ?% .=: tcmpM+lrcofsur&e. 1!X. Sticking Probibiiily `The ratio of the rate at which par&l+ are sorbed at a sutiace to the rate -at which they arrive at that surf&x. NOTE -.. In thK d&iriotr `UC sorbed' does not mean that the. tnolcculu murt k @emwncntly rorkd. Ii ir sulficient fix them to enter a wrbcd state and become thermally accommodatc.ci 10 rhc 8lWf~. In approprhte CS~ tht: typ of wr;,ti*>rr should k rpecilicd. 157. Residence Time The average time for which a m&cule is bound to a surface, in a state of sorption.
sorption rbould br mp4icd.
NOTE -In

approprhtc

cancq the type of

158. Pekneation

The passage of gas through a aolid barrier. Non- The process involva di&u&n~ of the m through the rulid and may involve variow rurfacr phcnom~.

1.59. Permeability
cient

CoefB- The quantity of gas passing in an interval of time through unit area of a permeable wall divided. by the mean remurc z+mlearion Coe~cicnr gradient within the wail and 1 y that rime. SECTION 2 VACUUM OPERATIONS

201. static conditions

The conditions prevailing when t& pressure is uniform throughout a vacuum. chamber and th@rc ir . amse qucntly no positive ga8 flow.19

Is I 4110 - 1967 2Q2. Dynamic condithm3 The conditions prevailing when the pressure is not uniform throughout a vacuum chamber and there is consequently positive gas flow. The limiting pressure approached in a vacuum chamber after pumping for sufficient time to establish that further reduction in pressure will be negligible. The limiting pressure approached in a blanked-off inlet to a pump after pumping for sufficient time to establish that further reduction in pressure will be negligible. The pressure at the outlet which discharges gas to below atmospheric. Presof a pump a pressure

20.3. Ultimate Pressure

204. Blanked-off Pressure

205. Backing

Pressure

206. Critical B&ring sure ( cbp )

The value of the backing pressure, at a stated throughput, at which a slight rise in the backing pressure causes on the high vacuum side of the pump a rise in the ultimate pressure abruptly greater than that caused by the same increase at lower backing pressures. NOTE - In some pumps the increase does not occur abruptly and the critical backing pressure is then not ~precisely determinable.

207. Backing Space

The space in a vacuum system between the outlet of a pump and the inlet of its backing pump. A reduction of the conductance potent. of a corn-

208. Throttling 209. Guard Vacuum

An enclosure, in which the pressure is less than atmospheric, between a vacuum vessel or part of a vacuum system and the atmosphere, which serves to reduce the rate of leakage into the inner member or to reduce the mechanical forces acting on the inner member, or both. The degassing of parts of a vacuum systerr by heating during evacuation. 14

210. Bake-tit

IS I 4110 - 1967 211. TWchSsqJ

212. Bombardmellt h 213. VirtualLeak

Heat-

The &gas&g of parta of a .vacuum system by the application of local heat to the walls during evacuation. The raisiug of'the tempcratufe ofpartsin a vacuum system by the impact of parti&. The xmblance of a leak due to evolution
of gas or vapour within a vacuum system. Of a vacuum chamber. The ratio of the volume of the vacuum chamber to the Pumping speed.
Nola - The time coxutant, Iike the pumping apead, varies for diiTcrcnt ga8cs or vapour%

214. Time Constant

215. Roaghing Time

The t&e taken for the roughing pump to evacuate a vacuum system from atmosphiric pressure to the pressure at which the second pump begins to operate. The time rcqu,jred to reduce the pressure in a vacuum chamber from atmospheric to the operating pressure. NOTE---' Pump down time ' should not be confused with `pump down time ' which is
tLc period when a pump is not ready for we.

216. pump-Down

Time

2 17. Venting Time

The time requir& to raise the pressure in a vacuum system, or in a given part of. it, from the operating vaIue to atmospheric pressure by admitting a gas through a specified conductance. The final, act of sealing off a vacuum device after evacuation and processing. 4t a given time, the time rate of pressure increase in a vacuum chamber at constant temperature, which has been suddenly isolated from the pump. The process of removing gas from a vacuum chamber or vessel by sorption. 3 PUMPS AND ASSOCtATED TERMS

2 18. Seal-Off 219. Rate Of Rise

220. Clean-Up

SECTION 301. Vacuum

Pump

A device for reducing the pressure of gas in a vessel or system, or for maintaining such a reduction of pressure. 15

-I $4110 - 1967 302. lbughing +mp A vacuum pump for reducing the pressure in a vesd or system from atmospheric to a lower value at which a second` pump&g system can begin to operate. A vacuum pump for maintaining the backing pressure of another pump below its critical value. ing the.backing pressure of certain types of vacuum pump when the throughput does not warrant the use of the main backing pump.

303. &kiag

Pwnp

304. Holding Pump

An auxiliary backing pump for maintain-

365. Booster Pump

A vacuum pump used between a vapour pump and a backing pump to increase the throughput of a numning system.
booster jxmp serves either to .NOTE 1 -A increase the throughput of a vapour pump and backing pump of a given size, or to enable a given throughput to be handled by a smaller vapour pump and backing pump. pumps are normally NOTE 2 -Booster ( see either mechanical booster pumps 314 Note ) or vapour boostrv mllrnos ( see 337 &!:olc ) .

306. Mechanical Vacuum _P Mechanical 307. C)U&aled Vacuum Pump

A vacuum pump in which gas is tr?nsported by the rotary or reciprocating movement of mechanical narts. A mechanical vacuum pump in which oil is used to seal the gap between parts which move with respect to one another, aud to reduce the residual free volume in the pump chamber at the end of the compression part of the cycle. A mechanical vacuum pump in gas is drawn in, compressed charged hy means of periodic in the vohnnc of the working which the and disvariations chamber.

30%. Positive Displacement Pump

309. Piston Pump

A positive displacement pump in which the periodic variation of the volume of the working chamber is brought about by `the movement of a reciprocating piston in a cylinder. 16

xs t 4110 - 1967 3 10. Positive Displacement Rotary Pump 311. `Rotary Piston Pump A positive: displacement pump in which the gasis transported by motion which is mainly rotary. A positive displacement pump in which a crescent-shaped working chamber is swept by a combination of a rotor running eccentrically and a single sliding blade. A positive displacement pump with an eccentrically placed rotor and one or more sliding ,vanes operating in an approximately radial direction and dividing the static crescent-shaped into circulating working chamber vacuum-tight regions of periodically increasing.and decreasing volume.

312. Sliding

Punlp

Vane

Rotary

313. Liquid

Ring `Pump

A positive displacement pump in whicii the crescent-shaped working chamber is formed between a rotating IZquid ring and an eccentrically placed rotor with 6xed blades. A podve displacement pump in which a pair of inter-locking and synchronized `lobed rotors rotate in opposite directions, moving past each other and the housing wall with a small clearance and without touching.
NOTB -A Roots pump wed as a booster pump ( se6305 ) is often termed a* mechanical !xxstcr pump `.

314. Roots

Pump

3 15. ginetic

Pump

A mechanical vacuum pump in which the gas is moved in a steady stream from the inlet to the outlet by the conversion of kinetic energy into pressure energy. purhp A kinetic pump in which the direction of flow of the gas is predominantiy parallel to the axis of rotation. A kinetic pump in which the direction of flow of the gas is predominantly at right angles to the axrs of rotation 17

316. Radial

Plow

317. Axiai Flow Pump

Is t 4110 - 1967 318. Molecs&r Drng Pump A kinetic pump in which momentum is imparted to the molecules of the gas by contact between them and the surface of a high speed rotor.

319. TurbwMolecdar

Pump A molecular drag pump in which the rotor has inclined slots or blades moving between corresponding slots or blades in a stator. An oil-sealed mechanical pump in which . a controlled quantity of a suitable noncondensable gas `isadmitted during the compression part of the cycle so as to transport condensable vapours with reduced contamination of the sealing oil. A vacuum pump in which a high speed jet of liquid or gas impels the gas being transported in the direction of the outlet. A fluid entrainment pump in which a fast moving liquid is used as the driving medium. A fluid entrainment pump in which a high speed fit of gas is used as the driving medium. A fluid entrainment pump in which the transport of the gas is effected by a jet or jets of vapour. A vapour pump in w&h the gas moves to and enters the vapour stream under conditions in whrch viscous flow predominates. A vapour pump in which the gas moves to and enters the yapour stream under conditions in which m_olecular flow predominates.
Rump

320. Gas Eallaot

Pump

321.

322. Liqcdd J& Pump

323. Gas Jet Pump

324. Vapour Ramp

325. EW-F'-P

326. l?ifhionppmp

327.

A multi-stage vapour. pump in which a stage or stages having the characteristics of a diffusion pump are succeeded by a 18

IS t 4110 - 1967

stage or stages having the characteristics of an ejector pump.

pumps~
Range 328. Intermediate Vapour pump

P

NQTE- Certain types of difhion-cjector ump normally used aa booster pumps see 30.5') a& often termed (vaiour booster `. '

529. Fractionding

pump

330. Self-purifying pump

331. Toepler hump

332. Sprengel Pump

333. sorption Pump

334. Getter Pump

335. Gryopamp

A vapour pump in which the gas moves ' to and enters the vapour stream under conditions in, which neither viscous flow nor molecular flow predominates. A multi-stage vapour pump in which the operating fluid is fractionated and supplied to the nozzles of successive stages in order of vapour pressures, thconstituent of lowest vapour pressure being supplied to the lowest pressure stage. A Gapour pump in which the volatile impuritiesin the operating fluid are, as far as possible, transported towards the outlet . and prevented from returning to the `boiler. A vacuum pump in which the raising of a, column of liquid ( normally mercury ) closes the intake port and compresses the gas ,in a chamber,, which is then discbargd through a discharge valve. A ..vacuum pump in which gas is transported between successive short columns ofa liquid ( normally mercury ) falling in a vertical tube. A vacuum pump containing a surface, usually renewable, which retains gas and thus reduces the pressure by sorption. A sorption pump in which the trapping surface is a metal or metal ahoy, either in btilk or in the form of a film deposited by vaporization or sputtering. A vacuum pump which operates by the condensation or sorption or both of gas at surfaces maintained at a temperature sufficiently low for the vapaur pressures of the condensed gases to be insignificant. 19

Is : 4110 - 1967 336. Ion Pump AII electricaldevice consisting of a means of ionising gases and a system of electrodes at suitable potentials and in some cases also a magnetic field, which causes the ions to be transported to;wards an auxiliary pump or trap An ion punqin are transported which the gas molecules to a sorption surface.

337. Ion-sorption Pump 338. Getter-Iou Pump

An ion-sorption pump in which the gas molecules and ions are trapped in a metallic sorbent which is renewed by getter action either intermittently of continuously.

339. Cold Cathode Getter-Ion A getter-ion pump in which a getter film is produced by the sputtering action at -=P a cathode maintained in a gaseous discharge, usually confined within a Sputter-Ion Pump magnetic field. 340. Evaporation Getter-Ion P-P 341. Trap A getter-ion pump in which a getter film is produced by the evaporation on heating of a suitable metal. A device in which one or more of the constituents of the gas in a vacuum system are removed from the gas, thus effecting a, reduction in the partial pressure or pressures of that constituent or those constituents. A trap which temperature. operates by reduction of by

342. Cold Trap 343. Inlet 344. Outlet

The ihtake port of a pump; the port which gas enters a component. The output the port ponent.

or discharge port of a pump; by which gas leaves a co+

345. Expansion Chamber

The increasing space within a mechanical vacuum pump into which gas flows from the high vacuum part of a vacuum system. The decreasing space within a mechanical vacuum pump in which the gas is compressed before being discharged through the outlet. 20

346.

Compression

Chamber

Is I4110-.1967 347. Vane
Blade

A sIidmgS member which di,yides into compartknts the working space bctween the rotor and stator ?f a rotary mechanical pump; Valve A valve operated autotitically during the discharge of gas fkom the comprcssion chamber of a mechanical,' MCUUIII pumpA discharge valve formed of a thin strip of metal, sometimes held in place by springs. A discharge valve consisting of a metal diic retained in a suitable housing by a spring. Liquid used for sealing or lubricatign a mechanical vacuum pump. in

348. Discharge

349. Feather Valve

350. Poppet Valve

351. Pump oil 352. Oil Separator 353. Oil Puri6er 354. Pnmp Fluid 355. Boiler

A device which reduces the less of pump oil as droplets at the outlet. A device for removing contaminants the pump oil. horn

The operating fluid in a vapour pump. The part of a vapour pum in which the pump fluid is converted ! y heating into vapour to feed the nozzle or nozzles. .The electrical power supplied to the heater of the boiler of a vapour pump. The pressure,at the surface of the pump fluid in the boiler of a vapour pump. The tube through which the vapour passes from the boiler to the nozzle or nozzles of a vapdur pump. The part of a vapour pump used to direct the flow of the pump flurd in order to produce the pumping action.

356. Heater Input ITnit : Watt (W) 357. Boiler Pressure 358. Vapour Tube
Vap~ur Pee V@ous Chimney

359. Nozzle

`360. 361. Noszfe Throat

The stream of pump fluid issuing from a nozzle in a vapour pump. The part of the nozzle having the smallest cross-sectional area. The ratio of the area of the exit aperture of a nozzle to the nozzle throat area.

362. Nonale Expansion Ratio 363. Nozzle Clearance Area

The smallest cross sectional area between the outer rim of a nozzle and the wall Unit : Square metre (m*) of the pump-casing. The width of the annulus determining the nozzle clearance area. The converging or diverging section of the wall of an ejector pump. Throat The part of a diffuser havmg the smallest . cross-sectional area. The integral system of nozzles and vapour ducts that can be removed from a vapour .pump. `he lower part of the jet assembly, usually enlarged, separating the returning condensed pump fluid and the generated vapour at the pump boiler.

364. Nozzle Clearance 365. Diifbser 366. DiBuscr

367. Jet Assembly

368. skis-t

369. Condtnser

(of
P-P

a

Vw=
370. Btmt

1

A system of cooled surfaces placed in front of and to the sides of a vapour jet to condense the. vapour and return the pump fluid to the boiler. An obstruction placed near the inlet of a vapour pump to im `ixle the passage of. back-streamin an dp /or back-migrating, vapour into ta e high vacuum part' of the system. The passage of molecules of the pump fluid of a vapour pump to the high vacuum side of the pump ( and of any associated ba6fe or trap ) following their diverging from the jet of vapour and their scattering on impact with surfaces of gas molecules. 22

371. Back-Strta+ng

Is : 4110 - 1967 3 72. Back-Migration In relation to a vapour pump. The passage of molecules of the pump fluid to the high vacuum side of the pump ( and of any associated baHe or trap ) following their re-evaporation from surfaces in the pump or on` the backing pressure side of it. In relation to a mechanical vacuum pump: The passage of vaporised molecules of the sealing fluid or of the lubricant to the high vacuum side of the pump ( and of any associated bafile or trap ).

373.

Back-Diffusion

374. Warm-Up

Time

375. Cool-Down

Time

376. Pumpi&

Speed ,_

Symbol : S Unit : litre per second (l/s) .

The passage of molecules of the gas being pumped by a vacuum pump, by dXusion through the gas or vapour in it, from the backing pressure side to the high vacuum side of it ( and of any associated baffle or trap ). The time required to bring the bailer of a vaponr pump from the ambient temperature ( or from a specified temperature lower than the highest temperature at whic!l the boiler may be safely opened to the atmosphere ) to the normal operating temperature, The time recluired for the boiler temperature of a vapour pump to fall, after isolation from the heat supply, from the normal operating temperature ta a specified temperature at Aich the boiler may be safely opened to the atmosphere. For a given pump and a given gas entering it from a given test dome under specified operating conditions, the throughput of the gas divided by the steady-state pressure at a specified point in relation to the pump inlet. Thus, .S = Q./P
NOTE --An ideal dcfk%on of pumping speed would be ' The volumetric rate of flow across a section at the pump inlet `. The quantity defined above is the one nearest to this ideal which can be measured in practical terms.

23

Is : 4110 - 1967 377. Test Dome Tat Header A chamber attached to the. inlet of a pump and equipped with means of pressure measurement through which a measured flow of gas may be admitted to the pump. 4 MANOMETERS AND GAUGES

SECTION 401. Vacuum Gauge 402. Absolute Gaflge

An instrument for measuring gas pressures less than normal atmospheric pressure. A vacuum gauge by which such physical mmsurements are taken that the pressure being measured is calculated using constants and these - measurements without reference to another vacuum gauge. A vacuum gauge for measuring tne difference between total.pr partial pressures existing simultaneously at two places. A vacuum gauge for measuring the ,partial pressures of constituents! of gaseous mixtures. `The deflection of the, indicator or the change in indicating current per unit di.Rerence, of pressure being measured. Of certain types of gauge. The part of the gauge containing the pressure-sensitive elements which are directly exposed to the vacuum, being measured. A gauge having a gauge head without envelope, the. sensitive gauge element being inserted directly into the vacuum system., A gauge having a relatively short gauge head with wide bore tubulation. Of certain types of gauge. The part of the gauge containing the power supplies which receives the signal fknr~ the gauge head and, after amplification or other processing, passes it to the gauge indicating unit or recorder. 24

. Vacuum

403. DiS~rential Vacuum Gauge

Pressure 404. PaXtiM Vacuum Garige 405. Gauge Sensitivity

406. &age

Head

407. Nude Gauge

408. Fat+ Gauge Fast Response Gauge 409. Gauge ilo& Unit

is : 4110 - 1967 410. Gauge Indicating Unit Of dertain types of gauge. The part of the-gauge containing the output device, usually calibrated in uniis of pressure. A differential vacuum gauge, commonly a U-tube, in which prmtire differences are measured in terms of differences in -liquid levels.
Nom -If the pressure above one surface of the liqui;d is maintained at a known value or at a value negligible compared with the pressure being meastired, the gauge is an absolute vacuum gauge. .

4 11. Liquid Level lneter

Mano-

412. Dubrowin Gauge CaktesianDiver GaupG

A gauge ?he essevtial part of which is a

thin-walled tube sealed at its upper end and fioating &&ally in a liquid. ( The equilibrium positi& is determined by the forces due to gravity,`the gas pressure to be measured, and the weight of liquid displaced .by the immersed L part of the ttibe. )
A differential

413. Diaphragm

Gauge

gauge in which the de%ec tion of a flexible diaphragm separating gases at different I_`resstires is used to measure the pressure difference.

414. McLeod

Ciauge

A liquid levri rc.iuum gauge in whicn a known volume of the gas at the pressure to be measured is compressed by the movement of a liquid column to a much smaller known volume, at which the resulting higher pressure is measured.
NOTE- For gases which obey Boyle's law, this gauge is'an absolute vacuum gauge.

415. Viscosity Gauge

A

vacuum gauge dependent on the interaction of the gas with the movement of an element of the gauge, for use in the ranges of. pressure'in which viscosity is dependent upon pressure.

416. Decrement Gauge

A viscosity garage dependenf on the rate ofdecay of the amplitude of the periodic vibration of an: element suspetided in the gas. 25

Is : 4110 - 1967 417. Molecular brag Gauge A viscosity gauge in which a surface is given a high velocity relative to another Closely situated surface, so that molecules leaving the moving surface exert on the second surface a force whose magni- .. tude is a function of the gas pressure. A vacuum gauge in which the vibrations of a piezoelectric crystal are communicated to the surrounding gas. A vacuum gauge which measures pressure in terms of the net rate of transfer of momentum by molecules between two surfaces maintained at different temperatures and separated by a distance much smaller than the mean free path of the gas molecules. A vacuum gauge dependent on the change, with changes of pressure,. of the rate of loss of heat from a heated element in the gas.

418. Piezoelectric Gauge

419. Knudsen Gauge

420. Thermal Conductiviiy Gauge

421. Pirani Gauge

A thermal conductivity gauge in which the' temperature of the element is measured in terms of its electrical resistance. ( The element forms part of a Wheatstone bridge circuit; measurement is made either of the imbalance resulting from pressure changes or of the bridge voltage required to maintain the filament temperature constant and hence keep the bridge balanced. ) A krani gauge in which the heated eiement is a.thermlstor. A thermal conductivity gauge in which the temperature of the heated element is measured by a thermocouple. A vacuum gauge in which pressure is measured in terms of the. ion current produced in the gas under controlled conditions. An ronization gauge in which.ionization is produced by, electrons emitted from a thermionic cathode. 26

422; Thermistor

Gauge

423. Thermocouple Gauge

424. Ionization Gauge

425. Hot Cathode Ionization Gauge
Thermionic C'athode Ionization Gauge

IS : 4110 - 1967 426. Cold Cathode Ioni&tion Gauge . An ionization gauge in which ionization is produced by electrons emitted from cathode. (There is an unheated generally a self-maintained glow discharge between two electrodes either in a magnetic field or without such a field. ) `A transparent tube in which the colour and form of an electrical discharge give an indication of the pressure and nature of the gas. The pressure below which an ionization gauge is not effective due to residual ionization current at the ion collector caused by X-radiation induced at the electron-collecting electrode. An ionization gauge in which the electrode structure is designed to. minimize the X-ray-induced electron omission from the ion collector. A'triode hot cathode ionization gauge m which the X-ray limit is depressed by the use of a thin ion collector wire arranged centrally in a cylindrical grid with the cathode mounted outside the arid. A hot cathode ionization' gauge in which the X-ray limit is depressed by mounting a suppressor electrode in the vicinity of the ion collector SO that any secondary e iectrons emitted at the collector are returned to iti A hot cathode ionization gauge in which a magnetic field is used to lengthen the electron path and so increase the number of ions produced: ( The instrument resembles a simple cylindrical magnetron operating under cut-of1 conditions ) . 27

427. Discharge Tube

428. .X-Ray

Limit

.429. Ultra-High Vacuum Ionization Gauge

430.' Bayard-Alpert Gauge

43 1. Suppressor Iokzation Gauge

432. Hot Cathode netron Gauge

Mag-

IS : 4110 - 1967 433. Modulator Gauge Ionization A hot cathode ionization gauge fitted with a modulator electrode in which the effect of residual currents (including any X-ray currents )/may be estimated by measuring the effect on the ion collector current of varying the potential applied to the modulator. For a given gas, the' ratio of ionization current to the product of the ionizing electron current and the corresponding ( The operating parameters pressure. should be stated. ) Thus, C = Iop where I r = ionization current I, = ionizing electron current, and p = pressure. Unit: with I1 and I8 in self-consistent units and p in torr, C will be in torr-l. 435. Penning Gauge A cold cathode ionization gauge in which a magnetic field is used to lengthen the electron path and.so increase the number of ions produced. A Penning gauge having electrodes arranged as coaxial cylinders, with the cathode the inner one: and an axial magnetic field.
I1

434. Ionization Gauge Constant Symbol: C

436. Cold Cathode Magnetron Gauge

437. Inverted Gauge

Magnetron

A Penning gauge having electrodes arranged as coaxial cylinders, with the anode the inner one, and an axial magnetic field. An ionization gauge in which ionization is produced by radiations emitted from a radio-active source. (Where the radiations are a-particles, the instrument is often known as the `alpha&on gauge `. )

438. IRadioactive Ionization Gauge

28

IS: 4110.1967 439. Mass Spectrometer An instrument which separates ionized particles of different mass/charge ratios and measures the respective ion currents.
N~TE-T~~ mass spectrometer may be used as a vacuum gatige to measure the partial pressure of a specific gas. as a leak detector sensitive ,to a particular search gas, or aa an analytical instrument te dtitermine the percenta e composition of a gas mixture. Types are f!. lstinguished by the methods of separating the ions.

440. Magnetic Deflectios Mass Spectrometer

A mass spectrometer

in which ions -are accelerated through a slit and then deflected by a magnetic field so ,as to pass through a second slit.
the `180"-deflection mass speclro. NOTE -In meter and in the 90"- and 60�-deflection sector field mass spktrometen the ions are deflected through 180�, 90' and 60� respectively.

441. Double Focusing Mass Spectrometer

442. Trochoidal Focusing Mass Spectrometer

Cycloidal Focusing Mass S&9ctrometer 443. Time-of
Flight Mass Spectrometer

444. Radio Frequency Mass
Spectrometer

Linear Resonance. Mass Spectrometer

A mass spectrometer in which ions are separated by the successive actions of a radial electrostatic field and a magnetic sector field so that the velocity dispersion is opposite and approximately equal in the two analysers. A mass spectrometer in which ions are separated by crossed electric and ,magnetic fields in which they follow different cycloidal paths, coming ?o different foci depending on their mass or charge ratios. A mass spectrometer in which gas is ionized by a pulse-modulated electron beam and each group of ions is accelerated towards an ion colkctor at the far end of a drift space, the difference in the times of arrival ofions in .a group depending upon their mass or charge ratios. A mass spectrometer in which ions travel in a linear path and are accelerated through a series of openings or grids alternately attached to a radio frequency oscillator, emergjng into an electrostatic field which permits only the ions accelerated in the radio .fieauency field to reach the collector. 29

IS : 4110 - 1967 445. Omegatron Maas Spectrometer A mass spectrometer in which ions are separated by following spiral paths of increasing radius due to a cyclotron resonance effect provided by high freuency electric and steady magnetic elds which are perpendicular to one % another. A mass spectrometer in injected axially into a consisting of a system which high frequency fields iti a critical ratio SpecA which ions are quadrupole lens of four rods to and dc electric are applied.

446. Q~i;a.d~rp~le Mass

447. Monopole Mass trometer

mass spectrometer in which an L-shaped electrode and a `single rod symmetrically disposed to it provide a field configuration similar to that in one quadrant of.the quadrupole, ions being injected near to the corner of the L-shaped electrode and only ions with a certain mass or charge ratio ( depending on the electric fields ) emerging.

SECTION 5 VACUUM SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS (OTHER THAN PUMPS AND GAUGES) 501. Vacuiun System

THEIR

A vacuum chamber and the components for producing, measuring and controlling the vacuum. An enclosure within which the required lpw gas pressure is ,produced. A vacuum system in the vacuum chamber of which a pressure below 10-s torr may be produced.
NOTE- Similarly rough, medium and high vacuum system8 (see 102 to 104).

502. Vacuum Chamber 503. Ultra-High Vacuum System-

504.. Demountable Vacuwn System 505. Se&d Vacuum System

A vaccum system m which one or more

joints may be readily disconnected and reconnected.

A vacuum system in which-all the joints are permanent or semi-permanent. 30

is : 4110 - 1967 506. Vacuum ( Adjustment ) Suitable for use in connection `with a vacuum system, normally having a low vapour pressure.
NOTE --The term may be applied to waxes, greases, cements and paints, lubricants and other fluida, etc.

507. Gasket

A closed loop of deformable _materiaI pressed between the two parts of a joint to wake it gas tight. A seal effected by the deformation of a gasket between the parts being joined. A `toroidal gasket made to dimensions and tolerances. specified

50$

Gasket Seal Gasket Ga6ket

509. O-Ring 510. V-Ring

A gasket made of material having a uniform trapezoidal cross-section. A gasket made of material having a uniform L-shaped cross-section. A gasket made from sheet material. SEALS

511, L-Ring Gasket 5 12. Flat Gasket

513. Hermetic Seal 5 14. Housekeeper Seal

A seal designed to permit no detectable leak. A hermetic seal made by the fusion of `L glass tube to the feather edge `of a coaxial tube of copper or other suitable metal. A hermetic seal made by the fusion of the ends of two coaxial glass tubes of equal diameter to the opposite faces of a disc of copper or other suitable metal. A hermetic seal made by the fusion of glass to metal or ahoy having a coefficienlt of thermal expansion close to that of the glass. A seal made of a series of materials graded in order of their coefficients of thermal expansion; adjacent materials having nearly similar coefficients, used to avoid undesirably large stresses in the joining of parts of a vacuum system having dissimilar coefficients of expansion. 31

515. Disc Seal

516. Matched Glass-To-Metal Seal

5 17. Graded Seal

IS t 4110 - 1967 518. Compression Glass-To-Metal Type Seal

A hermetic seal made by the fusion of glass to a metal or an alloy so that the glass is at all times subject to compression. A hermetic seal in which the metal&d surface of a ceramic' and a metal or alloy, are joined by the fusion of an interposed metal or alloy of lower melting point. A seal in which the flexure of bellows or a diaphragm hermetically sealed to a wall and a shaft permits some movement of the shaft relative to the wall. A seal in which packing material or one or more gaskets surround a shaft capable of rotary or linear movement relative to the wall. A seal designed to prevent leakage where a rotating shaft enters a vacuum system. A rotarv vacuum seal in which line contact `is made between a shaft and a circular flat gasket in which the hole is slightly smaller than the shaft so that the gasket assumes a conical form. An enclosure to which two or more vacuum devices may be connected with the object of simultaneous evacuation. A tube extending from a vacuum device through which gas is removed and which is usually hermetically sealed when the device has been evacuated. A device for adjusting the rate of flow of a gas or for completely stopping the flow. A vacuum valve characterized by an on or off action with little or no intermediate quantitative control of the gas flow but which when closed reduces the gas throughput between the-. parts of a vacuum system, to zero or to an ins@+ ficant amount, which it separates. 32

5 19. Ceramic-To-Metal

Seal

520. Hermetic Shaft Seal

521. Packed Shaft Seal

522. Rotary Vacuum 523. Wilson Seal

Seal

524.

vacuum Manifokl

525. Pumping Stem

526. Vacuum

Valve

527. Isolating Valve

IS I 4110 F 1967 528. Rtgmlatimg Valve A `v&cum v@ve giving ckse quantitative control of the gas throughput between the parts of a vacuum system which it separates. ) The main part of the valve in which the flow of fluid is controlled. An opening at the inlet or outlet of `any component of a vacuum system, through which gas flows. The variable opening within the valve body at which the flow is controlled as it moveS from the inlet to the outlet. The formed area against which the seal is made when the valve is closed. The part of a valve which transmits motion from the actuating component to the part adjusting the flow or effect-, ing closure. The part of a valve, rigidly attached to the body, through which the stem passes. A gasket placed between t!le bonnet and the body of a valve. A gasket which seals the port when the valve is closed. A gasket arranged to seat, to prevent leakage through the bonnet and stem assembly when the valve is open. A vacuum valve in which the stem passes through packing material which forms the seal between the stem and the bonnet. A vacuum valve in which there is no "motion of the stem through a packed Seal. A packless: vacuum Palve in which the seal between the St&n and the body is dfected by a flexible bellows. 33

529.' Btdy ( of a valvt 530. Port

(OfaValvt~

531. S&t (of a Valve) 532. Valve Stem

533. Bon&t

(of a Valve)

534. Bonnet Gasket 535. Stat Gasket' 536. Back Stat Gasket

537. Packed Vacuum Valve

538. Ptickltss Vat&n

Valve

539. Bellows Staled Valve

Is : 4110- 1967 540. Diapkragm Valve

A packless vacuum valve in which the seal between the stem and the body is effected. by a flexible diaphragm. A vacuum valve in which when the valve is closed the port is closed by a plate pressed against the seat. A plate valve circular. in. which the plate is

54 1. Plate Valve

542. Disc Valve 543. Quarter-Swing Vacuum
Valve

fi plate valve in `which the plate lies in the flow, parallel to the, flow when the

valve is open and across the flow when the valve is closed. 544. Butterfly Valve A quarter-swing vacuum valve in which the axis of rotation of the- plate lies at or near the centrc of the plate. A quarter-swing vacuum vtive in which the axis of rotation of the plate lies
near the edge of the plate.

545. Flap Valve

546. We

Valve

A plate valve in which when the valve is
open the plate serves as a baffle.

547. Gate Valve

A valve in which the plate moves in a
plane perpendicular to the common axis .of the inlet, the port and the outlet
SO as to leave a clear passage when the valve is open.

548. Needle Valve

A valve in which a tapered needle moving

with respect to the seat provides an annular, port of varying size enabling the flow to be closely controlled. body so that a bore through the ball may be aligned with the inlet and outlet.

549. Ball Valve

A valve m which a ball rotates in the

550. Plug Valve

A valve in which a conical plug is rotated so that one or more bores through the plug may be aligned with the inlet and the outlet. A plug valve rnade of glass.
34

551. Glass Stopcock

IS : 4110 - 1967 552, Cut-Off A device in which a liquid surface is used when required to separate two parts of a vacuum system.

553. Electra-magnetic Vacuum Valve 554. Pneumatic Vacuum valvi 555. Hydraulic Vacuum Valve 556. Backing Line 557. Backing Valve 558. Backing Reservoir

A vacuum valve actuated

559. Roughing Line 560. Roughing Valve
56 1. Gas Admittance

Valve

562. Air Admittance Valve 563. Liquid Catch Pot

by the passage of ti electric current through- a solenoid associated with the valve. A vacuum valve actuated by the `passage of air or either gas into or out of a pneumatic cylinder associated with the valve. A vacuum valve actuated by the passage of a hydraulic fluid into or out of a hydraulic cylinder associated with the valve. The pipe system connecting a pump to its backing pump. A vacuum valve placed in the backing line to permit the isolation of a pump from its backing pump. A vessel placed between a pump and its backing valve to serve as a gas receiver whilst the associated backing pump is not in use. A pipe system connecting vacuum equipment to a roughing pump. A vacuum valve placed in the roughing line to permit the isolation of vacuum equipment from its roughing pump. A vacuum valve used to permit. the entry of gas into a vacuum system. A vacuum valve used to permit the entry of dr directly from the atmosphere into a vacuum system. A vessel in a vacuum system designed to collect liquid and to prevent its accidental entry into other parts of the vacuum system. Liquid catchpots guarding against the entry of particular liquids may be termed, for instance, oil caitchpot, water catchpot. NOTE -. The USC of tht term ` trap ' for

NOTE- The use of this term to describe components which are really traps or v.alver is deprecated.

these devicea in deprecated in order to avoid comksion with the urt of ` trap ' at 941,

33

18 I 1110 - 1967 SECTION 601. Leak(inV~cuum Technology ) 6 LEAK DETW'I'ION Aholeorporosityinaboun akwing gas to pass .&om one sidedz! it to the other under the action ofa pressure or concentration difFercnce. Th;eT_pg
.

602. Leakage

or having passed through

Unit : torr litrc, newton metre ( Nm ) dr joule (J = Nm ) 603.Leak Rate The quantity of g& passin@ through the leak in a given time di\nded by that time.

Symbol : L or QL Unit : torr litre per second newton metre per second ( Nm/s ) or watt (W=J/s)

604. Vkous Flow Leak visGous L+?ak

.A leak of such a size that the flow through it is predominantly viscous flow and that the leak rate is mainly controlled by the viscous flow of the gas. A leak of such a size that the flow through it is predominantly nioiecular flow. A complete apparatus by which the presence of leaks `can be detected and an indication of their magnitudes obtained.
An instrument

605. Mokzalar

Flow Leak

Molecular Leak

606. Leak Detection System `. 607. Leak Detector

or device fix detecting the presence of leaks and obtaining some mdication of the magnitude of the leak rate.

608. Vacuaun Test

A test in which the equipment under test is subjected to a pressure lower than that surrounding it. 36

IS I 4110- 1967
609. Prqmrc Test

A test in which the equipment under test is subjected to a pressure in exzcss of that surrounding it.. A method of determining whether there is a leak or a virtual ieak in a system, or of obtaining an estimate of its magnitude, by observing the rate of rise of pressure in the evacuated system when it is isolated from the pump. A gas mtroduced into the equipment under test and detected as it is emitted from the leak in a pressure test 01 applied to the outer surface of the equipment under test and detected after it has entered the equipment through the leak in a vacuum test. ,A devicevsed in pressure trstmg to collect search gas from a region of the equipment under test and pass it to the ieak detector. A method of leak location in which a jet of search gas or liquid is moved over the surface of the vacuum system and its entry through a leak detected. A test in which-the existence o!' a leak verified by the entry into the system a search gas contained in a hood envelo surrounding the whole or part ofp" the system. is of or a

61(i. &tSSUre

RiSCTMt

611.

Search

G86

612. Sample Probe SniJir

613. Pi&e

Test

614. Hood Test

615. PubbIt Leak Test.

A pressure test in which search gas is detected by the appearance of bubbles in a liquid in which the equipment is immersed or in a layer of a suitable solution applied externally to it. Testing to determine whether the leak rate in a vacuum system .or component does or does not exceed a specified value. Leak detection in which the leak dectector is connected to the backing space of a vacuum pump .aiid not to the high vacuum` part of a system. 37

616. Leak Proving

6 17. Backing space Leak Detection

IS : 4110 - 1967 618. Response
Time

The time taken after covering a leak tith the search gas for the indication of the leak detector to rise to a value (1 -' ) times, that is 63 per cent of,

the value asymptotically attained when the search gas is indefinitely applied. 619. Clearing
Time

The time taken after the removal of the search gas from the leak for the indication of the leak detector to fall to a value ( 1 /e ) times, that is 37 percent of the value at the time of removal. Leak A leak detector consisting of a partial pressure vacuum gauge responsive 6niy to the search gas used. A leak detector for vacuum testing incorporating two vacuum gauges, both of which'respond to fluctuations of the total pressure but only one to the search gas, so that the eiiect of fluctuations of total pressure is reduced. A leak detector used for pressure testing in which the search gas is detected by measuring the change in the thermal conductivity of the gas in the system on the entry of the search gas. A leak detector for vacuum or pressure testing employing a halide as the search gas and depending on the increase of positive ion emission from a heated anode when halogen molecules impinge on it. NOTE - This inrtrument should be dirtinguishcd from the ` halide torch detector ' used

620. Vacuum

Gauge

Detector

621. Differential
Detector

Leak

622. Thermal
Leak

Condortkity Detector

623. Halidd Leak Detector

primarily-in refrigerator testing, which consists of a bunscn burner flame impinging ou a copper plate and which shows the presence of haloeen in the air intake of the burner by a change in the colour of the flame.

624. Palladium
Detector

Barrier

Leak

A leak detector

for vacuum testing employing hydrogen as a search gas and incorporating an evacuated gauge divided from the vacuum system by a palladium barrier which, when heated, is permeable to hydrogen. 38

625. Iouization `&tectoa

Gauge

Diode

A

kak

detector

for

vacuum

tirdimiti theimionic c&&on emission in.a diode &der the infknce of a suita-ble `search gas. 626. Mass spectrometer Leak Detector 627. HF Discharge
Detector

depending on the variation

oftemperato respoad

tutiug

A'mass spectrometer
in

adjusted

only to the search gas.

Leak

HF-generator having a probe which be applied to the wall of a glass vacuum system to locate leaks,
can

628. Teola

Coil Leak Detector Tube Leak

Arr HF-discharge leak detector `in which the HF-generator is a Tesla coil.

629. Discharge
Indicator

A glass tube with elect&es attached to a high voltage source so that changes in

630. Iafra-Red

Leak Detector

63 1. Ultra-Violet Detector

Leak

632. Noise Level ( of a Leak Detector )

633. Other-Gas Background ( in Connection witb a Leak Detector )

the colour of the electrical disch@rge can be observed when a suitable tracer gas flows through the leak. A leak detector in which (he presence of the search gas, normally nitrous oxide, is detected by its absorption in the it&a-red region of the spectrum. A leak detector in which the presence of the search gas is detected by its absorption in the ultra-violet region of the spectrum. The spurious indication given by the leak detector, expressed in quivalent leak rate or partial pressure units, which is not due to the action of gases on the detecting unit. The spurious indication given by the leak detector expressed in equivalent leak rate or partial pressure units, which is due to the action on the detccting unit of gases other than the search
!P.

634. Search-Gas Background (in Connection with a Leak Detector )

The spurious indication given by the leak detector, expressed in equivalent leak rate or partial pressure units,
which is due to the action on the detecting unit of the traces of the search gas

present in the vacuum system prior to the application of the search gas to the
leak. 39

IS I 4110 - 1967 635. Background (in CoMectionwith a Leak Detector ) The total spurious indication given by the leak detector, expressed in equivalent leak rate or partial pressure units, that is that part of the indication which does not arise Corn the application of the search gas to the leak. NATE - Background is thus the summation of noise level. other-nru backmound and
_acarch gas background.-

636. Drift

637. Sensitivity of a Leak Detection system

The time rate of variation of the baclcground; expressed in equivalent leak rate or partial pressure units per unit time, over periods of time long in comparison with the time taken to make an irid+dual reading. The change. in indication of the leak detector occurring in a specified time when a leak is completely covered by the search gas divided by the leak rate. use cf the term `sensitivity ' NOTE -The ` minimum detectable leak' is to mean
deprccatcd.`The detinition of sensitivity given here is that used in connection with instruments in a wide range of fields.

638. Pressure-Sensitivity of a Leak Detector

The change in indication of the leak detector due to a change in the partial pressure of the search gas at its input divided by that change in partial pressure. The minimum leak rate that can be unambiguously detected.

639. Mirrimum Detectable Leak(ofaLeak Detection System or a Leak Detector )

the

NOTE - The relevant factors in assessing minimum detectable leak include the background, the drift, the pressure-sensitivity *the leak detector and the acnsitivity of the leak detection system.

640. Rated Minimum Detectable Pressure Change

The change in pressure which, within-a specified time, causes a change in the indication given by the leak detector equal to a specified multiple of the mean of ten consecutive peak-to-peak fluctuations of the background or equal to 2 per cent of the full scale indication, whichever is the greater. 40

Is : 4tm - I%7
641. Rated Minimum Detectable CIhange of Par&l Pressure ofSe8rchGas The change in partial pressure due to the' search gas in the leak detection system which, within a specified, time, causes a change in the indication given by the leak detector equal to a specified multiple of the mean of 10 consecutive peak-to-peak fluctuations of the background or equal to 2 percent of the full scale indication, whichever is the greater.
NOTE -The multiple on which there two rated minimum detectable based should be indicated. 642. M~&WUU either of values in

Detectable concentration Ratio

The minimum ratio of the partial pressure of search gti to total pressure in a mixture of search gas and air which can be unambiguously detected. A device providing a known leak rate of a given gas between the two parts of a vacuum system which it separates when there are specified pressures on its two sides. A calibrated leak used to check the performance of a leak detecting system. A device.which enables gas to be admitted to a vacuum system by permeation through a non porous wall.

643. Calibrated Leak

644. Reference Leak 645. Membrane Leak

AP.PEWDIX
( C/ause 0.5 )
SYMBOLS

A

AND ABBREVIATIONS the

A-l. The
quantities

following recommendations relate to the symbols for and the abbreviations for the units used in thii standard:

Qwntity
Accommodation coefEcient Conductance Critical backiig. pressure DifTusion coefficient 41

SjWl~Ol

a u cbp

D

`Is :-4110 - 1967 sy?nBol
Ianisation gauge constant Leak rate Pressure Pumping speed Quantity of gas ( in pressure-volume units ) Resistance, impedance Throughput Volume

c
L,
fi QL

4s

!`o
W Q
0

Vnit
Atmosphere, standard Centimetre Dyne Dyne per square centimetre Gramme per second Joule LitI-C Litre per second Metre Square metre Square metre per second Newton Newton metre Newton per square metre Newton metre per second Second Second per Iitre Torr Tot-r litre Torr litre per second Watt ( For other units, see Appendix I3 ) 42

Abbreaiation atm cm dyn dyn/cm2 g/s

J
1 l/s m ms m*/s N Nm N/m2 N m/s
S S/l

torr torr 1 torr l/s W

IS : rnp " 1967

APPENDlX

B

(CZme 0.5)
UNITS OF PRESSURE
B-l. The units of pressure recommended for general use in vacuum technology are the newton per square metre and the torr, as deiined in Section I of this glossary. B-2. The bar, millibar and microbar ( especially the millibar ) have been in frequent use, related to the newton per square metre in the SI units and the dyne per square centimetre in the c.g.s. system by the following relationshil%: a) 1 microbar ( [Lb) = 10--l N/m' = 1 dyn/cms, b) 1 millibar (mb ) = lo* N/m" = lo5 dyn/cm2, and = 10s N/me = 10s dyn}cms. c) 1 bar B-3. The standard atmosphere [termed normal atmosphere in IS : 18!30 ( Part III j-1961* ] is defined as 101 325 newton per square metre. B-4. All the pressure units indicated above have received international recognition. They are defined absolutely in newtons per square metre or dynes per square'centimetre without reference to a column of liquid. B-5. The conventional barometric millimetre of mercury ( mmHg defined by reference to the millimetre of mercury. Thus while 1 mmHg = 0.1 x 13.595 1 x 980665 dyn/cms ( exactly ) = 1 333.22. dyn/cm* ( approsimately ) and 760 torr = 1013 250 dynjcm? ( exactly ) so that 1 torr = 1 33322 dyn/cnG ( approximately) ) is

The relationship I mmHg = 1.000 000 142 4 . . . torr cannot be cxpressed exactly. However, the millimene of mercury is equal to the torr within 1 part `in 7 x lo6 and 760 mmHg exceeds 1 atm by less than Some preference for the torr over the millimrtre of mercury 2 x lo-: atm. in vacuum technology is indicated by the reference in IS : 1890 (Part III j196 1* to the millimetre of mercury being used in meteorological barometry. The tot-r rather than the millimetre of mercury is recommended for use in vacuum technology in Section I of this glossary. B-6. The term micron, encountered in vacuum millitorr, is preferred. meaning micrometre of mercury, work but the equivalent pressure may still be unit; that is For con-

B-7. A conversion table of these pressure units appean on P 44. version of other units reference should be made to IS : 786-1956t. .--*Recommendations on quantities and units of mechania. tConrenion factors and conversion tables. ( Sincr m&d ). 43

TABLE1 ( For conversion

CONVERSI

ON TABLE s,w IS

OF CERTAX'iPRESSURE

UPlET% tables' )
hfIcROMRTRE ( AflCRON hh%RY OF &iERCURY )

ofother units
DYNE PER !jQUARR CWTIMETRE

: 786-1956 ` Convizrsion fkctors and convckon
PER

NEWTON SQUAUE METRE

Toaa

STANDARD Arms~mas

MILUmR

MILtiMETRR

One dyne per square ccntimctre ( dynlm' ) mctrc

=

I

lo--1

7400 62 x 10-r 7.500 62 x 10-s

9.869 23
x10-7

IO-'
-

?466
x

62

10-r

I-560 62 x IO-' 7-500 62

One newton persquare ( N/m2 ) One torr(torr) 2 One standard One millibar

=

i_u

I

94369 23 x 10-r 1.315 79

10-s

7.500 62 x 10-s (I)

= I 333.22

133.322

iI p_
0.750 062 (t)

1.333 22 (If)

x 10-i
1 9.869 23 x 10-4 1.315 79 x 10-s l-31.5 79 x 10-e I 013.25 I 1604NM 0.750 062 (#)

(W

atmoephcrs( ( mb)

atm ) = I 013 250 = loo --

101 325 -102 133.322

7@JooO 750-062

One millimetrc (mmHg) Onemkromctrc mertury

of mercury

= 1 333.22

(I)

101 1-333 (W 22 1.333 22 x 10-s -! IW -

(micron)

of

= I.33322

( rmHg )

I.333 22 x IO-1

( F)

-I

Exact values are underlined to distjnguish them from rounded values. NqmClose apptwximations are shown in brackets. The errors in the approximations I mmHg (or I torr ) = 13 mb and 1 inb = 2 mmHg (Dr 8 tort ) may he seen fim the table. The approximation I mmHg = I torr is closer thari the rounded values in the table; to the number of sienificant l&es used in the table the two are indistinguishrbte (see B-5 )_

zs : 4110 - 1967 ALPHABETICAL
Noti 12 Number rcfcrenccs

IWEX

arc to the terms and notes in the glossary.

NOTE 2 -Terms, such as Pressure, Partial Pressure, Static Pressure, arc each entqred alphabetically. .Prcssure ( Partial ), Pressure ( Static ) are not entered under the heading Pressure because they follow that term in the glossary. Pressure ( Ultimate ) is nevcrthejess entered because it does not follow `Pressure ' in tbc glossary. Other entries follow this pattern. A Absolute vacuum gauge 402 Absorbate see 151 Absorbent MC 15 1 Absorption 15 1 Accommodation coefficient 155 Adsorbate see 148 Adsorbent see 148 Adsorption 148 Air admittance valve 5G2 Alphatron gauge set 438 Atmosphere Normal see .4pp B Standard see 113 and App B Axial flow pump 317 Boiler 355 pressure 357 Bombardment heaiing Bonnet of a valve 533 gasket 534 Booster pump 305 Bubble leak test 615 Butterfly valve 544 C Calibrated leak 643 Cartesian diver gauge 412 Catch pot, Liquid 563 Ceramic-to-metal seal 5 I9 Chamber Compression 346 Papansion 345 Chemical adsorption I50 Chemisorption 150 Clean-up 220 Clearing time 619 Coefficient Accommodation I55 Condensation 154 Diffusion 127 Permeability; Permeation 159 Cold cathode getter-ion pump 339 i,oni_zationxaugr -426 rnagnctron gauge 436 irap 342 Compression chamber 346 type glass-to-metal seal 518 Concentration ratio, Minimum detectable Condensation coefficient 154 Condenser ( of a vap&a pump ) 369 Conductance 139 Intrinsi~c 140 Constant Ionization gwge 434 Time 214 Cool-down timr 375 Critical backing pressure 206

212

B
Back-diGsion 373 Background 635 Other-gas 633 Search-gas 634 Back migtation 372 seat gasket 536 streaming 371 Backing Xne 556 pressure 205 pressure, Critical 206 pump 303 reservoir 558 space 207 space leak deteCtion 617 valve 557 Baffle 370 valve 546 Bake-out 2 10 Ball valve 549 Bar'sec App B Bayard-Alpcrt gauge 430 Bellows sealed valve 539 Blade 347 Blanked-08' pressure 204 Body ( t$ a vlavc ) 529

641

45

Cryopump 335 Cut-off 552 Cycloidal focusing mass spectrometer 442 I) Decrement gauge 416 De-gassing 142 begree of saturation 124 Demountable vacuum system 504 Density, Molecular ( at a specific position inagas) 114 De-sorption 147 Diaphragm gauge 413 valve 540 Differential leak detector 621 vacuum gauge 403 DiBuser 365 throat 366 Diffusion 126 coefficient 127 ejector pump 327 .*pump 326 Ddfusivity 127 Discharge tube 427 tube leak indicator 629 valve 348 Disc seal 515 valve 542 Double focusing mass spectrometer 441 Drift 636 Dubrovin gauge 412 Dynamic conditions 202 pressure 110 Dyne per square centimetre see 113 and App B

Flow

of gases ycc 125 to 141 of molecules 135 Fluid entrainment pump' 32 1 Pump 354 Fractionating pump 329

G
Gas 116 admittance valve 561 ballast pump 320 jet pump 323 gzer5;+e see 116 to 124 bonnet 534 Seat 535 seal 508 Gate valve 547 Gauge control unit 409 head 406 indicating unit 410 sensitivity 405 Getter-ion pump 338 Getter pump 334 Glass stopcock 551 Glass-to-metal seal, Compression type 5 13 Matched 516 Graded seal 5 17 Guard vacuum 209 Ii Halide leak detector 623 Heater input 356 Hermetic seal 513 shaft seal 520 HF discharge leak deteefor 627 High vacuum 104 Holding pump 304 Hood test 614 Hot cathode ionization gauge 425 magnetron gauge 432 Housekeeper real 5 14 Hydraulic vacuum valve 555 I Ideal gas 117 Impedance 141 I&a-red leak detector $30 Inlet 343

E
Effusion, Molecular i28 Ejector pump 325 Electromagnetic vacuum valve 553 Evaporation getter-ion pump 346 Expansion chamber 345 F Fast gauge, Fast response gauge 408 Feather valve 349 Flap valve 545 Flat gasket 512

46

Is : 4llQ - 1967
inter-action of gases with liquids and solids See 142 to 159 Intermed+ range vapour pump 328 Intrinsic conductance ( of a duct ) 140 ~~n!maen+vn iwge 437 gauge 424 gauge constant 434 &uge diode detector Ion &UtTo:3;ump 337 Isolatin8 valve 527 J Jet 369 assentMy 367 K liinetic pressure 110 pump 315 Knudsen * II& 132 gauge 419 L Mass

spcetrometa 439 spectrometer leak detector 626 throughput 137 Matched glam&meti. seal 5 16 McLeod gauge 414 EzaFtath ( of a particle ) 125
booster pump SW 314 Note vacuum pump 306 &&dium vacuum IO3 Membrane leak 645 h&-rcury Micromctre of see App B _Millimetre of seu App B Microbar xa App B h4izromett-e cbmercury m App B Micron SWApp B ,M.ilhbar SCI:\pp B Millimetn of mercury s6c App B hC&num detectable changc-..of preasureo! search gas, Rated 641 concentration ratio 642 leak 639 pressure change, Rated 6-40 Modulator ionization gau8c 433 h~Jolecular density ( at a snccificd oosition in a gas~l14' partial 115 drag ,I-dUPC 417 St&p 318 efiusion 128 Row 129 leak605 flux 135 leak 605 Monopole mass spectrometer 447 N Nadle valve 548 Newton per square metrc 112 wtd -4pp e Noim level ( of a.kak detector 1 632 Non-condensable eras 118 Normal atmosph& JWApp B Nomlc 359 durancc 364 clearance area 363 ex&laJari1 ratio 362 Nude gauge 407

625

Leak
Calibrated 643 detection w 601 to 645 deteetion,Ba * space617 detectionsystemx . detector 607 ar&681 to631 mdh%tor, Dh&uge tube 629 (in we+nun teclnlology) 601

Mclx$rane 645 pm616
Reference644 Vhtual213 LuLNIe602 Limu resonance mass spectrometer Liquid ptchpot 563 tpunp322 Fewl manometer411

444

M Ma@& ManSld, de&&m Vacuum mass spectrometer 524 44~

0
Chxhaiion 153

47

Is t 4110 - 1967
Oil catchpot 563 pump 351 purifier 353 sealed mechanical vacuum pump 307 separator 352 Omegatron mass spectrometer 445 O-ring gasket 589 Other-gas background ( in connection with a leak detector ) 633 Out-gassing 143 Outlet 344 Packed shaft seal 521 vacuum valve 537 Packless vacuum valve 538 Palladium barrier leak detector 624 Partial molecular density ( of a specified molecular ;?5cies at a specified position in a gas) pressure 108 vacuum gauge 484 Penning gauge 435 Perfect gas 1 I7 Permeability coefficient 159 Permeation 158 Persorption 152 Physical adsorption, Physisorption 149 Piaoelectric gauge 418 Piraui gauge 421 Piston pump 309 Plate valve 541 Plug valve 550 Pneumatic vacuum valve 554 Poiseuille Bow 13 1 Poppet valve 350 Port 530 Positive displacement pump 308 rotary pump 310 Pressure 106,107 Backing 205 Blanked off 204 Boiler 357 rise test 610 test 609 sensitivity of a leak detector 638 Ultimate 203 Units of 112, 113 and App I3 Probe sample 612 test'613 Proving, Leak 616 Pump down time 216

pufi;yd($y)
oil 351 Vacuum Pumping z?sF 301

Q
Quadrupole mass titer 446 Quan';3?; of gas ( m. pressure-volume `units 1 Quarter-swing vacuum valve 543 R Radial flow pump 3 16 Radioactive ionization gauge 438 Radio frequency mass spectrometer 444 Ranges of vacuum see 102 to 105 Rated minimum detectable change of partial pressurr of search gas 641 pressure change 640 Rate of rise 219 Reference leak 644 Regulating valve 528 Residence time 157 Resistance 141 Response time 618 Roots pump 314 Rotary piston pump 311 vacuum seal 522 Roughing line.559 FK?2~~2 valve 560 Rough vacuum 102 8 Sample probe. 612 Saturated vapour 120 ~~ua$on8vapour pressure 12 1 Seal;d vacuum system 505 Seals see 513 to 523 Search gas 61 I background 634 Seat gasket 535 ( 0f.a valve ) 531 Self-purifying pump 330 Sensrtivity Gauge 405

P

48

Is : 4110- 1967
Sensitivity (Chati) of a leak detection system 637 Pressure, of a leak detector 638 skirt 368 Sliding vane rotary pump 3 12 Sniffer 612 Sorbate 146 Sorbent 145 Sorption 144 pump 333 Sprcngel pump 332 Sputter-ion pump 339 :%&a@ atmosphere see 1-13and App B conditions 201' pressure 109 Pumping 525 Valve 532 Sticking probability 156 Stopcock, Glass 551 Supersaturated vapour 123 Suppressor ionization gauge 43 1 T Ultra-high vacuum 105 ionization gauge 429 system 503 Ultra-voilet leak detccfor 631 Units of pressure JPC 112, 113 and App B Unsaturated vapour 122

V
Vacuum ( noun ) ( adjectivl ) 101,506 chamber 502 gauge 401 gauge leak daiector 620 guard 209 manifold 524 operations JUC 201 to 220 pump 301 system 501 test 608 valve 526 Valve e 348 Disch ar! stem 53 Vacuum 526 Vane 347 VHpour 115 booster pump 327 Note chimney; pipe; tube 358 ptimp 324 Velocity head; Pressure 111 Venting time 2 17 Virtual leak 213 Viscosity gauge 415 Viscous flow 130 leak; Viscous leak 603 Volumetric throughput 138 V-ring gasket 510

4Tesla coil leak detector 628
Test dome; Test header 377 G;ck detection JCC 608 to 615 conducti\;ity gauge 420 leak detector 622 transpiration 133 Thermionic Thermistor cathode 422 ionization

gauge 425

Thermocouple gauge gauge 423 Throttling 208 Throughput 136 Time constant 2 14 of flight mass spectrometer 443 ToepIer pump 331 Torching 211 Torrll3andAppB Total pressure 106, 107 Transport phenomena in gases see 125 to 133 TrarJ 341 Chid 342 Trochoidal focusing mass spectrometer 442 Turbo-molecular pump 3 19 U Ultimate pressure 203

Warmbup time 374 Water-catchpot see 563 Wilson seal 523 X X-ray limit,&8'

49

