RAT Aa IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


ames RICA GARA — ARAS 
AT ARA KIA METATA Tech 
ATT 1 THA Sener 
(asters - ALACANT — ART) 


Unified Digital Infrastructure — 
Unified Last Mile Communication 
Protocols Stack 


Part 1 Reference Architecture (UDI — ULMCPS — RA) 


ICS 35.100; 35.110 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM aa 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SENAR TH Ari, ay Redi 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 7 


Smart Infrastructure Sectional Committee, LITD 28 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Smart Infrastructure 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Information Technology Division Council. 


This standard is one of the series of Indian Standards on Last Mile Communication Protocols. Other standards 
published so far in the series are: 


(Part 5/Sec 1) Unified digital infrastructure — Unified last mile communication protocols stack — 
Network access layer (IEEE 802.15.4) 


The development of a series of standards for a Unified Digital Infrastructure across the country was motivated 
by the Smart Cities initiative of Government of India. A defining feature of Smart Cities is the ability of various 
components and systems to function efficiently in an integrated manner as well as independently. A Unified, smart, 
and Secure Digital Infrastructure will facilitate efficient integration of various Systems and Applications/services 
across the city. 

The Standard IS 18000 “Unified digital infrastructure ICT reference architecture (UDI-ICTRA)’ 
(under development) defines a comprehensive ICT reference architecture for a resilient, secure and sustainable 
digital infrastructure for smart cities, districts, states or nations. 

The “Unified last mile communication protocols stack — Reference architecture’ is an integral part of the 
UDI — ICTRA and the reference architecture described in this standard enables a seamless exchange of information 
among devices that operate using different communication technologies and deployed under different topologies. 
This standard covers only IPv6 based networks. 

In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications: 


a) IS 12373 (Part 1) : 2018/ISO/IEC 7498-1 : 1994 Information technology — Open systems 
interconnection — Basic reference model: Part 1 The basic model (first revision) 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


Contents 
Page No. 
INTRODUCTION = iii 
1 SCOPE Sr 1 
2 REFERENCES ES 1 
3 TERMINOLOGY te 2 
4 SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS u 2 
5 UNIFIED LAST MILE COMMUNICATION PROTOCOL STACK REFERENCE 
ARCHITECTURE (ULMCPS-RA) — GOALS AND OBJECTIVES ve 3 
6 DESIGN PRINCIPLES de 3 
7 CHARACTERISTICS OF UNIFIED LAST MILE COMMUNICATION 
PROTOCOLS STACK REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE (ULMCPS-RA) 4 
7.1 Composability 4 
7.2 Interoperability 4 
7.3 Functional and Management Capability Separation 4 
7.4 Homogeneity in Heterogeneity 4 
7.5 Scalability 4 
7.6  Shareability 4 
7.7 Unique Identification 4 
7.8  Well-characterized Components 5 
7.9 Security 5 
8 CONCEPTUAL AND REFERENCE MODEL: THE OSI MODEL 5 
9 THE UNIFIED LAST MILE COMMUNICATION PROTOCOL STACK (ULMCPS) 5 
9.1 Standardizing Layer 1 — 2 6 
9.2 Standardizing Layer 3 — 6 7 
9.3 Standardizing Layer 7 7 
9.4 Standardizing the Interfaces (“Network Access Interface Layer”) 7 
10  ULMCPS REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE 7 
10.1 Network Access Layer (ULMCPS-NAL) 8 
10.2 Network Access Interface Layer (ULMCPS-NAIL) 8 
10.3 Network & Transport Layer (ULMCPS-NTL) 9 
10.4 Application Layer (ULMCPS-AL) 9 
10.5 Security 9 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


11 REFERENCE PROTOCOL STACK 


12  ULMCPS STANDARDS FAMILY 


12.1 
12.2 
12.3 


ANNEX A 


TABLES 


Table 1 
Table 2 


FIGURES 
Fig. 1 
Fig. 2 
Fig. 3 
Fig. 4 
Fig. 5 


General 
Standards structure and hierarchy 
UDI LMCPS series of Standards — IEEE 802.15.4-2020 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Symbols and Abbreviations 
ULMCPS Family Standards 


OSI Model 

The Improvised LMCPS Reference Model 

ULMCPS Reference Architecture 

Ulmcps Ra with 802.15.4 Nal and 802.11 Nal Illustrations 
Reference Protocol Stack 


11 


O 0 aa 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


INTRODUCTION 


Rapid urbanization over the past two decades has led to the mushrooming of megacities (accepted as those with a 
population in excess of ten million) around the world. The sheer size and scale of these cities place huge pressure 
on infrastructure development, public services provision, and environmental sustainability. 


Cities nationally and internationally are main drivers of economic activity, growth and in the current context, 
recovery, but this output depends on a comprehensive infrastructure to deliver physical and social resources the 
fuel of a city’s “economic engine’. The economic performance of a city is inextricably linked to its physical and 
communications infrastructures, and the delivery of resources through these infrastructures. 


The society, the business, the infrastructure, the services and all other aspects of the civilization on the planet 
Earth are going through a paradigm shift in the wake of technological advancements, especially in the field of ICT. 


All the ecosystems like smart cities, smart grid, smart buildings, smart factories etc. are in the process of making 
the following three classes of transformations: 


a) Improvement of Infrastructure — To make it resilient and sustainable, 
b) Addition of the Digital Layer — Which is the essence of the smart paradigm; and 
c) Business Process Transformation — Necessary to capitalize on the investments in smart technologies. 


Smart city tchnologies based on digital infrastructure and digital services offers a potential way of monitoring and 
managing physical and social resource in the city. Digital technologies can collect sufficiently large amounts of 
data to support very close matching of supply availability against demand reguirements. The new communication 
potential from sensors on buildings, roads and other elements of the city and the sharing of data between service 
delivery channels, if integrated, will enable the city to improve services, monitor and control resource usage and 
react to real-time information. 


A defining feature of smart cities is the ability of the components and systems to function efficiently in an integrated 
manner as well as independently. The optimal use of resources across a complex urban environment depends 
on the interaction between different city services and systems. To identify the most effective use of resources, 
therefore, reguires communication between the different component systems (for example, energy consumption 
monitored by smart metering combined with external temperature and sunlight monitoring on the building to 
reduce the energy consumption). 


Smart infrastructure is the result of combining physical infrastructure with digital infrastructure, providing 
improved information to enable better decision-making, faster and cheaper. 


However, the rapid growth in communication technologies for last more than four-five decades has provided the 
users with multiple choices with their respective diversities and USPs for different applications and use cases. 
As a result, stakeholders of different ecosystems have chosen different technologies and protocols to meet their 
respective applications needs. In some cases, even different segmented stakeholders of a common ecosystem have 
developed/adopted different, communication technologies, protocols, data semantics and standards. 


The siloed way of deploying the IoT/M2M infrastructure is not desirable and a need was felt to have a harmonized 
common last-mile communication architecture approach. In a smart city scenario, to enable interoperability 
between divergent devices as well as applications while maintaining identity and access control, it is desirable to 
have common last-mile communication architecture. This will also ensure feasibility in the sharing of data with 
ensured security and privacy. 


The loT value chain is perhaps the most diverse and complicated value chain. Due to heterogeneity and lack 
of convergence the smart nodes of one network cannot talk to smart nodes of the other networks. The variety 
of solutions with limited interoperability exist for different areas like home automation, building automation, 
industrial automation etc. This limited interoperability is the major driving factor to consider developing 
Unified, resilient, secure and sustainable, ICT framework for smart infrastructure developments. The Standard 
IS 18000 “Unified digital infrastructure ICT reference architecture” (presently under development) defines a 
comprehensive ICT reference architecture for a resilient, secure and sustainable digital infrastructure for smart 
cities, districts, states or nations. 


The unified last mile communication protocols stack reference architecture is an integral part of the “unified digital 
infrastructure ICT reference architecture” and it layouts the contours of unified communication for “smart city” and 
“smart infrastructure”. 


iii 


Indian Standard 


UNIFIED DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE — 
UNIFIED LAST MILE COMMUNICATION 


PROTOCOLS STACK 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


PART 1 REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE (UDI - ULMCPS - RA) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Indian Standard defines the Unified Last 
Miles Communication Protocol Stack — Reference 
Architecture (ULMCP-RA) for communication devices 
deployed in digital infrastructure. 


1.2 The reference architecture described in this 
standard supports devices which operate using different 
communication technologies and deployed in any of 
the following topologies: 


a) Personal Area Network (PAN); 
b) Neighbour Area Network (NAN); 
c) Field Area Network (FAN); and 
d) Wide Area Network (WAN). 


1.3 This standard also provides a brief description of 
other standards in the last mile communication protocol 
stack series. 


NOTE — This standard covers only IPv6 based networks. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards. 


IS No./Other Title 


Publication 


IS 18000 : 2020 Unified Digital Infrastructure — 
Reference Architecture 
(UDI-RA) 

[6LOWPAN] Transmission of 
IPv6 Packets over IEEE 802.15.4 


Networks (6LoWPAN) 


[6LPHC] Compression Format 
for IPv6 Datagrams in 6LoWPAN 
Networks 


IETF RFC 4944 


IETF RFC 6282 


IS No./Other 
Publication 


IETF RFC 6775 


IETF RFC 3748 


IETF RFC 4764 


IETF RFC 2460 


IETF RFC 3633 


IETF RFC 4886 


IETF RFC 4443 


IETF RFC 4291 
IETF RFC 793 


IETF RFC 768 
IETF RFC 1123 


IEEE 802.15.4- 
2020 


IS 12373 
(Part 1) : 2018/ 
ISO/IEC 
7498-1 : 1994 


Title 


[6LPND] Neighbour Discovery 
Optimization for IPv6 over 
Low-Power Wireless Personal 
Area Networks (6LoWPANs) 


Extensible 
Protocol (EAP) 


The EAP-PSK Protocol: A 
Pre-Shared Key Extensible 
Authentication Protocol (EAP) 
Method 


Internet Protocol, 
(IPv6) Specification 


IPv6 Prefix Options for Dynamic 


Authentication 


Version 6 


Host Configuration Protocol 
(DHCP) version 6 
Using HMAC-SHA-256, 


HMAC-SHA-384, and 


HMAC-SHA-512 with IPsec 
Internet Control Message 
Protocol (ICMPv6) for the 
Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) 
Specification 
IP Version 6 
Architecture 


Addressing 


Transmission Control Protocol 
(TCP) 


User Datagram Protocol (UDP) 


Reguirements for Internet 
Hosts — Application and Support 


IEEE Std. 802.15.4™ — 2020, 
IEEE Standard for Low-Rate 
Wireless Networks 


Information technology — Open 
systems interconnection — Basic 
reference model: Part 1 The basic 
model (first revision) 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For this standard, the following definition(s) shall apply 
in addition to the definitions given in IS 18000 : 2020. 


3.1 Physical Layer (PHY) — In the open systems 
interconnection reference model, the layer that provides 
the mechanical, electrical, functional, and procedural 
means to establish, maintain and release physical 
connections for the transfer of bits over a transmission 
medium. 


3.2 Media Access Control (MAC) — The media 
access control (MAC) enables the transmission of 
MAC frames using the physical channel. Besides the 
data service, it offers a management interface and itself 
manages access to the physical channel and network 
beaconing. It also controls frame validation, guarantees 
time slots and handles node associations. Finally, it 
offers hook points for secure services. 


3.3 6LoWPAN — 6LoWPAN defines the frame 
format for transmission of IPv6 [RFC2460] packets 
as well as the formation of IPv6 link-local addresses 
and statelessly autoconfigured addresses on top of 
IEEE 802.15.4 networks. 6LoWPAN also defines 
mechanisms for header compression required to make 
IPv6 practical on IEEE 802.15.4 networks, and the 
provisions required for packet delivery in different 
network topologies using IEEE 802.15.4. 


3.4 Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) — Internet 
Protocol version 6 (IPv6) is the most recent version of 
the Internet Protocol (IP), the communications protocol 
that provides an identification and location system for 
computers on networks and routes traffic across the 
Internet. 


3.5 Internet Control Message Protocol Version 
6 (ICMPv6) — Internet Control Message Protocol 
version 6 (ICMPv6) is the implementation of the 
Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) for Internet 
Protocol version 6 (IPv6. ICMPv6 is an integral part 
of IPv6 and performs error reporting and diagnostic 
functions ( for example, ping), and has a framework for 
extensions to implement future changes. 


3.6 RPL — RPL is the IPv6 routing protocol for low- 
power and lossy networks. 
NOTE — RPL is designed to be a simple and inter-operable 
networking protocol for resource-constrained devices in 
industrial, home, and urban environments, intended to support 
the vision of the Internet of Things with thousands of devices 
interconnected through multi hop mesh networks. 


3.7 Last Mile — The last mile refers to the portion 
of the communications network chain that physically 
reaches the end-user’s premises and/or end devices. 


3.8 ULMCPS — ULMCPS stands for “Unified Last 
Mile Communication Protocols Stack”. 


3.9 UDI-ULMCPS-RA — UDI-ULMCPS-RA stands 
for Unified Digital Infrastructure - Unified Last 
Mile Communication Protocols Stack - Reference 
Architecture. Itis the reference architecture of the stack 
that defines the interplay, relationship and interfaces 
between different Layers in the Stack to enable 
heterogenous Communication Technologies to work in 
a homogeneous manner. 


4 SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS 


For this standard, the letter symbols given in Table 1 
have the meaning indicated against each, other symbols 
used in this standard have been explained at appropriate 
places. 


Table 1 Symbols and Abbreviations 


( Clause 4) 
Symbol Description 
UDI Unified Digital Infrastructure 
EAP Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP), 
IETF RFC 3748 
EAP-PSK The EAP-PSK Protocol: A Pre-Shared Key 


Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) 
Method, IETF RFC 4764 


Hash Message Authentication Code Using 
SHA-256 as Hashed Function. 


HMAC-SHA256 


ICMP6 Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMPv6) 
for the Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) 
Specification, IETF RFC 4443 

IPv6 Internet Protocol, Version 6  (IPv6) 
Specification, IETF RFC 2460 

IP6ADDR IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture, IETF 
RFC 4291 

IPv6-DHCP “IPv6 Prefix Options for Dynamic Host 
Configuration Protocol (DHCP) version 6, 
IETF RFC 3633 

ULMCPS Unified Last Mile Communication Protocol 


Stack 


ULMCPS-APP Unified Last Mile Communication 
Protocol — Application Layer 


ULMCPS-NAIL Unified Last Mile Communication 
Protocol — Network Access Interface Layer 


ULMCPS-NAL Unified Last Mile Communication 
Protocol — Network Access Layer 


ULMCPS-NTL Unified Last Mile Communication 
Protocol — Network and Transport Layer 


PICS Protocol Implementation Conformance 
Statement 

TCP Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), IETF 
RFC 793 

UDP User Datagram Protocol (UDP), IETF RFC 
768 

NAIL Network Access Interface Layer 


5 UNIFIED LAST MILE COMMUNICATION 


PROTOCOL STACK REFERENCE 
ARCHITECTURE (ULMCPS-RA) - GOALS 
AND OBJECTIVES 


Areference architecture models the abstractarchitectural 
elements in the domain of interest independent of the 
technologies, protocols, and products that are used to 
implement a specific solution for the domain. 


The “UDI-Unified Last Mile Communication 
Protocols Stack Reference Architecture” is a 
capability-based, layered, and standards-based 
Reference Architecture which is a project, market and 
vendor agnostic. ULMCPS-RA does not prescribe any 
solution or technologies and it enables modular and 
incremental implementations for IPv6 based network. 
ULMCPS-RA describes generic communication 
system characteristics, a conceptual model, and a 
reference architecture. The ULMCPS-RA provides 
guidance for the designer developing a communication 
protocol stack and aims to give a better understanding 
of last mile communication protocols stack architecture 
to the stakeholders of such stacks, including devices 
and systems manufacturers, application developers, 
systems integrators, communication service providers, 
customers and users. 


The ULMCPS reference architecture addresses all 
the crucial aspects like multiple communication 
technologies, security, services and functional 
characteristics, and implementation variations based 
on well-defined design principles. 


The intent of the reference architecture and its 
constituent design principles is to provide developers 
and stakeholders that wish to implement unified last 
mile communication infrastructure initiatives in a truly 
technology and vendor agnostic approach that will 
result in an enhanced interoperable, standards-based 
architecture and implementation which is specific to 
a technology when their specific application context 
is applied. In addition, this reference architecture can 
be used with existing communication technologies to 
plan for improving interoperability and functioning 
of an expanding technology solution for various 
digital infrastructure projects implementations. This 
technology and vendor agnostic approach is meant 
to provide key elements and concepts needed to be 
addressed to make these resulting solution architectures 
interoperable. 


UDI-ULMCPS RA aims for numerous benefits for 
citizens, businesses and government departments. 
The developmental objective is tremendous savings 
and optimization of CAPEX and OPEX of the digital 
infrastructure; and unprecedented reduction in the 
“Carbon Footprint' of the Digital Infrastructure in any 
earmarked geographical territory. 


This standard supports the following 
standardization objectives: 


important 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


a) To enable the production of a coherent set of 
standards for last mile communication, 


b) To provide atechnology-neutral reference point for 
defining standards for last mile communication, 
and 


c) To encourage openness and transparency in the 
development of a target ULMCPS RA and in 
the implementation of IoT and communication 
systems. 


6 DESIGN PRINCIPLES 


The reference architecture for unified last mile 
communication protocols stack should be considered 
as a common “umbrella” that allows the structured 
positioning of existing protocols stack architectures 
and associated implemented solutions. The reference 
architecture should support re-use of existing proven 
architectures, which are typically aimed at specific 
layers, such as the network access layer or the network 
transport layer or application layer which are more 
detailed and specific. 


a) The reference architecture follows a layered 
approach for decomposition of logical clusters, 
each of it can be defined either separately 
or integrated into an overall communication 
architecture. 


b) Capabilities are the center element of the 
architectures to ensure that a common ground 
is easy to be found; each capability cluster is 
represented by a single layer within the reference 
architecture. 


c) The reference architecture should allow and 
certainly not hinder incremental, iterative 
evolutionary approaches for implementation 
of open communication technologies, typically 
starting by focusing on existing opportunities/pain 
points and then incrementally further expanding 
the communication over time. 


d) The stack reference architecture should be based 
as much as possible on open standards, preferably 
based on proven large-scale deployments. 
Especially, between the various layers in a 
communication stack architecture, open standards 
are promoted to support flexibility and prevent 
vendor lock-in. 

e) The reference architecture should enable a variety 
of open communication technologies. In general, 
the reference architecture must be agnostic to 


technology, market structure, implementation 
method, vendor and products. 
f) The reference architecture should enable 


the stakeholders to use and deploy various 
(combinations) of global open communication 
technologies and corresponding open standards 
in the unified last mile communication protocols 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


stack, assuming they follow the logical clustering 
of capabilities. 


g) The reference architecture described in this 
document shall remain valid for as long as possible, 
even if technology and standards change — 
making it as much as possible future proof. 


h) Any infrastructure approach (WPAN, FAN, 
WAN, mix of all) shall be possible (that is, the 
reference architecture is agnostic to infrastructure 
deployment scenarios). 


j) Privacy and security principles are integral part of 
any communication stack and their architecture 
(often called privacy and security by design). 


k) Infrastructure data is currently often 
under-utilized, and then often in a single vertical 
application. Despite synergetic opportunities, 
data is hardly used across vertical domains. An 
important focus area of communication stack 
architecture should therefore be on harmonization 
of data from different domains and data providers 
for an increase re-use and repurposing of existing 
urban data and infrastructures. 


m) An important focus area of last mile 
communication reference architecture should 
be on “collaboration” and “sharing” approaches 
across domains versus “single entity/domain 
processes”. 


7 CHARACTERISTICS OF UNIFIED LAST 


MILE COMMUNICATION PROTOCOLS 
STACK REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE 
(ULMCPS-RA) 


The key characteristics of the unified last mile 
communication stack architecture to meet the 
comprehensive yet diverse requirements of the 
digital infrastructure stakeholders play a vital role 
in applicability, scalability and futureproofing of 
the reference architecture. Some of the essential 
characteristics are given in 7.1 to 7.9. 


7.1 Composability 


Composability is the ability to combine discrete 
communication stack layers into a comprehensive 
communication stack architecture to achieve a set of 
goals and objectives. 


7.2 Interoperability 


Interoperability is a key reguirement for the success 
of any solutions on the market. Systems must be 
“future-proof”, that is, grow and adapt with the 
changing needs of the user over time. Interoperability 
is addressed at multiple layers: 


a) Ability to exchange bits and bytes (network), 
b) Ability 
(syntax); 


to exchange well-formed messages 


c) Ability to correctly understand the information 
(semantics); and 

d) ability to correctly provide the desired services to 
the user (user perspective). 


7.3 Functional 
Separation 


and Management Capability 
Separation of functional and management capabilities 
means that the functional interfaces and capabilities 
of devices connected through the communication 
protocol are cleanly separated from the management 
interfaces and capabilities of that component. This 
typically means that the management interface is 
independent from that of the functional interface and 
the management capabilities are handled by different 
software components than the functional interfaces. 


7.4 Homogeneity in Heterogeneity 


A diverse set of components and physical entities of 
the unified digital infrastructure ecosystem that interact 
in various independent ways otherwise, work in a 
seamless homogeneous manner through the unified 
stack architecture. 


7.5 Scalability 


Scalability is the characteristic of a system to continue 
to work effectively as the size of the system, its 
complexity or the volume of work performed by the 
system is increased. 


The digital infrastructure involves various elements 
such as devices, networks, services, applications, users, 
stored data, data traffic, and event reports. The amount 
of each of these elements can change over time and it 
is important that the communication stack continues to 
function effectively when the volume of data from any 
element increases. 


7.6 Shareability 


Shareability is the capacity of an individual component 
to be accessed and its resources allocated communally 
between multiple interconnected systems. 


Many infrastructure components are underutilized 
since a single system often uses only a fraction of a 
component’s capabilities. Resources can be used more 
efficiently if functionality or outputs of components can 
be shared among multiple systems. The communication 
stack architecture should allow the data from individual 
components belonging to a specific vertical/siloed 
application to be shared with other stakeholders of that 
data ubiquitously. 


7.7 Unique Identification 


Unique identification is the characteristic of an 
infrastructure system to unambiguously and repeatably 
associate the entities within the system with an 
individual name, code, symbol, or number, and to 


interact with the entities, or trace or control their 
activities, by referencing that name, code, symbol 
or number. These entities include the components of 
the IoT system itself, such as software components, 
sensors, actuators, and network components. 


It is essential that the entities in an infrastructure 
system can be distinguished from each other even thru 
the communication stack. This enables interoperability 
and global services across heterogeneous 
infrastructure systems. It is important for entities to 
be uniquely identifiable within a given context so that 
infrastructure systems can appropriately monitor and 
communicate with specific entities. Some devices 
can be hidden behind infrastructure gateways, or 
information consolidated to protect privacy. A variety 
of identification schemes can be supported in specific 
implementations of infrastructure systems to meet the 
application requirements. 


For examples: IPv4 address, IPv6 address, MAC 
address, URI, and FQDNs are used as unique, 
unambiguous identification of network endpoints 
in Internet applications. Individual hardware 
devices, software, and other entities can have unique 
manufacturer’s IDs, object identifiers, universally 
unique identifiers (OIDs, UUIDs) or other identifiers 
which similarly allow unique, unambiguous 
identification. Physical Entities are often given 
labels in the form of radio frequency identification 
(RFID) tags, barcodes and their equivalents. These 
carriers can contain encoded identifiers that can be 
sensed by an infrastructure device. For humans, 
biometric information can be used to provide unique 
identification. 


7.8 Well-characterized Components 


Infrastructure components are considered to be 
well-defined when an accurate description of 
their capabilities and characteristics is available, 
including any associated uncertainties. Capability 
information includes not only information about the 
specific component functionality, but configuration, 
communication, security, reliability and other relevant 
information. 


Many components are used to assemble an infrastructure 
for any use case/application. They are typically 
discovered through an information system interface 
and the metadata associated with the component 
cannot be available because the component does not 
follow established standards or is incapable of storing 
metadata. Without understanding the capabilities of 
each component that will be used within a system it 
is difficult to understand whether the system meets its 
design goals. 


Similarly, there are many functional characteristics and 
trustworthiness characteristics that need to be the core 
characteristics of the communication stack reference 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


architecture to deliver its true value to the diverse 
stakeholders of the digital infrastructure paradigm. 


7.9 Security 


Security is the most important aspect of any network and 
is indispensable for the critical infrastructure. It is very 
important to incorporate security at the design phase. 
There are different aspects of security to be covered in 
any system design: 


a) Authentication; 

b) Authorization; 

c) Encryption; 

d) Data integrity; 

e) Key management; 

f) Hardware security; 

g) Identity management; and 
h) Secured firmware update. 


8 CONCEPTUAL AND REFERENCE MODEL: 
THE OSI MODEL 


The ULMCPS reference architecture is derived 
from the well-established and globally accepted 
standard-the OSI model. The standard OSI model has 
been improvised to ensure the multiple communication 
technologies can work in homogenous manner. 
Fig. 1 shows the OSI model and Fig. 2 shows the 
improvised LMCPS reference model. 


A detailed description of open systems 
interconnection basic reference model is available in 
IS 12373 (Part 1) : 2018/ISO/IEC 7498-1 : 1994, 


9 THE UNIFIED LAST MILE COMMUNICATION 
PROTOCOL STACK (ULMCPS) 


The key characteristic of “Last-Mile” communication 
technologies and their respective communication 
protocols defined as one of the principal constituents of 
the unified digital infrastructure reference architecture 
is the need to connect heterogeneous devices with 
heterogeneous applications while maintaining the 
necessary interoperability across all such devices 
(irrespective of the diversity in the PHY and 
link-layer technologies) and offer a seamless view to 
the applications. They should also allow connectivity to 
existing infrastructures and to the internet. 


A common network-layer protocol, IP-based 
“Last-Mile” architecture will enable interoperability: 


a) Among heterogeneous link-layer technologies, 
such as IEEE 802.11, IEEE 802.15.4, cellular, 
bluetooth or powerline communication (PLC) etc.; 
and 

b) Among heterogeneous reguirements in applications, 
such as web-based configuration systems, publish- 
subscribe protocols, etc. 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


Application 


Physical 


Fic. 1 OSI MoDEL 


Application 


Network Access Interface 


| 


Network Access 


Fic. 2 THE IMPROVISED LMCPS REFERENCE MODEL 


The 6LoWPAN (IPv6 Low-power PAN) adaptation 
layer, defined by IETF integrates IP-based 
infrastructures and heterogeneous “last-mile” field 
devices by specifying how IPv6 packets are to be routed 
in constrained networks (such as the IEEE 802.15.4 
network). Hence, the 6LoWPAN is considered as a 
universal adaptation layer for IP enablement in the 
LMCPS. 


It is also essential to unify the networking and data 
transfer stack for higher layers (ranging from network 
layer to the application layer); to make it easier 
for various protocols and stacks to cross-function, 
irrespective of the underlying PHY and MAC layer 
technologies. 


The unification of last miles communication can be 
achieved by: 


a) Standardizing Layer 1 — 2 (PHY/MAC [Network 
Access Layer]) 

b) Standardizing Layer 3 — 6 (Network/Transport 
Layer) 

c) Standardizing Layer 7 (Application Layer) 

d) Standardizing the interfaces (“Network Access 
Interface Layer”) between Layer 1-2 and 
Layer 3-6 

9.1 Standardizing Layer 1-2 


The PHY and MAC layers are tightly coupled with 
each other and hence the two layers need to be defined 


together. For any application, the selection of PHY 
and MAC layers depend on the different technology 
and its corresponding parameters considered for the 
application, use case and/or deployment scenario. 
Some of the parameters/criteria to be considered are as 
follows: 


a) Radio freguency band to be used", 

b) Maximum range expected, 

c) Type of modulation, 

d) Frame encryption needed; 

e) Channel access mechanism required 

f) Maximum data rate needed; 

g) Frequency hopping to avoid any channel access 
failure; 

h) Transmit power; and 

j) Dynamic control of transmit power. 


* should follow National Frequency allocation plan issued by 

WPC, DOT. 
Based on the above parameters/criteria and the use case, 
a suitable MAC and PHY can be chosen. Since, the two 
Layers (PHY and MAC) are closely coupled and hence 
considered as a single entity, “Network Access Layer” 
and are referred to as part of “Network Access Layer” 
in this document, here onwards. 


9.2 Standardizing Layer 3 — 6 


Since IPv6 is the way forward in the IP communication 
regime, IPv6 shall be kept as the basic requirement. 
This makes it easy to create a unified Layer 3 — 6 
Protocol Stack. It may still be needed to have few 
components like mesh network support, security 
as different options, which can be used based on 
the end application. Rest all other features and 
functionality can be unified for Layer 3 — 6. The unified 
Layer 3 — 6 should be defined in a way that it 
should work with any of the Network Access Layer 
(Layer 1 —2) options. To be specific, below are some of 
the parameters we will need to consider as part of the 
protocol definition at these layers: 


a) IPv6 support; 

b) Network topology (mesh, star, tree, etc.); 
c) Maximum number of hops; 

d) IP layer security; 

e) Security Framework 

f) Maximum packet size; 

g) Fragmentation/defragmentation; and 

h) Connection less/connection oriented. 


As the security (Authentication) may not be unified 
for all underlying technologies, suitable security 
specifications need to be defined depending on the 
specific technology being used. 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


9.3 Standardizing Layer 7 


To achieve end-to-end unified stack, and to achieve 
interoperability in a truly comprehensive manner, it 
is important to have interoperability at application 
layer as well. For this, the payload and data semantics 
need to be standardized, as well. The application layer 
standard shall essentially define the standardized data 
structures and frames that shall constitute the payload 
in any application and/or use case in unified digital 
infrastructure. It shall also define the different modes of 
the applications namely, RUN Mode, FOTA (Firmware 
update Over The Air) COTA (Configuration Update 
Over The Air) and other Device Management features 
like Device Registration, Device Bootstrapping, Device 
Life Cycle Management etc. 


Standardizing the data semantics is one of the 
most crucial aspects to be addressed in the unified 
dgital infrastructure domain. It has been observed 
that it is feasible to standardize the comprehensive 
set of data semantics for the digital infrastructure. 
However, creating (and standardizing) a very large list 
(and growing larger with time) of Data semantics 
shall not serve the purpose for such a complex and 
heterogeneous domain. We need to either identify any 
existing or create a framework to define a huge and 
ever-growing number of data semantics in a unified, 
harmonized and structured manner. However, this shall 
not be part of the LMCPS Set of Standards and shall 
be developed separately considering its wide scope 
and complex relationship with the ontology and data 
models in the data layer architecture. 


9.4 Standardizing the Interfaces (“Network Access 
Interface Layer”): 


To achieve seamless interworking between different 
communication technologies” respective PHY and 
MAC layers respective characteristics and data frames 
structures and the standardized layer 3-6 stack, it shall 
be required to customize the interface between these two 
macro layers with each of the different communication 
technology being used as per the need of deployment 
considerations. 


The “Network Access Interface Layer” introduction 
shall ensure that neither the standardized 
Layer 3-6 Stack (Network/Transport Layer) nor 
the Layer 1-2 (Network Access Layer) of any 
communication technology stack shall need any change. 
This “Network Access Interface Layer” shall provision 
and address all the interworking requirements. 


10 ULMCPS REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE 


This section describes the ULMCPS Reference 
Architecture based on which, a different set of 
standards under this domain can be developed 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


(Fig. 3). The set of standards developed based on this 
architecture ensure that the unified (and standardized) 
upper layers are harmonized and interworking 
with different technologies at the lower layers in a 
homogeneous manner. This will enable addressing 
multiple heterogeneous applications, use cases and 
deployment scenarios using diverse technologies in 
the same geographical territory in a ubiguitous, and 
comprehensive yet most optimized and sustainable 
manner. 


The Unified LMCPS Reference Architecture described 
in this standard has the following blocks and layers. 


10.1 Network Access Layer (ULMCPS-NAL) 


The ULMCPS Network Access Layer consists of a set 
of tightly coupled PHY and MAC Layer definitions, 
functions and characteristics of the Communication 
Technology being considered for the last mile 
communication in the unified digital infrastructure. 


10.1.1 Physical Layer (PHY) 


This block of the reference architecture contains the 
definition, functions and characteristics of physical 
layer being used. The physical layer may use a wired 
or wireless communication technology. For reference, 
it has been illustrated in Fig. 4 how this reference 
block can be realized by actual standard. Here, 
IEEE 802.15.4-2020 is used as the physical layer 
standard. 


Application 
(CoAP, LWM2M, ...) 


Transport 
(UDP, TCP, ...) 


10.1.2 Medium Access Control (MAC) 


This layer within the network access layer of the 
reference architecture contains the definition, functions 
and characteristics of medium access control layer 
being used. The MAC Layer based on the physical 
layer may use a wired or wireless communication 
technology. For reference, it has been illustrated in Fig. 
4 how this layer******** can be realized by the actual 
standard. For illustration is used IEEE 802.15.4-2020 
at the MAC Layer. 


10.2 Network 
(ULMCPS-NAIL) 


This Layer of the Reference Architecture comprises 
of either existing Open Standards or newly developed 
different Glue-Logics, Algorithms, Interworking 
Mechanisms and/or methodologies (or a combination 
thereof) required to seamlessly integrate the lower 
MAC and PHY Layers with the Upper Layers (Network 
/Transport and Application) of the Stack. 


Access Interface Layer 


For every different Communication Technology, 
deploying different Network Access Layer, a separate 
set of unique NAILS (Network Access Interface 
Layer Specifications) shall be developed to seamlessly 
Integrate the particular Network Access Layer with the 
Standardized Upper Layers (Network, Transport and 
Application Layer). 


Network 
(IPv6, ICMPv6, ...) 


Ayımaas 


Network Access Interface 
(6LoWPAN, RFC 2464, RFC 5072, ...) 


= 
mi 
> 
fi 
— 
p 
sa 
o 
— 
B 
2 
QO 
© 
> 
EJ 
QO 
© 
D 


CT 


Network Access 


IEEE IEEE IEEE Cellular ... (many 
802.154 1901.2 802.11 more) 


Fic. 3 ULmcps REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE 


Application 
(CoAP, LWM2M, ...) 


Transport 
(UDP, TCP, :::) 
n 
8 
= 
Network < 
(IPv6, ICMPv6, ...) 


111708 *X1"208 ‘STLA “STL-AVA) 


Network Access Interface 
(6LoWPAN, RFC 6550, IEEE 802.15.9, 


N) 


Network Access Network Access 
(IEEE 802.15.4-2020) (IEEE 802.11 a/b/g/n/...) 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


Application 
(CoAP, LWM2M, ...) 


Transport 
(UDP, TCP, ...) 
n 
Q 
O 
5 
Network < 


(IPv6, ICMPv6, ...) 


111708 XI 'Z08 ‘STILA “STL-AVA) 


Network Access Interface 
(RFC 2464, ...) 


Co 


Fic. 4 ULmcps Ra wita 802.15.4 NAL AND 802.11 NAL ILLUSTRATIONS 


For instance, Figure 4 illustrates how this Reference 
Block will be realized by the actual standard. In the 
illustration, 6LoWPAN, RPL, and other IETF standards 
have been leveraged to interface the underlying IEEE 
802.15.4-2020 based MAC and PHY Layers. It may be 
noted that these may change with change in underlying 
communication technology depending on their 
respective characteristics of the PHY & MAC Layers. 


10.3 Network & Transport Layer (ULMCPS-NTL) 


The ULMCPS Network& Transport Layer consists 
of a tightly coupled set of definitions, functions 
and characteristics. This Layer of the Reference 
Architecture shall comprise of the mechanisms like 
IPv6, ICMPv6, UDP, TCP, DHCPv6 and other either 
existing Open Standards or newly developed different 
Glue-Logics, Algorithms, Interworking Mechanisms 
and/or methodologies (or a combination thereof) 
required to seamlessly interface the lower Layers 
(NAL) through the NAIL (Network Access Interface 
Layer) to the Application Layer of the Stack. 


The objective is to create a unified Network & 
Transport Layer which can be used seamlessly with 
different underlying lower layers of PHY & MAC and 
Application Layer on the top. 


10.4 Application Layer (ULMCPS-AL) 


The ULMCPS Application Layer consists of a tightly 
coupled set of definitions, functions and characteristics. 
The application layer comprises communications 
protocols and interface methods used in 
process-to-process communications across an Internet 
Protocol (IP) computer network. The Application 
Layer only standardizes the Payload Frames and 
interworking between different End Nodes at the 
Application Level. The communication depends upon 


the underlying transport layer protocols to establish 
host-to-host data transfer channels and manage the data 
exchange in a client-server or peer-to-peer networking 
model. Though the TCP/IP application layer does 
not describe specific rules or data formats that 
applications must consider when communicating, the 
original specification (in RFC 1123) does rely on and 
recommend the robustness principle for application 
design. 


10.5 Security 


The Security Layer consists of a tightly coupled 
set of definitions, functions and characteristics for 
Comprehensive & Intrinsic Security in the Unified 
Last Mile Communication Protocol Stack Reference 
Architecture. It comprises of a set of Security Standards 
to be used to address the Security requirement of the 
Stack comprehensively. The chosen Standards may be 
used at different Layers ofthe Stack depending on their 
context. This block may need to be defined differently 
based on the Technology being used at MAC and 
PHY Layer. However, some different Communication 
Technologies may use a Security Block common to 
some other Communication Technologies, as well. 


Section 12 in this document describes each layer 
in detail for one of the underlying communication 
technologies (IEEE 802.15.4 - 2020) being used. This 
section may have multiple versions of it based on which 
technology is being used. 


11 REFERENCE PROTOCOL STACK 


This section describes a reference protocol stack 
(Figure 5) based on the Reference Stack Architecture 
defined in 10. The Reference protocol Stack defined in 
this section maps the different layers of the OSI Model 
to the ULMCP-RA Layers. 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


OSI Model Layers 


BIS UDI-LMCPS 


BIS UDI-Application 


BIS UDI-Network & Transport 


> 
= 
‘= 
5 
o 
© 
wW 
a 
> 
a] 
= 


BIS UDI-Network Access 


Fic. 5 REFERENCE PROTOCOL STACK 


The BIS-UDI-ULMCPS is essentially defined based 
upon various IETF, IEEE, ANSI/TIA, ISO, IEC, ITU 
and other International, Regional or National SDO’s 
Open Standards supporting Low Power and Lossy 
Networks. The complete BIS ULMCPS Reference 
Architecture provides an application independent 
IPv6-based Transport Service for both 
Connection-Less (UDP) and Connection-Oriented 
(TCP) Services. 


As enumerated in the Reference Architecture, 
the Stack Layers ULMCPS-NAL and 
ULMCPS-NAIL are specific to each distinct 


Communication Technology. However, it is important 
to understand that the ULMCPS RA does not 
develop Network Access Layer Specifications for any 
underlying Last Mile Communication Technology 
on its own; rather it develops and defines the NAILS 
(Network Access Interface Layer Specifications) to 
ensure seamless and efficient interworking of the 
Unified Upper Layers with diverse Communication 
Technologies’ respective Network Access Layer 
Specifications. These Layers shall be specific to the 
Technology selected, derived from the use cases 
and deployment scenario of application(s) under 
consideration. The Reference Architecture of the 
Unified Last Mile Communication Protocols Stack 
provides the freedom to select different wired/wireless 
technologies based on the application reguirement, e.g. 
Sub GHz or 2.4 GHz (IEEE 802.15.4- 2020], PLC, 
Wi-Fi, Cellular, NB-IoT, 5G, etc. The NAILS includes 
the standards and specifications reguired to integrate 
the Lower layer (NAL) with IPv6 Layer. It may also 
include some of the additional features needed which 
are specific to the technology being considered. For 
example, Network Topology (Mesh, Star, Tree etc.), 
Network Management, Security etc. 


The Stack Layer ULMCPS-NTL is defined as a Unified 
Stack for multiple underlying technologies. This layer 
will contain the definition & Characteristics of IPv6, 


10 


ICMPv6, UDP, TCP, DHCPv6 and other features to 
be used between PHY & MAC Layer and Application 
Layer (through the NAIL). 


The Stack Layer ULMCPS-AL contains the 
communications protocols and interface methods 
used in process-to-process communications across an 
Internet Protocol (IP) networks. The Application Layer 
only standardizes communication and depends upon 
the underlying transport layer protocols to establish 
host-to-host data transfer channels and manage the data 
exchange in a client-server or peer-to-peer networking 
model. 


The Security Layer/Block shall bespreadacross different 
Layers of the Unified LMCPS to cover different aspects 
of the security at different levels comprehensively to 
ensure the intrinsic character of Security that is critical 
in Smart and/or Critical Infrastructure of a Nation. This 
layer may or may not be defined differently based on the 
imperatives of different communication technologies 
being used at lower layers. 


12 ULMCPS STANDARDS FAMILY 


12.1 General 


This section describes the Standards (to be developed) 
which are part of the Unified & Secure LMCPS 
Reference Architecture. This list of standards will 
keep growing based on the new communication 
technologies being developed and adopted in future 
or any new requirements of the stakeholders of the 
UDI-ULMCPS. The NTL and APP Layer Specifications 
shall be combined and common to all different Lower 
Layers’ and their respective Technologies. 


The below set of standards and their classification is 
based on the initial general understanding and any 
deviation to merge the multiple standards into one or 
split any specific standard into multiple standards may 
benecessitated based on the ever changing requirements 
of new applications, use cases and/or deployment 


scenarios, or even emerging new technologies and, last 
but not the least, based on stakeholders concerns and 
expectations. 


12.2 Standards structure and hierarchy 


Table 2 provides the structure of the Standards (to be 
developed) in the ULMCPS family. These standards will 
get updated periodically based on the observations of 
the stakeholders, new features reguest, new application 
to be supported in future. But all the changes will be 
applicable to all underlying PHY and MAC support as 
part of ULMCPS. 


Table 2 ULMCPS Family Standards 


LITD-28-LMCPS Standard Numbering System 
IS 18xxx 
IS 18010 
IS 18010-x-y 


LITD28 standard series number 
UDI LMCPS Standard Series number 


Here 

“x” tells the Specification family: 

: Architecture 

: Application Layer 

: Network & Transport Layer 

: Network Access Interface Layer 
: Network Access Layer 


au hugo 


: System Test 
“y” tells the Specification Type: 
1: Technical Specification 


2: Test Specification 


NOTE — With every new communication technology to be integrated 
we will use next series under IS 1801x. Which means next technology 
will get the standards defined with a standard number of series 
IS 18011 and so on. 


Current Set of Documents Plan 


IS 18010-1 UDI ULMCPS 
Architecture 


JDI LMCPS Application Layer 
echnical specification 


JDI LMCPS Application Layer 
est Specification 


DI LMCPS Network and 
ransport Layer Technical 
pecification 


DI LMCPS Network Access 
nterface Layer (IEEE 802.15.4) 
echnical specification 


JDI LMCPS Network Access 
ayer (IEEE 802.15.4) Technical 
pecification 


JDI LMCPS 
ayer (IEEE 
pecification 


JDI LMCPS complete Stack Test 
pecification (IEEE 802.15.4) 


Reference 


IS 18010-2-1 


Aa 


IS 18010-2-2 


Man! 


IS 18010-3-1 


IS 18010-4-1 


35d 


IS 18010-5-1 


NE 


n 


IS 18010-5-2 Network Access 


802.15.4) Test 


wie 


un 


IS 18010-6-2 


El 


un 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


Future Set of Documents 

IS 18011-4-1 | UDI LMCPS 
Network Access 
Interface Layer 
(Technology A) 

IS 18011-5-1 | UDI LMCPS 
Network Access 
Layer (Technology 
A) 

IS 18011-5-2 | UDI LMCPS | Technology A 
Network Access 
Layer (Technology 
A) Test 
Specification 

IS 18011-6-2 | UDI LMCPS 
complete Stack 
Test Specification 
(Technology A) 

IS 18012-4-1 | UDI LMCPS 
Network Access 
Interface Layer 
(Technology B) 

IS 18012-5-1 | UDI LMCPS 
Network Access 
Layer (Technology 
B) 

IS 18012-5-2 | UDI LMCPS | Technology B 
Network Access 
Layer (Technology 
B) Test 
Specification 

IS 18012-6-2 | UDI LMCPS 
complete Stack 
Test Specification 
(Technology B) 


12.3 UDI LMCPS series of Standards — IEEE 
802.15.4-2020 


This section illustrates how the Last Mile 
Communication Protocol Stack and its Reference 
Architecture can be instantiated into Technology 
Specific Granular Architecture leading to actual 
Standards. This section does not define any standard as 
such, but it covers only the high-level reguirement to 
be covered at each Layer as per ULMCPS Reference 
Architecture. The detailed standards shall be covered 
as part of respective individual standards. 


For illustration purpose, the IEEE 802.15.4-2020 has 
been considered as the Physical Layer and MAC Layer. 


12.3.1 IS 18010-5-1 : 2020 Specification on UDI 
LMCPS NAL - Network Access Layer (IEEE 802.15.4) 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


12.3.1.1 General 


This specification is defined to cover all aspect of Sub 
Giga Hz (865-867MHz) Physical layer and Media 
Access Layer which is derived from IEEE 802.15.4- 
2020 specification. It may also use other MAC layer 
specification for any specific feature which is not 
supported by IEEE 802.15.4-2020 if needed. 


12.3.1.2 Scope 
Physical Layer: 


The Physical layer standard should define all technical 
aspects of the standards to be used including but 
not limited to the set of definitions, functions, and 
characteristics. 


The standard documents should clearly refer the 
standard being used as Normative References with 
section number, table number or figure number being 
referred. 


The standard document should clearly specify all 
optional featured of the standard being adopted as part 
of this BIS standard to ensure seamless Interoperability 
and enable developing comprehensive Compliance 
Test Strategy. 


The standard document should also contain a PICS 
section in it referring different standard and its section 
being used in a tabular form. 


MAC Layer: 


The MAC layer standard should define all Technical 
aspects of the standards to be used including but 
not limited to the set of definitions, functions and 
characteristics. 


The standard document should clearly specify all 
optional features of the standard being adopted as part 
of this BIS standard to ensure seamless Interoperability 
and enable developing comprehensive Compliance 
Test Strategy. 


The standard document should also contain a PICS 
section in it referring different standard and its section 
being used in a tabular form. 


12.3.2 IS 18010-4-1 : 2020 Specification on UDI 
LMCPS Network Access Interface Layer 


12.3.2.1 General 


The specification covers all aspects of Network Access 
Interface Layer. The NAIL will comprise of multiple 
standards based on the features to be supported. 
The NAIL will act as an interface between the 
IEEE 802.15.4-2020 MAC Layer and Network & 
Transport Layer. 


The Security should also be covered as part of this 
specification. It should cover all different aspects of 
the Security to be considered. The standards should 
be selected to make sure that all security reguirement 
mentioned in the below section is addressed properly 


12 


12.3.2.2 Scope 


The NAIL standard should define all Technical aspects 
of the standards to be used including but NOT limited 
to the definitions, functions and characteristics. 


The standard document should clearly specify all 
optional features of a standard being adopted as part 
of this BIS standard to ensure seamless Interoperability 
and enable developing comprehensive Compliance 
Test Strategy. 


The standard document should also contain a PICS 
section in it referring different standard and its section 
being used in a tabular form. 


12.3.3 IS 18010-3-1 : 2020 Specification on ULMCPS 
Network & Transport Layer (NTL) 


12.3.3.1 General 


This specification should cover all aspects of the 
Network and Transport Layer. IPv6 and other 
supporting components to be used as part of Network 
Layer Specification. The standard should use respective 
standardized and applicable RFCs. The Transport layer 
should support UDP as a mandatory feature and TCP as 
an optional feature. 


12.3.3.2 Scope 


The NT Layer standard should define all Technical 
aspects of the standards to be used for the Network 
& Transport Layer including but NOT limited to the 
definitions, functions and characteristics. 


The standard document should clearly specify all 
optional featured of a standard being adopted as part 
of this BIS standard to ensure seamless Interoperability 
and enable developing comprehensive Compliance 
Test Strategy. 


The standard document should also contain a PICS 
section in it referring different standard and its section 
being used in a tabular form. 


12.3.4 IS 18010-2-1 : 2020 Specification on ULMCPS 
Application Layer 


12.3.4.1 General 


The Application Layer standard should define to define 
communications protocols and interface methods 
used in process-to-process communications across an 
Internet Protocol (IP) network. 


The Application layer specification should be used to 
create a new standard if needed to meet the requirement 
as described in the Reference Architecture and Protocol 
stack section of this document. 


12.3.4.2 Scope 


The APP layer standard should define all Technical 
aspects of the standards to be used including but NOT 
limited to the definitions, functions and characteristics. 


The standard document should clearly specify all 
optional featured of a standard being adopted as part 
of this BIS standard to ensure seamless Interoperability 
and enable developing comprehensive Compliance 
Test Strategy. 


13 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


The standard document should also contain a PICS 
section in it referring different standard and its section 
being used in a tabular form. 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Smart infrastructure Sectional Committee, LITD 28 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 


Amravati Smart City Development 
Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


ARM, Noida 


Centre for Development of Telematics, 
New Delhi 


Criterion Network Labs, Bengaluru 
Cyan Connode Private Limited, Bengaluru 


E-Goverments Foundation, Bengaluru 
Ericsson India Private Limited, Gurugram 
ESRI, Noida 


European Project SESEI 
Hawlett Packard Enterprise 
IEEE India, Bengaluru 


India Smart Grid Forum, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 


Intel India Technology Private Limited, 
Bengaluru 


Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, 
New Delhi 


MoHUA Smart Cities Handholding team 


Narnix Technolabs Private Limited, New 
Delhi 


National Smart Grid Mission, Ministry of 
Power, Gurugram 


PHYTEC Embedded Private Limited, 
Bengaluru 


Pune Smart City, Pune 


Qualcomm India Private Limited, Bengaluru 
Renesas Electronics, Bengaluru 


Schneider Electric’s industrial software 
business - AVEVA, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


PROF BHARADWAJ AMRUTUR (Chairman) 


SHRI SIDDHARTH GANESH 


SHRI KUMAAR GUHAN 


SHRI AURINDAM BHATTACHARYA 
SHRIMATI ANUPAMA CHOPRA (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYAPRAKASH KUMAR 
Suri KRISHNA KUMAR Louati (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK NIMARE 
Suri MANISH WIDHANI (Alternate) 


SHRI KRISHNAKUMAR THIAGARAJAN 
SHRI SENDIL KUMAR DEVAR 


SHRI VIJAY KUMAR 
SHRIMATI SEEMA JosHi (Alternate I) 
Suri RUPESH Kumar (Alternate II) 


Suri DINESH CHAND SHARMA 
Suri R. DEVARAJAN 


SHRI SRIKANTH CHANDRASEKARAN 
Suri MUNIR MOHAMMED (Alternate) 


Suri REJI Kumar PILLAI 
SHRIMATI PARUL (Alternate) 


SHRI VASANTH RAJARAMAN 


SHRI C. SUBRAMANIAN 
SHRI ANANTHA NARAYANAN (Alternate 1) 
Suri SIDHARTHA MOHANTY (Alternate IT) 


SHRI KUNAL KUMAR 


SHRI PADAM VIJAY 


Suri N. KISHOR NARANG 


Suri MR ARUN MISRA 
Suri GYAN PRAKASH (Alternate I) 
SHRIMATI KUMUD WADHWA (Alternate II) 


Suri B. VALLAB Rao (VASU) 


Suri MANOJIT BOSE 


Dr VinosH BABU JAMES 
Dr Punit Ratuop (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVINDRA CHATURVEDI 
SHRI SAURABH Goswami (Alternate) 


Suri Gourav Kumar HADA 
SHRIMATI SANGEETA GARG (Alternate) 


14 


IS 18010 (Part 1) : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 


SHRI PUNEET KHURANA 
Suri ANIL Menta (Alternate I) 
Suri KAUSTUBH Pati (Alternate Il) 
Suri UTTAM KoTDIYA (Alternate II) 


Secure Meters Limited, Gurugram 


Shrama Technologies Private Limited SHRI AMARJEET KUMAR 


Suri PRADEEP KAPOOR 
Suri Ravi MADIPADGA (Alternate 1) 
Suri VIKRAM GANDOTRA (Alternate II) 
Suri MANOJ BELGAONKAR (Alternate 11) 


Siemens Limited, Mumbai 


Standardization Testing and Quality SHRIMATI LIPIKA KAUSHIK 


Certification (STQC) 


System Level Solutions (India) Private 
Limited, Anand 


Tata Consultancy Services Limited, Mumbai Suri RAMESH BALAJI 
Suri DEBASHIS MITRA (Alternate) 


Suri DIPEN PARMAR 
Suri Foram Movi (Alternate) 


Tejas Networks Limited, Bengaluru Dr Kanwar Jit SINGH 


Suri RAJEEV KUMAR TYAGI 
SHRI SusHiL Kumar (Alternate I) 
Suri UTTAM CHAND (Alternate II) 


Telecommunication Engineering Center, 
Department of Telecommunications, 
New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity 
Director General, BIS 


PROF SUPTENDRANATH SARBADHIKARI 


SHRIMATI REENA GARG, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (ELECTRONICS AND IT) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member secretary 


Suri MANIKANDAN K. 
Scientist ‘D’ (ELECTRONICS AND IT), BIS 


Panel involved in the Finalization 
LITD 28/P1 Last Mile Communication Protocols 


Organization 
Shrama Technologies Pvt Ltd 
Narnix Technolabs Pvt Ltd 
ARM 


Kalkitech 

Intel India Technology Pvt Ltd 
Secure Meters Ltd 

Itron India Pvt Ltd 

CDoT 

E-Goverments Foundation 

Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 
Genus 

CyanConnode Pvt Ltd 


SenRa 
Tata Communications Ltd 


Representative(s) 
SHRI AMARJEET KUMAR (Convener) 
Suri N. KISHOR NARANG 


SHRI KUMAAR GUHAN 
Suri JOTHI Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri NIRMAL THALIYIL 

SHRI C. SUBRAMANIAN 

Suri UTTAM KOTDIYA 

SHRI KUNAL SHAH 

SHRI AURINDAM BHATTACHARYA 
SHRI KRISHNAKUMAR THIAGARAJAN 
Suri ABHAY S. 

SHRI KAMAL LAMBA 


SHRI DEEPAK NIMARE 
Suri MATT Kern (Alternate) 


Suri Kush MISRA 


SHRI RAKESH TRIVEDI 
Suri ANAND NADAR (Alternate) 


15 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enguiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically, a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed, if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 28 (13502). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headguarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


