INATA Ah IS 6307 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


aara dete site — fates 
(FAT FART ) 


Rigid PVC Sheets — Specification 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 83.080.20 


© BIS 2023 


dit gtt eat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WH, 9 geet Me TH AM, 28 Keelt. 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


ees e 


August 2023 Price Group 8 


Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Plastics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division 
Council. 


Rigid PVC sheet is versatile material put to wide range of uses. General purpose rigid PVC sheets are used in 
display and advertising. Chemically resistant type is finding application in chemical plants for tanks, tank lining, 
ducting, etc. High impact sheets are used in helmets, aircraft map cues, parachute boxes, penciling, etc. Vacuum 
forming type is used for domestic and industrial trays, trays for developing photographs, refrigerator door panels, 
etc. 


This standard was first published in 1971 and further revised in 1985. In this revision, the following major changes 
have been incorporated: 


a) Range of thickness of sheet has been modified to 24.00 mm; 
b) Cross-referred standards have been updated; and 
c) Editorial changes. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex J. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 6307 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
RIGID PVC SHEETS — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the requirements and 
methods of sampling and test for rigid PVC sheets 
of 0.10 mm to 24.00 mm in thickness, manufactured 
by calendaring, extrusion or calendaring followed 
by lamination. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this standard, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of these standards: 


IS No. Title 
IS 2828 : 2019/ Plastics — Vocabulary 
ISO 472 : 2013 (second revision) 
IS 4905 : 2015/ Random sampling and 


ISO 24153: 2009 randomization procedures 
(first revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 2828 and the following shall apply. 


3.2 Rigid PVC Sheet — The sheet produced by 
extrusion or calendering (subsequently laminated 
wherever necessary to get required thickness) and 
consisting of polyvinyl chloride, and/or a copolymer 
of which the major constituent is vinyl chloride, 
suitably compounded with other ingredients. 


4 TYPES 


Rigid PVC sheet may be transparent to opaque, 
colourless or coloured. The material shall be 
classified into three types as given below: 


a) Type |— General purpose; 
b) Type 2 — With specified impact strength; 


and 
c) Type 3 — Suitable for deep draw vacuum 
forming. 
5 REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Appearance 


The sheet shall be uniform in colour and finish, 


transparent or opaque unless specified otherwise by 
the purchaser, and shall be reasonably free from 
detrimental scratches, creases, streaks, pinholes, 
dents, pimples and inclusions. 


5.2 Thickness 


5.2.1 The thickness of the sheet at any point shall be 
within the tolerance given in Table 1. 


5.2.2 The thickness of plain sheet shall be measured 
with a micrometer. In case of dispute, it shall 
however, be measured gravimetrically up to nominal 
thickness of 0.24 mm as prescribed in Annex A. 


5.3 Length and Width 


The length and width of rectangular sheets shall be 
within the tolerance = mm of the nominal size. For 


other shapes, the tolerances on linear dimensions 
shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the 
supplier. 


5.4 Squareness 


Cut sheets shall not deviate more than 10 mm from 
a true rectangle of the same dimensions. 


5.5 The sheet shall also comply with the requirement 
given in Table 2. 


5.6 Delamination (for | Calendered and 
Laminated Sheet) 


The material shall show no signs of delamination 
when tested in accordance with Annex F. 


5.7 Horizontal Burning Characteristics 


If agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, 
rigid PVC sheets shall also be tested for horizontal 
burning characteristics according to the test method 
prescribed in Annex G. 


NOTE — The test method described in Annex G is used 
primarily for the purpose of monitoring the consistency of 
production of the PVC sheet. Its use gives an indication of 
a suitable formulation which influences the performance of 
a test specimen as measured by this method. In no 
circumstances shall the test results thus obtained be 
considered an overall indication of the potential fire hazards 
presented by PVC sheet under the actual conditions of use. 


6 PACKING AND MARKING 
6.1 Packing 


6.1.1 The material shall be packed as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the supplier. 


IS 6307 : 2023 


6.1.2 The rigid PVC sheet shall be stacked 
horizontally on clean, firm and level ground and in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. On 
uneven grounds timber planks should be used. It is 
advisable to stack sheets not exceeding 25 cm in 
height. Care should be exercised while handling the 
sheets, particularly in cold conditions when rigid 
PVC sheet has a reduced impact strength. 


6.2 Marking 


6.2.1 The material shall be marked with the 
following information: 


a) Name of the manufacturer and trademark, if 
any; 

b) Type of the material; 

c) Methods of manufacture (extruded, 
calendered or calendered and laminated); 


d) Lot number and date of manufacture; and 
e) Any other statutory requirements. 


6.2.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


7 SAMPLING 


Representative samples of the material shall be 
drawn as prescribed in Annex H. 


Table 1 Tolerance on Nominal Thickness 


(Clause 5.2) 
SI No. Nominal Thickness, Tolerance on Nominal Thickness, 
(in mm) (in percent) 
À 
Extruded Calendered Calender and intimated. 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 0.10 to 0.24 + 20 +12 = 
ii) 0.25 to 0.49 +15 +10 — 
iv) 0.75 to 1.24 +10 = +20 
v) 1.25 to 1.49 ES 10 = SE 18 
vi) 1.50 to 1.99 +10 = +18 
vii) 2.00 to 4.99 +10 = +15 
viii) 5.00 to 9.99 +10 — +10 
ix) 10.00 to 24.00 +10 —- +10 


Table 2 Requirements for Rigid PVC Sheet 
(Clause 5.5) 


SI No. Characteristic Requirement Method of Test, 
k A i Ref to 
Type 1 Type 2 Type 3 
(1) (2) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Vicat softening temperature, °C, Min 65 50 B 
ii) Impact strength, number of failures No failure C 
iii) Tensile stress at yield, kg/cm’, Min 380 380 D 
iv) Dimensional change at 120 °C, 
percent, Max 
a) Extruded or calendered 20 K E 
b) Calendered and laminated 5 15 


* Limits shall be as agreed between the purchaser and the supplier. 


IS 6307 : 2023 


ANNEX A 


(Clause 5.2.2) 
DETERMINATION OF GRAVIMETRIC THICKNESS 


A-1 PROCEDURE 


A-1.1 Cut out three samples, each about 20 cm? to 
25 cm? in area and weigh them in air. Take a non- 
absorbent thread/wire and suspend the sample by the 
thread/wire and weigh under water maintained at 27 
°C + 2 °C. Weigh the thread or wire alone under 
water maintained at 27 °C + 2 °C (the depth of 
immersion in water in the two weighing being 
exactly the same). 


NOTE — All weighing shall be accurate to | percent of the 
mass. 


Calculate the relative density (S) as below: 


A 


Relative density (S) = ACB) 


where 


A = mass, in g, of the test piece in air; 

C = mass, in g, of the test piece and thread or 
wire in water; and 

B = mass, in g, of the thread or wire in water. 


The average of the three results expressed to the 
nearest 0.01 shall be taken as the relative density. 


A-1.2 Three square test pieces, each having an area 
of at least 25 cm?°+ 1 cm? and all of exactly the same 
length and width shall be cut from positions 
approximately equally spaced across the width of 
the sample at two places, about 1 m apart in 
longitudinal direction. Weigh the test pieces and 
calculate the average mass (M). 


A-1.3 Calculation 


A-1.3.1 Calculate the average gravimetric thickness 
to the nearest 0-002 5 mm as below: 


10M 


Average gravimetric thickness, in mm = ———— 
SxXLXB 


where 


M = average mass in g of the test piece; 

S = relative density as determined in A-1.1.1; 
L = length, in cm, of the test piece; and 

B = width, in cm, of the test piece. 


A-1.3.2 From the value of average gravimetric 
thickness obtained in A-1.3.1, calculate the percent 
difference from the nominal thickness of the 
material. 


ANNEX B 


[Table 2, SI No. (i)] 
DETERMINATION OF VICAT SOFTENING TEMPERATURE 


B-1 GENERAL 


B-1.1 Determination of the temperature at which a 
standard indenter penetrates 1 mm into the surface 
of a plastics test specimen under a test load of 5 kg. 
During test, the temperature is raised at a uniform 
rate. 


B-1.2 The temperature at 1 mm penetration is quoted 
as the vicat softening temperature (VST) in degrees 
celsius. 


B-2 APPARATUS 


B-2.1 Rod — provided with a load-carrying plate, 
held in a rigid metal frame so that it can move freely 
in the vertical direction, the base of the frame 


serving to support the test specimen under the 
indenting tip at the end of the rod (see Fig. 1). 


B-2.2 Indenting Tip — preferably of hardened 
steel, 3 mm long, of circular cross section, and area 
1.000 mm? + 0.015 mm’, fixed at the bottom of the 
rod. The lower surface of the indenting tip shall be 
plane and perpendicular to the axis of the rod and 
free from burrs. 


B-2.3 Micrometer Dial Gauge — graduated in 
divisions of 0.01 mm, to ensure the penetration of 
the indenting tip into the test specimen. The thrust 
of the dial gauge, which contributes to the thrust on 
the test specimen, shall be known and shall comply 
with the requirements of B-2.4. 


IS 6307 : 2023 


CIAL GAUGE MICROMETER 


CYLINDRICAL SLOTTED 
WEIGHT 


ASSEMBLY OF ROD AND 


INDENTER TIP SUPPORTING 


THE WEIGHT PAN 


LIQUID LEVEL 


INDENTER 


TEST SPECMEN 


FIG. 1 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF APPARATUS FOR DETERMINATION OF THE VICAT SOFTENING TEMPERATURE 


B-2.4 Load-Carrying Plate — fitted to the rod, and 
suitable weights adjusted centrally so that the total 
thrust applied to the test specimen can be made up 
to between 49.05 N (5 000 gf) and 49.54 N 
(5 050 gf). The combined masses of the rod, 
indenting tip and load carrying plate shall not exceed 
100 g. 


NOTE — The construction of the apparatus shall be such 
that the micrometer dial gauge reading caused by 
differential thermal expansion over the intended 
temperature range does not exceed 0-02 mm when the test 
specimen is replaced by a piece of borosilicate glass or low 
thermal expansion alloy steel. It is recommended that the 
apparatus be constructed of low thermal expansion alloy. 


B-2.5 Heating Bath — containing a suitable liquid 
(see Notes | and 2) in which the apparatus is placed so 
that the specimen is at least 35 mm below the surface 
of the liquid. An efficient stirrer shall be provided. 
The heating bath shall be equipped with a means of 
control so that the temperature can be raised at a 
uniform rate of 50 °C/h + 5 °C/h see Note 3. This 
heating rate shall be considered to be met if, over 
every 5 min interval during the test, the temperature 
change is within the specified limits. 


NOTES 


1 Liquid paraffin, transformer oil, glycerol and silicone 
oil may be suitable liquid heat transfer media, but other 
liquids may be used. In all cases, it shall be established 
that the liquid chosen is stable at the temperature used 
and does not affect the material under test. 


2 If no suitable liquid can be found for use as a heat 
transfer medium (as defined in Note 1), some different 
heating arrangement for which air may be found to be a 
suitable heat transfer medium, shall be used. If air is 
used as the heat transfer medium, it should be noted that 
errors in the quoted softening point may arise unless care 
is taken to correct for possible differences in temperature 
between the air and the specimen. 


3 A uniform rate of temperature rise can he obtained by 
controlling the heat input either manually or 
automatically, although the latter is strongly 
recommended. One method 


of operation found to be satisfactory is to provide an 
immersion heater adjusted to give the correct rate of 
temperature rise at the starting temperature of the test, 
and then to increase the power input (either in the same 
heater or in a subsidiary heater) by adjustment of a 
rheostat or variable transformer. 


4 It is desirable to have a cooling coil in the liquid bath in 
order to reduce the time required to lower the 
temperature between determination. This must be 
removed or drained before starting a test as boiling of 
coolant can affect the rate of temperature rise. 


B-2.6 Thermometer (or Other Accurate 
Temperature Measuring Device) — of appropriate 
range, and with graduations at least at each 0.5 °C. 
The scale error at any reading shall not exceed 
0:5 °C. 


B-3 TEST SPECIMENS 


B-3.1 Two test specimens shall be used for each 
sample. The test specimen shall be at least 
10 mm x 10 mm and of thickness equal to the 
thickness of sheet. The surfaces shall be flat at and 
parallel. 


NOTES 


1 If the thickness of sheet exceeds 6 mm, the test 
specimen shall be reduced in thickness to 
approximately 3 mm by machining one surface, the 
other being left intact. 

2 If the thickness of sheet is less than 3 mm, not more 
than 3 pieces shall be stacked together to give a total 
thickness of 3 mm to 6 mm. 


The test specimens shall be conditioned 
at 27 °C + 2 °C and at relative humidity at 
(65 + 5) percent for 24 h prior to testing. 


B-4 PROCEDURE 


B-4.1 The schematic arrangement of the apparatus 
is given in Fig. 1. 


B-4.2 Mount the test specimen horizontally under 
the indenting tip of the unloaded rod. The indenting 
tip shall at no point be nearer to the edge of the test 
specimen than 3 mm. The surface of the test 
specimen in contact with the base of the apparatus 
shall be flat. Immerse the assembly in the heating 
bath, the temperature of which shall be constant and 
at least 50° below the expected softening 
temperature of the material (see Note 4 
under B-2.5). The bulb of the thermometer shall 
be at the same level and as close as possible to 
the test specimen. After 5 min with the indenting 
tip still in position, note the reading of the 
micrometer dial gauge or set the micrometer to 
zero. Then add the weight to the load-carrying 


IS 6307 : 2023 


plate so that the totalthrust on the test 
specimen is between 49.05 N (5 000 gf) and 
49.54 N (5 050 gf). Raise the temperature of the 
bath at a uniform rate of 
50 °C/h + 5 °C/h. Stir the liquid well during the test. 
Note the temperature of the bath at which the 
indenting tip has penetrated into the test specimen 
by 1.00 mm beyond its starting position defined 
above and record it as the VST of the test specimen. 


B-4.2.1 Express the VST of the material under test 
as the arithmetic mean of the VST’s of two test 
specimens. If the individual results differ by more 
than 2 °C, the test is invalid and a repeat test shall be 
carried out. 


ANNEX C 
[Table 2, SI No. (ii)] 
DETERMINATION OF IMPACT STRENGTH 


C-1 GENERAL 


The impact strength is determined using a falling 
weight machine. This method is intended for sheet 
not less than 1 mm thick. 


C-2 TEST SPECIMEN 


C-2.1 A specimen either in the form of a disc 
60 mm + 3 mm diameter or a square of 
60 mm + 3 mm side shall be used. The thickness of 
the specimen shall be the thickness of the sheet 
under test. 


C-2.2 Twenty specimens shall be used. 
C-3 APPARATUS 


C-3.1 A falling weight machine shall be used and 
shall consist essentially of the following (see Fig. 2): 


a) A heavy rigid base fitted with levelling 
screws. 


b) A specimen support in the shape of a hollow 
steel cylinder of internal diameter 
50.0 mm 0.05 mm, external diameter of 
not less than 56 mm and height not less than 
25 mm. The support shall be so fixed to the 
base that its axis coincides with the line of 
fall of the striker. A soft shock- 
absorbing disc approximately 6 mm 
thick shall be placed inside the cylinder 
and resting on the base. 


c) A rigid superstructure to carry the release 
mechanism and the guide for the striker. 


d) A striker consisting of a hardened steel ball, 


12.5 mm 0.05 mm diameter, rigidly 
attached to a weight carrier which falls 
freely in the guides and providing a 
hemispherical striking surface, which shall 
be free from flats or any other imperfection. 


e) A plumb line or any other device for 
ensuring that the striker is directly above the 
center of the specimen support. 


f) The weights for attachment to the striker 
shall be such that the combined weight in 
kilograms of weights and striker can be 
adjusted to a value equal to 0.3 times the 
thickness of the sheet in millimeters. These 
weights shall be such that increment of 
100 g can be made. 


wa 


The height of the apparatus shall be such 
that the striker can fall 1 825 mm + 25 mm 
to the surface of the specimen with the 
help of a release mechanism. 


8 


NOTE — The striker may fall between guides or without 
guides, but in either case the point of impact of the striker 
with the specimen shall be not more than 2.5 mm from the 
axis of specimen support. If guides are used, the fall shall 
be substantially without friction. If guides are not used and 
the striker is supported electromagnetically, the magnetic 
flux shall be reduced to the minimum necessary to support 
the loaded striker. The machine shall be fitted on a rigid 
foundation. 


C-4 PROCEDURE 


C-4.1 The conditioning shall be done at 
27 °C 2 °C for at least 3 h but the actual testing 
may he carried out at ambient temperature within 
one minute of removing the specimen from the 
conditioning chamber. 


IS 6307 : 2023 


C-4.2 The combined weight of the striker and the 
weights to the nearest 100 g shall be calculated from 
the following equation: 


Total mass, in kg = 0.3 x (nominal thickness 
of sheet in mm) 


C-4.3 The specimen shall be placed centrally on the 


specimen support, and the release mechanism 
operated so that the striker falls on the specimen 
from a height of 1 825 mm + 25 mm. If any 
specimen is broken or show a crack or tear extending 
from one surface to the other, it shall be recorded as 
a failure. 


1 8625225 


Q U SUPPORT 
STEEL SPRING WEIGHT CARRIER 
INTERCHANGEABLE 
WEIGHTS 
¥ 12-5 DIA 
So APPROX i STEEL BALL 


FIG. 2 FALLING WEIGHT MACHINE 


ANNEX D 
[Table 2, SI No. (iii)] 
DETERMINATION OF TENSILE STRESS AT YIELD 


D-1 GENERAL 


The tensile stress at yield is determined using dumb- 
bell specimens cut from the rigid PVC sheets in a 
tensile tester. 


D-2 TEST SPECIMENS 


The specimens shall be cut by any appropriate 
means from the sheet under test in the form and 
dimensions shown in Fig. 3. The thickness of the 
specimen shall be the thickness of the sheet under 
test. Cut edges shall be smooth. Five specimens shall 
be tested. 


D-3 PROCEDURE 


The specimen shall be kept at 27 °C 2 °C for not 
less than three hours before testing and the test shall 
be carried out at 27 °C 2 °C. The specimen shall be 
gripped at its widened ends and shall be mounted in 
the tensile testing machine in axial alignment with 
the direction of pull. It shall be loaded by separating 
the grips at a substantially constant rate of 
20 mm +2 mm per minute, until it breaks. The range 
of testing machine being such that the maximum 
load falls between 15 percent and 85 percent of the 
maximum scale reading. The load at yield, that is, 
the first load that remains constant or decreases with 


increase in elongation or the specimen shall be 
recorded. 


D-4 CALCULATION 


The tensile stress at yield shall be calculated from 


R60 MIN 


T= 
LZ kee 


6040.5 


IS 6307 : 2023 


the load at yield and the original area of 
cross-section and shall be expressed at in kg/cm”. 


REFERENCE LINES 


THICKNESS "TT 


INITIAL DISTANCE BETWEEN 


GRIPS 11525 


150 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


FIG. 3 TEST PIECE 


ANNEX E 


[Table 2, SI No. (iv)] 
DETERMINATION OF DIMENSIONAL CHANGE AT 120 °C 


E-1 GENERAL 
E-1.1 Outline of the Method 


A circle of diameter 250 mm is scribed on a square 
test piece selecting an approximate center. Then the 
sheet is kept in an oven in a suitable assembly at 
120 °C + 2 °C for the specified time. At the end of 
this period the sample is removed from oven, cooled 


to room temperature. Another circle of diameter 
250 mm using the same center is scribed and 
maximum decrease from original diameter is 
measured. 


E-2 TEST SPECIMEN 


The specimen shall be a square with about 30 cm 
sides cut from the sheet. 


IS 6307 : 2023 


E-3 PROCEDURE 


E-3.1 The approximate centre of one face of the 
specimen shall be determined and this point shall be 
used as a center for scribing a 250.00 mm + 0.25 mm 
diameter circle, the material being at room 
temperature. A glass plate at least 350 mm square, 
covered with a fabric or suitable material offering 
minimum resistance to any movement of the sheet 
that may occur, is used to prepare the assembly. The 
assembly shall be heated in an air-oven maintained 
at 120 °C + 2 °C for a minimum time of 30 min. The 
specimen shall then be placed on the assembly in the 
oven and shall remain there for a time depending on 
the thickness of the sheet as follows: 


E-3.2 The assembly shall be removed from the oven 
and allowed to cool to room temperature. Further, 
250.00 mm + 0.25 mm circle with the same center 
as before shall be scribed on the specimen and the 
maximum decrease from the original diameter of the 
circle shall be measured to the nearest 0.25 mm. 


E-4. CALCULATION 


Dı- D2 


Change in dimension , percent = x 100 
where 


D; = original diameter; and 
D> = diameter after oven treatment. 


SI No. Nominal Thickness Heating Time 

(mm) (in min) 

OI (2) (3) 

i) Up to 0.24 541 

ii) 0.25 to 1.49 10+1 

iii) 1.50 to 2.99 20+ 1 

iv) 3.00 to 6.49 301 

v) 6.50 to 24.0 45+1 
ANNEX F 


(Clause 5.6) 
DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO DELAMINATION 


F-1 GENERAL 
F-1.1 Outline of the Method 


Two methods are described. Method A is to be 
followed for rigid PVC sheets of nominal thickness 
up to and including 3 mm and Method B for higher 
thickens. In Method A, the specimens are immersed 
in acetone for 2 h at room temperature and inspected 
for delamination. In Method B, the specimen fixed 
vertically in a vice is hammered sharp and examined 
for delamination. 


F-2 METHOD A 


F-2.1 Procedure 


Place three 100 mm x 25 mm specimens in separate 
400 ml beakers so that they are supported at an angle 
in the beaker, and the 25 mm edges rest on the 
bottom and side of the beaker. Totally immerse the 
specimen in acetone (pure grade) at room 


temperature and cover with watch glass. Maintain 
for 2 h and visually inspect for delamination or 
disintegration. 


F-2.2 Report 


The material shall be deemed to have passed the test 
if there is no disintegration of the components as 
evidenced by curling of delaminated sections or 
separation into granular component. Swelling or 
softening or both shall not be deemed to be a cause 
for failure. 


F-3 METHOD B 


F-3.1 Test Specimen 


The specimen shall be 150 mm long, 25 mm wide and 
the thickness of the sheet under test but more than 
3 mm. It shall be cut from the edge of the sheet 
with its length parallel to the edge of the sheet. 


F-3.2 Apparatus — A vice mounted on a rigid base 
for holding the specimen, a light hammer or mallet 
and a wedge having the dimensions shown in Fig. 4. 


F-3.3 Procedure 


The specimen shall be clamped vertically in the vice 
so that 150 mm edge is horizontal. This edge shall 
be at least 15 mm above the jaws of the vice. The 
wedge with its edge parallel with the panel of the 


ege 


R1.6 


44.5 
APPROX 


20° 
APPROX 


IS 6307 : 2023 


lamination shall be placed on the edge of the 
specimen and shall be struck with a sharp blow 
with the hammer or mallet. This shall be repeated 
at five points across the thickness of the 
specimen, these points being staggered along the 
edge. 


F-3.4 Report 


The specimen shall be deemed to have failed if in 
any one impact, delamination occurs. 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 4 TEST WEDGE 


IS 6307 : 2023 


ANNEX G 
(Clause 5.7) 
TEST FOR HORIZONTAL BURNING CHARACTERISTICS 


G-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


The sheet is held horizontally with its transverse axis 
at an angle of 45° to horizontal. The flame is applied 
for a short time to the free end of the sheet and after 
its removal, the time taken for the flame of the 
burning specimen to travel a distance of 100 mm is 
measured. 


G-2 TEST SPECIMEN 


The specimen shall be 150 mm long, 13 mm wide 
and 1.5 mm + 0.1 mm thick. Two lines shall be 
drawn across the specimen, one at 25 mm and the 
other at 125 mm from one end. Three specimens 
shall be used. 


G-3 PROCEDURE 


G-3.1 The specimen shall be tested in a draught free 


atmosphere. It shall be clamped in a rigid support at 
one end so that its longitudinal axis and its 
transverse axis is at 45° to the horizontal and so that 
both lines on the specimen are clearly visible. 


G-3.2 A piece of clean wire gauge, 7 meshes per 
linear centimeter, 130 mm square shall be clamped 
in a horizontal position 6 mm below the specimen 
with 6 mm of the unsupported end of the specimen 
projecting beyond the edge of the gauge as shown in 
Fig. 5. An alcohol lamp or bunsen burner with a non- 
luminous flame 13 mm to 19 mm in height shall be 
placed under the free end of the specimen so that the 
top of the flame just touches it. The flame shall be 
removed after 10 s and the specimen allowed to 
burn. Record by stopwatch separately, the time 
during which flaming and afterglow continues. 


\_ TEST SPECIMEN 


— 125 X 125 mm GAUZE 


1.5 
12.5 "ect 

45° 

k \ 

Ya ! 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


FIG. 5 SPECIMEN UNDER TEST FOR RATE OF BURNING 


IS 6307 : 2023 


ANNEX H 
(Clause 7.1) 
SAMPLING OF RIGID PVC SHEETS 


H-1 SCALE OF SAMPLING 
H-1.1 Lot 


In any consignment, all sheets of the same type and 
thickness manufactured under relatively similar 
conditions of production shall be grouped together 
to constitute a lot. 


Each lot shall be sampled separately for ascertaining 
its conformity to the requirements of this 
specification. 


H-1.2 Scale of Sampling 


The number of sheets to be selected from a lot shall 
depend upon the lot size and shall be in accordance 
with col (2) and (3) of Table 3. 


Sheets shall be selected at random from the lot. In 
order to ensure the randomness of selection, a 
random number table shall be used. For guidance 
and use of random number table, IS 4905 may be 
referred. In the absence of a random number table, 
the following procedure may be adopted: 


Starting from any sheet in the lot, count them in one 
order at 123. , up to r and so on where r is 
an integral part of Mn, N and n being the lot size and 
sample size respectively. Every 7™ sheet so counted 
shall be withdrawn so as to constitute a required 
sample size. 


H-2 NUMBER OF TESTS 


H-2.1 All the sheets selected as prescribed in col (3) 
of Table 3 shall be inspected for appearance, 
thickness, length and width and squareness. Any 


sheet which is unsatisfactory in one or more of these 
requirements shall be considered defective. 


H-2.2 For impact strength and tensile stress, the 
number of sheets to be tested is given in col (5) of 
Table 3. These sheets shall be selected from among 
those chosen under col (3) of Table 3. 


H-2.3 For each of the remaining characteristics one 
test shall be conducted. 


H-3 Criteria for Conformity 


H-3.1 A lot shall be considered satisfactory with 
respect to appearance and dimensional 
characteristics if the number of defective sheets in 
the sample does not exceed the permissible number 
given in col (4) of Table 3. 


H-3.2 The lot found satisfactory under H-3.1 shall 
be examined for other characteristics. If all the test 
results obtained on testing the selected sheets as 
under H-2.2 and H-2.3, satisfy the corresponding 
requirements given in 5, the lot shall be deemed as 
conforming to the requirements of these 
characteristics. 


H-3.3 If the sample fails in one or more tests, each 
such tests shall be repeated twice. For this purpose, 
two more samples shall be taken from the same rolls 
other than those from which the earlier sample had 
been drawn and the specimens cut from them so that 
duplicate tests may be conducted in respect of each 
failure. If all the specimens pass the duplicate test, 
the lot shall be declared conforming to the 
specification, otherwise not. 


Table 3 Scale of Sampling and Premissible Number of Defectives 
(Clauses H-1.2, H-2 and H-3) 


SI No. Lot Size Tolerance on Nominal Thickness, 
N Percent 
1 
{ \ 
Sample Size Permissible No. Sample Size for Impact 
of Defectives Strength and Tensile 
Stress 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 1 1 0 1 
ii) 2 to 25 2 0 1 
iii) 26 to 50 3 0 2 
iv) 51 to 100 5 0 2 
v) 101 to 150 8 1 2 
vi) 151 and 10 1 3 
above 


IS 6307 : 2023 


ANNEX J 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 


Organization 


Central Institute of Plastics 
Technology (CIPET), Chennai 


Engineering & 
All India Plastics Manufacturers Association 
(AIPMA), New Delhi 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Chemical and Petrochemical Manufactures 


Association (CPMA), New Delhi 


Coca-Cola India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Consumer Association of India (CONCERT), 
Chennai 


CSIR - Central Food Technological Research 
Institute (CFTRD, Mysore 


CSIR - Indian Institute of Toxicological Research 
(ITR), Lucknow 


CSIR - National Chemical Laboratory (NCL), Pune 


Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, New Delhi 


Food Corporation of India (FCI), Delhi 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAD, New Delhi 


GAIL (India) Ltd, Noida 


Haldia Petrochemicals Ltd, Kolkata 


HPCL Mittal Energy Limited, HMEL, Noida 


Representative(s) 


PROF (DR) SHISHIR SINHA (Chairperson) 


SHRI DEEPAK BALLANI 


Ms DIVYA SINHA 
SHRI C. K. DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI UDAY CHAND 


SHRI VIRENDRA LANDGE 
SHRI RAJENDRA DOBRIYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI G. SANTHANARAJAN 
SHRI M. R. KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI R. S. MATCHE 
SHRI KESHAVA MURTHY. P. (Alternate) 


DR V.P. SHARMA 
DR A.B. PANT (Alternate) 


DR P. R. SURESHA 
DRR. V. GUNDLOORI (Alternate I) 
SHRIMATI SANGEETA HAMBIR (Alternate II) 


SHRI O. P. SHARMA 
SHRI V ARUN SINGH POONIA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAGOPAL. A 
SHRI A K. U. B. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI CHIRAG GADI 


SHRI MANISH KHANDELWAL 


SHRI RAJ K. DATTA 
SHRI SUVOMOY GANGULY (Alternate) 


SHRI VINEET KUMAR GUPTA 
SHRI ALAKESH GHOSH (Alternate) 


Organization 


Huhtamaki Paper Product Ltd (HPPL), Hyderabad 


Indian Flexible Packaging & Folding Carton 
Manufacturers Association (IFCA), Mumbai 


Indian Centre for Plastics in the Environment 
(ICPE), Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Packaging (IIP), Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), New Delhi 


Indian Oil Corporation, R&D Centre, Faridabad 


Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, Ghaziabad 


Indian Plastic Institute (IPI), Mumbai 


Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF), 
New Delhi 


National Committee on Plasticulture Applications 
in Horticulture (NCPAH), Ministry of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Govt of India, 
New Delhi 


ONGC Petro Additions Ltd (OPAL), Gujarat 


Organization of Plastics Processors of India, 
Mumbai 


Plastindia Foundation, Mumbai 


Reliance Industries Ltd (RIL), Mumbai 


SABIC Innovative Plastics, Bengaluru 


Shivalik Agro-Poly Products Ltd, Mohali 


Technical Training and Research Centre (TTRC), 
Lohia Group, Kanpur 


IS 6307 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI MUTHUSAMY CHOCKALINGAM 
SHRI AISHWARYA VANGE (Alternate) 


SHRI ATIN CHAUDHURI 


SHRI T. K. BANDOPADHYAY 


SHRI MADHAB CHAKRABORTY 
DR TANWEER ALAM (Alternate) 


SHRI ANUP K. GHOSH 


SHRI DHANANJAY SAHOO 
DR G. S. KAPOOR (Alternate) 


DR JAI PRAKASH 
DR MANOJ KUMAR PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI MIHIR BANERJI 
SHRI V. B. LALL (Alternate) 


SHRI SATYENDRA KUMAR 
SHRI AMIT LOVE (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND ZAMBRE 
SHRI KRISHNA KUMAR KAUSHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK MEHTA 


DR SATYAPRASAD BHATTACHARYA 
SHRI DEEPAK LAWALE (Alternate) 


DR E. SUNDARESAN 
SHRI HITEN BHEDA (Alternate) 


SHRI S.V. RAJU 
SHRI AMIT SHAH (Alternate I) 
SHRI SUNIL MAHAJAN (Alternate II) 


DR SUMANDA BANDYOPADHYAY 
SHRI SUNIL RAUTO (Alternate) 
SHRI NAGARAJ DHADESUGUR 


SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR MAHAJAN 
DRG. D. TYAGI (Alternate) 


SHRI R. K. DWIVEDI 


IS 6307 : 2023 


Organization 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE), New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI M. A. U. KHAN 


SHRIMATI MEENAL PASSI, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (PETROLEUM, COAL AND RELATED 
PRODUCTS) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL 


(Ex-officio)| 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SHIVAM DWIVEDI 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISITANT DIRECTOR 
(PETROLEUM, COAL AND RELATED PRODUCTS), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 12 (20178). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern ` ` 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


