**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9524 (1980) : Recommended procedure for repair welding of 
steel components by aluminothermic process [MTD 12 : Welding 
Applications] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 9524 -1980 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR 

REPAIR WELDING OF STEEL COMPONENTS 

BY ALUMINO-THERMIC PROCESS 



UDC 621-79165: 669-14-42: 006-76 




© Copyright 1980 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAR BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC. 
NEW DELHI 110002 



October 1980 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 APRIL 2007 

TO 

IS 9524 : 1980 RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR 

REPAIR WELDING OF STEEL COMPONENTS 

BY ALUMINO-THERMIC PROCESS 

{Page 3, clause 0J, last line & clause 0.4, line 6) — Substitute C T 19-1994' 
for T19-65'. 

(Page 4, clause 4 J, line 2) — Substitute 'Scavenger'J&r *scaverger\ 

(Page 5, clause 4.3.1, line 2) — Incorporate the following in between die 
words 'chips* and 'to': 

'to reduce the temperature of super heated molten steel to about 2 100°O* 

(Page 5, clause 4.4, line 6) — Substitute '0.015 and 0.65' for '030 and 
70\ 

(Page 5, clause 4.4, line 7) — Substitute 4 0.65' for '0 70\ 

(Page 5, clause 4.4, line 8) — Substitute *0A5*for '0 30\ 

(Page 12, Table 2, Title) — Add the word 'MIXTURE* in between the 
words 'THERMIT' and 'REFERRED'. 

(Page 14, clause 8-1) — Add die following at the end of the clause: 

'For preheating of the job the following method may be adopted. At present 
there are three different systems: 

i) Use of air-petrol mixture through drum vaporizer, 
u) Use of compressed air-petrol mixture through burner, and 
m) Use of oxygen and LPG gas mixture through special type of preheating 
torch.' 

(Page 15, clause 9.2, first sentence) — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 

'The reaction shall be started by a suitable ignition method such as insertion of 
ignition device (sparkler) in the thermit mixture/ 

I 



Amend No. 1 to IS 95Z4 : 1980 

(Page 15, clause 12.1) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

'Wherever possible the welds should be subjected to suitably qualified non- 
destructive methods to ensure free d om from defects. The acceptance limit for 
the flaws shall be mutually agreed between the user and manufacturers. • 

(Page IS, clause 13.1, second line) — Incorporate the following in 
between the words 'be' and 'adequately*: 

'educated at least up to Secondary School (high school/matriculation pass) or 
having m certificate or equivalent and* 



(MTD 12) 

Reprography Unit, BIS, New D«IW. India 



Indian Standard 

'RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR 
REPAIR WELDING OF STEEL COMPONENTS 
BY ALUMINO-THERMIC PROCESS 

Welding General Sectional Committee, SMDG 14 

Chairman Representing 

Shri A. K. Bh attach aryya Ministry of Railways 

Members 

Deputy Director ( Met )-I 
RDSO, Lucknow ( Alternate I to 
Shri A. K. Bhattacharyya ) 
Production Eno inker 
ICF, Madras ( Alternate II to 
Shri A. K. Bhattacharyya ) 
Shiii J. K. Ahluwalia Stewarts & Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri Awtar Singh Beas Projects, Talwara Township, Distt Hoshiar- 

pur 
Shri R. N. Aoarwal ( Alternate I ) 
Shri J. P. Aroua ( Alternate II ) 
Shri S. Balasudrahmanyam Binny Ltd, Madras 

Shri K. Balmanohar Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Vishakhapatnam 

Shri R. V. Kai.k {Alternate) 
Shri P. G. Barduan Braithwaite & Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. K. Gangopadhyay ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. N. Bhattacharyya National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri S. Bhatia Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri J. Vaid (Alternate) 
Shri S. C. Dky Central Boilers Board, New Delhi 

Shri S. P. Dasgupta Central Mechanical Engineering Research Insti- 

tute, Durgapur 
Executive Engineer, Mechani- Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
cal Workshop Division 
CPWD, New Delhi 
Executive Engineer ( Elec- 
trical ) Central Electri- 
cal Division No. 1, Calcutta ( Alternate) 
Shri C. C. Gikotra Association of Indian Engineering Industry, New 

Delhi 
Shri R. S. Aqgarwal ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1980 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS s 9524 -1980 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri V. Gujral Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur 

Shri D. S. Honavar D & H Secheron Electrodes Ltd, Indore 

Shri A. G. Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. T. Kanbb Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 

Shri S. N. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Krishnamurthy Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri N. K. Sethi ( Alternate I ) 

Shri K. Pooranchandra Rao ( Alternate II ) 
Shri N. Murker jea Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R. Purkayastha ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. V. Mulay Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co Ltd, 

Jamshedpur 
Shri N. Mum Moorthy Engineer-in-Chief's Branch ( Ministry of Defence ) 

Shri M. K. Tadani ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. M. Pole Walchandnagar Industries Ltd, Walchandnagar 

Shri G. D. Apte ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. L. Prabhakar Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay; and Chemical 

Plant and Machinery Association of India, 
Bombay 
Snni J. R. Prasher Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri H. Ramaswamy Indian Hume Pipes Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. A. Vijay Keerthi ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. Ramaswamy Research and Development Centre for Iron and 

Steel (SAIL), Ranchi 
Shri P. B. Rao Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri S. Gangopaduyay ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. S. G. Rao Department of Atomic Energy, Bombay 

Shri L. M. Tolani ( Alternate) 
Representative National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur 

Shri R. Sarangarajan Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 

Shri S. K. Bhatia ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. P. Sanyal Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels Ltd, Vishakha- 

patnam 

Shri R. D. Pbnnathur ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. S. Sethi Directorate peneral of Employment and Train- 

ing, New Delhi 
Shri S. G. N. Swamy Mukand Iron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R. K. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. K. Takeja Indian Register of Shipping, Calcutta 

Shri S. Chandra ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. R. Upadryay Apar Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Patwardhan ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Visvanath Advani-Oerlikon Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. R. Rama Rao. Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Director ( Struc & Met ) 



Secretary 

Shri M. S. Nagaraj 
Deputy Director ( Struc & Met ), ISI 

( Continued on page 16 ) 



IS s 9524 - 1980 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR 

REPAIR WELDING OF STEEL COMPONENTS 

BY ALUMINO-THERMIC PROCESS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 26 May 1980, after the draft finalized by the Welding 
General Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and 
Metals Division Council, 

0.2 Alumino-thermic welding ( thermit welding* ) comprises of a group of 
welding processes wherein coalescence is produced by heating with super- 
heated liquid metal and slag resulting from a chemical reaction between 
a metal oxide and aluminium, with or without the application of pressure. 
Filler metal, when used, is obtained from the liquid metal. 
0*3 Thermit welding is increasingly used to fabricate large metal pieces, 
for joining rails, and reinforcing bars. Simple forgings and small castings 
are thermit welded into heavier units to reduce the cost substantially. The 
process is also used to repair heavy castings, shafts, etc. This standard is 
intended to be a guide for the use of thermit welding process for fusion 
welding for ferrous metals other than rails for which a separate Indian 
Railways Standard Specification No. T- 19-65 exists. 
0.4 This standard keeps in view the practices being followed in the 
country in this field. Assistance has also been derived from the following 
publications: 

Welding Handbook Section 3 B « Welding cutting and related 
processes ' American Welding Society, USA. 

IRS T 19-1965 'Fusion welding of rails by alumino-thermic 
process ' Ministry of Railways, Government of India. 
0*5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS:2-1960f. The number of significant places retained in the 



•The term ' thermit welding ' is used throughout this standard for the sake of 
convenience and uniformity. 

tRules for rounding off numerical values ( miud ), 



IS t 9524 - 1980 

rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1*1 This standard recommends the procedure for repair welding of steel 
components by alumino-thermic process. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard the definitions given in IS : 812-1957* 
shall apply. 

3. PRINCIPLE OF THE PROCESS 

3.1 Alumino-thermic welding (thermit welding) is based on the 
exothermic reaction between finely divided aluminium and iron oxide. 

The chemical reaction of the process may be expressed by the 
following formulae: 

3FeO +2Al = Al a 3 + 3Fe+0-78 MJ ( 187-1 kcal ) 
Fe 8 O s +2A1 = Al a O s +2Fe+0*76 MJ ( 181-5 kcal ) 
3Fe 3 4 +8Al = 4Al,O 3 +9Fe+3 01 MJ ( 719-3 kcal ) 

The iron which is set free in highly superheated state, immediately 
transforms into molten steel, while Al t 8 formed separates as highly 
superheated molten slag. 

3.2 The temperature of the reaction is not measurable by any mechanical 
instrument, but it has been theoretically determined to be about 3 000°C 
( neglecting the losses ). In practice this temperature is reduced to about 
2 100°C by the addition of metal chips and alloys and also due to general 
loss of heat by radiation and conduction. This leaves the metal about 
600°C of superheat to effect the welding of parts. 

4. THERMIT MIXTURE 

4.1 Plain thermit is a mixture of iron oxide and finely divided aluminium. 
This is the basis of most thermit mixtures and it yields very high 
temperatures. 

4.2 Carbon Steel Thermit — This is plain thermit with addition of steel 
chips and the ingredients as grain refiner, scaverger, alloying elements, 
etc, to suit the chemistry and the mechanical properties of parts to be 
welded. 



♦Glossary of terms relating to welding and cutting of metal?. 



IS; 9524- 1980 

4.3 Cast Iron Thermit 

4.3.1 This is plain thermit with additions of fcrro silicon to promote 
graphhization and steel chips to augment metal production. Unless the 
welded joint and its adjacent area are given a post-weld heat treatment, 
this weld metal is generally non-machinable. Because of differential con- 
traction between the weld metal and the cast iron base metal, use of this 
thermit mixture is limited to weld cast iron where the length is less than 
eight times its width. 

4.3.2 Another thermit that will yield deposits of an average cast iron 
weld metal analysis is used when it is necessary to have a machinable weld 
metal or when the length to width ratio of the component is greater than 
eight. This thermit mixture throws out graphitic carbon at the grain 
boundaries to a degree that depends upon the cooling rates. Weld metal 
contraction upon cooling is usually neglegible. 

4.4 While formulating the thermit mixtures, care should be taken to add 
correct quantity of aluminium ( deoxidizer ) and allowing elements in 
order to achieve the weld deposit of required chemical composition and 
physical properties. Precise weights of the constituents arc necessary so 
that after reaction, there remains a small excess of aluminium between 
0*30 and 0-70 percent in the thermit steel. When aluminium content 
exceeds 070 percent, the impact properties are badly affected. On the 
other hand, if it is below 030 percent, the thermit steel tends to be hot 
short and susceptible to porosity. Care should also be taken to ensure 
that the ratio of carbon to manganese is 1 : 3 Min. 

4.5 Thermit mixtures which are stable over a period of many years, shall 
be supplied in moistureproof bags. Ignitors shall be supplied separately. 
Thermit mixtures should be kept dry. Damp mixtures should not be used. 
Before use, the mixture shall be thoroughly mixed in the bag itself by 
inverting the sealed bag several times. In the case of large quantities, each 
bag of the mixture should be thoroughly mixed up dumping the mixture 
into a pan or a tray and turning the pile over a number of times before 
putting into the crucibles. 

4.6 The mixture if warmed to the touch of hand will result in smoother 
and faster reaction than the cold mixture. It is therefore desirable to 
warm the mixture carefully to drive off the dampness first before dumping 
it into the thermit crucible. 

4.7 The thermit mixtures are non-explosive. No fire hazard is incurred 
under normal conditions of handling and storing thermit mixtures, since 
a temperature of more than 1 200°C is required to ignite the mixture. 



IS 1 9524-1980 

5. THERMIT CRUCIBLE 

5.1 The thermit reaction takes place in crucibles which consist of a 
conical steel shell lined with magnesite using a suitable binder, for 
example, sodium silicate solution and covered with a conical steel cap 
with opening at both the ends and an inspection hole at the side. 
A typical crucible is illustrated in Fig. 1. 

CRUCIBLE CAP 

IGNITION POWDER 

THERMIT 



CRUCIBLE LINING 
CRUCIBLE SHELL 




-SLAG SEAL 
A S S E B AL ST0S ^ ; /'.'i£^-'H,MBLE 



-TAPPING PIN 
Fig. 1 Typical Crucible for Thermit Welding 

5.2 At the bottom of the crucible is a magnesite thimble-seat which has a 
tubular opening plugged by another small magnesite thimble of cylindrical 
form. This thimble provides a channel through which the liquid thermit 
steel is poured. The plug thimble can be removed by gently knocking it 
upward and a new thimble inserted. 

5.3 The high temperature together with vigorous ebulition of the molten 
metal during the reaction necessitates a lining which is not only mechani- 
cally strong but of a highly refractory nature. Magnesite as well as thermit 
slag have been found to be very satisfactory lining materials. 

5.4 The crucible is plugged before charging by first inserting the thimble. 
The tapping pin which temporarily closes the thimble is suspended 
through the thirnble and over this is placed the asbestos powder and 
thermit slag. 

5.5 The crucible stand shall be fabricated so as to position the crucible to 
suit the job. The tapping hole of the crucible shall be vertically above 



IS s9524*1980 

the centre of the pouring gate. In order to avoid splashing as well as to 
accommodate tapping pin and spade, a gap not exceeding 150 mm 
between the tapping hole and top of the pouring gate should be ensured. 
It is advisable to check the crucible stand for position before preheating 
the mould so that any necessary modification may be made during 
preheating. 

5.6 Crucible should be baked to make sure that its lining is free from 
moisture. Presence of moisture in the crucible causes splashing of slag and 
metal from the crucible during the reaction. 

6. PREPARATION OF COMPONENTS PRIOR TO WELDING 

6.1 The crack should be extended by suitable means until the component 
is separated into two parts. The ends shall be cut square. A pre- 
determined gap shall be kept between two parts to be welded depending 
upon the cross-sectional area. If the parts are of uniform cross-section, 
joint preparation shall be made by removing metal from either side of 
the fracture, but if the cross-section is irregular, same amount of metal is 
removed from both sides of the fracture. The matins: faces as well 
as adjacent surfaces shall be cleaned of any loose scale, slag, dirt, grease 
or other foreign matter. 

6.2 After making an allowance for contraction, the parts to be welded 
shall be aligned and firmly held onto the jig. The allowance varies from 
5 to P mm depending upon the size of the weld and the time of preheating. 
The parts arc clamped properly onto the jig with straps and bolts, care 
being taken to ensure that these bolts can be slackened immediately after 
welding to allow the part to contract. 

6.3 In order to allow for the proper amount of contraction of the weld 
area, it is desirable, after lining up the parts in preparation for cutting the 
gap, to place trim marks on the two parts. These marks are made 
at points outside the area to be covered by the mould box approximately 
at about 300 mm apart either side of the gap. The metal at the point of 
weld may then be cut out along the line of fracture with a cutting torch 
so that a parallel gap is provided. 

6.4 Calculation of Weight of Thermit Mixture 

6.4.1 The width of the gap depends upon the size of the section to be 
welded and may be calculated as follows: 

Width of gap = Thickness of collar at centre 

■" ty ( area of cross-section in cm 2 ) \2 64 



IS 1 9524 p 1980 

Width of collar = 0'3 X y/ ( area of cross-section in cm* ) + 2 X 

width of gap 

The volume of the gap should be calculated from the profile of the 
sections to be welded. The volume of collar can be calculated as follows: 

Volume of collar = 0*8 X width of collar x thickness of collar x 

circumference of collar 

The volume of risers, pouring, heating and connecting gates are also 
to be added to the volume of collar and gap. After calculating the 
volume, the weight of thermit mixture is to be calculated, assuming that 
1 cm 8 of thermit steel weighs approximately 8* 13 g. The mixture required 
should include provision for a 10 percent excess to meet the contingencies. 
It is always safe to use an excess amount of thermit mixture for a 
satisfactory weld. The yield of the steel is about 60 percent. 

Tables 1 and 2 show the dimensions of gap, collar riser, heating, 
pouring and connecting gates as well as the weight of thermit mixture 
required. 

6.4.2 The quantity of thermit mixture can also be calculated from the 
weights of the wax pattern. By weighing the wax before and after making 
the pattern, the amount of wax used is determined. For every kilogram 
of wax used approximately 25 kg of thermit is required. This factor may 
be reduced in the case of very large repair welds because the percent of 
metal in the gates and risers decreases. 

6.4.3 The calculation of the charge of thermit mixture depends on the 
chemistry and mechanical properties of the component to be welded. 
A typical weld metal composition for medium tensile steel component is 
given below: 

G - 028%, Mn - 085%, Si - 0*45%, Al^- 0-42% 

7. MOULDS FOR REPAIR WELDING 

7.1 The type of mould used depends upon two factors; whether the weld 
is repetitive or non-repetitive, and whether the parts to be welded are to 
be pre-heated or not. Repair welds are normally non-repetitive. Some 
large welds though repetitive in nature, may require the same handling as 
for non-repetitive welds. Pre-heating may be used economically for non- 
repetitive welds or where a number of duplicate welds are involved. The 
two controlling factors are the amount of heat required to produce the 
weld and the most efficient means of transferring it. 



IS 1 9524- lttO 



7.2 For non-repetitive welds each mould is made up individually on the 
part itself. When a single large weld is to be made, a wax pattern is 
formed on the weld and the process is called ' lost wax process '. The wax 
used as pattern may be paraffin wax or a mixture with commercial bees- 
wax in the ratio of 2 : I. The wax is made to fill the gap, and is applied 
to the surface of the parts in the exact shape desired in the finished weld, 
including collar. A vent hole is provided by embedding a 6 mm cord 
through the body of the wax after the mould is complete. A sand mould 
is then made around the pattern, using a suitable mould box of about 
5 mm thick plates to back up sand rammed around the parts. 

7.3 The sand mould is made by ramming a small amount around the 
edges of the box and then in towards the centre. The surface of the mould 
should be kept level during ramming. The material near the parts to be 
welded is packed as tightly as possible, since that area of the mould has 
to resist the pre-heating gases and the subsequent metal flow. Area of the 
mould towards the outside of the box need not be rammed as tightly. 
Wooden patterns suitable for pouring and heating gates, are inserted 
within the mould as it is being rammed. A wooden heating gate pattern 
is set at the lowest point of the wax. It should lead out to the front of the 
box where an opening through the mould box plate is provided. Table 3 
shows the typical composition and mechanical properties of moulding sand, 

7.4 When the two pieces to be welded are of the same size, the heating 
gate is centered directly on the wax pattern. If however, a light section 
is being welded to a heavy one, the preheating opening; in the mould is 
directed more towards the heavy section in order to ensure uniform 
heating of the two parts. A typical mould is shown in Fig. 2. 



SLAG 




POURING GATE 



PRE-HEATING 
GATE- 



REFRACTORY 



.PRE-HEATING GATE 
PART TO BE WEL0E0 
-PRE-HEATING GATE 



Fio, 2 Mould for Joining Massive Sections By the 
Thermit Welding Process 



IS t 9524 - 1880 



s fc5 rt <i»^ *">* ^* ^* 

g G g ~ ^ -, -cm 

^gJlllllllllllllSBSSiaSSSSJ 

: 2 I I I I I I I I I I I I ISI..I I 

w g«MeownWcoM««MMeoeoeo«eoeo«MWM 






£ s 



<0 



tf ~ 



vo 



^^^^^CM^CSCS^CS*^ CM — « CM "« -* CN CM CM CM CM 



CMCMCMCMCscMCMcoeocoeococococococococoencoco 






xxxxxxxxxxxxxx*xxxxxxxx 

g - -. « ^^^^^^^ 



B NinmcocoNO^r}'tpincocoHom«s ( ftON« 
5 M^^^^weMwNNWNWMweoeoeoeoveo* 



§ oo<n8ooNc?«owNlo8 

g lO^r^ — ^CM — C4 — M^CMCN 



Q irt ift Qifl \Ti © Q O 

xxxxxxxxx 



B88«S883a88R£88cQi3S8R 



to 



IS 1 9524 • 19*0 



OlfiNnNNOONHNiONeONOODMODWOjQJP 

r*-o<N©r^-f— dooa>"r©oeNio — rt mo w g o 
^eoMeoN^eoir)^ ic m 01 t^ - co <t o io n ^ * irt 

^ ~ ^ -• — CM ~» CM 






^NN<NN<NNNN CMcMCMCMCMCM<*CM'«* , CM*CMT»« 



r^r^r^r^^^^^©©©©©©^©©^©?^^?^ 



nnnnnnnwnnwnnnnmnnn<nnn 



t^^r^ocoooooooooo© o©©©o©o 



r-NNNNNNNNNNNMNCM CM eM CM CM CM CM CM 



MMMNOOOOmmiftiftM^CO CM M CM JN £ £J CM 



wnnwnnnnnn mm mm 



*s 



© «o © © m cm © id 



Soo m cm o> £ £ 
m to to to * ^ 






xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 

•O lO © »o © 

r*» © o> — © 



p iQ © © iO P 
,^. ■_, w , — ww.,.-.,-.. -._.CNO>iOCMt>»3' 

MN«NNNNNNN(NeONeONeOeOrt« 



© o 
<© co 
en ^ 



^f <* T 



© iO CO 



©iO© © m cm © m 



s 



if) O lO «5 (O N 



io »o 
cm i> 

co ^ 



g8RS8§ 

CO «0 CO U"> ~" " 



© © 

^ CO 



, © © 

> r* in 



> © © © w 

i in m o 

> tO a> h» •-* 



cm 5 



xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 



iO to © © JO JO 
cm cm »n «o £ •> 

co co co co co co 



° 9 



8SS8 

»o iO iO VO 



» © © © © 

m o o o 

i (O W N h 



11 



IS i 9524 - 1980 






H2S 









SO I 
S I o 



o i 






8» 



CO 

5 



go i 

A* 



[i s 



W 



o 



O 






5 



to 



Q S. g 



6 
g 
x 

6 
S 



ep a> 
cn -th 



* * n oo OJ -• eo 
CO CO iO 3 N O) - 



I I I I I I I I I I 



r»* r«* r>. 

CO CO CO 



i I I I I I I 






cococoeocococococo eo co co 



^ « M 



•^cscscmoicococococo 



r^ r*» t^ 

CO CO CO 



H WNcoeo««coeo$^ ^ ^ 



cMinmo^cN^mcoo ~ 

— • -* — • h N in m n eo m 



co 



CO CO 

xxxxxxxxxxxxx 



(Ni.oma)CM*t«ioooo^cot>.i^ 

~~-*~C\ICNCMOICOCOCOCO CO 



8 - - - - 



ass 

CM CM CM 



m o 
cm %n 

CO CO 



12 



IS : 9524 - 1980 



ff) CO h (O 
m (Ti <£> h«. 
— • «-h CM <f 



£ <P. 



© © o © © 

if) iO ""> iO in 



CM CM CM CM CM 



i^r-*ooooooo 
eocomioio»ntfim»n 



^hp-i-^^CM CMCMCMCM 



r-»t>.ooooooo 

CO CO iO »0 «"> uj ir> if} »0 



^h — . CM CM CM CM CM 



© © <o cm cr> »o 
uj ir> m to o i^ 



co co co 



s 


S 




r^ 

^ 


o 


CO 

m 




s 


o 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


8 


§ 


© 

CM 


CD 
CM 
CM 


a 

CM 


m 

CM 


3 

CM 


o 

CO 


CO 



QO-^r^ocotooo 



R 8 S 8 S 

co ^ ^ m m 



8 8 



13 



18:9524-1980 

7.5 When the mould is completely rammed, the top is hollowed out to 
provide a basin for the slag produced by the thermit reaction. A channel 
is also cut in the surface of this slag basin between the riser and the 
pouring gate opening. The moulding sand is then troweled away from the 
top of the pouring gate to provide a larger opening and a shelf onto which 
the thermit steel can subsequently be tapped. The mould should be 
vented thoroughly for the escape of moisture during the preheating process 
and gases after pouring the thermit metal. 

TABLE 3 TYPICAL COMPOSITION AND MECHANICAL PROPERTIES 
OF MOULDING SAND 

( Clause 7.3 ) 

Chemical Composition Mechanical Properties 



/— -" 

Constituents 


— > 
Percentage 




Si0 2 


90-2 


Green compn 


Clay 
A1 2 3 


70 
55 


strength 
Green shear s 


Fe 2 3 
CaO 
MgO 
Loss at 150°C 


1-5 
0-2 
0-2 
7-5 


Permeability 



— 40 



8. PRE-HEATING 

8.1 Most of the repair jobs require pre-heating, which may he carried out 
by any suitable method. The most common method is by burning a fuel- 
air mixture within the mould. Pre-heating may also be accomplished by 
running part of the molten metal from the thermit reaction into direct 
contact with the parts and overflowing it prior to flowing in the final 
filler metal. 

8.2 Where wax patterns are used, the initial purpose .of the pre-heating is 
to remove the wax. The heat is applied gradually and the burner is fre- 
quently removed from the heating gate to allow liquid wax to roll out of 
that part. Once the wax has been removed, the rate of flow of fuel is 
increased so that combustion takes place through the mould cavity. The 
purpose of heating at this time is to give the faces of the base metal an 
initial pre-heat and to thoroughly dry the mould. Pre-heating to about 
900°C is satisfactory. Upon completion of the pre-heat, the gate through 
which the heat was introduced must be blocked. 

9. IGNITING THE CHARGE AND TAPPING THE CRUCIBLE 

9.1 When the pre-heating is completed, the crucible is positioned over the 
mould, the burners are removed, the pre-heating gates quickly plugged 

14 



IS ; 9524 -I960 

with iron rod coated with sand and mud-mixture and the mould 
positioned ready for pouring. This should be completed very quickly as 
during this operation pre-hcated parts are losing heat. Therefore, all tools 
such as the tapping spade, spanner, hammer, etc, should be kept ready 
while pre-heating is carried out. 

9.2 The reaction shall be started by touching the mixture with a red hot 
steel rod. After the reaction is completed, the slag is allowed to 
float to the top, and the tapping pin is moved upwards allowing 
the thermit steel to run into the mould through pouring gate. Molten 
metal rises up through the gap and collar and (ills the riser. Slag floats on 
the top of metal in the pouring gates and spills into the slag basin without 
entering the mould at all. When the pouring is over, dry sand should be 
sprinkled over the slag to reduce heat losses and keep the riser molten. 

10. COOLING AND FINISHING 

10.1 After waiting for 4 to 5 minutes after tapping, the parts should be 
slackened to allow contraction to take place. The job should be allowed 
to cool slowly to about 400°G. The risers and the mould are then 
removed. Pre-heating gates are also removed by flame cutting. The 
collars may or may not be removed. 

11. POST-WELD HEAT TREATMENT 

11.1 No post-weld heat treatment is required for welds of small cross- 
section, but it is desirable to normalise them if the cross-sectional area is 
more than 325 cm 2 . This may be conveniently done by building up a 
temporary furnace with refractory bricks around the joint and heating to 
the appropriate temperature. 

12. TESTING THE WELDS 

12.1 Wherever possible the welds should be subjected to non-destructive 
tests such as megnetic particle, dye-penetrant, radiography, etc, to ensure 
freedom from harmful surface as well as internal defects. 

13. QUALIFICATION OF THE WELDING PERSONNEL 

13.1 The persons engaged in alumino-thcrrnic welding operation should 
be adequately trained to be capable of producing welds of satisfactory and 
consistent quality. They should have the knowledge of different foundry 
materials and methods of making moulds. 

13.2 The operators should be instructed to wear dark blue glasses as well 
as protective clothing to protect themselves from the intense glare and 
heat from the reaction. 

15 



16 t 9524 - 1*80 

( Continued from page 2 ) 



Subcommittee for Welding and Cutting Processes and 
Procedures, SMDG 14 : 3 



Convener 

Shri H. L. Prabhakar 

Members 

Shri J. K. Nanda ( Alternate to 
Shri H. L. Prabhakar ) 

Assistant Director ( Welding ) 



Representing 
Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 



Shri Awtar Singh 



Ministry of Railways 

Beas Projects, Talwara Township, Distt Hoshiar- 
pur 
Shri R. N. Aggarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Dasgupta Central Mechanical Engineering Research Insti- 

tute, Durgapur 
Shri D. S. Honavar D & H Secheron Electrodes Ltd, Indore 

Shri A. C. Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 



Shri G. P. Kamat 

Sum B. Malkani ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. T. Kanse 

Shri S. N. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. KniSHNAMURTiiY 

Shri J. C. Magoo ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. R. Prasukr 



Shri M. R. C. Nagara jan ( Alternate ) 



Advani-Oerlikon Ltd, Bombay 

Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 
New Delhi 

Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd 

Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 



Shri R. Pdrkavastha 

Shri S. K. Burman ( Alternate ) 
Representative 
Shri A. P. Sanyal 

Shri A. N. Subrahmanyam 

Shri S. C. Varma ( Alternate ) 
Shri W. R. D. Saxton 
Shri J. R. Upadhyay 



Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Central Boilers Board, New Delhi 

Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels Ltd, Vishakha- 

patnam 
Garlic Engineering, Ambarnath 

Lloyds Register of Shipping, Calcutta 
Apar Pvt Ltd, Bombay ' 



16 



INDIAN STANDARDS 
ON 

WELDING PROC£DURES 9 RECOMMENDATIONS AND SAFETY 



IS: 

818-1968 

819-1957 

822-1970 
1179-1967 
1261-1959 
2811-1964 

2812-1964 

3016-1965 
3023-1965 
4353-1967 

4944-1968 
5139-1969 

5530-1969 

6409-1971 
6916-1973 
8002-1976 
8004-197G 
8455-1977 
8987-1978 
9006-1978 



Code of practice for safety and health requirements in electric and gas 

welding and cutting operations (first revision ) 

Code of practice fur resistance spot welding for light assemblies in mild 

steel 

Code of procedure for inspection of welds 

Equipment for eye and face protection during welding (first revision ) 

Code of practice for seam welding in mild steel 

Recommendations for manual tungsten inert-gas arc welding of stainless 

steel 

Recommendations for manual tungsten inert-gas arc welding of aluminium 

and aluminium alloys 

Code of practice for fire precautions in welding and cutting operations 

Recommended practice for building up by metal spraying 

Recommendations for submerged-arc welding of mild steel and low alloy 

steels 

Cost of procedure for welding at low ambient temperatures 

Recommended procedure for repair of grey iron castings by oxy-acetylene 

and manual metal arc welding 

Code of procedure for repair and rectification of steel castings by metal arc 

welding process 

Code of practice for oxy-acetylene flame cleaning 

Code of practice for fabrication welding of steel casting 

Recommended procedure for welding of flexible PVC 

Recommended procedure for welding of rit^id PVC 

Recommended procedure for welding of polythlene 

Recommended practices for air carbon arc gouging and cutting 

Recommended practices for welding of clad steels 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Menak Bhavan, B Bahadur Shah Zafar Mary, NEW DELHI 110002 



Telephones : 26 SO 21, 27 01 31 

Rtglonal O/Ifcei / 

Wastarn | Novelty Chambers, Grant Road 
Eastern ft 5 Chowrlnghaa Approach 
6outharn ( 0. 1. Y. Campua, Adyar 

Branch Offic**t 

Puehpak*, Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur 

•P ' Block, Unity Bldg, Nara«lmhara|a Squara 

Gangotr! Complex, Bhadbhada Road, T, T. Nagar 

22E Kalpana Area 

Ahlrnaa Bldg, SCO 82*83, Sector 1TC 

5-8-6 6C L. N. Gupta Marg 

0*277 Todarmal Marg, Banlpark 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar 

Patllputra Industrial Estate 

Hantex Bldg {2nd Floor ), Riy Station Road 



Telegrams t Manakeanstha 

Telephone 



80MBAY 400007 


87 97 29 


CALCUTTA 700072 


27 50 00 


MADRAS 600020 


41 24 42 


AHMAOABAO 380001 


2 08 61 


BANGALORE 560002 


2 76 49 


BHOPAL 462003 


8 2718 


BHUBANESHWAR 751014 5 36 27 


CHANDIGARH 160017 


2 83 20 


HYDERABAD 500001 


22 10 83 


JAIPUR 302006 


6 28 32 


KANPUR 208005 


812,72 


PATNA 800013 


6 28 08 


TRIVANDBUM 665661 


8227 



Printed et N«w Indie Printing Press, Knurls, lodj* 



