**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 8436 (1989) : Thermal Cycling Test for Evaluation of 
Electroplated Plastics - Method [MTD 24: Corrosion 
Protection] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS 8436 : 1989 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



THERMAL CYCLING TEST FOR EVALUATION 
OF ELECTROPLATED PL ASTICS — METHOD 

( First Revision ) 

( ^^ ^5Rt?RTO ) 



MDC 678-5/'8 : 62 1 -3577 : 620-193-5 



© BIS 1990 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

March 1990 Price Groop I 



Metallic and Non-Metallic Finishes Sectional Committee, MTD 20 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 15 September 
1989, after the draft finalized by the Metallic and Non-metallic Finishes Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 

The thermal cycling test is intended primarily to assess adhesion. Temperature fluctuations in service 
may cause premature adhesion failures and the magnitude of these fluctuations should be taken into 
consideration when selecting the thermal cycling requirements given in IS 8376 : 1988 'Electroplated 
coatings of nickel plus chromium on plastics for decorative purposes'. Details of apparatus and thermal 
cycles are included in this standard. 

This standard was first published in 1977. Keeping in view of the latest developments in the field of 
electroplating on plastics, it was felt necessary to revise this standard to align the test cycle require- 
ments with ISO 4525-1985 ( E ) 'Electroplated coatings of Ni -f Cr on plastics materials', prepared by 
the International Organization for Standardization. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )\ The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS «436 : 198^ 

Indian Standard 

THERMAL CYCLING TEST FOR EVALUATION 
OF ELECTROPLATED PLASTICS ~ METHOD 

f First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard lays down method of thermal 
cycling test of electroplated plastics for evalua- 
tion of serviceability. 

2 REFERENCES 

2,1 The following Indian Standard is a necessary 
adjunct to this standard: 

Title 



IS No. 
IS 8376 : 1988 



Specification for electroplated 
coatings of nickel plus chromium 
on plastics for decorative pur- 
poses {first revision ) 



3 APPARATUS 

3.1 The apparatus shall consist of a circulating 
air heating chamber and cooling chamber 
sufficiently insulated, and controlled so as to 
maintain closely the required temperature. The 
two chambers may be separate, or may be built 
so as to constitute a single piece of apparatus. 
The controller and recorder used for chamber 
control, calibration and records shall be accurate 
to ± rc. All points within the working area of 
the test chamber shall remain within ± 2''C of the 
set temperature when tested by the procedures 
given in 3.2. The rate of air circulation shall be 
controlled so as to permit a consistent rate of 
heating or cooling of the parts under test. 

3.2 Thermocouples may be installed 25 mm from 
each corner of the test chamber, and each thermo- 
couple should be previously calibrated in boiling 
water and in ice water. 

NOTE — Alternatively, oven maintained at parti- 
cular temperatures may be used in place of the 
apparatus mentioned above and refrigerator may be 
used for lower temperatures provided the desired 
temperatures are maintained. 

4 SAMPLING 

4,1 The purchaser should select a suitable sampl- 
ing plan for the acceptance testing of lots of the 
plated items. The samples should be drawn 
randomly from the parts as this test is time 



consuming and often destructive and therefore, 
100 percent inspection may be impractical. 

5 ELAPSED TIME AFTER PLATING 

5.1 The elapsed time between completion of the 
plating operation and thermal cycling affects the 
test results. Therefore, the elapsed time shall be 
at least 24 hours, unless otherwise agreed to 
between the purchaser and the seller. 

6 PROCEDURE 

6.1 The parts may be introduced into the 
chamber unmounted, or mounted in a manner 
simulating assembly, if so agreed upon between 
the purchaser and the seller. 

6.2 The chamber is then loaded with the desired 
quantity and type of parts to be tested* 

6.3 The location of parts within the chamber, the 
loading, and the size of the parts being tested, 
should be recorded. 

6*4 The electroplated sample shall be subjected, 
not less than 24 hours after plating, to one of the 
following sets of conditions, according to the 
thermal cycling requirements indicated in 
IS 8376 : 1988. 

6.4.1 Thermal Cycle A 

There shall be four cycles, each cycle consisting 
of: 

The exposure of the coated part for 1 hour at 
75°C and then allow the part to return to 20 ± S^C 
as quickly as possible and this temperature is 
maintained for a total soaking period of 1 hour 
( minimum ), 

6.4.2 Thermal Cycle B 

There shall be four cycles, each cycles consisting 
of: 

The exposure of the coated part for 1 hour ©f 
— 20°C and then allow the part to return to 
20 ± S^'C as quickly as possible and this tem- 
perature is maintained for 1 hour ( minimum ). 



i 



IS 8436 : 1989 



The exposure of the coated part for 1 hour at 
75^C and then allow the part to return to 
20 ih S'^C, as quickly as possible and this 
temperature is maintained for 1 hour ( minimum ). 

6.4.3 Thermal Cycle C 

There shall be four cycles, each cycle consisting 
of: 

The exposure of the coated parts for 1 hour at a 
temperature of — 40"C, and then allow the parts 
to return to 20 ± 5°C, as quickly as possible and 
this temperature is maintained for 1 hour 
( minimum ). 

The exposure of the coated for 1 hour at 75°C 
and then allow the parts to return to 20 ± S^'C, 
as quickly as possible and this temperature is 
maintained for 1 hour ( minimum )• 



7 RECORDING OF TEST RESULTS 

7.1 The test report shall include the following 
information: 

a) A statement that this method was followed. 

b) The service grade number, the part was 
tested for. 

c) The tray construction ( if tray is used ) and 
chamber loading. 

d) The last calibration date of the controller 
and the recorder. 

7.2 Upon the completion of the test, the part 
shall be examined and a record made of the 
extent, nature, and location of any defect as 
specified in the relevant Indian Standard. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection* 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of alJ its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from tim.e to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of 
the latest amendments or edition Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
following reference: 

Doc : No. MTD 20 ( 3278 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah'Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg C33i 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 ^331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 3i-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 

Southern : C. I. T, Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MiDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
PATNA. TRIVANDRUM. 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Delhi, India 



