( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS:11789 - 1986

Indian Standard
DETERMINATION OF THE MAXIMUM SYMMETRICAL RADIATION FIELD IN THE RADIATION BEAM FROM A ROTATING ANODE X-RAY TUBE FOR MEDICAL DIAGNOSIS
Electromedical
Chairman
SURGEON

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

ETDC

50

A. K. DEB

R w A n-ADMIRAL

Ministry

of Defence

( R & D Organization)

Members Department of Electronics, New Delhi SIIRI B. A. CITETTY ( Aftcrnotc ) Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi PROF S. K. GIJHA Bhabha Atomic Research Centre. Bombav DR G. HARIDASAN DR G. SUBNAI~MANIAN( Alternate ) Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical COL S. K. JAIN Services, New Delhi MAJ-GEN J. M. GROVER ( Allcrnate ) Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( CSIR ), SHRI R. S. KRANDPUR Chandigarh SRRI V. K. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI I>. B. MALIK New Delhi Electromcdical Pvt Ltd, Indore SHRI P. K. MANTRT Directorate of Standardization (Ministry of Defence) DR N. NARAYANA RAO SRRI D. P. DRIMAN ( AlYrttatc) All India Instruments Manufacturers' & Dealers' SHRI B. PASRIOHA Association, New Delhi SERI M, M. KALA ( Alternate ) Sicmens India Ltd, Bombay SHRI D. NA~ARAJ RAO SHRI R. P. RAO ( Alternate ) Elpro International Ltd, Pune SARI D. SRINIDHI SRRI D. L. SULE ( Alternate ) Safdarjung Hospital. New Delhi DRR.S. SAXENA Director General, IS1 ( ( Es-ojiccio Mcmbrr ) SHRI S. P. SACHDRV, Director ( Elec tech )
SHRJ B. S. BEDI

Secretary SFIKTB. K. MAIIATA Joint Director ( Elec tech ), IS1

I 1
I INDIAN

@ Copyright 1987
STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication 1s prorccted under the h&ran Copyright Adl ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS :11789 - 1986

Indian Standard
DETERMINATION OF THE MAXIMUM SYMMETRICAL RADIATION FIELD IN THE RADIATION BEAM FROM A ROTATING ANODE X-RAY TUBE FOR MEDICAL DIAGNOSIS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 August 1986, after the draft finalized by the Electromedical Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 This standard describes a method for the determination of the greatest geometrically symmetrical radiation field at a specified distance from the focal spot for which the percentage energy fluence rate along the major axes does not fall below a permitted value. 0.3 While preparing this standard assistance has been derived from IEC Dot : 62B ( Central Office ) 53 Determination of the maximum symmetrical radiation field from a rotating anode X-ray tube for medical diagnosis. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard applies to X-ray source assemblies and X-ray tube assemblies containing rotating anode X-ray tubes, for use in medical diagnostic radiology for techniques in which the X-ray pattern will be received simultaneously over the image reception area. 1.2 Unless otherwise specified, this standard is applicable to an X-ray tube assembly with a brand new rotating anode X-ray tube.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rsvissd ).

2

IS : 11789- 1986 1.3 This standard does not apply to X-ray source assemblies and X-ray tube assemblies for special applications, when, for example, steeper variations of the energy fluence rate or particular distributions are intended. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.6 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions, in addition to the definitions given in IS : 1885 ( Part 43 )-1977*, shall apply. 2.1 Accompanying electrical installation, important information regarding safety. - Documents provided with an Documents electrical equipment or accessory and containing for the assembler, installer and user, particularly of the target that of

2.2 Actual Focal Spot - Area on the surface intercepts the beam of accelerated particles.

2.3 Anode - In any X-ray tube, electrode to which the beam electrons is accelerated and which normally contains the target.

2.4 Anode Speed - In a rotating anode X-ray tube, angular velocity at which the anode rotates, usually expressed in revolutions per minute. of the focal spot of an 2.5 Blooming Effect - As a characteristic X-ray tube, ratio of star pattern resolution limits obtained under specific measuring conditions. 2.6 Effective Focal Spot - Perpendicular focal spot on the reference plane.
NOTE The shortened

projection

of

the

actual

term focal spot refers to the effective

focal spot.

2.7 Focal Spot Pinhole Radiogram - Radiogram obtained by means of a pinhole camera, showing the shape, orientation and the spatial distribution of radiant intensity of the radiation emitted across an effective focal spot. - Radiogram obtained by means of 2.8 Focal Spot Slit Radiogram a slit camera, showing the distribution of radiant intensity in the direction normal to the length of the slit, of the radiation emitted across an effective focal spot. obtained by means 2.9 Focal Spot Star Radiogram - Radiogram of a star pattern camera, for the determination of the star pattern resolution limit in one or more directions across an effective focal spot. *Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 43 Electrical
practice. equipment used in medical

3

IS:11789-1986 2.10 Focal Track - In a rotating anode X-ray tube? part of the anode which is struck by the beam of electrons during rotation of the anode. 2.11 Intensifying Screen used in direct radiography radiation upon a radiation - Layer of suitable material to intensify the action of incident sensitive emulsion. or substance X or gamma

2.12 Irradiation Time - Duration of an irradiation determined usually the time a rate of a radiation according to specific methods, quantity exceeds a specified level. 2.13 Loading Factor - Factor influencing by its value the X-ray tube X-ray tube potential difference and its percentage load, for example, ripple, X-ray tube current, loading time, equipment anode input power. 2.14 Loading Time - Time, determined according to a specified method, during which the anode input power is applied to the X-ray tube. 2.15 Maximum Potential Difference - Highest permitted X-ray tube potential difference for specific operating conditions and for a specified rectification of the potential difference. 2.16 Modulation Transfer Function - As a characteristic of the focal spot of an X-ray tube, absolute value of the folurist transform of the one-dimensional distribution of radiant intensity emitter across the effective focal spot. 2.17 Nominal Anode Input Power power may be applied for a single X-ray time. Highest constant anode input tube load in a specific loading

2.18 Nominal Focal Spot Value - Dimensionless numerical value having a specific relation to the dimensions of the focal spot of an X-ray tube, measured under specific conditions. 2.19 Non-Screen Film use without an intensifying In direct screen. radiography, radiographic film for

2.20 Normal Use - Operation, including standby state, according&o the instructions for use or for the obvious intended purpose, 2.21 Pinhole Camera of a pinhole diaphragm film. Assembly of equipment to obtain by means a focal spot pinhole radiogram on radiographic

2.22 Radiographic Film - Sheet or roll material&consisting of a transport carrier covered with radiation sensitive emulsion on one or usually both sides and designed for use in direct radiography,

IS: 11789 - 1986 2.23 Radiographic Rating - For the operation of an X-ray tube, specified combination of conditions and loading factors under which the specified limits of loadability of the X-ray tube are attained. 2.24 Reconstructive Tomography - Indirect radiography the information is obtained by measurement of the attenuation radiation beam scanned across the object in various directions. in which of a small

2.25 Reference Axia - For a radiation beam, line in the reference direction through the centre of the radiation source. For a symmetrical radiation beam, the centre of the radiation field coincides within required tolerances with the reference axis of the radiation beam. 2.26 Reference Direction - For a beam of ionizing radiation, specified direction to which the target angle, the radiation field size and specifications with respect to the imaging properties of the radiation source are related. For an X-ray beam, direction to which the anode angle, the nominal focal spot value, the X-ray field size and specifications with respect to the imaging properties of the focal spot are related. 2.27 Reference Plane - For an effective focal spot, plane to the reference direction containing the point at which axis intersect with the actual focal spot. Usually, the point of intersection symmetry of the effective focal spot. 2.28 Rotating Anode X-Ray Tube of equipment to obtain 2.29 Slit Camera - Assembly slit diaphragm a focal spot slit radiogram on radiographic by means film. of a forms the perpendicular the reference centre of

intended

in combination with 2.30 Specifique - When used as an adjective parameters or conditions referring to a particular value or standardized arrangement, usually to those required in an IEC standard. in combination with 2.31 Specified - When used as an adjective parameters or conditions referring to a value or arrangement to be chosen and indicated for the purpose under consideration. 2.32 Star Pattern means of a test film. Camera - Assembly of equipment to obtain by pattern a focal spot star radiogram on radiographic As a characteristic frequency which of the can be

2.33 Star Pattern Resolution Limit focal spot of an X-ray tube, highest spatial imaged under specific measuring conditions. 5

IS : 11789 Y 1986 2.34 Target That part of an X-ray
a beam tube or a particle accelerator of accelerated particles to produce X-ray

onto which is directed or neutron radiation.

2.35 X-Ray Tube - Evacuated vessel for the production of X radiation by the bombardment of a target, usually contained in an anode, with a beam of electrons acceIerated from a cathode by a potential difference. 2.36 X-Ray Tube Assembly tube installed. 2.37 X-Ray Tube Current of X-ray tube. The X-ray tube milliampere ( mA ).

-

X-ray X-ray is

tube electric

housing current by its

with through mean

an

X-ray

the anode value in

current

expressed

2.38 X-Ray Tube Housing - Container for an X-ray tube providin protection except for the radiation aperture, against electric shock an 3 against X-radiation. It may optionally contain other components. 2.39 X-Ray Tube Load - Electric energy supplied expressed by a combination of values Ioading factors. 2.40 X-Ray Tube Potential Difference to an X-ray tube between the cathode, the anode. 3. ENERGY Potential electron to an X-ray

difference applied emitter, and the

FLUENCE RATE

3.1 Due to the increased absorption in the anode of an X-ray tube in oblique directions, the energy Buence rate decreases towards the edge of the radiation field in directions forming small angles with the surface of the anode.
In addition the energy fluence rate over the radiation field decreases with distance from the reference axis to the edges of the radiation field according to the inverse square labs. Absorption in the material of the target affects radiation quality as the results of measurements of well as energy fluence rate; therefore rate are affected by the amount of additional filtration energy fluence in the radiation beam. For this reason the measuring arrangement required in this standard includes substantial additional filtration of a given value in the radiation beam. 3.2 Further example: the distribution radiation of energy from objects fluence rate is affected beam, by, and for

a) Scattered

in the radiation beam.

b) The position

of any object

in the radiation

6

IS:11789

- 1986

Therefore, the radiation 3.3 A typical axes is shown

the measuring beam except distribution in Fig. 1.

arrangement is required to have no objects the added filter in its required position. of the energy fluence rate along the

in

major

~

FOCAL

SPOT

100

vr

50

I
FIG. 1 TYPICAL DISTRIBUTION OF THE RELATIVE ENERGY FLUENCE RATE ALONG THE MAJOR AXIS X OF A MAXIMUM SYMMETRICAL RADIATION FIELD SYMMETRICAL RADIATION FIELD Radiation Field -

4. MAXIMUM

4.1 Orientation of the Maximum Symmetrical For the determination of the maximum symmetrical

distribution of energy fluence axes in the measuring plane.

rate

radiation field the will be measured along two major of the into the

4.1.1 The major X-axis is the projection in reference direction longitudinal ax& of the X-ray tube assembly parallely shifted focal spot. 7

IS z 11789 - 1986 The major Y-axis is normal to the X-axis. Both major axes intersect on the reference axis. The orientation shown in Fig. 2. of the maximum symmetrical radiation field is

LONGITUDINAL AXIS OF /THE X-RAY SOURCE ASSEMBLY OR X-RAY TUBE ASSEMBLY

FIELD

FIG. 2

ORIENTATION OF THE MAXIMUM SYMMETRICAX. RADIATION FIELD

4.1.2 If the limitation of the radiation field owing to the anode angle ( Heel effect ) follows a line in a direction other than normal to the longitudinal axis of the X-ray tube assembly, the major X-axis shall be adjusted accordingly. 4.2 Distribution of Energy Fluence Rate - A maximum symmetrical radiation field shall be determined as the dimensions of the greatest radiation field at specified distance from the focal spot symmetrical with respect to the specified reference axis, with its edges parallel to the major axes, in which the distribution of relative energy fluence rate along the major axes does not fall by more than 70 percent of the energy fluence rate on the reference axis. 4.3 Maximum Energy Fluence Rate - At no point along the major axes shall the value of energy fluence rate exceed 110 percent of that on the reference axis. 8

IS : 11789 - 1986 5. MEASUREMENT FLUENCE RATE 5.1 The measurement
made: a) either by production of a direct radiogram and densitometric measurement ( see Appendix A ), b) or by another dosimetric method of comparable subsequent

OF THE

DISTRIBUTION
of energy

OF ENERGY
fluence rate shall be

of the distribution

resolution.

5.1.1 Mensurin,o Arrangement - At a distance of 75 percent of the specified smallest distance, urnin of the radiation field from the focal spot an added filter according to Table 1 shall be placed of sufficient dimensions to intercept the entire radiation beam. The measuring plane shall be at the specified radiation field from the focal spot and normal to the within 0'036 rad ( 2.06" ), distance(s), of the reference axis to

If for a specified special radiodiagnostic technique the `image receptor plane' is not normal to the reference axis the measuring plane shall be adjusted to normal to the direction specified for that technique to within 0.036 rad ( 2.06" ). In general, the measuring scattering and back-scattering. The measuring arrangement arrangement shall be so as to minimize

Iaid down is as shown in Fig. 3.
FOCAL SPOT

AT

o

FIG. 3

MEASURING ARRANGEMENT
9

IS : 11789 - 1986

5.2 Measuring rotate. The X-ray

Conditions

-

The

anode

of the

X-ray 1.

tube

shall

tube voltage shall be as given in Table
TABLE
1

RADIATION ( Clause 5.1.1 )

QUALITY

NOMINAL

X-RAY VOLTAGE 0 max kV (1)

TUBE

ADDED FILTER THICKNESS OB ALUMlNlUBl mm (2)

REQUIRED X-RAY TUBE VOLTAGE u kV

(3) 30 50 75 75 and 125

30 <

Umax <

50 75 125

5 10 20
20

50 < Umax 6 75 < Umax e 125 < Umax

The dosimetric and densitometric conditions shall be so that a refinement of the detector system would not result in a significant change of the dimensions determined. 6. COMPLIANCE 6.1 Assessment of Compliance - Along the major axes of a specified field no relative value of energy maximum symmetrical radiation fluence rate determined according to 5 shall be lower than the value resulting from the requirement of 4.
to

6.2 Statement of Compliance - If compliance with this standard is be stated, at least the indication of the maximum symmetrical radiation field shall be given that. corresponds to the smallest distance from the focal spot that is specified for the X-ray source assembly or X-ray tube assembly. The statement of a maximum symmetrical with this standard shall be done as follows: Maximum symmetrical radiation field at a distance from the focal spot of radiation field complying . ..mm/...mm . ..mm

Combinations of radiation fields and distances may be given in the form of a table or curve.
NOTE - Values for the maximum symmetrical radiation field and its distance from the focal spot, where the first value for a rectangular radiation field shall be in the direction parallel to the longitudinal axis of the X-ray source assembly or X-ray tube assembly ( see Fig. 2 ).

IS : 11789 - 1986

APPENDIX ( Clause 5.1 )
DETERMINATION RADIOGRAPHIC A-l. RADIOGRAPHIC

A

OF ENERGY FLUENCE RATE BY DENSITOMETRIC MEASUREMENT FILM

A-l.1 The radiographic film shall be a non-screen film of a type whose gradient of the sensitometric curve is linear at least from a diffuse transmission density of 0'5 up to 1'6. The radiographic film shall be large enough to extend up to 105 percent of the Radiation field in each direction. A-2. IRRADIATION CONDITIONS be exposed so that after full between 1'0 and 1'4 is obtained in

A-2.1 The radiographic film shall development a local diffuse density the areas of greatest blackening. ~-3. MEASUREMENT

OF BLACKENING

A-3.1 The direct radiogram obtained shall be scanned by means of a densitometer. Neither the width nor the length ( nor a circular diameter ) of the slit of the densitometer shall exceed 2 mm. A-4. DETERMINATION OF ENERGY FLUENCE RATE

A-4.1 The values of density above base and fog shall be transformed into values of energy fluence rate by means of a sensitometric curve for the film material used. The sensitometric curve shall be established using an identical film exposed under essentially the same conditions and processed under the same conditions as those used for the production of the direct radiogram.

11

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units
QUANTITY

SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS )

UNIT

SYMBOL

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance Units

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

m kg A K cd mol

Supplementary
QUAWITTY

UNIT

SYMBOL

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QUANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance force Electromotive Pressure, stress

radian steradian

rad sr

UNIT

SYMBOL

DEFINITION

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

N

1 1

N = 1 kg.m/sa J = 1 N.m

J w
Wb T HZ S V Pa

1 W = 1 J/s I Wb = 1 V.s 1 1 1 T = 1 Wb/m* s = 1 A/V V = lW/A 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-l)

1 Pa = 1 N/m*

