**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10810-9 (1984): Methods of test for cables. Part 9: Tear 
resistance for paper insulation [ETD 9: Power Cables] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDc 62V3i5'2ii : 621 '31 561 4-6 : 620-1 76-245 ( Rrst Reprint August 1997) IS : 10«10< Part 9 ) - 1984 



Indian Standard 
METHODS OF TEST FOR CABLES 

PART 9 TEAR RESISTANCE FOR PAPER INSULATION 



( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



1. Scope — Covers the method for determining the force required to tear a specimen of cable 
insulating paper, 

2. Significance — Paper when used in the manufacture of electric cables, is applied over the 
conductor by wrapping process in the form of tape of suitable widths, with angular feed, and 
consequently is susceptible to tearing. A similar phenomenon occurs when the cable using the 
paper, is subjected to bending while handling and installation. Therefore, it is pertinent to deter- 
mine the tear strength of paper. Tearing resistance is usually greater in cross direction than in 
the machine direction of the paper. 

3« Terminology 

3.1 Machine Direction — The direction of paper corresponding to the direction of the flow of the 
stuff on the paper machine. 

3.2 Cross Direction — Direction at right angles to the machine direction. 

3.3 Mactiine Direction Tear — Tear parallel to the machine direction to the paper. 

3.4 Cross Direction Tear — Tear made at right angle to the^machine direction. 

4. Apparatus 

4.1 Tear fesfer — Ballistic pendulum type, such as the Elmendorf type as illustrated in Fig. 1. 
The machine is provided with two clamps; one fixed and the other movable which is carried 
on a sector shaped pendulum, suspended from a column by means of a frictionless bearing 
located near the apex of the sector. A means is provided to hold the pendulum in the raised 
position and a lever to release the pendulum instantaneously. On releasing the pendulum, the centre 
tongue of the specimen is subjected to the load of pendulum recorded through a spring loaded 
friction pointer on the circumferential scale marked on the pendulum. 



FIXED CLAMP 



ADJUSTING-SCREW FOR POINTER 
FRICTION DEVICE 



MOVING CLAMP 




LEVELLING 
SCREW 



FIG. 1 GENERAL VIEW OF ELMENDORF TYPE TEARING STRENGTH TESTER 



Adopted 14 March 1984 



© June 1985. BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS:10810(Part9)-1984 

5, Material — No material other than the test specimen is required for performing this test. 

^. Test Specimen 

6.1 A specimen approximately 100 x 62 mm shall be cut from the insulating paper, the smaller 
dimension being in the direction in which the paper has to be torn. By means of a suitable slitting 
device ( which is usually provided with the apparatus } two siits shall be cut on one of the 100 mm 
edges at a distance of approximately 25 mm from each end, thus forming in the centre a tongue 
approximately 50 mm wide for insertion in the movable clamp, together with two outer tongues each 
of approximately 25 mm width for insertion in the fixed clamps. The length of these slits is immaterial 
provided that tlie distance from the end of each to the uncut 100 mm edge of the specimen Is 
44 mm.. This distance of 44 mm represents the length to be torn and must be precise. A speci.men 
containing the siits is illustrated in Fig. 2. 













1 ' 


. 25 ^ 


50 


- 25 ^ 






100 













All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG, 2 TEST SPECIMEN SHOWING TONGUE 

6.2 Number of Test Specimens — Five for each direction. More number of specimens may be taken, 
If required ( see 8.2 and 8.5 ). 

7. Conditiomng — All the test specimens shall be conditioned at least for a period of 24 h at a 
relative iiumidity of 65 ± 2 percent and a temperature of 27 db 2*'C, before this test is carried out. 

8. Procedure 

3A Before and after the test, the apparatus shall be checked to confirm that it operates correctly. 

8.2 The tests may be made either on a single test piece or, if required, in packs of two or more test 
pieces simultaneously so adjusted that the reading is not less than 35 percent and not more than 
90 percent of the capacity of the apparatus. This number of test pieces is then used for each of 
the tests. 

8.3 Hold outer tongues of the test specimen in fixed clamps and the centre tongue in the movable 
clamp. The clamping should be done in such a way that sample is not strained, but a slight bend 
in the unciamped portion of the tongue is of no consequence. The iever is operated sharply to 
release the pendulum. As soon as the swing of the pendulum is complete and the specimen has 
been torn the pendulum may be brought to the rest by applying the -brakes incorporated in the tester. 
The reading of the pointer on the scale is then recorded. Scale readings shall be taken to the 
nearest integer. 

8.4 The test is carried out for both machine direction as well as cross direction of the insulating 

paper. 

8.5 The tearing strength in each direction shall betaken as the arithmetic mean of five readings. 
A single divergent reading, differing by niorethan 20 percent from the mean, shall be excluded from 
the calculation. If two such divergent readings are obtained a further five tests shall be made. If 
no further divergent readings occur the original two shall be excluded. If additional divergent 
readings occur all ten readfngs shall be included in the average and the tearing strength of the 
paper shall be Reported variable. The tearing strength of the paper shall be expressed in grams to 
the nearest gra^i, 

8.6 The tearing strength of the samples (gf) is given by multiplying the actual reading of the scale 
by the constant of the apparatus and dividing by the number of test pieces torn simultaneously. 

Note — UsuaH.y the constant of apparatus is 3. 



iS:10810(Part9)-1984 



9. Tabulation of Observations 

Type of Insulating Paper: 
Constant of the Instrument: 



Specimen 
No. 



Direction 



Scale Reading 



Number of Papers 
Torn Simultaneously 



Machine or Cross 



10. Calculation 



Actual reading of the scale 



Tearing strength, gf = xi — /^^^"ai reaaing or tne scale ^Constant of the 

Number of papers torn simultaneously instrument 

11. Report 

11.1 Reference Specification 



Specimen 
No. 



Type of Insulating 
Paper 



Tear Strength, gf 



Observed 






Specified 



11.2 Conclusion — The specimen meets/does not meet the requirements of the specification. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



