NAT AWA IS 14983 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Tica (tet at Atha) — arent Hifa 


( Teel JAGO ) 


Phosphorus (White or Yellow) — 
Code of Safety 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.300; 71.060.10 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM eat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2022 Price Group 5 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on recommendation of the 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee and approval of the Chemical Division Council. 


White phosphorus is used in the manufacture of pesticide intermediates, rodenticides, semiconductors, incendiaries, 
fireworks, electroluminescent coatings, pyrotechnics, electronics industry, detergents, metal treatment, animal 
feed, phosphoric acid, phosphor bronze, metallic phosphides and other phosphorus compounds. It is also used for 
production of mortars, hand grenades, etc. 


White or yellow phosphorus does not react with water and is stable as long as it is kept wet or otherwise excluded 
from air. Contact of the product with oxidizing materials (including elemental sulphur) may cause a vigorous 
reaction or explosion. Contact with strong caustic may result in evolution of poisonous and flammable phosphine 
gas, and the product is otherwise reactive with a wide variety of substances. Smoke of the burning product is 
irritating and toxic by inhalation. The product is highly hazardous if physically contacted or ingested. 


The elimination of accidents is vital to public interest. Accidents produce social and economic loss, and impair 
individual or group productivity. Realization of this loss has led the authorities to devote a good deal of attention 
to safety education. Apart from general precautions, some typical precautions are required to be taken during 
manufacture, storage and handling of white or yellow phosphorous. This code of safety lays special emphasis on 
these points. 


This standard was originally published in 2002. The Committee felt a need to revise this standard with a view 
to update the standard based on the experience of last three decades and on the currently available data. In this 
revision general properties have been incorporated and modifications have been made to update safety measures 
for controlling hazards and essential information on symptoms of poisoning, first-aid, medical treatment, storage, 
handling, labelling and employee safety. 


In the preparation of this code of safety considerable assistance was derived from the following publications: 


a 


na 


Chemical safety data sheets — SD-16, Manufacturing Chemists Association, 1825 Connecticut Avenue, 
Washington, D.C. 20009. 


b) Sax’s Dangerous Properties of Industrial Materials, Volume Three, Tenth Edition, Richard J. Lewis Sr., 
Wiley-Interscience Publication, 2000. 


c) NIOSH, Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Centres for 
Disease Control, 1990 (National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health). 


d) IPCS-International Program on Chemical Safety, 2004 edition. 
e) AERB SAFETY GUIDELINES NO. AERB/SG. 
The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


IS 14983 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


PHOSPHORUS (WHITE OR YELLOW) — 
CODE OF SAFETY 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This code describes the properties of white or yellow 
phosphorus and nature of hazards associated with it. 
The standard prescribes safety measures for controlling 
hazards and essential information on symptoms 
of poisoning, first-aid, medical treatment, storage, 
handling, labelling and employee safety. 


This code does not, however, deal with specifications 
for design of buildings, chemical engineering plants, 
method and ingredients used in the manufacture, 
equipment for waste disposal and operation control. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revisions, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards: 


IS No. Title 

4155:1966 Glossary of terms relating to 
chemical and radiation hazards and 
hazardous chemicals 

8519 : 1977 Guide for selection of industrial 
safety equipment for body protection 

8520 : 1977 Guide for selection of industrial 
safety equipment for eye, face and 
ear protection 

8807 : 1978 Guide for selection of industrial 
safety equipment for protection of 
arms and hands 

10667 : 1983 Guide for selection of industrial 


safety equipment for protection of 
foot and leg 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given in 
IS 4155 shall apply. 


4 PROPERTIES 


4.1 General Information 


White or yellow phosphorus spontaneously catches 
fire in air, it does not react with water and is stable as 
long as it is kept wet or otherwise excluded from air. 
Contact of the product with oxidizing materials may 
cause a vigorous reaction or explosion. Contact with 
strong caustic may result in evolution of poisonous and 
flammable phosphine gas, and the product is otherwise 
reactive with a wide variety of substances. The smoke of 
the burning product is irritating and toxic by inhalation. 
The product is highly hazardous if physically contacted 
or ingested. 


4.1.1 Chemical Name — Phosphorus. 


4.1.2 Common Name and Synonyms — Phosphorus, 
white phosphorus, yellow phosphorus. 


4.1.3 Uses 


White phosphorus is having extensive uses in the 
manufacture of pesticide intermediates, rodenticides, 
fire retardants, semiconductors, solar cells, 
electroluminescent coatings, fireworks, pyrotechnics, 
electronics industry, detergents, metal treatment, 
animal feed, phosphoric acid, phosphor bronze, 
metallic phosphides and other phosphorus compounds. 


It is also used for production of mortars, hand grenades, 
incendiaries, etc. 


4.2 Identification 
4.2.1 Formula — P, 


4.2.2 CAS Number — 12185-10-3 (Also reported 
7723-14-0). 


IS 14983 : 2022 


4.2.3 UN Number — 1381/2447. 

4.2.4 UN Class — 4.2, Subsidiary Risk 6.1. 
4.2.5 Hazchem Code — 1WE. 

4.3 Physical Properties 

4.3.1 General 


Colourless to yellow crystalline solid with waxy 
appearance. Turns dark on exposure to light. 


4.3.2 Molecular Mass — 123.88. 
4.3.3 Physical State — Waxy solid and cubic crystals. 
4.3.4 Colour — Colourless to pale yellow. 


4.3.5 Odour — Pungent, sharp, garlic like (smell of 
oxide of phosphorus). 


4.3.6 Boiling Point — 279.7°C. 

4.3.7 Melting Point — 44.1°C. 

4.3.8 Vapour Density (Air = 1) — 4.42. 
4.3.9 Specific Gravity 


a) Solid (water = 1) at 20°C — 1.82. 
b) Liquid (water = 1) — 1.745. 


4.3.10 Viscosity at 30°C — 2.037 cP. 

4.3.11 Vapour Pressure at 76.6°C — 1 mm Hg. 
4.3.12 Heat of Combustion — (—) 5 900 kcal/kg. 
4.3.13 Refractive Index at 25°C — 2.144 2. 


4.3.14 Solubility in Water — Almost insoluble in water 
(0.000 3 g/100 g water at 20°C). 


4.3.15 Solubility in Other Solvents — Soluble in alkali, 
ammonia, benzene, carbon disulphide, chloroform, 
ether and toluene. 


4.3.16 Light Sensitivity — Turns red in sunlight. 
4.4 Chemical Properties 


4.4.1 Reactivity 


Very reactive with air or oxygen, igniting spontaneously 
and burning to form phosphorus pentaoxide. Reacts 
violently with oxidizing materials, strong caustics, 
ammonia, sulphur, beryllium, thorium, zirconium, 
various halogens, oxides, fluorides, azides, iodates, 
nitrides, acids, iodides, chlorides, chlorosulphonic 
acid, carbides, chlorates, bromates, acid anhydrides 
and other chemicals. 


It is not hygroscopic but oxide is highly hygroscopic. 
To be stored under water or in nitrogen atmosphere. 


4.4.2 Polymerisation — Not available. 


4.4.3 Allotrope Formation — Heated to 240°C in 
absence of air it turns to red phosphorus. 


4.4.4 Corrosion Properties — Phosphorus is not 
corrosive in absence of air or water. 


4.4.4.1 Phosphorous is stored under water since 
it is considered insoluble in water (solubility 
0.000 3 percent at 20°C); it oxidizes in the cover 
water and slowly acidifies it. The temperature of the 
cover water is a factor in the acidification. At higher 
temperatures, the solubility of phosphorus increases, 
causing a more rapid acidification. This process will, 
in time, corrode the container at the liquid level line. 
Hence, pH of the cover water should be periodically 
checked for acidity. 


4.5 Fire and Explosion Hazard Properties 
4.5.1 Ignition Temperature, 30°C. 

4.5.2 Flash Point, not available. 

4.5.3 Fire Risk 


Very small quantities of phosphorus even after cleaning 
of a spill can remain covered by dust or other coating. 
Such material can ignite when there is movement in 
the place. Hence, in any area where there has been 
spillage of phosphorus, wearing of safety shoes should 
be compulsory. If any flammable material is to be taken 
in the same area extreme caution need to be exercised 
to avoid accidental fire due to spontaneous ignition. 


5 HEALTH HAZARD AND TOXICITY 
INFORMATION 


5.1 General Information 


White phosphorus and its fumes (oxide) are known to 
have both acute and chronic health effects. They can 
be dermal, respiratory, eye injury and skeletal. Fatal 
exposure can also occur by routes such as exposure of 
skin, inhalation, or ingestion. Appropriate precaution in 
handling is essential to prevent exposure. 


5.2 Routes of Entry 
5.2.1 Skin 


Phosphorus can cause severe deep burns. Systemic 
effects may result following absorption. 
5.2.2 Eyes 


The material can produce severe chemical burns to the 
eyes on direct contact. Vapours or mist are extremely 
irritating. 


5.2.3 Ingestion 


In an unlikely event if phosphorus is ingested it could 
cause severe damage to intestinal tract. It could be fatal. 
Death could occur in 8 to 15 days after exposure. 


5.2.4 Inhalation 


Inhalation of vapours, aerosols (mists, fumes), or dust 
may cause severe toxic effects. These effects could be 
fatal. 


5.2.5 Long Term Effects 


Phosphorus is known to cause long term effect on 
the skeletal system and cause condition known as 
phosy-jaw. Long term exposure could also cause 
chronic diseases of lungs or stomach. 


5.3 Toxicity Information 


It emits highly toxic fumes of PO,. Available toxicity 
values are given below: 


a) Threshold Limit Value — Time-weighted average 
[TLV (TWA)] - 0.1 mg/m over each 8 h of 40 h 
work week. 


b) Short-Term Exposure Limit (STEL) — 0.3 mg/m’? 
for 15 min. 


c) Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health 
(IDLH) — 5 mg/m? 

d) Lethal Dose 50 (LD50) (rat), Dermal — 
100 mg/kg. 

e) Lowest Lethal Dose (LDLo) (human) Oral — 
0.7 mg/kg. 

f) Inhalation (Rat) Lethal Concentration (LC) — 
150 mg/m*/4 h. 


5.4 Antidote 


There is no antidote for white phosphorus toxicity. 
5.5 Health Effects 


5.5.1 Signs and Symptoms 


Irritation of eyes and respiratory tract, abdominal pain, 
nausea, jaundice, anaemia, dental pain, excess saliva, 
jaw pain, swelling, skin burns, etc. 


5.5.2 Acute Toxicity 
5.5.2.1 Systemic effects 


The absorption of phosphorus if swallowed may 
be delayed as much as 2 h. After ingestion, there 
is an initial stage starting in a few hours with local 
gastro-intestinal irritation shown by nausea, vomiting 
and severe abdominal pain. The vomits may have garlic 
like odour and may be phosphorescent (luminous in 
dark). After 24 to 25 h, the symptoms are remittent. 
In a few hours, or in 2/3 days nausea, vomiting and 
abdominal pain reappear with diarrhoea and tenderness. 
Erosion of intestinal tract and liver damage are known 
to occur. The skin becomes yellowish in colour. The 
condition progresses for 2 to 15 days, averaging 8 
days. The fatal dose is generally about 50 - 100 mg, but 
15 mg may be severely toxic. 


IS 14983 : 2022 


5.5.2.2 Local effects 


Phosphorus, when not surrounded by water, burns 
freely and will cause severe local tissue burns if it 
contacts the skin. The heat coagulation of the skin tissue 
is important effect of phosphorus burns. A firm eschar 
is produced and is surrounded by blisters. Phosphorus 
is especially hazardous to the eyes and produces severe 
damage. 


5.5.3 Chronic Toxicity 
5.5.3.1 Systemic effects 


Chronic poisoning occurs from long continued 
absorption of phosphorus especially through the lungs 
but also through the gastro-intestinal tract. A form of 
generalized weakness, attended by anaemia, loss of 
appetite, gastro-intestinal complaints, chronic cough, 
and marked weakness and pallor has been reported to 
be due to systemic phosphorus poisoning. The most 
common form of chronic phosphorus poisoning is that 
of jaw necrosis. Chronic phosphorus poisoning causes 
changes in the long bones. Seriously affected bones 
may become brittle, leading to spontaneous fractures. 
Industrially, necrosis of the bone is seen especially in 
the jaw bones. In such cases, the first symptoms are 
usually tooth ache and excessive salivation followed by 
the loosening of one or more teeth and severe pain and 
swelling of the jaw. A suppurative ulceration develops 
in the gums around the tooth or the tooth socket, which 
advances to a deep infection of the bone itself. There is 
a gradual progression of the process until most of the 
affected bones are involved. In extreme cases severe 
facial deformity may result. 


5.5.3.2 Local effects 


There are no usual chronic local effects. 
6 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 


6.1 Availability and Use 


The personal protective equipment is not an adequate 
substitute for good, safe working conditions, adequate 
ventilation, and intelligent conduct on the part of 
employees working with phosphorous. In many 
instances, it is the only practical mean of protecting 
the worker, particularly in emergency situations. One 
should keep firmly in mind that personal protective 
equipment protects only the worker wearing it, and 
other unprotected workers in the area maybe exposed 
to danger. 


The correct usage of personal protective equipment 
requires the education of the workers in proper 
employment of the equipment available to him. 
Under conditions which are sufficiently hazardous to 
require personal protective equipment, its use should 
be supervised and the type of protective equipment 


IS 14983 : 2022 


selected should be capable of control over any potential 
hazards. 


6.2 Non-Respiratory Equipment 


6.2.1 Eye and Face Protection 


Chemical splash protection as per IS 8520 category 
H-4. Use of goggles along with full face shield is 
recommended. Face shield should be of sufficient 
length to cover the neck portion. 


6.2.2 Head Protection 


Hard hats should be worm where there is danger 
of falling objects. If hard hats are not considered 
necessary, soft-brimmed hats or caps may be worn to 
give protection against liquid leaks and splashes. 


6.2.3 Foot and leg Protection 


Leather safety shoes with built-in steel toecaps are 
recommended for workers handling drums and cans 
of phosphorus. Alternately rubber gumboots must be 
used while handling phosphorus. Leather leg guard is 
recommended. Shoes should be thoroughly cleaned 
and ventilated after contamination (see IS 10667). 


6.2.4 Body, Skin and Hand Protection 


Clothing made of leather, asbestos, rubber or other 
impervious materials may be worn to protect the body 
against the splashes. Leather or rubber gloves should be 
worn for hand protection. Fireproof overalls should be 
worn when operations involving phosphorus fires are 
encountered (see IS 8519 and IS 8807). 


6.3 Respiratory Equipment 
Respirator selection (upper limit devices). 


a) 1 mg/m? — Dust and mist respirator with a full 
face-piece. 

b) 2.5 mg/m — Power air-purifying respirator with 
a high efficiency particulate filter. Supplied air 
respirator operated in a continuous flow mode. 


c) 5 mg/m? — Self-contained breathing apparatus 
with a full face-piece. Supplied air respiratory 
with a full face-piece. 

Air purifying full face-piece respirator with a high 
efficiency particulate filter. 

d) 200 mg/m? — Supplied air respirator with a full 
face-piece and operated in a pressure demand or 
other positive pressure mode. 


e) Emergency or planned entry in unknown 
concentration — Self contained breathing 
apparatus with full face-piece and operated in a 
pressure demand or positive pressure mode. 


The above can be used in combination with an 
auxiliary self-contained breathing apparatus. 

f) Escape — Air purifying full face-piece respirator 
with a high efficiency particulate filter. Appropriate 
escape type self-contained breathing apparatus. 


7 STORAGE, HANDLING, LABELLING AND 
TRANSPORT 


7.1 General 


All personal handling phosphorus should use proper 
personal protective equipment. Appropriate fire fighting 
equipment should be available in the vicinity while 
handling phosphorus. Persons handling phosphorous 
should have adequate training in use of fire fighting 
equipment. 


7.2 Storage 


7.2.1 The storage containers shall be labelled or marked 
to identify as follows: 


a) Contents of the container; 


b) Name and address of the manufacturer or importer 
of the hazardous chemical; and 


c) Physical, chemical and toxicological data as per 
the criteria given in the relevant schedule of the 
manufacture, storage and import of Hazardous 
Chemicals Rules, 1989. While referring to the 
statutes, the stipulations given in the subsequent 
amendments of those statutes shall be taken into 
account. 


7.2.2 Storage of any combustible material should not 
be allowed in the building. Phosphorus storage tanks 
should be grounded to prevent danger by lightning. 


7.2.3 Storage tanks may be constructed of concrete or 
welded steel. Bottom or side outlets are not allowed. 
The storage tanks should be placed in retaining basins, 
also to be constructed of concrete or welded steel, 
without bottom or side outlets. The basins should be 
adequate to retain the full contents of the tank or tanks 
with allowance for 80 - 100 mm of water coverage. 
Water lines should be provided to allow instant flooding 
of basin. 


7.2.4 Sealed tanks should be equipped with frangible 
discs or safety valves set to release at a predetermined 
pressure. End of pressure relief line should open under 
water. An ample safety factor should be allowed to 
protect the tank itself. Tanks should be equipped with 
internal or external heating coils. Internal coils and 
all pipe lines should be equipped with noncorrosive 
section at phosphorus water interphase, to avoid 
corrosion at the water line. Provide ventilation where 
phosphorus is stored or handled inside building. Under 
abnormal circumstances special emergency ventilating 
equipment such as fans or blowers may be necessary. 


7.3 Handling 


7.3.1 Pipeline should be jacketed, with hot water or 
steam traced, to prevent freezing of the phosphorus. 
Line should allow for expansion and contraction, 
and should be sloped to the outlet to allow maximum 
drainage. 


A warm water connection should be provided to flush 
out the lines after use. The line should be flushed, after 
every transfer with hot water and should be left free 
of phosphorus. Transfer lines should not be pressurised 
for removing blockage under any circumstances. 


7.3.2 Avoid use of flexible hoses in phosphorus transfer. 
If hose is to be used, it should be metal braided hose of 
appropriate pressure rating. Upbraided hose should not 
be used. 


7.3.3 All steel plug or gate valves are preferred. Valves 
should be hot water jacketed or steam traced. 


7.3.4 Phosphorus is generally handled in molten form. 
Water displacement is the safest method of transfer. 
Phosphorus should always be submerged under water. 
The usual handling temperature is 55°C. Below that, 
it is excessively viscous. Above 65°C it tends to float, 
it may reach the water surface and catch small fires or 
generate fumes. 


7.3.5 Transport tankers are filled with hot water. During 
transfer molten phosphorus displaces the water, which 
is returned to the tank from which the phosphorus is 
displaced or pumped. 


7.3.6 One storage tank equal in capacity to the largest 
tank in use should be kept free at all times to transfer 
phosphorus in case of emergency. 


7.4 Labelling 


7.4.1 Each container (including tank cars) should carry 
an identifying label or stencil. Manufacturers name 
with any label warnings required by regulations or 
ordinances form part of the label or placard. 


7.4.2 Each drum must be labelled “FLAMMABLE 
SOLID”. 


7.4.3 Each tanker and each railroad car carrying 
one or more containers of phosphorus must bear the 
“DANGEROUS” placard in addition. 


7.5 Transport 


Containers generally used for transport of phosphorous 
are: 
a) Tankers - which are insulated and without bottom 
outlet; 
b) Metal barrels or drums; and 
c) Metal boxes or containers with inside containers 


being hermetically sealed metal cans enclosed in 
other hermetically sealed metal cans or box liners. 


IS 14983 : 2022 


In all cases phosphorus is to be stored under a layer of 
water or under inert gas. 


7.5.1 Unloading Trucks 


Unloading stations should be equipped with safety 
showers. The truck should be spotted accurately 
and levelled. Stoppers/pegs should be used to avoid 
movement of truck during unloading. Supplier’s 
instructions for unloading should always be followed 
and all caution markings on both sides of trucks should 
be read and observed. Truck unloading should be 
preferably to tank at same level or at lower level. Truck 
should not be unloaded to a tank at higher elevation. 


7.5.2 Unloading Drums 


Ensure that all fittings are tight. Loosen plug in bung 
opening. Heat material by dipping drum in hot water in 
a tub or open tank to proper temperature, that is, above 
44°C and below 55°C. Heat preferably to about 52°C, 
prior to applying water to displace the material. 


7.5.3 Driver 


Only driver trained in phosphorus handling should 

be employed for transportation of phosphorus. Driver 

should carry TREM card when vehicle is on road. 
NOTE — If transport of the hazardous chemical is involved 
it shall be carried out in accordance with the Central Motor 
Vehicles Rules, 1989. While referring to the statutes, the 
stipulations given in the subsequent amendments of those 
statutes shall be taken into account. 


8 SPILLAGE, LEAKAGE AND 
DISPOSAL 


WASTE 


8.1 General 


All personnel attending to spill/leak should use 
proper personal protective equipment and fire fighting 
equipment while handling phosphorus. 


8.2 Spillage 


8.2.1 Genera/Information 


Proceed with caution. Restrict access to area. Keep 
unprotected personnel away and upwind of spill area. 
Avoid contact with spilled product. Protect sewers and 
waterways from contaminated runoff. Notify proper 
authorities. Plan response such that all physical contact 
with phosphorus should be avoided and that the product 
may ignite spontaneously in air when dry. Water in 
containers should be maintained between pH 5.5 and 
6.5 to prevent evolution of hydrogen from action of 
phosphoric acid on metal, and from evolution of toxic 
and flammable phosphine gas. 


IS 14983 : 2022 


8.2.2 Land Spill (Spill on Land) 


8.2.2.1 Containment 


Phosphorus may be contained by building dikes 
or barrier using sand, and or similar materials, and 
then covered with water, wet sand or dirt. Remove 
contained product as soon as possible to prevent spread 
of contamination. Keep product wet before and after 
removal. 


8.2.2.2 Consequence 
Any phosphorus that escapes may ignite upon drying. 


8.2.2.3 Mitigation 


Area cleared of spilled phosphorus may remain 
contaminated. There can be spontaneous fire. After 
removing spilled phosphorus the residual contamination 
should be allowed to burn off under supervision to 
ensure complete decontamination. 


8.2.3 Water Spill (Spill in Water) 


8.2.3.1 Containment 


Stop use of water. Notify proper authorities to stop water 
intake or to monitor water for contamination. Spilled 
product will sink in water. Use natural deep water 
pockets, excavated lagoons, or sand bag barriers to trap 
material on bottom and limit spread of contamination. 


8.2.3.2 Mitigation 


Collect solid phosphorus from under water using PPEs. 
Collect into a drum previously partly filled with water 
to prevent air exposure of phosphorus. Drum can be 
heated as shown under drum handling in 7.5.2 to melt 
and transfer phosphorus to a storage tank. 


8.3 Leakages 


8.3.1 General Information 


Leakages whether large or small, a leak from a drum 
or tank containing phosphorus is most effectively 
controlled at the source by applying a small stream of 
cold water to the wall of the vessel. The water chills 
the liquid phosphorus and converts it to the solid form. 
Keep the plug formed, wet to prevent re-ignition and 
melting till other means of containment are arranged. 
Phosphorus in the solid form, when not covered with 
water, will ignite and burn slowly at first. 


In case there is leak in a tank pipeline or storage 
vessel molten phosphorus will flow in a stream and 
form a pool of liquid on the ground. The liquid now 
can be restricted with earth and then covered with a 
layer of water which will effectively smother the 
burning phosphorus. In the absence of water, burning 
phosphorus can be smothered by using sand. 


8.3.2 Leak from the Truck 


If possible apply a stream of cold water on the leak point 
to freeze the phosphorus or adjust, to bring the leak on 
top side or try to dip the drums in water. Application 
of water should be gentle to avoid splashing of liquid 
phosphorus due to force of water. 


8.3.3 Caution 


High pressure water or stream of great velocity should 
not be used against phosphorus. Such high velocity 
streams have the effect of atomizing or scattering 
molten phosphorus into many small particles, such of 
which will burn violently in separate fires. 


8.4 Waste Disposal 


8.4.1 Disposal of phosphorus as such is generally not 
permissible. Contaminated material (such as a soil 
phosphorus mixture left after extinguishing of splash 
fire) should be taken to an isolated area and burned. 


8.4.2 Water in contact with phosphorus (Phossy Water) 
should be chemically treated before allowing it to flow 
out of the plant. 


8.4.3 Returnable drums should be thoroughly washed 
inside and outside with warm water, drained and cover 
tightly before returning. Non-returnable containers 
before scrapping, should be thoroughly washed with 
warm water until all traces of phosphorus have been 
removed. 


9 FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE FIGHTING 


9.1 General 


Phosphorus is not explosive. Phosphorus ignites 
spontaneously upon contact with air or oxygen and 
burns vigorously forming P,O, a great cloud of white 
smoke which is a strong irritant, corrosive to the skin, 
eyes and the mucous membrane. 


All personal engaged in fire fighting operation must use 
appropriate PPEs to prevent exposure. 


9.2 Prevention 


9.2.1 Fires are controlled by exclusion of air, using 
water, sand or carbon dioxide extinguishers. High 
pressure water should not be used, as it would scatter 
the material, causing secondary fires. 


9.2.2 Move container from fire area if without risk. 
Use water from side and from safe distance to keep fire 
exposed containers cool. 


9.3 Fire Fighting 


Phosphorus fires can be controlled with water. 
Containment of liquid phosphorus is crucial. 


10 TRAINING 


10.1 Safety in handling phosphorus depends upon 
the effectiveness of employee education, training and 
supervision. The education and training of employees 
to work safely and to use the personal protective 
equipment and other safe guards provided for them is 
a responsibility of supervision. Employee education 
and training should emphasize the need of handling 
phosphorus according to the methods outlined in the 
manual, in order to avoid spilling or splashing, leaks, 
burns, inhalation of the vapour of burning material, or 
ingestion. 


Unauthorised and untrained employees should not be 
permitted in areas where phosphorus is being handled. 


10.2 Before being placed on the job, all new employees 
should be instructed thoroughly for the proper handling 
of phosphorus. Older employees should be re-instructed 
periodically. 


10.3 Each employee should know the location, purpose 
and maintenance of personal protective equipment 
(PPEs) and be thoroughly trained when and how to use 
it. Each employee should know the location of safety 
showers, fountains for flushing the eyes, and hose lines. 


10.4 Only reliable, dependable and properly trained 
employees should be given the responsibility of all 
operations involving storage, handling, transport and 
emergency management involving phosphorus. 


10.5 Employee should be trained to report to the proper 
authority about all suspected leaks or equipment failure. 


10.6 They should be instructed to inform to supervisors 
any signs of illness or skin related problems. 


10.7 Each employee should know what to do in 
emergency and the first-aid measures and should 
realize the necessity for the prompt application of 
first-aid in case of contact with phosphorus or exposure 
to the vapours of the burning material. 


11 HEALTH MANAGEMENT, FIRST-AID AND 
MEDICAL TREATMENT 


11.1 Health Monitoring 
11.1.1 Personal Hygiene 


11.1.1.1 Employees should bath daily after finishing 
work. They should report any abnormal condition of 
the mouth or skin to medical department. 


11.1.1.2 Food should not be stored or eaten near the 
place where phosphorus is being handled. 


11.1.2 Physical Examination 


IS 14983 : 2022 


11.1.2.1 Pre-placement physical examinations 


Pre-placement medical examination should be directed 
toward eliminating from exposure to phosphorus those 
workers with any evidence of history of liver disease 
and those workers with any of the following dental 
defects: gingivitis, pyorrhoea, carious teeth, exposed 
sockets and dental cysts. Absence of all natural teeth is 
no contraindication. 


Employees who have or had syphilis should not be 
exposed to phosphorus. 


11.1.2.2 Periodic examination 


The extent of medical or dental control depends upon 
the amount of exposure to phosphorus. Where there is a 
prolonged exposure to open phosphorus, the following 
procedures are recommended. 


11.1.2.3 Medical examination 


An annual physical examination should be conducted 
for each employee who is constantly exposed to 
phosphorus. He should be instructed to report any 
illness, or any disorder of skin that he experiences. 


Liver function test and complete blood count on annual 
basis is recommended. 


11.1.2.4 Dental examination — Periodical dental 
examinations may be conducted. 


11.2 First Aid 


11.2.1 General Principles 


First-aid treatment should be started at once in all cases 
of contact with phosphorus in any form otherwise 
serious injury may result. Refer all injured persons to 
a physician even when the injury appears to be slight. 
Give the physician a detailed account of the accident. 
First aider is also at risk of exposure to phosphorus and 
should wear proper PPEs. 


11.2.2 Contact with Skin 


Immediate application of water to the area stops 
combustion of phosphorus. This may be accomplished 
by plunging the affected parts in water or by the copious 
use of running water. Phosphorus ignites when exposed 
to air or when it dries on clothing or skin. Therefore, 
get victim, or burned areas, under water as quickly as 
possible using a water bucket, a hose, a shower, a tank 
or a tub if necessary. Remove clothing under water. 
Any skin areas which may have phosphorus on them 
MUST BE KEPT IMMERSED IN WATER to exclude 
air until phosphorus can be removed. 


It should be borne in mind that in severe burns and 
those involving a large area of body surface, shock may 
appear at any time. This should be treated promptly by 
laying the patient down and keeping him reasonably 


IS 14983 : 2022 


warm until the physician arrives. No oil or ointment of 
any kind should be applied to burnt areas. 


11.2.2.1 Caution 


It should be remembered that the phosphorus stops 
burning after the application of water but when 
the area dries, due to the evaporation of water, the 
phosphorus will spontaneously ignite again. Drying 
may be prevented by covering the area with a cloth 
wet with water of 0.5 percent silver nitrate solution. 
The phosphorus must be removed as soon as possible. 
A physician should be called at the earliest possible 
moment, till then continue silver nitrate solution 
treatment. 


11.2.3 Contact with Eyes 


If even minute quantities of phosphorus either in solid 
form or in solution, enter the eyes they should be 
thoroughly washed immediately and copiously with 
water for a minimum of 15 min. The eyelids should be 
held apart during the eye washing to ensure contact of 
water with entire tissue of the surface of the eyes and 
lids. A physician, preferably an eye specialist, should 
be called in attendance at the first possible instance. 
If a physician is not immediately available, the eye 
washing should be continued for a second period of 
15 min. After the first 15 min period of eye washing 
is completed, it is permissible, as a first-aid measure, 
to instil two or three drops of an 0.5 percent aqueous 
topical anaesthetic. No oils or oily ointments should be 
instilled unless ordered by the physician. 


11.2.4 Ingestion 


If phosphorus is swallowed, either in a paste or 
as ‘phossy water’, a physician should be called 
immediately. There is no established antidote. Gastric 
lavage should be performed at the earliest. If lavage 
can not be performed the patient should be made to 
vomit at once by giving large quantities of water or 
salt solution (1 table spoonful of salt to 1 quarter of 
water). If necessary, stick finger down the throat to 
cause vomiting. Gastric lavage may be performed 
many hours after ingestion using copious quantities of 
potassium permanganate. Repeated vomiting should 
be encouraged by giving large quantities of fluids. 
Liquid paraffin (100 - 200 ml) should be introduced 
into the stomach following lavage and left there. Avoid 
digestible fats and oils. Physician should be called at 
once. Care to be taken to protect patient and attendant 
from vomitus which may contain phosphorus. 


11.2.5 Inhalation 


11.2.5.1 Inhalation of phosphorus vapour itself has 
not cause acute symptoms but the person should be 
immediately removed to fresh air. 


When phosphorus is burning, concentrations of the 
oxides of phosphorus are formed which are principally 


phosphorus pentaoxide. The products of oxidation 
are a lung irritant. The patient should be removed to 
fresh air at once. If the patient has respiratory distress 
or a persistent cough, medical oxygen is indicated. A 
physician should be called at once. 


11.2.5.2 Burning phosphorus in a confined area 
may cause a depletion of the oxygen from the air to 
a sufficient extent to cause asphyxiation. The patient 
should be removed at once to fresh air and effective 
artificial respiration initiated immediately if breathing 
has ceased. A physician should be called at once. 


11.2.6 First-Aid Kit 


First-aid kit containing the following item should be 
kept handy: 


a) 0.5 percent silver nitrate solution; 
b) Sofratulle sterilized gauzes; and 


c) Silversulpha ointment. (if patient is not allergic to 
Sulpha drugs). 


11.3 Medical Treatment 


11.3.1 Liquid paraffin (100 - 200 ml) should be introduced 
into the stomach following lavage and left there. Do not 
give digestible fats and oils. 


11.3.2 Isotonic solutions of sodium chloride and sodium 
lactate, parenterally combat shock, dehydration and 
acidosis. Glucose infusion may be required to correct 
hypoglycemia. Calcium gluconate may be required if 
hypocalcaemia appears. 


11.3.3 Morphine and other opiates to control pain. 


11.3.4 Vitamin K1 in large doses (for example, 
65 mg slowly by intravenous drip) may combat 
hypothrombinaemia but transfusions of fresh whole 
blood may be necessary to correct coagulation defect 
and anemia. 


11.3.5 Supportive for delirium and 


convulsions. 


treatment 


11.3.6 General supportive measures for hepatic 
insufficiency and more rarely renal failure. 


11.3.7 Treat skin burns by washing with warm water 
or with | percent silver nitrate. As long as un-oxidised 
phosphorus remains embedded in the skin, the 
contaminated area should be submerged in water or 
silver nitrate solution. Visible pieces can be surgically 
removed. 


12 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 


Additional information essential for particular 
equipment used for handling of phosphorous, Security 
measures to be taken while handling of phosphorous 
etc as essential for controlling hazards may be collected 
and applied. 


IS 14983 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Flat 1204, Bhumika Residency 
Co Housing Society, Sector 20, Plot 21 Roadpali 
Kalamboli, 410218) 


Alkali Manufacturers Association of India, Mumbai 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Food Technological Research Institute, 
Mysore 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire, Explosives and Environmental 
Science, Ministry of Defense Government of India 


Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 


Defence Research and Establishment, (DRDO), 
Gwalior 


Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, 
Government of India 


Department of Space(ISRO), Bengaluru 

Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 
Labour Institutes, Mumbai 

Gas Industries Association 

Hindustan Unilever Ltd, Mumbai 

Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 

Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, 
Kalpakkam 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI K. S. RAMPRASAD (Chairman) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
Supt H. S. Das (Alternate) 


Ms GARMA SINGH 
SHRI NIsHITH Gosh (Alternate) 


Dr DANDAMUDI USHARANI 
DR PRASANNA Vasu (Alternate) 


Dr M. SURIYANARAYANAN 


SHRI S. P. DOBHAL 
Dr Aarti Buatt (Alternate) 


MR P. N. KARLEKAR 
Dr J. C. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT GARG 
DR VIRENDRA VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VISHAL CHOUDHARY 


SHRI MURALEEKRISHNAN R. 
Ms Laxksumt V. W. (Alternate) 


Suri H. M. BHANDARI 
SHRI P. G. SATPUTE (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI ANOOP TANDON (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY HARLAKA 
SHRI RAKESH WADALKAR (Alternate) 


Dr C. NANDI 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR BANKUPALLI SATYAVATHI 
DR SRIPADI PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


DR NEERAJ ATRAY 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR KaNuJIA (Alternate) 


Dr SACHIN GUNTE 
PROF SANDIP ROY 


Dr D. K. PATEL 
DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr K. K. SATPATHY 


ProF Dr G. D. YADAV 
Dr B. M. BHANAGE (Alternate) 


IS 14983 : 2022 


Organization 
Ministry of Environment and Forest, New Delhi 
National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad 
National Institute of Technology, Thrichi 


National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas), Delhi 


Pesticides Manufacturer and Formulators Association 
of India 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, 
Nagpur 


Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association , 
Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
Tata Chemicals Ltd, Mithapur, Distt, Jamnagar 


In personal capacity (/-4/2/6, Parijat C.H.S., 
Spaghetti, Sector-15, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, 
410210) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 
Dr DinesH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


Dr Vwa V. BOKADE 
Dr M. MUTHUKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Dr B. RAVICHANDRAN 


PROF S. P. SIVAPIRAKASAM 
DR SREEJITH MOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 
SHRI K. D. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDAR M. MAHAJAN 


DR ARCHANA KUMARI 
Dr SANDIP SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. JHALA 
Dr YOGESH KHaRE (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI DEVANG Menta (Alternate) 


Dr JAGDISH KUMAR 
Dr DEEP SHANKAR CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SNEHASHISH A. CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI D. K. THAKUR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SOUNDARARAJAN 


SHRI AJAY K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (CHD) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)| 


Member Secretary 


Ms SHUBHANIJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (CHD), BIS 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 07 (17333). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


