( Reaffirmed 2001 ) xxxxxx 2010

IS :1304-1980

Indian Standard
TERMS GLOSSARY OF USED IN FERTILIZER AND INDUSTRY TRADE

( Second Revision )
Fertilizers
Chairman SERI V. R. R. GUPTA
Mambcrs

Sectional

Committee,

PCDC

20

Reprcsentcng Madras Fertilizer Ltd, Madras

DR T. S. VIaWANATnAN ( Altrrnatr to Shri V. R. R. Gupta ) AGRIOULTURAL CHE~~~FJT Andhra Pradesh Agricultural University, Hyderabad SHRI BAEUBALXGULABCHAND Indian Sugar Mills Association, Calcutta SH~I P. C. SAWENEY ( Alternote ) SHRI M. L. BEAMBANI National Test House, Calcutta Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI A. K. BoaE New Delhi SHRI M. S. GROVER ( Aftcrnate ) Indian Chemical Manufacturer's Association, SHRI N. C. BRAHMA Calcutta SHRI P. S. BHA~~A ( Alternate ) Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers SBIT S. CRAKRAVORTY SRR~ P. P. CHANDNA National Fertilizers Ltd, New Delhi SHRI S. CRANDRA~I~KHAR Planning Commission Department of Agriculture, Government of Uttar DR R. K. S. CHAUHAN Pradesh, Lucknow SH~I D. S. CHOWDHURY Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi DR G. DEV Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation ( Fertilizer DR B. K. DHAR Division ) SHEI K. R. AQQARWAL ( Alteracts ) SHRI A. C. GARQ Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation ( Crops Division ) DR A. 8. GHO~H Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi; and Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi DR K. S, GILL Director of Agriculture, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright STANDARDS 1980 INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Co&right Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS :1304-

1980

( COfltinUCdfiOf7l pag6 1 ) Mumbsrs AQRICULTURALCHEYISTRY & SOIL S 0 I EN 0 E, KRISEI MAHATMA PHULE VIDPAPEETE, RAEURI SHRI JOHN K. JOHN SHRI N. S. PARTHASARATHY ( DR JOSEPH XAVIER
HEAD OF

R6pr6s6nting Agricultural Chemist to the Government shtra, Bombay of Mahara-

E. I. D.-Parry ( India ) Ltd, Madras ANcrnat6 ) The Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Udvoeamandal

Ltd,

SERI T. NATARAJAN ( Attcrnata ) Coromandcl Fertilizers Ltd, Vishakhapatnam SHRI M. R. KRISHNAIAH SHRI K. R. K. MURTEY ( Altcrnatc) Indian Farmers Fertilizers Co-operative Ltd, SHRI S. D. KORPAL New Delhi _ S-RI H. C. MALHOTRA ( Alternate ) Directorate of Agriculture and Food Production, SERI U. C. PADHX Government of Orissa, Bhubaneshwar Rubber Board, Kottayam DR $5. NARAYANAW POTTY SHRI M. V. PUSHPADAB ( Alt6matc 1 Shiw Wallace & Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI P. C. RAMAKRISBNAN SBRI D. MEENAK~HI SUNDARAM ( Alternate ) The D. C, M. Chemicals Works, New Delhi SHRI A. K. RAO SHRI B. K. WAHI ( Alternatc ) The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi SHRISATYA NAND SHRI B. K. JAIN ( Alternat ) Rourkela Steel Plant ( SAIL )_, Rourkela SHRI M. THEYUNNI The Dharmasi Morarji Chemtcal Co Ltd, Bombay DR M.S. VAIDYA SHRI P. V. S. RAO ( Altcrnata) The Fertilizer ( Planning & Development) India DR S. VERI.XA Ltd, New Delhi DR K. M. VERMA ( Attarnatr ) Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal DRJ.S.P. YADAV DR I. P. ABROL ( Alternate) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Member ) SHRI M. S. SAXENA, Director ( P & C ) Sccrstary DR R. A. KHAN Assistant Director ( P & C ), IS1 Fertilizers Conocnrr SHRI M. R. AQQARWAL
M6mbcrs

& Allied

Products

Subcommittee,

PCDC

20 : 1

Rashtriya Chemicals

& Fertilizers Ltd, Bombay

SHRI Y. R. PAKKALA ( Altcrnats to Shri M. R. Aggarwal ) Pyrites Phosphate & Chemicals SHRI P. K. AWASTEI SHRI B. V. M. RAO ( Alternate)

Ltd, New Delhi ( Continued on pag6 16 )

2

IS : 1304 - 1880

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN FERTILIZER TRADE AND INDUSTRY (

Second Revision)
0.

FOREWORD
( Second Revision ) was adopted by the on 16 June 1980, after the draft finalized Committee had been approved by the Products Division Council. ,

0.1 This Indian Standard Indian Standards Institution by the Fertilizers Sectional Petroleum, Coal and Related 0.2 This Keeping Sectional chiefly to necessarily

standard was first published in 1958 and revised in 1963. in view the latest experience in manufacture and trade, the Committee decided to revise this standard. It is intended cover the technical definitions of most of terms, and it may not include all the legal meanings of the terms. exist between the terms as defined in this in standards for individual materials, the

0.3 Should any inconsistency standard and those defined latter shall prevail.
1. SCOPE

1.1 This standard defines the terms and industry in this country.

widely

used

in the fertilizer

trade

2. TERMINOLOGY
A Acid Forming Fertilizer - A fertilizer capable of increasing the residual alkalinity of the soil.

the

residual

acidity

or reducing

Activated Sludge - A material made from sewage, freed from grit and coarse solids, and aerated intensively. The resulting flocculated organic matter is withdrawn from the tanks, filtered with or without the aid of coagulants, dried, ground and screened ( see also ' Sedimented Sewage Sludge' ).

3

IS : lb04 - 1980 Agricultural Liming Material - Material containing oxides and/or carbonates and/or hydroxide of calcium and/or magnesium, used for neutralizing the acidity of the soil. Air-Slaked Lime - A product composed of various proportions of the oxide, hydroxide and carbonate of calcium or of calcium and , magnesium, and derived from exposure of quick lime. Alkaline ( or Basic ) Fertilizer - A fertilizer capable of increasing the residual alkalinity or reducing the residual acidity of the soil. Ammonia ( Liquid, Anhydrous ) ( NH8 ) - A material mostly produced by the synthetic process and obtained in the liquid form. It is used in the fertilizer industry extensively for the manufacture of urea, for amm?niation of superphosphate, in making base mixtures, in making mixed fertilizers, or for conversion into salts like sulphate, phosphate, chloride, nitrate, etc. It is also applied directly into the soil by suitable mechanical means. Fertilizer grade anhydrous ammonia contains about 82 percent of nitrogen by mass. Ammonia, Liquor ( Aqua Ammonia ) ( NH,OH ) - A solution obtained by absorbing ammonia in water. The solution is strongly aikaline and is made in various strengths for ammoniation purposes, generally containing not less than 20 percent of ammonia by mass. Ammoniated Superphosphate phosphate when it is treated with ammonia. - A product obtained from supcrammonia or solutions containing free

Ammoniating Solution ( Nitrogen Solution ) - A solution used for ammoniating super-phosphate or a mixture of superphosphate with other fertilizers. This solution may be liquor ammonia itself or a solution of ammonium nitrate or urea in liquor ammonia. Ammonium Chloride ( Sal Ammoniac or Muriate of Ammonia ) ( NH&l ) Ammonium salt of hydrochloric acid containing not less than 25 percent of nitrogen in ammoniacal form. Ammonium Nitrate ( Nitrate of Ammonia ) ( NH4NOa ) - A product obtained by neutralizing nitric acid with gaseous ammonia. It is usually in a granular or prilled form, and coated with a suitable Pure material to prevent absorption of moisture and caking in storage. ammonium nitrate has a total nitrogen content of about 35 percent, of which one-half is present as ammoniacal nitrogen and the other half as nitrate nitrogen. Due to the addition of conditioning agents applied in commercial practice, the nitrogen content is reduced. 4

IS t 1304 - 1980
Ammonium Phosphate Two important ammonium phosphates arc:

Mono-Ammonium Phosphate ( NH,HzPO* ) - Containing 12.17 percent of nitrogen and 61.7 percent of phosphoric acid ( as PzOs ), when pure. The commercial or the fertilizer grade contains about 11 percent of nitrogen and 52 percent of phosphoric acid ( as PzOs ).

b)

Diammonium Phosphate [ ( NH, )zHPO4 ] - Pure diammonium phosphate contains 21.21 percent of nitrogen and 53.76 percent of phosphoric acid ( as PsOs ). The commercial or fertilizer grade contains about 18 percent of nitrogen and about 46 percent of phosphoric acid ( as PzOb ).

Ammonium Phosphate Sulphate - A material produced by neutralizing a mixture of phosphoric acid and sulphuric acid with ammonia. Ammonium Sulphate ( Sulphate of Ammonia ) [ ( NH, )zSOa ] Ammonium salt of sulphuric acid containing not less than 20.6 percent of nitrogen in ammoniacal form. Ammonium Sulphate Nitrate - A double salt of ammonium sulphate and ammonium nitrate containing not less than 26 percent nitrogen of which about one-fourth is in the nitrate form and three-fourths in the ammoniacal form. Analysis - As applied to fertilizers, composition of the product expressed practice and laws require and permit. Anhydrous Aqua Ammonia it shall designate the percentage in terms which the existing trade ( Liquid, `. Anhydrous ) `.

See ` Ammonia Liquor

Ammonia

See ` Ammonia,

Available Phosphoric Acid - The sum of the water-soluble and the citrate-soluble phosphoric acid ( as PzO5 ) in a fertilizer, except for bone meal and basic slag in which the amount of phosphoric acid ( as Pa05 ) soluble in a two percent citric acid solution is considered ' available `. B Basic Fertilizer See ` Alkaline Fertilizer `.

Basic Slag - A by-product in the manufacture of steel from phosphatic iron ores. The product is finely ground to prescribed size and shall contain no admixture of materials other than what result in the original process of manufacture. Bone Ash - A product obtained by burning off bones to ash. material contains 30 to 40 percent phosphoric acid ( as PzOs ). 5 The

IS:1304-

1980

Bone Black ( Bone Char ) - A product obtained by heating bones in closed retorts. This is used for clarifying sugar-cane juice and the spent material is used as phosphatic fertilizer. It may contain one to two percent of nitrogen and 30 to 35 percent of phosphoric acid ( as PzOs ). Bone Meal, Raw - A by-product of the bone crushing industry and consists of ground bones. It contains at least 3 percent nitrogen, and at least 20 percent total phosphoric acid ( as PsOs ) of which not less than 8 percent is available phosphoric acid ( as PsOs ). Bone Meal, Steamed - A product obtained by subjecting bones to the action of steam under pressure. A major portion of glue and gelatinous material is extracted and the bones are then easily ground to a fine meal. It contains at least 22 percent of total phosphoric acid ( as PROS ) of which not less than 16 percent is available phosphoric acid ( as PzOa ). Bone Superphosphate See ' Dissolved Bone `.

Bone Tankage - A product obtained by processing bones along with a smaller proportion of meat of carcasses, with steam under pressure. It may contain 3 to 10 percent of nitrogen and 7 to 20 percent of phosphoric acid ( as PsOs ). Bulk Fertilizer - Commercial fertilizer supplied in solid or liquid form, in a non-packaged form (to which a label cannot be attached). Burnt Lime See ` Quick Lime `. C Calcium Ammonium Nitrate - A mixture of ammonium nitrate and fitly pulverized limestone or dolomite. It contains not less than 25 percent of nitroger], half of which is in the form of ammoniacal nitrogen and the other half in the form of nitrate nitrogen. Calcium Carbonate ( CaCO3 ) - A common naturally occurring Precipitated substance in the form of limestone, marble, shells, etc. calcium carbonate is also obtained as a by-product of certain industries. When finely ground, it IS valuable for application to the soil to neutralize soil acidity. It is also used as an ingredient in mixed fertilizers to render them non-acid-forming, Calcium Cyanamide ( Cyanamide ) ( CaCNa ) - A commercial product consisting principally of calcium cyanamide -and carbon. It contains not less th in 20 percent of nitrogen. The nitrogen in this product is in the form of synthetic, non-protein nitrogen. Calcium Metaphosphate treating phosphate rock at high temperature. [ Ca ( PO, )z ] - A product obtained by with gaseous phosphorus pentoxide ( PsOs )

6

IS : 1304 - 1980 not included in groups nitrogenous, Ca, Mg, S-Fertilizers - Fertilizers phosphatic, potassic, NP, NK, PK, NPK, but contain one or more of the elements Ca, Mg, S and of which the principal function is the supply of plant food. Calcium Nitrate [( CaN03 )2] - The calcium salt of nitric acid. It is a source of nitrate form of nitrogen and of water-soluble calcium. The commercial product contains about 15 percent nitrogen and 28 percent total lime ( CaO ). Caustic Lime Set ` Quick Lime `.

Chilean Nitrate of Soda ( Chile Saltpetre ) - A product obtained by refining the crude nitrate deposits found in Chile and containing about 99 percent sodium nitrate ( see ulso ` Nitrate of Soda ' ). Citrate Soluble Phosphoric Acid - It is that part of the total phosphoric acid ( as Pa05 ) in a fertilizer that is insoluble in water but soluble in neutral 1N ammonium citrate solution at 65�C. Citric Acid Soluble Phosphoric Acid - It is that part of the total phosphoric acid ( as PsOj ) particularly in basic slag and bone meal that is insoluble in water but soluble in 2 percent citric acid solution. Complete Fertilizer - Product containing three nitrogen, phosphoric acid and potash namely, Mixture ' ). Complex, Fertilizer - A one major plant nutrient in of which chemical reactions be present in.more than one Compost - A organic wastes. product major plant nutrients, ( see also ` Fertilizer

granulated fertilizer containing more than a pre-determined ratio in the manufacture are involved. The individual elements may form. by the controlled decomposition contains of more

obtained

Compound Fertilizer - A chemical than one major plant nutrient elements.

compound

which

Curing of Fertilizers - In the case of certain fertilizers and fertilizer mixtures if the materials are mixed and immediately bagged, the fertilizers would become caked or set hard as a result of various chemical reactions taking place. It requires weeks and frequently months for these reactions to be completed and during this time most of the water combines with materials like gypsum and crystallized compounds are formed. However the manufacturer usually prepares the mixtures well in advance and allows these chemical reactions to take place in the storage heap in the factory. This is known as ' curing'. When the fertilizer is finally powdered and bagged, it should retain the good physical condition suitable for distribution. 7

IS a 1304 - 1980 Cyanamide Ses ` Calcium Cyanamide D Diammonium Phosphate See ` Ammonium Phosphate `. `.

Dicalcium Phosphate ( CaHPO, ) - A product containing not less than 34 percent of available phosphoric acid in citrate soluble form, which is considered available to plants. Dissolved Bone - Ground bone or bone meal that has been treated with sulphuric acid. It is commonly known as ` Bone Super-phosphate ' and contains one to two percent nitrogen and 16 percent total phosphoric acid ( as PzO5 ) of which about 8 percent is water-soluble. Dolomite magnesium A mineral composed chiefly of carbonates in substantially equimolar proportions. of calcium and

Double Sulphate of Potash and Magnesia - A commercial product containing not lrss than 21 percent of potassium oxide, not less than 53 percent of sulphate of magnesia and not nore than 2.5 percent of chlorine. blood of slaughtered animals, dried Dried Blood - The collected ground, and containing 9 to 14 percent nitrogen in organic form. E Eqaivalent Acidity - The number of parts by mass of calcium carbonate ( as CaCOa ) required to neutralize the acidity resulting from the use of 100 parts by mass of the fertilizer. Equivalent Basicity - The number of parts by mass of carbonate ( as CaC03 ) that corresponds in acid-neutralizing to 100 pouts by mass of the fertilizer. F Fertilizer - A material, organic or inorganic, natural or synthetic which supplies one or more of the chemical elements required for the plant growth. Fertilizers ( Inorganic ) - Fertilizers in which the declared are as mineral or inorganic chemicals obtained by extraction physical and/or chemical industrial processes. Fertilizers ( Organic ) of biological origin added plant. nutrients and/or by calcium capacity and

These are carbonaceous products generally to the soil specifically for the nutrition of

8

IS :1304 - 1980
- Materials which are added Fertilizer Conditioners control free moisture and keep the fertilizer free-flowing prevent caking. to fertilizers by helping to to

Fertilizer Formula - It expresses the quantity and grade of the stock materials used in making a fertilizer mixture, for example, 400 kg of superphosphate containing 16 percent water-soluble phosphoric acid ( as PsO5 ), 400 kg of ammonium sulphate containing 20.6 percent nitrogen and 200 kg of muriate of potash containing 60 percent potash ( as K20 ). Fertilizer Grade - It represents the minimum guarantee of its plant food expressed in terms of percentage of nitrogen ( as N ), phosphoric acid ( as Pa06 ) and potash ( as KsO ). Fertilizer Mixture - A product obtained by mixing different fertilizer stock materials and containing more than one of the three plant nutrients, namely, nitrogen, phosphoric acid and potash ( see also ` Complete Fertilizer ' ). Filler - Any material mixed with fertilizers for any purpose other than the addition of available plant food, such as to facilitate granulation, for imparting anti-caking properties, to impart physical strength to granules and to adjust the nutrient percentage to the guaranteed levels. Finely Ground - It refers to actual size of particles as determined by the use of standard sieves. Seventy percent or more of the material should pass through 150-micron IS Sieve [ see IS: 460 ( Part I )-I978 to IS : 460 ( Part III )-1978* ] and 90 percent or more should pass through 300-micron 1'S Sieve. Fish Manure - A product consisting of largely non-edible fish that have been used for other commercial purposes, either ground or unground. It may contain 4 to 8 percent nitrogen and 4 to 8 percent phosphoric acid ( as PsOj ). Fused Calcium and Magnesium Phosphate - A product derived from the fusion of rock phosphate with approximately 30 percent of magnesium oxide as such or as a mineral silicate. Its fineness and available phosphoric acid content shall be up to the accepted standards. Fused Tricalcium Phosphate - A product alpha form of the compound represented by the is obtained when rock phosphate containing 5 to and the melt quenched. Its fineness and content acid shall be up to the accepted standards. *Specification for test sieves:
Part I Wire cloth test sieves ( second revision ). Part II Perforated plate test sieves ( sacond revision ). Part III iMethods of examination of test sieves ( second revision ).

composed chiefly of the formula Gas ( PO,)z. It 10 percent silica is fused of available phosphoric

9

IS : 1304 - 1980 G Garbage Tankage food materials A product obtained by treating waste with steam under pressure, drying and grinding. uniform household

Granulated Ground

Fertilizer -

of approximately

A fertilizer which has been made into particles size, ranging in diameter from 1 to 4 mm.

Limestone - It is the product obtained by grinding either calcareous or dolomitic limestone to a fineness so that all the ground product passes through l-70-mm IS Sieve. Ground Phosphate Rock - Material occurring phosphate rock to a fineness through 150-micron IS Sieve.
many materials It may mean: obtained by grinding naturally so that 90 percent of it passes which vary in source, compositi on

Guano - It includes and readiness for use.
a) bat guano

found in caves; accumulated excrement of sea birds found and phosphoric

b) Peruvian guano -the in Peruvian coast; c) fish guano, d) phosphatic whale

guano,

sheep guano, kinds.

goat guano;

guano of various

The nitrogen content varies from 0.4 to 9'0 percent acid ( as PzOs ) from 12 to 26 percent.

and total

Gypsum

- A hydrated calcium commercial .material contains varying as a soil amendment. H

sulphate amounts

( CaSO,.2HzO ). The of impurities and is used

.
not less than 25 phosphoric acid

High Analysis Fertilizer - A fertilizer containing percent of the major plant nutrients, namely, nitrogen, ( as PzOs ) and potash ( as KzO ). Hoof or Horn Meal grinding

A product resulting from processing, drying and of hoofs and horns and containing 13 to 15 percent nitrogen.

I Inorganic Fertilizer Scs ` Fertilizeis K Kainite - A natural impure mixture of potassium and sodium chlorides, sometimes containing sulphate of magnesia, with not less than 12 percent of potash ( as KzO ).
10 ( Inorganic ) `.

IS :1304- 1980
.Kotka Phosphate - A product obtained by partial acidulationof ground rock phosphate with sulphuric acid and containing not less than 16 percent of available phosphoric acid ( as PsO5 ) of which at least 8 percent is water-soluble. L -Liquid Ammonia See `Ammonia ( Liquid, Anhydrous )`.

Liquid Fertilizer - This term includes anhydrous ammonia, ammoniating soluCions and liquid mixed fertilizers. The principal materials used in making liquid fertilizers are ammonia, urea, phosphoric acid, nitric acid and potassium chloride. M Magnesia ( Magnesium the oxide of magnesium. ) ( MgO ) A product consisting Nutrients chiefly ) of

Major Fertilizer Elements ( Primary Plant elements are nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. Meatmeal carcasses. - A product obtained It contains 9 to 11 percent See` Trace

These from

by processing meat waste nitrogen in organic form. `.

Micro-Nutrients

Elements

Mixed Fertilizer - A product which contains two or more fertilizer materials, mechanically or otherwise physically well mixed such that they contain and supply two or more major plant nutrient elements ( see also ` Fertilizer Mixture ' ). Mono-ammonium Muriate Muriate Phosphate See ` Ammonium Chloride Phosphate `. acid. `.

of Ammonia of Potash

See ` Ammonium

( KC1 ) -

The potassium

salt of hydrochloric

N
Nitrate of Ammonia See ' Ammonium Nitrate `. The sodium salt of ( see 01so ` Chilean salt and

Nitrate of Soda ( Sodium Nitrate ) ( NaNOs ) nitric acid containing' about 16 percent nitrogen Nitrate of Soda ' ).

Nitrate of Soda and Potash - Chiefly the sodium and potassium nitric acid and contains not less than 15 percent of nitrate nitrogen 10 percent of potash ( as KsO ). 11

IS rl304 - 1980
Nitrogen Activity - It indicates how readily the nitrogen in a fertilizer or manure would become available to plants after application to soil. It, therefore, offers a qualitative distinction between slow and quickacting nitrogenous fertilize1 s and manures. Nitrogen Fertilizer contain other elements Nitrogen carbon. Nitrogen Fertilizer Solution ( Inorganic ) - It contains nitrogen and may but not declared amounts of PzO5 and/or KzO. ( Organic ) -

It contains

nitrogen `.

associated

with

Set ` Ammoniating

Solution

of phosphate rock Nitrophosphates - Products obtained by treatment with nitric acid alone or in admixture with sulphuric or phosphoric acid, with or without subsequent treatment with ammonia. - Fertilizers containing NK-Fertilizers contain other elements but not declared Non-Acid-Forming the residual acidity nitrogen and potassium amount of PzO5. and may

Fertilizer - A fertilizer not capable of increasing or reducing the residual alkalinity of the soil. and and

- Fertilizers containing nitrogen and phosphorus NP-Fertilizers may contain other elements but not declared amount of K,O. - Fertilizers containing NPK-Fertilizers potassium and may contain other elements. 0 nitrogen, phosphorus

Oil Cake - The residue left after extraction of fatty oil from different oil They are chiefly valued for their seeds employed for industrial purposes. nitrogen content in fertilizer use and also contain phosphoric acid, potash and other elements in small proportions. The more commonly used oil cakes are groundnut cake, castor cake, rape cake, cotton seed cake, mustard cake, JVEEM cake, and MAHLJA cake. The nitrogen content in these varies from 2 to 8 percent. Order of Terms of Plant Nutrients in Fertilizers - The order of terms of plant nutrients in fertilizers shall be nitrogen (N ) first, phosphoric acid ( as PzOj ) second and potash ( as KsO ) third. P Pelphos - It is a mixed rock phosphate containing product made from the basic slag and citrate and water soluble phosphate. ground

Phosphatic Fertilizer ( Inorganic ) - It contains phosphorus and may contain other elements but not declared amounts of N and KsO. 12

IS : 1304 - 1980
one or more calcium Phosphate Rock - A natural rock containing phosphate minerals of sufficient purity and quantity as to permit its use of commercial directly or after concentration in the manufacture phosphatic fertilizers. - Fertilizers containing phosphorus and potassium PK.Fertilizers may contain other elements but not declared amounts of N. and

- Fertilizers containing potassium and may contain Potossic Fertilizers other elcmcnts but not declared amounts of N and PsOj. Potassium Metaphosphate ( KPO, ) - A product composed chiefly of the crystalline compound represented by the formula KPOs. Its fineness and content of phosphoric acid and potash shall be up to accepted standards. double Potassium Schoenite - It is hydrated and magnesium manufactured from salt bitterns. sulphate of potassium

Precipitated Bone Phosphate - A by-product from the manufacture of glue from bones and is obtained by neutralizing the phosphoric acid of The phosphoric acid is chiefly present as processed bone with lime. dicalcium phosphate. Processed Tankage - A product made under steam pressure from inert organic nitrogenous materials, with or without the use of acid for the purpose of increasing the activity of` the nitrogen.
cm&

Q
Quick Lime ( Burnt Lime, Caustic Lime, Unslaked Lime and Shell Lime ) - A liming material produced by heating calcium carbonate until most of the carbon dioxide has been eliminated. R Reverted Phosphoric Acid - The part of the water-soluble acid in a fertilizer which, as a result of some reaction, insoluble in water. phosphoric has become

S
Sal Ammoniac Saltpetre, Chile See ` Ammonium Set ` Chilean Chloride `.

Nitrate 13

of Soda `.

IS : 1304 - 1980 Secondary
These

Fertilizer

Elements

( Secondary Plant
and sulphur.

Nutrients ) -

elements

are calcium,

magnesium

Sedimented

Sewage Sludge - Made from sewage, freed from grit, coarse solids and any floating materials and sedimented, either gravitationally or with the aid of chemical coagulants, and dried in the form of or after drying, ground and screened ( see also ' Activated lumps, Sludge ' ). Shell Lime See` Quick Lime `. See ` Superphosphate
of Soda `. `.

Single Superphosphate Sodium Nitrate -

See` Nitrate

Soil Amendment - Any substance that is added to the soil for the purpose of improving its physical or chemical character or enhancing soil productivity or promoting the growth of crops but exclusive of ccmmcrcial fertilizers and farm yard manures. Soil Conditioner ( Ca, Mg, S ) - A product containing one or more of the elements, Ca, Mg, S the principal function of which is the improvement of the soil and which otherwise cannot be classed as fertilizers ( see also ` Soil Amendment ' ). Straight Fertilizer - A product which contains and supplies to plants only one of the three major plant nutrient elements namely, nitrogen or phosphorus or potassium. Sulphate of Ammonia See` Ammonium ) The Sulphate `. acid.

Sulphate of Potash ( K$30,

potassium

salt of sulphuric

Superphosphate ( Single Superphosphate ) - A commercial product obtained by treating phosphate rock with sulphuric acid and contains not less than 16 percent of water soluble phosphoric acid ( as P20s ) along with calcium sulphate and other products of reaction. The grade of superphosphate is stipulated in terms of percent of water soluble phosphoric acid ( as P205 ). T Trace Elements ( Micro-Nutrients ) - Products which contain nutrient elements essential for living plants in relatively small quantities such as B, Mn, Fe, Zn, Cu, MO, Co. Fertilizers containing one or more trace elements have a declared content of each of these trace elements but may not have declared content of N, P, K, etc. Triple Superphosphate - A commercial product obtained by treating phosphate rock with phosphoric acid and contains not less than 40 percent of water soluble phosphoric acid ( as PsOr, ).
14

IS :1304 -1980 U Unit A unit of plant food is 10 kg or one percent `. of 1 000 kg.

Unslaked Lime -

See` Quick Lime

Urea [ CO ( NH2 )2 ] - A synthetic, non-protein organic compound, crystalline or made into granules for fertilizer use and containing not less than 46 percent of water-soluble nitrogen. W Waste Lime ( By-Product Lime ) containing calcium or calcium It may be designated acids. process by which is produced, lime kiln ashes, etc. r An industrial waste or by-product and magnesium in forms that will neutralize by prefixing the name of the industry or for example, gas house lime, tanner's lime,

15

fS:1304-1980 ( Continued
from page 2 ) R@rcssnting

Members DR B. K. DEAR

Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation ( Fertilizer Division ) SHRI K. R. AQQARWAL ( Alttmatr ) Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation ( Crops SHRI A. C. GARB Division ) Indian Explosives Ltd, Kanpur SHRIM. C.Gam SERI R. NARAYANAN ( Altrmatr ) Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi DR A. B. GHOSH Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co Ltd, New Delhi SHRI I. Gaos~ SIXRIS. K. A~RAWAL ( Altrmatr) Directorate General of Technical Development, SERI M. S. GROVER New Delhi SHRI V. G. NAYANAR ( Altematr ) Madrrr Fertilizers Ltd, Madras SHRI V. R. R. GUPTA DR T. S. VISWANATHAX ( Altematr ) Coromandcl Fertilizers Ltd, Vishakhapatnrm SHBI K. R. K. MURTHY SHRI CH. S. PRASAD ( Altrrnatr ) Southern Pctro-Chemical Industries Corporation, DR R. NATARAJAN Madras SHRI C. K. PANDARINATHAN ( Ahmatr ) E. I. D.-Parry ( India ) Ltd, Madras SHRI N. S. PARTHASARATHY SHRI A. G. KRIPAL SIN~X ( Altcmatr ) Indian Surrar Mills Association, New Delhi f&RI K. D. PURI SHRI P. C. RAMAXRISHNA~ Shaw Waliace & Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI D. MEENAX~HI SIJNDARAM ( Altsmatr) Ncyvcli Lignite Corporation, Ncyvcli SERI P. T. RANQAOHARI SHRI H. B. RUDRAPPA ( Altamatr j _ Gujarat State Fertilizers Co Ltd, Vadodara SHRI V. A. SANQHANI SHRI M. D. PATEL ( Altematr ) The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi SHRI SATYA NAND SERI V. S. SIVABHANKARAN ( Altrmatr ) Harvana Agricultural University, Hissar %%u.c. SEUXLA Da M. L. CHOUDHARY ( Altrrnotr ) ' Department of Agriculture, Government of Madhya SHRI D. V. SIN.~H Pradesh, Bhopal Indian Farmers Fertilizers Co-operative Ltd, New SHRI L. R. TALWA~ Delhi SERI S. JACOB ( Altwtatr ) The Fertilizers & Chemicals Travancorc Ltd, SHRI ABRAHAM THOYA~ Udyogamandal SHRI D. PANI~RAEI ( Altrmatc ) The Fertilizer ( Planning & Development ) India DR S. VERMA Ltd, New Delhi DR K. M. VERYA ( Alkmatr )

16

