**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 12193-2 (1987) : Methods of measurement on radio 
receivers for various classes of emission^ Part 2: Radio 
frequency measurements on receivers for amplitude modulated 
sound broadcast emissions [LITD 7: Audio, Video and 
Multimedia Systems and Equipment] 



aj^&Vi ilW^K-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nVF^f 



::^^s^\n%i9^j^/;s^>^^^^ 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS:12193(Part2)-1987 

Indian Standard 

MLiTIlODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR 

RADIO RECEIVERS FOR VARIOUS 

CLASSES OF EMISSION 

PART 2 RADIO FREQUENCY MEASUREMENTS ON 

RECEIVERS FOR AMPLITUDE-MODULATED SOUND 

BROADCAST EMISSIONS 



UDC 621-396-62083 : 621-317-3029-4 



© Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARQ 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 9 September 1988 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR 

RADIO RECEIVERS FOR VARIOUS 

CLASSES OF EMISSION 

PART 2 RADIO FREQUENCY MEASUREMENTS ON 

RECEIVERS FOR AMPLITUDE-MODULATED SOUND 

BROADCAST EMISSIONS 

Radio Communications Sectional Committee, LTDC 20 

Chairman Representing 

Shri S. P. Bhatikar Directorate General of All India Radio, New 

Delhi 

Members 

Shri O. P. Khushu ( Alternate to 
Shri S. P. Bhatikar ) 
Additional Director Standards Department of Railways ( RDSO ), Ministry of 
( S & T ) Transport 

Joint Director Standards ( S & T )-IV 
( A Iternate ) 
Shri A. K. Basak Development Commissioner, Small Scale Indus- 

tries, New Delhi 
Shri P. P. Malhotra ( Alternate ) 
Cor S. S. Baidwan, IN Ministry of Defence [( DPI ) ( N )j 

Lt a. Bhowmick, IN ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. M. Bhatnagar Indian Television Manufacturers Association 

(ITMA).New Delhi 
Shri J. S. Arora ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. L. Dhar National Airports Authority, New Delhi 

Shri P. K. Dhingra ( Alternate) 
Director ( Monitoring ) Ministry of Communications ( WPC ) 

Shri A. K. Ghose Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri N. Krishnan Kutty ( Alternate) 
Shri P. Guha Biswas Electronics Trade and Technology Development 

Corporation Ltd ( ETTDC ), New Delhi 
Shri Ishwar Dutt ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri J. Gupta Radio, Electronic & Television Manufacturers' 

Association ( RETMA ), Bombay; and Peico 
Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay 
Shri T. S. Buxi ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. S. Gupta Federation of Associations of Small Industries of 

India, New Delhi 
Shri K. Krishnamurthy Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri M. G. Sridharan ( Alternate) 
Col Krishan Lal Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Lt-Col S. S. Ahluwalia ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Lalwani Department of Telecommunication, New Delhi 

Shri P. D. Modak Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri K. S. Ramanujam ( Altenwte ) 
Shri K. J. Mohan Rao Directorate of Co-ordination ( Police Wireless ), 

Ministry of Home Affairs 
Shri R. P. Mathur ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. C. Mukherjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri R. N. Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri U. V. Navak Institution of Electronics and Telecommunica- 

tion Engineers, New Delhi 
Maj-Gen J. C. Ahluwalia (Alternate) 
Shri P. K. Rangole Central Electronics Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Pilani 
Shri H. K. Jain ( Altermite) 
Dr B. M. Reddy National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New 

Delhi 
Dr P. K. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri M.Sankaralingam Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. S. Arora ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. N. S. Sastry Ministry of Defence [( DTD & P ) ( AIR )] 

Shri C. M. Krishnamurthy 
( Alternate) 
Shri S. Sharma Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Dr K. S. K. Sai ( Alternate) 
Shri K. K. Taneja Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri H. S. Dubey ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. M. Thirumurthy Gujarat Communications and Electronics Ltd, 

Vadodara 
Shri K. S. Verma Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri S. Thirupathaiah ( Alternate) 
Shri Virendra Vuay Directorate General of Doordarshan, New 

Delhi 
Shri C. D. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Srinivasan, Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri D. K. Nayyar 

Deputy Director ( Electronics ), BIS 

( Continued on page 44 ) 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 



CONTENTS 



0. Foreword 

1 . Scope 

2. Terminology 



Page 
7 
8 
8 



SECTION 1 GENERAL 



3. Conditions FOR Measurement ... ... 9 

3.1 Standard Measuring Conditions ... ... 9 

3.2 Tuning and the Effect of Automatic Frequency 

Control ... ... ... 10 

3.3 Precautions ... ... ... 10 

SECTION 2 SENSITIVITY AND INTERNAL NOISE 

4. Output/Input Characteristics ... 11 

4.1 Introduction ... ... ... U 

4.2 Methods of Measurement ... ... 11 

4.3 Characteristics Related to the Output/Input and 

Noise Output/Input Characteristics ... ... 13 

SECTION 3 SELECTIVITY 

5. Explanation OF Terms ... 15 

5.1 Selectivity ... ... ... 15 

5.2 Immunity ... ... ... 15 

5.3 Single-Signal Method ... ... ... 15 

5.4 Two-Signal Method ... ... ... 15 

5.5 Audio-Frequency Signal-to-interference Ratio ... 16 

5.6 Audio-Frequency Protection Ratio ... ... 16 

5.7 Radio-Frequency Wanted-to-Interfering Signal Ratio ... 16 

5.8 Radio-Frequency Protection Ratio ... ... 16 

5.9 Desensitization ( Blocking ) ... ... 16 

5.10 Cross-Modulation ... ... ... 17 

5.11 Intcrmodulation ... ... ... 17 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

Page 

5.12 Adjacent- and Alternate-Channel Selectivity ... 17 

5.13 Image Rejection Ratio ... ... ... 17 

5.14 Intermediate-Frequency Rejection Ratio ... 17 

5.15 Spurious-Response Rejection Ratio ... ... 17 

5. 1 6 Pass-Band and Bandwidth ... ... 18 

5.17 Attenuation Slope ... ... ... 18 

6. Single-Signal Selectivity ... ... 18 

6.1 Introduction ... ... ... 18 

6.2 Method of Measurement ... ... 18 

6.3 Presentation of Results ... ... ... 18 

7. Two-Signal Selectivity Using Sinusoidal Moddlaiion of 

THE Unwanted Signal ... 19 

7.1 Introduction ... ... ... 19 

7.2 Method of Measurement ... ... 19 

7.3 Presentation of Results ... ... ... 20 

8. Two-Signal Selectivity Using Simulated Inierference ... 20 

8.1 Introduction ... ... ... 20 

8.2 Output Measurement ... ... ... 20 

8.3 Noise Signal for Modulating the Signal Generators ... 20 

8.4 Measuring Arrangements ... ,,. 21 

8.5 Depth of Modulation of the Signal Generators ... 21 

8.6 Frequency Separation of the Sources ... ... 25 

8.7 Audio-Frequency Signal-to-interference Ratio ... 25 

8.8 Measurements ... ... ... 25 

8.9 Presentation of Results ... ... ... 25 

8.10 Influence of Non-linear Distortion in the Signal 

Generators ... ... ... 25 

8.11 Accuracy ... ... ... 26 

9. Desensitization ( Blocking ) ... 26 

9. 1 Method of Measurement ... ... 26 

9.2 Presentation of Results ... ... ... 26 

10. Intermodulation ... .., ... 26 

10.1 Introduction ... ... ... 26 

10.2 Method of Measurement ... ... 27 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

Page 

11. Rfjection of Unwamfd SiGNAis FIntering Through ihe 
Anihnna ... 29 

11. 1 Introduction ... ... ... 29 

11.2 Single-Signal Method of Meai>urement ... ... 30 

11.3 Two-Signal Method of Measurement ... ... 31 

12. Overall Auoio-Frlqllncy Response and Acol'stic 
Freoltncy Characteristics ... ... 31 

12.1 Introduction ... ... 31 

12.2 Method of Measurement ... ... 32 

12.3 Acoustic Frequency Characteristics ... ... 32 

13. Pass-Band and An FNUAi ION Si OPH ... 33 

13.1 Introduction ... ... ... 33 

13.2 Modulation Frequency and Modulation Factor ... 33 

13.3 Method of Measurement ... ... 33 

14. Selectivity Controls ... ... 34 

15. Input Blocking and Cross-Modulai ION ... ... 34 

15.1 General ... ... ... 34 

15.2 Methods of Measurement ... ... 35 

15.3 Graphical Representation ... ... 35 

SECTION 4 INTERFERENCE DUE TO INTERNAL 
SOURCES 

16. Single-Signal Beat-Notes ... 36 

16.1 Introduction ... ... ... 36 

16.2 Method of Measurement ... ... 38 

17. Acoustic Effects ... ... ... 39 

18. Un>^ anted Oscillations ... ... ... 39 

19. Interference at the Power-Supply Frequency and its 
Harmonics ( HUM ) ... ... ... 39 

19.1 Introduction ... ... ... 39 

19.2 Method of Measurement... ... ... 39 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

SECTION 6 DISTORTION 

20. Introduction ... 40 

21. Overall Harmonic Distortion, Distortion-Limited AF 
Output and Distortion-Limited Input Level ... 40 

21.1 Method of Measurement 40 

22. Distortion Due to Inaccuracy of Tuning ... 41 
22.1 Method of Measurement ... ... 41 

SECTION 6 MISCELLANEOUS 

23. Tuning and Automatic Frequency-Control 



Characteristics 

23.1 Introduction 

23.2 Method of Measurement 

24. Maximum Output Power ... 

25. Maximum Useful Output Power 



42 
42 
42 
43 
43 



Fig. 1 Output/Input, Noise Output/Input and ( Selectively- 
Measured) Total Harmonic Distortion/Input Charac- 
teristics OF an a. M. Broadcast Receiver ... 12 

Fig. 2 Schematic of the Measuring Arrangements for Two- 
Signal Selectivity Using Simulated Interference ... 22 

Fig. 3 Filter Circuit with Frequency and Spectral 

Responses for Generating Weighted Noise Simulating 
Interference ... ... ... 24 

Fig. 4 Two-Signal Selectivity Curve and Blocking Curve at 

an Operating Frequency of 1 MHz ... ... 36 



IS : 12193 (Part 2 ) - 1987 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR 

RADIO RECEIVERS FOR VARIOUS 

CLASSES OF EMISSION 

PART 2 RADIO FREQUENCY MEASUREMENTS ON 

RECEIVERS FOR AMPLITUDE-MODULATED SOUND 

BROADCAST EMISSIONS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards on 26 August 1987, after the draft finalized by the Radio 
Communications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electro- 
nics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

0,2 The object of this standard ( Part 2 ) is to lay down the procedures 
for measurements on radio receivers designed for reception of amplitude- 
modulates sound broadcast transmissions. 

0,3 The methods of measurement on AM and EM radio receivers were 
earlier covered by IS : 614-1964* and IS : 2731-19641 based on lEC Pub 
69 'Recommended methods of measurement on receivers for amplitude- 
modulation broadcast transmissions' and lEC Pub 91 'Recommended 
methods of measurement on receivers for frequency-modulation broadcast 
transmissions' respectively. At international level, it has now been decided 
to bring out a series of publications covering methods of tests for sound 
broadcast receivers in lEC Pub 315 superseding lEC Pub 69 and lEC 
Pub 91. Consequently at national level also, it is proposed to follow the 
lEC trends and develop a scries of standards based on the latest lEC Pub. 
As such this series of standards is being brought out and this shall super- 
cede IS : 614-1964* and IS : 2731-19641. 

0.4 This standard is a part of a series of standards on methods of tests on 
radio receivers. Other parts likely to be covered in this series are: 

Part 1 General considerations and methods of measurements 

'Methods of measurements on receivers for amplitude modulation broadcast 
transmissions ( revised ). 

tMethods of measurements on receivers for frequency modulation broadcast 
transmissions. 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

Part 3 Radio frequency measuremcnls on receivers for frequency- 
modulated sound broadcast emissions 

0.5 This standard does not include the methods of tests for safety 
requirements which are covered by IS : 616-1986* nor with radiation which 
is covered by IS : 4546-1 983t. 

0.6 This standard is based on lEC Doc 12A( CO. ) 1 18 'Draft — Revision 
of Publications 315-3 Methods of measurement on radio receivers for 
various classes of emission : Part 3 Radio frequency measurement on 
receivers for amplitude-modulated sound broadcast emission', issued by 
the International Electrotechnical Commission (lEC). 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960J. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) applies to radio receivers for the reception 
of amplitude-modulated sound broadcast emissions. It deals mainly with 
measurements using radio-frequency signals applied to the antenna 
terminals of the receiver, or induced in a magnetic antenna. 

1.1.1 This standard shall be read in conjunction with Part 1. 

Note 1 — Receivers without volume controls or AF power output stages 
( tuners ) are included. 

Note 2 — Receivers for single-side band and independent side band emissions 
arc not included, nor all the receivers for stereophonic emissions as far as charac- 
teristics involving the encoding system are concerned. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions given in 
IS : 12193 ( Part 1 )§ shall apply. 



^Safety requirements for mains operated electronic and related apparatus for 
household and similar general use ( second revision ). 

tMethods of measurements of radiated and conducted interference from receivers. 

JRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised), 

iMethods of measurement for radio receivers for various classes of emission: 
Part ] General considerations and methods oi measurements. ( Under preparation ). 

8 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 
SECTION 1 GENERAL 

3. CONDITIONS FOR MEASUREMENT 

3.1 Standard Measuring Conditions — A receiver is operating under 
standard measuring conditions when: 

a) power supply voltage and frequency are equal to the rated values; 

b) standard radio-frequency input signal is applied via the appropriate 
antenna simulation network to the antenna terminals of the 
receivers or applied to a standard magnetic field generator to 
induce the signal into the magnetic antenna of the receiver; 

c) audio-frequency output terminals for connection to loudspeakers 
( if any ) are connected to audio-frequency substitute loads, as are 
any other audio-frequency output terminals, if measurements are to 
be made at those terminals; 

d) receiver is tuned to the applied signal in accordance with 3.2; 

e) volume control ( if any ) is adjusted so that the output voltage 
at the main audio-frequency output terminals is 10 dB below the 
rated distortion-limited output voltage or corresponds to a preferred 
reference value [ see 15.1.1 of IS : 12193 ( Part 1 )* ]; 

f) environmental conditions are within the rated ranges; 

g) for stereo receivers, the balance control or its equivalent ( if any ) is 
adjusted so that the output voltages of the two channels are equal; 

h) tone controls ( if any ) arc adjusted for the flattest possible audio- 
frequency response ( for example, for equal response at 100 Hz, 
1 kHz and 10 kHz ). This shall be carried out using an AF input 
signal if AF input terminals are available, otherwise the frequency of 
10 kHz given above should be reduced to 2 kHz; 

j) automatic frequency control is inoperative, if this can be achieved 
by means of a user control ( see Note ); and 

Note — Where a user control for automatic frequency control is provided, 
measurements shall, in general, be made both with automatic frequency control 
oflF ( which will allow easy analysis of the results ), and with automatic frequency 
control (on which represents the situation when the receiver is in normal use ). The 
twQ sets of results shall be clearly identified. 



^Methods of measurement for radio receivers for various classes of emission: 
Part 1 General considerations and methods of measurements. ( Under preparation ), 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) • 1987 

If the automatic frequency control cannot be made inoperative by means of 
a user control, it may nevertheless be necessary ( or desirable ) for the automatic 
frequency control to be disabled for certain measurements. In this case, the 
automatic frequency control shall be disabled by temporarily modifying the 
receiver, the action taken being detained with the results ( see 3.2 ). 

k) muting control ( if any ) is in the ^muting off' position. 

3.2 Tuning and the Effect of Automatic Frequency Control 

3.2.1 Preferred Tuning Method — If the manufacturer gives instructions 
on tuning the receiver, such as the use of a tuning indicator, these instruc- 
tions shall be followed. In the absence of instructions or of a tuning 
indicator, the receiver shall be tuned for maximum output voltage at the 
audio-frequency output terminals under the conditions [ with exception of 
(d) ] given in 3.1, care being taken to avoid overloading the audio- 
frequency part of the receiver. 

3.2.2 Effect of Automatic Frequency Control — All tuning operations shall 
be made with arrangements for automatic frequency control inoperative, 
if this is possible, except when the performance ofthc automatic frequency 
control is being investigated. 

When provision is made for the user to render the automatic frequency 
control inoperative, measurements may be made both with the automatic 
frequency control in operation and with it disabled. The results shall 
clearly show whether the automatic frequency control was in operation 
or not ( see also Section 6 ). 

3.3 Precautions — Many of the measurements described in this part arc 
likely to be adversely affected by interfering emissions and radio-frequency 
noise. It is usually essential that a screened room or screened enclosure 
is available to carry out these measurements. It is also highly desirable 
to monitor the audio-frequency output signal continuously with a loud- 
speaker or headphones in order to detect any interference or spurious 
output signals due to unwanted signals from the test equipment or 
elsewhere or spurious responses of the receiver. 

Measurement accuracy is also affected by inadequate signal-to-noise 
ratio. When the noise output is independent of the modulation factor 
( which is not always so ), the output with zero modulation shall be 
checked and if it is larger than — 10 dB ( unless otherwise stated in this 
part ) with respect to the output with modulation, the result of the 
measurement shall be rejected and measurement made using an AF band- 
pass filter to improve the signal-tornoise ratio, sufficiently to restore 
accuracy. 

10 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) . 1987 
SECTION 2 SENSITIVITY AND INTERNAL NOISE 

4. OUTPUT/INPUT CHARACTERISTICS 

4.1 Introduction — Virtually all commercially available receivers for 
amplitude-modulated sound broadcast emissions use some form of auto- 
matic gain control ( AOC ). To investigate the sensitivity and noise 
characteristics of such receivers, it is useful to measure and plot curves 
on the same graph of the AF output with a fixed modulation factor, and 
the noise output with zero modulation factor as functions of the RF input 
signal level. 

An example of such a graph is given in Fig. 1, which also shows the 
characteristics whose values may be determined from the curves or the 
tabulated results of the measurements. 

4.2 Methods of Measurement 

4.2.1 The receiver is brought under standard measuring conditions 
( see 3.1 ). An AF voltmeter ( preferably a true rms meter ), and a noise 
weighting filter and quasi-pcak meter such as distortion and noise level 
meter are connected across the audio-frequency substitute load at the 
terminals where AF output measurements are to be made. 

Note \ — Wide-band or A-weightcd noise measurements may be made in 
addition, if required [ see 6 of IS : 12193 ( Part I )♦ ]. 

Note 2— If ultrasonic components within the band-width of the AF voltmeter 
arc present in the AF output vohage, the voltmeter shall be, preceded by a band- 
limiting filter [ see 6.1 of IS : 12193 ( Part 1 )♦ J. 

4.2.2 The AF output voltage on the AF voltmeter is noted. The 
modulation factor is then reduced to zero and the noise output voltage 
on the noise meter is noted. 

4.2.3 The measurements are then repeated for different values of RF 
input signal level, measurements being made at signal levels low enough 
to give very low signal-to-noise ratios and high enough ( if possible ) to 
explore the overloading of the RF part of the receiver ( see 21 ). 

If overloading of the AF part of the receiver occurs at high RF input 
signal levels, the volume control attenuation is increased by a known 
amount to eliminate the overloading and measurements are continued. 
This increased attenuation is taken into account in presenting the results. 
If no volume control is fitted, the onset of AF overload sets a limit to the 



^Methods of measurement for radio receivers for various classes of emission: 
Part 1 Genera] considerations and methods of measurements. ( Under preparation ). 

11 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 



5F 

o 









-•. 





~ 


o 

11 


o 

is 


V. 


s 


% 


mm .. 


V 

^ 


( 


> 
ft 


CD 






















Ul 

K 

Z 
O 


lit 

II 








p 


i 






























01 
























5 


in 
















































o 
























u. 






















G 




0. 


























z 
















c 






^ 


III 


< 
















a 








n 








' * 


















z 








5 


















< 








Q. 


















€C 








»- 


















u 








d 










J 








X 








u. 










/ 








< 








4 










/ 








z 


Ul 
















/ 








> 














/ 








o 


o 

z 
< 

o 

< 














/ 


/ 






-J — 








JU 


OD 


7 










/ 












S9 


O^ 


/ 










/ 










1 


J^fO 


/ 










r 










I 


i^A 


<t^ 


r 








y 








L. 


-- 


V, 


M^ 


*tJ 






~ 


2 


/. 


-.. 


U 


^ 


^ 


4 


1 


9 i 


3 


o 


D 


o 


e 


O 4 


r~" 


9 < 


» G 






1 


fi * 






T 


M 


m 


^ 1 


i^ < 


ID 1 


■^ OB 




go 



inj.fto riaiWM.aBO /I^Aai iOdinO 3SI0N 
lOdiftO 03AV«»8PO I 13^3, ^n^^^O J» 



12 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

permissible RF input signal level and measurements should be 
discontinued. 

4.2.4 Particularly at high input signal levels, the receiver tuning shall 
be checked by adjusting the carrier frequency of the signal source 
before each result is recorded, since the receiver may detune. The 
extent of any detuning shall be recorded in terms of frequency at each 
input signal level during this measurement sequence, as the results are 
of value for the measurement of variation of operating frequency with 
RF input signal level. 

Note -— A decision whether to record the results of the output/input charac- 
teristic measurement with or without retuning is necessary. Unless the tuning 
variations are large, it is usual to record the resuh obtained without retuning. 
If retuning is carried out, this shall be noted with the results. 

4.2.5 The results of the measurement of the output/input characteristics 
and the noise output/input characteristic may be tabulated but are usually 
presented graphically, with input signal level in dB ( mw ) [ dB ( fw )] 
or dB ( ftV/m ) as abscissa and output or noise output level in dB with 
respect to a stated reference ( usually rated, distortion-limited, output/ 
voltage ). An example is shown in Fig. 1. 

4.3 Characteristics Related to the Output/Input and Noise Output/Input 
Characteristics 

4.3-1 Amplification Reserve — The amplification reserve is 10-5 dB 
plus the diflFerence between the AF output level measured with a high 
level of RF input signal, which shall be 90 dB ( fw ) or 94 dB ( fiWfm ), 
unless otherwise stated and the rated ( distortion-limited ) AF output level, 
allowance being made for any attenuation introduced by the volume 
control ( if any ) to avoid AF overloading. The RF input signal shall be 
the standard input signal except in respect of level. 

Note — The factor 10*5 dB is introduced to allow for the modulation factor of 
the standard input signal being 30 percent. The amplification reserve is thus 
related to 100 percent modulation. 

4.3.2 Gain-Limited Sensitivity — The gain-limited sensitivity is the RF 
input signal level at which the AF output is equal to the rated AF output 
with any volume controls set at maximum gain. 

The RF input signal shall be the standard input signal except in respect 
of level. 

4.3.3 Noise-Limited Sensitivity — The noise-limited sensitivity is the RF 
input signal level required to achieve a specified signal-to-noise ratio, 
which shall be 26 dB, unless otherwise stated, referred to a signal with 
30 percent modulation ( 36-5 dB referred to 100 percent modulation ). 
The RF input signal shall be the standard input signal except in respect 

13 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

f level so that the signal level in the signal-to-noise ratio calculation is 
that produced by 30 percent modulation. The noise output of the 
receiver shall be measured with the psophometric weighting and quasi- 
pcak meter [ see 6.2.2 of IS : 12193 ( Part 1 )* ], unless otherwise stated. 

4.3.4 Noise Factor — The noise factor of a receiver is the ratio of the 
noise output voltage under specified conditions to the noise output 
produced by the thermal noise of the resistive part of the source 
impedance. 

Although it is theoretically possible to calculate the latter output, 
in practice it is easier and more accurate to determine the noise factor 
directly by using a noise generator whose output level is calibrated 
directly in terms of noise factor expressed in decibels. To do this, the 
receiver is brought under the required conditions for measuring noise 
factor, with the noise generator connected to the antenna terminals 
through the appropriate antenna substitution network. The output of 
the noise generator is set to zero and the noise output measured with 
the wide-band filter and true rms meter. The noise generator output 
is then increased until the noise output level has risen by 3 dB. The 
noise factor can then be read from the output indicator of the noise 
generator. 

4.3.5 Automatic Gain Control — The performance of the automatic gain 
control is indicated in detail by the output/input characteristic curve, 
but for specification purposes a numerical figure-of-merit is useful. The 
AGC figure-of-merit is the range of RF input signal levels over which the 
AF output level changes by 10 dB, the RF input signal level corresponding to 
the upper limit of the range being stated [for example AGC figure-of-merit 
65 dB relative to 100 dB ( fw ) ]. This level shall be --20dB(mw) 
[ 100 dB ( fw ) ] or 104 dB ( /xV/m ), unless specified otherwise. 

Note — Former definitions have specified the upper limit of RF input signal 
level, giving different values for different types of receiver. Since it is difficult to 
assign appropriate values for the many different types of receivers, and different 
classes of performance within each type, it is considered more logical to require the 
manufacturer to specify this level. 

4.3.6 Dynamic Range ( of the RF Input Signal Level ) — The dynamic range 
of the RF input signal level is the difference in level between the distor- 
tion-limited input signal level ( see 21.1 ) and the input signal level 
required, either to achieve a specified signal-to-noise ratio ( which shall 
be 26 dB, unless otherwise stated ) or to achieve rated ( distortion- 
limited ) output voltage, whichever ( input signal level ) is the greater. 



^Methods of measurement for radio receivers for various classes of emission : Part 1 
General considerations and methods of measurements. ( Under preparation ). 

14 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

4.3.7 Distortion — It is often convenient to combine the measurement 
of the output/input characteristics with measurements of distortion 
( see 21.1 and Fig. 1 ). 

4.3.8 SIN AD ( Signal-tO'Noise and Distortion ) — SINAD measurements 
treat distortion and noise together as degradations of the output signal 
[^ee 21.1.1 (b)(4)]. 

SECTION 3 SELECTIVITY 

5. EXPLANATION OF TERMS 

5.1 Selectiyity ■— The selectivity of a receiver is a measure of its ability to 
discriminate between a wanted signal to which the receiver is tuned and 
unwanted signals entering through the antenna circuit. 

Selectivity may be measured in several ways, but only the complex 
method using simulated interference mentioned below correlates well 
with the performance of the receiver when in use. Two aspects of 
receiver performance are included in the concept of selectivity. One is 
the descrimination against signals whose frequencies arc relatively close 
to that of the wanted signal, and is controlled by the performance of 
the RF and if tuned circuits or their equivalent, while the other is the 
discrimination against signals whose frequencies are such that they may 
produce spurious-responses; for example, the image frequency of a 
superheat receiver. 

5.2 Immunity — The immunity of a receiver is a measure of its rejection of 
unwanted signals, entering otherwise than through the normal antenna 
circuit ( for example, through the power supply or through an antenna 
system intended for another frequency range ). 

5.3 Single-Signal Method — A single-signal method of measurement 
measures the response of the receiver to an wanted signal in the absence 
of the wanted signal. The results of such a measurement are meaningful 
only if the receiver is operating in a linear mode both during the 
measurement and in the condition to which the measurement results are 
to be applied. 

5.4 Two-Signal Method — A two-signal method of measurement measures 
the response of the receiver to an unwanted signal in the presence of the 
wanted signal. The receiver operating mode may be non-linear provided 
that the results are applied only to conditions where only one strong 
unwanted signal is present. 

A two-signal measurement using sinusoidal modulation of the 
unwanted signal is fairly simple to perform, but the results do not 
correlate well with the performance of the receiver when in use. 

IS 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

A two-signal measurement using simulated interference gives results 
which are a good measure of the true performance of the receiver. 

Measurements using three signals are required for some purposes 
( see 10-2 ). 

5.5 Audio-Frequency SignaMo-Interference Ratio -- The audio-frequency 
( AF ) signal-to-interference ratio is the ratio ( expressed in dB ) between 
the values of the voltage of the wanted signal and voltage of the inter- 
ference, measured under specified conditions, at the audio-frequency 
output of the receiver. 

This ratio corresponds closely to the difference in sound pressure 
level between the wanted programme and the interference. 

5.6 Audio-Frequency Protection Ratio— The audio-frequency (AF) protec- 
tion ratio is the minimum value of the audio-frequency signal-to-interference 
ratio considered necessary to achieve a subjectively defined reception quality. 

This ratio may have different values according to the type of service 
desired. 

5.7 Radio-Frequency Wanted-to-Interfering Signal Ratio — The radio- 
frequency ( RF ) wanted-to-interfering signal ratio is the ratio ( expressed 
in dB ) between the appropriate values of the radio-frequency voltage 
or power of the wanted signal and the interfering signal, measured at the 
input of the receiver under specified conditions. 

For example, in the case of amplitude-modulation wanted and inter- 
fering transmissions ( carrier with double side band ) the appropriate 
values will be the available powers of emfs of the wanted and interfering 
carriers. 

5.8 Radio-Frequency Protection Ratio — The radio-frequency ( RF ) 
protection ratio is the value of the radio-frequency wanted-to-inteifering 
signal ratio that enables, under specified conditions, the audio-frequency 
protection ratio to be obtained at the output of the receiver. 

The specified conditions include such diverse parameters as spacing 
of the wanted and interfering carrier, emission characteristics (type of 
modulation factor), AF signal characteristics ( bandwidth, dynamic com- 
pression, etc ), receiver input level as well as the receiver characteristics 
( selectivity and cross-modulation, etc ). 

5.9 Desensitization ( Blocking ) — Desensitization ( blocking ) is an effect, 
resulting in a given change ( generally reduction ) in the AF output of a 
receiver from a wanted modulated radio-frequency input signal of a specified 
level, caused by an unwanted unmodulated signal on a nearby frequency 
( see 9 ). The change in AF output shall be a reduction of 3 dB, unless 
specified otherwise. 

16 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

5.10 Cross-Modulation — Cross-modulation is an effect due to non-linearity 
in a predetector stage or stages, that produces an AF output from a 
receiver, receiving an unmodulated wanted signal of a specified level, 
resulting from the modulation of an unwanted signal on a nearby frequency, 
and is one of the factors affecting adjacent-signal selectivity. 

5.11 Intermodulation — Intermodulation is an effect producing an AF output 
from a receiver, receiving an unmodulated wanted signal of a specified 
radio-frequency input level, resulting from two simultaneously present 
unmodulated unwanted signals at specified frequencies ( see 10 ). 

5.12 Adjacent- and Alternate-Channel Selectivity — For receivers mtended 
for use with emissions planned with regular channeling, the adjacent-channel 
selectivity is the selectivity measured by one of the methods given in this 
part, when the unwanted signal frequency is separated by one channel 
spacing from the wanted signal frequency. The alternate-channel selectivity 
is the selectivity measured by one of the methods given in this part, when 
the unwanted signal frequency is separated by two-channel spacings from 
the wanted signal frequency. 

5.13 Image Rejection Ratio — The image rejection ratio ( of a superhet 
receiver ) is the ratio of the radio-frequency input signal level at an image 
frequency required to produce a specified AF output level from the 
receiver, to the level of the wanted radio-frequency signal required to 
produce the same output level. 

Note 1 — An image frequency is the wanted signal frequency plus or minus 
twice the value of an mtermediatc frequency of the receiver, accordmg to whether 
the frequency-change oscillator is, respectively, higher or lower in frequency 
than the wanted signal frequency. 

If the receiver incorporates more than one frequency changer, there will be 
more than one image frequency, and for each of these there will be a correspond- 
ing image rejection ratio. 

Note 2 — The automatic frequency contro' ( if any) will not function correctly 
with an input signal at image frequency. 

5.14 Intermediate-Frequency Rejection Ratio —The intermediate-frequency 
rejection ratio is the ratio of the level of a signal at any intermediate 
frequency used in the receiver, applied to the radio-frequency input 
terminals of the receiver which produces a specified AF output level from 
the receiver, to the level of the wanted radio-frequency signal required to 
produce the same output level. 

5.15 Spurious-Response Refection Ratio ~ The spurious-response rejection 
ratio is the ratio of the radio-frequency input signal level at the 
interfering frequency, required to produce a specified AF output level from 
the receiver, to the level of the wanted radio-frequency signal required to 
produce the same output level. 

17 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

Note — If /© is the frequency of the local oscillator, /i the intermediate 
frequency and n an integer, spurious-responses can occur from unwanted signals 
at the following frequencies: 

/ « /o 4- fil2 and / = nfo + /i, where /i is a positive integer. 

5.16 Pass-Band and Bandi/vidth — The pass-band or X dB bandwidth is 
the range of input signal frequencies over which the AF output level of 
the receiver, with an input signal having a specified low modulation 
frequency and modulation factor exceeds X dB with respect to tjiat at the 
operating frequency {see 3.2). The bandwidth or pass-band may also be 
defined for other specified values of response variation. In this part, X is 
assumed to be equal to 6, unless otherwise specified. 

5.17 Attenuation Slope — The attenuation slope is the slope of the graph 
of AF output level as a function of input signal frequency difference from 
the operating frequency, with an input signal having a specified low 
modulation frequency and modulation factor. 

6. SINGLE-SIGNAL SELECTIVITY 

6.1 Introduction — The single-signal selectivity is the ratio of the RF input 
signal level at a frequency, whose difference from the operating frequency 
is specified, required to produce a reference value of audio-frequency 
output level, to the RF input signal level at the operating frequency 
required to produce the same output level, the receiver being otherwise 
under standard measuring conditions. 

Unless otherwise specified, the reference output level shall be 10 dB 
below rated distortion-limited output voltage and the RF input signal level 
at the operating frequency shall be that of the standard RF input signal. 

Supplementary measurements may be made at other stated input 
signal levels and at other operating frequencies. 

6.2 Method of Measurement 

a) The receiver is brought under standard measuring conditions; 

b) The RF input signal is then detuned by a known amount and its 
level increased to restore the audio-frequency output level to its 
value in (a); 

c) The RF input signal level and the amount of detuning are noted; 

d) The measurement is repeated for other values of detuning; and 

c) The measurements may also be repeated with other values of 
initial RF input signal level or operating frequency. 

6.3 Presentation of Results — The results may be tabulated or presented 
graphically. The values of adjacent and alternate-channel selectivity 
shall be indicated. 

18 



IS: 12193 (Part 2)- 1987 

7. TWO-SIGNAL SELECTIVITY USING SINUSOIDAL 
MODULATION OF THE UNWANTED SIGNAL 

7.1 Introduction — The Iwo-signal selectivity using sinusoidal modulation 
of the unwanted signal is the ratio of the RF input signal level of a 
modulated signal at a frequency whose difference from the operating 
frequency is specified, required to produce an audio-frequency output 
level ( unless otherwise stated ) 26 dB below that obtained under standard 
measuring conditions ( that is, 36 dB below rated output voltage ), in the 
presence of an unmodulated RF input signal at the operating frequency 
and standard level. 

7.2 Method of Measurement 

a) The receiver is brought under standard measuring conditions. 

b) The input arrangements arc changed to include a suitable com- 
bining network and a second signal source whose output is set to 
zero. 

c) The RF input level of the first source is adjusted to allow for the 
insertion loss of the combining network. 

d) Then the modulation is switched off and the second source is 
tuned to the desired measuring frequency with 30 percent 
modulation at the standard modulation frequency. The input 
level of the second source is then adjusted until it produces, when 
modulated, an AF output level 26 dB below that produced when 
the wanted signal is modulated, the unwanted signal still being 
applied but being unmodulated ( see also 9 ). The input level 
of the second source is recorded as the result. 

Note — This method is specified rather than calling for adjustment of the 
volume control so that it can apply to equipment without volume controls. 

e) The modulations of both sources are then switched off. If the AF 
output drops by less than 10 dB, the results are being affected by 
noise or beat-notes and shall be discarded. If a narrow-band 
filter passing the standard modulation frequency is connected 
between the AF output terminals and the AF voltmeter, the 
measurements may be continued but only if noise ( rather than 
a beat-note ) affected the wide-band measurement. 

f) The measurement is repeated for other frequencies of the second 
source avoiding frequencies which cause beat-notes. 

g) The measurements may be repeated with other specified values 
of first source level and frequency, and for other specified values 
of AF output level difference. 

19 



IS : 12193 (Part 2 ) - 1987 

7.3 Presentation of Results— The results may be tabulated or presented 
graphically. The values of adjacent and alternate-channel selectivity 
shall be indicated. 

8. TWO-SIGNAL SELECTIVITY USING SIMULATED 
INTERFERENCE 

8.1 Introduction— This method is essentially a two-signal method which 
consists in modulating successively, with a given modulation depth, the 
wanted and the interfering sources a special weighted noise signal, the 
spectral amplitude distribution of which corresponds to modern dance 
music programmes. 

The inteference effect is measured at the audio-frequency output of the 
receiver by means of a standardized instrument ( see 8.2 ). The reference 
value used to define the audio-frequency signal-to-inteference ratio is that 
which is measured at the audio-frequency output of the receiver with the 
same instrument, when the wanted signal is modulated with the weighted 
noise, while the unwanted signal is switched off. 

8.2 Output Measurement — For measuring the wanted and interfering 
signals at the output of the receiver, a special meter is used. This 
includes a network for weighting the subjective interference effect of 
different interfering frequencies, in accordance with 6.2.2 of IS : 12193 
( Part 1 )*. 

Note — The use of an rms rather than a quasi-peak meter as given in 6 of 
IS : 12193 ( Part 1 )♦ permits more accurate account to be taken of the beat-note 
predominant with closer frequency spacings and all other effects. This conclusion 
was drawn from the excellent agreement between the values of radio-frequency 
protection ratio obtained, either using the objective two-signal method or from 
subjective listening tests for all values of frequency spacing. 

8.3 Noise Signal for Modulating the Signal Generators —- The following 
two conditions are fulfilled by the standard signal simulating modern 
dance music: 

a) Its special constitution corresponds to that of a representative 
broadcast programme; and 

b) Its dynamic range is small so that a sensibly constant reading is 
obtained on the meter. 

The amplitude distortion of modern dance music was taken as a basis, 
as it is a type of programme with a considerable proportion of high 
audio-frequencies. However, the dynamic range of this type of 



^Methods of measurement for radio receivers for various classes of emission: 
Part 1 General considerations and methods of measurements. ( Under preparation ). 

20 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

programme is too wide and does not fulfil, therefore, the second condition 
mentioned in 3.3(b). A signal, which is appropriate for this purpose, is 
a weighted noise signal, the spectral amplitude distribution of which is 
fairly close to that of modern dance music ( see curve A of Fig. 2 which 
is measured using one-third octave filters ). 

This weighted noise signal may be obtained from a *white-noise* 
generator by means of a passive filter circuit as shown in Fig. 2. The 
frequency-response characteristic of this filter is reproduced as curve /? 
of Fig. 2. ( It should be noted that the difference between curves A and 
B of Fig. 2 is due to the fact that curve A is based on measurements with 
'one-third octave' filters which pass greater amounts of energy as the 
bandwidth of the filter increases with frequency. ) 

The spectrum beyond the required bandwidth of the weighted noise 
signal shall be restricted by a low-pass filter having a cut-oflT frequency 
and a slope such that the bandwidth of the modulating signal is approxi- 
mately equal to half the standardized bandwidth of emission ( see Note ). 
The audio-frequency amplitude/frequency characteristic of the modulating 
stage of the signal generator shall not vary by more than 2 dB up to the 
cut-off frequency of the losv-pass filter. 

Note — For receivers intended for use with emissions whose channel spacing 
is n kHz, the bandwidth shall be n/l kHz. 

8.4 Measuring Arrangements — Figure 3 shows a schematic diagram of 
the measuring arrangements in which the elements of fundamental 
importance are drawn in thick outlines. The other elements are 
measuring and control devices which are required for putting the 
investigations into practice or for facilitating them. 

8.5 Depth of Modulation of the Signal Generators — The depth of modu- 
lation of the wanted or interfering signals is determined by the following 
procedure. The signal generator is first modulated to a depth of 
50 percent with a sinusoidal tone at 1 kHz from the generator A. 
adjusted by means of the attenuator B and verified by oscilloscope S at 
the radio-frequency outputs of modulators H or L, and the required 
audio-frequency voltage is measured at the modulator inputs ( switch U ) 
by means of the instrument R, The amplitude of the noise signal 
( C + /) ), which is measured with the same measuring instrument R, 
is then adjusted ( by means of the attenuator ^ ) to be 6 dB lower than 
the value obtained With the sinusoidal signal: provided that the instru- 
ment has a time constant of 200 ms. This corresponds to a depth of 
modulation of 50 percent measured with a programme meter with quasi- 
peak indication, peeper modulation is not appropriate, because on 
account of its very small dynamic range, the noise would have a more 
disturbing effect than any real programme. 

21 



ISM2193(Patt2)-1987 



^ 






rr 



it 



fft 



I 



Q 

X 



© 



© 



I 



/.{^ 



ji: 

X 



T 



X 

X 
© 



M 



11 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) . H987 



9 



S o 



4> 

C 

o 



t: 

o 

9^ 






^ o 



.5 & ^ 



IS 

t-l 



C c 

^ -9 



c 

.2 S 

9 V 

.5 a 

M 3 



O 



60 

C 






S 
9 






I 



t5 - 



ir 



:5 »: 



c 

I 



Ui 

I 

en 



> 



60 3 

2 s :r 

g 5 a 

£ ^ § 

^ ^ N 

O M .3 

o 2 



CO 



c 
o 

js 

"a 
•a 
o 

e 

6 






«o K 



o 

9 S 
S « 

^ s 

o So 



§ 



a 




3 



10 

•s 



I r 

8 o 



111 11^ 

I .1 I 1 I I 

hi. .q ft;. •*» ik< >if4, 



c 

H 

o 

So 

D 

> 

hi 

< 

O 

p "^ 

:^ oc 
< 

o 



d 
(14 



23 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 



10 



m 20 



30 



40^ 



- — /-;' A — ^r 


=^=:::====:::::===:=s^ £= 



20 SO 100 200 SOO 1000 2000 SOOO 10000 20000 
FRHQUENCY (Hz) —• m- 

3(a) 

Curve A — Frequency Spectrum of Standardized Noise ( Measured 
with One-Third Octave Filters ) 



600 ft °-,?»^f 



0-27H 3-S kSl 



r— « 1 

R^IOOQ 


->~1h- 


i r 




^.^^..~rrrrr>L.,..^ 


C! 


1 ^ 


) 


0-8 H- 


o 

o 




= 1HF 




(A 



3(b) 
Curve B -— Frequency Response Characteristic of Filter Circuit 

Fig. 3 Filter Circuit, with Frequency and Spectral Responses, 
FOR Generating Weighted Noise Simulating Interference 



24 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

8.6 Frequency Separatioo of the Sources — The unwanted signal frequencies 
shall be separated from the wanted signal frequency by ±1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 
6, 8, 9 and 10 kHz for co-channel and also at adjacent and alternate 
channel frequencies. 

8.7 Audio-Frequency Signal-to-Interference Ratio — The signal generator 
( wanted signal ) { G + H [ J ) is adjusted to give the standard RF input 
signal level and modulated with noise according to 8.3 and 8.5. It 
produces a signal at the audio-frequency output of the receiver under 
test g, which represents, when measured with the instrument R, the 
AF reference level ( dB ). The noise modulation is then transferred 
by means of a switch U, from the audio-frequency input of the modulator 
H of the signal generator ( wanted signal ) to the audio-frequency input 
of the modulator of the signal generator ( interfering signal ), whose 
carrier frequency is initially set 1 kHz above that of the wanted signal. 
The modulation of the wanted signal being zero, the radio-frequency 
level of the interfering signal generator ( K + L + M ) is then adjusted 
so that the AF output level is less than the reference level by the required 
audio-frequency signal-to-interference ratio, which shall be 26 dB, unless 
specified otherwise. The value used shall be stated. 

NoTt — There is a relationship between the achievable AF signal-to-interference 
ratio and the modulating signal bandwidth. Consequently, if a higher value than 
26 dB is adopted for the ratio, a reduction in bandwidth may be essential. 

8.8 Measurements — The RF output levels of the wanted and unwanted 
signals are recorded as results, and the measurement repeated with other 
values of wanted signal level, including low values where the receiver may 
be operating in a linear mode, and high values where cross-modulation may 
occur. With low values, the AF output level with both signals unmodulat- 
ed is also measured, and if this exceeds a level 3 dB below that obtained 
with the unwanted signal modulated, the result is being affected by 
receiver noise and shall be discarded. 

8.9 Presentation of Results -— The results may be presented graphically, 
with frequency separation as abscissa on a linear scale, unwanted-to- 
wanted signal level ratio in decibels on a linear scale as ordinate and 
wanted signal level as parameter. The values of adjacent and alternate- 
channel selectivity shall be indicated. 

8.10 Influence of Non-linear Distortion in the Signal Generators — The 

non-linear distortion occurring during the modulation process in the signal 
generator has components which widen the radio-frequency spectrum 
and this give rise to increased radio-frequency wanted-to-interfering 
signal ratios in the region of the adjacent channel and the alternate 
channel ( see 9 ). 

The non-linear distortion in the modulators of the signal generators 
should not, therefore, exceed 2 percent. 

25 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) • 1987 

8.11 Accuracy — The results obtained with the objective method have been 
compared with the results of corresponding subjective tests. From these 
tests, it has been found that objective measurements give a first approxi- 
mation to those obtained with the subjective method. In cases where the 
wanted programme is particularly susceptible to interference (for example, 
speech with long pauses ), the difference between the objective measure- 
ments and the subjective tests may amount to more than 5 dB. 

9. DESENSITIZATION ( BLOCKING ) (seeS) 

9.1 Method of Measurement — Blocking may be measured during the 
measurement of two-signal selectivity by the method given in 7, by noting 
in Step 4 of the method given in 7.2, the unwanted ( unmodulated ) input 
signal level required to reduce the AF output due to the wanted ( modu- 
lated) signal by 3 dB from the value under standard measuring conditions. 
It is desirable to extend the measurements to greater values of frequency 
separation than those required for selectivity measurements. 

9.2 Presentation of Results — Blocking may be presented graphically in 
terms of unwanted input signal level as a function of frequency separation 
between the wanted and unwanted signals. 

10. INTERMODULATION ( see 5 ) 

10.1 Introduction — Jntermoduiation is expressed as the radio-frequency 
input level of two unwanted signals of equal level, which result in an AF 
output level from the receiver at the standard reference frequency of 
26 dB below that which would be obtained if the wanted signal were 
modulated 30 percent at the standard reference frequency, for a specified 
radio-frequency input level of this wanted signal, which shall be the 
standard level, unless otherwise stated. 

Intermodulation is caused by the effect of receiver non-linearity on two 
( or more ) applied signals; this gives rise to distortion components, which 
are signals at frequencies nfi ± m/i* where n and m are positive integers 
and/i and/2 are the input signal frequencies. The sum ( #a + w ) is called 
the order of the non-linearity distortion or distortion component. 

Receivers may exhibit non-linearity of a high order, resulting in 
spurious-responses to a very large number of combinations of input signal 
frequencies. However, for well-designed receivers, consideration of 
spurious-responses due to selected second and third order distortion 
components is usually sufficient. 

Suitable input signal frequencies, which can give rise to a signal at the 
operating frequency, an image or intermediated frequency, by the effects 
described above, are as follows: 

26 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

a) a sum nearly equal to the intermediate frequency (Jl 21/1 + fi ), 
in which case the unwanted signals shall have frequencies close to, 
but not equal to, half the value of the intermediate frequency; 

b) a dilTcrencc nearly equal to the intermediate frequency (/i sij\ —fj). 
in which case the unwanted signal having the lower frequency of 
the two shall have a frequency near to that of the wanted signal, 
for example, in an adjacent channel; 

c) a sum nearly equal to the frequency of the wanted signal (/d Si /i +/!), 
in which case the unwanted signals shall have frequencies close to, 
but not equal to, half the value of the wanted signal; 

d) a difference nearly equal to the frequency of the wanted signal 
(/d 551 /i ~ /2 ), in which case the unwanted signal having the lower 
frequency of the two shall have a frequency near to that of the 
wanted signal, for example, in an adjacent channel; 

e) a sum nearly equal to an image frequency (/m ^ f\ 4-/2 ), in which 
case the unwanted signals shall have frequencies close to, but not 
equal to, half the value of the relevant image frequency; and 

f) a difference nearly equal to that between the wanted signal and the 
nearer unwanted signal (/d ci2/i — fi ), in which case the nearer 
unwanted signal shall have a frequency near to that of the wanted 
signal, for example, in an adjacent channel. 

Note — (a) to (e) arc due to second order intermodulation, while (f ) is due 
to third order intermodulation. 

10.2 Method of Measurement 

10.2.1 Method 

a) The receiver is brought under standard measuring conditions and 
then the input arrangements are changed to include a combining 
network for three sources which has adequate [ see 20 of IS : 12193 
( Part 1 )* ] isolation between sources to prevent intermodulation 
in the signal sources. The two unwanted signal sources are set to 
zero output and the level of the wanted signal source adjusted to 
allow for the insertion-loss of the combining network. 

b) Two unwanted unmodulated signals with equal levels, at fre- 
quencies f\ and /2, are then applied simultaneously with the wanted 
signal. The frequencies shall be taken from the following list, 
where (a) to (f ) correspond with (a) to (f) in 10.1. 



•Methods of measurement for radio receivers for various classes of emission; 
Part 1 Generel considerations and methods of measurements. ( Under preparation ). 

27 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

In all cases, the frequencies shall be chosen in such a way that 
the receiver audio-frequency output is negligible, if only one 
unwanted signal is applied and modulated. 

With all three signals applied without modulation, the frequency 
of one of the unwanted signals is adjusted slightly so that the AF 
output from the receiver is at the standard reference frequency, /r. 

Code Basic Equation ( Note I ) Spectra! Order Difference Frequency 

( Note 2 ) 

a) /i +/2 = /i + 1 kHz /i >/,/2 >yi /i ^/2 = 9 kHz 

b) A -/2 = /i + 1 kHz /i >/2 1/2 - ./d I = 9 kHz 

c) /i + ^2 =/d + 1 kHz /i >fal2 >/2 yi -/2 =9 kHz 

d) /i -fi =/ci + 1 kHz /i >/2 1/2 -/d I - 9 kHz 
c) /i + /i -/m + 1 kHz /I >fJ2 >/2 1/2 -ym I = 9 kHz 
f) 2/1 -yi =/a + 1 kHz 1/1 -/d I - 9 kHz 

Note 1 — If the standard reference frequency (the modulation frequency of the 
wanted signal ) is not 1 kHz, the value used shaU be substituted and stated with 
the tesults. 

NoT£ 2 — If the channel spacing of the emissions for which the receiver is 
designed is not 9 kHz, the appropriate value shall be substituted. This value of 
frequency difference shall be regarded as a lower limit rather than as a precise 
value; however, the value can affect the results and shall, therefore, be stated. 

c) Then the three signals are applied simultaneously without modula- 
tion. The input level of the wanted signal is kept constant, and that 
of the two unwanted signals ( whose levels are kept equal ) adjusted, 
until the AF output level produced is 26 dB below that produced 
when the wanted signal is modulated 30 percent and one of the 
unwanted signals is detuned by a few kilohertz so that the 
amplitude of the beat-note is reduced sufficiently to have no signi- 
ficant effect on the output level measurement ( a level 10 dB below 
that due to the wanted signal is sufficient ). The level of the 
unwanted signals is recorded as the result. 

Note — This method is specified, rather than calling for adjustment of the 
volume control so that the method is applicable to equipment without volume 
controls. The measurements are then repeated for other values of wanted-signal 
level, and may be repeated at other wanted-signal frequencies. 

10.2J Presentation of Results — The results may be presented as a table 
or graphically with unwanted-signal level expressed as a function of 
wanted-signal level. 

28 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

10.2.3 Precautions — Care shall be taken that the results are not 
affected by intermodulation in the signal generators. This can be checked 
by inserting a suitable additional attenuator between the combining 
network and the receiver under test. 

If there is no intermodulation between the signal generators, for each 
additional decibel of attenuation inserted, the level of each of the three 
signals will have to be increased by 1 dB to get the same result as without 
the additional attenuator. 

If there is intermodulation between the signal generators, and the level 
of the wanted signal is increased by 1 dB for every decibel inserted in the 
additional attenuator, the increase in the level of the unwanted signals 
necessary to restore the audio-frequency output level will be less than 
1 dB for each decibel inserted in the additional attenuator. This is due to 
an increase of the intermodulation between the signal generators. 

11. REJECTION OF UNWANTED SIGNALS ENTERING THROUGH 

THE ANTENNA 

11.1 Introduction — In addition to the responses to signals at frequencies 
near the operating frequency, superheterodyne and similar receivers respond 
to unwanted signals at the intermediate frequency ( or frequencies, in the 
case of double or multiple superhets ), the image frequency ( or frequencies ) 
and at harmonics of the signal frequency and other frequencies associated 
with harmonics of the local-oscillator frequency ( or frequencies ). 

These responses may be measured by single-signal or two-signal 
methods, and there are important differences both in the conditions of 
measurement and in the results obtained. It is essential, therefore, to 
distinguish clearly in the results in which measurement has been made. 

The single-signal intermediate-frequency rejection ratio is the ratio in 
decibels of the input signal level at the intermediate frequency to the 
input signal level at the operating frequency for equal values of audio- 
frequency output voltage or power. The input signal level at the tuning 
frequency shall be the noise-limited sensitivity of the receiver ( see 4.3.3 ) 
and the audio-frequency output shall be measured selectively if the signal- 
to-noise ratio is low. 

The two-signal intermediate-frequency rejection ratio is the ratio in 
decibels of the interference signal level at the intermediate frequency, to 
the RF signal level, at the operating frequency, which fulfils the following 
conditions: 

a) The inte^erence signal frequency and level are such that the 
unwanted AF signal, due to intermodulation, is at a frequency of 

29 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

1 kHz and at a level 26 dB below that due to the standard RF input 
signal; and 

b) The wanted signal level is such that the audio-frequency signal-to- 
noise ratio, in the absence of the unwanted signal, is at least 26 dB. 

Unless otherwise stated, the wanted signal level shall be the 
standard of input signal level. 

If the receiver has a balanced input circuit, two values of each of the 
above characteristics may be measured, one with the intermediate- 
frequency signal applied in the unbalanced mode, and one with the inter- 
mediate-frequency signal applied in the balanced mode. The former is 
usually more important in practice when the receiver is connected directly 
to an antenna not shared with another receiver. 

The single-signal image rejection ratio is the ratio in decibels of the 
input signal level at the image frequency to the input signal level at the 
operating frequency for equal audio-frequency output voltage or power. 
The input signal level at. the operating frequency shall be the noise-limited 
sensitivity of the receiver ( see 4.3.3 ) and the audio-frequency output shall 
be measured selectively if the signal-to-noise ratio is low. 

The two-signal image rejection ratio is the ratio in decibels of the input 
signal level at the image frequency to the input signal level at the tuning 
frequency producing a 26 dB signal-to-interference ratio, that is, for a 
1 kHz beat-note output 26 dB below the audio-frequency output due to 
the signal at the operating frequency. 

Spurious-response frequencies are those frequencies (/g) related to the 
oscillator frequency /o and the intermediate frequency /i by the following 
equations: 

a) y» == /o ± /iM where n is an integer greater than 1. 

Note — The responses for values of n greater than 2 are often but not always 
insignificant. 

b)/.«/o 

Note — This response can only be measured by a two-signal method ( see 11.3). 
^) /« = w/o ±/i. where n is zero or an integer greater than 1. 
11.2 Single-Signal Method of Measurement 
11.2.1 Method 

a) The method given in 6.2 is followed, except that after completing 
Step 1, the input signal level is reduced to the noise-limited 
sensitivity and the AF output level noted; 

30 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

b) In Step 2, the input signal frequency is set to the appropriate 
intermediate, image or spurious-response frequency and adjusted 
slightly for maximum AF output level; 

c) The input level is then adjusted to obtain the same AF output level 
as noted in Step 1 above, and the difference in decibels between 
this level and the wanted input signal level, is recorded as the 
result; and 

d) The measurement may be repeated with other values of wanted 
signal level and other operating frequencies. 

11.2.2 Presentation of Results — The results may be presented as a 
table or graphically as the difference in decibels between unwanted and 
wanted signal levels as a function of wanted signal level or frequency, 
with a clear indication that single-signal measurements were made. 

11.3 Tvio-Signal Method of Measurement 

11.3.1 Method 

a) The method given in 7.2 is followed, except that after completing 
Step 3, the wanted input signal level is reduced to the noise-limited 
sensitivity. 

b) A band-pass filter ( such as a one-third octave filter ) passing the 
standard reference frequency ( normally 1 kHz ) is connected 
between the AF substitute load and the output meter, allowance 
being made for the insertion loss of the filter, if any, and the AF 
output level is noted. 

c) With both signals unmodulated, the frequency of second source is 
adjusted to the appropriate intermediate, image or spurious- 
response frequency. Its level is then increased and its frequency 
varied slightly to obtain maximum AF output level. The second 
source input level is then adjusted so that the wanted input signal 
level is recorded as the result. 

d) The measurement may be repeated with other values of wanted 
signal level and other operating frequencies. 

11.3.2 Presentation of Results — The results may be presented as 
in 11.2.2, with a clear indication that two-signal measurements were made. 

12. OVERALL AUDIO-FREQUENCY RESPONSE AND ACOUSTIC 
FREQUENCY CHARACTERISTICS 

12.1 Introduction — The overall audio-frequency response is the variation 
with modulation frequency of the difference in decibels between the AF 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) . 1987 

output level and that obtained with modulation at the standard reference 
frequency. 

12.2 Method of Measurement 
1Z2.1 Method 

a) The receiver is brought under standard measuring conditions and 
the reference audio-frequency output voltage is noted. The 
modulation frequency is then varied and the output voltage at each 
frequency is noted and expressed in decibels relative to the 
reference voltage. The modulation factor is kept constant at 
30 percent unless the receiver is designed to recei\c emissions 
having pre-emphasis. In this case, it is preferable to adjust the 
modulation depth at each frequency in accordance with the pre- 
emphasis characteristic; to avoid over-modulation at some frequen- 
cies, it may be necessary to use a modulation factor of less than 
30 percent at other frequencies. 

b) If overloading of the AF part of the receiver occurs, either the 
volume control attenuation shall be increased or the modulation 
factor reduced, a corresponding factor being applied to the results; 
and 

c) The measurements may be repeated with other values of RF input 
signal level and frequency. 

12.2.2 Presentation of Results — The results shall be presented graphi- 
cally, with modulation frequency plotted logarithmically as abscissa and 
the output level in decibels as ordinate. 

12.3 Acoustic Frequency Characteristics 

12.3.1 The acoustic frequency response of a receiver indicates the 
manner in which the acoustical output of the receiver depends on the 
modulation frequency. 

12.3.2 The method of measurement shall be analogous to that in 
12.2.1, except that the measurement of the electrical output is replaced 
by measurement of relative sound pressure with respect to standard 
reference frequency, produced by the loudspeaker under free field 
conditions. A suitable measuring frequency shall be chosen from those 
listed in IS : 2264-1963*. 

12.3.3 The absolute value of the sound pressure at the reference 
frequency, produced at a distance of one metre from the reference point, 



^Preferred frequencies for acoustical measurements. 

32 



IS .12193 (Part2).1987 

measured oh the reference axis, expressed in N/m^ or in dB, referred to 
the standard reference pressure ( 20 N/m^, 0000 2 dyne/cm^ ), when the 
receiver is delivering an output power of 10 dB below the maximum 
useful output power, shall be stated with the results. 

12.3.4 When this measurement is made, the receiver shall be in its 
normal listening position. 

13. PASS-BAND AND ATTENUATION SLOPE ( see 5.16 and 5.17 ) 

13.1 Introduction — The simplest method of measurement of these 
characteristics uses an RF input signal modulated with a low-frequency 
signal at a low modulation factor. Limits are set on the modulation 
frequency and modulation factor by the necessity of maintaining an 
adequate signal-to-noise ratio, especially with low RF input signal levels. 
This is made much easier by the use of an AF band-pass filter at the 
output. 

13.2 Modulation Frequency and Modulation Factor — For small portable 
receivers with restricted low-frequency ( audio ) response, a modulation 
frequency of 125 Hz is usually satisfactory. For higher-quality receivers, 
increased accuracy and reduced distortion of the modulation due to the 
effect of the attenuation slope can be achieved by the use of a lower 
frequency, such as 22*4 Hz, chosen to avoid possible interference from 
the power supply frequency and its harmonics. 

A modulation depth of 10 percent is usually satisfactory, since it 
further reduces the effect of the attenuation slope in causing distortion 
of modulation. 

13.3 Method of Measurement 

13.3.1 Method 

a) The receiver is brought under standard measuring conditions and 
then the modulation frequency is changed to the appropriate low 
frequency ( see 13.2 ) and the modulation factor to 10 percent. 

b) An AF band-pass filter (such as one-third octave filter) is introduced 
between the AF substitute load and the AF voltmeter, allowance 
being made for the insertion loss (if any) of the filter, and the AF 
output level noted ( see Note ). 

c) The signal carrier frequency is then varied in known steps in each 
direction from the operating frequency, and the AF output level 
noted at each step. The difference in dB between this level and 
that obtained in 13.3.1 (b) is recorded as the result. If possible, the 

33 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) . 1987 

signal frequencies at which the level difference is 6 dB shall be 
determined. 

d) The measurements may be repeated with other RF input signal 
levels and frequencies. 

Note — It is useful to observe the waveform of the modulation, and the 
effect of noise or possible interference, by means of an oscilloscope connected 
at the filter input. 

13.3.2 Presentation of Results — The results may be presented graphi- 
cally, with level difference in dB expressed as a function of frequency 
difference, using linear scales. From this graph, the pass-band and 
attenuation slopes can be determined and tabulated. 

14. SELECTIVITY CONTROLS 

14.1 The action of selectivity controls may be determined by performing 
appropriate measurements with the selectivity control in various stated 
positions. Measurement of the pass-band is usually most appropriate. 

15. INPUT BLOCKING AND CROSS-MODULATION 

15.1 Geoeral — The purpose of this test is to determine whether the 
selectivity curve is, in fact, achieved when a strong interfering signal 
is present. Two cases are generally considered, namely: 

a) That of an unmodulated signal in the adjacent channel (or channels ) 
from the wanted signal frequency which may overload a stage in 
the early part of a receiver but which is prevented by the selectivity 
of the later stages from reaching the detector at an appropriate 
level. The effect of such overloading is to modify ( usually to 
reduce ) the level of the output due to the wanted signal. This 
effect is known as 'blocking', 

b) That of an unwanted modulated signal which, due to overloading 
of a stage in the receiver, will cause the appearance of an inter- 
fering signal at the output at the modulation frequency of the 
unwanted signal. This effect is known as 'crosS'modulation\ 

15.1.1 In both the cases mentioned in 15.1, the measurement is by the 
two-signal generator method. In both the cases, the protection of the 
receiver against the unwanted signal is measured by means of the unwant- 
ed signal level which produces a specified interference in the presence 
of a specified desired signal, namely: 

a) a reduction of 3 dB in the desired signal at the output in the case 
of blocking, and 

b) appearance of an interference signal in the output level which is 
30 dB below the desired signal in case of cross-modulation. 

34 



18:12193 (Part 2)- 1987 

15.2 Methods of Measurement 

15.2.1 Two-signal generators shall be connected to the receiver. 
The desired signal shall be modulated 30 percent at the standard 
modulation frequency and tuned to a standard frequency; the frequency, 
at which the measurement is usually made, is 1 kHz; measurements at 
other frequencies being desirable if the receiver sensitivity varies greatly 
with frequency. The level is adjusted to a value at which measurements 
are to be taken. With the unwanted signal maintained at zero, the 
volume control is adjusted so as to obtain at the output a power at the 
highest suitable value at which no overloading of any part of the receiver 
occurs. 

15.2.2 The unwanted signal is then applied without modulation and its 
level is adjusted so as to produce a decrease of 3 dB in the output signal. 
The level thus obtained is a measure of the protection of the receiver 
against blocking for the signal specified. 

15.2.3 The modulation of the desired signal is then removed. The 
unwanted signal is modulated 30 percent at the standard modulation 
frequency and its level adjusted so as to obtain an output signal 30 dB 
below the reference power. When this is being done, the modulation of 
the unwanted signal is removed, and that of the desired signal reapplies; 
if the decrease in output due to blocking is appreciable, the volume 
control of the receiver is again adjusted so as to restore the output power 
to the reference level. The modulation of the desired signal is then 
removed and that of the unwanted signal reapplied, and the measurement 
repeated by means of successive approximations until there occurs 
simultaneously a signal equal to the reference power and an interfering 
signal 30 dB lower. The level of this unwanted signal is a measure of the 
protection of the receiver against cross -modulation for the desired signal 
specified. 

15.2.4 The entire measurement of blocking and cross-modulation is rep- 
eated for different frequencies of the unwanted signal differing in frequ- 
ency from the wanted signal by ± 10, i20, ±100 kHz, depend- 
ing upon the degree of protection achievable. 

15.2.5 If the receiver is provided with manual or variable selectivity 
control, measurements shall be conducted both at the maximum and mini- 
mum positions and also at the minimum value suitable for reception of 
broadcast signals. 

15.3 Graphical Representation — • Taking the level of the desired signal 
as a parameter, the results of the measurements of blocking and cross- 
modulation are plotted as two curves, which can be drawn on the same 
graph by plotting the frequency differences expressed in kHz as abscissa 

35 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

on a linear scale marked with positive and negative signs and the ratio 
of the levels of unwanted signal and the wanted signal respectively, 
expressed in dB, as ordinate on a linear scale. An example is shown in 
Fig. 4. 



z 
o 



z 

o 
o 



lUU ■ 




i 1 ! 1 i 








"" 












"" 




1 


r 


^" 






r- 


r 






on - 




1 t • 1 

; ! . 1 




















































1 ' ! 












































nn - 


r- 


^ 


r 

L ( ' 




































> 


^ 









^ 


<l 




— 


























/ 


^ 


70 - 






i 


>N 












































k 




























/ 
















en - 
















s 
























/ 
















ou 


















s. 




















/ 
















(tA -- 


















\ 


















/ 






















3U 




— 


- 


- 


^ 








J 


V 




- 










/ 






















Lt\ — 


A 




\ 


i 


















^ 


» 


















1 


S\i 








1 






/ 


S 


^N. 


^ 


.X 


^ 








lA _ 














j 




N 


V 










1 




/- 








































c< 


\ 










/ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


-* 






«/l ~ 


















.1 






1 / 
















1 ! 










\l 






/ 




^ 


^ 


















\t\ - 


♦ II 
f 1 1 
















— -^ 


i 






,^ 


^ 






















ly 


: 1 1 










- 


^ 


^ 


: 


_ 










^ 


V 


£ 


— 
















. 


1 1 i 








L. 










_ 












^ 





- k 



01 

■o 



u 
o 



7S -SO -CO -20 20 AO 60 ^5 

FReOUENCY DEVIATION FROM WANTED SIGNALOCHz ) 

Two-signal selectivity curve and blocking curve (O 
Input Level for a 86 dB (V) 

Input Level for h 46 dB (V) 

Input Level for c and c' 26 dB (V) at an operating frequency of 1 MHz 

Fig. 4 Two-Signal Selectivity Curve and Blocking Curve at an 
Operating Frequency of 1 MHz 

SECTION 4 INTERFERENCE DUE TO INTERNAL SOURCES 

16. SINGLE-SIGNAL BEAT-NOTES 

16.1 Introduction -— Unwanted signals may be generated by several 
processes in the receiver. Such signals include harmonics of the inter- 
mediate frequency or of any internal oscillators, together with frequencies 
generated by the action of non-linearities in the receiver on these 
frequencies and wanted and unwanted signals. Receivers using digital 
techniques may generate a clock frequency ^ and or sub-multiples of /o 
and of osdllator frequency. 



36 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

The relative importance of these unwanted signals depends on the 
design and application of the receiver, including the particular frequencies 
of the emissions receivable at the actual location of the receiver when in 
use. However, some of these unwanted signals are of general importance 
as follows: 

a) Harmonics of the intermediate frequency : nf\ where n is a positive 
integer and fi is the intermediate frequency. These give rise to AF 
beat-notes ( whistles ) when U = nju where j\\ is the operating 
frequency. 

b) Intcrmodulation products of harmonics of the wanted signal and 
oscillator frequencies : w/o — nfa. where m and n arc positive 
integers and Jo is the oscillator frequency. These ^\\e rise to AF 
beat-notes ( whistles ) when 

/d = /i ( m + 1 ) / ( /T - m ) 

As a consequence of both of these processes, beat-notes may occur 
at operating frequencies fa ^ - p.fu where, for values of m and n up 
to 8, p may have the following values: 

1/6, 1/5, 1/4, 2/7, 1/3. 2/5. 1/2, 3/5, 2/3, 3/4, 
4/5, 5/4. 4/3, 3/2, 5/3, 2, 5/2, 3, 7/2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8. 

Of these, /? = 2 and /; =3 arc the most important for MF band 
receivers of conventional design. 

c) Signals related in frequency to local clock or oscillator frequencies: 
mf^jn, where m and n are positive integers and /c is a clock 
frequency. These give rise to AF beat-notes when f^ ^ J\ mfn — 
mfo/n, where fo is a local note when fa -- f mj( n — m ). 

All pairs of m and n which can give beat-notes, in any frequency 
band for which the receiver is designed, should be checked. 

The strength of a beat-note, for a specified RF input signal 
level, may be expressed as the difference in AF output level due to 
the beat-note caused by an unmodulated signal ( the input signal 
frequency being adjusted so that the beat-note frequency is equal 
to the standard reference frequency ); to be level which would be 
produced by a signal at the same frequency modulated 100 percent 
at the standard reference frequency ( that is, f 10-5 dB relative to 
that produced by a 30 percent modulated signal ). Alternatively, 
the strength may be expressed as the percentage modulation factor 
producing the same output level as the beat-note. 

Note •— By relating the strength of the beat-note to the output produced hy a 
100 percent modulated signal, the value expressed as a level difference Is directly 
related to that expressed as percentage modulation factor. 

37 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) . 1987 
16.2 Method of Measurement 

16.2.1 Method 

a) The receiver is brought under standard measuring conditions and 
the input signal frequency changed to that at which a beat-note 
may occur. 

b) The input signal frequency is adjusted to produce maximum AF 
output level ( if any, beat-note is present ). 

c) The receiver tuning is adjusted to reduce the beat-note frequency to 
zero and the input signal frequency temporarily readjusted to 
determine the operating frequency which is recorded. 

Note — A second signal source may be used for this purpose. It is helpful 
to listen to the output when setting the beat-note frequency to zero. 

d) The input signal frequency is returned to its previous value, 30 per- 
cent modulation is applied at the standard reference frequency and 
the AF output level noted. It may be desirable to adjust the volume 
control ( if any ) if the AF output level is low. An AF band-pass 
filter may also be included, if required. 

c) The modulation is then reduced to zero and the signal frequency 
adjusted slightly so that the beat-note frequency is equal to the 
standard reference frequency, choosing the stronger response, if 
there are more than one. The AF output level is then recorded. 

f) The difference between this level and that obtained in ( d ) is 
recorded as the result. Alternatively, the result may be expressed 
as percentage modulation factor: 

m = antilog [ ( ^5 - I4 — 10-5 )/20 ] x 100 percent 
where 

L4 = AF output level obtained ia (d), and 
£5 = AF output level obtained in (e). 

g) The measurements are repeated at other appropriate signal 
frequencies. 

16.2.2 Presentation of Results — The results may be presented as a 
table or a spectrum diagram, with level difference or modulation factor 
as ordinate and frequency as abscissa. 

The measurements may be repeated with other values of input signal 
level at a given frequency, and the results presented graphically with 
level difference or modulation factor as ordinate and input signal level as 
abscissa. 

38 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

17. ACOUSTIC EFFECTS 

17.1 Acoustic feedback may occur between the loudspeaker and com- 
ponents in the RF part of the receiver. For the measurement of these 
effects, the method given in 16 of IS : 12193 ( Part 1 )* shall be 
employed, except that an unmodulated RF input signal at the operating 
frequency is applied in addition, and measurements are repeated for 
appropriate values of the level and frequency of this signal, especially 
high values, which are likely to produce greater effects. 

The conditions under which each result was obtained shall be stated 
with the results. 

Note — Care is necessary to avoid acoustic feedback to the RF signal source. 

18. UNWANTED OSCILLATIONS 

18.1 The receiver shall be operated under various stated conditions 
chosen as likely to produce unwanted self-oscillation, such as extreme 
settings of the tuning, volume and tone controls, with and without a 
signal, with and without an antenna ( unless the antenna is an integral 
part of the receiver or not intended to be detached by the user ), with 
and without a signal earth connection ( if provided ), ( safety earth 
connection shall not be removed ), and with and without connections to 
external equipment. Any anomalous output, such as whistles, noise or 
distortion may indicate oscillation, which should be further investigated. 

19. INTERFERENCE AT THE POWER SUPPLY FREQUENCY AND 
ITS HARMONICS ( HUM ) 

19.1 Introduction — The radio-frequency stages, particularly mixer stages, 
of a receiver may give rise to hum due to amplitude or frequency 
modulation of the signal by low ( audio ) frequency voltages from the 
supply mains or elsewhere, or electric or magnetic fields. Automatic 
frequency control circuits, in particular, can cause hum due to frequency- 
modulation of the local oscillator. 

Measurements shall be made at rated supply voltage and at the 
appropriate over- and under- voltages [ see 13.4 and Table 2 of IS : 
12193 ( Part I )*]. 

19.2 Method of Measurement 
19.2.1 Method 

a) The receiver is brought under standard conditions and then the 
modulation frequency is changed to 80 Hz so that comparison of 



' *Mcthods of measurement for radio receivers for various classes of emission: 
Part 1 General considerations and methods of measurements {JJndt? preparation), 

39 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

the signal and hum is less influenced by the frequency response of 
the audio-frequency stages. 

b) The modulation is then removed and the hum output is measured 
as separate spectral components with a wave analyzer or as total 
hum output with a true rms meter. 

c) The measurements shall be repeated at the appropriate over- and 
under-voltages. 

d) The measurements may be repeated at other input signal levels 
and with automatic frequency control in operation. 

Note — Care shall be taken that the input signal is sufficiently free from hum 
modulation. For example, a check may be made with cither the signal source, the 
receiver or both supplied from batteries. 

19.2.2 Presentation of Results — The results may be tabulated or 
presented as a spectrum diagram. 

SECTION 5 DISTORTION 

20. INTRODUCTION 

20.1 Distortion present in the AF output of a receiver may be expressed 
in several ways. It is usually sufficient to determine in detail the distortion 
characteristics of the AFpart of the receiver with an AF input signal, and 
to confine overall measurements to those of harmonic distortion. A valid 
investigation of demodulator distortion ( which may be higher than that 
of the AF part of the receiver ) requires the use of high modulation 
frequencies and modulation factors, but the maximum modulation 
frequency of the emissions for which the receiver is designed shall not be 
exceeded. Measurements at low modulation frequencies are also of 
importance, since distortion may arise through AGC action. Care is 
required that distortion in the modulator of the signal source is low 
enough not to affect the results. A level difference of 10 dB between 
each modulator distortion component and that due to the receiver is 
sufficient. 

21. OVERALL HARMONIC DISTORTION, DISTORTION-LIMITED 
AF OUTPUT AND DISTORTION-LIMITED INPUT LEVEL 

21.1 Method of Measurement 

21.1.1 Method 

a) The receiver is brought under standard measuring conditions and 
the harmonic content of the AF output measured. 

40 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

b) The measurement may be repeated under the following conditions: 

J ) with the volume control ( if any ) adjusted so that rated total 
harmonic distortion is produced, the distortion-limited AF output 
level, voltage and/or power are noted. If there is no volume 
control, the modulation depth is increased until rated total 
harmonic distortion is produced; 

2) with the volume control ( if any ) in the position for standard 
measuring conditions, and with an input signal modulation 
factor of 80 percent, the overall harmonic distortion with 80 
percent modulation may be measured; 

3) with the volume-control ( if any ) in the position for standard 
measuring conditions, and with the input signal modulated 30 
percent, the input signal level is increased until rated total 
harmonic distortion is produced. This input signal level is the 
distortion-limited input level for a specified value of modulation 
factor and at rated total harmonic distortion; and 

4) with other specified values of modulation factor and frequency, 
and/or RF input signal level. 

Note — Harmonic distortion measurements are valid only for modulation 
frequencies for which the significant harmonics lie withm the pass-band of the AF 
part of the receiver, including the demodulator. The highest frequency, for which 
this is true, may be deduced approximately for the overall AF response measured 
with a high level of RF input signal, and the order of the highest significant 
harmonic measured at lower modulation frequencies. 

With low values of RF input signal level, the noise output of the receiver 
will be comparable with or greater than that due to the harmonics of the 
modulation frequency. If the distortion is measured with a distortion 
factor meter, the results include the effect of noise, and arc termed 
SINAD ( signal-to-noise and distortion ) measurements and may be 
specified instead of signal-to-noisc ratios. For the measurement of distor- 
tion alone, selective methods using a wave-analyzer or spectrum analyzer 
may be employed, the rms sum of the amplitudes of the individual 
harmonics giving the total harmonic content of the AF output signal. 

21.1.2 Presentation of Results — The results may be tabulated or, in the 
case of 21.1.1(b)(4), presented graphically ( sec Fig. I ). 

22. DISTORTION DUE TO INACCURACY OF TUNING 

22.1 Method of Measurement 

a) The method described in 21.1 is employed, measurements being 
made at several input signal frequencies close to the operating 

41 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

frequency of the receiver, within the limits of the pass-band 
( see 5.16 ). 

b) The results may be presented graphically, with distortion expressed 
as a function of the difference between the input signal frequency 
and the operating frequency. 

SECTION 6 MISCELLANEOUS 

23. TUNING AND AUTOMATIC FREQUENCY-CONTROL 
CHARACTERISTICS 

23.1 Introduction — The tuning characteristic of a receiver shows the 
relation between the audio-frequency output voltage and the signal 
frequency when the signal frequency is varied each side of the operating 
frequency. 

The tuning characteristic is modified by the action of automatic frequency 
control. The characteristic measured with automatic frequency control in 
operation shows the pull-in and hold-in ranges. 

23.2 Method of Measurement 
23.2.1 Method 

a) The receiver is brought under standard measuring conditions. 

b) The input signal frequency is varied in steps either side of the 
original frequency and the AF output level is measured at each step 
and recorded as the result. 

c) The measurement may be repeated at other input signal levels. 

d) If automatic frequency control is fitted, the measurements shall be 
repeated with it in operation. The input signal frequency is first 
varied stepwise away from the original frequency until a sudden 
drop in audio frequency output occurs, and then varied stepwise 
towards and beyond the original frequency until the output 
suddenly drops again. The input signal is then varied back towards 
the original frequency again. From these measurements, the hold-in 
and pull-in ranges of the automatic frequency control may be 
determined. 

e) Alternatively, instead of monitoring the audio output level, the local 
oscillator frequency may be measured with a frequency counter at 
each input signal frequency. 

Note •— Some types of automatic frequency control do not function satis- 
factorily if the pull-in range is widet because the receiver is detuned from a weak 

42 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 1987 

signal in the presence of a strong signal on a nearby frequency. Other types of 
automatic frequency control can have a very wide hold-in range associated with 
a narrow pull-in range and these arc affected less by strong signals. Due to the 
wide variety of effects that may occur, it is difficult to standardize a method of 
measurement; a method as given in 9 is suitable. The change of audio-frequency 
output when the unwanted carrier is applied is compared with that occurring, due 
to blocking, with the AFC inoperative, and any greater change with AFC operative 
is a measure of the interference of the unwanted carrier with the AFC action. 

23.2.2 Presentation of Results — The results may be presented graphi- 
cally with the AF output level plotted in decibels on a linear scale, and 
the difference between the input signal frequency and the operating 
frequency (the detuning ) plotted linearly as abscissa, or as local oscillator 
frequency plotted linearly as ordinate and the difference in frequency 
plotted linearly as abscissa. 

24. MAXIMUM OUTPUT POWER 

24.1 The maximum output power is the total electrical output power a 
receiver is capable of delivering under certain conditions, irrespective of 
the distortion present. 

24.2 For this measurement, the receiver shall be tuned to a signal of 
5 mV or -46 dB ( V ) at 1 000 kHz, modulated 30 percent with standard 
modulation frequency, the signal being applied as specified. The output 
of the receiver shall be measured across the load with the volume control 
adjusted to obtain maximum output power. 

25. MAXIMUM USEFUL OUTPUT POWER 

25.1 The maximum useful output power of a receiver is the lowest value 
of output power at which the overall harmonic distortion amounts to 
10 percent. 

25.2 The method of measurement shall be the same as under 21.1 and 
shall be repeated for that position of the volume control which gives an 
overall harmonic distortion of 10 percent. The corresponding output 
power shall be measured and noted as the maximum useful output power. 

25.3 The measurement shall be repeated at the over-voltages and under- 
voltages specified. 



43 



IS : 12193 ( Part 2 ) - 19VT 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Panel for Radio Receivers, LTDC 20 : P2 



Convener 
Shri a. S. Guin 



Representing 
All India Radio, New Delhi 



Members 
Shri B. B. Bhatia 

Shri J. Gupta 
Shri Jagjit Singh 

Shri H. K. Jain 

Dr P. K. Rangole ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. Kohli 



Wireless Planning & Coordination ( WPC ), 

New Delhi 
Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Punc 
Federation of Associations of Small Industries 

of India, New Delhi 
Central Electronics Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ). Pilani 



Electronics Regional Test Laboratory ( North ), 

New Delhi 
Shri B. C. Ashok Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. Bhaskara Rama Murthy Information & Public Relations Department, 

Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 
Representative National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New 

Delhi 
Representative Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Representative Rural Broadcasting, Government of Maharashtra , 

Bombay 
Representative Radio» Electronics & Television Manufacturers* 

Association, Bombay 
Shri Kersi J. Shastri National Radio Electronics Co Ltd, Bombay 



44 



BOBEAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

HeadQuarterr* 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
Telaphones : 3 31 01 31, 3 31 13 75 Tolegraa.s : Wlanaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 



Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 
NEW DELHI 110002 

1/14 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, 
Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 
SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, 
CHANDIGARH 160036 
C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 



^Eastern 

Northern 

Southern 



Telephone 
/33 10 131 
133 11 375 

36 24 99 



r4i 

<41 
L41 



r2 18 43 
\3 16 41 

24 42 

25 19 
29 16 

tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 Ml DC, MaroL Andhcri ( East ), 6 32 92 96 

BOMBAY 400093 
Branch Offices: 
'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, /2 63 48 

AHMADABAD 380001 \2 63 49 

'F' Block, Unity BIdg, Narasimharaja Square, 22 48 05 

BANGALORE 560002 
Qangotri Complex, 5th Floor Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar^ 6 67 16 

BHOPAL 462003 
Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road. BHUBANESHWAR 751002 6 36 27 

63/5, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 

6th Byelane. GUWAH ATI 781 003 "~ 

5-8-56C, L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampolly rt'7;ion Road ). 23 10 83 

HYDERABAD 500001 
R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 



117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 



{ 



6 34 71 

6 98 32 

68 76 

82 92 

6 23 OS 

7 66 37 



Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 
Hantex BIdg ( 2nd Floor }, RIy Station Roa^. 

TRIVANDRUM 696001 
taapBCtlon Offfcaa { With Sale Point } i 621 04, 621 1 7 

Puahpanjali, 205-A West High Court Road, 2 61 71 

Bharampeth Extension, NAG PUR 440010 " 

Institution of Engineers ( India } Building, 1332 Shivail Nagar, 6 24 38 
PUNE 411006 



*SalM Offica In Calcutta la at 5 Chowrlnghae Approach P. 0. Princap 27 08 00 
Straat, Calcutta 700072 

fSalaa Offica in Bombay la at Novelty Chamb^a, Qrant noad, 89 88 28 
Bombay 400007 



PirtotMt St Kapoor Art Praw, Ham D»Uii, India. 



