INATA Ah IS 7247 (Part 5) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


HN score enr a — dfe afar 
ATT 5 AAs ATITARATT 
(TETI TART ) 


Fumigation of Agricultural Produce 


— Code of Practice 


Part 5 General Requirements 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 65.040.20 
© BIS 2023 
AA HAR Sat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HA, 9 eT TE AH AM, ag feet - 110002 
———— MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2023 Price Group 6 


Foodgrains, Allied Products and Other Agricultural Produce, FAD 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Foodgrains, Allied Products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Food and Agriculture Division Council 


The use of fumigants for the control of pests of agricultural importance is on increase in the country. Fumigants, 
being poisonous chemicals result in toxic manifestations to operators exposed to them during or after fumigation 
process, 1f handled carelessly. The fumigation operation can be made safer involving good practices leading to 
safe and economical use of fumigants and control of the infesting organisms. 


This standard (Part 5) is one of the series of Indian Standards on Code of practice for fumigation of agricultural 
produce. The other parts published in this series are: 


Part 1 Methyl bromide 


Part 2 Ethylene Dibromide [Withdrawn, as the fumigant has been banned vide S.O. 682 (E) dated 
17th July 2001] 


Part 3 Aluminium phosphide (Phosphine) 
Part 4 Ethylene dichloride and carbon tetrachloride mixture 


These parts (Parts 1 to 4), cover the selection, safety and suitable application techniques of individual fumigants. 


This standard (Part 5) was published in 1985. This standard recommends the general principles for the use of 
gases and vapours for the fumigation of buildings, ships’ holds, shipping containers, silos. 


Manual for Fumigation Operators, Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage has been published by 
Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage and may be suitably refereed for additional guidance. 
Also, there may be State specific requirements, which may be referred. 


This standard is being revised to incorporate latest technological developments in the field of fumigation of 
agricultural products and the major changes include: 


a) Fumigation process has been modified; 

b) Step of gas monitoring has been included; 

c) Guideline for waste disposal has been included in detail; and 

d) Record pertaining to fumigation details has been updated as per other modifications. 


The composition of the committee responsible for formulation of the standard is listed in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, 
is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (second revision)’. 


IS 7247 (Part 5) : 2023 


Indian Standard 
FUMIGATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE — CODE OF 
PRACTICE 


PART 5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This standard (Part 5) lays down the general 
procedures and precautions to be adopted when 
chemical fumigation for the eradication of storage 
pests is being carried out. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. AII 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 

IS 1260 (Part 1) Pictorial marking for 

: 1973 handling and labelling of 
goods: Part 1 Dangerous 
goods 

IS 3521 (Part 1) Personal fall arrest systems 

: 2021 specification: Part 1 Full 
body harness (fourth 
revision) 


IS 6151 (Part 1) Storage management code: 
: 2020 Part 1 Terminology (first 
revision) 


IS 14166: 1994 Respiratory protective 
devices full — Face 
masks — Specification 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions in addition to those given in 
IS 6151 (Part 1) shall apply. 


3.1 Fumigant — A chemical which at ambient 
temperature and pressure can exist in a gaseous 
state in sufficient concentration and penetrability 


and for sufficient time to be lethal to storage pests. 


3.2 Fumigation — The process of employment 
of fumigants for disinfestation. 


3.3 Fumigation Enclosure — Any space which has 
been or is intended to be made gas tight to contain 
the fumigant. 


3.4 Risk Area — The area surrounding the 
fumigation enclosure into which there is any reason 
to suspect that the fumigant may escape in 
concentrations hazardous to human beings and 
animals. 


3.5 Authorized Fumigator — That person who is 
licensed to carry out fumigation, or a trained and 
experienced person who is in charge of the 
fumigation. 


NOTE — For the purpose of this standard, the term 
fumigator is taken to mean an authorized fumigator, as 


defined above. 
4 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Safety Equipment 
4.1.1 Full Face Canister Type Respirator 


The respirator most commonly used is the full face 
canister respirator used as a combination of 
respirator face piece and correct canister, in 
accordance to IS 14166. This apparatus is the most 
important piece of equipment used for the protection 
of persons working with fumigants It is advisable 
that each operator be supplied with his own 
respirator and that the fumigator in charge be 
responsible for its care and maintenance. 


4.1.1.1 Each time a full face canister respirator is 
donned; the following checks should be carried out: 


a) That the correct canister is being used; 


b) That the face piece is the correct fit, by 
closing the inlet to the canister with the 
palm of the hand and inhaling deeply; the 


IS 7247 (Part 5) : 2023 


c) vacuum so created should cause the face 
piece to adhere to the face for at least 15 
seconds; 

d) That the shelf life of the canister has not 
expired (see 7.2); and 

e) By reference to the canister log, that the 


recommended usage time has not been 
exceeded (see 7.2). 


NOTE — In no circumstances should a full face canister 
respirator be used when there is a possibility of exposure to 
toxic levels of fumigation concentrations or to an 
atmosphere deficient in oxygen. In such cases self- 
contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) should be used. 


4.1.2 Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus 


For emergency use where an operator, must enter 
area contaminated with toxic levels of a fumigant, a 
self-contained breathing unit or apparatus 
complying with IS 14166 shall be worn. 


4.1.3 Protective Clothing 


All operators when releasing fumigant shall wear 
protective clothing. Impervious gloves and 
impervious footwear should, where applicable, be 
worn. 


NOTE — Impervious is taken here to mean impermeable to 
the relevant fumigant gas., under the conditions of use. Only 
products known by the fumigator to comply with this 
requirement should be used. 


4.1.4 Safety Harness and Ropes 


When any fumigator is required to enter a basement 
or the hold of a ship or other such area for the 
purpose of applying fumigant or for rescue purposes, 
he/she shall wear a safety harness to which is 
attached a rope by which he/she can be hauled up. 
All safety harness and lifelines shall comply with IS 
3521 (Part 1). 


4.1.5 Detection and Monitoring Equipment 


The correct gas leak detection and monitoring 
equipment for the fumigant being used shall be 
available on every fumigation and shall be kept in 
efficient working order, for example, gas detector 
tubes, calibrated electronic monitors and infrared 
gas analyser. 


4.1.6 Torch 


An efficient torch shall be available on all 
fumigations, certified by a recognized testing 
authority as safe for use in an atmosphere made 
flammable by the fumigant or any other material 
such as dust. 


4.1.7 Medical Kit 


A kit for the treatment of fumigant poisoning shall 
be available at each fumigation done. 


NOTE — Advice on this kit may be obtained from the 
appropriate State department of health or department 
responsible for industrial regulations. 


4.2 First Aid Instructions 
4.2.1 Entering Contaminated Area 


Adequate protective equipment shall be used when 
a contaminated area is to be entered for rescue 


purpose. 
4.2.2 Evacuation of Succumbed Person 


A succumbed person shall be removed to fresh air, 
laid down in a restful position and kept warm. 


4.2.3 First Aid Treatment 


When an accident occurs, first aid treatment shall be 
started at once. If possible, one person should begin 
treatment while another calls a doctor and 
ambulance giving details of fumigant and 
circumstances of exposure. 


4.2.4 Measures to be Taken While Awaiting Arrival 
of Medical Aid 


Where practicable, the following measures shall be 
carried out while awaiting the arrival of medical aid: 


a) Apply artificial resuscitation and external 
cardiac massage, if required; 
b) Loosen all tight clothing; 
c) Remove contaminated clothing including 
wrist watch and spectacles; 
d) Thoroughly wash contaminated skin with 
clean water; and 
e) Eye contamination: 
i) Hold eyelids open and wash eyes 
immediately with a gentle flow of 
water; 


ii) Continue washing until doctor arrives; 
and 


iii) Do not use any chemicals, as they may 
increase the injury. 


5 ACTION BEFORE FUMIGATION 


5.1 Notification of Authorities and Persons 
Concerned 


5.1.1 Fumigation of a Building or Enclosed Space 


A fumigator intending to fumigate a building or 
other enclosed space shall intimate to the occupant 
about the intention of fumigation. 


5.1.2 Fumigation of a Vessel 


The fumigator in-charge, when intending to 
fumigate a vessel, shall deliver a notice in writing 
prior to the fumigation about the intention of 
fumigation. 


5.2 Fumigation Warning Signs 


The fumigator in-charge for fumigation of any 
building, vessel or enclosed space should, before the 
application of the fumigant, affix to each door and 
other means of access to the fumigation enclosure as 
prescribed in Fig. 1 with a white background. 
Information on the notice should be written in 
capital letters not less than 10 cm high, in contrasting 
colour to the background. 


5.3 Precautions and Tests of Equipment 


No person shall commence a fumigation until the 
following conditions apply: 


a) The fumigator has by personal inspection 
ascertained that all portions of the 
fumigation enclosure and risk area have 
been vacated; 


b) All fires and naked lights within the 
fumigation enclosure have been 
extinguished. For flammable fumigants 
there should be no smoking or carrying of 
matches and cigarette lighters in the risk 
area; 


c) All electric points have been thoroughly 
checked ascertaining that there is no spark 
while operating the points/buttons. All 
loose connections have been properly 
repaired; 


d) Fans as required are in position and tested 
for efficiency. For flammable fumigants, it 


e) 


g) 


h) 


j 


k) 


IS 7247 (Part 5) : 2023 


is essential that fans and their switches, if 
any, used within the fumigation enclosure 
comply with the requirements of hazardous 
locations; 


All cracks, crevices or openings in or 
between walls and ceilings or roof and 
floors and all fireplaces in the building, 
vessel, or other enclosed space about to be 
fumigated have been sealed to prevent the 
escape of fumigant from the fumigation 
enclosure; 


All liquids, foods and other items that are 
not required to be included in the 
fumigation and might be affected by the 
fumigant are separated from the fumigation 
enclosure. Some fumigants are corrosive to 
some metals. For example, phosphine 
released from Aluminium phosphide reacts 
with copper and its alloys and hence 
electrical items including motors must be 
protected or removed during treatment; 


In case of open area, fumigation shall be 
carried out either early morning or when 
there is no wind blowing, that is, in calm 
atmosphere. Also, avoid fumigation of 
outdoor stacks with aluminium phosphide 
(phosphine) during raining; 


Fumigator has attached a card to his shirt 
indicating his name, full address and 
telephone number, required in case of 
emergency; 


The nearest operable telephone has been 
located and number noted; and 


Fumigator has consulted relevant Indian 
Standards on specific fumigants as per 
various parts of IS 7247. 


DANGER KEEP OUT 


TELEPHONE No. ............... 


OPERATOR-IN- CHARGE (If Any) 


, A 
TOXIC GAS // 


FIG. 1 FUMIGATION WARNING NOTICE 


IS 7247 (Part 5) : 2023 


6 FUMIGATION PROCEDURE 
6.1 Fumigation Process 


The efficacy of all fumigants is dependent upon a 
suitable concentration and duration of fumigation. 
In the first instance prepare a  Fumigation 
Management Plan of the sequence of operations, and 
about intimation/permission of the appropriate 
authority to undertake the work and manpower as 
well as material requirements. Work out in detail the 
number of persons to be involved, 
suitability/preparation of the fumigation enclosure 
for the treatment, quantity of fumigant required, 
fumigation accessories including sealing materials, 
safety devices such as hand gloves, respirators, 
working condition of the gas leak checkers and 
monitors and display of warning placards. The Plan 
must also take into account post-treatment 
operations such as aeration, waste disposal and 
issuance of clearance certificate. Read the 
applicator’s instructions, label and SDS (safety data 
sheet) of the fumigant before application and refer 
appropriate Government guidelines. Under no 
circumstance shall be fumigant dosage/application 
rate be grossly different from the recommended 
concentration which is based upon scientific 
experiment. 


6.2 Minimum Number of People to Conduct a 
Fumigation 


No matter how small the dosage or how restricted 
the extent of the fumigation, at least two persons 
shall always he present during the introduction and 
removal of the fumigant. One of these should he 
designated the fumigator and he should ensure that 
the other fumigation staff receives instructions on 
the use of protective equipment and first aid 
measures specific to the fumigation being 
conducted. 


6.3 Ventilation 


Provision for ventilation should be made during the 
preparation of structures for fumigation. Where 
possible, two openings to facilitate flow-through 
ventilation should be provided with temporary seals 
that can be removed from the outside of the 
fumigation enclosure at the completion of 
fumigation. Doors, windows or hatches selected for 
this purpose should be arranged so that they may be 
opened from the outside of the fumigation enclosure. 
Where fans are used, these should comply with the 
requirements of 5.3 (d). Generally, fans should be 
operated intermittently to allow for desorption of 
fumigant from commodities. Where fans are run 


continuously, no reduction in the nominal 
ventilation period should be made. 


6.4 Introduction of Fumigant 


Fumigants should be introduced to the fumigation 
enclosure in accordance with specific fumigation 
instructions and safety measures, taking care to 
ensure that all application equipment is gas tight and 
that the correct dosage is applied. 


6.4.1 The fumigant should be introduced from 
outside the fumigation enclosure wherever possible. 


6.4.2 Whenever a safety harness is required to be 
worn (see 4.1.4), at least one other member of the 
fumigation staff shall remain in the immediate 
vicinity and in clear sight of the operator. Adequate 
provision shall be made to haul out the operator in 
an emergency. 


6.4.3 The fumigant shall not be applied in a manner 
as to be absorbed in liquid form by goods or 
structures. 


6.4.4 During the liberation of the fumigant and until 
the fumigation enclosure and risk area are free from 
danger, any member of the fumigation staff who is 
in or who enters any part of such areas shall wear a 
suitable respirator or other approved breathing 
apparatus. He should wear protective clothing also. 


6.5 Watchman 


Where the fumigation enclosure and risk area cannot 
be satisfactorily secured by locking, a watchman 
shall be on duty. It is recommended that, even on 
locked premises, a watchman should be present 
during the exposure period. 


6.6 Detection of Leaks 


During and after completion of introduction of the 
fumigant, the fumigator, wearing a respirator, shall 
inspect visually, and with appropriate detection 
apparatus, for leaks in equipment and in the 
fumigation enclosure. The following action should 
be taken if leaks are detected: 


a) Seal and re-test any leaks located, to ensure 
that the fumigation enclosure is gas tight; 
and 

b) Inthe event of a massive accidental release 
of fumigant, evacuate the risk area 
immediately. 


6.7 Gas Monitoring 


Gas concentrations should be measured at different 
levels inside the fumigation enclosure, at regular 


intervals, to ensure even distribution of the 
fumigant, retention of effective gas concentration 
throughout the exposure period and thereby, to 
predict the success of the treatment before 
termination of fumigation. 


6.8 Removal of Fumigant 


At the end of the required fumigation period, the 
fumigant should be removed by controlled release 
into the atmosphere, ensuring that the following 
conditions are complied with: 


a) That the risk area is free from all 
unauthorized persons; 

That the fumigation team is properly 
equipped for fumigation; and 

That ventilation of the fumigation enclosure 
is done by mechanical means, where 
applicable/available; where mechanical 
ventilation is not available, that the 
enclosure is unsealed in sections to allow 
gradual release of the fumigant. Where 
natural ventilation is insufficient for rapid 
clearing of the gas, fans may be utilized, but 
operators should retire from the risk area for 
at least 30 minutes immediately after 
switching on the fans. 


b 


— 


c 


— 


6.9 Checking for Clearance 


The risk area shall be checked for clearance of the 
fumigant as follows: 


a) The fumigation team shall be properly 
equipped in accordance with 3 and after a 
sufficient period of ventilation, shall check 
the concentration of fumigant in the risk area 
and, if it is acceptably low, should proceed 
to check the fumigation enclosure; anti, and 


b) Upon excessively high concentration of 
fumigant being detected, the fumigant team 
shall retire, wait a further period of time and 
recommence the check procedure until all 
sections of the fumigation enclosure have 
been proved safe for re-entry. 


6.10 Waste Disposal 


Proper disposal of wastes is an integral part of 
fumigation. Used aluminium flasks in the case of 
aluminium phosphide (phosphine) fumigation and 
used methyl bromide cans or cartridges in methyl 
bromide treatment must be collected, deactivated, if 
any residues present and crushed or punctured 
before sending them for recycling or disposal. Also, 
following fumigation with aluminium phosphide 
tablets or pellets, the spent powder residues must be 


IS 7247 (Part 5) : 2023 


retrieved from fumigation enclosure, deactivated 
properly and then disposed. 


7 ACTION AFTER FUMIGATION 
7.1 Re-Entry into the Fumigation Area 


When the fumigant concentrations in the fumigation 
enclosure and risk area have fallen to a safe working 
level, operators may re-enter the areas to remove 
fumigation equipment. 


7.2 Use and Care of Respirator Canister 


The respirator canister shall always be replaced 
before either its shelf life has expired or the 
recommended usage time has been reached. The 
expiry date of a canister may easily be calculated 
since each 1s marked with the date of manufacture 
and shelf life. 


7.3 Canisters should be stored in a cool, dry, well 
ventilated place away from contamination by any 
fumigants. The following precautions shall always 
be observed: 


a) When the canister is attached to the 
respirator face piece after the top seal is 
removed, record the date. This is best done 
by writing the date on a small adhesive 
label which must be affixed to the canister. 
This label can be used as a ‘log’ to record 
exposure of the canister to the fumigant; 


b) Before using the respirator, remove the cap 
and the seal over the air inlet valve of the 
canister. Again, at this time mark the date 
on the 'log' label. Once this seal is 
removed, even if there is no exposure to 
fumigant, replace the canister after a lapse 
of 6 months; 


c) After any fumigation in which there has 
been prolonged exposure to low 
concentrations of the  fumigant or 


d) accidental exposure to high concentrations, 
immediately discard the canister. As a 
guide, on hour of wearing is the usual 
period after which a canister should be 
discarded. This could be extended to two 
hours only when exposure is minimal. 
Allow a wide margin of safety in 
estimating exposure times as canisters cost 
little in terms of health of the individual. If 
there is any doubt about the exposure life 
of the canister, discard it; 


e) When canisters are discarded, they should 
be rendered unusable by mutilating the inlet 


IS 7247 (Part 5) : 2023 


port and disposed of under conditions which 
will prevent them from being picked up and 
used again; and 


f) Canisters that show any sign of external 
damage must be considered worthless, and 
shall be discarded. A severe blow on the 
metal covering may cause displacement of 
the contents, permitting contaminated air to 
pass through to the wearer. 


NOTE — Immersion of the canister in water renders it 
useless. Water may enter the canister through the face piece. 
Disconnect the hose and canister when cleaning or 
disinfecting the face piece. 

7.4 Fumigation Records 

Every person in charge of a fumigation shall keep a 


record of the fumigation which shall include details 
of the following: 


a) Address of fumigation enclosure; 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


k) 


Type of fumigation (Stack/shipping 
container/ship's hold/silo); 


Commodity (name, moisture content, 
infestation present, previous fumigation 
history); 

Fumigant used, dosage, method of 
application and exposure period; 
Fumigation commencing date and time; 


Temperature and humidity conditions inside 
the enclosure; 

Gas concentration data; 

Fumigation clearance date and time; 

Waste disposal details; 


Copies of all notices submitted; and 


m) Results of fumigation. This information 


should be retained for examination by the 
concerned authorities on demand. 


IS 7247 (Part 5) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Foodgrains, Allied Products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee, FAD 16 


Organization 
Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Ministry of 


Agriculture, New Delhi 


All India Food Processors Association, New Delhi 

CSIR-Central Food Technological Research [Institute 
(CFTRI), Mysore 

Central Warehousing Corporation(CWC), New Delhi 

Confederation of Indian Food Trade & Industry (CIFTI)- 
FICCI, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industries (CII), New Delhi 
Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 
Consumer Research, Education, Action, Training and 


Empowerment (CREATE) 

Defence Food Research Laboratory (DFRL), Mysore 

Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Faridabad 

Directorate of Plant Protection Quarantine & Storage, 
Faridabad 

Food Corporation of India (FCI), New Delhi 

Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAD), 
New Delhi 

G.B. Pant University, Food Science Division, Pant Nagar 

ICAR-Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering & 
Technology (CIPHET), Ludhiana 


ICAR-Central Tuber Crop Research Institute 


(CTCRI), Thiruvananthapuram 


Representative(s) 


DR NACHIKET KOTWALIWALE (Chairperson) 


SHRI KRISHNA KUMAR JOSHI 
SHRIMATI KAMIA JUNEJA (Alternate) 


DR M. S. MEERA 
DR V. B. SASHIKALA (Alternate) 


SHRI SIDHARTH RATH 
DR ANURAG TRIPATHI (Alternate) 


SHRI KANNAN B. 
MS RITIKA (Alternate) 


SHRI HIMALAYA KOUL 
Ms NEHA AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
DR M. S. KAMATH (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SURESH KANNA 
SHRI R. PONNAMALAM (Alternate) 


DR PAL MURUGAN.M 
MS SAKSHI SHARMA (Alternate) 


DEPUTY AGRICULTURAL MARKETING ADVISOR 
SMO (STD) (Alternate) 


DR RAVI PRAKASH 
MS SUNITA PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI A.S. ARUNACHALAM 
SHRI RAVIKUMAR SINHA (Alternate) 


MS APRAJITA VERMA 
DR SATISH K. SHARMA 
DR SWETA RAI (Alternate) 


DR D. N. YADAV 
DR MRIDULA DEVI (Alternate) 


DR KRISHNAKUMAR T. 
DR M. S. SANJEEV (Alternate) 


IS 7247 (Part 5) : 2023 


Organization 


ICAR- Centre of Excellence for Soybean Processing, CIAE, 


Bhopal 


ICAR- Indian Institute of Pulses Research, Kanpur 


ICAR-National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), Hyderabad 


ICAR-National Rice Research Institute, Cuttack 


Indian Grain Storage Management and Research Institute, 


Hapur 


Indian Institute of Packaging (IIP), New Delhi 


Management (NIFTEM), Sonipat 


Management (NIFTEM), Thanjavur 


National Sugar Institute (NSI), Kanpur 


Protein Foods and Nutrition Development Association of 


India (PFNDAI) 


Roller Flour Millers Federation of India (RFMFI), 
New Delhi 


Vasantdada Sugar Institute (VSI), Pune 


Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority 


(WDRA), New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity (House number 183, Sector 16 A, 
Faridabad - 121002) 


In Personal Capacity (250 A, Pocket 1, Phase 1, 
Mayur Vihar, Delhi 110091) 


BIS Directorate General 


National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship & 


National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship & 


Representative(s) 


DR PUNIT CHANDRA 
DRS. K. GiRI (Alternate) 


DR PRASOON VERMA 
DR UMA SAH (Alternate) 
DR NAVEEN KUMAR R. 
DRB.C. PATRA 
DR TORIT BARAN BAGCHI (Alternate) 


DR SUTAPA SARKAR (Alternate) 


DR R.K. SHAHI 
DR R.K. BARALA (Alternate) 


SHRI MADHAB CHAKRABORTY 
DR NILAY KANTI PRAMANIK (Alternate) 


DR ANKUR OJHA 
DR LOGANANTHAN 

DR M. VENKATACHALPATHY (Alternate) 
DR V. P. SRIVASTAVA 


DR SHATADRU SENGUPTA 
DR JASVIR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI D. V. MALHAN 


DR RAJEEV V. DANI 
DR SANJEEV V. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIMESH SINGH 


DR S. C. KHURANA 


SHRII.C. CHADDHA 


SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
MS LAVIKA SINGH 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(FOOD AND AGRICULTURE), BIS 


IS 7247 (Part 5) : 2023 


Panel on Storage of Foodgrains, FAD 16/Panel 2 


Organization Representative(s) 
Personal Capacity SHRI I. C. CHADDA 
Central Warehousing Corporation, Delhi DR. SIDDHARTH RATH 
Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Faridabad DEPUTY AMA (QC) 
Food Corporation of India (FCI), New Delhi SH. A.S. ARUNACHALAM 


SHRI RAVI KUMAR SINHA 
ICAR- Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering DR. GURUP 
and Technology, Ludhiana 


ICAR- Centre of Excellence for Soybean DR. DEBABANDYA MOHAPATRA 
Processing, Bhopal DR. ADINATH KATE 
Warehousing Development and Regulatory SHRI ANIMESH KUMAR 


Authority, New Delhi 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 16 (19766). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


