**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8439 (1977) : Methods for sampling of lead and lead 
alloys [MTD 9: Lead, Zinc, Cadmium, Tin, Antimony and their 
Alloys] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS :S«9- 1977 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



METHODS FOR SAMPLING OF 
LEAD AND LEAD ALLOYS 



UDC U(i9'4 : 543'Uj 




® Cafyrixht 1977 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI linCHJGf 




Angst st 1977 



IS : 8439 - 1977 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR SAMPLING OF 
LEAD AND LEAD ALLOYS 



Lead, Zinc, Tin, Antimony and Their Alloys Sectional Committee, 

SMDC 12 

Chairman Representing 

Shri F. A, A. Jasdan walla Indian Standard Metal Co Ltd, Bombay 

Members 
Shri A. M. Bedageri Indian Smelting and Refining Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A, K. Bhattacharya National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri K. D. Das ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. Chatterjee Indian Standard Metal Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. R. Maniar ( Alternate ) 
Chemist & Metallurgist, Ministry of Railways 
Eastern- Railway, J amalpur 
Assistant Director ( M. S, ), 
RDSO, Ltjoknow ( Alternate ) . 
Shri M. L. Ganguly Indian Cable Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri Tjiilok Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Guha Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. M. Taneja ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. P. Jain Saru Smelting Pvt Ltd, Meerut 

Shri D. N. Ghakraborti ( Alternate ) 
Shri Kishori Lal National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 
Shri C, S. Sivaramakrishan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Lakshmanan Indian Lead/Zinc Information Centre, New Delhi 

Dr M. N. Parthasarthi ( Alternate) 
Shri Laxaman Mishra Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri T. R. Mohan Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Narasimha Metal Box Company of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri Raman Lal Nagindas Star Metal Refinery Private Ltd, Bombay 
Parikh 
Shrt Harish Chandra Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. R. Rai Cominco Binani Zinc Ltd, Calcutta 

Shrt N. Srinivasan ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. K. Rao Binani Metal Works Ltd, Calcutta 

Shrt A, K. Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1977 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act { XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any mean* except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 8439 -1977 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri B. N. Ray Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri P. M. Senoupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Roy Eyre Smelting Private Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri A. K. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. D. Sen All India Federation of Master Printers, Bombay 

pRor Ved Vrata ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Sreenivasan Union Carbide India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R. K. Mehrotra ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Venkateswaelu Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri E. S. Bhagiratha ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. C. Wadhavan Hindustan Zinc Ltd, Udaipur 

Mr B. R. L. Row ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. R. Rama Rao, Director General, I SI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Struc Met ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. L. Bali 
Deputy Director ( Metals ) , ISI 



IS : 8439 - 1977 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR SAMPLING OF 
LEAD AND LEAD ALLOYS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 29 April 1977, after the draft finalized by the Lead, Zinc, Tin, 
Antimony and Their Alloys Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Structural and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 In order to bring out uniformity and to avoid repetition in describing 
procedures of sampling in standards relating to lead and lead alloys, need 
was felt for a standard which should lay down specific procedures for 
sampling of these alloys and to which reference may be made in relevant 
standard wherever required. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers methods of sampling of ingot lead, lead alloy 
ingots, lead sheets, pipes, etc, for chemical analysis. 

2. PROCEDURE 
2.1 Ingots 

2.1.1 Lot — In any consignment, all the ingots of one brand shall be 
grouped together to constitute a lot. 

2.1.1.1 Samples shall be taken and tested from each lot. 

2.1.1.2 The number of ingots to be selected from a lot shall depend 
on the size of the lot as given in Table 1. The ingots shall be taken at 
random. 

TABLE 1 SCALE OF SAMPLING 

No. of Ingots No, of^Ingots 

in a Lot to be Taken 

Up to 4 All 

5 to 50 4 

51 to 100 7 

101 and above 9 



IS : 8439 - 1977 

2.1*2 Sampling of the Selected Ingots — The ingots shall be placed side by 
side in rows of three and/or four so as to include all the samples and a 
line drawn diagonally across the row from the left-hand corner of the 
first to the right-hand corner of the last ingot ignoring any lug on the 

ingots. 

2.1.2.1 The points opposite to that where the centre line ( lengthwise ) 
of each bar and the diagonal, thus drawn, intersects should be located 
( see Fig. 1 ). A cut shall be made at this point in a direction perpendicular 
to the centre line of the ingot. Sawing shall be continued halfway through 
each ingot. For spectrographic analysis, a slice of required thickness shall 
be taken and surface prepared and cleaned properly for the analysis. 

2.1.2.2 All sawings should be collected and mixed thoroughly. Iron 
contamination, if any, should be removed by means of a powerful magnet. 
If any oil is present, the sawings shall be washed in petroleum ether and 
dried. 

2.1.2.3 Sufficient sawings should be taken to provide a representative 
sample. 

2.2 Material Other Than Ingots — At least 1 kg of the material should 

be taken at random in a manner agreed between the purchaser and the 
supplier. If parts of the material have to be cut off, this should be done 
by means of a saw, and the cutting should be carried out so as to obtain 
a section through the piece. 

2.2.1 Where pieces contain inserts, care should be taken to ensure that 
there shall be no contamination from the different metal, 

2.2-2 The sample pieces should be sawn, cut, filed or drilled to provide 
a fully representative sample. All the prepared samples should be collected 
and mixed thoroughly. Iron contamination, if any, should be removed 
by means of a powerful magnet. If any oil is present, the prepared 
sample shall be washed in petroleum ether and dried. 

2.2.3 For the determination of antimony, the sample pieces may be 
melted, covered with a suitable oil and dip samples taken from which the 
final sample is cut, filed or drilled as under 2.2.2. 



SET OF 3 BARS 



SET OF A BARS 



Ui 




7 



POINTS 1st 
ON BARS 



2nd 



3rd 



"^^„ 




— — 


'^V^ 


\v 


_ 7 — :^_ 


-f- /-^s<- 


LINES"'' 




^-DIAGONAL 


-\ r* 


\i_ 


\ 


♦ ♦/ 



POINTS 1st 
ON BARS 


2nd 


3rd 


4th 




G OF INGOTS 








5? 
6 

CD 
■ 

F* 

to 
^1 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

LEAD, ZINC, TIN, ANTIMONY AND THEIR ALLOYS 



25-1966 Antifriction bearing alloys ( second revision ) 

26-1966 Tin ingot ( second revision ) 

27-1965 Pig lead ( second revision ) 

193-1966 Soft solder ( second revision ) 

209-1966 Zinc ( second revision ) 

211-1977 Antimony ( third revision ) 

404-1962 Lead pipes ( revised ) 

405-1961 Lead sheet ( revised) 

713-1966 Zinc base alloy ingots for die casting ( revised ) 

742-1966 Zinc base alloy die castings ( revised) 

1339-1965 Lead alloys for sheathing of electric cables ( revised) 

1357-1966 Printing metal ( revised) 

1654-1966 Antimonial lead ( revised) 

1655-1968 Code of practice for manufacture of zinc alloy pressure die castings (first 
revision ) 

Rosin cored solder wire ( first revision ) 

Rolled zinc plate, sheet and strip (first revision ) 

Metal for casting movable types 

Refined secondary lead 

Refined secondary tin 

Refined secondary zinc 

Solders for jointing aluminium and aluminium alloys 

Cadmium metal 

Methods for sampling of lead and lead alloys 



