( Reaffirmed 2003 )

ls:

2550-1963

Indian

Standard
TERMS

GLOSSARY OF CLASSIFICATION
Documentation Sectional Committee, EC 2

5u.t N. c. CHAuhV~TY SHNB. L.B HAaADWA,.\ (Akrna/#) Stim S. Dlu &PTA SHRIDHANPAT Ru Stint NoSmu A. E~tn
GIFzJA KXJMABI

UnivaYity of Delhi, D&i Indian Lii As�ociatiott, Calcutu Baptist Mkion Prm, Calcutta Indian school of International Studies. New D&i National Anrbiver of India, New Delhi Oxford Univusity Central Secatit Press, Bombay Library, New Delhi

SHRl R. c. CWTA SHPJ A.

N. K. AIYANCAR (A&m&) National Library, Calcutta Indian Council of Agricultural Research. New D&i Publication Division, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting Printing & Stationery Departm&t, Government of Bombay, Bombay Hindustan Antibiotics Limitcd, Pimpri Indian Sational Scientific Documentation Centre (INSDOC), New Delhi AU India Federation of Master Printers, Calcutta Council

Sttat IL E. ~wxtris &at B. S. KEWVAN SW N. M. Kttnc*n Da D. B. KWHNA RAO I)1 P. KACHROO (Al-) Stint U. S. MOHAN FLw SHU G. NATJJA NATH (Altcmufe) SHRIB. S. N.ur SHIUA. NEELAMEOHAY SHIl s. P.4nTlx.uAuTtN SHlUs. Runr Stiat H. K. D.+ss (AZ-) SHIUB. N. Saunw Simr A. KRLWNAYUITHI (Al&n&) SHRIc s. SlYA-N

of Scientific & Industrial
Chamben

Research, New D&i of Commerce & Industry,

Federation of Indii New Delhi

(Continued on pap 2)

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTlTUTION
ZAFAR MARC

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI llooO2

Commercial Cenval Director, Board

Printing

Press, Bombay & Power. New Delhi

of Irrigation

ISI

(Ex-ajScio M&j

SHlf Extra

GURCHARAN SINOH
Director v. P. VIJ 1% (Pub), IS1 sitnr

Assistant

Chier

Librarian,

Library Tezhnique fIhDtz_ SHll s.
PAllniAsAPATHY Indiin

Subcommittee,
Xational New Delhi Scientific

EC 2

: 8
Ckntre (INSDCQ,

Documentation

Members

SHRI Amr

Smcm Bern

Central Institute Delhi Centrat Indiao hew

Water

& Power

Commiaion Delhi

SHXI N. K. Co% SHU R. S. COYAL SHU N. M. KETKAR SnRr A. s. RNZADA DR S. R. ~~c.ua~~tiax

of Economic Library,

Growth, Delhi Library,

Public

Secretariat National Delhi capacity

New

*Ihi Centre (INSDOC),

ScientiSc (Sarol,

Documentation

In personal

100 Main Rood 4, Bangalore-3)

Panel for Glossary of Classification
CD& S. R. RAN~AY~A~..\~ Member SHRl v. P. vtj Indian Standards In penocal capacity

Terms, EC 2
(Gr&.

:8 : 2

100 Main Road 4, Bangalore-3)

Institution,

New

Delhi

2

Is:
CONTENTS

2550-1963

PAGE

0. FOREWORD 1. SCOPE CHAPTER A CHAPTER B UNIVERSE

.. ..

.. ..

.. ..

.. .. ..

. . . .

4

CLA~~IPICATION IN GENERAL

CANONS OF GENERAL CLASSIFICATION . . FOR LIBRARY CLASSIFICATION .. .. .. OF KNOWLEDGE .. .. .. ..

.. ..

6 7 15

CHAPTERC CHAPTERD CHAPTERE

UNIVERSEOF KNOWLEDGE UNIVERSEOF WORKS .. UNIVERSEOF DOCUMENTS .. OF THE UNIVERSE

.. .. ..

19 21 24

CLASSIFICATION CHAPTER F CHAPTER G CHAPTER H CHAPTER J CHAPTER K CHAPTER L CHAPTER M CHAPTER N CHAPTER P CHAPTER Q CHAPTER R CHAPTER S CHAPTER T CHAPTER U CHAPTER v CHAPTER W CHAPTER X CHAPTER Y

KNOWLEDGE CLASSIFICATION FACETS OF A CLASS PHASESOF A CLASS PLANES OF WORK .. .. ..

CANONS FOR KNOWLEDGE CLASSIFICATION CONCEPT OF FUNDAMENTAL CATEGORIES POSTULATES FOR CLASSIFICATION PRINCIPLESFOR ARRANGEMENT STEPS IN CLASSIFYING .. .. .. .. .. .. ..

DEVICES IN IDEA AND NOTATIONAL PLAW~ ZONE ANALYSIS: IDEA PLANE ZONE ANALYSIS : NOTATIONAL PLANE FACET A~TALYSIS NOTATIONAL SYSTEM .. ..

.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. :: .. .. .. .. ., ..

28 31 35 38 41, 43 55 57 61 64 68 69 72 75 78 83 85 92 99

DOCUMENT CL.A~~IFICATIOR .. CANONS FOR DOCUMENT CLASSIFICATION CONTACT WITH CATALOGUE MACHINE SEARCH .. .. .. .. .. ..

ALPHARETICAL INDEX

3

Is:

!2!%0-1963

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF CLASSIFICATION
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 20 December 1963, after the draft finalized by the Documentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Executive Committee. 0.2 During the last 100 years, a number of schemes of library classification has been designed in the world. In fact, a stage has now been reached when it is being increasingly felt necessary to examine the basic principles involved in the designing of such schemes. Once these basic principles are adequately thought out, properly standardized and tested in actual practice, it is expected that a stage would then be reached which would eventually lead to the adoption of one `Single Universal System of Classification' at the international level, where this problem has been engaging the attention of the International Federation for Documentation (FID) for quite sometime. At the national level, the Documentation Sectional Committee has already widely circulated a draft standard on Principles for Designing a Scheme of Library Classification. 0.3 At its meeting held in Brussels on 16 September 1955, the General Assembly of FID adopted a resolution to the effect that necessary steps should be taken to prepare a glossary of classification terms. As a first step in this direction, it was recommended and agreed to in 1957 that each school of thought on the theory of classification should prepare the glossary of terms used by it, and finally these glossaries should be collated to arrive at a universal comprehensive glossary of all the classification terms. 0.4 Also with the large increase in literacy and the phenomenal expansion and increase in number of libraries in the country, there is a need, at the present time, to have an authoritative and comprehensive glossary for the guidance of technical staff engaged in such libraries in classification work. Further, there are now many schools of library science-more than a dozen at the university or professional level and an equal number In minimizing aberrations in the process at the semi-professional level. of teaching and communication, such a glossary will go a long way. All these considerations led the Documentation Sectional Committee to take up the preparation of this glossary of classification terms. 0.4.1 An Cataloguing Indian Terms Standard on a similar subject, namely, Glossary has already been pubhshed. (IS : 796-1959) terms current three stages. of

TERMS

0.5 This standard covering glossary of classification Indian school of thought has beeq arrived at through 4

in the

Is:2!%0-1963 05.1 In the first stage not only of all other schools of thought in Further, the definitions prevalent prevalent in the other schools of were also included.
the terms of the Indian school but also English speaking countries were taken. in the Indian school as well as those thought in English speaking countries

0.5.1.1 The definitions included in the first draft were taken from the ALA Glossary, and the works of: Henry Evelyn Bliss, Donker Duyvis, S. R. Ranganathan, W. C. Berwick Sayers, B. C. Vickery, and Frank S. Wanger, Jr. 0.5.1.2 The terms and definitions drawn from the sources mentioned in 0.5.1.1 were presented in parallel columns to facilitate a careful comparative study. 0.5.2 At the second stage, the draft included only those terms that were considered by the Sectional Committee as fit for retention. These included some alternate terms and some alternate definitions, 0.5.2.1 At the second stage, the result was presented with the recommended term and its definition followed by equivalent definitions, alternate definitions, and alternate terms with their definitions as given by the school of thought concerned. 0.5.3 At the third and final stage, the draft at second stage was carefully studied along with the suggestions received as a result of wide circulation. 0.5.3.1 It was decided that the final standard should give the terms and their meanings according to the Indian school of thought. Whenever warranted, however, alternate terms current in other schools of thought might also be given. In. a few cases, an alternate term belonged to the earlier stages in the development of the Indian school of thought and by the time had become obsolete. In such cases, the word `obsolete' has been entered against the term. 0.6 Taking into consideration the special nature of the subject and the convenience of readers, this glossary has been presented in a different style. There are 23 chapters numbered with Roman capitals and an alphabetical index is provided at the end. Each item in the glossary is given an entry number and this number, preceded by the capital letter denoting the chapter, is used as the index number in the alphabetical index. The numbering system followed in this glossary is different from the system recommended in IS : 12-1958 Guide for Drafting Indian Standards (Revised). The numbers of the sections have all been constructed in accordance with the principle of mnemonics (see K3 for definition) which pervades all through classification. This system automatically makes certain that relevant terms and their definitions will cohere together. It is hoped that the Glossary in this form would be more expressive to the members of the profession who would, therefore, be in a position to make a better use of the standard. 5

X3:2550-1963 0.6.1 Against each entry number in the Glossary, gives the approved standard term and its definition. terms alternate to the approved term, if any.
the first paragraph This is followed by

0.6.2 At the end of each paragraph, the source from which the term and the definition are taken is given within brackets. In the case of terms originated by the Sectional Committee itself, no source is indicated. 0.63 The abbreviations used for the sources cited are as given below: SOURCE Dictionary of documentation WANGER (Frank S). (American Documentation 11, 1960, 102-I 19) Library classification RANGANATHAN (S R). (Annals of Library Science, 5; 1958, 76-112) RANGANATHAN (S R). Notational plane: polation and extra-polation (Annals of Library 10, 1963, 1-13) BLISS (H E) . Bibliographic (S R). (S R) . (S R). classification Colon RANGANATHAN 1959 RANGANATHAN 4, 1958 RANGANATHAN cation. 1951 classification. terms. glossary InterScience,

ABBREVIATION Am dot Antlals

Bib cc ccc COMM E/e Faceted Gloss htrod Manual
PTOl

1- 11, 1952 Ed code. 6, Ed

Classified catalogue Classification ements and

communiclassifica-

RANGANATHAN tion. Ed 3, 196 l@ VICKERY ALA glossary (B C) .

of library

R)* Faceted

El classification. 1956 to library of classiIntroduction Manual 1960

of library

terms.

SAYERS (W C Berwick) . fication. Ed 9, 1958 SAzdEFSlg$V C

Berwick) .

classification. classi-

RANGANATHAN (S R) . Prolegomena fication. Ed 2, 1957

to library

Rev

RANGANATHAN (S R). The series on common isolates in the Review of documentation 23-25; 1956~57

1. SCOPE 1.1This standard covers definitions
of library classification.

of technical 6

terms current

in the field

A05
CHAPTER A

CLASSIFICATION

IN GENERAL

NOTE- Most of the terms in this chapter were used for the first time in the first edition of Pro1 (1937). But the reference is given only to the sections in the second edition (1957).

0 UNIVERSE
01 02 03 04 041 042 Existent Undefined

AND
assumed

ENTITY
term. or conceptualwithout that is a thing any special

Entity -Any existent, concrete or an idea. (Pro& s 120).

Aggregate-A collection of entities arrangement of them. (Pro& s 120). Universe (Pro& s 120). An aggregate Universe under

consideration

in a context. of entities. number of

Finite Universe (Anlz, 5, 1958, 76).

with a finite number with an infinite

Inf%nite Universe entities. (Atzn, 5, 1958,

Universe 76)

Example: Universe of knowledge is an infinite universe. By its very nature all the entities of an infinite universe cannot be New entities will continuously come to be known at any time. known as and when they emerge. 05 Attribute (Pro& s 120). E.yample: Any property or quality of an entity.

The following

are some of the attributes

of a book:

Subject-matter Form of expression, such as catechism, drama, prose, narrative, pictures; etc The following philosophy : are some of the

Language Author Year of publication Binding attributes of a system of

Number of ultimate principles assumed, such as monism, dualism and pluralism Attitude towards reality, such as idealism and realism Founder Country of origin 7

A051
051

Like Entities - Entities sharing a given attribute equally in measure, intensity, extent, or on any other basis, the likeness being with reference to the said attribute. (Pro& s 1211). Unlike Entities - Entities sharing a given attribute unequally in measure, intensity, extent, or on any other basis, the unlikeness being with reference to the said attribute. (Prol, s 12 11).
Example: Basu's Algebra and Radhakrishna Ayyar's Algebra are alike with reference to subject-matter, but unlike with reference to author.

052

06

Characteristic -Attribute or complex of attribute with reference to which the likeness or unlikeness of entities can be determined and at least two of the entities of the universe are unlike. (Prol, s 1212). Example: Height is a characteristic of the entities in a universe of men; but possession of a face is not.

07

Natural Characteristic - A quality or complex of qualities in the things classified, inherent and inseparable from the things and without which they could not be the things they are. [Manual, s 119(a) 1.
Artiiicid Characteristic - A quality which is possessed by a group of things in common, but is not a necessity of their being, for example, colour in man, or maleness, or height. [Manual, s 119(b) 1. 1 DMSION

08

AND GROUP

11

Division

1)

Process of sorting the entities of a universe into sub-aggregates on the basis of a preferred characteristic, putting like entities into the same sub-aggregate and the unlike entities into different sub-aggregates. The result of division in the first sense, that is, a set of subaggregates formed by the division of the entities of universe. (Pro& s 1213).

2)

Alternate Terms Classification (First universeiinto a multitude Sense, Permitive Use) (Comm, s 113). of groups. specific difference Division of in charac-

SpeeiCcation - Definition by ters. [Bib, p. 105, cat (7)]. 8

A24 12 13 14 15 16 Division Characteristic - Characteristic preferred as the basis for the division of the entities of a universe. (Prol, s 1213). of the entities formed Group - Any sub-aggregate division of the entities of a universe. (Prol, s 1214). Unitary Group-Group entity. (Prol, s 1214). Multiple Complete Group Group consisting consisting of one and by the only one

of two or more entities.

(Pro& s 1214).
Division 1) Process of continuing the division of the entities of a universe on the basis of a sequence of characteristics, until no multiple group is left. (Pro& s 1215). 2) Result in the complete division AND in the first sense. CLASS

2 ASSORTMENT 21 Assortment

1) Process of the division of the entities of a universe into groups plus that of arranging the groups in a definite sequence. 2) Results of the assortment of a universe in the first sense.

(Pd,
Alternate

s 122).
Term Use) - Classifi-, resulting groups as

Classification (Second Sense; Common cation in first sense and arrangement of the in a preferred sequence. (Comm, s 12). 22 221

Assortment Characteristic - Characteristic preferred the basis for the assortment of a universe. (Prol, s 12301). Ranking -Arranging the entities of a universe, entities of the universe. Alternate Term enumeration of subjects (Kaiser. Depth, p. 28). according

the groups formed by the division of so as to arrive at an assortment of the

(Pro& s 712).

Arrangement-An some specific purpose. 23 24 Class Unitary Ranked Class -

to

group.

(Pro& s 1221).
one and only one entity.

Class containing 9

(Prol, s 1221).

rfi25
25 26 MultipIe Class (ZW, 5 1221). Complete
Class

containing

two

or

more

entities.

Assortment of a until (Prol,

1) Process of continuing the assortment of the entities universe on the basis of a sequence of characteristics, no multiple class is left. 2) 261 27 Result of complete s 1223). assortment in the first sense.

Individualization - Separation of an entity in a universe into a unitary class by the process of assortment. (Pro& s 12231). Scheme of Assortment

1) The characteristics used as the basis of a complete assortment of the entities of a universe, 2) The sequence in which the characteristics should be used, and 3) The principles used for ranking the classes at each step in the progress towards the complete assortment. (Pro& s 12243. 3 ARRAY 31 AND ORDER OF CLASS AND OF AN ARRAY

Array-A set of classes arranged in the proper sequence and derived from a universe on the basis of a single characteristic at any step in the progress towards a complete assortment of the entities of the universe. (Pro!, s 1222). Open Array Closed polation. Array An array of classes, admitting An array
Array -

311 312 313 314 32 321 322

of extrapolation. of extraof of

of classes not admitting ,4n array of classes,

Discontinuous interpolation Continuous interpolation.

admitting

Array -

An array

of classes,

not admitting

Order of a Class - The number of successive characteristics (&al, s 123). on the basis of which it is derived from a universe. Class of Order IA class derived from a universe basis of the first characteristic. Class of Order 2 - A class derived basis of two successive characteristics.
NOTE -

on the on the

from a universe

Similarly for class of order 3, 4, etc.

1G

A422 33 Order of an hay - The number of successive characteristics on the basis of which the classes in the array are derived from a universe. (Prol, s 123). Array of Order 1 - Array of classes derived from a universe on the basis of the first characteristic. Array of Order 2 - Array of classes derived from a universe on the basis of two successive characteristics.
NOTE Similarly for array of order 3, 4, etc.

331 332

34 35

Co-ordinate Classes (Pro& s 123). same array.

Cldssej: belonging

to one

and

the

Immediate Universe - The class of order next higher to that of a class or an array, when viewed relative to that class or array. (Prol, s 123). Universe of First Remove Immediate Immediate Immediate universe. universe universe of the of the

351 352 353

Universe of Second Remove uni-rerse of first remove. Universe of Third Remove universe of second remove.
NOTE -

Similarly for universe of fourth remove, fifth remove, etc.

36

Collateral Classes - Classes of the same order but not belonging to one and the same array, derived from a common universe. (Pro& s 123). a common Class 4 CHAIN
Collateral

37 38

universe.

Arrays

-

Arrays of the same order derived from (Pro& s 123). The original AND universe. (Pro& s 123).

of Order

0 -

OF CLASSES

ORDER

OF CHAIN

41

Chain-The sequence of the classes of a universe consisting of a class and of its universes of successive removes, carried backwards to any point desired. (Prol, s 124). LinkOrder First chain. Last chain.
NOTE -

42 420 421 422

A class in a chain.. of a Link (Prol,

(Pro& s 124). of the class which it represents. order order contained contained in a in a

Order link link

Link-The s 124). The
s 124).

of the lowest of the highest

Link(Prol,

See also section X2.

11

A43 43 44 45 46

Order of a Chain (Prol, s 124).

The order of the first link of the chain.

Primary Chain - The chain of order 0, that -is a chain with the original universe as the first link. (Pro& s 124). Loose Chain (Pro& s 124). Chain with a unitary class as its last link.

Complete ChainLoose primary chain-that is a chain with the original universe as its first link and a unitary class as its last link. (Pro/, s 124). 5 FILIATORY

SEQUENCE arising in the course of the considered as an empty recepthat is the unitary classes and it as the immediate universe. by the addition of its

51

Pseudo Entity-Any class complete assortment of a universe, tacle for the array of the entities, the multiple classes derived from (Pro& s 1251).

52 53

Amplified Class - Class enriched pseudo entity. (Prol, s 1252).

Completely Amplified Universe - Original universe amplified by the pseudo entity corresponding to itself and by the pseudo entities corresponding to all the multiple classes arising in the course of its complete assortment. (Pro& s 1252). Completely Amplified Class - Any class amplified by the pseudo entities corresponding to all the multiple classes arising in the course of its complete assortment. (Pro& s 125). Filiatory Sequence - Sequence of the entities and the pseudo entities of a completely amplified universe. (Pro& s 1256). Alternate Term closely (SS)]. related subjects in proxi-

54

55

Collocation - P!acing mity. [Bib, p. 111, cat. 56

Scheme of Classes - Statement showing the fihatory sequence of the classes-that is pseudo entities alone-arising in the course of the completely amplified assortment of a universe ignoring the entities themselves. (PYo~,s 127). Scheme terminology of Classifkation - Scheme of classes and notation. (Pro& s 1283). 12 fitted with

57

A76 Alternate I) Library 2) System Terms Claosi6cation of ClassiGcation OLOGY

6TERMANDTERMIN 61

Term - Word or word group in a natural language or in the jargon of a profession or a trade denoting or naming a class (Pro& s 12831). in a scheme of classification. Terminology A system of terms. SYSTEM numbers representing (Pro& s 12832). the (Prol, s 12831).

62

7 NOTATIONAL 71 72

No&&on - The system of ordinal classes in a scheme of classification.

class
a scheme

Numbew -

Ordinal number representing of classification. (Prol, s 12832). Definition

a class in

Equivalent

Translation of the name of a class into the artificial language of ordinal numbers, specified and elaborated in a scheme of classification. (CC, s 02).
NOTE-&C section T4 for definition as applied to knowledge classification.

73 74

classification.

Ordinal Name-

Class number (Pro& s 12832).

of a class in a scheme

of

Classificatory Language - Artificial language of the ordinal numbers used in a scheme of classification. (Pro&s 12832).
NOTE See section T41 for definition as applied to knowledge classification.

75

Schedule of Classification - Dictionary helpful in finding the meaning of each class number or ordinal name, as expressed in a natural language or a jargon of profession or a trade. (Pro& s 1284).
NATE-Obviously, this dictionary or schedule will be arranged sequence of class numbers. in the

76

Index to Classification - Dictionary giving the class number representing a term in a natural language or the jargon of a profession or a trade; in other words, helpful in finding the meaning of such a term, in terms of the ordinal names used in a classificatory language. (Prol, s 1285).
NOTE-Obviously, alphabetical sequence. the dictionary or index will be arranged in an

13

A81 8 CLASSIFICATIONIST 81 AND CLASSIFIER

Chssifying -- Assigning an entity of a universe to the appropriate class in the scheme of classification adopted, by ascertaining the way in which each of the characteristics implied by the scheme is shared by it, and assigning the appropriate (Pro& s 1287). class number to it. Chssificationist - Person who designs a scheme of classification. (Prol, s 1286. Rev dot 11, 1948, 156, s 102). Classifier - Person who classifies the entities of a universe according to a scheme of classification. (Yrol, s 1286. Rev dot 14, 1948, 156, s 102). Rules of Classification A set of rules to guide the classifier.

82 83

84

Alternate

Term
Code (Gloss, p. 30).

QassiGcation

14

B14 CHAPTER B

CANONS OF GENERAL CLASSIFICATION
Prol (1937). Pml(l957).

Noral-

Most of the canons were formulated for the first time in the first edition of
But the references are given in this chapter only to the second edition of

NOTE 2 -This standard merely defines the canons likely to arise in discussion but it does not recommend or deny any of the canons. 1

CANONS

FOR cHARAcTERIsTIcs

11

Canon of Differentiation-A characteristic used as the basis for the classification of a universe should differentiate some of its entities, that is it should give rise at least to two classes. (Pro& s 13). Example: In the universe of men, height is a characteristic that differentiates; but the possession of a face is noi a chai-acteristic that differentiates.

12

No two characteristics used in Canon of concomi~cesuccession as the basis for the classification of a universe should be concomitant, that is they should not give rise to the same array of classes. (Pro& s 132). Example: In the universe of men the characteristics, age and year of birth, should not be used as successive basis for classification, as they will both give rise to the same array. But the characteristics, height and age, can be used in succession, as they will give rise to two different arrays.

13

Canon of Rekvaace - A characteristic for the classification of a universe should purpose of the classification (Prol, s 133).

used as the basis be relevant to the

ExamfiLe: In the universe of books, if the purpose of classification is to help readers, the subject-matter, the language of exposition, the year of publication, and the name of author may be relevant characteristics as the basis of classification. But the thread and the tape used for stitching, the mode of stitching, the board and the covering materials used for binding, and tooling on the back are not relevant characteristics. However, they may be relevant if the purpose of classification is to help the binding trade.
14 Canon of AscmtainabUity - A characteristic basis for the classification of a universe should ascertainable. (Prol, s 134). 15 used as the be definitely

B15 Example: In the universe of poets, the year of birth is ascertainable and is, therefore, eligible for use as the basis of its classification. But the year of death is not, as it cannot be ascertained with certainty in the case of living authors even with the aid of astrologers and palmists.
15 used as the basis Canon of Permanence - A characteristic for the classification of a universe should continue to be unchanged so long as there is no change in the purpose of classification. (EM, s 151).

Example: Classification of the territory of a country on the basis of its physical features satisfies this canon. But its classification on the basis of its political and administrative division often violates this canon. And yet, the latter is a relevant one for most purposes.
16 Canou of Relevant Sequence - Characteristic used as the basis for the classification of a universe should be used successively in a sequence relevant to the purpose of the classification. (Pro& s 136).

Example: In classifying books on literature, the four characteristics, language, form, author, and work, may be used as the basis. Using them in the sequence mentioned above is more helpful to the majority of readers than any of the other 23 possible sequences.
17 Canon of Consistency - Characteristic used as the basis for classification zf a universe should be used successively in the same sequence, so long as there is no change in the purpose of the classification. (Pro& s 137).

Example : We should not use the sequence language, form, author, and work in classifying some of the books on literature, and the sequence language, author, form and work, in the case of some other books on literature.
2 CANONS 21 FOR ARRAY of classes universe. of classes

Canon of Exhaustiveness - Classes in an array should be totally exhaustive of their common immediate (Pro& s 141). Canon of Exclusiveness - Classes in an (Pro& s 142). should be mutually exclusive. array

22

Example: The classification of professors into the single array: mathematicians, geologists, dull lecturers, and brilliant lecturers violates this canon.
16

B51
220 cro8s caas~cation - Use of two or more characteristics to form one and the same array leading to the violation of the the Canon of Exclusiveness. Canon of Consistency and (Pro& S 3653).
Canon of Help&l Sequence - CIass~ in any array should (Pro/, s 143). be- helpful to those to whom it is intended. Canon of Favoured Sequence - In arrangement precedence should be given to a class, whatever be its natural position in the normal sequence, so as to be of greater help to those for whom it is intended. Canon of Consistent Sequence - If similar classes occur in different arrays, their sequences should be parallel in all the arrays, unless there is a positive difference in purpose and helpfulness. (Plot, s 143). 3 CANONS 31 FOR CHAIN

23 237

24

Canon of Decreasing Extension-While moving down a chain of classes, from its first link to its last, the intension of the classes should increase and their extension should decrease at each step. (Prol, s 151). Resolving Power - Power of recognizing the sub-classes appropriate to the array of the first order of an immediate universe. Canon of Modulation - A chain of classes should be derived from the universe with the use of correct resolving power at each stage of division. (Pro& s 152). 4 CANONS FOR FDJATORY SEQUENCE

32

321

41

Canon of Sub-Ordinate Classes -All the sub-ordinate classes of a class, in whatever chain they may occur, should immediately follow it without being separated from it or among themselves by any other class. (Prol s 161). Canon of Co-Ordinate Classes-Among the classes no class with less affinity should come between two classes or arrays with greater affinity. (Pro& s 162). 5 CANONS FOR TERMINOLOGY

42

il

Canon of Currency - The term used to denote a class in a ' scheme of classification should be one currently accepted by those specializing in the universe to which the scheme is applicable. (Pro& s 171). 17

52

Csrnon of Retictmce - The term used to denote a class in a scheme of classification should not be critical, that is express any opinion of the classificationist. (Prol, s 172). Canon of Enumeration - The denotation of term in a scheme of classification should be determined and should be left to be determined in the light of or through the sub-classes (lower links) enumerated in the various chains having the class denoted by the term in question as their common link. (Pm& s 173).

53

54

Canon of Context - The denotation of a term in a scheme of classi6cation should be determined in the light of the different classes of lower order (upper links) belonging to the same primary chain as the class denoted by the term in question. (Prol, s 174).
6 CANONS FOR NOTATION

61

The number of digits in a class Canon of Relativitynumber should be proportional to the order of the class it represents. (Pro& s 1881). The number of digits in a class Canon of Upiformitynumber should be constant whatever be the order of the class it represents.
is the pqation of the `Canon of NOTE- The `Canon of Uniformity' Relativity'. It is possible to design the notational system on the bask either of these two canons.

62

of

63

Canon of Rspressiveness -There should be in a class number a digit to represent each of the characteristics used in constructing the class number. (Pro& s 1882). Hierarchiad Notation-A notation designed to show that two terms are in the same array, or the same chain. (Faceted, p. 48). Canon of Non-hierarchid Notation - In a class number there should not be a digit to represent each of the characteristics used in constructing the class number. N--me `Canon of Non-hierarchical Notation' is the negation pf `Canon of ?spressivencss'. It is possible to design the notational system on the basis of either of these two canons.

64

65

66

Canon of Mixed Notation - The notation of a scheme of classification should be a mixed one. (Prol, s 1883).
Nom -See section U221 for definition of `Mixed Notation'.

67

Canon of Pure Notation -The classification should be a pure one.
NATE-

(Pro& s 1883).

notation of a scheme of

See section U211 for definition of `Pure Notation'.

18

c4 CHAPTER C

UNIVERSE OF KNOWLEDGE
1 2 Universe 79). Subjed of Knowledge Assumed term. Assumed term.

(Ann&, 5, 1958,

(Annals, 5, 1958, 79).

Alternate

Term
Mass Subject.

Knowledge

NOTE - Its exposition may extend in print to several volumes at one extreme or to only a single sentence or even a single word at the other extreme. For example, the knowledge masses, contained in and &noted by the following, stand arranged in the decreasing sequence of their extension : 1) Encyclopaedia of general knowledge; 2) Encyclopaedia of library science; 3) The knowledge content of this standard (IS: 2550- 1963); 4) The knowledge content of Chapter C of this standard; and C2. 5) The knowledge content of this very section-Section

3 31 32

Thought -

Knowledge

mass, that is subject. of great extension, (Pro& s 61393). usually em-

Macro-Thought - Subject bodied in the form of a book.

Micro-Thought - Subject of small extension, usually embodied in the form of an article in a periodical, or of a section (Prol, s 61393). or a paragraph in a book, or of a pamphlet.
NCITE- Macro thought sharp line of demarcation. and micro thought are relative terms without a

DEVELOPMENT 4

OF UNIVERSE

OF KNOWLEDGE

Dissection - Breakdown of a subject or an isolate into several subjects or isolates of smaller extension on the basis of a characteristic and thereby creating an array of new subjects of isolates. (Rev dot, 14, 1948, 157). In dissection, the boundary lines of the new subjects or isolates formed thereby are exclusive of one another as schematically shown below :

@ID
Dissection

19

c5 5
DclNIddOSl -Progressive decrease of the extension and the increase of the intension or the depth of a subject or an isolate and thereby producing a chain of new subjects or isolates. (Rev dot, 14, 1948, 157).

In denudation, the boundary lines of the successive new subjects or isolates lie within one another as schematically shown below:

0
~ 6 . 0
tiOll -Reducing

Denudation

the extension and increasing the intension or the depth of a subject by attaching to its isolates one or more isolates appropriate to it. (Revdoc, 14, 1948, 158). The following is a schematic representation:

00
1
7

Lamination of two isolates

LazEon

of three

Assemblage - Formation of a new subject by bringing one subject into relation with another not capable of forming or (Rev dot, 14, sharpening the first subject by subject device. 1948, 159).

Loose-Assemblage

D2 CHAPTER D

UNIVERSE

OF WORKS

NOTE - Most of the terms in this Chapter were used for the first time in Ranganathan's co&s (1955). But the reIerence is Heading and ca~ns: Cmnporalim studyo fim cataioguc T c ese terms have also been included in IS : 796-1959 given here only to CCC, ed 5,1964. Glossary of Catalog&g Terms.

0

Expressed Thought - Thought expressed in language, pictures, or symbols, or in any other medium and thereby made communicable. (CCC, s FA3).

Exampk: The above definition itself is `Expressed Thought'. A picture is also `ExIt is expressed in the English language. A mathematical or a chemical formula is pressed Thought'. A gesture is equally an `Expressed again `Expressed Thought'. Thought'. Alternate
Work I

Term
Expressed thought. (CCC, s FA4). generally accepted

Sacred Work-Basic work of a religion, (CCC, s FA5). as such among its followers.

Example :
Vedas Upanishads Tantras Tripitakas
NOTE -

Talmud Bible New Testament Koran

A sacred work is often treated as if it were a class or a subject.

2

Literary Work-Work (other than a sacred work) in the form of a poem, drama, fiction, prose, champu or any other literary form with outstanding qualities, such as beauty of form, emotional or intuitional appeal, endless layers of suggestions in regard to meaning and intuitive or trans-intellectual origin. (CCC, s FA6).

Example :
Ramayana Iliad Sakuiltala Canterbury Hamlet Hound of Heaven Post Office Apple Cart

Tales

NATE 1 - This involves judgement particularly in the case of poem, drama, fiction, and champu; and judgement may not be unanimous. NOTE 2 - h literary work is treated as if it were a class or a subject unless its purpose is an exposition of specialized knowledge.

21

D3 3 Classic - Work usually appearing in several versions, and/or having several adaptations and translations, inspiring other works on itself and repeatedly coming in print even long after its origin. (CCC, s FA7).

Aristotle's Newtons'
NOTE, -

Poetics Ptincipia

Marx's Capital

A classicis often treated as if it were a classor a subject.

4

Pedestrian Work - Work which is not a sacred work, a classic, or a literary work, and is not treated as if it were a class or a subject in usage. (CCC, s FA91). Pseuddllassic -- A pedestrian work provoking other works, such as criticisms or parodies of itself and other dependent works.

41 51

Integral Treatment -Treatment of a subject in a work in such a way that the treatment of its subdivisions are not separable from one another or from the whole work. (AILA; 1; 1950; 73-83).
Disjunctive Treatment - Treatment of a subject in a work in such a way that the treatment of its subdivisions are separable and admit of each being made a work by itself independently of (AILA; 1; 1950; the other subdivisions and of the whole work. 73-83). Multi-focal Work - Work treating several collateral subjects, not having a common universe of the first remove according to the preferred scheme of classes. (Annals; 5; 1958; 81).

52

53

Example: A work with chapters on Sound and Heat is not multifocal as the two subjects have physics in their common universe But of first remove, according to most schemes of classification. a work with chapters on Differential Equations and Sound is multi-focal as the two subjects have different universes of first remove, viz, Mathematical Analysis and Physics, respectively.
6 7 Title Name of a work. (CCC, s FBl).

Author
1) Person creating a work, that is the thought sion constituting it. and the expres-

2) Corporate body owning responsibility for a work, that is for the thought and the expression constituting it. (CCC, s FC3). 22

D86

71

Personal Author - Person as author, the responsibility for the thought and expression contained in the work resting solely on his private capacity and not the capacity of any office he may hold within a corporate body, nor on the corporate body. (CCC, s FC31). Corporate Autkor - Corporate body as author, the responsibility for the thought and expression constituting the work resting solely on it or of any organ of it, and not on the private capacity of any person forming part of or holding office in or in any other way connected with that body. (Ccc, s FC32). Dependent Work-Work got by some modification another work or by the augmentation of it. (CCC, s GA4). of

72

80

NOTE l.- A list of the varietiesof dependent work will be found in CC ed, ch6andinCCC,sGA5andGA6. NOTE2 - The modificationor augmentation, as the case may be, need not necessarilybc by tbe author of the original work. It may also be done by any other person or corporatebody.

81

Abridgment - Reduced form of work, by condensing and/or omitting more or less of details, but retaining the general sense and the unity of the original work. (CCC, s FA41).

Exan@e:
gives an

Part 1 of the Librat-y manual of S R Ranganathan Abridgment of his work entitled Ftie Laws of Librmy

S&nce.
82 Adaptation - A version of work, re-written for a particular purpose, but not so changed as to be deemed an independent work on the basis of the quality of its thought and expression. (CCC, s FA42).

Example: Part 7 of the Library manual is an adaptation for the use of small libraries of the work entitled Colon classijication.
Lamb's T&s from Shakespeare is an independent work, and not an adaptation of Shakespeare's dramas, on account of its own individualistic quality of thought and expression. 83 a4 85 Catechism Parody imitation. Work in the form of questions work and answers. by

(Annals; 5; 1958; 81).
Work in which another is mimicked

Translation - Work forming the expression of another work in a language different from that of the original but not d&rving to be deemed an independent work on the basis of the quality of its thought and expression.
Seqpel -

86

Work continuing

another

work.

23

EQ
CHAPTER E

UNIVERSE OF DOCUMENTS
0
Embodied Thopeht - Record of work on paper or other material, fit for physical handling, transport across space, and preservation through time. (CCC, s FEl). Alternate Term

Docmment -

(CCC, s FE2).

NO-i73 -This term ia introduced for brevity. It was brought into use a few decadea ago to emphasize embodied micro thought. It is now extended in use to in&de any embodied thought, micm or macro and whether the physical embodiment is aclwive to one work or is shared by more than one work.

01

volume - Physical entity formed of several leaves of paper or other material on which is recorded, either the whole or a part of a work and fastened together so as to be opened at any de&red place. (CCC, s FE7).

1 21 211

Thought Content - The expressed thought embodied within a document or a volume of it. (CCC, s FE8).
Maa. Document (Ccc, s FE3).

-Document

embodying

macro thought.

Host Document - Macro document when viewed from the angle of a document forming part of it. (CCC, s FE5).

Example: A periodical is a macro document. Each article in it is a micro document. The periodical is the host document for each of the articles contained in it. So also, a book is the host document for each of its chapters and sections, when they are looked upon as independent documents.
22 Micro Docxunent (CCC, s FE4). KINDS 3 Periodial Document embodying micro thought.

OF DOCUMENTS

Publication

1) Document with attributes as stated below:
a) Periodicity - A volume, or a small group of volumes of it, is published or` intended to be published and completed normally once in a year or at other regular intervals though irregularity in interval is not ruled out ; 24

E311

b) Distinguishing

.Numbcr - Each successive volume or periodical group of volumes, is usually distinguished by the year of publication and/or by a number belonging to a system of simple or complex ordinal numbers. Such a number is usually called a
The intentic n had been to continue the for ever, though not actually carried out. publication in the first

VOLUME NUMBER; and

4 2) hY
31
sense.

Contim& publication

single volume of a periodical (CCC, s FE1 1).

Periodical

1) Periodical

publication of which each volume is made up of distinct and independent contributions, not forming a continuous exposition, normally by two or more personal authors and normally the specific subjects and the authors of the contributions in successive volumes also being, in general, different, but all the subjects falling within one and the same region of knowledge, contemplated to be brought within its purview. It is not usually released complete as a volume but as fascicules or numbers, as they are called. It essentially expounds knowledge and does not repeat the same kind of information usually in the same pattern in each of its volumes, just bringing the information up to date from volume to volume. in the first sense. (CCC,

2) Any single volume of a periodical s FFll).

Examfiles: 1) Annals of library science. 2) Proceedings of the Royal Society of London.
3) Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft. 311 Suqplement to a Periodical deutschen morgenlandischen

1)

Periodical associated with another periodical and which is desirable to be put in juxtaposition to it. This may be called a PERIODICAL SUPPLEMENT TO A PERIODICAL. book published in instalments in the issues of a periodical with independent paginatidn. This may be called BOOK SUPPLEMENT TO A PERIODICAL. purpose of a periodical brought out for a or on a specific occasion or at specified 25

2) A

3) An issue usually extra
specific

E32 This may or may not have independent paginaintervals. tion. This may be called a SPECIAL SUPPLEMENT TO A PERIODICAL. 32 Serial

1) Periodical

2)

publication of which each volume, or each periodical group of volumes, embodies more or less similar kind of information, casually in the same pattern, mainly relating to its year (or other period) of coverage. It is It is not made of usually released complete as a volume. diverse contributions, each forming a continuous exposition of knowledge. Any single volume of serial in the first sense. (CCC, s FFl12).

Examples:

1) Annual report of
2) 3) 4) 5)

the Director of Madras. Madras Telephone Directory. Statesman's year-book. Who's who in America. Year-book of the Carnegie Institution ton. Periodical

Agriculture,

of Washing-

4

Bibliographical

1) Periodical giving a catalogue of the articles bearing on a stated subject and appearing in the current fascicules of periodicals. This may also include entries of books currently published. 2) Periodical giving a catalogue (CCC, s FF2). 41 of books currently published.

Indexing Periodical - Periodical giving a bare catalogue of articles bearing on a stated subject and appearing in the current It may also include bare entries of fascicules of periodicals. books currently published. (CCC, s FF2 1).

Exam/des:

1) Agricultural index. 2) Technical index. 3) Index list.

42

Abstracting Periodical - A periodical giving a catalogue of articles bearing on a stated subject and appearing in the current fascicules of periodicals, each entry being provided with an abstract of the article described by it. It may also include annotated entries of books currently published. (CCC, s FF22).

Examples: 1) Biological abstracts. 2) Library science abstracts. 3) Science abstracts : Ekvtrical engineering. 26

E7 43 Reviewing Periodical - A periodical giving, in a narrative form, an account of the contributions bearing on a stated subject and appearing in the fascicules of periodicals and the books publi(CCC, s FF23). shed during its period of coverage.
ExamQles: 1) Xear's work in librarianship. 2) ReQor t on progress in physics. 3) Annual review of biochemistry.

5

Rook - Physically independent document or documents, embodying a work, other than a periodical publication-that is the work has been completed or has been intended to be completed in one volume or a finite number of volumes. (CCC, s FF3).
NOTES Usually a book is in one volume. underNOTE 2 - The above definition really connotes what is commonly stood by the term `Book'.

51

Supplement - Volume forming a continuation of a book or a volume of it, making good its deficiencies, correcting its error or adding more information. Multi-volumed Rook - Set of volumes deemed to be inseparable and to form a single book, on the ground that:

6

1) 2) 3)
7
1)

the thought content is so distributed among the volumes of the set that it is unhelpful to treat each volume as it were a separate book; (CCC, s FF31); or the same sequence of pagination is contiiued in all the volumes of the set; or the set possesses a common index.

ContibUtiOll

Thought embodied in a host document in the form of ram&& in a periodical or of a section or a paragraph . (CCC, s FF5). 2) Micro document embodying a contribution.

27

FOI CHAPTER F

KNOWLEDGE CLASSIFICATION
SCHEME
01 OF KNO WLEDGE CLASSES

Vedic ClassiBcation - Scheme of classes implied in the Upanishads and later adopted in the Puranas, the Bhaghavat Gita, and the Tantras. (Annals; 5; 1958; 92). .Bacon Classification-Scheme Advawment of learning (1605) of 1958; 92). of the West.
NOTE-

02

of classes implied in the Francis Bacon. (Annals; 5;

It hasinfluenced manyof the schemesof knowledge classification

03

Kant ClassificationScheme of classes implied in the Critique of pure reuson (1781) of Immanuel Kant. (&mu&; 5; 1958; 92).
NOTE- This is severelydichotomic. Hegel Classifxcation - Scheme of classes' implied Logic (1812) of Hegel. (Annuls; 5; 1958; 92). NOTE-This is severely trichotomic. in the

04

05 06 07

Compte Classihation - Scheme of classes implied in the Courseof positive PhilosoPhy (1830) of Compte. (Annals; 5; 1958; 92). Ampere Classification - Scheme of classes implied in the Essay onphilosopt$ of science (1834) of Ampere. (Annals; 5; 1958; 92) Spenser ClassiBcation - Scheme of classes given in the Classijcation of science (1864) of Herbert Spenser. (Annals; 5; 1958; 92). SCHEME OF KNOWLEDGE CLASSIFICATION

1

Brnnet Classification - Scheme of classification designed by Jacques Charles Brunet and published for the first time in 1809 in his Manual du libraire et de I'amateur de lovers. (Annals; 5; 1958; 92). of the Bibliotheque NOTE- This is said to have influencedthe classification Nationaleof Franceand of the BritishMuseumLibrary.

2

Decimal Classification - Scheme of classification designed by Melvil Dewey and published for the first time in 1876. (Annuls; 5; 1958; 92).
NOTE-

This is essentialiy an enumerative schemeof &ssification. 28

Expansive Classification by Charles Ammi Cutter and 1893. (Annals; 5; 1958; 92).
Nura -

Scheme of classification designed published for the first time in

This is essentially an enumerative scheme of classification.

Universal Decimal ClassiScation - Scheme of classification sponsored by the International Institute of Bibliography and its successor body, the International Federation for Documentation and published for the first time in 1896. (Ann&; 5; 1958; 93).
Nrnx - This uses the Decimal Classification as the core and superimposes on it Time,. Space, Energy, Matter, and Personality Facets, and Phases without diffcrentiatton of these.

5

Library of Congress Classification - Scheme of classification designed at the Library of Congress of the United S-&es of America and published for the first time in 1904. (Annals; 5; 1958; 93). Nora notation. This is essentially an enumerative scheme of classification with gap

6

Subject Classification - Scheme of classification designed by James Duff Brown and published for the first time in 1906. (Annals; 5; 1958; 93).

NOTE- This is essentially an enumerative scheme of classification with some provision for facet analysis, and phase analysis.
61 Adjustable Classidication - Scheme of classification designed by James Duff Brown for smaller English libraries, with a notation of letters and numbers allowing for later insertions. (G&, p. 3). Colon Classification - Scheme of classification along with book classification scheme designed by Shiyali Ramamrita (Annals; Ranganathan and published for the first time in 1933.

7

5; 1958; 93).
NOTE - This is essentially a scheme of analytico-synthetic faceted classification with full provision for facet analysis, phase analysis, and anteriorizing common isolates.

8

Bibliographic Classification - Scheme of classification designed by Henry Evelyn Bliss and published for the first time in 1935. (AnnaL; 5; 1958; 93).
NOTE- This has a fair element of analytico-synthetic provision for anteriorizing common isolate. feature and has

91

Rider's International ClassiGcation - Scheme of classification designed by Fremont Rider and published for the first time in 1961.

29

F91
OTHER TERMS

1) Basic Classification - Version of a scheme of classification for the needs of macro-thought and of libraries for general readers. (Ant~~ls; 5; 1958; 92).

2) Depth Classi&ation-Version

of a scheme of classification sufficiently worked out for the needs of micro-thought and of libraries for specialist readers and of documentation work and service. (Annals; 5; 1958; 92).

30

G3 CHAPTER G

FACETS
1 11

OF A CLASS

Knowledge Class - Subject ranked among other subjects of the universe of knowledge in a scheme of classification.
Qasi Class-Work_, such as a sacred work, a classic, a literary work, or a perrodical publication or a bibliography, treated in a scheme of classification as if it were a class in the universe of knowledge. Class enumerated in the array of order 1, Main class[Prol, in a scheme of classification for the universe of knowledge. s 345(l)]. Canoaieal Class -Traditional sub-class of a main class, enumerated as such in a scheme of classification for the universe of knowledge, and not derived on the basis of definite characteristics. [Pro& s 345(3)]. Basic class - Generic name for a main or a canonical class [Pro& in a scheme of classification for the universe of knowledge. s 345(4)]. Isolate Idea - Thought unit, which is usually a manifestation of one of the five fundamental categories or is enumerated as such and which is not a subject by itself, but yields, when added to a basic or compound class, a subject of smaller extension than the host class. [Pro& s 345(5)].

12

13

14

2

Example: Chemistry, technology, mining, smithy, and economics are basic classes. Gold, iron and coal are not subjects but isolates. Combined with a class they yield subjects such as `Chemistry of Gold', `Technology of Iron', `Coal Mining', `Economics of Gold', `Smithy of Gold', `Smithy of Iron'.
21 22 3 Array-Isolate Idea array taken by itself. Thought unit enumerated in a single in an

Qpasi Isolate Idea-A characteristic array as if it were an isolate idea.

enumerated

Special Isolate Idea - Isolate idea special to a basic class or to an isolate idea or to an array-isolate idea-or to a small group of basic classes, isolate ideas, and array-isolate ideas, as the case may be -and usually denoted by special isolate terms and represented by special isolate numbers, or denoted by special array-isolate terms and represented by special array-isolate numbers as the case may be.

31

G4 Example:
circulatory 4 Wave length in radiation; system in medicine. design in engineering;

Common Isolate Idea - Isolate idea that can be attached to several host classes, but is denoted by the same isolate term, and represented by the same isolate number, whatever be the host class.
NOTE This concept is exploited in many schemes of classification.

Bibliography, periodical, institution, application, evaluation, and any geographical isolate, and any time isolate But they are not are made common isolates in CC and UDC. so made in the Library of Congress Classification.

Examjde:

Equivalent

Terms

1) Form Division - A division of a classification schedule or of a subject heading based on form or arrangement of subject matter in books, as for dictionaries or periodicals. (Gloss, p. 61). 2) Form Division (or Common Sub-division) - A division showing the aspect from which a subject is viewed or the authors' method of treatment. (Intro, S 16). 41 Anterior&q Common Isolate Idea - Common isolate idea whose attachment to a host class makes the resulting class have precedence, in arrangement, over the host class. of Mathematics' has precedence over Example : `Bibliography This is desired by the idea plane to secure `Mathematics'. helpful sequence, as one would like to consult the bibliography as a subject before selecting the regular books on it for reading.

Alternate

Term
of a general subject to be treatment of

Anterior Sub-division - Sub-division placed anterior or preliminary to a subjects. [Bib, 111; Cat, (63)]. 5

Posteriorizing Common Isolate Idea - Common isolate idea whose attachment to a host class makes the resulting class succeed the host class.

Example: Evaluation of a work in a class succeeds the work Institution pertaining to a class succeeds the class. in the class. Local treatment of a class succeeds the class.
6 Systematic is determined time principle; Isolate Idea - Isolate idea whose isolate number in conformity to a principle, such as Later-in-! principle of spatial contiguity, etc. 32

G93
7 Seminal IsoIate to several host classes whatever be the host in the context of the Idea - Isolate idea that can be attached and represented by the same isolate number, class but denoted by different *late terms host classes concerned.

Norm - This concept has been developed and is being exploited in CC. The endeavour of the Indian School is to replace the several schedules of special isolates by a single or a few schedula of seminal isolates.

Example: The digit 3 representing `Physiology' science, `Syntax' in linguistics, `Teaching Technique' `Function' in political science.

in biologjcal in education,

This concept was originated in CC in 1925. It was denoted by the term Unscheduled Nemonics. But in 1950, the more appropriate term `Seminal' in the place of `Unscheduled' was suggested by BI Palmer and AJ Wells. a Super-Imposed Isolate Idea - A portion of an isolate falling within the range of another co-ordinate isolate, that is another isolate in the same array. Example: Blood vessels of the right foot in the organ facet of medicine; rural children where the isolate `Child' is restricted by the isolate `Rural residence' in the facet of social groups in sociology.

Alternate
91 Facet subject.

Term
Isolate Idea. (Pro/, s 237). class or an isolate of a Generic name for a basic

Auto-biased

NOTE - See section T5 for definition as applied to the schedule of knowledge classification. 92

Compound Class - Class with more isolate facets. (Pro& s 345(6)].

a basic

facet

and

one or

Example: Coal mining in India in 1958 is a compound class. `Mining' is its basic facet; `Coal', the personality facet, `India' the space facet; and `1958', the time facet. 921 Order of a Compound in a class. Class -Number of isolate facets

Example: The example in 92 is of order isolate facets - Coal, India and 1958. 93

3, as it has the three

Dimension of a Class - Number of facets including the basic facet in a compound class; and the total of the number of facets in all the constituents of a complex class. 33

G94
94 Badiri a class. Intemity of the relation between any two elements

Nom+-Thefokwingtable presentsthe bonds between the divem elements vrvlgedininaeasingsaluenceofintensity.Thestrcngthofthebondineach case is indicated by an ordinal number - the grcate-rthe ordinal number, the greater being the intensityof the bond.

sTRENoTH
OF BOND

CONNlXXlNG
SYMBOL

fiLMION

: 3 4 2

0 8

Interclass phase relation Intrafacet phase relation Intra array phase relation 1

Phase relation

0

7

;
Appm&ate comxting symbol No connecting mbol Superimposition relation

Facet relation

9"
10 11

chaii

relation
Class, T=The,

Nora- The abbreviations used in the table are: BC=Basic S=Space, E=Energy, M=Matter, and P=Personality.

34

HI CHAPTER H

PEASES OF A CLASS
1
Complex Class - Class formed by the combination of two or more basic or compound classes and made to express the relation between them, but excludmg the case when one of the classes forms an isloate of the other, formed by subject-device. [Pool; s 345(g)].

Examjde: Numerical solution of differential equations for designers of machinery is a complex class. But the `Chemistry of Apple' is not a complex class as `Chemistry' is only an energy isolate formed by subject-device. 10 Order of a Complex Class -Number of basic or compound classes combined to form it. [Pro& s 345(g)]. Example: The example under 1 is `of order 2, as it has two compound classes, the relation between which is expressed. 2 Isolate formed by the combination of Complex IsoIatetwo or more isolates in one and the same facet (according to definition of `Facet' in Set T5), to express the relation between them, but excluding the case of their superimposition. (CC, s 841). Exwn@: Physiological anatomy has `Medicine' as its implied basic class. It expounds the relation between the two energy isolates `Physiology' and `Anatomy'. Therefore, it is a complex isolate. It is, of course, an energy isolate. 20 Order of Complex to form it.
Isolate -

Number of isolates combined

Example: The example under 2 is of order 2, as it has two isolates, the relation between which is expressed. 3
Complex Array Isolate-Array isolate formed by the combination of two or more array isolates in one and the same array to express the relation between them but excluding the case of their superimposition.

30 4

Order of Complex Array isolates combined to form it.

Isolate-Number

of array

Phase -A component of a complex class or of a complex isolate or of a complex array-isolate as the case may be. Example : `Numerical solution of differential equations' is one 35

H41 phase of the example phase. 41 under 1 `Design of machinery' is its other

Phase 1 - Phase of a complex class or of a complex isolate or of a complex array-isolate which is the primary one of exposition or otherwise deemed to be primary. (CC, s 6201).
Exam/de: In the example under 1, `Numerical differential equations' is the subject of exposition. fore, its first phase.
solution of It is, there-

42

Phase 2 - Phase of a complex class or of a complex isolate or of a complex array-isolate which is not the one of direct exposition but merely affects the exposition of phase 1. (CC, s 6202).

Example: In the example
ph,se 5 2.

under

1 `Design

of machinery'

is

Phase Relation - Relation between the phases of a complex class or of a complex isolate or of a complex array-isolate. (Annals; 5; 1958; 95). Inter Class Phase Relation ponent classes of a complex class. Relation between between the comthe comthe com-

501 502 503 51

Intra-Facet Phase Relation - Relation ponent isolates of a complex isolate. Intra Amy Phase Relation ponent array isolates of a complex General prehensive

Relation between array isolate.

Relation - Phase relation of a more or less comor non-descriptive kind between the two phases.

(CC, s 62a).
511 General Relation Phase - Second phase of a complex class or of a complex isolate or of a complex array-isolate as the case may be, in which relation. (CC, s 62al). 52 the phase relation is a general phase

B&se Relation - Phase relation indicating that the exposition 1 is biased towards phase 2, that is the exposition specially attuned to the needs of a specialist in the subject or the isolate or the array-isolate forming phase 2, either by selection or the arrangement of the topics, or by emphasis, or by the standard of exposition, or by the examples selected, or by other means.

of phase

(CC, s 62b). Example: In the example under 1, the phase relation is a bias
relation. 36

H551
521 Rhs Phase - Phase 2 of a complex class or of a corn lex isolate or of a complex array-isolate as the case may be, in w Rich phase relation is bias relation.

Exam/&:
bias phase. 53

In the example

under

1 `Design

of machinery'

is

Comparison Relation compared with phase 2.

- Phase relation in which phase 1 is (CC, s 62~). of `Biochemistry' and `Physiology'.

Example: Comparison
531

Comparison Phase-Phase 2 of a complex class or of a complex isolate or of a complex array-isolate as the case may be, in which the phase relation is a comparison relation. (CC, s 62~1). Diffcrenee Relation - Phase relation in which the difference between phase 1 and phase 2 is expounded. (CC, s 62d).

54

Exam@:
541

Difference

between

`Plant life'

and

`Animal

life'.

DiSerenee Phase - Phase 2 of a complex class or of a complex isolate or of a complex array-isolate as the case may be, in which the phase relation is `difference relation'. (CC, s 62d 1). Influencing Relation - Phase relation in which the influence of phase 2.on phase 1 is expounded or phase 1 is expounded as influenced by phase 2. (CC, s 62g).

55

Example: `Geopolitics' is exposition of `Political formation and development' as influenced by geographical factors. Here the phase relation is influencing relation.'
551 In&aeneing Phase - Phase 2 of a complex class or of a complex isolate or of a complex array-isolate as the case may be, in which the phase relation is influencing relation. (CC, s 62 gl).

Example: In the example the influencing phase.

under 55 `Geographical

factors' is

37

JO
-ER J

PLANES OF WORK
0 Plane of Work - One or other of the three planes - Idea Plane, Verbal Plane and Notational Plane-in which the designing or application of a scheme of classiication has to be done. plane of concepts viewed by themselves, Idea Plane -The that is independently of the terms denoting them and the numbers representing them; in other words independently of their expression in a natural language or their representation in an artificial language of ordinal numbers. Verbal Plane-The plane of expression of a concept in a natural language; in other words the plane of words, word groups, phrases, clauses, sentences and paragraphs in a natural language. Object-Language loped. (Pro& s 87). Language studied, described or deve-

1

2

21 22

Meta&mgaage - Language used as a medium of exposition in the study, description, and development of an object-language. (Prol, s 87).
Example 1: In a book of Sanskrit, linguistics explained for English speaking people with the aid of the English language as the medium of exposition, Sanskrit is the object-language and English is the meta-language. Example 2: In an English Jargon used by a particular profession or trade expounded with the aid of the normal English language, the jargon is the object-language and the normal English language is the meta-language.

23 3

Symbolic Meta-Ianguage -A defined symbols. (Pro& s 876).

meta-language of numbers

made

of

Notational concepts.

Plane -The 4 EQWALENT

plane

representing

TERMS

NATE - The terms defined in Chapter G belong to the idea plane. Each of the terms 11 onwards can be given a corresponding term belonging to the A.9an example, we give the foll0wL.g verbal or notational plane respectively. sets of equivalent terma: c1a.u Quasi Clas Ix&a Idea Subject Quasi Subject Isolate Term 38 Class Number Quasi Class Number Isolate Number

5GmmRIcTERMs
51 52 Generic term to denote an isolate idea or a basic Foeusclass or a compound class or a complex class. Isolate - Generic term to denote isolate idea or isolate term or isolate number. 6 CHART OF EQWALENT TERMS

NCTE- In any set of equivalent terms, the term in the idea plane has been delined. Some of the other terms have been delined when expediency demanded, but not all.

GENERIC

INTHEIDEA

lN=it.z-L
Subject Isolate Term Array-Isolate Term Basic Subject Main Subject Canonical Subject

INTHEN~TATXONAL PLANE Class Number Isolate Number &ray-IsolateNumber
Basic Class Number Main Class Number %ZEC1=

FocU? Basic Focus M&lFocuS Caoooical Focus Isolate Common Isolate h;erio&%g so Common
BasiCclass

Main Cliur canonical class Isolate Idea %Eoo lsolat=

Isolate Term Common Isolate Tel7l.l Anteriorizmg Common Isolate Term Posteriorizing Common Isolate TelXXl Array-Isolate Term Basic Subject Isolate Term Basic Subject Isolate Term Compound Subject

ksolateNumber common Isolate NUmber Anteriorizii Common Isolate Numba Posteriorizing Common Isolate Number %ZF Basic Class Number Isolate Number BasicClas Number Isolate Number "NWoc class (Confinucd)

Anterioriziig ;;y Isolate Posteriorizing Common Isolate Idea Array-Isolate Idea Basic Clas ( Isolate Idea Basic Clas Isolate Idea Compound Class

Posteriorizing Common Isolate Array Isolate

Facet Basic Facet Imlate F& Compound Focus

39

552
G~NENC

IN THE IDEA
PLANE Complex Class

IN THE VERBAL

PLANE

IN THE NOTATIONAL PUNE

Complex

Focus

Complex

Subject

Complex Class Number Co;up~~&solate

Complex

Isolate "IYX? 1solate "Tz2 lso'ate Complex ArrayIsolate Idea Biasing Class Biasing Isolate Idea Complex ArrayIsolate Term Biasing Subject Biasing Isolate Term

Complex Array Isolate

Complex ArrayIsolate Number Biasfs2.s Biasq~late

Biasing Focus Biasing Isolate

Biasing Array Isolate Comparison Comparison Focus Isolate

Biaszsg Array-Isolate cOmparison Class

Bias&Array-Isolate Comparison Subject

Biastsey-Isolate

Co;up;bp Cc;upme

Class Isolate

Cq~wimn

Isolate

Chnnnison

Isolate

YxEon Difference Difference

A=y Focus Isolate

Comparison Array&&ate Idea Difkrence Difference Idea Class Isolate

Comparison ArrayIsolate Term Difference Difference Term Subject Isolate

Comparison AnmyIsolate Number Diierence class Number DiNeg Isolate

DiEEe a Influencing

hy Focus

Difference ArrayIsolate Idea Influencing Ithexing Class Isolate

DifErence ArrayIsolate Term Influencing Influencing Tel?ll Subject Isolate

Difference ArrayIsolate Number InEt Class

Influencing

Isolate

InkuIhgy

Isolate

General Relation FOeuS General Relation Isolate General Relation Array Isolate

General Relation ClasS General Relation Isolate Idea General Relation Array-Isolate Idea

Genera1 Relation Subject General Relation Isolate Term General Relation Array-Isolate Term

Ge;w&lwat~ General Relation Isolate Number Genera1 Relation Array-Isolate Number

K7 CHAPTER K

CANONS FOR KNOWLEDGE CLASSIFICATION
NATE- The general canons for classification given in Chapter B are applicable not only to classes of knowledge but also to the isolates in each of the facets belonging to any Basic Class.

I

Canon of Hospitality in Array-The construction of a class number or an isolate number should admit of an infinite number of new co-ordinate classes or isolates being added to the array to which it belongs at appropriate filiatory places, without disturbing the existing class numbers or isolate numbers in any way. (Pro& s 221). Canon of Hospitality in Chain-The construction of a class number or an isolate number should admit of an infinite number of new class numbers or isolate numbers being added at the end of the chain to which it belongs, without disturbing the existing class numbers or isolate numbers in any way. (Prol, s 231). General Canon of Mnemonics -The digit used to represent a specified concept in a class number of isolate number should be the same in a:1 class numbers or isolate numbers having that concept represented in them, provided that insistence on such consistent representation does not violate more important requirements. (Pro& s 241). Canon of Verbal Mnemonics - The alphabetical device may be used to represent any isolate or array-isolate, when arrangement on the basis of any characteristic other than the name, is not more helpful. (Pro& s 251). Canon of Scheduled Mnemonics -A scheme of classification should include a set of schedules of common isolates likely to occur in an array of some order or other of all or several classes, or that it should refer any recurrent set of isolates to the one schedule of them given in connection with an appropriate basic class. (Pro& s 261). Canon of Systematic Mnemonics-A scheme of classification should use one and the.same sequence of digits to represent the isolate in an array, arranged according to each one of the principles, such as Later-in-time; spatial contiguity, etc. (Annuls; 9; 4; 1962; 190). Canon of Seminal Mnemonics - A scheme of classification should use one and the same digit to represent seminally equivalent concepts in whatever array of whatever facet of whatever class they may appear, though the concept may be denoted by different terms in different contexts or arrays. (Pro& s 271). 41

2

3

4

5

K91 91 Coextensiveneas - The expression in a class number of the measure of incidence of each of the relevant characteristics of the subject embodied in the document concerned. Flexibility - Classification permitting the insertion of any new class and its notation being capable of expansion to mark that insertion without dislocating the rest of the notation. (MunuaZ, p 81). Close Qassi6cation 1) Arrangement of subjects in a classification system in minute subdivisions under inclusive divisions. (Gloss, p 32). 2) A method of classifying books that places there in minute subdivisions rather than in inclusive divisions of a scheme of classification. (Gloss, p 32). Broad ChxssiBcation 1) Arrangement of subjects in a classification system in broad general divisions with a minimum of subdivisions. (Gloss, P 20). 2) A method of classifying that places material in inclusive divisions rather than in minute subdivision of a scheme of classification. (Gloss, p 20). Apupa Arrangement -Arrangement complying with the pattern Alien, Penumbral, Umbra], Penumbral, Alien, that is, starting with the class or the isolate or the array-isolate of primary interest to the reader at the moment on either side of it following successively the classes or the isolates, the array-isolates of progressively decreasing interest to him, until they fade out into classes, or isolates, or array-isolates not of interest to him. (Pro& s 444). UmbraI Region-Region in an arrangement consisting of the class or the isolate or the array-isolate of primary interest to the reader at the moment. (Prol, s 444). Penumbral Region - Region in an arrangement on either side of the umbral region consisting successively of classes or isolate or array-isolates of progreisively decreasing interest to the reader at the moment. (Pro& s 444). Alien Region-Region in an arrangement consisting on either side of the umbra1 region, beyond the penumbral_region concerned, consisting of classes or isolates or array-isolates not of interest to the reader at the moment. (Pro& s 4-M). Every where Apupa Arrangement - Arrangement presenting an apupa arrangement, whichever class of isolate or array isolate is taken to be umbra1 region. (Pro/, s 444). 42

92

93

94

95

951

952

953

954

L131 CHAPTER L

CONCEPT OF FUNDAMENTAL
0

CATEGORIES

Fundamental Categories - Generic term denoting time, (Prol, s 3501. Fund, s 514). space, energy, matter and personality.
NOTE 1 -These are only postulated categories without any metaphysical significance. Their connotation is indicated in the succeeding sections. NATE 2 - It is possible to postulate a greater number of fundamental categories but scientific method requires that we should prefer the minimum number of categories which prove necessary and sufficient in designing a scheme of classification.

1 TIME
10

AS A FUNDAMENTAL

CATEGORY

Time -Assumed

term.

(Fund, s 141).

11

Conventional Time Isolate 1) Conventional division of time, such as millennium, century, decade, year, month, week, day, etc. 2) Geological age measured from a conventional era. (Pro& s 463. Abgifu; 1; 1950; 49, s 3).
Featured Time Isolate - Pocket of time repeating itself in the stream of time, as a result of astronomical factors like:

12

Rotation of the earth on its axis; Periodical motion of the moon, the earth, and the other planets along their respective ecliptics; Astrophysical factors like variation in sun spots and other solar phenomena; and Cosmic factors, such as the periodical contraction and expansion of the universe as a whole. With all of which are correlated meteorological occurrences and seasons, thermal, radiational, electrical, ionic, magnetic, cosmic ray and other phenomena. (Pro& s 463. Annals; 1; 1954; 68, 313). 13
Time Isolate Level 1 - First manifestation of the fundamental category Time in any particular round-usually the last round -in a subject when it is analyzed into facets and the facets are arranged in accordance with the postulates and principles prescribed for the purpose. (Prol, s 463. Abgila; 1; 1950; 49, s 3). Time Isolate Level 2 - Second manifestation of the fundamental category time in any particular round - usually the last a subject when it is analyzed into facets and the facets round -in 43

131

L132 are arranged in accordance with the postulates and principles prescribed for the purpose. (Pro& s 463. Annals; 1; 1954; 68,313). 132 14 Time Isolate Level 3 Analogous to 13 1.

Public Time-Time conventionally reckoned from the assumed year of birth of Jesus Christ or any other epoch as origin. Abgila; 1; 1950; 57, s 33). (Prol, s 4533.
Public
NATE -

141

Era -

Origin

for reckoning

public

time.

(Rev ah;

23; 1956; 71, s 21).
A schedule of some public eras is given in the ahove reference.

142

Favoured Era - Era most helpful in classifying the majority of the documents in a collection, library or a bibliography. (& dot; 23; 1956; 72, s 23).
NOTE The Christian era is now the favoured era in wide use.

15

Private Time s5u7bj;c3t3,as origin.

Time reckoned from an epoch intrinsic to a (Rev dot; 23, 1956, 77, s 6. Abgila; 1, 1960,

,
of foetus and the ontogeny of any organism, the epoch of fertilization is a more relevant origin for the measurement of time than the year of birth of Jesus Christ.

Examglc 1: In the study of the development

Example 2: In the biography of a person or the history of an institution, the year of his birth or the year of its foundation is a more helpful origin for measurement of time. Example 3: So also, in the study of the fundamental particles in nuclear physics, and in certain micro and macro phenomena in physics, chemistry, technology, biology, agriculture, medicine, education, and economics, the initial phenomenon concerned is more helpful in the measurement of time.
151 23; 16 Private Era - Origin 1956; 77, s 61). for reckoning private time. (&a dot; time for light

'

Unit of Time - Duration of time used in measuring (Rev dot; 23, 1956; 72, s 2). forming time isolate.

Examples: Millennium, century, years, geological age, etc.

decade,

year,

month,

NOTE- Units of different durations may he used for different epochs, according to the class context and according to the array in the time facet.

I7

Public Unit of Time - Unit of time based on astronomical factors, such as millennium, century, decade, year, month, etc, in common use. (Annals; 5, 1958; 84). 44

L212 171
century digit 5; 1958; 84).

Eective

centuryis

Odd century or a century whose 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9 in AD millennium. (Ad;
or a decade (CC,s311). whose decade

172 173

E&et& Decade - Odd decade digitis1,3,5,7orginanADcentury.

Method of Complements - Method for determining the digit for a century, decade or year in the time isolate number in a BC millennium, such that the ordinal sequence of the years follows in the progression of time from the past into the future and similarly for other eras. (cc, s 330).
NC?lB -The procedure is as follows: Write the conventional number of the year in Indo-Arabic numerals. The excess of 9 over each corresponding digit is the century digit, decade digit, and year digit rcqxctively in the isolate number.

Example: 3 BC=C996;

Taking C to 10 BC=C989;

represent the first millennium and 500 BC=C499.

BC,

18

Private a subject.

Unit of Time - Unit of time intrinsic (Rev dot; 23, 1952; 79, s 8).

and suited to

Example: In the ontogeny of a living organism, such as the stage of prenatal, new born infant, child, adolescent, adult, and the old, different units of time may have to be used. So also, in the study of the fundamental particles in nuclear physics, minute fractions of a second may have to be used, depending on the nature of the particle. 2 SPACE

AS A FUNDAMENTAL
Assumed term.

CATEGORY

20 21

Space -

(Fund, s 5143).

Space Isolate Level 1 - Conventional division of the surface of the earth, such as continent, country, constituent state, district, country, taluk, and other political or general administrative division and or region, ocean, sea, bay, gulf and other water formation; troposphere, stratosphere, ionosphere, and space inside or outside the earth. (Pro& s 3521). Examples: Asia, India, Country Madras Country (State), Tanjore (District). belongs.

211 212

Mother (CC, s 42).

to which

the library

Favoured Country - Country about which the library has a larger collection than about other countries barring mother country. (CC, s 43).

45

L213 213 Zone -- Division of the surface the earth or of a geographical area, based on latitude as characteristic. (Rev ubc; 24, 1957, 24, s 44. Abgila; 1, 1950,80 s 433). Non-conventional Zone - Divisiin of the surface of the earth or of a-geographical area, based on any diameter other,than the polar axis and any other diameter orthogonal or oblique to it. (Abgila; 1; 1950; 81, 544). Example: Zones used for aviation maps. 214 Orientation Division - Division of the surface of the earth or of a geographical area based on orientation as characteristic. (Rev dot; 24, 1957,23, s 43. Abgila; 1, 1950; 80, s 443).
Empire - The totality of the nations under the sovereignty of one among themselves as a ruling nation. Subject Region - Geographical area whether contiguous or not, but taken together and having a specific subject, feature. (CC, s 413. Abgila; 1, 1950,98, s 452).

of

2131

215 216

Examples: Geological circles of a country, the rice belt of the world or of a country, communistic countries, postal district, dollar area, and under-developed countries. 217
Near-Sovereign Formation - Area comprising countries, whose governments have agreed to form a group with willingness to surrender or with the intention of surrendering eventually some part of their sovereignty to the authority of the group. (CC, s 412. Abgila; 1, 1950,83, s 448).

Example: League of Nations, United Nations, the Commonwealth. 22
Featured Space Isolate - Physiographical feature smaller than a continent or an ocean and man-made formations and population clusters. (Pro& s 3522. Rev dot; 24, 1957, 57, s 52).

Examples: Valley, plateau, mountain, desert, prairie, coastland, cape, delta, island, bay, gulf, lake, river, city, town, village, etc. 23 area with a high density Population&luster Isolate -An of population and with certain community centres, such as vihars, temples, mosques, churches, gurdwaras, market places, meeting places, and cultural centres. Example: Super city, city, town, village and hamlet. 24
Zonal Isolate - Subdivision of a physiographical feature based on some characteristic intrinsic to it. (Rev dot; 24, 1957, 57, s 6). 46

L31 Trcdcss zone, snow zone, etc, of a mountain.
Territorial water, high sea, continental shelf' and bedofanoceanGarden, ridge, street, notified area, shopping zone, etc, of a locality. 25 First manifestation of fundamental Space Isolate Level lcategory space in any particular round-normally the last roundin a subject when it is analyzed into facets and facets are arranged in accordance with the postulates and principles prescribed for the purpose. (Pro& s 3521).
Space Isolate Level 2 - Second manifestation of fundamental category space in any particular round -normally the last round in a subject when it is analyzed into facets and facets are arranged in accordance with the postulates and principles prescribed for the purpose. (Pro& s 3521). Space Isolate Level 3 -

251

252

Analogous to 25 1.
AMENTAL CATEGORY

3 ENERGYASAFUND 30
Energy Isolate -

Categories, such as: 1) Action by human agent on another human being or material or concept ; 2) Reciprocal action between physical, biological, or human entities j 3) Reciprocal action between natural groups in biology and social groups in social sciences; 4) Auto-action within an entity; 5) Action involved in reciprocal action and auto-action; and 6) Any other category deemed as energy in a scheme of classification, manifesting itself as an isolate in a subject. (Prol, s 3531. Funds 5143).

Exam@: In Cc, structure, normal functioning, reciprocal action with environment, evolution from one form to another, and development of one and the same form. These enumerated categories are without a common name but are applicable in new subject contexts. 31 Energy Isolate Round 1 - First manifestation of the fimdamental category Energy in a subject, when the latter is analyzed into its facets and the facets are arranged in accordance with the postulates and principles prescribed for the purpose. (Prol, s 35611. Abgila; 2, 1952, 185, s 5751). NATE - The sequence of the mauife&ations of energy arising in the analysis
is generally detennined by Wall-Picture-Principle.

of a subject into ita hcets (sm section N22).

47

L32 32
Energy Isolate Round 2 - Second manifestation of the fundamental category Energy in a subject, when it is analyzed into its facets and the facets are arranged in accordance with the postulates and principles prescribed for the purpose. (Prol, Abgifa; 2, 1952, 185, s 5751). s 3561.

Example: If two energy isolates occur in a subject as `disease' and `cure' `disease' belongs to the first round and `cure' belongs to the second round, as determined by the Wall-Picture-Principle. 33
Energy 4 MATTER Isolate Round 3Analogous to 32.

AS A FUNDAMENTAL

CATEGORY

400
4001

Preliminaries Concrete Entity - Entity existing physically in space-time, mesh, outside the mind of the knower, as it is commonly underIt is either recognizable with the aid of the primary stood. senses or inferable from data obtained with the aid of primary senses. (Annals, 5, 1958, 86).

ExampleS: House, Door, Table, 4002

Electron,

Virus, Galaxy.

Abstract Entity - Entity existing only as a concept within the mind of the knower, without a concrete entity as a correlate in a space-time mesh and not recognizable with the aid of the primary senses. (Annals, 5, 1958,86).

Examples: 4003

Goodness,

Constitution,

Law.

Natural Material - Concrete entity found in and extracted from nature. (Annuls, 5, 1958, 86).

Examples:

Clay, Paddy,

Milk.

Near-Natural Material - Natural material processed within small limits and without the aid of technology and elaborate machinery in order to bring it to the stage of being consumable, or nearer to that stage. (Annals, 5, 1958,86).

Examples: 4005

Brick, Rice, Boiled Rice, Pudding,

Butter.

Ultimate Commodity - Natural or near-natural material either directly consumable or processed beyond small limits and usually with the aid of technology and elaborate machinery and brought to the stage of being consumable as it is. (Annals, 5, 1958, 86).

Examples: 4006

Fruit,

Rice-Pudding,

Motor

Car.

Intermediate Commodity r If A B C . . , . . X Y Z are the entities at definite successive stages in the progress of the natural 48

L40094 or near-natural material A towards the ultimate commodity Z, commodity. (Aaau~, eachofBC . . . . . . X Y is an intermediate 5, 1958,86). 4006 1 intermediate or ultimate commodity By-product - An produced concomitantly in the process of reaching some other intermediate or ultimate commodity from a given raw material. RawlWatcrial-LetA,B . . . . . . P,Q . . . . . . Y, Zbethe entities at definite successive stages in the progress of the natural or near-natural material A towards the ultimate commodity Z, then, A, is the raw material for B; P is the raw material for Q; and Y is the raw material for Z. (Annals; 5 ; 1958; 86).

4007

Examples: Paddy is raw material for rice.
Roiled rice is raw material for rice-pudding. Milk is also raw material for butter and rice-pudding. 4007 1 Catalytic Material-Natural or near-natural material or an intermediate commodity, whose mere presence is essential in the process of arriving at the ultimate commodity if it is the next stage or into the intermediate commodity of the next stage in its progress towards the stage of ultimate commodity.

Examples:
catalytic

Manganese dioxide in the preparation of oxygen gas. Active carbon in the production of hydrogen chloride.
are not yet fully
known.

NATE -

material

The details about the modification and the final restoration of &e

4008

ImmediateCommodity-LetA,B . . . . . P,Q . . . . . Y,Z be the entity at definite consecutive stages in the progress of the natural or near-natural material A towards the u&mate commodity Z, then B is the immediate commodity for A, Q is the immediate commodity for P, and Z is the immediate commodity for Y. (Annals; 5; 1958; 86).

Exam+:
from paddy. 4009 1

Rice and bran are immediate

commodities

processed

Material - Natural material, intermediate (Annals, 5, 1958, 86). Service -

material, near-natural material, catalytic commodity, or ultimate commodity.

40092

Action to satisfy a want. Transport service, Laundry

(Ant&ah, 5, 1958, 86).
service, Teaching.

Examfiles:
40093 40094

ultimate Service - Service at the stage of its being directly satisfying a want. (Annals, 5, 1958, 86). Intermediate towards ultimate Service - Service at any stage in its progress service. (Annals, 5, 1958, 86).

49

L40 40 Matter 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 8) 9) Isolate Category, such as:

Natural material, Near-natural material, Catalytic material, Intermediate commodity when used as raw material, Ultimate commodity, Intermediate service, Ultimate service, property-attribute of an entity, and Value-attribute in respect of degree of excellence, principle,quality or the like which is intrinsically desirable; quality,

manifesting itself as an isolate in a subject. Examples: Tubular structure, red colour, oxidizing ethical value, educational value, social value. 41

I

Matter Isolate Round 1 - Manifestation of the fundamental category Matter before the &n&station of the f~damental category Energy in the round 1; in a subject when it is airalyxed into facets and the facets are arranged in accordance with postulates and principles prescribed for the purpose. (ZW, s 3532. Abgila; 2, 1952, 186, s 5752).
Matter Isolate Round 2 - Manifestation of the fundamental category Matter after the manifestation of the fundamental category Energy in its round 1 and before its manifestation in round 2. (Prol, s 3532. Abgila; 2, 1952, 186, 5752). Matter Isolate Round 3-

42

.43 44

Analogous to round 2.

First man&station of the fundaMatter Isolate Level lmental category Matter in any particular round in a subject when it is analyzed into facets and the facets are arranged in accordance with postulates and principles prescribed for the purpose. (Pro!, s 466. Abgila; 2, 1957, 186, s 5756).
Matter Isolate Level 2 - Second manifestation of the fundamental category Matter in any particular round in a subject when it is analyzed into facets and the facets are arranged in accordance with postulates and principles prescribed for the (Pro& s 466. Abgila; 2, 1950, 186, s 5756). purpose. Matter Isolate Level 3 -

45

46

Analogous to round 2. AL CATEGORY

5 PERSONALITY 500
Preliminaries

AS A FUNDAMENT

50

WOO7 WhoIe Assumed term. term.

Put-Assumed Examjh:

and constituent of a whole.

It is taken as a generic term to denote portion, organ

Port&m of a Concrete Entity - Part of a concrete entity, different from its whole only in quantity or size. (Pro&s 3503). Example :
1) Aglassofmilktakenoutofajugofmilk. 2) A short piece of wire cut out of a long piece of wire. 3) A lump of clay taken out of a big ball of clay.

Organ of a Coner&e Entity--Part of a concrete entity which is not a portion of it, which has its own individuality, with its own distinctive features and functions, which is specrfic to the whole entity, and which contributes to the make up of the
whole. (Pral, s 3503).

.Example :

1) Hand of a human body. 2) Wheel of a bicycle.
3) Top layer of a road surface.

Constituent of a Concrete Entity - Material of w `lich the entity or any of its organs is made. (Pro& s 3503). Exanqde : 1) Iron in a bicycle. 2) Cement in the wall of a building. 3) Water in the human body.
is a manifestation of the

Nom. The constituent of a concrete entity fundamental category Matter.

Organ of a Social Entity - Part of a social entity which has its own individuality with its own distinctive features and functions, and which contributes to the make up of the whole. (Annals, 5, 1958; 87). Example : 1) Cabinet of a Governm ent . 2) Academic Council of a University. 3) Top Management of a business enterprise. of. whole (as agGnst an (Pro& s 3503).

Universe of Wholes -Universe Example :

organ) entities of specified kind, concrete or social.

1) Universe of bicycles whatever be the brand or size. 2) Universe of Governments whatever be the kind of Government. 3) Universe of literature whatever be the language. 51

WOO81 50081 Universe of Organs of First Remove-Universe of the organs of a typical whole entity of the universe of whole concerned, arrived at the first level of breakdown of the whole into its organs. (Prol, y 3503). Example : 1) Wheel, gear, frame, handle, of first remove of a bicycle. and seat are organs

2) Head, cabinet, legislature, are organs of first remove of a government. 3) Foundation, floor, walls, pillars, are organs of first remove of a building. 50082 Universe of Organs of Second Remove - OniversP of the organs of the first remove of a typical whole organ of tr.e first remove of a typical whole entity of the universe of the whole concerned. (Prol, s 3503). Example : 1) The tyre, the tube, the rim, the spokes and the hub of a wheel of a bicycle. education minister, finance 2) Prime minister, minister, etc, of the cabinet of a government. 3) The pedestal, the stanchion part and the capital of a pillar of a building. of Organ of Third Remove-Analogous

50083 50

Universe to 50082.

Personality Isolate - The residue arising in the analysis of a subject into the fundamental categories, after Time, Space, Energy, Matter, and Anteriorizing Isolates (Jee s C41) are separated out. (Prol, s 3550). NOTE1 - The residue may be universe of whole of concrete or social entities or thr universe of their organs of dnv remove, or a universe of abstract entities forming isolates in subjects belong& to ce&in basic subjects, such as mathematics, literature, linguistics, religion, education, and law.
Nor. 2 - The Personality isolates as such by a scheme of classification. in these subjects are usually general definition indicated and more indicated

NOTE 3 -- This will have to bc so until an objective, positive detinition than thr one given in the enumc%Avc above, could be formulated.

51

Personality

Isolate

Level 1

1) In the case of concrete and social entities, a universe of whole. (Prol, s 3551). 2) In the case of abstract entities, an isolate prescribed in a scheme of classification as belonging to level 1. Example : 1) Hind cycle, Gents' cycle, 52 Humber cycle, Realeigh cycle, Ladies' cycle, Children's cycle.

L57

2) Monarchy, 3)
52 Personality

Oligarchy, Democracy among types of Government. English, Sanskrit, Tamil as media for Literature.

Isolate Level 2 1) In the case of concrete or social entities, a universe of organs of first remove of the universe of books. 2) In the case of abstract entities, an isolate prescribed in a scheme of classification as belonging to level 2. (Pro& s 3552).

Examples : 1) Wheels of different brands of a bicycle.

2) Head, Cabinet, Parliament, etc, of a Government. 3) Forms of literature, such as Poetry, Drama, Fiction, Prose, etc. 53
Personality Isolate Level 3 -

Analogous to 52.

NOTE1 -The first definition in 51 and 52 are, as can be seen, objective and independent of any scheme of classification.
NOTE 2 -The second definition of 51 and 52,however,depends may vary with a scheme of classification in use. upon and

Ncnx3 - The question of arriving at an objective definition, independent of any scheme of classification, for levels of a universe of abstract entities requires further research. Nwra4 - Generally speaking, Wall-Picture-Principle be of help in determining lwels. 54 (see section N22) will

Personality Isolate Round 1 - Personality isolate manifesting itself in a subject before the first manifestation of ,tht fundamental category Energy, when the subject is analyzed into facets and facets are arranged in accordance with postulates and prmciples stated for the purpose. (Pro& s 3534). Personality Isolate Round 2 - Personality isolate manifesting itself in a subject after the first manifestation of the fundamental category Energy but before its second manifestation. (Pro& s 3534). Personality System Isolate Roand 3-

55

56 57

Analogous to 55. with

Exposition of a basic subject in accordance a specific school of thought. (Pro!, s 3671).
Examples:

1) Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, Allopathy and Homoeopathic systems in medicine. 2) Classical, Psycho-analytical, Behaviouristic, Gestalt and Field systems in psychology. 3) Kindergarten, Dalton plan and Basic education system. 53

Wfl 571 Favoured System - The system which is taken by a library to be the favoured system in a subject, usually on the basis of its having the greatest literary warrant in the library. (Prol, s 367 11).

Example:

The following are now being taken favoured systems:

1) Allopathy in medicine.

2) Classical psychology in psychology.
3) Capitalistic system in economics. 572 Saab-System - Exposition of a subject according to a system which is accepted to be a sub-system of another system.

Example: Adler's Individualism and Jung's system are among the sub-systems of Freud's psycho-analysis.
58 Special - Exposition of a basic subject restricted to some limited range of any of its facets, helpfulness to readers demanding (cc, s 054). all such expositions to be kept together.

Example :

female 1) Child medicine, medicine in medicine.

medicine,

industrial

2) Low pressure physics, high temperature physics, and nuclear physics in physics. 3) Hydroponics in agriculture.

.

54

Ml92 CHAPTER M

POSTULATES FOR CLASSIFICATION
11 are five Postulate of Fundame ntal Categories -There and only five fundamental categories, namely, Personality (P), Matter (M), Energy (E), Space (S) and Time (T). (Elc, s Hl). Postulate of Rasic Facet (Ele, s Ml 1). Each subject has a basic facet.

12 13

Postalate of Isolate Facet - A subject may have one or more isolate facets each one of which can be deemed to, be a manifestation of one and only one of the five fundamental categories. We, s H12).
Non. - A subject consistseither of a basic classalone or of a basic class aud one or more mauifestationof one or more of the five fundamental categories.

14

Postulate of Concreteness-The five fundamental categories fall into the following sequence, when arranged according to their decreasing concreteness, P, M, E, S, T. (Ele, s H2). Postulate of Sequence - The basic facet of the subject should be put first, and the other facets should be arranged thereafter in the sequence of the decreasing concreteness of the fundamental categories of which they are respectively taken to be manifestation, in the case of their not being more than one manifestation of any fundamental category. (EC%, s H21). Postulate of Space and Time Facet - Ordinarily, [S] and ET] should be put last in the sequence in which they are mentioned here. (Elc, s 541). Postulate of Rounds for Energy - Energy may manifest itself in one and the same subject more than once in succession, that is in more than one round. (Ele, s 551). Postulate of Rounds for Personality and Matter-It is possible for a manifestation of Personality and Matter to occur after [lE], again after [PE], again after [3E], and so on, that is, in any round. (Et%, s 552). Postulate of Sequence Within a Round-The sequence of the isolate facets within a round should be the same as given by the postulate of sequence. (Ele, s 553). Postulate of Level - Personality may manifest itself in one and the same round in a subject more than once, that is in two or more levels. So also in the case of Matter, Space, and Time. (Ele, s K4). 55

15

16

17

18

191

192

Ml93 19s
Postulate of Level Chmter - Facets of different levels of the same fundamental category within one and the same round should be kept together. (Elc, s K41).

2vERBALPLANE
NOTE-NO postulate has yet been formulated.

3 NOTATIONAL
Postulates for Notational

PLANE Plane

Non. -While the postulates for the idea plane can form a suitable basis for many different schemes of classification, the postulates for the notational plane are likely to be different for dXerent schemes of classification. Section 31 gives postulates applicable to CC and UDC. The postulates in the other sections are applicable to CC only.

31

Postulate of Connecting Digit - The connecting digits to be inserted before an isolate number are as shown below. (Ele, s H5).
Nora - In UDC, there is not a clear distinction between [PI, [M], and [El. In case of some basic classes, these facets are provided for under the name Analytical Divisions; and the connecting digit for them is a hyphen as given in the following table. Where analytical divisions are not provided, combination of facets is secured by the device of a colon, linking numbers. NATURE OF
ISOLATE THE

cc
;

UDC

Personality Matter Energy Space Time Anterioriaing

,

(1.1 . ..' -0 (-1

` nil

32

Postulate 1 for Omission of Connecting Digit - In CC, the connecting digit need not be inserted before [PI, if it immediately follows basic class. (Ele, q H51). Postulate 2 for Omission of Connecting Digit - In CC,. the connecting digit need not be inserted before [2 P], [3 P], etc if these follow immediately after [El, [2E], etc. (Ele, s J71). Postdate 3 for Omission of Connecting Digit - In CC, of two consecutive facets, if all the isolate numbers in the earlier facet are known to consist of same number of digits, the connecting digit between two facets may be omitted. (Ele, s K61). Postulate of Anteriorking Qpality - In CC, any number followed by a Roman small or an arrow shall have precedence over the original number. (Ele, s 0251). , 56

33

34

35

N23 CHAPTER N

PRINCIPLES FOR ARRANGEMENT
1 GENERAL 11

PRINCIPLES

Principle of Increasing Concreteness - If two classes X and Y are such that X can be said to be more abstract and less concrete than Y, X should precede Y. (Prol, s 3581). Example : Methodology
Theoretical account precedes application. of a subject precedes local description of it.

12

Principle of Inversion-The facets in the facet of a basic class should be in the decreasing sequence (Prol; s 3582. concreteness in each of the rounds. 2; 1952; B219).
2 PRINCIPLES

formula of their

Abgila;

FOR FACET SEQUENCE BASIC FACET)

(OTHER

THAN

21

Commodity-Raw Material-Transformation-Principle If facet A is a commodity got out of the raw material forming facet B by the process of transformation forming facet C - all of the same subjectthen the three facets should be arranged within the class and the class number of the subject in the sequence A, B, C. (Ele, s H31).

Example: Consider the subject `Weaving of yarn into cloth'. This belongs to the basic class `Textiles'. Here `cloth' is [P]. So also `yarn' is [PI, `weaving' is [E] . The sequence of these facets within the basic class textiles should be, Textiles (BC), Cloth [PI, Yarn [P2], Weaving [El. 22
Wall-picture-Principle - If two facets A and B of a subject are such that the concept behind B will not be operative unless the concept behind A is conceded, even as a mural picture is not possible unless the wall exists to draw upon, then the facet A should precede facet B. (Ele, s H 32).

Example: Consider `Disease' and `Cure'. The concept of `Cure' leans for its very existence on the concept of `Disease'. So also let the manifestation be `Disease' and `Prevention'. Here also the concept of `Prevention' leans for its very existence The sequence should be `Disease' on the concept of `Disease'. [E] `Cure' [2E] ; and `Disease' [El, `Prevention' [2E].
23 Actond-Aeon-Actor-Tool-Principle - If in a subject facet B denotes action on facet A by facet C with facet D as the tool 57

N24 then the four facets should be arranged in the sequence A, B, C, D. (EL%, s H33). Example: In the sutject `Tubercular disease of lungs', `Disease' `Lungs' is acted upon; it is, therefore, the Actand. is the action. It IS, therefore, the Actor. `Tubercular' bacillus acts on lungs. Thus these facets should be arranged in the sequence Medicine (BC). Lungs [PI. Disease [El. Tubercular bacillus [2P].

24

Cow-Calf-Principle - If facet A and another facet B belonging to the same subject are not to be separated though they are distinct from each other and separable, they should be kept together within one and the same round as a milchmg cow and its unweaned calf are not separately sold out though they are distinct entities and are thus separable, but are kept together (Ele, s H34). with one and the same owner. Example: In the subject `Functions of the President of India', `Function' is [El. President is [PI. `India' which stands for the `Indian State' is also [PI. `President' is with `India in the inseparable relation of a calf and its cow. Therefore, the facets The `India' and `President' should be tied together as it were. resulting sequence will be History (BC). India [PI. President' [P2], and Function [El.

25

Whole-Organ-Principle -- If in a subject facet B is an organ, (Ele, s H35). that is an organic part, then A should precede B.

3 PRINCIPLES

FOR ISOLATE

SEQUENCE

IN AN ARRAY

31

Principle of Increasing Qwtity - If the characteristic used as the basis of classification admits of quantitative measurement, the sequence of the isolates should be in the ascending sequence of the measure in which the characteristic is shared (Pro& s 1431). by the isolate. Example: The isolates in geometry based on the dimension of the space studied as the characteristic may be arranged as `Lime' or one-dimensional space, `Plane' or two-dimensional space, `Solid' or three-dimensional space, four-dimensional space, etc.

32

Principle of Later-in-Time - If the isolates in an array have originated at different times, they may be arranged in parallel time-sequence. (Pro& s 1432). Example: E;tmVedic s . A helpful sequence for the religions is Vedic religion, Hinduism, Jainism; Budhism, Judaism, Christianity,

58

33

Principle of Later-in-Evol#ionIf the isolates in an array belong to different stages of evolution, they should be (Pro& s 1453). arranged parallel to the course of evolution. Example: A helpful sequence for the natural groups of animals in zoology is to begin with protozoa and to end with mammaha , as this is taken to be evolutionary sequence.

34

PrincipleofSpatidCodguityIftheisolatesinanarray occur contiguously in space, they should be arranged in a parallel spatial sequence. (Prd, s 1434). Exam@: According to this principle, a helpful sequence of the regional organs of the human body is, Lower Extremities, Abdomen, Thorax, Upper Extremities, Neck and Head.

341

Principleof Bottom UpwardsIf the-isolate in an array can bc taken to be those occurring regularly along with a vertical line, then they should be arranged from bottom upwards. (CC, s 084). Exam@le: The
following

organs of a plant should be arranged
Root, Stem, Leaf, Flower.

in the

sequence,

342

Principle of Left to Right- If the isolates in an array can be taken to be those occurring roughly along a horizontal Ime, they should be arranged from left to right. (CC, s 084). Principle of Away from Position- If the isolates in an array can be taken to start from a certain point and diverge away from it, roughly along a line, they should be arranged from the starting point along the diverging line. (Cc, s 084).
Principle of Clockwise - if the isolates in an array can be taken to be those occurring roughly in a circle, they should be arranged in the clockwise direction. (Cc, s 084).

343

344

35

Principle of Increasing ComplexityIf the isolates in an array show different degrees of complexity, it is helpful to arrange them in the sequence of the increasing measure of their complexity. (Pro& s 1435). Examjh: A helpful sequence of plane curves is: Straight-lines, Conies, Cubits, Quadrics, etc.

36

Principleof Canonical Sequence- Ifnone ofthe 9 principles stated in sections 31 to 35 is applicable, but isolates in an array are traditionally mentioned in a specific sequence, it is helpful to conform to that sequence. (Pro& s 1436). Example: Sound, Heat Radiation, form a canonical sequence.
59 Electricity, and Magnetism

N370 370 371 Literary Warrant -The quantity of documents published or reasonably anticipated to be published on an isolate. Principle of Literary Warrant - If none of the 10 principles stated in sections 31 to 370 is applicable, the isolates in an array may be arranged in the decreasing sequence of literary warrant. (Pro& s 1437). Example: principle. 38 Ancient Classics are usually arranged by this

Prindple of Alphabetical Sequence - If the arrangements of the isolates in an array on the basis of any of 11 principles stated in sections 31 to 371 give a more helpful sequence, and if the isolates have names internationally current, they may be (Prol, s 1438). arranged alphabetically by those names. Alternate Term grouping of matearranged and subdiwithm each class.

Alphabetical Classed Filing System-A rial into.broad subject classes alphabetically vided by topics, arranged alphabetically (Gloss, p 4) .

60

P3 CHAPTER P

STEPS IN CLASSIFYING
Raw Title - Title as it is found on the title page or at the head of document. (Ele, s N80).

Example : Biological
delta.

control

of paddy-flower-virus

in Tanjore

Full Title -Title derived by an examination of the document, from raw title by filling up ail the ellipsis found in it, breaking down each derived composite term into its fundamental constituent terms corresponding to the five fundamental categories and if necessary corresponding to the characteristics leading to the various isolates, so as to bring out all the relevant facets including the basic facet. (Ele, s N81).

Exampk: This step is illustrated as follows with the example in section 0. The terms introduced as a result of scanning the document and of breaking down composite terms are put within brackets.
Biology control, as a preventive step against the disease caused by virus (in the) flower (of) paddy in the delta (of) Tanjore (district) in the first week of flowering during the winter of 1958 (in agriculture). 2 Kernel Title - Title derived from full title by removing all the auxiliary terms and puffs and by replacing all the essential focal terms in their respective nominative forms. (Ele, s N32).

Example:
example

The kernel title derived from the full title in the in section 1 will yield the following kernel title: Paddy. PreFirst Week.

Biology Control; Disease. Virus. Flower. ventive Step. Delta. Tanjore (District). Winter. 1958. Agriculture. 3

Analyzed Title - Title derived from kernel title by adding after each kernel term the symbol denoting the nature of its manifestation (as decided with the aid of -the postulates and the principle? stated for the purpose) ,' ,`.s provide-d below. (file, s 583). (BC:) Basic class Personality Personality Personality facet facet facet 61 of round of round of round 1, level 2, level 1 1 1, level 2

IPI
VY [?P]

P4

[2W ;z, [2W [2M21 PI

Personality Matter Matter Matter Matter Energy Energy Energy

facet of round

2, lcvcl 2

facet of round facet of round facet of round facet of round

1, level 1 1, level 2 2, level 1 1

facet of round 2, level 2 facet of round 2 facet of round 3 I 2 1 2 3 isolate of level 1 isolate of level 2 title

PEI
[3El PI IS21 El pr31 MCI) W2)

Space facet of level Space facet of level Time Time Time facet of level facet of level facet of level common

Anteriorizing Anteriorizing

common

Exam~e: The analyzed title derived from the kernel in the example in section 2 will be as follows:

Biology Control [3P] Disease [EJ Virus [2P] Flower [P2] Paddy [P] Preventive Step [2E] Delta [S2] Tanjore (District) [S] First Week [T] Winter fT3] 1958 [T2] Agriculture (BC).

4

Transformed Title - Title derived from analyzed title by rearranging the kernd terms in accordance with the postulates and the principles stated for the purpose and retaining with each, its own descriptive symbol. (Elr, s N84).
Examfh: The transformed title of the subject given in section 3 will be as follows: AgricuIture (BC) Paddy [P] Flower [P2] Disease [E] Virus [2P] Preventive Step [2E] Biology Control [3P] Tanjore (District) [S] Delta [S2] First Week [Tl 1958 p23 Winter [T3].

5

Title in Strndnrd Terms - Title derived from transformed title by replacing each non-standard kernel term by the standard term used in the schedules of clas&cation, but retaining with each term its own descriptive symbol.
Example: The title in standard term of the subject in section 4 will yield the following title in standard terms: Agriculture (BC) Rice [P] Flower [P2] Disease [E] Virus [2P] Preventive Step [2E] Control Measure Biology [2P] Tanjore (District) [S] Delta [S2] First Week [Tl 1958 [T2] Winter [T3] 62

P8 6 Title in Foal Numbers-Title derived from the title in standard terms by replacing each kernel term by its focal number but retaining with each focal number its own description symbols. [A%, s N86). Example: The title in the standard terms of the subject given in section 5 will yield the following title in focal numbers : J (BC) 381 [P] 6 [P2] 4 [E] 23 [2P-j 5 [2E] 4 [G] [3P] 44114 [S] 137 [SS] (0) 1 [Tl N58 [T2] n7 [T3]. 7 Synthesised Title in Focal Numbers, that is, Chm Numbers - The ordinal number derived from the title in focal number; by removing the descriptive symbols and inserting before each focal number its appropriate connecting symbols as prescribed by the postulates and principles stated for the purpose. (EZe, s N87). Example: The title in focal term given in 5 will yield the following colon synthesised title in focal number, that is, class number: J 381, 6:423:54 If UDC (G).44114.137`(0)1`N58'n7 [3PJ class is used the results in step 6 will be:

63 (BC) 18 [Pj [E] [P2] 63 [S] 3? [2P] 632.93 [2E]? 54114 [S] [282.6.] [S2] OCB[T] 1958 [T2] 324 [T3]. The Universal number will be: Ncnx -This Decimal Ordinal name, that is, UDC

633:18:632.38:632.937

(54114:282.6)

"OC2:1958:324"-

implements the notation for the intrinsic era cum duration of time in UDC, suggested in Rev dot; 24: 1956; 77 and 78, S61 and 72.

2 The question mark `?' is put in the places where the necessary digits have not yet been prescribed in UDC. 3 The geographical by India to FID. 8 Verification analyzing naming number of Madras is what is recommended Translation The process of:

of Reverse each facet;

1) 2)

the class number

into its facets; ignoring

3) giving a progressive digit by digit interpretation, the stages of un-sought link; and

4) thus verifying if the meaning of the class number agrees in substance with the full title and the raw title of the book.

63

Ql
CHAPTER Q

DEVICES IN IDEA AND NOTATIONAL
1

PLANE
a host

Facet Device (Idea Plane) - Device for sharpening focus in the form of a class by the addition of new facet(s). s 235).

(Pro&

10

Facet Device (Notational Plane) - Device of prefixing a connecting symbol to an isolate number within a class number (Pro& in order to implement the facet device of the idea plane. s 235). for sharpening a host Phase Device (Idea Plane) -Device focus by the addition of a focus of the same species as a second phase (as an additional phase). (Pro& s 236). Phase Device (Notational Plane) - Device of prefixing a connecting symbol to a di.git representing a phase relation in the idea plane. (Pro& s 236). Inter-Class Phase Device (Idea sharpening a host class by the addition additional phase. Plane) of another Device for ~.:ass as an

2

20

21

210

Inter-Class Phase Device (Notational Plane) - Device of prefixing a connecting symbol to a digit representing a phase relation in the idea plane.

Example: In CC, in the class number VOgW (=geopolitics= history influenced by geographical factors), V is first phase, 0 is the connecting symbol for phase, g is the phase relation known as `influencing' and W is the second phase.
22 Intra-Facet Phase Device (Idea Plane) -Device for sharpening a host isolate by the addition of another isolate in the same facet as additional phase. Intra-Facet Phase Device (Notational Plane) - Device of prefixing a connecting symbol to a digit representing intra-facet phase relation in the idea plane.

220

Exampfc: In CC, in the class number X: 5*2Oj73 (=commercial relation between India and USA), in the space facet 2 is the first phase, 0 is connecting symbol, j is the phase relation known as `general' and 73 is the second phase.
23 Intra-Array Phase Device (Idea Plane) -Device for sharpening an array-isolate by the addition of another arrayisolate in the same array as additional phase. 64

230

Intra-Array Phatt Device (Notational Plant) -Device of prefixing a connecting symbol to a digit representing intraarray phase relation in the idea plane. Example: In CC, in the class number Y310t5 (=comparison of rural and urban people), Y is the first phase, 0 is the connecting symbol, t is the phase relation known as `comparison' and 5 is the second phase.

3

Chronological Device (Idea Plane) - Device for forming an isolate or sharpening a host focus in the form of an isolate or an array-isolate with the help of chronological characteristic.
NGTE - Chronological characteristic with the time expressed in accordance with international current usage may be, such as, the epoch of birth or origin or first investigation or initiation, or commencement or occurrence or any other relevant event.

30

Chronological Device (Notational Plane) - Device of using a chronological number as an isolate number or adding to a host isolate number a chronological number to implement the chronological device of the idea plane. (Pro& s 2233). Geographical Device (Idea Plane) - Device for forming an isolate or sharpening a host focus in the form of an isolate or an array-isoiate with the help of geographical characteristic.
NOTE - Geographical characteristic may be, such as, place of origin or habitation or prevalence or any other relevant geographical association.

4

40

Geographical Device (Notational Plane) - Device of using geographical number or adding to a host isolate number a geographical number to implement the geographical device of the idea plane. (CC, s 684). Subject Device (Idea Plane) - Device for forming an isolate or sharpening a host focus in the form of an isolate or an array-isolate with the help of subject characteristic. Subjtct Device (Notational Plane) - Device of using class number as an isolate number or adding to a host isolate number, a class number to implement the subject device of the idea plane. The class number used in implementing subject device should be taken as fused and treated as if it were a single digit by enclosing it within brackets or using any equivalent device. (Pro& s 36141). Packet Device - Notational mechanism used in subject device so that the subject number concerned can be taken as (Pro& s 36411). fused and treated as if it were a single drgit. NOTE- CCusesthe circular brackets to form the packet. The FID/cA (the

5

50

`1

Committeeon General Theory of Classification of the International Fede.ation for Documentation) has recommended the use of square brackets to form the packet in UDC. (itea dot, 22, 1956, 156, section 2 of the minutes of FID/CA>,

65

Q6
6 Alphabetical Devioe (Idea Plane)-Device for forming an isolate or sharpening a host focus in the form of an isolate or array-isolate with the help of the name characteristic.
NOTE The name used should be one in international usage.

60

Alphabetical Device (Notational Plane) - Device of using the first or the first two, or the first three, etc, initial letters of the international name of an isolate term or adding similarly to a host number, to implement the alphabetical device of the idea plane. Alphabetical part should be taken as fused and treated as if it were a single digit. (Pro& s 36141).

7

Enumeration Device (Idea Plane) - Device for forming the classes or the isolates in a facet or the array-isolates in an array by directly enumerating them. Enumeration Device (Notational Plane) -Device of using successive digits for forming the classes or the isolates in a facet or the array-isolate in an array by directly enumerating them.
Super-Imposition Device (IdeaPlane) - Device for sharpening a focus in the form of an isolate by restricting its extension to the portion of it falling within another isolate of the same facet. (Prol, s 237).

70

8

Alternate
Auto-Bias

Term
Device -

(Obsolete.)

80

Super-Imposition Device (Notational Plane) - Device of prefixing a connecting symbol between the isolate numbers representing the isolates involved in the super-imposition device in the idea plane. In CC the connecting digit for super-imposition device is a hyphen(-). (Pro& s 237).

Example: the head'. 91

LltL3 is the class number for `Circulatory system of

Gap Device - Device of leaving a finite gap between the numbers representing two array-isolate ideas appearing to be consecutive at the time of the enumeration, in order to accommodate new isolates, as and when they arise, claiming their filiatory pIaces withm that gap. (Pro& s 233).
-In NOT%% LC, this device is extensively used.

Device - Device of interpolating between two consecutive digits of one species a digit of another species and defining its ordinal value accordingly. (Pro& s 2231). Interpolation

Examph:

CC uses this device sparingly for this purpose. 66

93

Sector Device-Device of using a sectorisii digit, that is, to form another sector or stretch of co-ordinate digits by adding to it the successive digits of the species and deeming the resulting double-dig&d numbers as if fused into a single digit, and repeating this process to form successive sectors. (Pro&s 2232).
Ncnz -CC had adopted this de-vice from the lxginning consciously. It haa now been adopted by FIDjor UDC.

94

Group Notation Device - Device of using ordinal decimal fraction numbers of two or more digits (but the same number of significant digits) to represent a number of co-ordinate isc&.tes or array-isolates, when they are too many to be represented economically by sector device alone. (Prol, s 368).
NATE-CC haa begun to employ this device consciously since it was studied in 1954.

Exam@:
941

381 for `Rice' and 382 for `Wheat'.

CapacityThe capacity of a notation is the number of classes that can be individualized.
NUTE 1 -The capacity of a notation is determined by the length of its base, the upper limit arbitrarily fixed for the number of digits in a class number, or in an iaolate.number by providing a distinctive set of connecting symbola between isolate numbers, such as the punctuation marks used by CC such that the number of digits in an isolate number is within = single sweep of the eye and ia capable of being retained in memory for a short while. The capacity of a notation can be increasedconsiderably. NATE 2 -By Aarpening on the basis of an ad.iitional characteristic, ,wc get a sharpened isolate as well aa sharpened ckas but we do not get a

sharpenedarray-isolatebecausethe result of shaqxning is not an array-isolate according to our definition and because it involves the characteristics.

95

. Deumal Fraction Device-Device of taking the place value of each digit in a number as in a pure decimal fraction, though the decimal point or its equivalent mark is not actually put in front of the number. (Prol, s 234).

67

Bl
CHAPTER R

ZONE ANALYSIS : IDEA PLANE
NOTX- The concept of zone and sector is inherent to the idea plane and is independent of the notational plane.

1

Generalized Array of Kind 1 -Array in a schedule of classification in which, notwithstanding the definition of A31, isolates based on different it has been expedient to put characteristics or derived from different devices and quasiisolates, with certain conventicns as a safeguard against the incidence of violation of the Canon of Consistency and of the resulting cross-classification.
NOTE- In the rules for classification, safeguardsare provided to prevent cross-classification in the use of a generalized array of time.

Zone - A portion of an array in which all the array-isolates (Pro!, s 362-368). are formed by one and the same device.
Enumerated by enumeration Array-Isolatedevice. Array-isolate of an array got

Devised Array-Isolatechronological or alphabetical Enumerated Common enumeration device. isolates, 6 7 8 91 92 93 94 95 ~&sed device. meration and posteriorizing Common

Array-isolate of an array or subject device. IsolateCommon isolate

got by got by common

Examples: Time isolates, space isolates, anteriorizing
common isolates. Isolate Common Special

isolate got by subject isolate got by enu-

hruneroted
device.

Spmial

Isolate -

D&s& Special tion device. zone 1 -The common isolates. Zone 2 -The special isolates. ame isolates. &me isolates. 3 4 -

Isolate zone zone

Special

isolate got by enumeramade made up of enumerated up of enumerated
special

of the array of the array

The zone of the array

made

up of devised

The zone of the array made up of devised common

-or-The set of isolates in a zone got on the basis of a single characteristic. 68

CHAPTER

S

ZONE ANALYSIS : NOTATIONAL

PLANE

Ncrra 1 -The concept of zone and sector of the notational plane depends only on the quality of the notational system and is independent of the idea plane. Nom 2 - The first charge on a zone or a sector of the notational plane is the implementation of the demands of the zones and sectors, arising in the idea plane. NOTE 3 - If the number of sectorsin the idea plane is smaller than that in the notational plane, more than one sector and even more than one zone of the notational plane can be used to meet the demand of one and the same zone or sector in the idea plane. NOTE 4 - A table showing the zones and sectorsin an array of the notational plane is given at the end of this chapter. The table is constructed subject to the condition that the number of digits in (AIN) should not exceed 3.

0

Zone -The portion of an array in which the first significant digits of all isolate numbers are of the same species or the first digits are starters.
Examples:
1) The array 1, 2.. . . . .7, 8, 91, 92.. ..97, 98.... 2) a, b ,...... x, y, za . . . . . . zb . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3) 99A, 99B. .....99y.......99z............... 4) (0), (a), (b)....(l), (12) . . . . (9A), (9B) _.....

Zone 1 - The zone of the array in which the first significant digits of all isolate numbers are of the species with the lowest group of ordinal value.

Example: In CC z is defined to be smaller in ordinal value than l,a,b, . . . . . . .z form the species of significant digits of the lowest ordinal values. Therefore, in zone 1 of an array in CC, the first significant digits are all Roman smalls. 2
Zone 2 - The zone of an array in which the first significant digits of all isolate numbers are of the species with a group of ordinal value next higher than those of zone 1.

Example: In CC the species of digits next higher than those of lower Roman Arabic numerals. Therefore, in zone first significant digits are all Indo-arabic 3

whose ordinal values are smalls is that of the Indo2 of an array in CC, the numerals.

Zone 3 -The zone of an array in which the first significant digit of all isolate numbers are of the species with a group of ordinal vaiues next higher than those of zone 2.

Example: In CC the species of digits whose ordinal values are next higher than those of Indo-arabic numerals is that of Roman capitals. Therefore, in zone 3 of an array in CC, the first significant digits are all Roman capitals.
69

4

Zone 4 - The zone of an array in which the first digit of aII isolate numbers are of the species with a group of ordinal values next higher than those of zone 3. Example: In CC the starter bracket is given an ordinal value greater than that of capital Z. Therefore, in zone 4 of an array in CC, all the isolate numbers begin with a starter.

5

Sector of a tine -A portion of a zone with either no octavising digits, with only one octavising digit or with only two octavising digits, and so on respectively.

Exam&s: 1) 1,2..

. . . . . . . .8

2) 91,92 . . . . . . . . . . 97,98 3) 991,992..........997,998

TABLE
Non1 Now.2 -

OF ZONE

ANli

SECTOR

IN CC NOTATION

Boundary Condition: (AIN) is not to have more than three digita. not put to we: (Sm)+ i, 1, 0; (Cap) 19 0.

-Digits

ZONE

sacroll

SacrGRIzmo

DIGIT

ACTUAL (AIN)

No. oc WW

`First
1 1

Second' (Sm]+* z z z 9 9 9 Z Z Z (Sm) (Sm) wwt (Cap) : (IAN) (Sm) (IAN) (Cap) (&P) (Sm) (IAN) (Cap)

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13

a z z 2 z z z z z z 2 z 2

a,b, ..-,X,Y a, zb, . . ..=.w ua, zzb, . . .) zzx, zzy
zzl, 222, . . ., 227, zz8 zzA, ZZB, . . ., zzx, ZZY zl, 22, . . ., 27, z8 zQa, z9b, . . ..29X.2* ~91, zQ2, . . ., 297, z@ zQA, zQB, . . ., zQX, zQY zA,zB, . ..) zX,zY zZa, zZb, . . ., zZX, zZy zZl,zZ2, . . . . 227,228 ZZA, ZZB, . . ., zZX,zZY Total

22 22 22 8 23 8 22 8 23 23 22 8 23 234

70

I
2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13

DIGIT A

.Fint

Second.

3

FIRST SI0NRWAN.X DIGIT

Acns~~ (AIN)

No.

OF

WW
8 22 22 8 23 8 22 8 23 23 22 8 23 220 23 22 22 8 23 8 22 8 23 23 22 8 23 235 22 8 23 53 742

9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

z z z 9 9 9 Z Z Z

(IAN) (Sm) (Sm) (IAN) (Cap) (IAN) (Sm) (IAN) (Cap) (Cap) (Sm) (IAN) (Cap)

1,2 ,..., 7,8 9a,9b, . . ..9y %a, 9zb, . . ., 9zy 921,922, . . ..9z8 9zA, 9zB, . . . ,9zY 91,92, . ...98 99a,99b, . . ..99y 991,992, . ...998 9%i, 99B, . . . , 99Y 9A,9B, . . ..9Y 9Za, 9Zb, . . . ,9Zy 9z1,922, . . ., 928 9ZA, 9ZB, . . ., 9ZY Total

3

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13

z Z 2 Z 2 2 2 2 2 Z Z Z

z z z 9 9 9 Z Z Z

(_P) (Sm) (Sm) (IAN) (Cap) (IAN) (Sm) (IAN) (&P) (Cap) (Sm) (IAN) (Cap)

A,R, . . ..Y Za, Zb, . . . . Zy Zza,Zzb, . . . . Zy ztl, 222, . . ., Zz8 ZzA,ZzB, . . . . ZzY Zl, 22, . . ., 28 Z9a, Z9b, . . ., Z9y Z91,292, . . ., 298 Z9A, Z9B, . . ., Z9Y ZA, ZB, . ..) ZY ZZa, ZZb, . . ., ZZy ZZI, 222, . . ., ZZ8 ZZA, ZZB, . . ., ZZY Total

4

1 2 3

(Sm) (IAN) (Cap)

(a), (b), . . ., (Y) (l), (2), . . ., (8) (A), (I% . . ., (Y) Total Grand Total

l*Sm = Roman Small letter.

*AIN = Array-Isolate Number.

tIAN = Indo-Arabic Numeral. SCap = Roman Capital letter.

71

CHAPTER

T

FACET ANALYSIS
1 2 Facet Analysis - Analysis of a subject into its facets according to the postulates and principles stated for the purpose. Facet Synthesis - Synthesis of the focal numbers of a subject into class numbers according to the postulates and principles stated for the purpose. Analytico Synthetic Classification - Scheme of classification involving analysis of subject into its facets in the idea plane, transformation in the verbal plane, translation from the focal terms in the verbal plane to the focal numbers in the notational plane, and synthesis of the focal numbers into class numbers in the notational plane.
NOTE - Such a scheme of classification does not usually give ready made class numbers for any but basic subjects. It gives schedules for basic subjects and for isolates in diverse fa`cets. Its schedule is thus not a monolithic one. It is a polylithic one.

3

Alternate

Term

Faceted Classification 4 Class Number of a subject relatively Ordinal

.
number which fixes the position (CC, s 02).

to other subjects.

NOTE 1 -The class number of a subject may be looked upon as translation of its name into the artificial language of ordinal number=., specified and elaborated in a scheme of classification. NOTE 2 See A72 for the general definition of class number.

41

Classiticatory Language - Artificial language of ordinal numbers and system of class numbers used to represent subjects.
Examples: NOTE -

Colon language,

Decimal

language.

See A74 for the general definition of classificatory language.

5

Facet -- The totality of the isolates, each one of which can by itself be attached to a specified basic class or a class derived from it, and which are enumerated together in a schedule as possible manifestations of a particular fundamental category in a specified level of a specified round.
NOTE See G3 for definition as applied to a class, that is subject.

6 TELESCOPING 62

OF ARRAYS

Generalized Array of Kind 2 - Array, in a schedule of classification, into which co-ordinate as well as subordinate isolates 72

T73 are put for economy in section A3 1. 63 Telescoped fication, made from the idea co-ordinate, as of notation, notwithstanding the definition

Array -Array of isolates in a schedule of classiof co-ordinate and subordinate isolates, as viewed plane, but whose isolate numbers appear to be viewed from the notational plane. (CCC, s 3191).
in the

Example: Consider the following array of the isolates natural group of plants facet in Botany in CC and UDC:

CC No.
1 2 3 4 5 7 8

ISOLATE TERM
Cryptogarnia Thallophyta Bryophyta Pteridophyta Phanerogamia Monocotyledon Dicotyledon

UDC No. 21 22 32 35 41 52 61

NOTE - Here Cryptogamia and Phanerogamia belong to array of order 1, and all the other isolates belong to array of order 2, as viewed from the idea plane. But as viewed from the notational plane it is easily seen that both the groups of isolates appear to belong to array of order 1 iLl CC and of order 2 in UDC, as the number of digits in the respective isolate numbers show. Therefore, the arrays are called telescoped arrays.

64

Array Telescoping Point - Isolate in a telescoped array, of which at least one succeeding isolate in the array is a subisolate. (CCC, s 31911). Example: In the telescoped array given 63, the following are isolates-at-telescoping 1) Cryptogamia, 2) Phanerogamia. 7 TELESCOPING OF FACETS
as example in section

points:

73

Generalized Array of Kind 3 - Array, in a schedule of classification, into which isolates belonging to different facetsfacets which are manifestations of the same fundamental category in different levels in the same round - are put for convenience of presentation, notwithstanding the definition in section A31. 73

T74 74 Telescoped Facet - Array of isolates,in a schedule of cl&fication made of isolates belonging to different facets, forming consecutive levels in the same round of manifestation of one and the same fundamental category, as viewed from the idea plane, but'whose isolate numbers appear to be all co-ordinate ones as viewed from the notational plane.
NOTE-Telescoping of facets is possible when the notation is a mixed one. It is widely used by CC for convenienceof presentation.

75

Facet Telescoping Point - Stage in the enumeration of the isolates in a telescoped facet, where change of level of facet occurs.

Example: In the personality schedule coming after the energy isolate `Personal management' in the basic class `X Economics', the following isolates occur in one array:
= Wage 1 9C = Unskilled personnel 1 K5 = Alien personnel 3

(After telescoping

point 1)

(After telescoping

point 2).

Consider the following class numbers: X : 9K5,9C,3 = Wages of alien unskilled personnel. Here it is ohvious%hat K5=Alien personnel is an isolate in the first level personality facet in the second round; 9C = Unskilled personnel personality facet; and 3 = Wages is an isolate This is as viewed from the the schedule given above, to one and the same facet is an isolate in the second level

in the third level personality facet. idea plane. But in the extract from these three isoiates appear to belong as viewed from the notational plane.

74

us1
CHAPTER U

NOTATIONAL
1 2

SYSTEM

Digit - Each one of the distinct symbols, taken by itself, found (Prol, s 181). in a class number or used in constructing it. Base - A conventional set of digits or two or more conventional sets of digits taken as co-ordinate, in the notation of a scheme of classification, for example 1 2. . . . . .9; A B C . . . . . . Z. Simple Base - A base consisting ventional set of digits. of one and only one con123 abc . . . . . . 9; . . . . . . z.

21

Examples:

1) Arabic 2) Roman 3) Roman

Numerals Capitals Smalls

A B C . . . . . . Z.; and

211 22

Pure Notation -

Notation

system with a simple base.

Compound Base - A base consisting of two or more simple bases, for example, base of one of the following schemes of classification: 1) The base of Expansive 2) The base of Bibliographic 4) The base of Universal Classification, Classification, and Classification. base.

3) The base of Colon Classification, Decimal 221 3 Mixed Notation Notational

system with a compound

Starter - Symbol inserted at the -beginning of a subjectdevice number or any other number which should be treated as if it were a single digit and should always be taken along with that symbol. (Prol, s 361444). Arrester-Symbol inserted at the end of a subject-device number or any other number which should be treated as if it were a single digit and should always be taken along with that symbol. (Pro& s 361444).

31

Examples : 1) In CC the circular
circular 2) FID/CA brackets bracket

bracket `(' is starter; `)' is arrester.

and the

has recommended the use of square as starter and arrester in UDC. should be treated as if it It is got by subject-device.

(B28) 3) In S : (B28), were a single digit. 75

z

U32 32 Anteriorking Digit - Digit, the addition of which at the end of a class number (hereinafter referred to as host class number) makes the resulting class number precede the host class number. (CC, s 215).

Example : In CC, the Roman
Xa precedes X. 33

smalls are anteriorizing

digrts.

Favoured Focus Number-The digit representing a favoured isolate number or a favoured class number (that is the isolate or a class in which a library specializes and has, therefore, many documents).

Example: In CC ' - ' (hyphen) is used as the favoured focus number. For example, it is used to denote the isolate `English language' in the main class `literature', in the case of a library which specializes in English literature.
4 Connecting number-that (Pro& s 3615). Alternate Sign-post
NOTE -

Digit - A digit used as a connector is as a conjmlction in a classificatory

`in a class language.

Term Digit

A connecting digit has ordinal value. It also functions as signpost to denote the fundamental category of which the succeeding isolate number is a manifestation.

51

Empty presenting Alternate

Digit - A digit with ordinal any specific focal idea. Terms Digit Digit Digit

value

but without

re-

1) Sectorizing 2) Octavizing 52

(Dbsolete) .

3) Extra-polating

Emptying Digit - A digit with ordinal value and also depriving the preceding digit of its focal idea. Alternate Term Difit number digit. consisting of an Inter-polating

521 522 53

Inter-polated Number-A emptying digit preceded by another

Inter-polation - The device of interpolating between any two consecutive numbers in an array a new co-ordinate number. Empty and Emptying Digit -A digit with ordinal value, without representing any specific focal idea, and depriving the preceding digit of-focal idea. 76

U64 61 Substantive Di@t - A digit with ordinal senting a specific focal idea. Alternate Rich 62 Term value and repre-

Digit

Systematic Rich Digit-A digit with ordinal value and representing a focal idea in conformity to the Canon of Systematic Mnemonics. Alternate Term with ordinal to the Canon value and of Seminal Extra Rich Digit

63

Semantic Rich Digit -A digjt representing a focal idea in conformity Mnemonics. Alternate Term Super Rich Digit

64

Emptying Substantive Digit - A digit with ordinal value representing a focal idea, and depriving the preceding digit of its focal idea. Example: mentioned trative: In CC, there are digits belonging to each of the aboveeight semantic levels. Tine following table is illus-

SItMANTtC RmnNFas 1

LEvBL01

KIND OF SEMANTIC VALUE

DIGIT (NORMALLY USED) ( a9z )

DESCRIPTIVE NAME or Dmrr Packeting Empty

2
3 4 5

6 7 8 9

Bindingandordinalvalue but not representing any special focal idea Ordinal value but not representing any specific isolate idea Ordinal and sign-post value but not representing any specific focal value idea Ordinal value and depriving the preceding digit of focal idea Ordinal value, and also depriving the preceding digit of its focal idea but not representing any specific focal idea Ordinal value and representing specifit focal idea Ordinal value and representing a specific systematic focal idea Ordinal value and representing a specific seminal focal idea Ordinal value and depriving the preceding digit of focal idea ,and representing a specific focal idea

` . : ;,T U V W XYZ UWYZ

Connecting
Emptying Empty and Emptying Rich Extra-Rich Systematic Rich Super-Rich Seminal Rich Rich and Emptying

a.....y ~::::."y 1. . . . .8 A . . . . .Y 1. . . . .8 TVX

77

vo
CHAPTER V

DOCUMENT

CLASSIFICATION

NOTE1 - Most of the terms in this chapter were brought into use in edition 1 ofCCin 1933. But the references are given here only to the edition 6 of CC (1966). Nors2 - The following rules are stated in terms of position of documents on the shelves or other receptacles but they are all equally applicable to the position of the main entries of documents in the classified part of a catalogue or a bibliography.
Nora 3 Book classification is a conventional equivalent of document classification;

0

Ultimate Class of a Document - Class of the smallest extension admitted by a scheme of classification, into which the (CC, s 027). document can be placed. BOOK NUMBER AND ITS FACETS

1

Book Number - Ordinal number which fixes the position of a document in a library relative to the other documents having (CC, s 03). the same ultimate class.
Nora - Book number individualizes the document among the documents It is used for mechanizing the position of a having the same class number. document among the documents having the same ultimate class.

Alternate

Term

Internal Notation-Notation which indicates the order or location of individual books, or other bibliographic items, [Bib, p 109, cat (49)]. within the class severally. 2 Cutter Table - Either one of two alphabetical order schemes devised by CA Cutter, consisting of decimal numbers so constructed that they may be combined with initial letter or letters or surnames or words, one table using two figures, the other, three figures. (Gloss, p 42). Cutter-Sanbom Table - A three figure alphabetical order scheme, an alteration of the two figure cutter table, made by Kate E Sanborn. (Gloss, p 42). Cutter-Number-An author number from one of the Cutter Tables or from Cutter-Sanborn 3-figure Alphabetic Table. (Gloss, p 42) . Merrill Book Number - A book number from a scheme devised by W S Merrill for arranging material in alphabetical order by means of numbers, or in chronological order by means (Gloss, p 87). of date abbreviations. 78

3

4

5

V720 6

Blscoe Time NunhxA book number expressing a date in abbreviated form, from a scheme devised by W S Bkcg for arranging books on shelves chronologically rather than alphabetically. (Gloss, p 13).
7 COLON BOOK NUMBER AND ITS FACETS may consist

70

Colon Book Number-Colon book number of one or more of the following successive facets:

Language number; Form number; Year number; Acquisition number; Volume number; Supplement number; Copy number; Evaluation number; and Evaluation Acquisition number. (CC, s 0302). 71 Language Number - Ordinal number into which the name of the language, in which the document is expounded, is translated. (CC, s 031). Language Facet - Part of the book number of a document, (Annals, 5, 1958, 101). which is its language number. Favoure!d Language - Language of the majority of the books actually or intended to be included in the library. (CC, s 0311). Scale of Popularity of Languages - Descending scale of popularity of the languages, maintained by a library on the basis of their respective uses ~4s the medium in the exposition of its documents. (CC, s 0312). Most Popular Language - Language, among a given set of languages in which a document has been written and which occurs earliest in the scale of popularity of languages, maintained by a library. (CC, s 0312).

710 711 712

71s

Exwnple: 2 N5 1 RANGANATHAN (S R) . Library English which is taken as the favoured language].
2 152N51 laya:Prakriya
RANGANATHAN (S

manual

[in

[Hindi translation

GranthaR) AND NAGAR(ML). of the book in the first example].

Here 152 is Language N51 is year Number. 72

Number.

Form Number - Ordinal number which is the translation of the name of the form of arrangement or of exposition or again (CC, s 032). the physical form of the document.
For;n Facet - Part of the book number of a document, is its form number.

720

which

79

v73

Exumplc:

W

j7N33

ADAMS (Mary),

is a symposium of contributions Here p7 is the form number. 73 730

Ed. Modern by several authors].

state [which

Year Number - Ordinal number which is the translation of the year of publication of the document. (CC, s 033). Year Facet - Part of the book number of a document, is its year number. (Annals, 5, 1958, 101). which

Example:

In the example under V713,

N51 is the year number.

Acquisition Number - Integral number which-denotes the sequence of accessioning of a document, which shares the sarne ultimate class and the same form number, language number, and year number with some other documents. (CC, s 033). 740 Acquisition Facet - Part of the book number of a document which is its acquisition number. (Annals, 5, 1958, 101).

Example : 2 N513 GOEL (R S) and VIJ (V P). Library economy [This is the fourth, of the books, published in 1951 on library economy and acquired by the library].
Here 3 is the acquisition 75 number. Volume Number-Number within the book number of a vohime of a multi-volumed book, individualizing the said volume in the set. (CC, s 03511). Volume Facet - Part of the book number of a document which is its volume number. (Annals, 5, 1958, 101).

750

Example:
economics.

X N20.1-N20.2 ed 2.2V

TAUSSIG

(F

W).

Principle

of

Here 1 and 2 are volume numbers. 76 Supplement Number-Number within the book number of a book, which individualizes the said supplement from the host volume and the other supplements. (CC, s 0362). Supplement Facet - Part of the book number of a document, (Ann&, 5, 1958, 101). which is its supplement number.

760

Example: Assuming that there are two supplements of a book with call number E N63, the book number for the first supplement will be N63-1 and that for the second supplement N63-2.
77 Copy Number - Number within the book number of a copy of a document of which there are two or more copies, individualizing the said copy. (CC, s 037). 80

v7911 770 GupyFaeetPart of the book number of a document which is its copy number. &am$?: Assuming that there are in the libarary two copies of the book with call number E N63, the book number of the second copy will be E N63; 1. 78 EvaIuation Number - Part of the book number of a document, which is an appreciation, criticism, evaluation, or review of or a reply to, a pseudo classic, attached after its part taken from the book number of the host pseudo classic. (Cc, s 038). Evahsation Facet - Part of the book number of adocument, which is the evaluation number. (Annals, 5,1958,10!2).

788

Exaqjde: Assuming that there is an evaluation of the book with class number X N63, the class number of the document emhodying evaluation will be X N63 : g. Here : g is the evaluation number.
781

Evaluation Acqx&&ion Number - Integral number which denotes the sequence of the accessioning of an evahmting document among the several evahrating documents on the same pseudo classic.
EvaI~sation Acquisition Facet - Part of the book number of a document, which is the evaluation acquisition number.

7810

Exam@: Assuming that there is a second evaluating document on the book with a call number X N63, its call number will be X N63 : gl. Here 1 is evaluating acquisitron number.

791 COLLECIION 7910

AND

COLLECTION

NUMBER

CoIIe&m - One of the several groups other than the main group in which some of the books of a library have to be kept for administrative, safety, facility-for-use or other reasons. (CC, s 84 & 041).

Example: Pamphlet or under-sized collection, Over-sized collection, Rare book collection, Reading room collection, Mathematics department collection, Browsing collection, etc. A collection may be permanent or temporary.
7911
Collection Number - Symbol thanthemainone. (CC,sO41).

to denote collection, other

81

V792 Exammplc :
COLLECTION C~LL~~~I~NNUNIBER

Under-sized Over-sized Abnormal Worn Out

Underline Rook Xumber Overline Rook Number Underline and Overline Rook Number Encircle Rook Number

Here ore some other cxamplcs: Reading Room Secondary Tertiary Periodicals Physics Department Law Department 792 CALL RR SC TC PC CD ZD AND LOCATION

NUMBER

7920

Call Number - Ordinal number which fixes the position of a (CC, s 01). document in a library. Alternate Call Term (Gloss, p 22). Arrangement of documents in relation Mark.

792 I

Relative Location to one another.

NATE - In relative location, call number is a combination of the class number of the subject expounded in the document plusthe book number of the document plusif necessary the collection number of the document.

Equivalent

Definition

The arrangement of books in a library according to their in its proper location-% relations to each other, allowing material, the introduction of new material on the shelves. Contrasted with fixed location. Also known as movable Iocation. (Gloss, p 114). 7922 7923 Fixed Location - -4rrangement of documents in terms of their fixed position on the shelves or other receptacles. Shelf Number - The number assigned to a shelf in a fixed location system. (Gloss, p 126). Alternate Terms and Press Mark - .4 symbol indicating the room, case, (Gloss, p 108). sometime shelf, where a book is kept. Shelf Mark - In fixed location, dicating the location of a special shelf. 82

a letter or number in(C/ass,p 126).

WI CHAPTER W

CANONS FOR DOCUMENT
1

CLASSIFIG4TION

Canon of Classics - A scheme of classification should have a device to bring together all the editions, translations, and adaptations of a classrc; and next to them all the editions, etc, of the different commentaries of it, those of a particular commentary coming together, and next to each commentary all the editions, etc, of the commentaries on itself (commentaries of the second remove on the original classic) in a similar manner, and so on with the commentaries of further removes. (Pro& s 62 1) .

Example : R66,5xl ,B
R66,5xl R66,5xl ,B,P ,B,P,P Sankara: Brahmasutra

known classic in Monistic

- bhasya (a well philosophy). com-

Padma-pada : Paiica-pHdikH (a mentary on the above classic).

Prak%?sPtmztn : Pafica-pHdik&vivarana(a commentary on the above commentary, that is, a commentary of the second order on the host classic given as the first). Akhandgnanda-muni : Tattva dipana (a commentary on the above commentary, that is, commentary of the third order on the host classic). Cit-Sukha : Vivarana-tatparyadipiki (another commentary of the third order on the host classic). Amalananda : Paiica-padik&darpana (a second commentary of the_ second order on the host classic). Vitas-Pati-misra: Bhlmati (a second commentary of the first order on the host classic). Amalananda: Kalpa-taru, that is a commentary on the above commentarv (that is a commentary of the second order on the host classic). 83

R66,5xl

,B,P,P,T

R66,5~1 ,B,P,P,V

R66,5xl,B,P,PA

R66.5xl,B,B

R66,5xl,B,B,K

w2 R66,5xl ,B,B,K,P Appaya Diksita: Pari-mala (a commentary on the above commentarycommentary of the second order on the host classic). Cit-sukha : Bhkya-bhW?i-prak%a (a commentary of the second order on the host classic). Vijnana Bhiksu: Vijnanamarta(a classic on Monistic philosophy). second

R66,5xB,B,H

R66,5x2,V R66,5xJ50,N

Appaya D'&ita : Nyzya-raksgmani (a classic on Monistic philosophy by an author taken to have been born in 1550). Siiri : Raghu-nHtha Sankara-p?idabhtisana (a classic on Monistic philosophy by an author taken to have been born in 1850). scheme of classification sequences of classes to meet

R66,5xM50,S

2

Canon of L+ocal Variation-A should have provision for alternative (Prof, s 631). special local interests.

Example :

1) In BC `Descriptive geometry' may be given the class number AV or ATN according to local needs. 2) In CC `Indian history' may be given the class number V2 in Indian libraries and V44 in the libraries of other countries.

Canon of Book Number - A scheme of document classification should be provided with a scheme of book numbers to individualize the documents having the same class of knowledge as their ultimate class. (Prol, s 662). Canon of Collection Number-A scheme classification should have provision for a schedule numbers to individualize the various collections of ments to be formed on the basis of the peculiarities bodies, or their rarity, or service exigency, or for (Pro& s 678). of document of collection special docuof their gross other reasons.

5

canon of Distinctiveness - In a scheme of library classification, the class number, the book number, and the collection number (together forming the Call Number), should be written quite distinct or apart from one another. (Prol, s 6852). 84

Xl CHAPTER X

CONTACT

WITH

CATALOGUE

Qppoi Digit - Group of digits to be treated as if they together formed a single digit. Alternate

Term

Fused Number Chain Formation - Representation of a class number in the form of a chain, according to a procedure, such as the following: Step 1 Mark out the following: 11 The First Link that is, the first digit; that is, the first two digits; 12 The Second Link -

13 The Third Link - that is, the first three digits; and so on up to the last link which is to be made of all the digits. Step 2 Write out the Links one below the other in succession; 21 Write against each link its translation I into natural language, that is, the name of the class of which the link is the class number; 22 Connect sign. Step 3 Join the ("=") sign of each link with that of the next succeed(CCC, s 320). ing link by a downward arrow. Exumkle : 0 111,2 J64,P 0 01 Othello Literature (Sought Link) (Unsought each link with its translation by (,,=`*)

Indo-European Link) Teutonic English 85

Literature

011 0111

Literature Literature

(Unsought (Sought

Link)

Link)

0111,
0111,2 0111,2J 0111,256 0111,2J64 0111,2J64, 0111,2J64,5

i_ I . i
rt i i i i

(False Link) English Drama (Sought Link)

(Part of Fused Link) (Part of Fused Link) Shakespeare (False Link) Fifth Octave of the Shakespeare's (Unsought Link) Othello (Sought Link) last in the chain under Section got from a plays (Sought Link)

0111,2J64,P

= -

i

2

Last

Link

class number.

Link occurring (CCC, s KBl).

Exam@:
Othello"

In the chain given is the last link. Link:

1 "0111,2J64,P=

21

False Link -

1) Which is not a class number, that is it is not a concatenation of digits, intelligible according to the rules of classification, that is it has no meaning; or 2) Which is the last link of a compound class number and does not have a name in the verbal plane, in common usage, in a natural language or in the jargon of a profession or trade. (CCC, s KB2).

Exam@: In the chain are false links:
0111, 0 111,2J64, 0 111,2J64,5 Consider V v4 V4' = != i

given

under

Section

1, the following

(False Link) because no meaning (False Link) (False Link) because no meaning

b ecause no meaning V4'N5

the following = 1 = 1 = History History

chain of the class number (Sought of Asia Link) (Sought Link)

(False Link) 86

because

no meaning

x223

V4'N V4'N5 22

i =

(False Lii)

beta use no name in common usage

(False Link) because no name in common usage

Fused LinkLink whose end isolate number is a fused number because of its being got by: (CCC, s KA31). 1) Chronological device ; 2) Geographical device; 3) Subject device; 4) Alphabetical device; 5) Phase device ; or 6) Packet device. Example: In the chain given under Section 1 "0111,2564" a fused link. is

221

Part of a Fused Chronological Link - Link ending within a fused link got by chronological device. (CCC, s KA41). Example: In the chain given under Section 1, the following are parts of a fused chronological link: 0111,2J 0111,2J6 7 = (P art of a Fused Chronological Link) (Part of a Fused Chronological Link)

222

Part of a Fused Geographical Liok - Link ending within a fused link got by geogaphical device. (CCC, s KA51). Example: In the class number 256:=British = = Law, Where Z 256 Law British Law

1

25 is a part of the fused geographical link 256 because of Great Britain is in no sense a the municipal law sub-division of European Law. 223 Part of a Fused Subject Link - Link ending within a fused link got by subject device. (CCC, s K 51). P Example : 1) In the CC class number T9(Y31)=Rural Where T T9(Y31) = = Education Rural education, education

1

T9(Y and T9(Y3 are parts of the fused subject link Tg(Y31). 87

2) In the DC class number 331.2822 = Wages in mining, Where 33 331 331-2 331.2822 = 1 = 1 = 1 = Economics Labour Wages Wages in mining

331.282 is a part of the fused subject link 331.2822. 224 Part of a Fused Alphabetiad Link a fused link got by alphabetical device.

- Link ending within (CCC, s KA61).
strain of

Examfde:
1) In the CC class number 531 lCO=Coimbatore sugarcane, Where J 7 Agricu'ture Foodcrop Sugarcane Coiibatore strain of sugarcane

53
JSlll J3 111 CO

=
1 = i

J311C is a part of the fused alphabetical link 5311 ICO. 2) In the UDC class number 820 SHAK=Shakespeare, Where 8 82 820 SHAK 82OS, 820SH, 820 SHAK. 225 820SHA = 1 = = Literature English Literature Shakespeare

1

are parts of the fused alphabetical link

Part of a Fused Phase Link - Link ending within a fused and KA723). link got by phase device. (CCC, %A713

Examjh :
1) In the CC class number BObM8=Mathematics drapers, = Mathematics Where B 1 = Mathematics for drapers BObM8 for

BObM is a part of the fused phase link of BObM8.
88

x3 2) In the UDC drapers, Where 5 1 51:687-l

class number 51:687*1=Mathematics
= 1 = Mathematics Mathematics for drapers

for

51:6, 51:68, 51:687 are parts of the fused phase link 51:687-l. 226 Part of a Packeted got by packet device. Link - Link ending within a fused link industry,

Example:

In the CC class number X8(F182) =Steel =

Where X X8(F182) X8(F, 24 X8(Fl,

=

i

Economics Steel industry

(F182 are part of packet link of X8 (F182). Link Link which,

Unsought

1) ends with a part of the isolate focus in a facet of a class number; and 2) represents a subject on which reading likely to be produced or sought or which is looked up by any reader seeking materials subject forming the last link of the full class s KB3). material is not not likely to be on the specific number. (CCC, sociology,

Example:

In the CC class number Y31 =Rural = 1 = 1 = Sociology

Where Y Y3 Y31

Sociology of groups based on residence Rtiral sociology

Y3 is not likely to be sought in a general library and so that library may treat it as an unsought link. However, in a library specializing in sociology to serve research workers in sociology Y3 will have to be deemed to be a sought link.
Ia the light of NOTE - This rule admits oflocal variation in its application. the reading materials organized, the interest cfthe readers served, and the nature of the service attempted, each library may define in an exact way suited to itself the links which should be dcemcd to be unsought links. This more orecise local definition should be consisten:ly followed. A similar local definition may also be made hy an organization engaged in the production of international or national bibliographies or union catalogue of books and/or of periodical publications.

3

Sought Link -- Link which is neither false, nor part of a fused link nor an un-sought lir!.k. (CCC, s KB4). 89

X?l
Alternate Term

l!Sctive
NOTE -

Iink-

Sought

Lii.

(17rcorg; 117).

This term was replaced by `Sought link' in 1954.

31

Upper

Link

-

Link other than the last link.

(CCC,

s D-5).

Example:
links other
NOTE -

In he chain given as example in Section 1 all the than 0111,2J64,P=Othello, are upper links.
Set also section A423 Link-As between two links in a chain engaging the link occurring lower than the other one. (CCC,

32

Lower

attention s KB6).

4IRREGULARGHAIN

41

C&a&with-gap - A chain of isolates in a schedule of classification, in which an intermediate isolate is not to .be given, as (CCC, a result of failure to conform to the Canon of Modulation. s KB92).

Exam@: 1) In DC we have the following array, 2 Relgion, Let us throw it into a 22 Sacred Books, 225 New Testament. chain, then we have:
=ReIigion 1 22 =Sacred Books 1 225=New Testament is a chain-with-gap, This missing in the schedule between 2) I =Botany 1 I1 = Cryptogamia 1 12 =Thallophyta Let us throw 12 into a chain, I =Botany 1 12 =Thallophyta is is then we have as the isolate "Christianity" is 2 Religion and 22 Sacred Books. array: 2

In CC we have the following

This is a chain-with-gap as the isolate I1 `Cryptogamia' missing between I `Botany' and 12 `Thallophyta'. This

x51 caused not by omission of the missing isolate in the schedule as it is in the example from DC, on the other hand, this is a result of the array being telescoped one.
NOTJZ In any telescoped array a gap of this kind will occur.

42

Missing Isolate (CCC, s KB921).

-

The

isolate

missing

in a chain-with-gap. given as example Its isolate isolate.

Example: 1) In the DC, chain-with-gap under section 41 `Christianity' is a missing number may be written as 22128.

2) In the CC, chain-with-gap given as example under section 41 `Cryptogamia' is a missing isolate, but in the schedule it has the isolate number 11. It appears to be co-ordinate to 12 as a result of telescoping of array. 43 Missing Link-A link in a chain-with-gap, corresponding to the missing isolate in the chain. (CCC, s KB92). 5 CHAIN 51 PROCEDURE

Chain Procedure - Procedure for determining the class index entries, the specific subject entries, and the J;e also subject entries of a document from its class number and the class number of the cross reference entries provided for it. (CCC, K).

91

Yl CHAPTER Y

MACHINE SEARCH

10

Machine for Search - Mechanical aid for searching entries of sought documents, in a list of documents. (Annals; 5; 1958; 104). Examples : I) Machine 2) Magnetic 3) Pattern involving holes punched in cards;

tape and wire; and of transparent spots on film.

11

punched Card - Cards with holes punched in particular positions, each punched hole representing a particular idea, basic subject, isolate, or term, and admitting of mechanical sorting. (Annals; 5; 1958; 105). Field - In punched cards, a set of columns in a card fixed The total area of a punched card as to number and position. available for information storage. (Am dot; 11; 1960; 109). Instruction - Information which, when coded and fed as a unit into a digital computer, causes it to perform a sequence of manipulation. (Annals; 5; 1958; 105). Program - Sequence of instructicns given to a computer to solve a problem. (Am dot; 11; 1960; 114). Memory - Device into which information could be stored for extraction at a later time, and which usually forms an integral (Annals; 5; 1958; 105). part of a computer. Memory Capacity - Maximum number of distinguishable stable states in which a memory device can exist, the measure of the capacity being given as the logarithm to base 2 of that maximum number. (Annals; 5; 1958; 105). Channel - A device, either manual, mechanical or electrical, for transducing, informative signals from one place to another. (Am dot; 11; 1960; 105). Channel Capacity-The maximum number of binary digits or elementary digits to other bases which can be handled (Am dot; 11; 1360; 105). in a particular channel for unit time. 92

12

13

131 14

141

15

151

Y231 2 PREPARATION 20 Preparation Sequence PHASE of steps in which, into their relevant facets, that is

1) 2)

documents are analyzed basic class, and isolates; the facets are coded; and

3) the code is fed into an appropriate scanning medium to be (Annals; scanned by a machine whenever required. 5; 1958; 105). 21 Indexing - The first step in the preparation the technique of, phase involving facets

1) perusing

documents the standard

and

spotting

out the relevant

in them; term to denote each of the facets;

2) choosing

symbol of the document 3) giving a location or identification concerned, as an index number to the several terms arising in 2; and the terms, pertaining to all the documents 4) alphabetizing of the collection along with their respective index numbers. (Annals; 5; 1958; 105). 211 Auta-abstract - To select an assemblage of key words from a document, commonly by an automatic or machine method. (Am dot, 11, 1960, 104). Editing - The second step in the preparation phase involving the technique of expressing, either by indicators or by the formation of sequences, the relation between- the appropriate facets figuring in the index. (Annals; 5; 1958; 105). Coding - Rendering the index entries into non-graphic physical symbols suited to the machine. (Annals; 5; 1958; 105). Example: spots. 231 Punching the holes in a card; making magnetic

22

23

Encipher - To construct a sequence of binary digits made up of the code for the first letter of a message fcllowed by the code for the second letter of a message, and extending the length of the (Am dot; 11; 1960; 109). message.

Alternate

Term

Encoding - To associate a specific code with each letter of an alphabet. (Am dot, 11, 1960, 109). 93

Y232 232 orthographic coding

1) A device for increasing the efficiency of single-field superimposed coding systems through a statistical analysis of the spelling of the descriptive headings used. (Am dot; 11; 1960; 113). 2) A superimposed coding system using pairs of letters single field. (Am dot; 11; 1960; 113). 233 in a

Machine Language - Code language in non-graphic physical symbols suited to the machine handling them in accordance with prescribed programme. (Annals; 5; 1958; 105). Machine Word - Unit of information involving the standard number of distinct or primary code digits, wtiich a computer (Annuls; 5; 1958; 105). regularly handles in each operation. Alternate Term unit of word in machine language. (Am dot; usuaJ!y one 105).

2331

Bit - A single 11; 1960; 104). 23311 2332 Cell character

Storage for a single element of information, (Am dot; 11; 1960; or one machine word.

Binary Code - Code with only two primary code digits (A&; equivalent to `yes' and `no', respectively, for example. 5; 1958; 105). Alphabetical Code - System of coding used in preparing information for input or storing into a machine, so that information may be extracted in letters and words. (Annals; 5; 1958; 105). Lexeme (Am dot; 11; A' word, particle 1960; 111). or stem with a meaning.

2333

2334 2335

Grapheme - A written or machine code representing a single Pictographs, ideographs, and hieroglyphs, are semanteme. (Am dot; 11; 1960; 109). special forms of graphemes. Ideograph ing a notion. X specific grapheme or type of grapheme (Am dot; 11; 1960; 110). Coding of lexemes for machine depictinput.

2336 2337 24

Alphabetic Coding (Am dot; 11; 1960; 103).

Code Dictionary-Dictionary technical terms usually occurring (Annals; 5; 1958; 105). abstracts. 94

giving code symbols for the in learned papers and their

Y33

25
26

Input computer.

Information stored into the internal (Annals; 5; 1958; 105).

memory

of the

Computer - Machine which translates in one kind of language suitable to a machine into another kind of Ianguage also suitable to a machine. (Annuls; 5; 1958; 105). Alternate Definition

Machine designed to receive and store pieces of information, manipulate them in assigned ways, and supply the result of the manipulation. Example: Machine which translates information expressed punched cards into the same expressed in magentic tape. 3 EXPLOITING 30 Explqitation Sequence PHASE of steps in which, form; in

1) 2) the

the information statement the machine;

sought is stated in a standard of information of instruction is analyzed

from the angle of

3) the programme 4) the entries machine;

is stored into the machine; documents are searched by the

of the relevant

5) the findings in the search (hnals; 5; 1958; 106). Alternate Retrieval 31 Term
4

are delivered

by the machine.

Statement - Enunciation, in a standard form, of the information for which the entries should be located and brought out by the machine. (Annals; 5; 1958; 106). Interrelation - Analysis of the information sought into facets along with their relation, and expression of it in the machine language. (Annals; 5; 1958; 106). the Automatic Programming -- Technique whereby computer itself is used for transforming the programme from a form suited to the human mind to the form suited to the efficient functioning of the computer. (Annals; 5; 1958; 106). 95

32

33

Y331

Alternate

Term
(from data and

Datamation - Automatic data processing automaton). (Am dot; 11; 1960; 107). 331

Data Processing - The manipulation of information by machines, resulting in a column reduction and simplification, to make it more understandable, rational, or meaningful. Commonly applied to a logical sequence for rapid access. (Am dot; 11.; 1960; 107). Search - Passing through the machine the medium in which entries are coded, in order to Iacate the relevant entries. (Ann&; 5; 1958; 106).

34

Alternate

Term

To examine every reference or every entry in a 1) Seanfile, routinely as a part of a retrieval scheme. (Am dot; 11; 1960; 114). 2) sort 35 Output - Information transferred from the internal memory of the computer to the outside in a form suited to the human mind. (Annals; 5; 1958; 106).

4 EFFICIENCY 41

MEASURE

Resolution Factor - Ratio of the number of selected documents to the total number of documents searched. (Annals; 5; 1958; 106). Elimination Factor - Ratio of the number of documents to total number of documents searched. 5; 1958; 106). rejected

42

(Annals;

43

Pertinence Factor - Ratio of the number of relevant documents among the selected documents to the total number of documents selected. (At~z&; 5; 1958; 106). Pertinency --- h quality of being related to a subject .sought. (Am &c; 11; 1960; 113). Noise Factor - Ratio cf the number of irrelevant documents among the selected documents to the total number of documents selected. (rl~als; 5; 1958; 106). 96

431 44

\

Y52

AltemaieTema
False-dro~ - A reference citation that does not pertain the subject sought. (Am&c; 11; 1960; 109). 441 to

Noise-An undesirable signal which disturbs the desired signal in a communication net work. (Am dot; 11; 1960; 112). ReeaU Fa&or - Ratio of the number of relevant documents selected to the total number of relevant documents for which the machine had been fed with entries. (Annals; 5; 1958; 106). Omissioll Factor - Ratio of the number of relevant documents not selected to the total number of relevant documents for which the machine had been fed with entries. (Annals; 5; 1958; 106). Entropy - The unavailable information in a group of documents. The degree of disorganization in an informational assemblage. (Am dot; 11; 109). 5 SERVICE PHASE

45

46

461

50

Service - Supplying copies of the documents sought by the reader with the aid of automatic equipment, in which the machine :

1) gets

activated by the location of the document sought;

or the identification

symbol

2) inspects

the film roll containing a photographic document along with their respective location tion symbol ; and

record of the or identificaof the

reproduction of the record 3) provides a photographic document selected. (Annals; 5; 1958; 106). 51 RaPid Selector - Machine great speed. (Annals; 5; 1958; Cybernetics designed 106). to scan

film reel at a

52

1) Study 2)

of the communication system made of the brain and nervous system. (Annuls; 5; 1958; 106).

Study of the communication system made of a mechanoelectrical system, such as a computing machine. (Annuls; 5; 1958; 106). 97

Y53 53 Telecommunication &da - Service in which the copy of the document selected is read out and made available or is made visible to the reader at a distant place or is typed out at the consumer's end.

Alternate

Term

Tele-reference - A method for consulting catalogues from a remote location, consisting of a closed circuit television system or viewing the mechanical handling equipment for moving the (Am dot; 11; 1960; 116). catalogue cards br page about.

98

IS:

2550-1963

INDEX
The index number in each entry is the number of the chapter or the section in which the item occurs in this standard. The first letter in the index number denotes the chapter. The Indo-Arabic numerals following the first letter denote the section: A34 = Section 34 in Chapter A Abbreviation used : ~&rrahcrnate term to approved term ~4 Imm=equivalent term to approved term ti=in relation to A Abridgement D81 Abstract entity L4002 Abstracting periodical E42 Acquisition facet V740 number V74 Actand-action-actor-tool principle N23 Adaptation D82 Adjustable classification F61 Aggregate A03 Alien region K953 Alphabetical class filin system N38 &r code Y2 f 33 ==giny2337 idea plane Q6 notational plane Q$O link, Fused x224 sequence, Princrpie of N38' Ampere classhication F06 Amplitied class A52 Analyzed title P3 Analytico-synthetic classitication T3 ~~~m~nxlivision G41 al&r . . . g common isolate idea G41 digit u32 quality, Postulate of M35 Apupa arrangement K95 Ar+gcmcnt A221 alter Array A31 &Ssf;oj12B2 Collateral A37 Continuous A314 Discontinuous A313 Genm1iS.d dckind 1 RI ofkind 2 T62 dkind 3 I-73 99 Array (C&f) isolate Complex H3 Devised R4 Enumerated R3 idea G21 of order 1 A331 of order 2 A332 OpcIl A3f1 point T64 te cscopmg Arrester U31 Artificial characteristic A88 Ascertainability, Canon of B14 Assemblage C7 Assortment A2 1 characteristic A22 Complete A26 SEhcme of A27 Attribute A05 Author D7 Auto abstract Y211 bias device Q8 alttr isolate idea G8 after Automatic programming Y33

B Bacon classification F02 Ec U2 class Cl4 classification F91 oiler 1 facet, Postulate of M 12 E!;;wap;f!;,p?;odi;;a Bias zz~;2 Emary code Y2332 ;;

Is:

2550-1963

Bixoa time number V6 Bit Y2331 alter giz &% Multi-volumed E6 number Vl Canon of W3 Colon v70 Merrill V5 Bottom upwards, Principle of N341 Broad classification K94 Brunet classification Fl By-product L4006 1

-of(-)

C Call mark V7920 alter number V7920 Canonical class G13 sequence, Principle of N36 Canon of ascertainability B14 book number W3 classic! Wl collection number W4 concomitance B12 consistency B17 consistent sequence B24 context B54 co-ordinate clapsa B42 E%g?itension B3 1 differentiation Bl 1 distinctiveness W5 enumeration B53 exclusiveness B22 exhaustiveness B21 exprusiveness B63 favoured sequence B233 eneral mnemonics K3 a elpful sequence B23 hospitality in array Kl hospitality in chain K2 local variation W2 mixed notation B66 mncmonia K3 modulation B321 non-hierarchical notation B65 permanence B15 pure notation B67 relativity B61 relevance B13 relevant sequence B16 reticence B52

scheduled mnemonia K5 seminal mnemonics K7 subordinate classes B41 systematic mnemonics K6 uniforniity B62 verbal mnemonics K4 Canons for array B2 chainB3 characteristics Bl document classification W filiitory sequence B4 knowledge classification K notation B6 terminology B5 =padty 4941 channel Y151 Memory Yl41 card, Punched Y 11 Catalogue, Contact with X catalytic material L40071 catechism DE3 Cell Y23311 Century, Effective Ll71 Chain A41 canons for B3 Complete A46 formation Xl Loose A45 Order of A43 primaryA procedure x51 with-gap x41 Channel Y15 tiIcz$?&&i . .

A?sortment A22 Division Al2 Natural A07 Chronological device in idea plane 43 notational plane 430 link, Fused X221 class A23 Amplified A52 Basic G14 Canonical G13 collateral A36 Completely amplified A54 Complex Hl Co-ordinate A34 Krowledgc Gl Main G12 Muhiple A25 number A72; T4

100

ls:25!io-1963
numbers, Synthesised Title in P7 of order 0 A38 of order 1 A321 of order 2 A322 @asi Gll Unitary A24 Classes, Scheme of A56 Classic D3 Pseudo D41 Cla&ics, Canon of W 1 Clasification Close K93 code A84 alter Ckm B220 Document V in first sense primitive use All al& in second sense common use A21 alter Rules of A84 Schedule of A75 Class~licationist A82 FJizt>7lan8uage A74 ; T4 1 cla&ying A81 Clockwise, Principle of N344 Close classification K93 Closed array A312 Code Alphabetical Y2333 Binary Y2332 Dictionary Y24 Coding Y23 Alphabetic Y2337 Orthographic Y232 ~~k=x~veness K91 ZYS7 Collection V79 10 number V7911 canon of w4 Collocation A55 al&r Colon book number V70 Cclon classification F7 Commodity Immediate L4008 Intermediate L4006 raw material-transformation principle N2 1 Ultimate L4005 Common isolate Devised R6 Enumerated R5 idea G4 Common subdivision G4 cq term Comparisxm phast H531 relation H53

class (Cdd)

eet$

Methods of L173

assortment A26 chain A46 division Al6 Completely amplified class A54 universe A53 Compiex array isolate H3 Order of H30 class Hl Order of HlO isolate H2 Order of H20 Compound base U22 class G92 Computer Y26 Compte classification F05 Concomitance, Canon of B12 Concrete entity L4001 Constituent of L5005 Organ of L5004 Portion of L5003 Concreteness, Postulate of Ml4 Connecting digit U4 Postulate of M3 1 Consistency, Canon of B17 Consistent sequence, Canon of B24 Constituent of concrete entity WOO5 Contact with catalogue X machine search Y 10 Context, Canon of B54 Continuous array A314 Contribution E7 Conventional space isolate L2 1 time isolate Lll Co-ordinate classes A34 Canon of B42 COPY facet V770 number V77 Corporate author D72 Country Favoured L2 12 Mother I211 Copcalf principle N24 Criticism acquisition facet V7810 alter number V781 alter facet V780 alter number V78 alter Chss classification B220

101

Is:
SZcy,

!mo-1963
Canon of B51 Devised array-isolate R4 com?on isolate RG rl Isolate R8 DI erence phase H541 relation H54 Dictionary, Code Y24 Differentiation, Canon of Bl 1 Digit Ul Anteriorizing U32 Connecting U4 Empty U51 Octavising US1 ah 2 Sectorising U51 al&r 1 Substantive U61 Dimension of class G93 Discontinuous array A313 Dissection C4 Disjunctive treatment D52 Distinctiveness, Canon of W5 Division Al 1 characteristic A 12 Orientation L214 Document EO alter classification V Host E211 Macro E21 Micro E22 Ultimate class of VO Universe of E E Editing Y22 Effective century Ll71 decade L 172 link X3 altrr Efficiency measure ~4 Elimination factor Y42 Embodied thought EO Empire L2 15 Empty and emptying digit U53 Empty digit U51 Emptying digit U52 substantive digit U64 Encipher Y23 1 Encoding Y231 alter Energy 53 as fundamental category L3 isolate L30 round 1 L31 round 2 L32 round 3 L33 Rounds for, Postulate of Ml7

number V4 Sanborn table V3 table V2 Cybernetics Y52

D Data proccssin Y33 1 Datamation Y f 3 alter Decade, Effective L172 Decimal classification F2 Decimal fraction device 495 Decreasing extension, Canon of B3 1 Denudation C5 Dependent work D80 Depth classification F91 al&r 2 Device Alphabetical, in idea plane Q6 notational plane Q60 Chronological, in idea plane 43 notational plane 030 Decimal fraction Q95 Enumeration, in idea plane Q7 notational plane 470 Facet, in idea plane Ql notational plane QlO Gap Q91 Geographical, in idea plane Q4 notational plane Q40 Group notation 494 Interpolation 492 Intra-array phase, in idea plane 423 notational plane 4230 Intra-facet phase, in idea plane Q22 notational plane 4220 ;r:; i:5' idei plane 42 notational plane 420 Sector Q93 Subject, in idea plane Q5 notational plane 450 Super-imposition, in idea plane QS notational plane Q80

102

IS:
Entity A02 Abstract L4002 Concrete L4001 Constituent of L5005 organ of L50@4 Portion of L5003 Like A051 Pseudo A51 Social, Organ of L5006 Unlike A052 Entropy Y461 Enumerated array-isolate R3 common isolate R5 special isolate R7 Enumeration Canon of B53 device in idea plane 47 notational plane 470 Era Favoured L142 Private L151 Public L141 Evaluation acquisition facet V7810 number V781 facet V780 number V78 Everywhere apupa arrangement K954 Exclusiveness, Canon of B22 Exhaustiveness, Canon of B21 Existent A01 Expansive classification F3 Exploitation Y30 phase Y3 Expressed thought DU Expressiveness, Canon of B63 Extrapolating digit U51 alter 3 Extra rich digit U62 al& F Facet G91; T5 analysis Tl device, in idea plane Ql notational plane QlO sequence, Principle for N2 Synthesis T2 Telescoped T74 telescoping point T75 Faceted classification T3 at&r False-drop Y44 al&r False link in chain procedure X2 1

2550-E&3

Favoured country L212 era L142 focus number U33 language V7 11 sequence, Canon of B233 system L571 Featured space isolate L22 time isolate L12 Field Y12 Filiatory sequence A55 Canons for B4 Finite universe A041 First link A421 remove, Organ of L50081 Fixed location V7922 Flexibility K92 Focal number Synthesised title in P7 Title in P6 Focus J51 Formation, Near sovereign L2 17 Form division G4 rp term facet V720 number VJ2 Full title PI Fundamental category LO Energy L3 Matter L4 Personality L5 Postulate of Ml 1 Space L2 Time LlO Fused alphabetical link X224 chronological link X22 1 geographical link X222 link X22 number X0 alter phase link .X225 subject link X223

G
Chain-with X41 device Q91 General canon of mnemonics K3 relation H5 1 phase H511 Generalized array of kind 1 R,l of kind 2 T62 of kind 3 T73

Gap

103

Is:

!2!550-1963
Infinite universe A042 Influencing phase H55 1 relation H55 Input Y25 Instruction Y13 Integral treatment D51 Intermediate commodity L4006 set-v& L40094 Internal notation \`I alter Interpolated number U52i Interpolating digit U52 altm Interpolation U522 device 492 Interrelation Y32 Intra-array phase device, in idea plane 423 notational plant 4230 relation H.503 Intra-class phase device, in idea plane 421 notational plane Q2 10 Intra-facet phase device, in idea plane 422 notational plane 4220 relation H502 Inversion. Principle of N 12 Icolatc H23: J52 Complex H2 Otder of H20 Energy L30 round 1 1~31 round 2 L32 round 3 1.33 ~et,~~tulatc of Ml3 , hlatter 1.40 level 1 L44 level 2 L45 lcvc: 3 L46 round 1 L4l round 2 L42 round 3 L43 Missing X42 Personality LSO level 1 L.51 level 2 L52 level 3 L53 round 1 L54 round 2 L55 round 3 L56

Geographical device, in idea plane 44 notational plane Q40 link, Fused X222 Grapheme Y2335 Group A13 Multinle Al 5 notation device Q94 Unitary A14

II
Hegel classification 1~04 Helpful sequence, Canon of 823 Hierarchical notation B64 Hospitality in arrav. Canon of Kl in chain, Canon of K2 Host document E2 1 I

I
Idea Array-isolate G2 1 Auto-biased isolate G8 alter Common isolate G4 Anterioriaing G41 Posteriorizina G5 Isolate G2 plane Jl Devices in Q Sector R95 Zone R2 1 R91 2 R92 3 R93 4 R94 Seminal isolate G7 Special isolate G3 Super-imposed isolate G8 Ideograph Y2336 Immediate commodity I,4808 service L40094 universe A35 Increasing complexity, Principle of N3.5 concreteness, Principle of Nl 1 quantity, Principle of XT.3 I Index to classification A76 Indexing Y2 1 periodical E4l Individualisation A261

IS:2550-1963 `$gpM
level 2 level 3 Time level 1 level2 level 3
level 1 L.251

L 252 L253 I~131 L132 L133

K
Kant classification F03 Kernel title P2

K;y$",";:
classification Canons for KO mass c2 alter Universe of Cl

Link (C&d) Lower X32 Missing X43 Order of A420 Soueht X3 Unsought X24 Up er, in c g am procedure X31 Literary warrant N370 Principle of N371 work D2 Local variation, Canon of W2 Location Fixed V7922 Relative V792 1 Loose chain A45 Lower link X32 M Machine for search Y 10 language Y233 word Y2331 Macro document E2 1 thought C3 1 Main class G 12 Mark Press v7923 alter Shelf V7923 alter Material L40091 Catalytic I.40071 Natural L4003 Near-natural L4004 Raw L4007 Matter as fundamental category L4 isolate L40 level 1 L44 level 2 i45 level 3 1~46 round 1 L41 round 2 L42 round 3 L43 Memory Y 14 capacity Yl41 Merril book number V5 Meta language .J22 Method of complements L173 Micro document E22 thought C32 Missing isolate X42, link X43

L
Lamination C6 Language Classificatory A74 facet V710 Favoured V7 11 Machine Y233 Meta 522 Most popular V713 number V71 Object 521 Scale of popularity of V712 Symbolic meta 523 Last link in chain procedure X2 finite universe A422 Later-in evoiution, Principle of N33 time, Principle of N32 Left to right, Principle of N342 Level cluster, Postulate of Ml93 Postulate of M 192 Lexeme Y2334 Library classification A57 al& ! Library of congress classification F5 Like entities A051 Link A42 Effective X3 altn False X21 First A421 Fused X22 Last, in chain procedure X2 finite universe A422

105

IS:

2550-1963
Open array A31 1 Order of array A33 of chain A43 of class A32 of complex array-isolate H30 of complex class HI0 of complex isolate H20 of compound class G92 1 of link A420 Ordinal name A73 Organ of concrete entity L5004 of first remove L50081 of second remove L50082 of social entity L5006 of third remove L50083 Orientation division L2 14 Orthographic coding Y232 output Y35

Mixed notation U22 I Canon of B66 Mnemonics Canon of K3 scheduled K5 seminal K7 systematic K6 verbal K4 Modulation, Canon of B321 Most popular language V713 Mother country L211 Multi-focal work D53 Multiple class A25 group Al5 Multi-volumed book E6 N Natural characteristics A07 material L4003 Near natural material L4004 sovereign formation L2 I7 Noise Y441 factor Y44 Non-conventional zone ~2131 Non-hierarchical notation Canon of B65 Notation A71 Canons for B6 Hierarchical B64 Mixed U221 Canon of B66 Pure u211 Notational plane 53 Devices in Q Postulates for M3 Zone SO I Sl 2 s2 3 s3 4 s4 system U

P Packet device Q51 Packeted link, Part of X226 Parody D84 Part of fused alphabetical link X224 chronological link X22 1 geographical link X222 packeted link X226 phase link X225 subject link X223 Personality L5002 Pedestrian work D4 Penumbral region K952 Periodical E3 1 Abstracting E42 Bibliographical E4 Indexing E4 1 publication E3 Reviewing E43 Suppiement to E311 Permanence, Canon of Bl5 Personal author D71 Personality as fundamental category L5 isolate L50 level 1 L51 level 2 L52 level 3 L53 round 1 L54 round 2 L55 round 3 L56

106

f-1) H41 {-2j H42 Bias H521 Comparison H53 1 device, in idea plane Q2 notational plane 420 Difference H54 1 Influencing H551 link, Fused X225 of a class H relation H5 Plane of work JO Population-cluster isolate L23 Portion of concrete entity L5003 Posteriorizing common isolate idea G5 Postulate for classification M for notational plane M3 1) for omission of connecting symbol M32 2) for omission of connecting symbol M33 3) for omission of connecting symbol M34 for verbal plane M2 of anteriorizing quality M35 of basic facet Ml2 of concreteness M 14 of connecting symbol M31 of fundamental categories Ml 1 of isolate facet Ml3 of level M 192 of level cluster Ml93 of rounds for energy h117 of rounds for personality and matter Ml8 of sequence M 15 of sequence within a round h4191 of space and time facet Ml6 Preparation Y20 phase Y2 Press mark V7923 alter Primary chain A44 Principle Actand-action-actor-tool N23 Commodity-raw material-transformation N21 Cow-calf N24 for facet sequence N2 of alphabetical sequence N38 of away from position N343 of bottom upwards N341 of canonical sequence N36

Principle (Contd) of clockwise N344 of increasing complexity N35 concreteness Nl 1 quantity N31 of inversion N12 of later in evolution N33 time N32 of left to right N342 of literary warrant N371 of spatial contiguity N34 Wall-picture N22 Whole-organ N25 Private era L151 time L15 unit of time Ll8 Program Yl31 Programming, Automatic Y33 Pseudo classic D41 entity A51 Public era Ll41 time L14 Unit of time L17 Punched card Y 11 Pure notation U2 11 Canon of B67

Q
Quasi class Cl1 digit X0 isolate idea G22 R Ranking A22 1 Rapid selector Y51 Raw material L4007 title PO Recall factor Y45 Relation Bias H52 Comparison H53 Difference H54 General H5 1 phase H5 11 Influencing H55 Phase H5

107

IS:

2550-1963
SPand time facet, Postulate of Ml6 as fundamental category L20 isolate, of level 1 L251 level 2 L252 level 3 L253 Spatial contiguity principle of N34

Relative location V7921 Relativity, Canon of B61 Relevance, Canon of B13 Relevant sequence, Canon of B16 Resolution factor Y41 Resolving power B32 Reticence, Canon of B52 Retrieval Y30 alter Reviewing periodical E43 Rich digit U61 alter Rider's international classification F91 Rules of classification A84

s
Sacred work Dl Scale of popularity of languages V712 Scan Y34 ali% Schedule of classific?tion A75 Fchm$edf mnemomcs, Canon of K5 assortment A27 classap A56 classification A57 knowledge Classes FO knowledge classification Fl/8 Search Y34 Sector device 493 idea plane R95 of a zone S5 Sectorising digit U51 alter ScSc~r$ rich digit U63 isolate idea G7 mnemonics, Canon of K7 Sequel D86 Sequence Filiatory A55 Postulate of Ml5 within a round Ml91 Serial E32 Service L40092 in machine search Y50 Intermediate L40094 Telecommunication Y53 Ultimate L40093 Shelf mark V7923 alter number VJ923 Sign-post digit U4 aNtr Simple base U21 eye;titytyOrgan of L5006 Sought link X3

"%teL~ Devised R8 Enumerated R7 idea G3 Specification All al& fZ&znnc$ssification FOJ Steps in classifying P Subject as assumed term CZ classification F6 device, in idea plane 45 notational plane 450 link, Fused X223 region L216 Subordinate classes, Ca AI of B41 Substantive digit U61 Sub-system L572 Super-imposed isolate idea G8 Super-imposition device in idea plane QS notational plane Qf30 Super rich digit U63 a&r Supplement facet V760 if& periodical E51 number V76 Symbolic meta-language 523 Synthesised title, in class number P7 focal number P7 Systematic isolate idea G6 mnemonics, Canon of K6 rich digit U62 system L57 Favoured I+571

StatementY31

T `telecommunication se&CC Y53 Tck-rekrence Y53 alter

IS:2550-1963
array- T63 facet T74 Telescoped facet T74 Telescoping of facrt T7 Term A61 Terminology A62 Canons for B5 Thought. C3 content El Embodied EO Expressed DO Macro C31 Micro C32 Time as fundamental catcgoq isolate level 1 Ll31 level 2 1,132 level 3 L133 number, Biscoe VG Private L 15 Unit of 1~18 Public I.14 Unit 1.17 Unit of Ll6 Title D6 Analyzed P3 Full PI in focal number P6 in standard terms P5 Kernel P2 Title Analyzed P3 in focal number P6 in standard term Pri Raw PO Synthesised, in class numbers P7 focal numbers P7 Transformed P4 Translation D85 U Ultimate class of document 170 commodity L4005 service L40093 Umbra1 region Kg.51
Uniformity, Canon of BG2 Unitary clas A24 group Al4 Unit of time I.16

LlO

Universal decimal classification Universe A04 Completely amplified A53 Finite A041 Immediate A35 Infinite A042 of documents E of first remove A351 of knowledge Cl of organ _ of first remove I.50081 of second remove L50082 of third remove L50083 of second remove A332 of third remove A353 of wholes L5007 Unlike entities A052 Unsought link X24 Upper link X31

F4

Vedic classification 1~01 Verbal mnemonics, Canon of K4 plane .J2 Postulates for M2 Verification by reverse translation P8 Volume EOl facet 17750 number V75

W
Wall-picture-principle N22 Whole organ principle N25 personality L.500 1 Word, Machine Y2331 Work DO al& Dependent D80 Literary D2 Multifocal D53 Pedestrian D4 Sacred I>1

Y
Year facet V730 number V73

Private L18 Public L17

109

iS:2550-1963
2 Tonal isolate J,24 Zone analysis, in idea plane R notaiional plane S in idea JAane R2 1 R9J 2 R92 3 R93 4 R94 Zyne (Confd) In notational plane SO J SJ : :z 4 s4 Geographical area L2 J 3 Non-conventional L2J3J Sector of a S5

