( Reaffirmed 2002 )

1s

I

9441

l

1979

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION
Educational
Chairman DR B. SEAPAN

FOR SEXTANT
Sectional

Instruments and Equipment Committee, EDC 77
Representing

National Council of Educational Training, New Delhi

Research

and

Members Towa Optics ( India ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI C. L. BATRA SARI RAJESH K. BATRA ( AIIernare) Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi SERI K. S. BHANDARI National Council of Educational Research and SIXRI P. K. BHATTACHARYA Training ( Dcptt of Education in Science ((r Mathematics ), New Delhi All India Federation of University & College DR M. M. CHAKRAVARTY Teachers' Organizations, Calcutta Paop M. BHATTACHARYYA ( Alternate ) Planning Commission ( Education Division ), SERI S. R. CHOPllA New Delhi Ministry of Industry and Industrial Development SHRI K. M. DARQAR Directorate of Technical Education, Government of PROP N. R. DAVE Gujarat, Ahmadabad Ministry of Education & Social Welfare, New Delhi DR K. GOPALAN Department of Science & Technology, New Delhi DR P. K. KATTI Ambala Scientific Instruments SHRI M. L. MADAN Manufacturers' Association ( Regd ), Ambala Cantt SHRI S. N. DHAWAN ( Alternate ) Director of Industries, Government of Haryana, SERI K. MANIVANNAN Chandigarh SHRI P. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) Directttar of Industries, Delhi Administration, SHRI H. L. MEHANDRU Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( CSIR ), Chandigarh SHRI D. S. PATHANIA ( ALternate ) COBWANDER V.B. NAIR Ministry of Defence ( NHQ ) LT CDR V. N. NARAYANAN ( Altcrnat8 ) University Grants Commission, New Delhi Pnos A. V. PATANKAR The Scientific Instruments Manufacturers' & SIIR. LAESH~~ISA~AR Dealers' Association ( Regd ), Ambala Cantt Snnr S. P. TUTEJA ( Alternate ) SHRI B. P. MITTAL ( Continued on page 2 )

F @ Co&right 1980
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9441 - 1979
( Cnnhusd

from pngt 1 )
Members R@rrrenfing The Scientific Instrument ) Co Ltd, Allahabad

SHRI B. N. SINEA Drr A. S. RAJPUT ( Alftrnatt SHRI VED PUAKAIH SHRI H. C. VERMA

PROF V. N. WANCEOO SERI R. K. MOHTA ( Alternatt ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-ofiio SHRI S. CHA~DRASEKEARAN, Head ( Mech Engg )

Modern Equipment Company, Ambala Cantt All India Instrument Manufacturers and Dealers Association, Bombay All India Science Teachers' Association, New Delhi Membtr )

Deputy Director

SHRI S. P. ABBEY

( Mech Engg ), ISL

Physical

Sciences

Subcommittee,

EDC

77

: 1
Government of

convt?lt~
Paolr N. R. DAVE Mtmberr SHRI R. K. BATRA SHRI C. L. BATRA ( Ahnaft SHRI K. MANIVANNAN SHRI P. K. JAIN ( Altarnatt ) SHRI LAKSHMI SAQAR Towa Optics ( India) ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Government of Haryana, Directorate of Technical Education, Gujarat, Ahmadabad

Director of Industries, Chandigarh The

SERI B. N. SINHA
SERI

SHRI S. P. TUTEJA (

Scientific Instruments Manufacturers' and Dealers' Association ( Regd ), Ambala Cantt Co Ltd, Allahabad Organization ( CSLR ),

Allttndt )
)

The Scientific Instrument

DR A. S. RAJPUT ( H. s. TRIARA

Afttrnatr

SHRI H. C. ASIJA (Alttmau ) Modern Equipment Company, SHRI VED P~AKASH SBRI NEERAJ PRAKASH ( Alfrmatt )

Central Scientific Instruments Chandigarh

Ambala Cantt

2

IS : 9441 - 1979

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION
0.
0.1 This Indian

FOR SEXTANT

FOREWORD
Standards Institution by the Educational had been approved subtended by the

Standard was adopted by the Indian on 31 December 1979, after the draft finalized Instruments and Equipment Sectional Committee by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 0.2 The sextant is used for determining the distant point objects at the place of observation.

angle

1. SCOPE 1.1 This

sextant

standard prescribes the general for use in schools and colleges.

requirements

and

tests

for

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose ( see Fig. 1 ). 2.1 Arc A portion of this standard, of a circle the following definitions shall apply

carrying

a graduated

scale in degrees.

supported by two fixed radial arms, meeting at 2.2 Body -. A quadrant a point which is the centre of the circle of which the quadrant forms a part. 2.3 Filter - Coloured glass plates interposed across a beam of light falling on the mirror for the purpose of minimizing the intensity of the incident light. 2.4 Handle 2.5 Horizon the body.
-

A suitable
Mirror -

device A mirror

for holding

the instrument

in hand. arm of

fixed suitably

on the radial

2.6 Index Arm passing through part.

A radial the centre

arm which is free to rotate around of the circle of which the quadrant line provided

the axis forms a arm

2.7 Index Mark - A fine reference indicating the reading on the scale. 3

on the movable

IS : 9441 - 1979

\

INDEX

MIRROR

H@Rl

FIG. 1
2.8 Index Mirror arm. 2.9 Legs surface. 2.10 Scale The A mirror fixed in a mount for putting portion the on the movable instrument radial

feet provided

on a plane *

The graduated

of the arc. for magnifying the distant

2.11 Telescope - An optical instrument objects making them appear nearer.

is made for 2.12 Tangent Screw - A screw by which a fine adjustment the setting of the instrument about its axis in order to bring the line of sight into co-incidence with an object. 2.13 Vernier - An auxiliary scale attached to or sliding in contact with the main scale, which enables one to take readings to a fraction of a division. 4

1s
3. MATERIAL 3.1 Arc AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

I

9441 . 1979

ed to allow impregnated

It shall be of brass or gun metal and shall be properly finishthe smooth movement of movable radial arm. It may have stainless steel or silver for the purpose of the scale. as

3.2 Body - It shall be of brass or gun metal and shall be shaped sector of a circle and shall be rigid in construction.

3.3 Filter - Coloured glass plates, suitably mounted which shall be capable of being brought in or out from the field of view of the horizon and index mirrors. 3.4 Handle - X hand& of suitable material giving a firm grip shall be rigidly attached in the frame for ease of handling the instrument while in use. 3.5 Horizon Mirror - It shall be made of optical glass, silvered on the back or silver coated over the lower half of the surface. It shall be mounted in a brass frame and shall be provided with adjusting screw of It shall brass so as to adjust its plane normal to the plane of the scale. be fixed in such a manner that when index arm is at zero of the scale this is parallel to the mirror within one degree. alloy, brass or gun-metal and 3.6 Index Arm -It shall be of aluminium shall be capable of free movement along the circumference of the arm. provided with a micrometer 3.7 Index Mark - In case of instrument head, a fine index mark shall be provided to fix the reading on the scale. 3.8 Index Mirror - It shall be made of optical glass, silvered on the back or silver coated. It shall be fitted at the end of the index-arm in a plane perpendicular to the plane of the scale. 3.9 Legs These shall be made of brass or chrome plated mild steel.

3.10 Scale - It shall be made of brass, gun-metal graduated in degrees with a minimum range of -5 3.10.1 Graduation equal in width and surface.

or stainless steel and to f130 degrees.

The graduation shall be of uniform thickness shall form a proper contrast to the graduated

3.11 Tangent Screw or Micrometer Head - It shall be made of brass or stainless steel and shall provide a smooth and uniform movement free of backlash or jerks. 3.12 Telescope - Two telescopes ( one inverting and other erecting ) and a sight with a peep hole with an arrangement for adjustment so that its optical axis may be made parallel to the plane of the scale, shall be 5

IS : 9441.1979 provided with the instrument. It shall also be capable of adjustment in a horizontal plane. It shall be fitted with Huygenian eyepiece and an achromatic objective of minimum aperture of 25 mm to give a clear and The body of the telescope shall be of brass or sharp image of the object. aluminium blackened from inside to minimize internal reflection. The sight tube shall be provided with a dense cobalt blue filter glass to view the sun. 3.13 Vernier - It shall be made of gun-metal, brass or stainless The least count of the vernier shall be 10 or 12 seconds. 4. ACCURACY 4.1 The accuracy of reading of the instrument shall be within the least count of the vernier at any point throughout the length of the scale. 5. TEST 5.1 The instrument shall be tested for the accuracy of the scale. steel.

5.2 The instrument shall be tested to ensure that the plane of the index glass is either normal or it is possible to make it normal to the plane of the scale. For this purpose, the measuring scale shall be looked in the Since the index mirror passes through the centre of the index mirror. scale, the latter and its image will appear to intersect at the edge of the mirror and if the adjustment is satisfactory they will appear to lie in the same plane. 5.3 The instrument shall be tested to ensure that the axis of the telescope is parallel to the plane of the scale. For this purpose the check shall be carried out by observing two objects and causirlg them to coincide at the The axis of the telescope is a line joining the centre of the field of view. centre of the object glass to the centre of the eyepiece or to the centre Perpendicular to this axis lies one of the cross wire. of the field ,of view. By tilting the instrument until the images lie near the edge of the field it should be noted if they still coincide. The instrument shall be further tilted so that they lie near the opposite edge. If coincidence persists, the axis is correctly adjusted. 5.4 The instrument shall be tested to check that the index and horizon mirror are parallel and at the same time the vernier reads zero. For this purpose, an object should be viewed through the telescope and made to appear in the field of view by reflection in the horizon mirror. If it is possible to bring about coincidence, the two mirrors are parallel. 6. FINISH 6.1 The sextant shall be finished shall be given a suitable coating dull black with the graduations 6 for rust prevention in white. and

IS I9441 - 1979 7. MARKING 7.1 Each sextant shall be legibly trade-mark of the manufacturer, manufacture. 7.1.1 The Mark. sextant may and indelibly marked with name, the serial number and the year of with the IS1 Certification

also be marked

NOTE - The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality IS1 control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

8. PACKING 8.1 It shall be packed in a wooden carrying case together with accessories and an instruction booklet. Suitable receptacle shall be provided for holding the telescope.

7

INTERNATIONAL
&Be

SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS )
UNIT mctre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole A K cd mol SYIdBOL m kg

units
QUANTITY

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic tetnpcrature Luminous intensity Amount of substance lupplementary QUANTITY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units Units

UNlT radian steradian

SYMBOL rad sr

QUANTSTY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, rtreis force

UNI!l' newton joule watt weher tcsla hertz siemens volt Pascal

SYMBOL N J W Wb T HZ S V Pa 1 1 1w I 1 1

DEFINITION N = 1 kg.m/ss J=1N.m = 1 J/s T-1 SelA/V VP 1 W/A Wb/m'

1 Wb = 1 V,s

1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-1)

1 Pa = 1 N/m*

