**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  10225  (1982)  :  Bearing  Spools  for  Tractor-operated  Disc 
Harrows  [FAD  21:  Farm  Implements  and  Machinery] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


Indian  Standard 


•fIRi .         A 

rS:  70225  -1382 

(Reaffirmed  1999) 


l> 


SPECIFICATION  FOR 
BEARING  SPOOLS  FOR 
TRACTOR-OPFRATm  DISC  HARROWS 


U>C    631 -3 13-6*072  :  62t'822'72 


rg  Copyright    1982, 

INDIAN     STANDARDS     INSTITUTION 

MAISAK      BHAVAN,      !     BAHADUR     SHAH     ZAFAR      MARC 

NEW  DELHI   LI  now 

Gr  !  Septrmbrr  WBl 


IS  :  10225  -  1982 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 
BEARING  SPOOLS  FOR 
TRACTOR-OPERATED  DISC  HARROWS 

Soil  Working  Equipment  Sectional  Committee,  AFDC  50 

Chairman  Representing 

Shri  K.  S.  Yadav  Ministry    of    Agriculture    (Department    of    Agri- 

culture &  Co-operation),  New  Delhi 
Members 
Shri  V.  W.  Ambekar  Directorate  of  Agriculture,    Government  of    Uttar 

Pradesh,  Lucknow 
Shri  M.  R.  Dew  an  Tractor  Training   &    Testing  Station  (  Ministry  of 

Agriculture  ),  Budni 
Shri  J.  Prasad  (  Alternate  ) 
Director  Central      Institute      of     Agricultural     Engineering 

(lCAR),Bhopal 
Dr  C.  Sriram  (  Alternate ) 
Director  Tractor  Training  Centre  (  Ministry  of  Agriculture  ), 

Hissar 
Senior  Test  Engineer  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  K.  Gupta  State  Farms  Corporation  of  India  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Shri  M.  L.  Garg  (  Alternate) 
Shri  J.  S.  Hanjra  Partapsons  Engineers,  Jalandhar 

Shri  R.  S.  Hanjra  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  M.  M.  Mehta  Escorts  Limited,  Faridabad 

Shri  Ripdaman  Singh  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  B.  Pandya  National  Farmers  Organization,  New  Delhi 

Shri  B.  R.  Barwale  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  J.  S.  Panwar  Indian   Agricultural  Research  Institute     (  ICAR  ), 

New  Delhi 
Shri  Parampal  Singh  Bharat  Krishak  Samaj,  New  Delhi 

Shri  E.  C.  Peter  Haryana  Agro-Industries  Corporation  Ltd,   Chandi- 

garh 
Shri  K.  K.  Sagar  Light  Carts  Private  Ltd,  Meerut 

Dr  M.  P.  Sinha  Department   of  Agriculture,   Government  of  Bihar, 

Patna 
Dr  S.  R.  Verma  Punjab  Agricultural  University,  Ludhiana 

Dr  B.  S.  Sandhtj  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  S.  Yadava  Uttar   Pradesh   State    Agro-Industries    Corporation 

Ltd,  Lucknow 
Shri  T.  Pttrnanandam,  Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-officio  Member  ) 


Director  (  Agri  &  Food ) 


Secretary 

Shri  R.  N.  Sharma 
Deputy  Director  (  Agri  &  Food,  )  ISI 


©  Copyright  1982 

INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV    of  1957  )    and 

reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 

publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


IS  :  10225  -  1982 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 

BEARING  SPOOLS  FOR 

TRACTOR-OPERATED  DISC  HARROWS 

0.    FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards 
Institution  on  30  July  1982,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Soil  Working 
Equipment  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Agricultural 
and  Food  Products  Division  Council. 

0.2  Bearing  spools  are  used  for  separating  end  discs  in  a  gang  of  disc 
harrow.  Normally  two  bearing  spools  are  used  in  a  gang.  Bearing 
spools  also  help  in  attaching  the  gang  with  the  frame.  It  consists  of  bear- 
ing spool,  upper  half  bearing  and  lower  half  bearing.  Provision  for  the 
lubrication  is  also  made.  In  order  to  unify  the  dimensions  for  ensuring 
interchangeability  as  well  as  to  stipulate  other  quality  parameters  of  the 
bearing  spools,  a  need  was  felt  to  prepare  this  Indian  Standard.  Require- 
ments for  plain  spools  of  the  disc  harrows  have  been  covered  in  IS  :  7230- 
1974*. 

0,2.1  This  standard  is  complimentary  to  IS  :  6635-1972J. 

0.3  In  preparation  of  this  standard,  assistance  has  been  derived  from 
Light  Carts  Private  Limited,  Meerut. 

0.4  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of 
this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated, 
expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in 
accordance  with  IS  :  2-1960J.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained 
in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value 
in  this  standard. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This   standard  specifies  material,  dimension  and  other  requirements 
for  bearing  spools  for  tractor-operated  disc  harrows. 


♦Specification  for  plain  spool  for  tractor  operated  disc  harrows. 
tSpecification  for  tractor  operated  disc  harrow. 
JRules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised  ). 


IS  :  10225  -  1982 

2.  MATERIAL 

2.1  The  material  of  construction  of  spool,  upper  and  lower  half  bear- 
ings shall  be  cast  iron,  preferably  conforming  to  Giade  20  of  IS  :  210- 
1978*. 

3.  HARDNESS 

3.1  The  hardness  of  the  castings,  when  tested  in  accordance  with  the 
method  given  in  IS  :  1789-1 96 If  shall  be  between  160  to  220  HB. 

3.2  Surface  of  the  bearing  spool,  and  that  of  the  lower  and  upper  half 
bearings  coming  in  contact  with  the  bearing  spool,  shall  be  chilled.  The 
depth  of  the  chilling  shall  be  not  less  than  1'5  mm  and  hardness  shall  be 
between  230  to  300  HB  (  see  IS  :  1789-1961f ). 

4.  DIMENSIONS 

4.1  The  dimensions  of  the  bearing  spool  shall  be  as  given  in  Fig.  U 


-    1     0  16 


0  115*2 


-2?5±2 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

Fig.  1     Spool  Bearing 


♦Specification  for'grey  iron  castings  (  third  revision  ). 
fMethod  for  Brinell  hardness  test  for  grey  cast  iron. 


IS:  10225- 1982 

5.  OTHER  REQUIREMENTS 

5.1  Both  the  faces  of  the  spool  coming  in  contact  with  discs  shall  be 
finished  properly  to  fit  the  curvature  of  the  disc. 

5.2  The  hole  for  axle  shall  be  smooth  and  free  from  casting  projections. 

5.3  Provision  for  lubrication  of  the  bearing  shall  be  made.  Grease  nipple 
(  see  IS  :  4009-1967*  )  if  provided,  should  have  a  thread  size  designation 
of  3/8. 

5.4  The  mass  of  the  complete  bearing  spool  shall  be  not  more  than 
11-0  kg. 

6.  WORKMANSHIP  AND  FINISH 

6.1  The  casting  shall  be  free  from  cracks,  seams,  blow  holes  and  other 
visual  defects. 

6.2  The  spool  shall  be  free  from  rust.  The  bearing  spool  may  be  given 
a  coat  of  anti  corrosive  paint  if  required  by  the  purchaser. 

7.  MARKING  AND  PACKING 

7.1  Marking  —  Each  bearing  spool  shall  be  clearly  marked  with  the 
following  particulars: 

a)  Manufacturer's  name  or  recognized  trade-mark,  and 

b)  Batch  or  code  number. 

7.1.1  Each  bearing  spool  may  also  be  marked  with  the  ISI  Certification 
Mark. 

Note  —  The  use  of  the  ISI  Certification  Mark  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the 
Indian  Standards  Institution  (  Certification  Marks  )  Act  and  the  Rules  and  Regu- 
lations made  thereunder.  The  ISI  Mark  on  products  covered  by  an  Indian  Standard 
conveys  the  assurance  that  they  have  been  produced  to  comply  with  the  require- 
ments of  that  standard  under  a  well-defined  system  of  inspection,  testing  and  quality 
control  which  is  devised  and  supervised  by  ISI  and  operated  by  the  producer.  ISI 
marked  products  are  also  continuously  checked  by  ISI  for  conformity  to  that 
standard  as  a  further  safeguard.  Details  of  conditions  under  which  a  licence  for  the 
use  of  the  ISI  Certification  Mark  may  be  granted  to  manufacturers  or  processors, 
may  be  obtained  from  the  Indian  Standards  Institution. 

7.2  Packing — Each  bearing  spool  or  a  set  of  bearing  spools  for  a 
harrow  shall  be  packed  as  agreed  to  between  the  manufacturer  and  the 
purchaser,  for  safe  handling  in  transit. 

8.  SAMPLING  FOR  LOT  ACCEPTANCE 

8.1  Unless  otherwise  agreed  to  between  the  purchaser  and  the  supplier, 
the  sampling  of  bearing  spool  for  testing  for  lot  acceptance  shall  be  done 
in  accordance  with  3  of  IS  :  7201-1974f . 


♦Specification  for  grease  nipples. 

tMethod  of  sampling  of  agricultural  machinery  and  tractors. 


