**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13416-2 (1992) : Recommendations for preventive measures 
against hazards at workplaces. Part 2: Fall prevention [CED 
29: Construction Management including safety in 
Construction] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



^TR^^TFT^ 



IS 13416 ( Part 2) : 1992 
( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



Indian Standard 

PREVENTIVE MEASURES AGAINST HAZARDS 
AT WORKPLACES - RECOMMENDATIONS 

PART 2 FALL PREVENTION 



UDC 69-055-4-783*4 : 658-382 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

May 1992 Price Group 1 



Safety in Construction Sectional Committee, CED 45 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Safety in Construction Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 

On many occasions accidents take place at construction worksites due to fall of persons. Some 
times such fall may be serious and may lead to death The fall may be from scaffolds, gangways, 
ladders, cranes, collapse of excavation, etc. It is, therefore, necessary to identify the areas where such 
fall may take place and to adopt necessary measures to prevent hazards due to such fall. 



IS 13416 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 



Indian Standard 

PREVENTIVE MEASURES AGAINST HAZARDS 
AT WORKPLACES - RECOMMENDATIONS 



PART 2 FALL PREVENTION 



1 SCOPE 



1.1 This standard (Part 2 ) lays down the types 
of falls of persons at construction sites and 
measures required to prevent such falls and the 
consequent hazards. 

2 REFERENCE 

2.1 IS 3696 (Part 2) : 1991 'Scaffolds and 
ladders ~ Code of safety : Part 2 Ladders 
{first revision Y is a necessary adjunct to this 
standard. 

3 TYPES OF FALLS 

3.1 DifTerent categories of falls at worksite are 
generally as follows: 

a) From height such as various floors, scafTol- 
ding, sloping roofs, hoists, ladders, steps, 
poles and platforms, etc, erected for 
execution of the work; 

b) In pits such as lift shaft, down stairs, 
chutes, basements and excavations, etc; 

c) In water such as wells, sea, rivers, etc; 

d) In sewers; 

c) Through roof covering such as tiles, slates, 
sheets, etc; 

f) Through manholes or in tunnels containing 
foul air, dirty water and lilth; and 

g) From chimneys, steel structures, plant and 
machinery, etc, such as hoists, cranes, 
trucks, dumpers etc. 

3.2 The fall may also be flat on floors/ground due 
to various reasons mentioned below: 

a) Stepping on objects, slipping or tripping; 

b) Striking against objects; and 

c) While pushing wheel barrows, trolleys, 
tipping wagons, etc, 

4 MEASURES FOR FALL PREVENTION 

4.1 The various methods and precautions for 
preventing accidents due to fali are given m 4. LI 
to 4.L9. Safely belts and harnesses prevent fall 
of workers while working at heights and hence 
shall be used, where necessary. 



4.1.1 Fali from Ladders 

Accidents from ladders are mainly due to slipping 
or falling of persons. Precautions recommended 
in IS 3696 ( Part 2 ) : 1991 shall be followed while 
using ladders. However, the following salient 
points should be specially taken care of: 

a) Safe anchorages on firm footing should be 
provided. 

b) Swaying, sagging, movements on sides 
should be avoided. 

c) The ladders should be placed at correct 
angle of repose [ see IS 3696 ( Part 2 ) : 
1991]. 

d) Equal support on each side of stile should 
be provided. 

e) Special precautions should be taken in bad 
weather, specially windy conditions. Shoes 
with mud, grease/oil should be avoided 
while climbing. 

f) While erecting a ladder in front of any 
opening, care shall be taken to keep watch 
on the traffic. 

g) The gap between the last rung and the top 
floor level shall not be kept more than 
220 mm. 

h) The ladders should be sound, free from 
loose nails, screws cracks and other defects. 
These should be checked weekly/periodically 
and damaged ones repaired or removed 
from site [see IS 3696 (Part 2) : 1991 ]. 

4.1.2 Fall from Hoists 

Provision of gates for hoists and wire nets on 
each Iloor/landing should be made to prevent fall 
of workers. 

4.1.3 Fall from Scajfoldings, Stagings, etc 

All stagings, scaflbldings or platforms should 
stand on firm ground and should be secure, 
properly anchored and provided MnXh railings at 
least 900 mm high. Toe boards at least 100 mm 
high should also be provided to prevent fall of 
persons. 



4.L4 



Fall from Floors and Various Storeys 



All floors after casting should be provided with 
walls at end as soon as possible to prevent fall of 
persons. In case ot delay, safety parapet barri- 
cades should be provided. Unauthorised persons 
should not be allowed and if work is carried out 
beyond day light, artificial lights should be 
provided. All types of lloor opening shall be 
covered or barricated to avoid fall through the 
openings. 



1 



IS 13416 (Part 2) : 1992 



4.1.5 Fall from Sloping and Fragile Roofs, etc 

For sloping and fragile roof self-supporting 
platform should be used. Safety nets may also be 
provided inside below the roof. The workers 
should be provided with safety belts, safety 
harness, helmets, etc. Securely supported crawling 
boards or ladders shall be used while working on 
fragile roof. 

4.1.6 Fall in Pits, Excavations, Lift Shafts, Down- 
stairs^ Chutes and Basements, etc 

All accesses should be barricaded to prevent 
accidental fall. 

4.1.7 Fall in Water, Wells, Sea, Rivers and Ponds, 
Etc 

Persons working should have proper attire, safety 
belts or harnesses, A good swimmer trained for 



rescue and providing first aid should be employed. 
He should also keep watch on workers engaged 
in such typical situations. 



4.1.8 Fall in Sewers, Tunnels, Man-holes, etc 

Special regulations for working in sewer lines, 
manholes and tunnels as recommended by the 
appropriate authority should be strictly followed. 

4.1.9 Falls from Chimneys, Structural Framework, 
Plant and Machinery 

Such falls should be prevented by following the 
safety regulations in letter and spirit. Provision 
of railings, cat-walks, wire-mesh, safety belts and 
harnesses, etc, reduce chances of fall. Safely bells 
and harnesses save workers from grave injuries. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions ot" the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 19S6 and Ihc Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been protiuccd 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control whicli is devised and supervised by iilS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products arc also continuously checked by BIS for conformity 
to tliat standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may he granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 



BIS r^^.^tutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmoniOTR d*"-velopment of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending AKOJv^ected matters in the country. 



Copyright 



BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course 
designations. Enqi 



irm without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
itions. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director { Publications ), BIS. 



Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from lime to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of 
the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
following reference : 

Doc : No. GEO 45 ( 4872 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 33 II 3 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional OflSces: Telephone 



Central : Manak Bhavan» 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 



f331 01 31 

1331 13 75 



Eastern : 1/14 C. L T. Scheme VII M. V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 235 02 16 

Western : Manakalaya. E9 MIDC, Marol. Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORR. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. SRINAGAR. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, 



Printed at Printiade, New Delhi» India 



