IS 4081 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


UA HTF 
water sit dated Tele arf — ga afea 
( ZAT FATT ) 


Indian Standard 


BLASTING AND RELATED DRILLING 
OPERATIONS — CODE OF SAFETY 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 13.230; 93.020 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 2013 Price Group 5 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been adopted by 
the Civil Engineering Divisional Council. 


Blasting and drilling is a specialized job involving a lot of hazards which often lead to accidents. It is necessary, 
therefore, that certain safety precautions are laid down for various operations involved in the process of blasting 
and drilling for the guidance of those who are engaged in this work with a view to minimizing the risk of 
accidents and injuries. 


This standard was first formulated in 1967. It was first revised in 1986 to incorporate developments in view of 
the advancement made in the field of blasting and drilling processes. The first revision also incorporated 
modifications to the safety rules relating to various operations involved like transportation of explosives and 
their storage, issuing of explosives, the drilling and loading operations, electrical shot firing and safety in fire 
blasting. 


This second revision has been brought out to incorporate the improvements based on the experience gained in 
use of the standard since its last revision. In this revision, the following major modifications have been incorporated: 


a) Clause on compliance to statutory requirements relating to explosives, blasting and related drilling 
operations, has been included. 


b) Definition for misfire has been included. 

c) Requirement of having spark arrestor in the vehicles transporting explosives, has been included. 

d) Provision for placement of generator, where used, away from the magazine premises, has been included. 
e) References to Indian Standards have been updated. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4081 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


BLASTING AND RELATED DRILLING 
OPERATIONS — CODE OF SAFETY 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down the safety requirements for 
blasting and related drilling operations in locations 
other than mines. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

2878 : 2004 Fire extinguisher, carbon dioxide 
types (portable and trolley mounted) 
— Specification (third revision) 
Code of practice for construction of 
tunnels: Part 2 Underground 
excavation in rock, Section 1 Drilling 
and blasting 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


5878 (Part 2/ 
Sec 1) : 1970 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Blaster — The person assigned the duty of loading 
and blasting the explosives and having statutory 
approval/licence for handling explosives. 


3.2 Blasting Cap — A shell closed at one end and 
containing a charge of detonating compound, which 
is ignited from a spark. It is used for detonating 
explosives. 


3.3 Detonator — Any device containing a detonating 
charge that is used for initiating detonation in an 
explosive. The term includes, but is not limited to, 
electric blasting caps of instantaneous and delay types, 
blasting caps for use with safety fuse and detonating 
cord delay connectors. 


3.4 Electric Blasting Cap — A shell containing a 
charge of detonating compound which is ignited by 
an electric current from two projecting insulated leg 
wires. 


3.5 Explosive — Any mixture or chemical compound 
which is capable of producing an explosion by its 
own energy. This includes gun powder, dynamite, 
nitroglycerine compounds, fulminate, fuses, 
detonators, cartridges or an explosive substance 
having explosive power equal to or greater than gun 
powder. 


3.6 Magazine — A building or other structure meant 
for the storage of explosives. 


3.7 Misfire — Failure of an entire charge of explosive, 
to explode in a shot hole. 


3.8 Missed Hole — A drilled hole containing an 
explosive charge that failed to explode. 


3.9 Permanent Blasting Wires — Wires between the 
firing switches, for use in blasting where the power 
source is an electric circuit. 


3.10 Primer — An explosive cartridge with a detonator 
or igniting agent inserted therein. 


3.11 Safety Fuse/Detonating Fuse — A medium 
manufactured specially for firing explosive charges, 
that conveys a flame at uniform rate rather than one 
that is in itself a detonator or one that operates on some 
other principle. 


3.12 Stemming — Material used for confining a charge 
of explosives in a hole or to cover explosives. 


4 COMPLIANCE TO 
REQUIREMENTS 


STATUTORY 


Notwithstanding the provisions of this standard, all 
relevant statutory provisions under the relevant Act, 
Rules and Regulations relating to explosives, blasting 
and related drilling operations, etc shall be complied 
with. 


5 TRANSPORTATION OF EXPLOSIVES 


5.1 All the relevant central, state and local laws and 
Rules and Regulations framed thereunder shall be 
complied and necessary licence obtained. Loading, 
unloading and handling of explosives shall be 
supervised by qualified personnel. At the time of 
loading or unloading of explosives, no electrical switch 
should be operated. 


IS 4081 : 2013 


5.2 Containers 


For carrying small quantity (up to 5 kg of explosives) 
specially designed insulated containers may be used. 
These containers shall be constructed of finished wood 
not less than 50 mm thick or plastic not less than 6 mm 
thick or pressed fibre board not less than 10 mm thick. 
Metal components, including nails, bolts, screws, etc, 
shall not be used in the construction of the containers, 
which shall be waterproof and provided with lids. The 
containers shall be provided with suitable non- 
conductive carrying device, such as rubber, leather or 
canvas handle or strap. 


5.2.1 Each explosive container should have clear and 
indelible markings to indicate, 


a) manufacturer’s name or trade mark; 

b) name of the explosive; 

c) lot number; 

d) date of manufacture; 

e) expiry date; and 

f) the words ‘EXPLOSIVES, HANDLE WITH 
CARE", 


5.2.2 Containers used for storing explosives or 
detonators shall be used for that item only. 


5.3 Vehicles 


5.3.1 The vehicles used for transporting explosive shall 
be driven only by a licenced driver who is physically 
fit and is familiar with the precautions to be taken while 
carrying the explosives in his vehicles. All vehicles 
used for transporting explosives shall be maintained 
in good working condition. 


5.3.2 The body-work of each vehicle shall preferably 
be of the completely enclosed type with a properly 
fitting door and locking arrangement. The body-work 
shall be leak-proof. In open bodied vehicles, the floor 
shall be leak-proof, the sides and ends shall be of 
sufficient height to prevent the explosives from falling 
off the vehicle and the explosives shall be covered with 
a waterproof and flame resistant tarpaulin. 


5.3.2.1 The interior of the body shall not have any 
exposed metal parts, except those of copper, brass and 
other non-sparking metals, and shall preferably be lined 
with wood. 


5.3.2.2 The chassis of the vehicles shall be well sprung, 
the unsprung country carts shall not be used for the 
transportation of explosives. The tyre pressures shall 
be maintained as per the requirements of the relevant 
explosives Rules/Regulations. Vehicle transporting 
explosives shall have spark arrestor in the silencer. 


5.3.2.3 The exterior of the body shall be conspicuously 
marked on both sides and ends, with the word 


‘EXPLOSIVES’, painted in not less than 100 mm high 
letters in white over a red background in English and 
local language. 


5.3.3 AIl electrical wiring and equipment of vehicles 
shall be adequately insulated and protected against 
mechanical damage to prevent shortcircuiting. 


5.3.4 Two carbon dioxide fire extinguishers, each of 
not less than 3 kg capacity, conforming to IS 2878, 
shall be carried on each vehicles. The extinguishers 
shall be securely mounted on the vehicles in such a 
manner that they can be readily removed for use in an 
emergency. 


5.3.5 A motor vehicle carrying explosives shall not be 
re-fuelled except in emergencies and even then only 
when the motor has been stopped and other precautions 
have been taken to prevent accidents. 


5.3.6 All motor vehicles used for transportation of 
explosives shall be carefully inspected at the beginning 
of the day’s work to ensure that: 


a) the vehicle is in good condition in all respects 
for safe transportation of explosives; 

b) the chassis, engine and body are clean and 
free from surplus oil and grease; 

c) the fuel system of the vehicle, including the 
fuel tank(s) is free from leakage; 

d) all electrical wiring and equipment are in 
sound condition; 

e) lights, brakes and steering mechanism are in 
good working order; 

f) the fire extinguishers are serviceable and in 
position on the vehicle; and 

g) driver is trained in the use of extinguishers 
on his vehicle. 


5.4 Safety Precautions 


Safety precautions outlined below shall be observed 
for transportation of explosives: 


a) No metals except the approved metal truck 
bodies shall be allowed to come in contact 
with cases of explosives. Metals and 
flammable or corrosive substances shall not 
be transported with explosives. As far as 
possible, transportation of any other material 
along with explosives shall be prohibited. 

b) Smoking shall be prohibited in the vehicle 
carrying explosives and in its vicinity. 

c) No unauthorized person shall be allowed in 
the vehicle carrying explosives. 

d) Explosives and detonators of blasting caps 
shall not be permitted to be transported in the 
same vehicle. 


e) Detonators and other explosives for blasting 
shall be transported to the site of work in the 
original containers or in securely locked 
separate non-metallic containers and shall not 
be carried loose or mixed with other materials. 

f) Care should be taken in loading and unloading 
of explosives. The filled containers shall not 
be handled roughly or dropped. 

g) Drivers shall not leave the vehicles unattended 
while transporting explosives. 


h) The speed of the vehicle shall not exceed 25 
km/h on rough roads and 40 km/h elsewhere. 

j) Vehicles transporting explosives shall not be 
taken into a garage, repair shop or parked in 
congested areas, public parkings or similar places. 

k) Explosives shall not be transported in trailers. 
Further, any trailer shall not be attached to a 
motor truck or vehicle when it is being used 
in transporting explosives. 


m) Explosives shall not be transported on public 
highways during darkness, except in 
emergencies and even then only when the 
written approval of the project authorities has 
been obtained. Such vehicles shall be fitted 
with adequate warning lights on both ends, 
while operating in darkness. 

n) Explosives shall not be transferred from one 
vehicle to another on public highways except 
in cases of emergency. 


5.5 Weight of Consignments 


The quantity of explosives that may be transported by 
different modes of transport shall be as given below: 


a) For transportation by rail, unless otherwise 
permitted, quantity of explosive in any wagon 
shall not exceed 4 500 kg. The minimum gross 
wagon load (inclusive of mass of packing 
cases) shall be 3000 kg, which is 
approximately equal to 102 cases of 
explosives if packed in wooden cases or 114 
cases if packed in fibre board cases. 


b) For transportation by road, the quantity of 
explosive carried in any single vehicle shall 
not exceed 75 percent of the rated load 
carrying capacity of that vehicle or 3 600 kg, 
whichever is less. 


6 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES 


6.1 Storage of explosives is regulated by the Indian 
Explosives Act, 1884 and provision thereunder should 
be strictly observed. 


6.2 Explosives shall be stored only in a magazine which 
is clean, dry, well-ventilated, reasonably cool, correctly 


IS 4081 : 2013 


located, protected against lightning in accordance with 
The Electricity Act, 2003 and Indian Explosives Act, 
1884 and Rules and Regulations framed thereunder, 
substantially constructed bullet and fire resistant and 
securely locked. 


6.3 The storage should be done in such a way that the 
first store should be used first and to have this facility, 
the explosives should be stored in sequence. 


6.4 Blasting caps, electric blasting caps or primers shall 
not be stored in the same box, container or room with 
other explosives. 


6.5 Explosives, fuse or fuse lighters shall not be stored 
in a damp or wet place or near oil, gasoline, cleaning 
solutions or solvents or near radiators, steam pipes, or 
other sources of heat. 


6.6 Smoking and use of matches, naked lights and 
readily flammable articles or open fires/flame shall be 
prohibited within the fenced area around the magazine. 
Suitable notices to this effect shall be conspicuously 
posted at appropriate locations (see also 6.16). 


6.7 An area up to a distance of not less than 8 m on all 
sides of the magazine shall be maintained free of all 
vegetation, debris and combustibles. Oily cotton rags/ 
waste and articles liable to spontaneous ignition shall 
not be allowed in or near the magazine. 


6.8 Metals, metallic objects and metal tools that are 
capable of producing sparks shall not be stored or used 
inside or in the immediate vicinity of the magazine. 


6.9 If nitroglycerine from deteriorated explosives 
has leaked down onto the floor of the explosive 
magazine, the floor shall be desensitized by washing 
thoroughly with an agent obtained before hand from 
the supplier of the explosives. For this purpose, 
desensitizing agents and the instructions for using 
them shall always be obtained along with the supply 
of nitroglycerine. 


6.10 Magazine shoes, without nails, shall be kept at 
all times in the magazine, and a wooden tub or cement 
trough, approximately 300 mm high and 450 mm in 
diameter, filled with water shall be fixed near the door 
of the magazine. Persons entering the magazine shall 
put on the magazine shoes provided for the purpose, 
and be careful not to allow the magazine shoes to touch 
the ground outside clear floor. Persons with bare feet 
shall, before entering the magazine, dip their feet in 
water, and then step direct from the tub over the barrier 
( if there is one ) on to the clear floor. 


6.11 A brush or broom shall be kept in the lobby of 
the magazine for cleaning the magazine on each 
occasion it is opened for the receipt, delivery of 
inspection of explosives. 


IS 4081 : 2013 


6.12 Boxes of explosives shall not be thrown down or 
dragged along the floor and may be stacked on wooden 
trestles. Where there are termites, the legs of the trestles 
should rest in shallow copper, lead or brass bowls, 
containing water. 


6.13 Packages containing explosives shall not be 
allowed to remain in the sun. 


6.14 Empty boxes or packing materials shall not be 
stored or permitted to be around, inside or in the 
vicinity of the magazine. 


6.15 Adequate quantity of water and fire fighting 
equipment shall be provided in the magazine. Guards 
(see 6.17) shall be properly trained in handling such 
equipment. 


6.16 Signboards reading ‘DANGER — HIGH 
EXPLOSIVES’, ‘PROTECTED AREA’, ‘NO 
SMOKING’, etc, shall be prominently displayed in 
front of the magazine. 


6.17 Well trained armed guard shall be posted to guard 
the magazine. 


6.18 The following shall be hung up in the lobby of 
the magazine: 


a) Copy of The Explosives Rules, 2008, 

b) Statement showing the stock in the magazine, 
and 

c) Certificate showing the last date of testing of 
the lightning conductor. 


6.19 For continued blasting-operations, the magazine shall 
be located at a safe distance near the work-site and actual 
requirements of explosives for each blast may be drawn 
and transported to the site; left overs, if any, must be 
immediately returned to the magazine. Where the blasting 
operations extend to several scattered sites and/or one of 
a short duration, portable magazines shall be used. Each 
such magazine shall be located at a safe distance from 
the work site, enclosed in a fence and properly guarded. 


6.20 If generator is used for lighting purpose, it shall 
be kept at least 10 m away from the magazine premises 
to avoid any spark from silencer of the generator. 


7 HANDLING AND USE OF EXPLOSIVES 


7.1 Handling of explosives shall be avoided during 
thunderstorm or when thunderstorm is expected. All 
persons shall retire to place of safety. 


7.2 Any package containing explosives shall not be 
dragged, dropped or handled roughly. The packages 
shall be opened at a safe distance and at a shielded 
location vis-a-vis the magazine. 


7.3 Sparking metal tools shall not be used to open kegs 
of explosives. 


7.4 Smoking shall not be permitted nor matches, open 
lights, fire, flame, or any other device capable of 
producing sparks or flame shall be carried while 
handling or using explosives. 


7.5 Explosives shall not be placed where these may be 
exposed to flame excessive heat, spark or impact. 


7.6 The covers of the explosive cases or packages shall 
be replaced every time after taking out part of the 
contents as long as any explosives are left in them. 


7.7 Explosives shall not be carried in the pockets or 
folds of clothing by any person. 


7.8 Primers shall not be made up in a magazine or near 
excessive quantity of explosives, or in excess of 
immediate needs. 


7.9 Nothing shall be inserted in the open end of a 
blasting cap except fuses. 


7.10 No person shall strike, tamper with, or attempt to 
remove or investigate the contents of a blasting cap or 
an electric blasting cap or attempt to pull out the 
crimped safety fuse out of a blasting cap. 


7.11 Children and unauthorized or unnecessary persons 
shall not be present where explosives are being handled 
or used. 


7.12 No attempt shall be made to soften hard set 
explosives by heating over a fire or by rolling the 
explosive on the ground. 


7.13 The blasting powder, explosives, detonators, 
fuses, etc shall be in good condition and not damaged 
due to damp moisture or any other cause. They shall 
be inspected before use and damaged articles shall be 
discarded totally and removed immediately. 


7.14 No attempt shall be made to reclaim or use fuses, 
blasting caps, electric blasting caps or any other 
explosives which have been water soaked, even if these 
have been dried out. The manufacturers shall be 
consulted in such cases. 


8 DRILLING AND LOADING 


8.1 Blasting shall be carried out only with the 
permission of the engineer-in-charge. The blasting 
operation shall remain in the charge of competent and 
experienced supervisor and blaster who are thoroughly 
acquainted with the details of handling explosives and 
blasting operations. All the materials, tools and 
equipment used for blasting operations shall be of 
approved type. 


8.2 No drilling shall be started until previous holes in 
the blasted area are flushed with air and water. 


8.3 The blaster shall be competent and qualified by 
reason of his training, knowledge or experience in 


the field of transporting, storing, handling and using 
of explosives, and having a working knowledge of 
rules and regulations pertaining to explosives. The 
blaster shall be in good physical condition and not be 
under influence of drugs, alcohol, intoxicants, etc. 


8.4 While planning drilling operations for blasting 
purposes, consideration shall be given to the nature of 
stratum and the overburden with a view to avoiding 
the possibilities of land-slides after blasting. 


8.5 The face of rock shall be carefully examined before 
drilling, to determine the possible presence of unfired 
explosive. No attempt shall be made to drill at a site if 
undetonated explosives are suspected. In all such cases 
action shall be taken according to 12.5. 


8.6 The position of all holes to be drilled shall be 
marked out with white paint. 


8.7 The bore hole shall be carefully checked for length, 
presence of water, dust, etc, with a wooden tamping 
pole or a measuring tape before loading. It shall be 
cleared of all debris before explosives are inserted. 


8.8 The diameter of the bore of each hole shall be 
greater than the outside diameter of the cartridges of 
explosive. The line of detonating fuse extending into 
a bore hole shall be cut from the spool before loading 
the remainder of the charge. Use of short pieces of 
fuse shall be prohibited for detonation purposes. 


8.9 Surplus explosives shall not be stacked near 
working areas during loading. 


8.10 Loading and drilling shall not be carried out at 
the same time in the same area. 


8.11 A bore hole shall not be loaded with explosives 
after springing (enlarging the hole with explosives) or 
upon completion of drilling without making sure that 
it is cool and that it does not contain any hot metal, 
burning or smoldering materials. Temperatures in 
excess of 65°C are dangerous. 


8.12 A bore hole near another hole loaded with 
explosives shall not be sprung. 


8.13 Cartridges or explosives shall not be forced down 
a bore hole or on obstruction in a bore hole. 


8.14 Blaster shall keep an accurate up-to-date record 
of explosives, blasting agents, blasting supplies used 
in a blast and shall keep an accurate running inventory 
of all explosives and blasting agents stored at operation 
site. 


8.15 No force shall be used for inserting a blasting cap 
or an electric blasting cap into explosive. The cap shall 
be inserted into a hole made with a pricker designed 
for the purpose. A hitch of the electric blasting cap 
leading wire shall be made on the primer cartridge so 


IS 4081 : 2013 


as to prevent pulling out of the electric blasting cap 
from the explosive charge. In case of detonating fuse, 
the fuse shall be tied to the explosive cartridge so that 
the blasting cap is not pulled out. Care shall be taken 
so that the electric blasting cap, loading wire or the 
length of the safety fuse does not get damaged during 
loading of the charge. 


8.16 No attempt shall be made to slit, drop, deform or 
abuse the primer. 


8.17 No holes shall be loaded except those to be fired 
on the next round of blasting and after blasting, all 
remaining explosives and detonators shall be 
immediately returned to an authorized magazine. 


8.18 Blasting caps or electric blasting caps shall not 
be connected to detonating fuse except by methods 
recommended by the manufacturers of the caps. 


8.19 No cartridge shall be cut or explosive removed 
from it for any purpose whatsoever. 


8.20 Metallic devices of any kind shall not be used in 
tamping. Wooden tamping tools with no exposed metal 
parts except non-sparking metal connectors for jointed 
poles shall be used. Violent tamping shall be avoided. 
Primer shall not be tamped. 


8.21 Care shall be taken to confine the explosives in 
the bore hole with sand, earth, clay or other suitable 
non-combustible stemming material. 


8.22 Kinking or injuring of fuse or electric blasting 
cap wires shall be avoided when tamping. 


8.23 No person shall be allowed to deepen drill boles 
which have contained explosives or blasting agents or 
insert a drill, pick or bore in butts of old holes even if 
examination fails to disclose explosives. 


8.24 Drilling shall not be resumed after blasts have 
been fired until a thorough examination has been made 
to make sure that there are no unexploded charges in 
the remaining butts of old holes or otherwise, which 
the drills may strike. 


8.25 Rock drillers shall be equipped with approved 
respirators for use in siliceous dusty atmosphere 
arising out of drilling operations. Wet drilling may 
be used for arresting generation of silica and other 
harmful dust. 


8.26 In tunneling work, welding/cutting of metal shall 
not be done, inside the tunnel at the time of loading at 
the face, until the, blast has been fired. 


9 ELECTRICAL SHOT-FIRING CIRCULT 


9.1 In deciding the sizes of wire, fuses, circuits, 
exploders, blasting switches, etc, instructions issued 
by the manufacturers of these articles shall be followed. 


IS 4081 : 2013 


9.2 No person shall attempt to uncoil the wires and 
open out the short circuited bare loading wires of the 
electric blasting cap during approach of dust storm or 
near any source of large charge of static electricity or 
near a radio transmitter. The manufacturer of the cap 
or the Controller of Explosives shall be consulted 
regarding the distance from the transmitter beyond 
which electric blasting shall be conducted. 


9.3 Firing circuit shall be kept completely insulated 
from the ground or other conductors, such as bare 
wires, rails, pipes or other paths of stray current. 


9.4 There shall not be any electric live wire or cable of 
any kind near electric blasting caps or other explosives 
except at the time and for the purpose of firing the 
blast. 


9.5 All electric blasting caps shall be tested singly and 
also when connected in a circuit in series using only 
an approved type of circuit continuity tester or 
ohmmeter. 


9.6 No attempt shall be made to use in the same circuit 
either electrical blasting caps made by more than one 
manufacturer or electric blasting caps of different 
design or function even if made by the same 
manufacturer unless such use is approved by the 
manufacturers. 


9.7 No attempt shall be made to fire a circuit of electric 
blasting caps with less than the minimum current 
specified by the manufacturer of that electric blasting 
cap. 


9.8 Care shall be taken to ensure that all wire ends for 
electrical connections are bright and clean. 


9.9 The electric cap wires or loading wires shall be 
kept short circuited until ready to fire. 


9.10 When energy for blasting is taken from power 
circuits, the voltage shall not exceed 220 V. The wiring 
and controlling arrangements shall conform to the 
following: 


a) The blasting switch shall be strictly according 
to the specifications, externally operated 
double-pole double throw switch, which when 
locked in the open position will short circuit 
and ground the leading wires. The switch shall 
be installed at the location where the firing is 
to be controlled; 


b) A ‘safety’ switch of the same type as the 
blasting switch shall be installed between the 
blasting switch and the firing circuit and lead 
lines, at a distance not to exceed 1 800 mm 
from the blasting switch; and 

c) Both the safety switch and the blasting switch 
shall be locked in the open position 


immediately after firing the shot and before 
any person is permitted to return to the 
blasting area. Key to the switches shall remain 
in the possession of the blaster at all times. 


9.11 Copper wires with solid cores of appropriate 
gauge shall be used for firing lines; the wires shall be 
adequately insulated and in sound condition. 


9.12 Blasting operations in the proximity of overhead 
power lines, communication lines, utility lines, or other 
structures shall not be carried out until the operator or 
the owner, or both of such lines have been notified 
and precautionary measures deemed necessary, have 
been taken. 


9.13 All holes loaded on a shift shall be fired on the 
same shift. 


9.14 As far as possible, blasting shall be carried out 
using suitable exploder with 2.5 percent excess 
capacity. Electric power from the mains shall be used 
only when it is absolutely necessary. 


9.15 Each electric blasting cap shall be tested with an 
approved galvanometer before and after tamping in a 
hole to determine whether it will carry the current. All 
testing shall be done by placing the galvanometer 
outside the tunnel and away from the tunnel face. 


9.16 The number of electric blasting caps used in a 
circuit shall not exceed the tested capacity of the 
blasting machine. 


9.17 The circuit, including all caps, shall be tested with 
a circuit tester or galvanometer before being connected 
to the firing line. 


10 BLASTING WITH SAFETY FUSE 


10.1 The fuse shall be carefully handled to avoid 
damage to the covering. In very cold weather, the fuse 
shall be slightly warmed before using so as to avoid 
cracking of the water-proofing. 


10.2 The minimum length of fuse shall not be less than 
that required by state laws; in any case, it shall not be 
less than 750 mm. The maximum burning rate of the 
fuse shall be such that it allows sufficient time to all 
concerned persons to reach a place of safety before 
the blast occurs; the burning rate of the fuse shall, in 
any case, be not more than 600 mm/min. 
Recommended minimum fuse lengths and maximum 
burning rates for normal conditions are given below: 


Number of Minimum Fuse Maximum 
Holes Length mm Burning Rate 
mm/min 
4-10 1 800 450 
11-12 2 150 450 


10.3 The fuse shall not be cut until all preparations 
have been taken to insert it into a blasting cap. About 
25 mm to 50 mm length of the fuse shall be cut from 
its end to ensure a dry end. It shall be cut across 
squarely with a clean and sharp blade. The fuse shall 
be seated lightly against the cap charge and care shall 
be taken to avoid twisting after it has been placed in 
position. 


10.4 Blasting caps shall not be crimped by any means 
other than a cap crimper designed for the purpose. It 
shall be necessary to make sure that the cap is squarely 
crimped to the face. 


10.5 The fuse shall be lighted with a fuse lighter 
designed for the purpose. If a match is used, the fuse 
shall be slit at the end and the match head held in the 
slit against the powder core and then the match head 
rubbed against an abrasive surface to light the fuse. 


10.6 The fuse shall not be lighted until sufficient 
stemming has been placed over the explosives to 
prevent sparks of live match head from coming into 
contact with an explosives. 


10.7 The explosives shall not be held in hands when 
lighting the fuse. 


10.8 Not more than 12 holes shall be loaded and shot 
at one time if cap and fuse are used for detonating. 


11 UNDERGROUND WORK 


11.1 Only permissible explosives shall be used and that 
too in the manner specified by the appropriate authority. 
In case ANFO is used, due care shall be exercised in 
doing more extensive temping required so as to eliminate 
chances of static current being generated. 


11.2 Excessive quantities of explosives shall not be 
taken underground at any time. Gun powder or pellet 
powder shall not be used with any other explosive in 
the same bore hole. 


11.3 For blasting in tunnels and shafts precautions 
detailed in IS 5878 (Part 2/Sec 1) shall be followed. 
The poisonous gases shall be promptly removed by 
using exhaust fans in shafts and reversible axial flow 
fans in tunnels. The air duct shall be of such size so as 
not to allow too much pressure drop so that the velocity 
of air at the delivery end is not less than 0.2 m/s. 


12 BEFORE AND AFTER BLASTING 


12.1 Before blasting, sufficient warning shall be given 
to enable the people working in the blasting area to 
get off the danger zone. All persons, other than the 
blaster, shall leave the danger area at least 10 minutes 
before the blasting starts. The danger zone shall be 
suitably cordoned off and flag men posted at important 
points. 


IS 4081 : 2013 


12.2 No loose materials, such as tools, drilling 
implements, etc, shall be left on the rock surfaces to 
be blasted. 


12.3 Blasting in the open shall be carried out during 
fixed hours every day or on fixed days in the week. 
This information shall be amply publicized and the 
following precautions observed: 


a) All approaches to the project site, where 
regular blasting operations are undertaken, 
shall be sign-posted for warning the public 
and indicating the days and timings when 
blasting is to be carried out; 

b) All approaches to the project site, shall be 
closed by barriers at a distance of not less than 
400 m, 10 min before firing is to take place; 
and 

c) Loud wailing note of not less than 1 min 
duration shall be sounded on sirens to warn 
the public before commencement of firing. 
The end of firing operations shall be followed 
by sounding an all clear signal on the sirens 
as a continuous long note of not less than 
1 min duration. 


12.4 Each bore hole shall be thoroughly cleaned before 
a cartridge is inserted. Wooden tamping rods (not 
pointed, but cylindrical throughout) shall be used in 
charging the holes. The cartridges shall be gently 
placed and not rammed. The primer cartridge shall be 
on the top. 


12.5 The blaster shall not return to blasting site after 
firing, until at least 5 min have elapsed. In case of 
electric shot firing, the shot holes shall be examined 
after blasting and in case of misfire no person shall be 
allowed to approach the blasting site for at least 5 min. 
In case of blasting with safety fuse, utmost care shall 
be taken to count the number of loud reports to ensure 
that all the shots have fired and in the event of misfire, 
no person shall be allowed to approach the blasting 
site for at least 30 min. In any case, all holes shall be 
carefully inspected for residual undetonated explosives 
after firing the shots. No other person than those duly 
authorized shall approach the holes until one of the 
following operations has been performed in respect of 
each of the misfired holes: 


a) Ifthe misfire is due to a faulty cable or faulty 
electrical connection the defect shall be 
remedied and the shot fired; 


b) The stemming shall be floated out by use of 
water or air jet from hose until the hole has 
been opened to within 600 mm of the charge, 
whereupon water shall be siphoned or 
pumped out, then a fresh new charge placed 
and duly detonated; and 


IS 4081 : 2013 


c) Anew hole shall be drilled 600 mm away from 
the old bore and parallel to it and about 300 
mm less in depth and the new hole charged 
and duly fired. 


12.6 If a shift change is unavoidable, the person in 
charge of the outgoing shift shall, before leaving the 
work, inform the person relieving him of any cases of 
misfired shots, point out to him their positions, duly 
cross-marked, and also state clearly what action 
remains to be taken in each case. 


13 EXPLOSIVES DISPOSAL 


13.1 No explosive shall be abandoned. These shall be 
disposed off or destroyed strictly in accordance with 
the approved methods and in doing so the manufacturers 
or the appropriate authority shall be consulted. 


13.2 Explosives, caps, boxes lines or material used in 
packing of explosives shall not be left lying around in 


places to which children or unauthorized persons or 
livestock can have access. 


13.3 Paper or fibrous material employed in packing 
explosives shall not be put to any subsequent use. Such 
material shall be destroyed by burning in the presence 
of a responsible person. 


14 ACCOUNT 


14.1 A careful day-to-day account of the explosives 
shall be maintained in an approved register and manner, 
which shall be open to inspection at all times by the 
concerned authorities. 


14.2 Explosives shall be issued only to competent 
persons upon written requisition signed by the blaster 
or by an official authorized for the purpose and only 
against the signature or thumb impression. Such 
requisitions shall be preserved by the person-in-charge 
of the magazine. 


IS 4081 : 2013 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Consulting Engineering Services (India) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
Creative Design Consultants & Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 
Delhi Metro Railway Corporation, New Delhi 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH & S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 

Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 

MN. Dastur & Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, Army 
Headquarters, New Delhi 


Ministry of Railways, Govt of India, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, New Delhi 


National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Institute of Construction Management and Research, Mumbai 


Nirman Vikas Anusandhan Sansthan, Raipur 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KrisHNAN (Chairman) 


Suri A. K. PATHAK 
SHRI ANUPAM VERMA (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. PASRICHA 
SHRI SANJAY SONI (Alternate) 


Dr SHAILESH KR AGRAWAL 
Suri Panka Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. G. Dave 
Suri AJAY SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
SHRI MANU AMITABH (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. SWARUP 
Suri Ravi Jar (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. DATTA 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 
SHRI ANKuR Dure (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 
CHEF ENGINEER (HQ) (Alternate) 


SHRI DALJEET SINGH 


SHRI Joer KURIAN 
Suri B. K. Smna (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri R. K. BATRA 
Suri M. K. Gare (Alternate) 


SHRI JAIVEER SRIVASTAVAA 
SHRI RAJEEV CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SRIVASTAVA 
Suri P. S. CHApua (Alternate) 


Pror B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr KN Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. P. Namu 
Sur! R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Suri S.K. GUHA 
SHRI GoBINDA PaL Cnuouppnupx (Alternate) 


BRIG AMAR KRISHNA 
CoL SuniL Kumar (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr DEVENDRA VERMA 
Suri R. RasesH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJENDRA CHAUDHARI 
Suri H. K. Duawan (Alternate) 


Suri S. S. NAHAR 
Suri P. C. Arya (Alternate) 


DR ANIL AGARWAL 


SHRI SANJEEV KASLIWAL 
SHRI AMARJEET SINGH (Alternate) 


Ms Bina BUDHWAR 
SHRI ANIL Kapoor (Alternate) 


IS 4081 : 2013 


Organization 
Planning Commission, New Delhi 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 

School of Planning and Architecture (Deptt of Building Engineering 
and Management), New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 
Spectral Services Consultants Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (4/1, Technology Apartments, Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (W-12/34, Western Avenue, Sainik Farm, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Mother Dairy 
Road, Patparganj, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
SHRI S. S. GANAPATHY 


SHRIMATI LEENA GUPTE SAMANT 
Suri Tesas Sura (Alternate) 


SHRI VIPUL KUMAR 
SHRI JITENDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. PAuL 


SHRI Manos KUMAR MITTAL 


SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 
SHRI SANJAY Kausuik (Alternate) 


Lt-Gen (RETD) Hart UNIYAL 
Suri O. P Gok (Alternate) 


Dr VANITA AHUJA 
Suri R. P. LAHIRI 


Dr ANIL SAWHNEY 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Suri A. K. Saint, Scientist "OG & Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretaries 
SHRI SANJAY PANT 
Scientist ‘E’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


and 


Suri S. ARUN KUMAR 
Scientist ‘C’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


Alert Group on Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction), CED 29/AG 


Organization 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 
Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 
Larsen & Toubro Limited, Chennai 
Larsen & Toubro Limited, ECC Group, Chennai 


School of Planning & Architecture (Dept of Building Engineering 
and Management), New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 
In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Mother Dairy 
Road, Patparganj, Delhi) 


10 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KrisHNAN (Convener) 
Suri H. S. PASRICHA 
Suri P. R. SWARUP 
Suri M. P. Namu 
Suri M. NACHIAPPAN 


Dr V. K. PAuL 


SHRI Manos KUMAR MITTAL 
SHRI CHANDRA PAL 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (7774). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


