( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS I 2661.1978

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR MOBILE LIBRARY VAN

( First Revision)
Library Buildings, Fittings and Furniture BDC 27 Sectional Committee,
Chairman
PROFP.B.MANGLA

Representing

Department of Library Science, University of Delhi,
Delhi

Members SHRI 0. P. AHUJA SHRI S. BALAKRISHNAN Ahuja Furnishers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Engineer-in-chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi

SHRI N. M. DAVID ( Afternate ) SARI PREY BHALLA National Institute of Designs, Ahmadabad SHRI JYOTISH G. SEVAK ( Alternate ) SHRI R. K. CHHABRA University Grants Commission, New Delhi DR S. C. GOEL ( Alternate ) Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi SHRI GIRJA KUMAR National Archives of India, New Delhi SHRI R. C. GUPTA SHRI R. E. JAMBHEKAR Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay DR P. A. J~SAI ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi SHRI A.L. KAPOOR Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan, New Delhi SHRI H. L. KHOSLA SRRI A. K. SAXENA ( AItcrnate ) Delhi Public Library, Delhi SHIU .J. C. MEHTA National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI M. M. MISTRY SHRI SURYA PRATAP ( Alternate ) Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, SHRI R. S. PANESAR New Delhi School of Architecture & Planning, Guindy SHRI F. B. PITRABADIAN Standard Library Service, New Delhi SHRI R. P. PCJRI Indian National Scientific Documentation Centre SHRI T. S. RAJAGOPALAN ( CSlR ), New Delhi SHRI K. RAMASWAMI ( Alternate ) Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE SHRI T. S. SRINIVASAN ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN

@ Copyright STANDARDS

1979 INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indiun Coprright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS I 2661-1978
( Continusd from
pU6C

1) Representing

Membsrs
SHRI V. R. SARDESAI SHRI B. G. SHIRKE

Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI B. T. UNWALLA ( Alternate ) University of Delhi, Delhi PBOP A. P. SRIVABTAVA SRRI N. DATTA ( Altemotr ) Uttar Pradesh State Archives, Lucknow DR K. P. SRIVASTAVA Central Building Research Institute, Roorkce SEXI R. D. SRIVA~TAVA Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member ) SHRI D. AJITHA SIBIHA, Director( Civ Engg )

SHBI STJRESH MALKANI Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

IS : 2661 - 1978

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR MOBILE LIBRARY VAN

( First Revision
0.

)

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 October 1978, after the draft finalized by the Library Buildings, Fittings and Furniture Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 With constant and rapid advances in all fields of human knowledge, to lead a successful life, one has to keep oneself constantly informed of self education is possible only latest developments. Th is continued through use of libraries. Library service has therefore attained a vital importance these days for a civilized citizen. But the location of a library cannot favour all concentrations of population in big sprawling cities or in the countryside. In many cases the size of the community does not justify, or the financial inability of the library authority prevents the setting up of a branch of the library. In such cases a mobile library acts as the extension arm of the library which takes the library service to those who find it difficult to reach the library, especially women and children, who are less mobile. 0.2.1 This standard is intended to provide necessary guidance in regard to the requirements of a mobile library which is a power driven vehicle on four wheels and is either with a fixed engine or is pulled as a detachable trailer. The requirements specified in this standard relate to the ) in Indian bus body ( and not the engine, whether fixed or detachable conditions. 0.2.2 The specification shelves inside the vehicle bus body. 0.3 This is meant for mobile library vehicles having book as opposed to shelves fitted on the exterior of the

standard was first published in 1964. In view of the appearance materials and techniques the Sectional Committee has felt the In this revision, the layout of van has been need to revise the standard. modified to avoid practical difficulties encountered by the users. The capacity, the constructional aspects and service features have also been revised to provide for additional facilities to users.

of new

3

IS : 2661.1978 0.4 The requirements of the road transport authorities states shall be binding, not withstanding the provisions wherever applicable. of the various of the standard

0.5 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 0.6 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards requirements of libraries. A list of Indian Standards published the series is given on fourth cover page. covering so far in

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordThe number of significant places retained in the ance with IS : 2-1960*. rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the basic requirements of a mobile regard to its dimensions and layout of the interior. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions which is shall apply. library with

2.1 Library

Authority ding the library service.

-

Any institution/organisation

provi-

2.2 Mobile Library or Book-Mobile - A four wheeler vehicle fitted as an open-access travelling library.

power

driven

2.3 Pay Load - This is the net total load that the unit can take safely, excluding its own dead load ( dead load includes due load of fittings and fixtures ), 2.4 Unit power unit.
*Rules

The term ` Unit ' shall mean a mobile

library

excluding

the

for rounding

off numerical

values

( rewed ).

4

IS : 2661- 1978 3. SELECTION OF THE UNIT

3.0 In India there is no firm specialising in construction and sale of ready-made book-mobiles. The library authority therefore will have to select and buy an engine-chassis and to get a body designed and constructed on it by a body-building firm. 3.1 The size of the chassis shall be such that it can have a body of the size shown in Fig. 1 and also meets the requirements of the local transport authority. 3.2 In order to provide a good selection of books to readers and also books in more than one language the interior shall be so designed that it carries the maximum number of books. 4. GENERAL 4.1 A typical LAYOUT layout AND PLANNING is illustrated as entry shall in Fig. 1. cum exit, on the left

of a book-mobile

4.2 There shall be one side door serving side of the vehicle nearer the fore-wheel. 4.3 The entrance right side. to the driver's cabin

be through

a door on the

4.4 Discharging Counter -On the left side at the rear end a window The counter should be large shall be provided with a counter inside. enough to hold a charge tray and to leave some space for handling of returned books. A fixed non-tilting chair shall be provided for the This shall serve as discharging counter person who attends this counter. as well as registration and enquiry counter. 4.4.1 One all steel heavy-duty type strong, foldable skid-proof footstep with locking device shall be fixed on the outside as access to the discharging counter window. A strong horizontal grab handle shall be provided slightly below the window sill level. (in the space 4.5 Charging Counter - To the left of the entrance available towards the left of the driver and the engine ) there shall be a charging counter large enough to hold a charge tray and to provide space for opening and stamping of books. This counter shall also have a fixed, revolving, non-tilting chair for the person who attends this counter. 4.6 Cupboard - A suitable sized cupboard carrying tiffin boxes and other private property shall be provided of the staff. for

water and ice for the staff 4.7 Ice-Box - An ice-box to carry drinking especially during hot weather should be provided at a suitable place in the van with a proper exhaust for waste water so that there is no wetting of the floor. 5

I

I

P

DRIVER'S

dBD

PARTITION

500 mm HIGH FULL SIZE RACK

CABIN

-RAC 730

HIGH

RETURN COUNTER, 590 mm HIGH

INSIDE PLAN

GRAB FOLDING

H ANDLE STEP

-GRAB

HANDLE

STEP

FOLDED

IN

All dimensions in millimetrcs. FIG. 1 TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION OF A MOBILE LIBRARY VAN

IS : 2661.1978 4.8 Shelves - Double sided shelves shall be provided running along the middle, length wise, leaving ample spaces at both ends for allowing the readers to go round ( this would leave the walls free for provision of adequate sized windows for necessary natural light and ventilation in Indian climatic conditions ). The shelves shall have vertical supports spaced at 0.77 metre intervals, running to the full height of the van.
4.8.1 If space permits, there shall be one rack fixed along the right side, in the rear end and one small, window-height rack at the rear end along the width of the vehicle accessible to the return counter man for storage of returned books. 4.9 Bulletin Board - A glazed bulletin board of a suitable size should be fitted in the left side in the middle of the van for notices, etc. It should be operatable from inside and should have a light fitted in it. 5. CAPACITY

5.1 Height 5.2 5.3

The minimum 1.9 m ( see Note under 5.3 ).

height internal length

from

the floor

to ceiling

shall

be

Width Length -

The

minimum

width of the unit shall be 2'25 m. 6'5 m.

The internal

of the unit shall not exceed

NOTE - While deciding the overall dimensions of the van, due consideration should be given to various factors, such as height of bridges, width of roads and local transport authority rules.

5.4 Weight - The pay load of the unit shall not be less than kg, where n is the number of books. 6. MATERIALS

( a+500

)

6.1 Steel - The steel used for shelves shall conform to IS : 1079-1973* Mild steel shelves shall be given phosphating or IS : 513-1973t. treatment in accordance with IS : 3618-1966$, followed by a coat of
suitable primer, then be applied. such as red oxide. Two coats of enamel paint shall

6.2 Timber - Timber used for construction of the body shall conform to the relevant Indian Standards wherever they exist; the density of timber shall, however, be not less than 720 kg/ma. For construction of the trailer, the timber shall conform to IS : 2179-19625. *Specification for hot rolled carbon steel, sheet and strip ( third revision ). TSpecification for cold rolled carbon steel sheets ( second rsvision ). SSpecification for phosphate treatment of iron and steel for protection corrosion. &Specification for timber for lorry bodies. 7

agains

IS:266101978 - If aluminium is used for shelves or at other places 6.3 Aluminium to IS: 733-1975* or it shall be of any of the suitable grades conforming IS : 737-19747. 6.4 Other materials used in the construction comply with the relevant Indian Standards, 7. DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTIONAL of the body of the unit shall if any. ASPECTS

They shall be made from 7.1 Shelves - Shelves shall be of fixed type. The depth of the shelf shall be either steel sheets or aluminium sheets. 220 mm minimum. The clearance between the shelves shall normally be 270 mm. The shelves shall have a backward incline of 15 degrees so that the books do not fall out at turns. The back vertical plate of each shelf shall have an angle of 90 degrees with the shelf base. 7.2 Shelves for Children's Books - The rows on one side may be used for children's books. 7.3 Charging and Discharging Counters rear counters counters shall shall be constructed comply with to the of lower two shelves

front and 7.3.1 General -The match and blend with shelving. 7.3.2 The charging following requirements: and

discharging

4 b)

easily Top - The top of the counter shall be of hard-wearing, cleanable material, such as plastic laminates. TO avoid injury to persons or to clothing there shall be no sharp edges or corners. Charge trays and covers - Charge trays shall be movable to be put on the counter top when the van goes to service stations and shall be designed according to the requirements of charging method adopted by the library. The charge tray will be daily changed depending on the route to be visited.
shall be

7.4

Side Door
with

equipped

while

and - The side door shall open on the outside an arrangement to keep the door in the open the unit is functioning.

position

7.4.1 Necessary grab rails and two heavy steps accommodated in the step-well, with non-skid treads shall be provided near the entrance.
*Specification general engineering tspecification general engineering for wrought aluminium and aluminium purposes ) ( secondrevision ). for wrought aluminium and aluminium purposes ) ( second revision ). bars, alloys, rods and sections and strip ( for ( for

sheets

8

IS t 2661-1978 7.5 Windows - The unit shall be provided with adequate number of glazed windows in the sides and rear of the van. These shall have rust proof steel frames. Half of each window shall have a fixed glass pane and the other half shall be openable by sliding the gIass pane sideways ( for letting in air ). The whole of the window shall be covered from outside with a mesh of heavy wire gauze which would not permit books to be passed out. The wire gauze shall be of a movable type to permit cleaning of the glass panes. 7.5.1 The windows shall be made water-proof exposure to strong monsoon showers when closed. 8. SERVICE FEATURES Weather The following service features enough to withstand

8.1 Protection Against shall be included:

a) The construction of the unit shall provide for reasonable insulation against external heat during hot weather to maintain the interior at a comfortable temperature. b) The top tight. the rear without and the sides of the unit shall be made absolutely water Provision shall be made for the rain water to flow off to of the van through a channel along the sides at the top affecting the entrance. be made absolutely water-tight and

c) All openable parts shall dust-proof when closed.

in the van increases the cost of 8.2 Lighting - Fitting of a generator the unit considerably. Therefore, lights and fans shall be run on the city's electric supply obtained either from a philanthropic local resident or from a connection obtained by the library authority from local electric The van shall therefore carry a cable to enable the supply undertaking. van to use electric current from an outside source ( see 8.4.1 ). 8.2.1 The exterior of the unit shall be provided with lights in accordance with the regulations of the traffic authority and the state laws under which the unit is to operate. 8.2.2 For use at night, shall be made. adequate arrangement for electric lights inside shall

8.3 Fans - An adequate number of cabin fans of 300 mm diameter be fitted in the vehicle for circulation of air in hot weather.

8.4 Wiring - Besides the normal wiring system, with the vehicle battery as source of power ( for all customary points in the vehicle ) there shall be installed a 220 volt wiring system to be fed from outside source. The wiring will be of a standard type. A connection and fuse board shall be provided in the end panel of the vehicle. 9

IS : 2661.1978 8.4.1 A 10 metre long water proof three-core cable in rubber sheathing This cable shall be permanently connected to the shall be provided. main switch on one end and the other end will be provided with a suitable plug for obtaining electric current from the external source. Inside the switch-board, hooks shall be provided on to which the cable can be coiled when not in use. Suitable earthing arrangement shall alao be made.

8.5 Wall-to-Shelf Shutters -Two removable and lockable wire net wall-to-shelf shutters shall be provided at the fore end of the shelves. These when locked in position would segregate the shelves and obviate the necessity of emptying the van of books when it is sent to the workshop for engine repairs. 8.6 Anti-theft Re0ector Mirror - As the left side of the rack would not be visible to either of the staff members, to check the possibility of pilferage, a convex mirror should be fixed in the right hand fore-corner of the ceiling at a suitable angle so that the man at the issue-counter can sometimes see what is happening on the other side of the racks. 8.7 A one litre carbon dioxide type fire-extinguisher IS : 2878-1976* shall be fitted in the driver's cabin. conforming to

*Specification for portable fire extinguishers 10

carbon

dioxide

type

(Jirst

revision ).

