**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11057 (1984): Industrial Safety Nets [TXD 34: Technical 
Textiles for Building Technology Applications] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



tS:110S7.19i4 

(Reafflrmed ^001) 

Iruiian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
INDUSTRIAi SAFETY NETS 



UDQ 6H-ftat.'4imf'^ 







jtowry 1985 



IS i 11057 • 1984 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
INDUSTRIAL SAFETY NETS 

Cordage Sectional Committee, TDG 14 

Chairman Ripnstnting 

Shki p. K. Sdb The Ganges Rop« Company Limited, Howrah 

Mtmbtrs 
Sbbi p. K. Gtjfta ( AUanatt to 
Sbri P. K. SuT ) 
Susi A. T. Basak Directorate General of SupDlies & Ditposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New £)elbi 
Col a. K. Bhattaohabta Calcutta Port Truit, Calcutta 

Shbi S. K. Muxbkbjbb ( AUtrnaU ) 
Sbri A. Biswas Rail India Technical and Economic Services Ltd, 

New Delhi 
Lt-Col Ashok CooiCAB Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Sbbi S. P. Cuakraborty ( Alt*rnaU ) 
D B P u T Y Chief Mbohanioal Railway Board, Ministry of Railways 
Enoinxbr ( Marinb ), North 
Eastbbn Railway, Patna 
Shbi T. N. Ghabru Ministry of Defence ( DPIN ) 

STO'JSO ( Chbmical ) of CINS (B) 
( AlttrnaU ) 
Shbi A. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

SuBl Sbkhar Guoa Eskaps ( India ) Private Limited, Calcutta 

Shbi N. B. SbnOufta ( Atternati ) 
Sbbi Tahru S. M. Khakdan M. M. Tayebally, Calicut 

Shbi Suabbir S. M. Kbandan 
( AlUrnati ) 
Smri a. C. Matuur Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shbi S. C. Gufta ( AtUrnalt ) 
Sbbi K. N. Misra Gujarat Filaments Pvt Ltd, Vadodara 

SuBi G. N. Prabhu Coir Board, Ernakulam 

Shbi V. Abdul Majbbd ( AUtrnatt ) 
Caft B. R. Rao The Scindia Steam Navigation Co Ltd, Bombay 

RkFrksbktativk Neomar Limited, Vadodara 

Refbfbentativb Office of the Jute Commissioner, Calcutia 

Shri Nirmal K. Somani Indian Rope Manufacturers' Association, 

Calcutta 
Shri T. Bhattacharya ( AUtrnate ) 

( ConttKUid on pagt 2 } 



O Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act, 



IS : 11057 - 1964 

( Continued from pag§ 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Gapt V. SuuuAXAKiAM Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay 

Capt S. B. Kunderoi ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. G. Tambja Naval Headquarters, Ministry of Defence 

Shei R. Vishvanath ( Alternatt ) 
Smbi R. M. Telako Garware-Wall Ropes Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. K. Kapub ( Alternate ) 
Shri Kaktix.ai< G. Tkakawala M. Best Cotton Rope Manufacturing Co, Bombay 
SuBi Madhukant G. Thanawala 
( Alternate ) 
Shri R. I. Midha, Director General, ISI ( Ex-offieio Member ) 

Director ( Tex ) 

Secretarjf 

Shri A. R. Bambrjxs 
Senior Deputy Director ( Tex ), ISl 



IS 111057-1984 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
INDUSTRIAL SAFETY NETS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 15 September 1984, after the draft finalized by the Cordage 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 

0.2 The objective of this standard is to make available an authoritative 
specification that will enable users to purchase safety nets with the 
assurance that they will obtain material of adequate quality and 
performance and to assist manufacturers by obviating variations in 
requirements wiih a view to increasing productivity and providing better 
service for users . 

0.3 This standard is setting only two levels of maximum duty height for 
safety nets, simplifies the requirements for safety nets and brings the 
maximum duty height to a level that is considered to be safer and more 
practical one that reduces the danger of bounce after impact. 

0.4 This standard is concerned particularly with the performance and 
testing of safety nets. 

0.5 In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been 
derived from BS 3913 : 1982 Specification for industrial safety nets, 
issued by the British Standards Institution. 

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements of industrial safety nets 
made from man-made fibres and designed to catch personnel and/or debris 

*RuIe9 for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



18 111057-1984 

falling whilst work on high biddings, and structural work of shipbuilding 
is being carried out: 

a) Requirements arc specified for two types of safety nets; one 
suitable for use at maximum duty height up to 6 m and the other 
for a maximum duty height of I m, 

b) Reconmiendations on the care of nets are given in Appendix G. 

2. DEFINITIONS 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Mesh Cord — The cord from which the mesh of the net is 
constructed. 

2.2 Border Cord — The cord surrounding the net and determining the 
overall dimensions of the net. 

23 Tie Cord — The cord used for securing the border cord to a suitable 
support. 

2.4 Length of Meth Side — The distance between two sequential knots 
or joints, measured from centre to centre when the yam between those 
points is fully extended. 

2.5 Nominal Size — The overall dimensions of a net when laid evenly on 
a flat surface in a relaxed condition and without any tension on the border 
cords. 

2.6 Initial Sag — The amount of sag in the centre of the net when 
placed in the working position. 

2.7 Duty Height — The maximum vertical distance between the working 
level and the level at which the safety net is to be placed in use. 

3. CONSTRUCTION 

.3.1 MeteriaU — Nets shall be made from man-made fibre ropes and 
plaited cords, with the exception of polyethylene ropes and cords. 

The choice of material shall be determined by the circumstances in 
which the net is to be used, the performance required of the net and the 
prevailing conditions. 

Note — Strong sunlight can cause weakening of the fibres, but it is unlikely to 
penetrate beneath the surface. An ultra-violet stabilizer should be incorporated in 
the fibres and unnecessary exposure should be avoided. 

3,2 Design — The net shall be designed in such a way that, when 
tested as described in Appendix A, for a duty height of 6 m or 1 m as 
appropriate, it complies with requirements given in 6. 



IS t 11057 - 1904 

3.3 Cords — The mesh cord, border cord and tie cord shall be flexible, 
uniform and as free as practicable from defects in the preparation of 
yarns, strands and in finishing. 

3A Tie Cords — Tie cords shall be fixed to the net in each corner, and 
along each side of the net, equaUy spaced at not more than 75 cm interval. 

3.5 Test Cords — Each net shall be provided with at least eight test 
lengths of mesh cord for periodic testing ( see Appendix B ). Each test 
length shall be loosely threaded through the meshes of the net and each 
end shall be Brmly attached to the net at not less than 0*5 m from the border 
cord. The length of each test cord shall be suitable for the method of test 
adopted ( see Appendix A ) and shall in any event be not less than 2 m. 
The test cords shall be identified by use of an indelible contrasting colour 
applied over a length of approximately 50 cm from one end. 

3.6 Multi-Layer Nets — If the safety net is in'the form of a multi-layer 
net the layers shall be firmly joined together and fitted to a conunon border 
cord or cords. 

3.7 Overlay Nets — A safety net may be supplied with an overlay net 
for use with the safety net to catch objects such as tools and debris but such 
overlay nets shall not be included when the safety net is subjected to the 
tests described in Appendix A. 

4. DIMENSIONS 

4.1 The minimum nominal size of the net shall be 4 m x 3 m in length and 
width respectively. 

4.2 Nets shall be made with a square or diamond mesh and the length of 
the mesh side shall be not greater than 10 cm. 

4.3 A continuous length of net, having no joins, shall be used to cover the 
span between supports. 

4.4 When in use, the net shall have a sag at the centre of not less than 
one-fifth and preferably not more than one-fourth of the length of the 
shorter side ( see Fig. 1 ) . , 

NoTfE — Purchuen should distinguish between the area to be covered (the 
coverage ) and the size of the net required when allowance is made for the 
recommended tag, for example, a 6 m net with a sag ratio of I : 5 will only cover 
approximately 5 m y 5 m. 

5. FINISH 

5.1 The ends of sdl cords used in the nets shall be secured to prevent 
unravelling. 



IS 1 11057 - 1984 



TIE CORDS 
INITIAL SAO 




BASe leVEL 



DISTANCE TO ALLOW FOR 
INITIAL SAG PL^S OEFLEC 
-TION DURING TEST DROPS 
600 cm APPROX 





All dimeniions are in centimetres. 

Note — Dropping points for test loads are shown at (g) ( see appendix A ). 

Fio. I Test Rio for Industrial Safety Nets 

6 



IS 111057 -1984 

6. PERFORMANCE 

6.1 The performance of safety nets shall be tested as described in 
Appendix A, using a representative net. 

6.2 A net of the same type, construction and material when subjected to 
the test described in Appendix A shall be deemed to behave in the same 
way as the tested net and to comply with this standard if the tested net 
complies with 6.4. 

6.3 Safety nets shall be capable of retaining, without failure of any of the 
cords in the net, as a sequence of drops of a test load as described in 
Appendix A. 

6.4 The deflection at the center of the net, when subjected to impact as 
described in Appendix A, shall not be greater than 2 m or one-half of the 
length of the shortest side, whichever is more. 

6.5 The breaking strength of the mesh cord, when tested as described in 
Appendix A, shall be recorded as a basis for comparison with subsequent 
measurements of test cords as described in Appendix B. 

NoTB — The uter of a safety net should carefully retain the manufacturer*! 
certiflcace ( set 7.3 ) tot the purpose of this comparison. 

7. MARRING AND MANUFACTURER'S CERTIFICATION 

7.1 Each net shall be provided with soft, flexible, permanent labels of 
textile or plastics material, at two different positions, and also marked with 
indelible ink in letters of 3 cm in height with the following wording: 

"MAXIMUM DISTANCE BELOW WORKING LEVEL 'X' 
METRES " 

where * X* is the duty height at which the net complies with 
requirements given in 6. 

7.2 The label shall also be marked with the following: 

a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, 

b) The nominal size of safety net, 

c) The date of manufacture, and 

d) The deflection at the centre of the net ( see 64 ). 



18 111057 .1984 

7.2,1 The safety net may also be marked with ISI Certification Mark. 

NoTK — The VM of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISl for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions, under which a licence 
for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

7.3 The manufacturer shall supply a certificate with each net or batch of 
nets of the same type and construction that specifies! 

a) Type of net, the method of construction and the materials used; 

b) Breaking strengths of the mesh and border cords in the net 
supplied; 

c) Breaking strengths of the mesh and border cords in the net that 
has been tested as described in Appendix A; and 

d) Drop height and the deflection at the centre of a net with the 
same construction, when tested as described in Appendix A. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clauses 3.7 and 6.3 ) 

TESTS FOR SAFETY NET 

A.I. METHOD OF TEST 

A-1.1 General — If an overlay net is provided for use with the safety net, 
testing shall be carried out on the safety net without the overlay net. 

A.2. SELECTION OF SAMPLE FOR TEST 

A-2.1 At least one sample of each type or construction of net shall be 
subjected to this loading test. 

A^. APPARATUS 

A-3.1 Supporting framework, rigid and strong enough to resist shock load 
imposed during the test without serious distortion or deflection. A suitably 
supporting framework is illustrated diagramatically in Fig. I . 



IS 1 11057 "ISM 

A-3.2 Test mass, consisting of a bag of sand of mass 140 kg. The bottom 
shall be hemispherical with a radius of 20 cm ( 1260 cm* cross-section ). 

A-4. PROCEDURE FOR THE DROP TEST 

A-4.1 Suspend the net on a rigid framework as shown in Fig. I and 
conduct the test by dropping the test mass successively three times on to 
the centre of the net, then once on to a point on a diagonal 100 cm from 
one corner of the net and once half-way along any side 60 cm from the 
border cord of the net ( see Fig. I ). 

The test drop height for nets of each type shall be: 

a) for nets of maximum duty height of 6 m : a 12 m test drop height; 
and 

b) for nets of maximum duty height of 1 m : a 3 m test drop height. 

The deflection of the net for each of the three drops at the centre 
shall be measured and the mean deflection, in metres, calculated. 

A.5. PROCEDURE FOR THE CORD STRENGTH TEST 

A-5.1 Determine the breaking strength of each type of cord by following 
any one of the methods as given in Appendix A of IS : 4572 ( Part 1 )- 
1982*. 



APPENDIX B 

( Clauses 3.5 and 6.5 ) 

PERIODIC TESTING AND INSPECTION OF INDUSTRIAL 
SAFETY NETS 

B-1. PERIODIC TEST AND INSPECTION 

B-1.1 It is recommended that nets in use should be inspected weekly by a 
competent person. Immediately after any incident that may have aflcc- 
ted the strength of the net ( see Appendix C ), the net should be carefully 
examined. 

B-I.2 Deterioration of nets during use is difficult to assess. It is recom- 
mended that the users should seek the advice of the net manufacturers on 
this point and also when to carry out tests on the test lengths ( see 3.5 ). 
The number oi test lengths for each net is based on one test ewcry 3 



*SpecificaUon for polyamide multifilament ropci: Part 1 ( hawser-laid and plaited ) 
General ( stcond revision ). 



IS 1 11057 « 1984 

months and a net life of 2 years. The test length should not be used for 
any other purpose and should remain fixed to the net until required for test. 
At present it is not possible to make recommendations as to when a net 
should be taken out of service if the tensile strength of the cords has fallen 
below that shown in the net manufacturer's certificate ( see 7.3 ) , the 
advice of the net manufacturer should be sought on this matter. 



APPENDIX G 

( Clause 6.5 ) 

THE CARE OF INDUSTRIAL SAFETY NETS 

G-l. GENERAL 

C-1.1 Safety nets made from any material are liable to wear and mecha- 
nical damage, and may be weakened to some extent by various agencies 
such as chemicals, heat and light. Regular inspection by a competent 
person is necessary to ensure that the nets are still serviceable. 

G-1.2 It should also be emphasized that no matter what agency has 
weakened the net, the effect will be more serious on smaller cordage than 
on the larger sizes of cordage. Consideration should, therefore, be given 
to the relationship of the surface area of the cordage and cross section. 

G-1.3 Inspection should be done by examination of the net in small 
sections, the cordage being turned to reveal all sides before continuing. 
At the same time the cordage should where practicable, be opened up to 
allow for internal examination. 

G-1.4 To define a standard of acceptance or rejection is much more 
difficult than to describe the method of inspection. There can be no well- 
defined boundary between nets, that are safe and those that are not, 
because this depends on the stresses placed on the net in an emergency. 
The decision whether to continue to use a net or to take it out of service 
should be based on an assessment of the general condition of the net. This 
is necessary because many of the conditions that will guide the competent 
person cannot be exactly described but only stated in general terms. If, 
after examination, there should be any doubt about its safety, it should be 
withdrawn from service. It should again be emphasized that the eficcts 
of wear and mechanical damage are relatively great on thinner cordage, 
which therefore require more stringent standard of acceptance. 

10 



IS: 11057-1964 

€-2. CAUSES OF DAMAGE 

C-2.1 External wear due to dragging over rough surfaces causes filamen- 
tation. This is the most readily noticeable cause of weakness particularly 
if a new net is available for comparison. In the extreme use, the strands 
become so worn that their outer faces are flattened and the outer yarns 
severed. In ordinary use, some disarrangement or breakage of the fibres 
on the outside of the net is unavoidable but is harmless if not too 
extensive. 

C.3. SPECIFIC CAUSES OF DAMAGE 

C-3.1 Abrasion — Man-made fibre nets have very good abrasion rcsis- 
tance. 

C-3.2 Overloading — The resistance of man-made fibre cordage to 
damage due to repeated overloading is excellent but a permanent elonga- 
tion may occur and then the extension available in any emergency is 
reduced. 

G-3.3 Chemical Attack — The chemical resistance of man-made fibres 
is in general very good and a very brief description of the resistance to 
chemical attack of the difTercnt man-made fibres is given below. 

C-3.3.1 The resistance of polyester fibres to acids is good, with the 
exception of sulphuric acid with a concentration of above about 80 percent 
( o/t> ), but the resistance to alkalies is only moderate. On the other hand, 
the resistance of poly am ides to alkalies is good but the resistance to acids 
is poor. The resistance of poly olefins ( for example, polypropylene ) to 
both acids and alkalies is good. 

G-3.3.2 Resistance of man-made fibres to hydrocarbon oils and 
common organic solvent is good, although certain man-made fibres may 
swell in some chlorinated solvents. Attack by concentrated phenols on 
polyamide and polyester fibres is severe and contact should be avoided. 

G-3.3^ As a general rule, if acids or alkalies of any concentration are 
brought into contact with a man-made fibre net, they should not be 
allowed to dry oft and thus concentrate the chemical, but the net should 
be washed out well and taken out of service. Advice should be taken on 
the most suitable material if a net is to be used in an environment where 
chemical contamination is likely. 

C-3.3.4 Net should not be subjected to excessive heat, fibre or steam 
and they should not be used where they could be damaged by falling 
sparks or molten metal from welding equipment. 



11 



INDIAN iTANDAUDfl 

ON 

CORDAOB 



I8i 

1084-1983 Manila ropet ( third rwision ) 
1321-1982 Siial ropet: 

( Part t )-1982 Untarred varieties ( jtcond rtDinoti ) 

( Part 2 )-1982 Tarred variteiei ( stctnd rniiion ) 
1410-1983 Coir ropes ( steond rtpision ) 
1804-1982 Fibre core for iieel wire ropes ( steohd rmsion ) 
1857-1972 Tarred hemp marline, two-ply {first rmsim ) 
1887-1978 Spun jute yam {first rmsion ) 
1912-1 984 Country j ute tw ine ( sKond rmsion ) 
1920-1973 Hemp lines {first romion ) 
2452-1973 Hawser-laid cotton ropes ( first rnision ) 
2453-1978 Cable-laid cotton ropes {first rmsion ) 
2807-1981 Whipcords {first rwision ) 
2819-1983 Braided cotton cord ( steond rtvision ) 
3252-1975 Shroud-laid cotton line ( first rtvision ) 
3253-1965 Hawser-laid nylon rope for mountaineering purposes 
3256-1980 Code for inland packaging of ropes and cordages ( first revision ) 
3262-1965 Pilot lead line 

3871-1984 Glossary of terms relating to fibre ropes and cordage {first rtvision ) 
4145-1967 Code of practice for storage of ropes 
4572 Polyamide multifilament ropes 

(Part I)- 1982 General requirements for hawser-laid and plaited ropes {steond 
rndsion ) 

{ Part 2 }-1983 Hawser-laid ropes for specific applications ( steond rtvision) 

( Part 3 )*1983 Hawser-laid ropes for general purposes ( steond rtvision ) 

{ Part 4 )-1982 8-Strand plaited 
4575-1983 Code for handling of fibre ropes ( steond rtvision ) 
5175-1982 Polypropylene ropes ( 3 -strand hawser-laid and 8-8trand-plaited ) {first 

rtvision ) 
5 1 76- 1 969 Hawsei^laid hemp line and ropes 
3177-1969 Jute lines and ropes 
6587-1972 Spun hemp yam 

6590-1972 Braided nylon ropes for mountaineering purposes 
7082-1973 Sisal lines 

8674-1980 Polyethylene ropes {first rtvision ) 
9336-1960 Nylon cord 

9560-1980 Colour code for identification of ropes and cordages 

9936-1981 Guide on equivalence between maniU ropes and nylon, polyester And poly- 
propylene ropes for marine purposes 
9944*1981 Recommendations on safe working loads for natural and man-made fibre 

ropes slings 
1 1058- 1984 Sisal agricultural twines 
11066-1984 Polyester multifilament ropes ( hawser-laid ) 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 SEPTEMBER 2007 

TO 

IS 11057 : 1984 SPECIFICATION FOR 

INDUSTRIAL SAFETY NETS 

(First Revision) 

(Page 3, clause 1.1) — Substitute the foUowmg for the existing: 

'This standard prescribes the requirements of industrial safety nets hiade fipom 
man-made fibres and designed to catch personnel and/or debris facing whibt 
work on high rise buildings, flyovers, nMda/expressways, chimneysi, induiMal 
equipment installation like conveyors and structural work of shipbuilding b 
carried out.' 

{Page 4, ctause 3.1) — Substitute the following Notes for the existing: 

•NOTES 

1 Strong sunlight can cause weakening of the fibres, but it is unlikely to penetrate benctlh the 
surface. An ultra-violet subilizer should be incorporated in the fibres and unnecessary exposure 
should be avoided. 

2 The surety nets and the neuings from which dte satiety nets are made shall be heat set SO that 
slippage of knots and/or joints may be avoided. While heat setting the nettings/nets» care shouM be 
taken thai the heat trunsfcr adequiicly tightens the knots. The knots should not change position by 
more than 10 percent (average) when a load of 20 percent of Mesh Breaking strength is apptied «ftMr 
insulling a mesh on tensile testing machine as defined in ISO 1806. The average should be 
calculated over readings of 3 meshes at all 4 jointa/knots of the mesh. 

3 Net shall be made from man-made fibre ropes and braided/plaited cords.' 

{Page 5y clause 4,2) — Substitute the tbUowing for the existing: 

*Nets shall be made with a square or diamond mesh and the length of the mesh 
side shall not be greater than 10 cm with a tolerance of i:3 percent except for 
length of mesh side 10 cm. In case of mesh size 10 cm the tolerance shall be -3 
percent,* 

(Page 5, clause 5.1) — Insert the following Note at the end of the clause: 

NOTB ~ A safety net made from braided/pliHed cords is unlikely to unravel when used in the ntesh 
cord.' 



Amend No. 1 to IS 11057: 1984 

{Page 7, clause 7.2) — Add the following after (d): 
'e) Lengfh of the mesh side.* 



(TX9) 



Reprography Unit. BIS, New Delhi, India 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 SEPTEMBER 2007 

TO 

IS 11057 : 1984 SPECIFICATION FOR 

INDUSTRIAL SAFETY NETS 

( First Revkhn) 

(Page 3, ciause 1.1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

'This standard prescribes the requirements of industrial safety nets made from 
man-made fibres and designed to catch personnel and/or debris falling whlbt 
work on high rise buildings, flyovers, roads/expressways, chimneys,, indui^ 
equipment installation like conveyors and structural work of shipbuilding it 
carried out.* 

(Page 4, clause 3.1) ~ Substitute the following Notes for the existing: 

•NOTtS 

1 Strong sunlight can cause weakening of the fibfts. but it is unlikely to penetrate beneath the 
surface. An ultra-violet subilizer should be incorporated in the fibres and unnecessary exposure 
should be avoided. 

2 The sAfety nets and the nettings from which the safety nets are made shall be heat set SO that 
slippage of knots and/or joints may be avoided. While heat setting the nettings/nets, care should be 
taken ihoi the heat uonsfcr adcquiicly tightens the knots. The knots should not change position by 
more than 10 percent (average) when a load of 20 percent of Mesh Breaking strength is applied lliMr 
installing a mesh on tensile testing machine as defined in ISO 1S06. The average should be 
calculated over readings of 3 meshes at alt A jointa/knots of the mesh. 

3 Net shall be made from man-made fibre ropes and braided/plaited cords.' 

{Page 5, ciause 4,2) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

'Nets shall be made with a square or diamond mesh and the length of the mesh 
side shall not be greater than 10 cm with a tolerance of i:3 percent except for 
length of mesh side 10 cm. In case of mesh size 10 cm the tolerance shall be -3 
percent.* 

(Page S, clause 5.1) — Insert the following Note at the end of the clause: 

NOTE ~ A safety net made from braided/pliited cords is unlikely to unravel when used in the mesh 
ciird.* 



