Waa AT IS 16191 : 2014 
Reaffi d 2020 
Indian Standard (Reaffirme ) 


& fem ALE 


Safety for Oil Fired Furnaces 


ICS 25.180 


© BIS 2014 


did AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HM HAT, 9 ARRE WH Hm, ae feect-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2014 Price Group 2 


Industrial Fuel Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee, MTD 26 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Industrial 
Fuel Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 


Safety is of utmost importance, specially for the oil fired industrial furnaces which are dealing with oil firing 
equipment. 


Main reasons are: 


a) Furnaces should be designed and equipped for safe and reliable operation. 

b) All process parameters like temperature, pressure, flow of oil, combustion air supply and distribution to 
burners should be controlled within safe limit to avoid fire hazards. 

c) Safety instruments for oil pumping and heating unit are to be provided for safe operation. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be founded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16191 : 2014 


Indian Standard 
SAFETY FOR OIL FIRED FURNACES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard deals with safety norms to be considered 
while designing and operating industrial furnaces with 
oil firing system. 


2 LOW OIL PRESSURE 


Low pressure switch will be installed in main oil line 
and will be interlocked with oil solenoid valve of each 
zone. In case the oil pressure is lower than the set 
pressure, there will be audio-visual alarm and pressure 
switch will give impulse to oil solenoid valve which 
will cut-off oil supply to the burners to avoid firing 
problems at the burners and fire hazards in the furnace. 


3 SAFETY IN OIL PUMPING AND HEATING 
UNIT 


3.1 Pressure regulating valve with by-pass valve is to 
be provided in the oil pumping and heating unit. This 
will regulate the pressure of oil in the main ringmain 
for proper and safe combustion through the burners. 


3.2 When oil preheater is used for heavy oils like HFO 
and LSHS, a temperature controller is to be provided 
with the oil preheater which will be interlocked with 
the power supply to the oil heater for safe working of 
heater. In case the temperature of oil exceeds the set 
limit, there will be an audio-visual alarm and the 
temperature controller will cut-off power supply to 
the oil heater. 


3.3 A suitable duplex type filter is to be provided in 
oil line for reliable operation of pump, pressure 
regulator, control valves and other instruments in the 
oil ringmain. 


4 OIL DAY TANK 


Following safety interlocks are to be provided in the 
oil day tank: 


a) Level controller is to be provided with 
contactor for high level of oil in oil day tank. 
In case the oil level goes beyond the high set 
level, level controller will give audio-visual 
alarm annunciation as well as will cut-off the 
oil supply to the oil tank by closing supply 
valve or by switching off the supply pump to 
avoid over flow of oil. 

b) Incase the oil level in the tank reduces below 
set low level, controller will give audio-visual 
alarm annunciation and will open the supply 
valve or switch on the pump for filling the 
day tank. 


c) When heavy oils such as HFO and LSHS are 
used, an outflow heater will be mounted at 
oil day tank and a temperature controller is 
to be provided for temperature control. In case 
the temperature of oil exceeds the set limit, 
the temperature controller will cut-off power 
supply to the oil heater. 

d) Incase of steam oil heater, the temperature 
controller will cut-off steam, if temperature 
exceeds set value. 


5 EXCESS ZONE TEMPERA TURE CONTROL 


Each zone of the furnace will be provided with a 
separate excess (override) temperature controlling 
system. In case the temperature of particular zone is 
not being properly controlled by the main zone 
temperature controlling system and exceeds beyond 
the safe operating temperature limit, this controller will 
give impulse to the respective solenoid valve to cut- 
off the oil supply to the burner. The system will include 
1 number thermocouple, ON/OFF type temperature 
indicating controller and solenoid valve. In case the 
zonal temperature overshoots the maximum set value 
it will shut off the zone fuel oil solenoid valve and at 
the same time the system will raise an audio-visual 
alarm. 


In case of hot redundancy in PLC control the additional 
excess temperature controller is not required. 


6 FURNACE PRESSURE CONTROL 


In order to control the furnace pressure, one set of 
furnace pressure controlling instrument is provided 
which consists of furnace pressure transmitter, pressure 
indicating controller and actuator motor for flue 
damper actuation (see Fig. 1). In this instrumentation 
system, the furnace pressure is measured with respect 
to atmospheric pressure through pressure transmitter 
which gives signal to furnace pressure indicating 
controller. Based on the desired set furnace pressure, 
the pressure indicating controller will give impulse to 
the actuator for proportionately opening/closing of the 
flue damper fitted in the flue passage. This process 
repeats all the times and controls the furnace pressure 
within the set limit to avoid flame shooting through 
furnace openings. 


7 LOW COMBUSTION AIR PRESSURE 


A low pressure switch will be installed in the 


IS 16191 : 2014 


OPEN TO ATMOSPHERE 


PT = Pressure transmitter 
PAH = High pressure alarm 


FLUE DAMPER 


PIC = Pressure indicating controller 
ACT = Actuator 


Fic. 1 FURNACE PRESSURE CONTROL Loop 


combustion air line after the combustion air blower 
and will be interlocked with main oil solenoid valve. 
In case combustion air pressure is lower than the set 
pressure, there will be audio-visual alarm and pressure 
switch will give impulse to the oil solenoid valve 
which will cut-off the oil supply to the burner to avoid 
flow of unburnt oil in the furnace. 


8 HIGH COMBUSTION AIR PREHEAT 
TEMPERATURE AFTER RECUPERATOR 


The temperature controlling system comprising a 
thermocouple and ON/OFF temperature indicating 
controller will be provided in the combustion air line 
after recuperator so that if the temperature of 
combustion air exceeds beyond desired temperature, 
the controller will provide impulse to the modulating 
motor/pneumatic actuator of the hot air bleed control 
valve to bleed off the hot air as safety measure to avoid 
burner operation system (see Fig. 2). 


This hot air bleed control also protects the recuperator 
by allowing more cold combustion air flow through 
the recuperator tubes, thus reducing the mean wall 
temperature of the tubes. 


9 SAFETY AGAINST HIGH ENTRY 
TEMPERATURE OF FLUE GAS TO 
RECUPERATOR 


The temperature of flue gas before entering into the 
recuperator is controlled and kept within the safe 
limit. In this system the flue gas temperature is 
sensed by thermocouple and signal is given to 
temperature indicating controller. Based on the set 
desired temperature of the flue gas, temperature 
indicating controller will give impulse to the 
actuator of the air control valve in the dilution air 
line which will open the air flow to the flue passage 
in order to limit the temperature of the flue gas at the 
recuperator entry. 


IS 16191 : 2014 


(COLD) HOT AIR TO BURNER 


(FROM BLOWER) 


420 MA 


(619) € | i i 
DILUTION | ÄI | 4 
AIR z! 


| 
L_420mA _| 6 ©, = 
DILUTION AIR CONTROL | HOT AIR BLEED CONTROL 
-—PD PRESSURE 
SENSER 


TEMP CONTROL OF PRE HEAT COMB AIR 


TIC - Temperature indicating controller ACT = Actuator 

CV = Control valve HV = Hand valve 

PSL = Low pressure switch PG = Pressure gauge 
PAL = Low pressure alarm PT = Pressure transmitter 


ACT = Actuator 
PIC = Pressure indicating controller 


Fic. 2 P & I DIAGRAM — TEMPERATURE CONTROL OF PREHEAT COMBUSTION AIR AND 
DILUTION AIR CONTROL FOR RECUPERATOR ENTRY 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 26 (5081). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


