INMA MT IS 11485 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaftirmed 2020) 


hepte SİN fas ili & ŞTİ 
om fsg © fem aes 


(Wen FRAT) 


Criteria for Design of Sluices in 
Concrete and Masonry Dams 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 17.120.20 


© BIS 2014 


Rd AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© HAF Ta, 9 FIRM WAL AM, ae feeeit-110002 
amli ie MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2014 Price Group 6 


Dams and Spillways Sectional Committee, WRD 09 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Dams and Spillways Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


Sluices are provided in the body of the dam to release regulated supplies of water for a variety of purposes which 
are briefly listed below. 


a) River diversion; 

b) Irrigation; 

c) Generation of hydro-electric power; 

d) Water supply for municipal or industrial uses; 

e) To pass the flood discharge in conjunction with the spillway; 


f) Flood control regulation to release water temporarily stored in flood control storage space or to evacuate 
the storage in anticipation of flood inflows; 


g) Depletion of the reservoir in order to facilitate inspection of the reservoir rim and the upstream face of 
the dam and for carrying out remedial measures, if necessary; 


h) To furnish necessary flows for satisfying prior right uses downstream; and 
j) For maintenance of a live stream for abatement of stream pollution, and preservation of aquatic life. 


The flow through a sluice may be either pressure flow or free flow along its entire length or a combination of 
pressure flow in part length and free flow in the remaining length. 


This standard was first published in 1985. This revision has been taken up to incorporate structural design aspect 
of sluices in concrete and masonry dams, to make the standard comprehensive. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value 
should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11485 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


CRITERIA FOR DESIGN OF SLUICES IN 
CONCRETE AND MASONRY DAMS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard lays down the criteria for hydraulic 
and structural design of sluices provided in concrete 
and masonry dams for the purpose of conveying water 
from reservoir to down-stream either during 
construction period or during operation period. 


1.2 The design of sluices which are large in 
comparison with the size of the dam is not included in 
the scope of this standard. 


NOTE — Sluice is considered large when either of the following 
is complied with, 


a) If d>7 m, where dis maximum cross-sectional dimension; 
b) If A > 50 m7, where A is area of cross-section of sluice; or 


c) Concrete or masonry cover any where around it is less than d. 


1.3 This standard does not cover the design of openings 
for penstocks. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provision which, 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of the standard indicated below. 


IS No. Title 
456 : 2000 Code of practice for plain and 
reinforced concrete (fourth revision) 


1786 : 2008 Specification for high strength 
deformed steel bars and wires for 
concrete reinforcement (fourth 
revision) 

6512 : 1984 Criteria for design of solid gravity 
dams (first revision) 

8605 : 1977 Code of practice for construction of 
masonry in dams 

12966 (Part 2): Code of practice for galleries and 

1990 other openings in dams Part 2 


Structural designs 
3 TYPES OF SLUICES 


3.1 Straight Barrel Sluice 


The barrel of this sluice is kept nearly horizontal between 


the entry and exit transitions (see Fig. 1A,1B and1C). 
This sluice has the advantage of having minimum length 
due to which lesser friction losses take place. 


3.1.1 Horizontal sluices are generally used under the 
following conditions: 


a) When the sluices are drowned at the exit; and 

b) When they have to be located at or near the 
river bed level, for example in sluices for river 
diversion or reservoir depletion. 


3.1.1.1 The width of the sluice barrel is generally kept 
uniform throughout the length except in the entry 
transition. 


3.1.1.2 If the sluice is designed for pressure flow 
conditions then the top profile of the sluice may be 
given a slight constriction in accordance with 4.4.1. 
On the other hand if free flow conditions prevail then 
no such constriction is required. 


3.2 Trajectory Type Sluice 


The barrel of this sluice is generally kept horizontal 
downstream of the entry transition up to the service 
gate to facilitate resting of the latter. Beyond the service 
gate the bottom of the sluice conforms to the parabolic 
path of the trajectory and meets the downstream face 
of the dam section tangentially (see Fig. 1D and 1E). 


3.2.1 The equation of the bottom profile after the 
service gate shall be: 


xX = k.H.y 
where 


k = coefficient (A value of about 4 is generally 
used depending on the distance available to 
accommodate this curve in the reach 
between the service gate and the 
downstream face of the spillway/non- 
overflow section), 


H = headatthe center line of the gate opening, and 
x, y = co-ordinates of any point on the profile 
(see Fig. 1D, 1E). 


In case the trajectory profile of sluice would not permit 
meeting tangentially the downstream face of dam, a 
small transition just before the tangent point (TP) of 
sluice profile and downstream face of dam in form of 


IS 11485 : 2014 


DOWNSTREAM FACE 
OF SPILLWAY/NON 
OVER FLOW SECTION 


Hr 


A— Ç OF SLUICE i 


SERVICE GATE 
EMERGENCY GATE 


1A Straight Barrel Sluice 


DOWNSTREAM FACE 
OF SPILLWAY/NON 
OVER FLOW SECTION 


POINT OF GREATEST 
CONTRACTON 
(VENA CONTRACTA) 


SERVICE GATE 
EMERGENCY GATE 


1B Straight Barrel Sluice with Partial Gate Opening with Free Flow 


Fic. 1 Type oF SLuice (Continued) 


IS 11485 : 2014 


DOWNSTREAM FACE 
OF SPILLWAY/NON 
OVER FLOW SECTION 


SERVICE GATE 
EMERGENCY GATE 


1C Straight Barrel Sluice with Partial Gate Opening 


DOWNSTREAM FACE 
OF SPILLWAY/NON 
OVER FLOW SECTION 


AIRVENT 


EMERGENCY SERVICE GATE 
GATE 


wt OF SLUICE 
BUCKET 


1D Trajectory Type Sluice 


Fic. 1 Type or SLuice (Continued) 


IS 11485 : 2014 


EMERGENCY 
GATE 


DOWNSTREAM FACE 


OF SPILLWAY/NON 
OVER FLOW SECTION 


POINT OF GREATEST 


CONTRACTION 
(VENA CONTRACTA) 


1E Trajectory Type Sluice with Partial Gate Opening 
Fic. 1 TYPE OF SLUICE 


vertical curve with suitable radius of curvature may be 
provided. 


3.2.2 The width of the sluice is kept uniform through 
out the length except in the entry transition. 


3.2.3 The height of the sluice is gradually reduced from 
downstream of the service gate to the exit in order to 
ensure pressure flow in the sluice. The constriction shall 
be in accordance with 4.4.1. 


4 HYDRAULIC DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 


4.1 Fixation of Size and Number of Sluices 


The size and number of sluices required to pass the 
desired discharge at a predetermined reservoir elevation 
may be found based on the type of flow required to be 
maintained in the sluice, that is, either pressure flow 
or free flow or a combination of both. The sluice 
dimensions shall be so proportioned as to provide a 
preferably atleast two number of sluices to permit 
inspection and repair of the same. 


4.1.1 Pressure Flow in the Sluice 


For pressure flow conditions, the following basic 
relation may be used: 


Hy,=h +h, 


H, = total head needed to overcome various head 
losses to produce discharge, 


h, = the cumulative losses of the system in terms 
of velocity head, and 


h, = velocity head at the flow control that is at 
the sluice exit. 


For a free discharging sluice H+ shall be measured from 
the reservoir water surface to the center of the sluice at 
the exit (see Fig. 1A, 1B and 1D). If the out flowing jet 
is supported on a downstream floor the head shall be 
measured to the point of flow control (see Fig. 1B and 
1E) that is at the exit and if the sluice is submerged at 
the exit then the head shall be measured to the tail water 
level. The losses shall consist of trashrack losses, 
entrance losses, exit losses, friction losses, gate or valve 
losses, bend losses, gate groove losses, expansion, 
contraction losses etc. They may be expressed in terms 
of velocity head. The above equation may be re-written 
in a simplified form as follows: 
y? 
Hr=K, 2g 


Then Q=a, Bells, 
K, 

K, = constant, which is obtained after 
considering all the losses in the system; 

V = velocity at the point of flow control where 
the cross-sectional area is a,; 

a, = cross-sectional area of the sluice, where the 
control of flow exists; 

g = acceleration due to gravity; and 

O = discharge to be passed through the sluice at 


a predetermined reservoir elevation. 
4.1.2 Free Flow (Open Channel Flow) in the Sluice 


4.1.2.1 When open channel flow is controlled by 
regulating gates (see Fig 1C), the following relation 
shall be used: 


Q = Zeg 2g (H? — A, 


where 
Q = discharge to be passed through sluice; 
g = acceleration due to gravity; 
B = width of the sluice; 
H,, H, = head upto the sill of sluice and bottom 
of lifted gate respectively under its 
lifting condition subjected to any F.R.L/ 
R.W.L (see Fig. 1C); and 
C = coefficient of discharge (see Table 1). 
Table 1 Coefficient of Discharge, C for Conduit 
Entrances 
(Clause 4.1.2.1) 
Particulars Coefficient of Discharge C 
nA 
Maximum Minimum Average 
Gate in thin wall — unsuppressed 0.70 0.60 0.63 
contraction 
Gate in thin wall — bottom and 0.81 0.68 0.70 
sides suppressed 


Gate in thin wall — corners rounded 0.95 0.71 0.82 


4.1.2.2 When there is high tail water either due to canal 
water supply level or downstream influence in the 
stream bed, the regulating gate opening may be either 
partly or entirely submerged. For the unsubmerged part 
of the gate opening the discharge shall be calculated 
according to 4.1.2.1. However, for the submerged part 
of the gate opening discharge shall be calculated by 
the following relation: 


Q = C.A. PeH 


Q = discharge through submerged portion of the 
gate opening 


where 


IS 11485 : 2014 


A = area ofthe submerged portion of the sluice; 

H = difference between upstream and down 
stream water levels, and 

C = coefficient of discharge for submerged 
orifice or tube flow. (Its value generally 
varies between 0.62 to 0.81) 


4.1.3 For calculating the size of the sluice and plotting 
the water surface profile maximum losses shall be 
considered. However, minimum losses shall be 
considered for the design of the energy dissipation 
arrangements for the flow through sluices. 


4.2 Shape of Sluice 


Generally rectangular gates are preferred. Therefore, 
the shape of sluices is also normally kept rectangular. 
Generally the height of the sluice is kept as 1.5 times 
the width. However, circular shapes may also be 
provided when small diameter openings (less than 1m) 
are required to be regulated by valves. 


4.3 Entry Transitions 


The efficient functioning of a sluice depends to a great 
extent on the design of its entry transitions. To obtain 
the best inlet efficiency, the shape of the entrance shall 
simulate that of a jet discharging into air. A bell mouth 
entrance which conforms to or slightly encroaches upon 
the free jet profile will provide the best entrance shape. 
Elliptical entrances have been found to be suitable. 


4.3.1 For a rectangular or square sluice the entrance 
transition may be defined by the following equation: 


2 2 


> — <İ 
D (0330) 


where D is the vertical height of the sluice (downstream 
of the entrance curve) for top and bottom curves and 
the horizontal width of the sluice (downstream of the 
entrance curve) for the side curves. 


4.3.2 For a rectangular entrance with bottom placed 
even With upstream floor, the side curves at the entrance 
may be defined by the above eguation. However, the 
top contraction curve may be given by the following 
eguation: 


2 2 


D? (0.67D) 
where D is the vertical height of the sluice downstream 
of the entrance transition. 
4.3.3 For a circular entrance the entry transition is 
given the following equation: 

x y 

2 + 2 7 
(0.5D) (0.15D) 


IS 11485 : 2014 


where D is the diameter of the sluice downstream of 
the entrance transition. 


4.4 Exit of the Sluice 


The exit of the sluice shall be tangential to either the 
downstream face of the spillway non-overflow section 
or the bucket or it may be upturned (see Fig. 2). 


4.4.1 In order to ensure the pressure flow conditions 
through out the length of the sluice and to avoid 
negative pressures the section of the sluice shall be 
constricted at the exit so as to give reduced cross- 
sectional area to commensurate with the increase in 
the velocity of flow. A constriction of 10 to 15 percent 
in flow area is generally found adequate by effective 
constriction in the roof profile only. 


4.42 When the exit of the sluices is not drowned, the 
top profile of the sluices is given a small turn of about 
1.0 to 1.5 m normal to the downstream face of the 
spillway/non-overflow section. This helps in the 
aeration of the sluice (see Fig. 2). 


4.4.3 In case of an upturned exit, the shape and 
dimensions of the profile may be best worked out on 
the basis of the model studies. It has to be used with 
caution, because the flow from the sluice may damage 
the energy dissipation arrangements of the spillway or 
the downstream face of the spillway/non-overflow 
section if it falls over them. Alternatively, a jet disperser 
of suitable shape, based on model studies may be 
provided. 


4.4.4 Incase of the sluices located in spillway then no 
separate energy dissipation arrangements are necessary. 
However, if they are provided in a non-overflow 
section, then separate energy dissipation arrangements 
may have to be provided. 


4.4.5 Incase the spillway and sluice run together then 
either eyebrow deflectors may be provided on the exit 
of the sluice or aeration be provided at the exit end. 


4.5 Control Devices 


The flow through sluices is controlled by either gates 
or valves. Generally, two sets of gates, that is, 
emergency and services gates are provided. In case of 
construction sluices, the flow is generally uncontrolled 
and only stoplogs are provided for the eventual 
plugging of the sluices. Where the construction sluices 
are required to be closed under flowing water, provision 
of emergency gates may be considered. 


4.5.1 The control (services) gates shall be located as 
far upstream as possible. The operation and servicing 
may be done from operation galleries/chambers in the 
dam (see Fig. 3). In order to repair the gates without 
emptying the reservoir, the usual practice is to install a 


guard or emergency gate, further upstream in the 
sluices. These emergency gates may be placed either 
at the entrance or inside the sluice and operated from 
galleries. 


4.5.2 Sometimes when the sluice have to be located 
at high levels near the crest in the spillway section, 
where it is not possible to provide a gallery for gates 
operation, the sluices may also be located in thick 
spillway piers in which the gates are operated from 
the top of the pier (see Fig. 4). 


4.5.3 In case of high heads (more than 30 m) gate 
controls may also be located near the downstream end 
of the sluice to minimize possibilities of cavitation. 


4.5.4 For better slot hydraulics, the gate slots shall be 
as small as practicable and adequately streamlined. 


4.6 Air Vents 


Air vents of suitable size shall be provided downstream 
of the control gates to supply air and thereby avoid or 
minimize cavitation damages. The air demand for 
calculating the size of air vent may be calculated from 
the following formulae: 


a) For hydraulic jump formation in the conduit 
B = 0.006 6 (Fie - 1)!4 
b) For spray flow 
B = 0.20 Fie 
c) For free flow 
B = 0.09 Fi 
where 
air-demand ratio = 


Volume flow rate of air 


Volume flow rate of water 


F,, = Froude number at Vena contracta 
D Ms 
7 gd,, 
Vie = velocity of flow at the vena contracta, 
d,, = depth of flow at the vena contracta, and 
g = acceleration due to gravity. 


The size of air vents as determined above assumes that 
the maximum air demand occurs at a gate opening of 
80 percent open and the maximum air velocity in the 
vent does not exceed 50 m/s. Air vent passages shall 
use generous bend radii and gradual transitions to avoid 
losses and particularly excessive noise. The air vent 
intakes should be so located that they are inaccessible 
to the public and shall be protected by grills. The intake 
entrance average velocity shall not exceed 10 m/s. The 


TANGENTIAL TO 


SPILLWAY PROFILE 


IS 11485 : 2014 


TANGENTIAL TO THE 


UPTURNED 
SLUICE 


Fic. 2 Types oF SLUICE Exit 


air vent exit portal shall be designed to ensure spread of 
air across the full width of the conduit. The air vent shall 
terminate into a plenum located in the conduit roof and 
immediately downstream of the gate. The plenum shall 
extend across the full width of the conduit and shall be 
vaned so that the air flow is evenly distributed. 


4.6.1 The size of the air vent shall be such that the 
pressure drop downstream of the gate does not 
normally exceed 2 m. 


4.6.2 Hydraulic jump formation in the sluice shall 
normally be avoided. When unavoidable sufficient 
clearance shall be provided above the jump profile to 
avoid choked jump conditions. 


4.6.3 Normally a sluice located in a spillway section 
shall not operate simultaneously with the spillway. 


However, if it is obligatory to run the sluice in 
conjunction with the spillway, proper aeration shall be 
ensured at the exit either by running the sluice partially 
full or by providing a suitable air-vent at the exit of 
the sluice. 


4.6.4 Sometimes a steel liner may also be provided in 
the sluices near the gates to avoid cavitation damages. 
In case of control being located at the exit end, the 
entire length of sluice shall be provided with steel liner. 


4.7 Model Studies 


Hydraulic model studies are desirable to test the 
efficacy of the hydraulic design of the sluice and to 
verify the air-demand. They shall be done for the pre- 
determined minimum reservoir elevation at which the 
sluice is designed to pass the required discharge and 


IS 11485 : 2014 


UPSTREAM 
FACE OF SLUICE 
DAM OPERATION 
CHAMBER 
Ç | 
EMERGENCY 
GATE SERVICE 


GATE 


Fic. 3 A TypicAL ARRANGEMENT WITH GATES OPERATION FROM OPERATION CHAMBER 
(DETAILS OF GATES AND Hoists NOT SHOWN) 


GATE OPERATION 
CHAMBER 


SPILLWAY 
PIER 


GATE WALL ` 


SECTION BB 
: da, 


GATE WELL. İİ 
be DAY ie be re ss 


SPILLWAY PIER 
SECTIONAL PLAN AA 


Fic. 4 TypıcaL DETAILS OF SLUICE LOCATED IN THICK SPILLWAY PIER 


also for higher reservoir elevations under the gate 
opening necessary to pass the same discharge. 


5 STRUCTURAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 


5.1 Design Assumptions 


5.1.1 The grade of concrete used around the sluice 
shall conform to IS 456 and have minimum cube 
strength of 20 N/mm? and a minimum thickness of 1 m. 


5.1.1.1 The reinforcement used shall be high strength 
deformed bars conforming to IS 1786. 


5.1.1.2 The problem is treated as plane stress problem. 


5.1.1.3 Concrete is assumed to behave as an elastic 
material. 


5.1.1.4 Tensile force is taken only by steel 
reinforcement. 


5.1.2 Permissible Stresses 


The permissible stresses in concrete shall be in 
accordance with IS 456. The permissible stress in 
reinforcement shall be taken as 80 percent of the values 
specified in IS 456, while for masonry, it shall be in 
accordance with IS 6512. For reinforcement, however, 
a permissible stress of 190 N/mm? and 230 N/mm? be 
adopted for high strength deformed bars of grade 
Fe 415 and Fe 500 respectively conforming to IS 1786. 


5.1.3 Increase in Permissible Stresses 
The permissible stresses mentioned in 5.1.2 shall be 


1 
increased by 33 — percent when earthquake loads are 


considered in the design. 


5.2 Loads to be Considered in the Analysis 


The following loads shall be considered in the structural 
design of the sluice barrel: 


a) Dead load of the structure; 

b) Reservoir and tail water loads; 

c) Earthquake loads; 

d) Uplift pressure; 

e) Internal water pressures (hoop tension); 
f) Earth and silt pressure; 

g) Ice pressure; 

h) Wind and wave pressure; 

j) Loads due to road bridge; 


k) Loads due to gates, hoisting equipments etc; 
and 


m) Temperature stresses. 


5.3 Analysis 


5.3.1 Openings in the structure develop a discontinuity 
in the stress field and due to stress concentration around 


IS 11485 : 2014 


the openings, zones of high compressive stresses or 
tensile stresses may develop and in general this will 
weaken the structure. Reinforcement requires to be 
provided around the openings to avoid the uncontrolled 
cracking of concrete. 


5.3.2 The stress field at the center of the opening can 
be determined by any of the following methods. 


5.3.2.1 Gravity method of analysis 


This analysis assumes a linear distribution of vertical 
stresses on horizontal planes. This method provides a 
two dimensional solution and idealizes the dam as 
composed of number of vertical cantilevers and 
assumes that each cantilever carries the loads to the 
foundation without any transfer of the loads to adjacent 
vertical elements. The shear stress distribution is 
assumed as parabolic and the horizontal stress 
distribution as cubic. For details reference may be made 
to IS 12966 (Part 2). 


5.3.2.2 Photoelastic method 


This can be an experimental method of stress analysis 
using models made of birefringent materials. 
Observation of loaded model under polarized light 
shows fringe patterns. The complete stress distribution 
in a plane structure, can be determined using fringe 
pattern and other supplementary data. 


5.3.2.3 Finite element method (FEM) 


In this method, the structure is conceptually divided 
into a number of elements and the stiffness of each 
element is determined. The load and the displacement 
conditions of each element are introduced and the 
simultaneous equations of equilibrium in terms of 
displacements are obtained there from and are solved 
using computer. Finally, the computation of the stresses 
is made using the displacement data. 


5.3.3 Stress Distribution Around Opening 


The stress distribution around the opening at any 
location may be determined by theory of elasticity, 
stress coefficients method, photoelastic method or finite 
element method. 


5.3.4 Load Combinations 


Different loads to be considered in the design are 
mentioned in 5.3. Design shall be based on the adverse 
combinations of loads which lead to the development 
of critical stresses. They shall include those loads 
having a reasonable probability of occurring at the 
same time. The different loading conditions are listed 
in IS 6512. 


5.3.4.1 Reinforcement Design 


The grade of concrete used around the sluice shall 


IS 11485 : 2014 


conform to IS 456 and have a minimum cube strength 
of 20 N/mm? and a minimum thickness of 1 m. 


In case of masonry dams the portion around an opening 
which is reinforced is constructed in concrete and the 
minimum thickness of concrete shall be 1 m. 


5.3.4.2 The reinforcement provided shall be adequate 
for withstanding the total tensile stresses due to (a) 
stress concentration, (b) internal water pressure, and 
(c) temperature stresses. 


5.3.5 Reinforcement for Stress Concentration 


a) Reinforcement for stress concentration (for critical 
combination of loadings) is determined by the 
following steps: 


1) Locate the center of the opening on dam cross- 
section. 

2) Determine the prevalent stress field at that 
location in the absence of opening. 

3) Determine the stress distribution around the 
opening subjected to uniform stress field 
arrived at 5.3.5 (a)(2) [see Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 
of IS 12966 (Part 2)]. 

4) Compute the total tensile force across the 
section. 


5) Compute the area of steel required. 


b) Location of critical section computation of total 
tension 


The critical section is determined on the basis of 
maximum tensile stress and maximum total tension. 
To determine this, it is necessary to obtain normal stress 


distribution along various reference lines, analytically 
or experimentally. The total tension is determined by 
integrating the area under tension along the particular 
critical section. 


c) Area of steel reinforcement 


After obtaining the total tension for critical section for 
the opening, the area of steel A,, is calculated as F/O, 


d) Detailing of reinforcement 


Typical reinforcement details are shown in Fig. 5. The 
bars shall be straight as far as possible and anchored 
in the zone of compressive stress. Diagonal bars shall 
be provided at the corners, and fillets. The minimum 
diameter of reinforcement bar shall be 16 mm and the 
maximum spacing shall be 300 mm c/c. The minimum 
cover shall not be less than 150 mm. 


5.3.6 Reinforcement for Internal Water Pressure 


The reinforcement for internal water pressure is 
determined as follows (see Fig. 6): 


Let W and H be the width and height of the sluice. 
‘P’ is the internal water pressure 
(acting at the center of the section) 


Area of reinforcement steel for faces AD and BC 


_ PH 
20,, 

Area of reinforcement steel for faces AB and CD 
PW 


20,, 


DISTRIBUTION BARS 


MAIN BARS 


DIAGONAL BARS 


MAIN BARS 


DISTRIBUTION BARS 


DIAGONAL BARS 


Fic. 5 TYPICAL REINFORCEMENT DETAILS AROUND A SLUICE 


10 


Fic. 6 İNTERNAL WATER PRESSURE 
5.3.7 Reinforcement for Temperature Stresses 


When the control gate of sluice is opened during the 
construction period or operating period, water at lower 
temperature gushes into the sluice. The inner periphery 
of the sluice thus attains a lower temperature than the 
concrete around it. The temperature gradient around 
the sluice induces thermal stresses which are tensile in 
nature and around the inner periphery of the sluice. 


The thermal stresses are computed based on the theory 
of thick cylinders subjected to thermal gradients. The 
thickness of structural concrete around the opening is 
taken into account to compute the inner and outer 
radius. The rectangular opening area is transformed to 
equivalent circular area. 


Internal Radius R} = ue 
T 
External Radius R, = RAAE AE 
T 
where 
T = thickness of structural concrete around the 


opening. 
Circumferential tension on the inner surface: 
_-Ea(0, —9,, ) 
7 l-v 
temperature at a distance R from the center 
of the circle. 


R, 

0 = 

Assuming a linear variation of temperature from the 
inner to outer periphery (see Fig. 7) 


_ R-R, 
R,—R, 


9 


(0, —0,)+9, 


2 7 
Hence 6,, = —— | ORdR 
R, —R, R 
2 “| R-R 
6,,= — >| 1 (0, —0,)+0, |RdR 
R, —R, R,-R, 


Rı 


Or 


Integrating 
(6, -0, )(2R,'-3R,R, +R, ) 
3(R? -R° \(R, -R,) 


11 


IS 11485 : 2014 


TENSION 


R2 


COMPRESSION 


Fic. 7 TEMPERATURE VARIATIONS 


Circumferential compression at the outer radius is 
given by 


_ —Ea(@, —9,, ) 


Ro l-v 


Knowing 6, ando,, total tensile force can be found out 
and area of reinforcement steel computed for the same. 
NOTE — FEM analysis for this case does not involve 


approximation like transformation of rectangular opening to 
equivalent circular area. 


5.3.7.1 Special cases 
a) Opening close to the block joint 


The sluice opening may be kept at least at a distance d 
away from the block joint. When the sluice opening is 
provided close to the block joint, photoelastic methods 
or finite element method may be used to obtain the 
stress fields. 


b) Multiple openings 


When more than one sluice opening is provided in the 
same dam block, the minimum clear spacing between 
these openings shall be equal to the width of the 
opening. The compressive stresses due to stress 
concentration shall be within the allowable limits. 
Otherwise reinforcements for compression shall be 
provided wherever required. 


Further, in addition to loading conditions enumerated 
in 5.3.4 other condition arising due to one sluice 
running full under pressure while the adjacent one 
empty is, shall also be considered (where the minimum 
spacing of one width is provided). 


c) For openings considered as large (see note 
under 1.2) and closely spaced openings detailed two 
or three dimensional analysis shall be carried out either 
by Finite element method or photo elastic method. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 09 (0553). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


