( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 9637 - 1980

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR PRESENTATION OF INFORMATION IN TECHNICAL MANUALS
Publications and Graphic Technology Sectional Committee,
Chairman
SRRI A. DAR*

EC 10
of Uttar

Representing Printing & Stationery, Pradesh, Allahabad Government

Members
SHRI

ABUL HASAN

SHRI N. J. ARDESHIR PROF A. K. BANERJI SRRI J. K. BERI SHRI I. M. L. BHASIN SRRI M. V. BICAU SHRI Y. R. CHADH.4
SKRI

PROF M. R. DUA

SERI R. N. SHA~MA (Alternate) V.N. CHHABRA

National Book Development Board & Book Promotion and Copyright Clearance Cell i&try of Education & Social Welfare), &% Delhi Bolton Fine Art Litho Works, Bombay Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi The Times of India, New Delhi Punjab National Bank, New Delhi Air-India Press,a:dmbay Directorate Publications Information ( CSIR ), New Delhi The Statesman Ltd, New Delhi Indiazelrstitute of Mass Communication, New

SRRI H. C. GANDHI

Directorate of Advertising & Visual Publicity (NMwm;;;iof Informatron & Broadcastmg ), Goverzment Institute of Printing Technology, Bombay University of Calcutta, Calcutta Indian National Scientific Documentation Centre ( CSIR ), New Delhi The Federation of lndian Publishers, New Delhi

SHRI

S. B. JADHAV

SHRI S. KANJILAL SHRI A. KRISHNAN
SERI D. N. M~LBOTRA

University of Delhi, Delhi DR P. L. MALHOTRA SHRI T. PREMKUMAR ( Alternate ) All India Hindi Publishers .4ssociation, Varanasi SRRI VISHVANATRMALHOTRA SHRI KRISHNACHANDER BERI ( Alternate )
( Continued on page 2 ) *Shri A. Dar was the Chairman at the meeting in which this document 0 Copyriiht INDIAN This publication is protected STANDARDS under the Indian 1981 INSTITUTION was finalized.

Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the Dub&her shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

1s : 9637 - 1980
( Continuedfrom

page1 )
Representing National Book Trust, India, New Delhi Tata Press Limited, Bombay

Members
SHRI U. K. MALLYA

SHRI: A. K. MANCHANDA SERI M. S. PETKAR ( Alternate SERI D. R. MANKEKAR SHRI L. J. MENESSE
SHRI G. D. DHOND ( Alternate ) SHRI MOHANJIT SINGH

)
Authors Guild of India, New Delhi Directorate of Printing and Stationery, ment of Maharashtra, Nagpur Govern-

Directorate of Printing ( Ministry of Works & Housing), New Delhi .. _\ SHRI P. S. RAMACHANDRAN ( Alternate ) Defence Scientific Information & Documentation SRRI S. S. MURTHY Centre ( Ministry of Defence ), Delhi SHRI G. S. SHARMA ( Alternate ) The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta COL B. T. NA~RANI SIIRI B. R. SUBRA~CIANIAM ( Alternate ) A. P. Government Textbook Press, Hyderabad SHRI V. V. NAIDU SRRI G. RA~A~RISHNA RAO ( Alternate ) National Council of Educational Research and SHRI JAIPAL NANGIA Training, New Delhi SHRI C. N. RAO (Alternate ) Office of the Director of Printing, Stationery and SHRI B. N. RAMA MURTHY Publications ( Government Press ), Bangalore Thomson Press ( India ) Limited, New Delhi SERI R. S. R&WAL Paper and Its Products ( Excluding Packaging SHRI K. L. SAH~AL Materials ) Sectional Committee, CDC 15, IS1 SRRI 0. L. DU~C+AL ( Alternate ) The Regional Institute of Printing Technology, SHRI D. SEN Calcutta SHRI P. SEN ( Alternate ) Associated Artists, New Delhi SHR~ N. N. SETHI All India Federation of Master Printers, New SHRI V. SET~URAM Delhi Publications Division ( Ministry of Information & SHRI K. C. SETHURAMAN Broadcasting), New Delhi SHRI H. H. N. TANDON ( Alternate ) Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Co Ltd, New SHRI N. R. SUBRAMANIAN Delhi Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojkio Member) SHRI GURCRARAN SINGH, Director ( Pub ) Secretary SHRI~IATI PARMINDER BAJAJ Assistant Director ( Pub ), IS1 ( Continued on page 18 )

2

IS : 9637 - 1980

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR PRESENTATION OF INFORMATION IN TECHNICAL MANUALS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 3 November 1980, after the draft finalized by the Publications and Graphic Technology Sectional Committee had been approved by the Executive Committee. 0.2 A technical manual should communicate all the information required to enable him product at the lowest maintenance cost. remedial measures with reference to some example: ( a ) effective operating instructions maintenance, ( b) preventive maintenance wear and tear, (c) illustrated parts lists spares identification and location, etc. to the user in precise manner to get the best use from the It should provide effective of the cost elements. For reduce unnecessary calls for schedules reduce excessive overcome the difficulty in

0.3 A technical manual should contribute to the safety of personnel and to the maximum life and efficiency of an investment, whether this be building, plant or machinery. 0.4 The text and illustrations in a manual should combine to assist installation, commissioning, operation and maintenance and facilitate repair and replacement of parts speedily and effectively without hazard and with minimum call on the user's labour force. 0.5 A blend of presentation techniques-writting, illustrating and production should be used SO as to make the communication process The basic objective of making essential facts accessible in the effective. not be achieved unless all aspects of shortest possible time may presentation are considered and the best solution to the user's needs identified. 0.6 This may entail the development of different manuals for differing markets ( for example home and overseas ) and for different products. Not only many different languages give rise to changed presentation requirements but the operation needs and test/repair strategies may also The manufacturer may adopt only such of the clauses of be different. this standard to suit his specific requirements. 3

IS : 9637 - 1980
0.7 In this context, it is important to identify a technical manual with the technical sales, servicing and product support activities of the manufacturer and with the test and repair strategies adopted for the product in a particular market. The servicing policy ( for example, determination of the levels at which user repair is allowed and at which manufacturer service is recommended ) will considerably affect the content and presentation. 0.8 It is also important to consider the knowledge level of the user/ maintainer and that no assumptions should be made of high skill or prior knowledge. When in selling in a variety of markets the product should be supported by a manual written for the lowest level of user skill. 0.9 This draft Indian Standard is based on the publication ` Technical Manuals-A Guide to Users Requirements, 1974 `, published by the Institution of Plant Engineers, London. Substantial material has been drawn from the above publication and assistance derived is gratefully acknowledged.

0.9.1 In the preparation of this standard the following: also been taken-from
BS BS BS

considerable

assistance manuals: manuals:

has Part 1 Part 2

4884 : Part 1 : 1973 Specification for technical Content. British Standards Institution. 4884 : Part 2 : 1974 Specification Presentation. British Standards for technical Institution.

4940 : 1973 Recommendations for the presentation information about products and services in the industry. British Standards Institution.

of technical construction

Guide for the preparation of maintenance and operation manuals for machine tools and accessories 1974. Central Machine Tool Institute, Bangalore.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This manual. manuals.
standard provides guidelines for the preparation of a technical It aIso includes instructions relating to publication of technical

1.2 This guide will help the product manufacturer to communicate required'information in a clearly understood and logical manner. 4

the

IS : 9637 - 1980 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard,
the following definitions shall apply.

-A technical 2.1 Technical Manual selected persons so that they may be informed regarding the installation, use, of machinery or apparatus, or complete 2.2 Book 1963* ). 2.3 Booklet A document -

manual conveys information to appropriately instructed and/or maintenance and repair of items plant systems. and a spine ( see also IS : 2550but no spine. covers or spine (see also

which has covers which

A document A sheet

has covers without

2.4 Pamphlet IS : 796-1966t).

or sheets

2.5 Product -Any material or item of any complexity ranging from raw material to a finished product or to a complete engineering system, which is offered for sale. The term includes services having no material content. 3. CONTENTS 3.1 A technical manual may contain information in the sequence as indicated. of information is also given: Category and Order a ) Technical cation ) b ) Operating c ) Technical d ) Handling data ( specifiinformation description instructions the following categories of The purpose of each category Purpose To define the purpose ante of the product To describe emergency To describe functions and performand in and its

its use normally the product

To detail effective and safe handling, transit, storage and installation procedures To state the products maintenance requirements and facilitate costeffective maintenance

e ) Maintenance tions

instruc-

*Glossary of classification terms. *Glossary of cataloguing terms (jirst rsutiion ). 5

IS:9637

-1980 Category and Order Purpose To assist with planned procedures To facilitate accurate cation and location details To maintenance parts identifiprovide'

f)

Maintenance

schedules

g ) Parts list h ) Modification

record changes and modification procedures

3.2 Technical Data following information: a ) Statistics 1 ) Dimensions 2 ) Supply

The chapter

on technical

data should contain

the

and weights

( SI units); foundations, etc;

requirements,

services,

3 ) Environmental 4 ) Physical

considerations; and manning; and

handling data.

5 ) Performance b ) Information Sources

1 ) Specifications, 2) Reports and design disclosure documents ( see Note I ),

3 ) Drawings 4 ) Quality

( see Note 2 ) and schedules assurance documents, manual and

( see Note 3 ),

5 ) Any other instructions

or publication.
calculation sheets

NOTE 1 -Design disclosure documents to sketches and design block diagrams.
NOTE 2 -Drawings

range from designer's

*

are the official design drawings for manufacture.

NOTE 3 -Schedules are the lists of data, drawing numbers, equipment items and components which form part of the total package of design data from the designer. The schedules enable the technical writer to see the total picture of the system or product and to be sure he has knowledge and data of every part of it. c ) Hazards

1 ) Standard 2 ) Special

safety notices, hazard warnings, and in case of hazards.

3 ) Antedotes

or remedial

precautions 6

IS : 9637 - 1980
322.1 Summary of Contents-This section under technical data should describe the purpose for which the product is intended, to enable the prospective user to assess its suitability for his requirements. Details of supply loadings and other services required together with foundation and mounting data should be adequate for pre-delivery planning purposes. All relevant hazards warnings, including any hazard notes, relation to the input materials ( if a manufacturing system or machine ) and to the output ( including effluent ) of the product, must be clearly stated. Where complex systems are being described, it may be advisable to abbreviate or limit this section in order to reduce the size of the manual. Reference should be made to a separate comprehensive specification as appropriate. Lists of information sources may be treated in a similar fashion. 3.3 Operating Information should contain the following: a ) Full description requirements; of The chapter on operating modes and information manpower

operating

b ) Operating procedures ( normal and emergency for the various with safety notes and hazard warnings; a clear modes, distinction should be made between individual and team responsibilities; c ) Operator fault diagnosis instructions, including detection and repair of malfunctions within the scope of the operator and reporting procedure for faults requiring supervisory or maintenance attention; d) Training programmes where drills or sequences have to be established before the product enters service or when new staff are introduced; and information such as injury waste or effluent regulations. or

e ) Special safety and environmental resuscitation procedures, product

3.3.1 Summary of Contents - This section should contain complete operaIt should be suitable for division into parts, appropriate tor information. for various Ievels of personnel ( supervisor, leading operator, operator etc ) and for use by the production department as a separate document; for example, training manual, operator manual, procedure card, etc. Descriptions of the various operating modes and manning requirements should be included. These may vary with: a ) the method of control ( manual, auto, remote paper boxes, ); roil, plastic ); etc );

b ) the input material c ) the end product

selected

( cut paper, boxes, 7 die-cut

( printed

IS : 9637 -

1980
state ( starting up, shutting down, cleaning, etc);

d ) tlFdoperational e ) the storage

of in-progress

material.

3.3.1.1 Operating procedures for each mode should follow and, as far as possible, be complete without the need for cross-referencing to sections dealing with other modes. Emergency procedures must be clear and easily recognized and understood. Safety notes should always precede the relevant instructions thus:

' Open delivery
SAFETY NOTE

chute selector clear of delivery button

'
area '

` Ensure

all personnel

` Press START

'

3.3.1.2 Capital letters should be used to denote legend actually appearing on the controls and the manual writer should inform the designer of any omissions or desirable changes to such legends. 3.3.1.3 Operator fault diagnosis procedures should be included, preThese reduce unnecessary requests for ferably in flow chart form. maintenance services and facilitate diagnosis of faults, for example input material variations, which might otherwise be interpreted as product faults. The acceptable levels of fault diagnosis, adjustment and repair by the operator should be verified as the pr0cedure.s are written. Procedures for monitoring and reporting failures which require skilled repair should be provided. This will ensure that maximum assistance is given to repair personnel by the operator reporting a fault. 3.3.1.4 Training programmes, safety formation should be included as necessary. 3.4 Technical Description - The should contain the following: a ) Full technical b ) Technical c) chapter data and environmental in-

on

` Technical

Description

'

details of products; of functional of supporting parts; items and ( power source, test

description

Technical description gear, etc ).

3.4.1 Summary of Contents - The technical description should be presented in logical order, from the highest level ( that is, outline of the complete system or machine ) down to'the assembly, component or part level, consistent with the recommended repair policy ( this lowest level may vary for different markets and the supplier may omit technical descriptions at component level if maintenance by the user is not possible at this level ). 8

IS : 9637 - 1980 3.5 Handling should contain Instructions the following: The chapter on ` Handling instructions; and Instructions

'

a ) Handling, b ) Installation d ) Relocation,

transportation and connection

and unpacking details; procedures;

c) Commissioning

and proving

storage

and disposal

instructions.

3.6 Maintenance Instructions - The chapter on ` Maintenance Instructions ' should contain full information on the following:

a) b) cl

Minor maintenance tasks (such ning and minor repairs ); Major maintenance tasks re-assembly, testing ); and Fault diagnosis routines

as calibration, as

adjustments,

clea-

(such

dismantling, checks.

overhaul,

and performance

3.6.1 Summary of Contents - Full instructions are required for maintenance. The information given should reflect the test and repair strategy to be adopted and should conform to the various levels at which servicing and repair work is to be executed. For example: Level Level or Level Level Level (a ) (b ) (c ) Maintenance within the capability of the operator ding adjustments, cleaning, minor repair, etc. Maintenance Maintenance by the user's mobile by removal personnel inclu(a ) ( b) Maintenance to user by the user's staff full information staff given

Maintenance by the supplier's given to user

less information

to a workshop policies are agreed information should

3.6.1.1 In cases where maintenance and servicing between the user and the supplier adequate supporting be provided.

3.6.1.2 Repair or corrective maintenance instructions are generally required in two parts, namely minor and major tasks as indicated in 3.6. Where removal to workshop is envisaged, the instructions for removal, handling and return to service should be included. 9

IS : 9637 - 1980 3.6.1.3 When the product is subjected to overhaul in which complete dismantling, repairs,re-assembly and test procedures are required, the information should be presented in a form suitable for use as a work instruction. 3.6.1.4 Fault diagnosis routines should be included. Flow charts ( algorithms ) are recommended for establishing a strategic approach to diagnosis in a particular fault condition. Maintenance dependency charts or functional block diagrams with test data schedules are best used for detailed diagnosis at assembly or component level. These charts should be suitable for reproduction as separate documents designed for ease of use in the working environment.
return to service.
NOTE 2 -All NOTE 1-All

maintenance procedures should include instructions for testing and part names and numbers should conform to those used in the chapter on

illustrated parts list.

3.7 Maintenance Schedules - The should contain the following: a) Inspection c) Lubrication d) Preventive e) Calibration, schedules; b) List of reco,mmended schedules; maintenance overhaul

` Maintenance

Schedules

'

lubricants; procedures and repair (routine servicing ); and

schedules.

3.7.1 Summary of Contents-Maintenance schedules are required for cleaning, lubrication, inspection, monitoring, preventive work, testing and replenishment. Detailed recommendations are necessary and should include the most suitable frequency of action. Each schedule should be complete in itself and not dependent upon reference to other parts of the manual, so that individual work instruction cards, etc, may readily be prepared for use in the maintenance department. Schedules should be adequately illustrated, provide the basis for a logical approach by the user and give step-by-step sequences. Details of special tools, test gear, test rigs and handling equipment should be supplied. 3.7.1.1 Inspection schedules should recommend an inspection frequency based on the machine utilization factor, and not upon time periods, unless these can be directly related to running hours. Inspection periods should by synchronized with the lubrication schedules if possible, to assist the maintenance planner in the user's organization. If provisions are made for vibration or other forms of monitoring, these should be described and instructions given for use of the equipment and evaluation of readings. 10

IS :9637 -1980
3.7.1.2 This section should contain a list of recommended lubricants and equivalents. Lubrication schedules indicating grades of lubricant, frequency of application, point of application and method of application are required, preferably based on illustrations. Capacities of sumps and other reservoirs should be indicated.
3.7.1.3 Preventive maintenance procedures should be complete and fully illustrated to permit recognition of parts, test points, lubrication points, calibration points, etc. Preventive maintenance ( cleaning, minor adjustment, performance checks, etc ) performed by the operator shuld be included in the section ` Operating Information ' ( see3.3 ) and reference made to it in this section. 3.7.1.4 Where the product is a materials processing machine or plant, calibratiron schedules should contain complete information for calibration in all working modes and for all grades of materials. The schedules should provide a basis for machine audits at periodic intervals or for setting to work after removal or major overhaul. 3.7.1.5 Overhaul and repair schedules should indicate the various levels of repair and overhaul activity and the frequency at which overhaul action is required. Detailed and illustrated instructions are required. Complex work of a scheduled nature ( an annual overhaul with replacement of major parts ) requires work schedules, estimated times, handling instructions and if necessary, network plans. Testing and return to service procedures are essential for all tasks. 3.7.1.6 Quality control in overhaul and repair work can be developed through the technical manual as follows:

4 Defining b) Providing 4 Defining

fits and tolerances effective

clearly,

with illustrations; as indicated items so that above; and a meaningful

testing procedures

parameters of replaceable evaluation of wear is possible.

NOTE- It is sometimes useful to indicate in the overhaul procedures when all wearing parts in an assembly ( these may be marked with* on a dsawing ) should be replaced at the same time and the assembly tested and returned $0 service and the remaining parts evaluated for scrapping or for return to stock.

3.8 Parts List - The manufacturer should define the most economic parts replacement policy. Where a complete item by nature of its fabrication presents a difficult repair problem, this should be stated. The component parts of an item should be quoted wherever possible and supported by suitable illustrations, such as exploded perspective drawings, to assist both with the identification of the parts and recognition 11

IS : 9637 - 1988
of the way in which replacement or repair may be made. The parts list should be preceded by identification drawings of the plant layout and by essential general arrangement drawings to identify the equipment items in a system configuration, or the major assemblies in a machine or single equipment. The presentation of the parts list must follow this subdivision pattern: the parts for major items being listed and illustrated first, then parts for minor items and fiinally parts for the lowest order of subassembly or the smallest component groupings. The parts list should indicate the following: a) Reference number parts illustration; of the item on the circuit diagram or exploded

b) Description of the item; c) Supplier's reference number d) Manufacturer e) Manufacturer's reference

( the part number supplier);

);

(if not the actual number;

and f) Number of items per assembly; Recommended spare parts stock. g)
NOTE - When a part is not specially made by the supplier of the product, the original manufacturer's reference should be quoted in order to permit the user to manage his purchasing and stock holding effectively and rationalize his investment in spare parts.

3.8.1 Use of IllustrationsAll plant items, machines, products and assemblies should be illustrated suitably, preferably by exploded perspective drawings. These not only form the basis of the parts list but are also of great value in the maintenance department to support overhaul and repair work. The annotations on the drawings may be direct (that is, part names or part numbers added directly to the drawings ) or indirect ( reference numbers added to the drawings which key the part to its place in the associated parts list ). The latter method is preferred because it is more flexible if changes are made and facilitates alignment of the numbers at the edge of the drawing for faster reading ( from the supplier's point of view, indirect annotations reduce the cost of incorporating translated part names when export versions of a manual are produced ). 3.8.1.1 The parts list for a system or a complex equipment should be preceded by block diagrams, or general assembly drawings which are keyed to the parts list for the major items. Similar drawings may be necessary to facilitate identification of subunits or major assemblies within a major item. At the lowest level of detail and where individual components of an assembly are shown on an exploded drawing, it is useful to inset a small sketch showing the location of the assembly within the major unit of system. 12

to the product; prior to 3.9 Modification Details -Modifications acceptance, including any made during commissioning (or as post commissioning work by user engineers ) should be recorded to the standards of the presentation used in the rest of a manual. Amendments/ replacement pages should be issued for all sections of a manual whenever necessary including operating procedures, illustrations, lists of parts, technical description and maintenance instructions. The use of looseleaf manuals facilitates updating. Blank pages should be notes of modifications by the user and other comments on the subject or on the manual.
NOTE - All modifications sheets should carry the title and reference number of the manual so that the recipient is made aware of the loss of any amendments in a series. The date of issue should also be stated.

4. PRESENTATION
4.1 The

AND

STYLE

matter should be presented in an organized and consistent way to provide information which is technically accurate and easy-to-use. Information about related products should not be scattered into different sections but should be properly grouped. Frequently consulted data should be similarly located on the pages for each product. A clear statement ` limitations' and warnings/precautions should be given in appropriate sections or grouped under one heading to prevent any possible misuse of the machine. 4.1.1 Wherever necessary, the relevant data should be supplemented by illustrations such as sketches, drawings, photographs, etc. 4.1.2 The imperative form should be used for instructions active voice should be used for descriptive matter. and the

4.1.3 The extent of information provided will depend on the nature of the product and the user's needs; some products will not require any supporting information, while others may require only some of the categories mentioned in 3.1. Accordingly, the producer should select the type of the document ( book or booklet, or pamphlet ) whichever is appropriate to the product being described. 4.2 Front Cover - A front cover may be provided giving the following information on the front cover: a) Reference number of the manual; b) Model or type designation of subject; and c) Title of the manual. 4.2.1 Reference Number of reference number for ease series number, if any (for the case of catalogues in manual should be given a simple This number shall include of identification. example: Catalogue: 2, IIandbook: 2 ). In foreign languages, the symbol indicating the
Manual-A

13

IS : 9637 - 1980
languages should be suffixed to the reference number ( for example: 216E where ` E ' indicates English language ). The reference number shall be given on the front cover of books and booklets and on the first page of pamphlets. The reference number shall appear with title of the manual on the spine of books ( and binders/wrappers/jackets) and the edge of the back cover of booklets (see Fig. 1 ).
t-EDGE kOOKLET OF THE AN0 BACK iOVER PAMPHLEI OF

I
9

-SPINE OF BOOKLEl

10

5,'

FiINCH HOLE

SPINE DETAILS NOT 10 BE GIVEN BELO&' THIS LEVEL THAT IS BETWEEN A AN0 B

FIG. 1 DETAILS ON SPINE AND BACK COVER OF BOOKLET AND PAMPHLET

IS : 9637 - 1980

a title page is not included in the 4.2.2 Date of Publication - Wherever manual ( see4.3 ), the month and year of publication shall be printed on Wherever possible, the the front cover, below the reference number. period of validity of the manual should be stated. 4.2.3 Information on Suberseded Publication shall clearly be stated on the front cover. 4.3 Title-Page
-

Information

on supersession

The title-page shall include the following:

4 Reference number of the manual; b) Model or type designation of subject; 4 Title of the manual; 4 Date of issue; 4 Issue number; f ) Name and address of manufacturer/supplier;

d
h)

Name

of publisher of manual [ if not the same as (f) 1;

Name of author or editor, if desired; and Copyright statement. may not be necessary but the

j)

In the case of a pamphlet, title-page 1 . . , informatlon may be given ersewnere.
4.3.1 The following information, elsewhere in the manual:

where

applicable,

may

be given

a) Information

for obtaining copies of the manual; ( for example, security ) on use of the manual; ( if any );

b) Any limitations

c) Authority for publications d) Record of amendments; e) Translation information

( that is, language versions available );

f ) Notes on use of the manual ( for example, updating procedure); g) Contents list; h) List of useful works of reference j ) List of supplementary k) Warnings, hazards, precautions, 15 and information sources; and or associated publications;

first aid, statutory notices, etc.

IS : 9637 - 1980 5. PRODUCTION 5.1 Size - The size of the document should be one of the sizes in A Series, preferably A4 (210x 297 mm ), specified in IS: 1064-1980*. Any drawing bigger than A4 size may also be included after suitably folding to A4 size. Kinematic schemes, electrical or hydraulic circuits may be accommodated in A3 or A4 sheets.

5.2 Quality of Paper - The factors the quality of paper shall include:

to be considered

in the choice of

a) not so reflective/glossy as to cause discomfort in reading; b) sufficiently opaque to prevent show-through; c) the stability of the dimensions of nomographs, graphs or drawings from which measurements are to be taken; d) the need to reproduee fine details; and e) sufficient strength to withstand rough use at the shop floor. 5.3 Layout
of a Page

5.3.1 Margin - The back margin shall not be less than 25 mm ( 6 em ) for punching and binding for documents.

5.3.1.1 Wherever a document is in the of two or more larger sheets with many leave sufficient margin while printing the when the whole document is folded the along with the margin for punching holes.

form of multi-folder (consisting fold ), care should be taken to matter on each fold, so that required space should be left

text should usually be presented in a single 5.3.2 Columns -The In the case of bilingual documents, matter may appear in column. double column, simultaneously with common figures or illustrations, if any. 5.4 Reproduction 5.4.1 The requirement of legibility should be considered in the choice of the reproduction process and the type face, inter-word spacing, line spacing and line length. Type size of less than 2.75 mm ( 8 point ) shall not be used. However, 3.5 mm ( 10 point ) and above are preferred for the text. 5.4.2 Variation in Type Face -Varied type sizes and colours ( if required ) may be used to emphasize the structure of the document (first, *Specification for paper sizes (wend revision ). 16

IS : 9657 - 19M)

second, and third level headings ) or to distinguish Variation in type face should be kept to the minimum.

terms

or

units.

5.5 Divider Leaves -The divider leaves may be cards and/or The utility of the divider leaves printed in colour to focus attention. will be enhanced if they are shown by projecting tabs or thumbs or key board printing ( mark on the edges of leaves which indicate where different sections are when the document is closed ). The sequence of divider leaves should correspond with major headings in the main contents list.
5.6 Pagination - Pages should be numbered consecutively in international form of numerals. Manuals divided into parts may have the pages numbered separately for each part indicating both part and page number, for example ( 6 - 13 ) indicating Part 6, page 13.

5.7 Binding
5.7.1 Any system of binding giving substantial or permanent anchorage down the left hand side of the document is acceptable, provided it allows the text to lie flat without damage to the spine. The use of loose leaf binders gives additional advantages ( see 3.9 ).

5.7.2 pages.

Covers of loose leaf binders should be larger

to accommodate

5.8 Spine - If the thickness of the spine ( sre Fig.1 ) is 15 mm or more the following information may be given: a) Product classification; b) Reference number of the manual, 4.3 (a) 1, and c) Name of the organization. if applicable [see 4.2.1 and

5.8.1 Details on the spine should not be given up to 100 mm from the lower edge of a book. - A wrapper or a jacket where provided, shall be 5.9 Wrapper/Jacket such that it withstands rough handling at the shop and is not spoiled by greasy material.

17

I8 : 9637 ( Coniinuedfrom

1980
page 2 )

Panel for Presentation of Information in Technical
Convener SHRI Il. NAPASIMHAIAH Representing

Manuals, EC 10 : P3

Office of the Director of Printing, Stationery and Publications ( Government Press ), Bangalore

Members Institution of Engineers, India, Bangalore SHRI R. S. BIR Central Machine Tool Institute, Bangalore SERI V. S. PRAB~AKAR RAO Madura Coats Ltd, Bangalore SERI P. PRATAP LIN~AM Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd, Bangalore S=I M. RANOASHAI SHBI K. L. RAIUDAS ( Alternate ) SHRI N. SRINIVASAMURTHY ( Alternate )

18

