-

I

^

.

IS 9401 (Part

13 ) : 1992

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF WORKS IN RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS ( DAMS AND APPURTENANT STRUCTURES )
PART .._, 13 EARTH AND FILL DAMS

UDC

627.824 : 626.1 : 69.003.12

@ BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDiS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

December

1992

Price Group 2

Measurement

of Works of River Valley Projects

Sectional

Committee,

RVD 23

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 13 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Measurement of Works of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. In the measurement of works of river projects a large diversity of methods exist at present according to local practices. This lack of uniformity creates complications regarding measurements and payments. Keeping in view the large amount of financial outlay involved in river valley projects and also the fact that the authorities responsible for completing these projects, are of the state level or national level, it is felt that a suitable methodology is needed for adopting uniform practices towards the measurement of works so that the scope of complications and misinterpretation of items of work is reduced, as far as possible. This standard is being formulated in various parts so as to cover each type of work separately. This part is intended to provide a uniform basis for measuring the work done in respect of earth and fill dams. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 9401 ( Part 13 ) : 1992

Indian Standard

METHODOFMEASUREMENTOFWORKSIN RIVERVALLEYPROJECTS (DAMSANDAPPURTENANTSTRUCTURES)
PART 13 EARTH AND FILL DAMS

1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 13 ) covers the method for measurement of earth and fill dams. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The Indian Standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to this standard: Title IS No. Method of measurement of 9401 ( Part 1 ) : 1982 works in river valley projects ( Dams and appurtenant structures ) : Part 1 Excavation for foundation Method of measurement of 9401 ( Part 2 ) : 1982 works in river valley projects ( Dams and appurtenant structures ) : Part 2 Dewatering Method of measurement of 940 1 ( Part 3 ) : 1980 works in river valley projects ( Dams and appurtenant structures ) : Part 3 Grouting Method of measurement of 9401 ( Part 6 ) : 1984 works in river valley projects ( Dams and appurtenant structures ) : Part 6 Ventilation pipes and other embedded materials Method of measurement of 9401 ( Part 8 ) : 1985 works in river valley projects (Dams and appurtenant structures ) : Part 8 Instrumentation
3 GENERAL

to the nearest 0.01 ma and cubic contents shall be walked out to the nearest O-01 m3. 3.4 Work executed in the following conditions shall be measured separately: a) Work in or under water b) Work in or under foul tions c) Work under tides positions/condi-

3.1 In booking dimensions the order shall be consistent and generally in the sequence of length, breadth or width and height or depth or thickness. 3.2 Items may be clubbed together provided that the break-up of the clubbed items is agreed to be on the basis of the detailed descriptions of the items stated in the standard. 3.3 All work shall be measured net in the decimal system. Dimension shall be measured to the nearest 0.01 m areas shall be worked out 1

3.4.1 The levels of high and low water tides where occurring shall be stated. 3.5 The items of work shall fully describe the material and workmanship and accurately represent the work to be executed. 3.6 The following work shall not be measured separately and allowance for the same shall be deemed to have been made in the description of the main item: a) Setting out work, profiles, bench marks, etc; b) Site clearance such as cleaning grass and vegetation; c) Unauthorized battering or benching of excavation; d) Preparation of borrow areas; e) Forming ( or leaving ) steps or ramps in the sides of deep excavation and their removal after measurement; f) The labour and material required for taking cross sections; and g) Bailing or pumping out of water in excameasured if not vation frcm rain, separately.
if measured separately, shall NOTE - Dewatering, be according to Part 2 of this standard ( see 2.1 ).

4 CLASSIFICATION

4.1 The materials to be excavated from borrow areas shall be broadly classified as follows: a) Those requiring blasting, and b) Those that can be excavated without blasting.

IS 9401 ( Part 13 ) : 1992 5 EARTHWORK AND FILL

7 STRIPPING

AND BENCHING

5.1 The measurement of earthwork and fill shall be done in cubic metres. The measurement taken shall be those of the authotized dimensions.

7.1 The stripping and benching measured, shall be of the actual work done which shall include all items like excavation, dressing of benches and foundations, rehandling and renioval of materials from site. 8 CUT-OFF TRENCH 8.1 The measurement shall be made as in 5 as per actual work done and shall include items of work i:;cluding excavation of earth, transportation, breaking clods, picking of roots levelling and laying, watering and compaction. It shall include leads and lifts of disposal and shoring where necessary. 9 FOUNDATION GROUTING shall be ( see 2.1 ).

5.2 lrregular areas shall be divided into a number of$igures of known area like triangles, rectangles, etc. The remaining part, which cannot be formed into regular figures may be evaluated by taking out average height drawn on a common base, by Simpson's Rule. In case of irregular volume the volume shall be determined by prismodial formulae. The measurement of each classification material ( fiII ) shall be measured separately. of

Theactual measurement of fill shall be calculated by taking levels at suitable intervals ( normally at 15 m or closer ) cf the original ground before the start of the work after site clearance and stripping, where required, and after compaction of the fill as envisaged in the schedule of work a,ld the quantity of fill computed from these 1eveIs. Deductions shall be made from actual measuremelitsin all claises of fi!ls toarrive at a net measurement of filling based on preaccepted deductions ( stated as a percentage ). The compacted earthfill ( done by means of rollers, etc ) shall be measured separately in cubic metres and shall include formation of slope lines. The actual measurement shall be done as mentioned above and no deduction shall be made for settlement, shrinkage, etc. The volume of structures, specially compacted earthfill ( see 5.2.1 ) and other works, which are measured separately, shall be deducted. If any tests are to be conducted in respect of material or finished work the same shall be specified and included in the item. 5.2.1 The specially compacted earthfill ( in which rollers, etc, cannot be used ) shall be metres separately as measured in cubic mentioned above. 5.3 The item shall include treatment of foundation, laying of layers in uniform specified thickness wit,h specified degree of compaction, removal of roots and vegetations, breaking clods and dressing, preparation of slopes, watering and conducting specified tests with all leads and lifts. 6 EXCAVATION IN FOUNDATION to Part 1

9.1 The method of measurement according to Part 3 of this standard
10 CLAY BLANKET, 10.1 The

ETC

work shall be measured as i,l 5, the gross quantity of hearting, casing, clay blanket, etc, as the case may be, shall be based on these cross sections, in which also shall be indicated separate zones of hearting, casing, clay blanket, filter material, pitching, etc, for facility of arriving at the correct quantity of hearting and casing, etc, that went into the embankment.
11 FILTER 11.1 Measurement of filter shall be done by volume in cubic metres. The description shall indicate the type of material, the method of tamping to the requisite dimensions and shall include supply of material and labour necessary for completing the work. The excavation, if any, shall be measured separately as in 5.

12 RIPRAP of riprap shall be made in volume in cubic metres of the quantity placed. The description of item shall include all operations, type of material and method of placing. Excavation, if done, shall be measured separately as in 5. 13 TURFING 13.1 It shall be measured in square metres. 1`he descripiion of items shall include all operations including supply and transportation of materials, grcwing grass or vines af?er placing rich soil of specified thickness and, if required, watering after placing specified quantity of manure.
12.1 The measurement

6.1 It shall be measured according of this standard ( see 2.1 ).

IS 9401( Part 13 ) : 1992 14 DRAINAGE 14.1 Horizontal SYSTEM Drain 15 RELIEF WELL 15.1 The measurement of relief wells shall be in linear metres of the depth of the well. The description of the item.shall specify the type of material used, type of various well screen, bottom plug, bedding, gravel pack, making of and placing backfill in the the well structure, excavated area outside the embankment. Excavation, if required, shall be measured separately as in 5.

The perforated pipe for horizontal drain shall be measured according to Part 6 of this shall be standard ( see 2.1 ). The excavation measured separately as in 5.
14.2 Vertical Drain

Drilling of drainage holes shall be measured in linear metres cf the depth from the inside face of the concrete, including the portion of the holes formed by pipe inserts, if used. The description of the item shall include types of the pipes and ail labour required to complete the work. 14.3 Rock Toe It shall be measured in cubic metres of the volume placed to the lines and grades as shown in the drawing. The description of the item shall include all materials, operations including the labour required for forming and transportation with all lead and lift.
14.4 Tqe Drain

16 INSTRTJMENTAI'ION 16.1 Instrumentation measured according ( see 2.1 ). as applicable shall be to Part 8 of this standard

17 REMOVAL OF TREES AND HEDGES Clearing areas of shrubs, brush-wood and small trees not exceeding 30 cm in girth, shall be measured in square metres and shall be deemed to include removal and disposal. Cutting down trees exceeding 30 cm girth and over up to 100 cm, shall be enumerated as one item. The cutting down of trees exceeding 100 cm girth shall be enumerated separately stating the girth. The girth shall be measured at 1 m above ground level. The item shall include lopping of branches as well as removal and disposal. Cutting down hedges and removal of fences shall be fully described and measured in running metres and shall be deemed to include removal and disposal. Digging out of roots, including stacking shall be measured separately and enumerated.

The measurement of toe drain shall be in linear metres. The description of item shall include the type of the material used, the method of embedding in filter, preparing and placing bedding materials under and around the pipe/tiles, making joints to the pipe and placing backfill in trenches outside the limits of the dam embankment. Excavation, if necessary, shall be measured separately as in 5.

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards AC?, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and Standard marked products are also continuously checked by operated by the producer. Details of conditions under BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to of standardization, marking and quality promote harmonious development of the activities certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of thes: publications may be reproduced BTS has the copyright of all its publications. in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards if Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be possession of the latest amendments or edition. sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. RVD 23 ( 69 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi Telephones : 331 01 31, 331.13 75

110002 Telegrams ( Common
: Manaksanstha

to all

Offices )

Regional Central
I

Offices :
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur

Telephone Shah Zafar Marg 37 84 99, 1 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 53 23 84 I 235 02 16, `235 15 19, I 110002 700054 160036 331 01 31 75 E331 13~ 37.85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

NEW DELHI
:

bastern
I

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA

horthern Southern Western

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113
? Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGA.LORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh. India

