UDC

635 34 : 664'8'031

IS : 11965 - 1987 IS0 6000-1981
( Reaffirmed 2001 )
Indian Standard

ROUND-HEADED

CABBAGE

-

STORAGE

IN THE

OPEN

National

Foreword

This Indian Standard, which is identical with IS0 6000-I 981 `Round-headed cabbage - Storage in the open' issued by the international Organization for Standardization (ISO), was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the recommendation of the Fruits and Vegetables Sectional Committee and approval of the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. In the in the Indian adopted standard, Standard; attention certain terminology and conventions are not identical is particularly drawn to the following: in Indian Standards, with those used

a) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker, while is to use point ( , ) as decimal marker; and b) Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. This Indian Standard is also applicable Standard' appear,

the current practice

referring

to this standard,

they should

be

to the areas where

the temperature

is sub-zero.

Adopted

28 February 1987 I BUREAU
MANAK

@ March 1988, OF
BHAVAN,

BIS I STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

Or 3

INDIAN

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 11965

IS0 6000 - 1981

- 1987

0

Introduction

The stem of the heads shall be cut between

1 and 2 cm below

the level of the outer leaves; the cut shall be clean and smooth. Cold storage of round-headed cabbage is practically unknown in a number of countries; on the other hand, storage in enclosed spaces, without artificial cooling, is better known, but most round-headed cabbage is commonly stored in clamps (temporary silos) constructed outdoors. This has resulted in the storage technique being largely dependent on local conditions, but, although the simple methods of storage are very well known, it is also necessary ?o describe them.

2.3

Quality
intended for storage shall be whole, fresh in ap-

Cabbages pearance,

undamaged,

sound and healthy,

clean, and, in par-

ticular, free of soil and traces of water. Heads showing signs of attack by parasites or diseases or showing pronounced bruises or deterioration due to freezing shall be rejected. Before storage, it is convenient to remove dead or damaged

1

Scop'e and field of application
Standard lays down guidelines relating to the

outer leaves from the heads. Heads having a mass between for storage in the open air. 2 and 2,5 kg are most suitable

This International

technique of storing round-headed cabbage (Bras&a oleracea var. capitata Linnaeus sv. alba and Brassica olerancea var. capitata sv. rubra) outdoors, to allow a quality suitable for consumption or industrial use to be maintained.

2.4

Putting

into store
maturity and suitable for storage shall Prior to

Cabbage putting

of convenient intp store,

be put into store as quickly as possible after harvesting.

2
2.1

Harvest and storage conditions
Cultivars
described apply equally to all cultivars interest. and other Difen-

however,

the crop shall be dried in a venDuring drying, the outer and adhere tightly to the head.

tilated place protected

against frost.

leaves lose their brittle character

Dried cabbages are less sensitive to damage and disease. The duration of drying shall be 35 to 48 h when cabbages are not sufficiently It is dry during selection. that cabbages be stored at low

The storage techniques of cabbage, ferences vironmental considerably However, suitable compact

the keeping of which' is of economic soil conditions

due to the weather,

recommended

factors in various regions and growing greater than differencies in cultivars.

areas, are

temperatures.

2.5
cabbages for storage; soil. of the late cultivars so are cabbages are generally more grown in light or semi-

Method

of storage

The clamp (a cabbage pile of a roughly triangular cross-section) shall be situated in a location sheltered from water or atmospheric condensation, orientated, if possible, to take into account the prevailing winds. The depth, height, covering and types ventilation of clamps vary according to country; different

2.2

Harvest

Cabbages intended for storage shall be ripe, headed and firm. A late harvest favours cracking during storage. Cabbages storage, harvested and irrigation from humid soils are less suitable be stopped for

of clamps may be combined

:
ventilation covering; channels;

should, therefore, at least

clamps with or without clamps with or without underground

-

15 days before harvesting. They shall be harvested in dry weather, at a temperature below 10 OC. The optimum temperatures range from 0 to 5 "C. To avoid damage caused by not be harvested, handled or temperature is below 0 "C. It is harvested in wet weather be freezing, cabbages shall transported if the outdoor recommended allowed that

or soil surface clamps.

Underground clamps provide better storage conditions, notably more uniform temperatures and hurnidities. However, these types of clamp can be installed only in light and sandy on soils and in dry soils. Soil surface clamps are constructed

cabbages

to dry before storage.

2

IS : 11965 - 1987
IS0 6000 - 1981

compact and heavy soils and on wet soils; in this case, the ground has to be level and clean. The clamps may be of different sizes. For small clamps (width 1 to 1,2 ml, ventilation channels are not usually provided. Such clamps are covered successively with thin layers of insulating materials above the cabbages and by thicker layers of material towards the outside. This allows the required conditions of ventilation to be obtained when the interrial temperature drops. In these small clamps, the amount-of .heat evolved by the cabbages in respiration is lost through the covering layers of the clamps. Also, in clamps without ventilation, the carbon dioxide content increases due to respiration, which is advantageous for the stored cabbage. Larger clamps [width 1,5 to 2,0 m) have to be ventilated in order to be quickly cooled and to expel the excessive heat evolved during respiration in the larger clamps after the cabbage is stored in the autumn. The ventilation channels have to be covered or uncovered according to the internal and external temperatures of the clamp. The depths of underground clamps may be 20 to 60 cm. The ventilation channel, constructed from boards, shall be placed along the longitudinal axis of the clamp with its end protruding for a few centimetres. Ventilation systems vary according to country. Ventilation of the clamps shall be assured by horizontal ventilation channels, of internal dimensions 20 to 30 cm and 40 to 50 cm longer at both ends than the base of the clamp; vertical ventilation channels, of internal dimensions 15 to 20 cm, of height 150 to 160 cm, and 40 to 50 cm higher than the clamp. Allowance should be made for channels every 2 m. The recommended width of clamps is between 100 and 160 cm, and the corresponding height is from 70 to 140 cm (although other recommendations require a minimum width of 160 cm, with a permissible clamp height of up to 200 cm). The length of the clamp may be from 15 to 25 m. The clamp base shall be covered with a layer of clean straw, 10 to 15 cm thick. For outdoor storage in clamps, provision should be made for 15 kg of straw per 100 kg of cabbage. Planks or open-work (lattice) crates may also be used as the foundation. The cabbages should be placed in rows with the cores pointing upwards. Each layer should contain cabbages of the same size. The choice of the method of storage of cabbages in clamps depends upon local circumstances and conditions, but should guarantee that : in autumn, cabbages are cooled as quickly as possible to a temperature of 0 to + 1,0 OC; low and constant temperature and uniform humidity are maintained throughout the clamp for the full duration of storage; there is protection against the temperature dropping below 0 "C.

The methods and materials used for covering the clamps vary according to local conditions and depend on the ambient temperature and atmospheric humidity. The most important factor, however, is the rate of atmospheric precipitation. Thus the following may be used :

a covering of earth (sand) in layers, directly over the cabbages; a single cover put directly on the clamp surface only;

covering of the clamp with straw, cornstalk or other similar material, protected by a plastic film; a straw cover combined with an external covering of earth;
covering with any other material locally available.

It is not necessary to provide a ventilation system if the stored cabbage has been pre-cooled and if there is only a thin covering. For this purpose, the heads of cabbage are stored in two or three layers, in a 300 cm wide clamp, sunk into the ground and covered with a layer of light sandy soil. The covering should allow the cabbage to cool as quickly as possible. When the temperature of the cabbage falls to 0 to + 1 `C, and the outdoor temperature is below freezing point, it is necessary to use a thicker covering, for example an earth layer, 10 to 20 cm thick, then over this, a straw layer 20 to 25 cm thick, and another earth layer, 10 to 15 cm thick. Such covering will be sufficient in the case of temperatures down to -20 OC.. At lower temperatures, the thickness of the covering has to be increased. The different storage methods and the various climatic conditions do not permit specification of the dimensions for clamps. The following data is given for information only.

The mass of 1 m3 of cabbage is about 35O`kg, and, in the case of red cabbage, about 450 kg. Clamps should be placed with the longitudinal sides at least 5 to 6 m apart without the cover; the ends of the clamps should be at least 3 m apart.

-

3

Optimum

storage conditions

Values for temperature, relative humidity, and ventilation rates for clamps in the open cannot be exactly specified, as these parameters are difficult to control and depend on the predominant weather conditions. For this reason, this International Standard does not specify the conditions of storage but specifies the operations necessary for their determination.

3

iS :17965 - 1987
IS0 6000 - 1981

3.1

Optimum

temperature

and its control

3.4

Covering

of the clamps

During storage, the temperature of the clamp should be checked three times a week during autumn, and at least twice a week in winter. The optimum storage temperature is from 0 to + 1 "C. It is necessary to ensure that the temperature in the clamp does not fall below freezing point for extended periods. It is equally dangerous if the temperature in the clamp exceeds 5 to 6 OC, and a temperature greater than 8 OC can provoke deterioration. The temperature shall be measured by means of a thermometer at places 10 m apart along both sides of the clamp. At each place, the thermometer shall be introduced half way up the clamp side, perpendicularly to the layer of earth, and at a depth such that the end of the thermometer reaches the upper surfaces of the cabbages in the clamp. It shall be left from 15 to 20 min in the clamp before the temperature is measured. The clamps shall be regularly checked during storage and all cracks and gaps shall be blocked up. If the outside temperature falls to freezing point, and if the clamp is not covered with snow, it is necessary to protect it by additional layers of earth. For this purpose, corn stalks, straw covered by tarpaulin etc., followed by another layer of earth, may be used. During checking, a collapsed edge, a slumped side, or snow melting more quickly in certain places, is a sign of putrefaction of the cabbages. Sporadic putrefaction of the outer leaves is not a hazard to the stored cabbages, but in the case of significant areas of putrefaction, the clamp must be demolished. If the external air temperature remains at about 5 "C for 4 to 5 days, the earth layer shall be removed; above 10 OC, cabbages cannot be kept for more than a short time.

The constructed clamp shall be loosely covered with a soft straw layer, 20 to 25 cm thick. This straw layer can be made thicker or covered with earth if the external temperature falls to - 1 to - 2 OC, or when the cabbage has properly cooled off.

Earth can also be used directly to cover the clamp - as straw, in contact with the cabbage, may cause mould to grow on the cabbage - by placing a layer of earth only a few centimetres thick over the cabbages. When the clamp has cooled and prior to the advent of a stronger frost, cover the clamp with straw, or any other insulating material, or with a second layer of earth.

If the external temperature continues to decrease and the temperature in the clamp approaches, or reaches freezing point, apply a further layer of earth to the clamp. This settled earth layer shall be of a thickness of about 10 cm. Frozen earth shall not be used. For this purpose, cover the soil adjacent to the clamp, to a width of 50 to 60 cm, with a layer of straw 5 to 10 cm thick prior to the advent of the first frost. Use the earth from under the straw layer for extra covering.. Covering clamps is also important in places where the autumn temperature does not approach freezing point. In this case, cabbage under the thin covering will cool off during the night and warm up less in the day-time.

3.5

Sorting and termination

of storage

3.2

Relative

humidity

The optimum relative humidity is from 85 to 90 % (065 to 0,901; it should be higher, rather than lower, than this value.

If the outside temperature exceeds + 5 OC for a long time, a careful check must be made for damage due to putrefaction. Extensive rot may necessitate the opening of the clamp, thus terminating storage. This is achieved by dismantling the clamp. The cabbages shall be removed from one end (face1 of the clamp. They shall be removed by hand as the use of forks may impair the quality. The opened clamp shall be covered again if there is a risk of frost, but such covering shall be exclusively with straw.

3.3

Duration

of storage

Round-headed cabbage may be stored for a short duration up to December or January, or for a longer period up to March or April.

The cabbages should be carefully sorted and the outer withered or rotten leaves should be removed; the stem should be cut shorter. Afterwards, the recovered cabbages may be marketed after vigorous grading to ensure a quality in accordance with local standards.

4

IS : 11965 - 1987 IS0 6000 - 1981

Annex List of round-headed cabbage

A for long phriods of

varieties recommended outdoor storage

Producting

country Amager,

Recommended Danish durable, bewaarwitte,

varieties

Hungary
Netherlands

and some regional varieties Langedijker bewaargele. Langedijker bewaar-

Langedijker rode

Pdand

Langedijker, Kamiina Zimowa

white and red Glowa

z Mor : Amager, Braunschweig, de EUZ&I, Licurisca

Romania

Whiie Red

: Arges,

L 403. C&p de negru Beloruskaja, Podarok is available from

USSR OTE-TheSstofrecommended

Amager,

Zimovlta,

arieties will be completed

later when further information

other cabbage pmducing

countries.

IS : 11965 IS0 6000

- 1987 - 1981

Annex

B

Comments
The following comments refer to the role of the area of producdifficulties of storage. example in the case of fustiness that has not yet spread extensively, by selection, moving and cooling, after which the sound heads can remain in storage. In more serious cases, and after the apparition of mould, the cabbages are no longer worth storing in clamps.

tion and to unforeseen

B.l

Role of the area of production
method which influences) manifest themselves

(Ecological

and production These

influences,

in the case of

B.2.2

Freezing
are brittle, and wither and On cutting, frozen the leaves cabbage stored. thawing,

round-headed

cabbage

put into cold store, are equally valid in The outer leaves of frozen cabbage influences

the case of cabbage The following

stored in clamps. unfavourable

are especially

:

turn yellow after having been thawed. appear vitreous and brown. After must be used immediately

-

premature

or late harvest,

having possibly run to seed;

as it cannot be further

heads not sufficiently soils over-treated soils;

compact; fertilizers, or moist

B.2.3

Grey mould

Wotry~is cinerea)
fusty, or damaged cabbages.

with nitrogenous

This appears which

usually on moist,

and compact -

The diseased leaves are covered by a layer of grey mould under the leaves will brown and by protecting and decay. The advent, of grey from mechanical of the cabbage; loss of leaves, or mould can be prevented and storage, damage. by careful handling during preparation the cabbages

harvest in the rainy season, wetness lesions caused by frost, excessive

stems cut too short.

B.2

Unforeseen

difficulties

in storage

8.2.4

Black

vein Pseudomonas
infected

campestris) in the area of pro-

Taking into account storage,

the range of diseases which can occur in

The plant becomes

with microbes

only a brief review is given.

duction. The microbes propagate within the veins of the cabbage leaves, making the veins black. Often the disease is only visible after splitting the head. The diseased cabbage should not be used even for forage.

8.2.1

Moisture

or frost
may become treatment, for

Cabbage stored in a moist or frozen condition
fusty. This can be prevented by appropriate

During

selection,

check for bacterial showing

infection

by boring and

store only the cabbages

no signs of infection.

6

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

