Is:22Q4-1962
( Reaffirmed 2000 )

Indian

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF REINFORCED CONCRETE SHELL ROOF
(Eighth Reprint OCTOBER 1989 )

UDC

69.024.4:624.074.4

@ Copyright

1962

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 6

December

1962

IS:2244-1962

Indian

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF REINFORCED CONCRETE SHELL ROOF
Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, BDC 13 Chairman .SHRIN. G. DEIVAN Members
Sam J. P. J. BILLIBXORIA DIRECTOR DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( A~CEITECTURE ) SHR~ C. M. GOVEA~ SHRX S. K. JO~LEKAR SERX S. B. JOSHI SHRI R. N. JOSHI ( Alfernak SHRI V. S. KAMAT
SHRI V. KANDASWAXY SHRI B. P. KAPADIA SHIU KEWAL KRISHAN

Representing
Central Public Works Department lndian Institute of Architects Hyderabad Engineering Reseerah Hyderabad Research, Designs and Standsrds ( Ministry of Railways ) Atomic Energy Commission Central Public Works Department S.B. Joshi & Co, Bombay

Laboratory, Crgeni88tion

Hindustun Construction Co. Ltd, Bombay Central Zone Subcommittee, BDC 13 : 7, ISI Builders' Association of Indi8, Bombay Public Works Department, Punjabi and .Northern Zone Subcommittee, BDC 13 : 8, IS1 National Buildings Grgenization `(Ministry of SHRI C. P. MALIK Works, Housing & Supply ) SHRI M. A. HAFE~Z ( Alternate 2) `Eastern Zone Subcommittee, BDC 13 : IO, ISI SHRI N. M. MALKANI Concrete Association of Indie;and Western Zone SHRI K. K. NAYBIAR Subrommitbee, BDC 13 : 9, ISI SHRI N. H. MOHILE ( Alfernate ) Forest Research Institute & Colieges, Dehra Dun; DR D. NARAYANAMURTI and Timber Engineering Subcommittee, BDC 13 : 4, ISI Hindusten Housing Factory, New Delhi SHRI D. J. PATEL Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi;~d Building BRIG K. B. RAI Measurement Subcommittee, BDC &3 : 1,15X SHBI M. L. RAHEJA Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Hsadqutntsrs SHRX D. D. BORKER ( Alternate ) Institution of Engineers ( India ) SHRI RAM BILAS National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd, Sn~r V. SA~KA~AN New Delhi Directorate General of Xealth Services (Ministry SHRXJ. D. SHASTRI of Heelth )

)

( Continued on page 2 ) BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
%;\Fr\K hli\RC

9 IhZH.\DUR SIlhH NE\Y DELHI 110~02

Is: 2204.1962
( Continuedfrom puge 1 )

Members
SUPERINTENDINO ENC+~NEER ( DESIGNS ) PWD, MADRAS LT-GEN H. WILLIAMS

Representing
Public Works Department, Medres, and Southern Zone Subcommittee, BDC 13 : I , IS1 Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR j, Roorkeo IS1

SHRI H. V. MIRCKANDANI ( Alternate ) Director, DR H. C. VISVESVARAYA, Deputy Director ( Bldg )

( Ex-officio Member )

Secretary
SHRI S. P. RAMAX Assistant Director ( Bldg ), IS1

Western Zone Subcommittee,
Convener
S~BI K. K. NAMLIIAR Concrete Association

BDC 13 : 9
of India

Members
SARI JAL. N. BHARUCHA SHRX D. S. BORXE~ SHBI RUTON J. DUBASH SHBI M. K. JADHAV SHBI B. P. KAPADIA SEBI G. B. MEATRE Saar N. H. MOEILE SHIU T. N. S. RAO SHRI P. M. APTE ( Alternate ) SOPEBINTENDINC) ENQINEEB, BOMBAY CI~TBAL CIBCLE SBRI K. V. TEADANEY SHBI D. S. THAKUR SHRI C. SOARES ( Alternate ) Nerim8n B. Bherucha & Sons, Bombay Public Works Department, Government of Mahereehtra In personal capecity ( Consulting Engineer, Prospect Government of Mehereshtre Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay In personal capacity ( Chartered Architect, Prospect Concrete Association Gaimmon India Ltd.

Chambers Annexe, Dadabhoy Naoroji Road, Fort, Bombay )

Chambers Annexe, Fort, Bombay )

Dadabhoy Naoroji Road,

of India Bombay

Central Public Works Department ConCr8ti Association of India Bombay Municipal Corporation

IS : 2204- 1962

Indian

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF REINFORCED CONCRETE SHELL ROOF
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards InstiA tution on 22 October 1962, after the draft finalized by the Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee had been approved by the Building Division Council. 0.2 Reinforced concrete shell roofs are chosen commonly for covering large clear areas using the minimum of intermediate supports, such as in factory buildings, godowns, power stations, garages, island platforms of railway stations, stadia, etc. 0.2.1 This standard is intended to give a general guidance to those engaged in the construction of reinforced concrete shell roofs. Because of the multiplicity of shapes employed in modern shell construction, it is difficult to lay down rules which will have a universal application. It needs hardly be emphasized that the design and construction of sheil roofs is a specialized job and the specifications of the designer shall always prevail over the general regulations laid down in this standard. 0.3 The Sectional Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has taken into consideration the views of builders and technologists and has related the standard to the building practices followed in the country in this field. Due weightage has also been given to the need for international co-ordination among standards prevailing in different countries of the world. 0.4 Wherever a reference to any Indian Standard appears in this code, it shall be taken as a reference to the latest version of the standard. 0.5 Metric system has been adopted in India and all quantities dimensions in this standard have been given in this system. and

0.6 For the purpose of deciding wh ther a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, th e-fie nal value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960 Rules for Rounding Off Numerical Values ( Revised ). The number of significant places retained in the rounded

IS:2204-1962
off value standard.

should he the same as that of the specified value in this

0.7 This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical provisions relating to reinforced concrete shell roof construction, and it dots not cover all the necessary provisions of a contract.

1.S This standard covers the in-situ construction shells of single and double curvature.
X,3 Shells of light weight concrete this standard. 2. TERMINOLOGY 28 For apply*

of reinforced

concrete

1.2 Precast and prestressed shells are not covered in this standard.

are also excluded from the scope of

the purpose of this standard,

the following definitions shall

2.1 Shell Dimensions 2.1.1 Chord Width (see sf the arc of the shell. B in Fig.
1)The horizontal projection

2.1.2 Radius - Radius at any point of the skin in one of the two principal directions in the case of cylindrical shells. NOTE - Ifs circukr BTC is used, the rsdiua of the 8rc is the radius of shell. In other cases, the redius R et any point ia related to the radius R, at the orown by R E R. ccmn4, where # is the alope of the tengent to the curve 8t that point. The value of n is I I -2 and -3 fur the cycloid, the oeten8ry end the purbole respectively. For an ellipse

R= @iii

-__-____

+ 6s co@ $ ) ,f
of the

as 6s

a and 14 we the semi-major end eemi-minor 8Xe8 end 4 is the S* fsngent 8t the point.

rise of the shell at any rection is 2J.3 Rise ( see fin Fig. 1 ) -The the vertical distance between the lower springing level and the highest Ievcl or apex of the shell. 2.1.4 Semi-centA Angle (see q$ in Fig. 1 ) -This is half the angle subtended by the arc of a symmetrical circular shell at the ctntrt. 4

IS:2204-1962 2.1.5 Span (see L in Fig. 1 ) - As referred to a cylindrical shell, this is the distance between the centre lines of `two adjacent end frames or traverses.

EDGE

MEMUER

\

.
END FRAME OR TRAVERSE

FM.

1

SIMGE

BAEBEI,

Sxlru

2.2 Types 2.2.1 Barrel Shells the crown. Cylindrical shells which are symmetrical about

2.2.2 Butterfly Shells - Butterfly shells are those which consist of two parts of a cylindrical shell joined together at their lower edges ( see Fig. 2 ). 2.23 Continuous Cylindrical Shells - Cylindrical shells longitudinally continuous over the traverses ( sty Fig. 3 ). 2.2.4 Corrugated Shells surface ( see Fig. 4). Shells which have corrugations which on are their

23.5 Cylindrical Shells - Shells generated a straight line or vice versa. Barrel shells 5

by a curve moving on (see Fig. 1 ), north light

1532204-1962

F1o.2 BUTTI~~FLY SHELL

,
Fio. 3

CONTINUOUS BARREL SEELU

6

IS:2204-1962
cylindrical shells, and butterfly shells are common examples of this type. of cylindrical (d) catenary

The common curves employed for the cross section shells are (a) arc of a circle, (b) semi-ellipse, (c) parabola, and (e) cycloid (see Fig. 5).
NOTE -The

.the tangents

semicircle, the semi-ellipse and the cycloid have the advantage that at the ends are vertical and hence the horizontal thrusts transferred

FIG. 4

CORRUGATEDSHELL

5A

Arc of a Circle

5B

Semi-ellipse

%

Parebola,

5D

Inverted

Cetenary

Fro.

5

5E Cycloid COMMON CURVES USED FOR ` DIRECTRICES' OF CYLINDBICAL SHELUJ

JS : 2204 - 1962 to the edge membersare negligible.but these shapesare somewhatdifficultto conetruct. By frtr the most common curve employed in modern cylindrical ehell construction is the segment of 8 circle. 2.2.6 Multiple Cylirtdrical shells ( see Fig. 6) cylindrical shells which are traversely continuous. A series of parallel

FIN. 6

MULTIPLE BARR~~L SRELI~

2.2.7 North-Light Cyiindrical Sfiells - Cylindrical shells with the two springings at different levels and built in sing!e or multiple bays and having provisions for north-light glazing ( see Fig. 7 )_
surface which can be generated entirely by a 2.2.0 Ruled Surfaces -A straight line, The surface is said to be singly ruled if at every point a single straight line only can be ruled and `doubly ruled ' if at ever) Cylindrical shell and conoid point two straight lines can be ruled. ( see Fig. 8 ) are examples of singly ruled surfaces, and .hyperbolic paraboloid ( see Fig. 9A and 9B ) and inverted umbrella ( see Fig. 10 ) are examples of doubly ruled surfaces. Ruled surfaces have a practical advantage that they can be formed Doubly ruled surfaces obviously have by straight plank shuttering. greater advantage for shuttering than singly ruled surfaces. 2.2.9 Shells of RevoiutionThose generated by curves revolved about Examples are segmental domes (see Fig. 11 ), iheii axis of symmetry. paraboloids of revolution and hyperboloids of revolution. The term ` hyperboloid of revolution `) unless otherwise qualified, will mean hyperboloid of revolution of one sheet. 2.2.10 Shell Roof-Curved surfaces in which the thickness is small as compared to the radius and other dimensions. 8

6

#------____-_---+----_--__

-____-------___'

I!3:2204-1962

9A

9B Fxo. 9 HYPBBBOLIO PABABOLOID

11

FIG. 10 INVERTED UMBRELLA

Fro. 11 SEC+MEWTAL DOME

is the surface generated when one 2.2.11 Xranslational Shell -This curve moves parallel to itself along another curve, the planes of the two curves being at right angles to each other. As a special case, one or both the curves may be straight lines. Examples are ` hyperbolic paraboloids ' ( generated by a convex parabola moving over a concave parabola or vice versa ), ` elliptic paraboloids ' ( see Fig. 12 ) ( generated by one parabola moving over another parabola, both being convex), and "cylindrical shells `. 2.3 Components of Shell Roof -

See Fig. 1.

2.3.1 Common Edge Member ( Intermediate Beam or Rib ) - The common edge member provided at the junction of two adjacent multiple shells. 12

IS:2204-1962

Fm. 12 ELLIPTIOPABABOLOID

2.3.2 End Frames or Traverses - E&l frames
provided 2.33 to support and preserve the geometry provided

or traverses are structures of the shell. at the edge of the shell. is said to shell and

Edge Member - -4 member

233.1 An edge member or traverse or a portion thereof be ( up-stand' when it projects above the extrados of the ` down-stand' when it projects below intrados of the shell. 3. NECESSARY INFORMATION

3.1 For the efficient construction of shell roofs, detailed information with regard to &e following shall be furnished by the designer to the builder: Working drawings showing the orientation and arrangement of shells, dimensions, details of reinforcement including exact positioning, and other salient features, such as arrangement of north lighting, skylight, roof drainage, construction joints and expansion joints, etc. 3.2 Before the construction, the builder shall give detailed consideration to the design and fabrication of formwork and centering. The details of hrliiwork and the sequence of erection and release of formhork use:1 in shell construction shall be as approved by the designer. 4. DESIGN 4.1 Slope CONSIDERATiONS Generally, if the slope of the shell 13 exceeds 45", it will bt,

Is:2204-1962
too steep for easy concreting ( see Note ). and will necessitate the use of backforms

NOTE -It is the experience of some builders that concreting can be done without the use of backforms up to a slope of 60' if it is for short distances, and with cautioas tamping, satisfatitory compaction of concrete even up to a slope of 65O would be possible without backforms.

4.2 Thickness 4.2.1 The thickness of singly-curved shells shall, in no case, be less It is the usual practice to thicken the shells near the edges than 5 cm. and the traverses.
4.2.2 The thickness of shells of double-curvature shall, in no case, be less than 4 cm. This minimum thickness is adequate, as shells of double curvature are non-developable and hence are more resistant to buckling. Moreover, flexural stresses are small. 4.3 End Frames or Traverses - An ` end frame ' or ` traverse ' is provided to preserve the shape of the shell. It may be a solid diaphragm, an Where a clear soffit is arch rib, a portal frame or a bowstring girder. required, especially where travelling formwork is employed, the end frames may consist of up-stand ribs. 4.4 Reinforcement

4.4.1 The diameter of reinforcement shall not be less than the unthickened portion of the shell, and shall not be greater following limits:
10 mm dia 12 mm dia 16 mm dia

5 mm in than the

For shells from 4 cm up to less than 5 cm thick For shells from 5 cm up to less than 6.5 cm thick For shells 6.5 cm and ness over in thick-

4.4.1.1 The maximum diameters specified in 4.4.1 apply only to the Larger diameters for reinforcement unthickened portion of the shell. will be permissible subject to the approval by the designer. 4.4.2 The maximum spacing of reinforcement in any direction shall be limited to five times the thickness of the shell and the area of unreinforced panel shall in no case exceed 15 d2 where d is the thickness of the shell. 4.4.3 The total depth occupied by reinforcement in the direction of thickness in the unthickened portion of the shell shall not exceed three times the maximum permissible diameter for reinfor ct mcnt 2s specified in 4.4.1.

14

IS:2204-1962 4.5 Mix Proportions for Concrete 4.5.1 Generally, a nominal mix of 1 : 2 : 4 (by nominal volumes ) may be used for shells of medium dimensions and a nominal mix by volume of 1 : 14 : 3 for very large shells. In no case shall the nominal mix for concrete used in shell construction be lower than 1 : 2 : 4. It is, however, desirable that the required strength for concrete is arrived at from considerations of stresses in the shell and its elastic stability, and the mixes specified by strength rather than by nominal volumes. Rich mixes will be generally undesirable as the concrete shrinks more, giving rise to cracks.
4.5.2 Wherever feasible, the maximum size of aggregate shall be 20 mm. If there are difficulties in placing such a concrete, the maximum size may be restricted to 12 mm provided the requirements for strength are satisfied. NOTE - ` 20 mm maximum size ' of eggregste corrwponda to * 12 mm nominal size ' according to *IS : 383-1952Specification for Coarse and Fine Aggregates from
Netural Sources for Concrete.

4.5.3 It is advisable to use an air-entraining agent so that satisfactory workability is obtained without increasing the water content of the mix. Concrete having excessive water contents should be avoided as it is likely to slip down steep slopes. 5. SEQUENCE OF CONSTRUCTION

5.1 Shells may have edge members which are designed to act in unison

with the shells; adjacent shells may also have been designed to take the loads in unison. For ease and economy of construction, however, it is generally necessary to construct the various elements separately. In order that the .final stress pattern in the completed structure may conform as closely as possible to that assumed by the designer, it is necessary that the designer should specify the essential conditions The actual sequence proposed governing the sequence of construction. by the builder shall be subject to the designer's approval before construction starts on any of the elements of the shell structure and this sequence shall not be varied without the designer's approval.

5.2 In the type of shell roofs, covered by this standard, the following sequence of construction may generally be used at preliminary stages of planning the construction work: Type a) Single shell

Stage
I

Operation
Erection of formwork for the edge members the traverses, and fabrication and placing of reinforcement and concreting with 15

Remarks
Wherever economitally feasible, consideration may be given to the erection Gf the formwork for the entire shell unit

*Since revised.

Operation such portion of shell as reinforcement shown in the drawings.

Remarks including the edge member and the traverse. However, it shall be ensured that the formwork for the member and edge traverse is not in any way connected with the formwork of the shell proper.

II

III

IV V VI VII b) l$$ple

Removal of formwork required leaving supports. Erection of formwork for the entire shell, fabrication and placing of steel therein and concreting. Curing. Removal of formwork. Waterproofing and insulating. Finishing. Multiple shells do not generally exceed four or at the most five in number in one series depending on the deGgner's requirements for expansion joints. For multiple shells the stages of construction will be the same as those for single shells. However, unless otherwise provided for in the design, supports required for the edge beams, traverses and shells in one series shall remain till the entire series is completed. 16

is : 2204 - 1962 6. FORMWORK 6.1 Smce shape is the essence of shell design and thicknesses are small, greater care shall be exercised in the tiesign and erection of formwork _ . __ . . _ .._. and special attention shall be paid to minimizing the differential settlement of the centering and of the props supporting them. Where repetitions justify, formwork in panels or mobile units may be considered. Details for mobile units, if used, shall be worked out by the builder. If the formwork is to be used a great number of times, the surface of the forms shall be of firm construction to give the required repetitions. A hard and smooth surface for the form may eliminate the need for plastering, thus effecting economy. Where no additional decorative treatment is to be carried out, the designers may specify the general pattern to be left on the intrados by the formwork. 6.2 Formwork :Lall be designed and erected lend itself to be removable as specified in 11. 7. PLACING OF REINFORCEMENT 7.1 The reinforcement in shell structure including edge members, traverses, etc, shall be placed as shown in the drawing accompanying the design. To ensure monolithic connection between shell and the edge members, the shell reinforcement shall bc adequately anchored into the edge members or vice versa, by providing suitable bond bars from the edge members to the shell. 7.1.1 Reinforcement in the ShellAs far as possible, hooks shall be avoided in the shell and adequate laps or welded joints as specified by the designer shall be provided in straight lengths. If at all hooks are to br provided forreinforcement in the shell, they shall be kept parallel to the plane of the shell. Only the minrmum number of lengthening joints in the bars shall be used and the joints shall be staggered.
NOTE -Welding ia rarely adopted in the CURBof reinforcement placed within the thickness of the shell. However, if it is requi.ed that the reinforcement shall be welded, only lap welding shall be adopted.

in such

a manner

as to

7.1.2 Reinforcement in edge me: Sers may be lapped, welded, or provided with special couplings with or without welding. If butt welding is used, it shall be done with extreme caution for successful results. 7.1.3 Provision of special couplings may be advantageous in edge members of large spans as it would avoid congestion of bars ( see Note ) due to laps and hooks. In such cases, the details and positioning of couplings shall be decided by the designer. - The problom of conge&on in reinforcement will, however, NOTIS serious with the use 19 prostressed conoreta oonatruction. 17
become less

IS:

2204-1962

7.2 A minimum cover of 12 mm shall be provided for the reinforcement. For regulating the cover, accurately made and matured precast The reinforcement shall be mortar or concrete pieces shall be used. The reinforcement may be securely correctly placed and firmly fixed. tied or welded so that the spacing of the bars is correctly maintained. 8. MIXING

CONCRETE

concrete shall be mixed in accordance with the requirements specified for concrete in*IS : 456-1957 Code of Practice for Plain and ( Revised), and Reinforced Concrete for General Buildin g Construction also the special instructions, if any, of the designer. 8.2 Unless otherwise specified by the designer, the maximum size of the aggregates shall be 20 mm and the aggregate shall conform to TIS : 383-1952 Specification for Coarse and Fine Aggregates from Natural Sources for Concrete. 9. CASTING OF THE SHELL

8.1 The

9.1The

full thickness of,the shell The positioning of the construction designer.

shall be concreted in one operation. joints shall be as indicated by the shall be concreted first. as

The portion of an up-stand member, if any, soon as possible after the concreting of the shell. 9.2 Edge members and end frames shall of 4 cm for the concrete will be sufficient. be

concreted

A slump

9.3 For casting the shell either hand tamping or mechanical compaction by vibrators may be used. The concrete shall have a slump of not less than 5 cm, if hand tarnping is used. Concreting may be done in panels of convenient dimensions and shape. In the case of singlycurved shells, the panel should be laid parallel to the curved edge in order to limit the effect of shrinkage; each panel shall be started at the lowest level and worked upwards. In the case of doubly curved shells, the arrangement of panels shall be decided by the designer giving due consideration to shrinkage effects. Mechanical compaction shall be done by using screed vibrators generally. Needle vibrators may be used in thickened portions of the shell as advised by the designer; however, use of needle vibrators shall be restricted to edge members or thickened portions of the shell where the depth will be sufficient to accommodate these vibrators. 9.4 Concreting shall preferably or during the night in summer. -*Second revision in 1964. t Since revised. be done in the cool hours of the morning

18

Is:22@4-1%2 9.4.1 Special care shall be taken in tamping the concrete stand stiffening members which are usually deep. in down-

9.5 Concrete shall be finished to the correct curve as set by template. This may be done either continuously or by alternate-bay method. 9.6 Thickness of the shell shall be regulated by using templates of corresponding thickness. This thickness of the shell shall also be accurately checked at typical points in between the thickness guides on the shell. 9.7 Proper arrangements shall be rr.Jde to avoid displacement of steel during placing of concrete by providing walkways above the level of the finished concrete and supported and free from the reinforcement at intervals so as to avoid disturbance of the reinforcement. 9.8 Construction Joints -Construction They shall preferably the curve. shear stress, as for example, along construction joints shall be finished will effectively bond with the old. next day, the joints shall be cleaned cement slurry. 9.9 The surface of the concrete joints shall invariably be along be located along a line of zero The the directrix at mid-span. in such a way that new concrete When the work is commenced the with wire brushes and slushed with

shall be finished vith wooden floats.

9.10 The portions of the shell that are already cast shall be effectively protected from exposure to sudden rains by means of tarpaulins and similar coverings. 9.11 When concreting proceeds, cubes of concrete shall be taken out from each day's work for purpose of testing and verification of its quality. 10. CURING 10.1 In a shell roof, the ratio of the exposed area to the volume of concrete is relatively much larger in comparison with normal reinforced Hence, extreme care is required in keeping concrete structures. the surface sufficient!y damp for curing. As soon as concrete has sufficiently hardened to prevent damage to it, it shall be kept continuously moist for the first 24 hours by covering the surface with wet Thereafter, the surface shall be kept continucanvas or gunny bags. ously moist for a period of at least 10 days by sprinkling water or by covering it with gunny bags or similar materials which are sprayed over with water periodically; alternatively curing compounds may be used with the approval of the engineer in-charge.

ISt2204-1962 11. DECENTERING 11.1 The process of decentering shall be gradual and without shock and so controlled that the .ovcrall stress pattern in the structure, at any stage of decentering is reasonably similar to the pattern expected in the design. Supports of adjacent edge members may have to be lowered The decentering procedure to simultaneously with those of the shell. be actually adopted shall be subject to the designer's approval.
NOTE 1 - As D general guido, the decentering may commenre when concrete has attained a strength equal to twice the maximum dead load stress multiplied by a factor equnl to FcjFb, where Fc = ultimate crushing sfrength of concrete, and Fb = ultimate buck!ing strength of ihe concrete in tho shell. NOTE 2 - Generally in the absence of test results on cubes, the centering of the shell may be removed at the end of 14 days, and the decentering the bottom shuttering of the edge members and the end frames may be done at the end of 21 days. Uy casting the latter a week in advance of tho shell, it will be possible to strike the centering of the shell, the edge members and the end frames on the same day.

12. EXPANSION JOINTS 12.1 Expansion joints shall be provided in accordance with the design and specification of the designer (see relevant provisions of IS : 2210-1962 Criteria for the Design of Reinforced Concrete Shell Structures and Folded Plates ). Complete structural isolation of the roof members shall be effected at the expansion joints with a clear gap of not less than 2 cm. It may also be necessary; sometimes, The gap shall be filled with an elastic filler, to have double columns. and the waterproofing carried across the joint without a break. 13. LIGHTING AND OTHER FIXTURES 13.1 Skylights, when provided, the shell very near the crown.
may be at the crown or on the slope of or

13.2 After completion of shells, no fittings suspended from the shell without the approval

shall be embedded of the designer.

14. THERMAL INSULATION 14.1 Thermal
insulation may be provided by the following methods:

a) By application of light-weight insulating concrete, foamconcrete, cork, etc, over the shell roof; b) By providing an air gap between the shell and any rigid form of waterproofing, such as asbestos sheets; 20

I!3:2204-1%2
c) By casting the shell over rigid boards that provide thermal acoustic insulation; and and

d) By spraying on the underside of the shell a coating of insulating material, such as asbestos. 14.2 Whatever type of thermal insulation is adopted, the net weight of the insulation layer shall not exceed that assumed in the design, and the designer shall always specify this weight. 15. WATERPROOFING 15.1 Waterproofing following methods proofing. of shell roofs may be carried out by any of the or any other accepted method of flexible waterof bitumen-hessian process, bituminous felts, or

a) By application cold bitumen;

b) By lining with aluminium foils; and c) By lining with asbestos sheets. 1512 Adequate waterproofing. slope for drainage of water shall be made in the

15.3 Whatever method of waterproofing is adopted, the net weight of the waterproofing layer shall not exceed that assumed in the design and the designer shall always specify this weight. 16. FINISHING 16.1 After completion of the shell, the inside may be given a rubbed The rubbing may be done with an abrasive finish, if so required. stone.

21

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

S TANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Regional Offices: Telephone Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 331 01 31 NEW DELHI 110002 331 1375 I *Eastern : l/l 4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, 36 24 99 Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, 21843 CHANDIGARH 160036 I 3 1641 41 24 42 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 41 25 19 1 41 2916 tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093 Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Branch Offices: `Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur. 2 63 48 AHMADABAD 380001 I 2 63 49 +,Peenya Industrial Area 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road 38 49 55 BANGALORE 560058 I 38 49 56 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor. Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, ' 6 67. 16 BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82/83.-Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5 36 27 531'5. Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 3 31 77 GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), 23 1083 HYDERABAD 500001 63471 R14 Yudhister Marg. C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 { 6 98 32 21 68 76 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 ( 21 82 92 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 6 23 05 T.C. No. 14/1421. Universitv P.O.. Palayam 16 21 04 TRIVANDRUM 695035 16 21 17 inspection Oifices ( With Sale Point ): Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, 2 51 71 Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 5 24 35 PUNE 411005
*Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhre Approach, P. 0. Princep 27 68 00 Street. Calcutta 700072 tSales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambera, Grrnt Road, 89 6628 Bombay 400007 $Saler Office in Bangalore is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, 22 36 71 Bangalore 560002

Reprography

Unit,

BE,

New Delhi,

India

