**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 690 (1988) : Method for Determination of Colour Fastness 
of Textile Materials to Sea Water [TXD 5: Chemical Methods 
of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS : 690-1988 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 



METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF COLOUR 

FASTNESS OF TEXTILE MATERIALS 

TO SEA WATER 

(First Revision) 



UDC 677-016-474 : 535685- 15 



© Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 



Gr 1 December 1988 



IS : 690-1988 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF COLOUR 

FASTNESS OF TEXTILE MATERIALS 

TO SEA WATER 

( First Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard (First Revision) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
20 May 1988, after the draft finalized by the Che- 
mical Methods of Test Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Textile Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1956 
and has been revised to align it with ISO 105/E- 
1978 Textiles— Tests for colour fastness E02 
Colour fastness to see water, issued by the Inter- 
national Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
and also to incorporate changes in line with other 
standards on colour fastness tests. 



0.3 Colour fastness of textile materials is of consi- 
derable importance to the consumer. The fast- 
ness depends not only upon the nature and depth 
of shade of the dyestuff used but also upon the 
nature of the fibre and the method of dyeing or 
printing employed; the same colouring matter, 
when used in dyeing or printing different fibres 
or when applied by different methods upon the 
same fibre, may give vastly different results. 
Formulation of standard methods of test for 
determining colour fastness of textile materials 
to different agencies likely to effect change in 
colour is, therefore, necessary. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for the 
determination of colour fastness of textile materials 
of all kinds and in all forms to immersion in sea 
water. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 A specimen of the textile in contact with speci- 
fied adjacent fabrics is immersed in sodium 
chloride solution, drained and placed between 
two plates under a specified pressure in a testing 
device. The specimen and the adjacent fabrics 
are dried separately. The change in colour of 
the specimen and the staining of the adjacent 
fabrics are assessed with grey scales. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sample to determine conformity of a lot of 
coloured textile material to a specification shall 
be selected so as to be representative of the lot. 

3.2 Sample drawn in compliance with the relevant 
material specification or as agreed to between 
the buyer and the seller to evaluate colour fastness 
of the material in the lot shall be representative 
of the lot. 

4. APPARATUS 

4.1 Testing Device — consisting of a frame of 
stainless steel into which a weight-piece of mass 



5 kg and a base of 11-5 cm x 6 cm is closely 
fitted, with glass or acrylic resin plates of the 
same size and of 0-15 cm thickness. In this case, 
the size of the composite specimen must be 
10 cm x 4 cm. 

Note 1 — Suitable testing devices are the hydrotest, 
the perspiration tester and the perspirometer. If the 
dimensions of the composite specimen differ from the 
size of 10 cm x 4 cm, such a weight piece has to be used 
so that a pressure of 12' 5 kPa is applied to the specimen. 

Note 2 — Other devices may be used provided the 
samer esults are obtained as with the apparatus described 
in 4.1. 

4.2 Air Oven — maintained at 37 ± 2°C 

4.3 Two Adjacent Fabrics — each measuring 10 
cm X 4 cm, one piece made of the same kind of 
fibre as that of the textile to be tested or that 
predominating in the case of blends, the second 
piece made of the fibre as indicated below or in 
the case of blends, of the kind of fibre second in 
order of predominance, or as otherwise specified 



If the First Adjacent 
Fabric is 


Second Pie* 


Cotton 


Wool 


Wool 
Silk 


Cotton 
Cotton 


Linen 


Wool 



Viscose 



Wool 



1 



IS : 690 - 1988 



Acetate or triacetate 
Poiyamide 
Polyester 
Acrylic 



Viscose 

Wool or cotton 
Wool or cotton 
Wool or cotton 



4:4 Grey Scales — for evaluating change in 
colour and staining. 

5. REAGENT 

5.1 Sodium Chloride Solution — containing 30 g 
of pure sodium chloride per litre of distilled water. 

Note — Pure sodium chloride shall mean sodium 
chloride that does not contain impurities which affect 
the test results. 

6 PREPARATION OF COMPOSITE 
SPECIMEN 

6.1 If the textile to be tested is fabric, place a 
specimen 10 cm X 4 cm between two adjacent 
fabrics ( 4,3 ) and sew along one of the shorter 
sides to form a composite specimen. 

6.2 If the textile to be tested is yarn, knit or weave 
it into fabric and treat as in 6.1 or form a layer 
of parallel lengths of it between the two adjacent 
fabrics ( 4.3 ), the amount of yarn taken being 
approximately equal to half the combined mass 
of the adjacent fabrics and sew along two opposite 
sides to hold the yarn in place and to form a com- 
posite specimen. 

6.3 If the textile to be tested is loose fibre, comb 
and compress an amount approximately equal 
to half the combined mass of the adjacent fabrics 
( 4.3 ) into a sheet 10 cm x 4 cm. Place the 
sheet between the two adjacent fabrics, sew along 
all four sides to hold the fibre in palce and to 
form a composite specimen. 

7. PROCEDURE 

7.1 Wet each composite specimen thoroughly 
in separate container by immersion in sodium 



chloride solution ( see Note ) at room tempera- 
ture. Pour off the solution and place the com- 
posite specimen between the two glass or acrylic 
resin plates measuring 11 -5 cm x 6-0 cm x 1-5 
cm under a pressure of 12*5 kPa. Keep the 
glass plates in position in the Perspirometer ( or 
its equivalent) and place the apparatus in the 
air oven maintained at 37 ± 2°C for 4 hours. 
At the end of this period remove the specimen, 
separate the specimen and the two pieces of 
adjacent fabrics and dry them apart by hanging 
in air in shade at a temperature not exceeding 
60°C with the three parts in contact only at the 
remaining line of stitching. 

Note — Special care should be taken when wetting 
the specimen to see that it is uniformly saturated, in parti- 
cular, when wool or material containing wool is to be 
wetted out, it should be kneaded thoroughly by hand with 
the flattened end of a glass rod, or by a mechanical device. 

7.2 Evaluate the change in colour of the 
treated test specimen by the method prescribed 
in IS : 768 - 1982* and the degree of staining 
of the two pieces of adjacent fabrics by the method 
prescribed in IS : 769 - 1982f. 

Note 1 — Treated test specimens and the pieces of 
adjacent fabrics should have cooled after drying and 
should have regained their normal moisture content before 

evaluation. 

Note 2 — In cases of doubt in the assessment of 
colour fastness ratings by a single observer, the assess- 
ment should be done by at least three observers and the 
overall average rating should be reported. 

8. REPORT 

8.1 Report individually the numerical rating for 
change in colour of test specimen and the numeri- 
cal ratings for staining of the two pieces of adja- 
cent fabrics used in the preparation of the com- 
posite specimen. 



♦Method for evaluating change in colour ( first revision )- 
t Method for evaluating staining (first revision ). 



The Central Electric Press, Delhi-7 



