IRAN HAF IS 11921 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Tat ated Rama seq Tau Y 
qeria ht waht 


( FAT FTÜRTTT ) 


Automotive Vehicles — Method of 
Evaluation of Constant Speed Fuel 
Consumption 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 43.020 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM YO 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR NGA, 9 Te TH HM, ay Rei - 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2020 Price Group 5 


Automotive Braking Systems, Steering Systems, Vehicle Tesing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, 
TED 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Automotive Braking and Steering System, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


This Standard was originally published in 1986 and was subsequently revised in 1993. This revision is being 
undertaken keeping in view the technological advancements made in the field and to align the standard with the 
current international practices. 


In this standard Slunits have been used, the unit of force, in Newton (N), of tyre load, in kilogram (kg) and of 
pressure, in Pascal (Pa). Their relationship are given below for information: 


1 kgf = 9.80665 N (exactly) 
= 9.81 N (approximately) 
= 10 N (within 2 percent error) 
1kPa = 0.01 kgf/cm? (within 2percent error) 
1 kgf/cm? =98.066 kPa 
NOTE — Values of kPa rounded to the nearest practical unit. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11921 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — METHOD OF 
EVALUATION OF CONSTANT SPEED FUEL 
CONSUMPTION 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies the method of test for 
assessing fuel consumption at constant speed on a test 
track for all M and N category vehicles as defined in 
IS 14272 with gross vehicle weight (GVW) exceeding 
3 500 kg. 


1.2 This standard is not applicable to Hybrid electric 
vehicles as defined in IS 14272 as amended from time 
to time. Such vehicles have already been covered for 
fuel economy in AIS-102 (Part 2). 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standard contains provision, which 
through reference in this text constitutes provision of 
the standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard is encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
9211 : 2003 Denomination and definitions of 
weights of road vehicles 
14272:2011 Automotive vehicles — Types — 
Terminology 


3 FEATURES OF TEST TRACK 


3.1 The test track shall be straight, level paved road, 
covered with asphalt, concrete or similar material, dry, 
clean and smooth and shall have sufficient length on 
either side for the vehicle to attain and stabilize the test 
speed and also for stopping the vehicle at the end of 
test. 


3.1.1 Where sufficient length of track is not available 
to conduct the test for the relevant speed, the test track 
having straight portion of at least 1 000 m may be used. 
Further, at the request of the manufacturer, a track with 
straight portion of less than 1 000 m length may also 
be used. 


3.1.2 Alternately, at the request of the manufacturer, a 
closed-circuit track of minimum 2 000 m in length and 
having minimum radius of 200 m in the curved portion 
and suitably banked at the bends may be used. With the 
agreement between the manufacturer and test agency 
the data measured in the curved portions of the track 
may be omitted and only the data measured on straight 
portions of the track, not less than 500 m, may be used 
for fuel consumption determination. 


3.2 The longitudinal and lateral slope of the straight 
portion of test track shall not be more than 0.5 percent 
and 2 percent respectively. 


3.3 The test track shall have suitable marking to enable 
the driver to drive the vehicle along a straight line. 


4 TEST VEHICLE SELECTIONS 


4.1 Every vehicle model shall be subjected to the 
test. However, in case of a family of vehicles (base 
model and its variants), the test agencies and vehicle 
manufacturer shall endeavour to minimize number of 
variants to be tested to verify compliance of the whole 
family (base model and its variants), to this standard. 
The following criteria shall be used to select the worst 
case vehicle for the test in a given family (base model 
and its variants): 

a) Model/variant with the highest GVW within the 
given GVW range shall be selected. 

b) Model/variant with the highest overall ratio and/ 
or lower tyre rolling radius which gives highest 
engine speed for the constant speed test, shall be 
selected. 


ma 


Model/variant with the highest frontal cross 
sectional area, for example, highest deck body 
(single deck) for buses, shall be selected. While 
calculating frontal cross sectional area, the height 
of roof mounted CNG cylinders or air conditioning 
equipment shall be included. 


c 


4.1.1 In case of vehicles with automated manual 
transmissions (AMT), at the request of the manufacturer 
it shall be permissible to conduct the test in the manual 
mode. 


IS 11921 : 2020 


4.2 The fuel consumption value measured on the tested 
model/variant selected as per 4.1 be assigned to each 
variant of the vehicle models considered in selecting 
the vehicle in 4.1. 


4.3 As agreed between test agency and vehicle 
manufacturer, for the purpose of optimization of 
tests, the vehicle manufacturer may offer a specially 
configured variant to meet the requirements of worst 
case vehicle selection specified in 4.1. This specially 
configured variant need not be otherwise type approved 
for production. 


4.4 In the case of buses and trucks, the bus variant 
with fully built bus body and truck variant with cab 
and load body shall be used for test. If the variant list 
does not include such fully built version, the test may 
be conducted with drive away chassis versions with 
alternate near equivalent test cabin and test load body 
complying with GVW/GCW test conditions. In case of 
drive away chassis version of buses, the test may be 
conducted with the vehicle having complete body shell 
representing completely built vehicle for test purposes 
complying with GVW test conditions. 


5 PREPARATION OF THE VEHICLE 


5.1 The vehicle shall conform in all its parts, components 
and systems to the technical specifications declared by 
the manufacturer. 


5.2 The vehicle selected for the test shall be run-in for 
a distance as prescribed by the manufacturer. Where no 
recommendation is available from manufacturer, the 
vehicle shall be run in for at least 500 km. Further, it 
may be permissible at the request of the manufacturer 
for the engine to be removed and run in on engine 
dynamometer for a duration equivalent to the run in 
vehicle distance prescribed by the manufacturer. At the 
manufacturer’s request, test as per 9 can be carried out 
on a vehicle having odometer reading less than 100 km. 


5.3 The adjustments of fuel system, ignition system, 
grade, quality, quantity of lubricants for various 
moving parts, adjustments of brake, clutch, steering, 
idling speed, etc., shall conform to the manufacture’s 
recommendations. 


5.4 The tyres shall be run in at the same time as the vehicle 
or shall have a tread depth not less than 90 percent of 
the tread depth of a new tyre and should have operated 
for atleast 500 km or the distance recommended for the 
running in of the vehicle, whichever is lower, on the 
road prior to the test. 


5.5 The tyre pressure shall be adjusted to the value 
specified by the manufacturer, when cold, and shall 
not be more than the maximum value specified in the 
relevant Indian standard for that size of tyre. 


5.6 The vehicle shall be serviced before the test as per 
the procedure recommended by the manufacturer. 


5.7 Before the test, the vehicle including all its parts, 
components and systems shall have reached a stable 
temperature normal to the vehicle operation. The total 
distance of this run shall, however, be not less than 15 
km and shall be carried out at a speed very close to the 
test speed. 


5.8 Accessories 


5.8.1 All power consuming accessories and equipment, 
such as lighting and light illuminating devices, 
windshield wiper and washing system, record player, 
air conditioner and its compressor, public information 
system, etc., shall be switched off. At the request of 
the manufacturer, test can be conducted with these 
equipment working. The vehicle battery shall be fully 
charged to minimize alternator loading. 


5.8.2 In case, for reasons of safety during test, any of 
the lighting and light illuminating devices are to be kept 
operative, a separate power source shall be used, which 
does not impose an extra load on the engine. 


5.8.3 Where the power operated or power assisted 
devices have an integrally connected drive for devices, 
such as power steering, power and vacuum assisted 
brakes, and similar feature required for the normal 
operation of the vehicle, these shall be kept operative. 


5.8.4 If the radiator fan is temperature controlled (for 
example, viscous fan), it shall be in the condition of 
normal operation of the vehicle. 


5.8.5 All the windows and ventilating systems and 
hatches of the vehicle shall be kept closed, except as 
required for the instrumentation purposes but such 
opening shall be kept to the minimum required. 


6 AMBIENT CONDITIONS FOR THE TEST: 


6.1 The ambient temperature shall be in the range of 
10 to 40°C. 


6.2 The relative humidity shall not exceed 80 percent. 


6.3 Air density when calculated as described below 
shall not differ by more than 10 percent from the air 
density under the reference conditions: 
d = d, Z P x T, 
RAT, 


Where, 
d,_ Air density at test site expressed, in kg/m’; 
d, Air density at reference conditions = 1.168 kg/m’; 
P _ Atmospheric pressure at test site, in kPa; 


T,= Ambient temperature at reference condition = 
300 K; 


P,= Atmospheric pressure at reference condition = 
100 kPa; and 


T, = Ambient temperature at test site K. 


Alternatively, air density may be directly measured by 
any suitable device. 


6.4 The wind velocity in any direction shall not exceed 
3m/sec and gusts less than 5 m/s. The measurement and 
recording of wind velocity and direction shall be done 
at a height of 1 m to 2 m above the road surface. 


6.5 The above measurements shall be carried out as 
close as possible to the test track. 


7 VEHICLE LOADING 


7.1 The unladen weight shall be the complete vehicle 
kerb weight as per IS 9211, where applicable. 


7.2 Vehicle Loading 


7.2.1 The vehicle shall be loaded to the gross vehicle 
weight (GVW) or gross combination weight (GCW) as 
applicable, as specified by the manufacturer and shall 
be recorded in the test report. 


7.2.2 The weight distribution between the axles shall 
be as recommended by the manufacturer and weight of 
any axle shall not be more than the maximum value 
recommended by the manufacturer. 


7.2.3 The instruments, the testing personnel and other 
equipment necessary to be carried on the test vehicle at 
the time of test shall form part of the pay load and shall 
be recorded in the test report. 


8 INSTRUMENTATION 


8.1 General Conditions for Instrumentation 


8.1.1 Fitment and operation of all instruments shall be, 
such as not to hamper the visibility or freedom of the 
driver to have proper control of the vehicle at all times. 
In addition, such fitment shall not unduly project out of 
the vehicle profile affecting the air drag or safety. 


8.1.2 It must be verified that all the instruments are 
pre-calibrated before testing. 


8.2 Vehicle Fuel 


8.2.1 The test vehicle shall be filled with the 
corresponding commercial fuel as specified in Central 
Motor Vehicle Rules (CMVR) of Government of India, 
as amended from time to time. 


8.2.2 At the request of the manufacturer, the vehicle 
may be instead filled with the reference fuel as specified 
in CMVR. 


IS 11921 : 2020 


8.3 Suitable instruments to measure the following shall 
be used: 


a) Ambient pressure, 

b) Ambient temperature, 
c) Relative humidity, and 
d) Wind velocity. 


8.4 Fuel Measuring System 


8.4.1 The fuel measuring system shall be compatible 
with vehicle fuel system. The instrument used shall 
be a flowmeter working on the principle of positive 
displacement for sensing the flow. 


8.4.2 The fitment and operation of fuel measuring 
system shall be such that normal flow of the fuel to the 
engine is not hampered. The fuel tank shall be suitably 
vented to the atmosphere. 


In the case of gravity fed petrol engine vehicle, 
the pressure head at the carburetor inlet shall not be 
more than the head corresponding to the condition of 
the vehicle when the fuel tank is filled to 90 percent 
capacity, and also this shall not be less than that 
corresponding to the near empty condition of the fuel 
tank to the extent possible. 


8.4.3 In the case of the vehicle with fuel return flow 
system, the return flow shall be cooled if necessary 
and processed so that, its temperature is very close 
to the temperature of the incoming fuel and is free of 
entrapped air or vapour bubbles. 


8.5 Distance 


8.5.1 The test may be conducted by the measurements 
being taken between two fixed points on the test track. 


8.5.2 The test may be conducted by measuring the 
actual distance travelled by vehicle during the test run 
by using instruments, such as fifth wheel, contactless 
distance measuring systems, etc. 


8.6 Speed 

There shall be a suitable speed indicating device to 
enable the driver to maintain the speed within the 
stipulated limit. 

8.7 Time 

It shall be possible to measure the time taken for the 
vehicle to cover the measuring stretch. 

8.8 Fuel Temperature 

Fuel temperature shall be measured at a point as close 
to the volumetric measurement of the fuel, as possible. 
8.9 Synchronization 


The operation of the instruments measuring the 
distance, time and the fuel quantity shall be synchronized 
within 0.2 s. 


IS 11921 : 2020 


8.10 Accuracy and Least Count 


The accuracies and least counts of the instruments used 
shall be as under: 


Least Count Error Not 
Not More More than 
than 
i) Fuel measurement 0.1ml + 1 percent 
of measured 
value 
11) Distance Im +2m 
111) Time 0.1 sec + 0.2 sec 
iv) Fuel temperature 1K +2K 
v) Ambient 1K +2K 
temperature 
vi) Atmospheric ImmofHg +1mmof 
pressure Hg 


9 TEST PROCEDURE 


9.1 The vehicle shall be tested at the constant speed/ 
speeds (for example, 40 km/h, 50 km/h and 60 km/h) 
required for the test. Instead of required test speeds, at 
the request of manufacturer, test agency and vehicle 
manufacturer can mutually agree for a test speed which 
is greater than the required test speed(s) by +5 km/h. 
However, even at those test speeds, the vehicle shall 
meet the fuel consumption limits applicable to the 
required test speed(s). 


If vehicle rated speed at laden condition is not more 
than 60 km/h, the vehicle may be tested at 40 km/h 
and shall meet the fuel consumption limits applicable 
to 40 km/h. If any laden vehicle could not achieve 
required test speed(s), tests may be undertaken at 
lower speed(s) stipulated in statutory rules or may be 
exempted from these tests. 


9.2 The vehicle shall be run in top gear or in the gear as 
recommended by the manufacturer. 


9.2.1 Vehicles fitted with overdrive transmissions where 
overdrive limit engages automatically, shall be driven 
with the actuating switch (if any) in a position which 
ensures engagement when conditions of operation are 
reached. Vehicles having gearboxes with HIGH and 
LOW banks of gear ratios shall be engaged in HIGH 
mode. Auxiliary crawler arrangements if any shall 
remain disengaged. 


9.2.2 Vehicles with automatic transmission shall 
be driven in the drive ranges. If the vehicle has 
multiple driven rear axles, such as 6 x 4 and 6 x2 or 
8 x 4 and 8 x 2 etc., then the test shall be conducted 
only 6 x 4 or 8 x 4 (4 wheel drive mode) and no test 
shall be conducted on 6 x 2 or 8 x 2 configuration. 


If vehicle has 2-wheel drive mode and 4-wheel drive 
mode both, the test shall be conducted only at 4-wheel 
drive mode and no test with 2-wheel drive. 


9.2.3 Vehicles having lift axle shall be tested with the 
wheels of lift axle in contact with ground and in fully 
functional condition. 


9.2.4 If the vehicle has multiple operation modes with 
manual switching and with different fuel efficiency 
performance requirements, the test shall be conducted 
in the default mode fixed by the manufacturer. For 
this, all the modes of operation shall be declared by 
the manufacturer in his application. At the request of 
the manufacturer, the tests may be conducted in all the 
modes of operation declared by the manufacturer. 


9.3 During the test run, the speed shall be maintained 
within +1 km/h of the target speed. While maintaining 
this speed band, the movement of accelerator control 
position shall be minimized. Any unavoidable 
movement of the accelerator control required to hold 
the speed constant shall be smooth and gradual. At the 
request of the manufacturer, cruise control systems may 
be used to maintain the vehicle speed at the desired 
speed. 


9.4 During the test, the following shall be recorded: 
a) Volume of fuel consumed, ml ...O 
b) Distance travelled, m ...S 


c) Time taken to cover the test distance, seconds 
weal 


d) Fuel temperature, K sak, 

e) Ambient temperature — Dry bulb,K  ...7,, 

f) Ambient temperature- Wet bulb, K ...T,, 
Ambient temperature, T, = (T,,, + T,,,)/2 

g) Ambient pressure at test site, kPa aP, 

h) Wind velocity, in m/s ena 

j) Relative humidity, in percent ssd 


9.5 The test shall be conducted over a distance of 1 000 
m preferably. In case of the straight portion of the track 
being less than 1 000 m, manufacturer and test agency 
may agree to conduct the test over shorter lengths of 
the track. Two consecutive test runs in the opposite 
directions shall constitute a pass. 


9.6 It shall be permissible for the track to have non- 
straight portion which are used for accelerating the 
vehicle to the test speed. However, the data measured 
in the curved portions of the track may be omitted and 
only the data measured on straight portions of the track, 
not less than 500 m, may be used for fuel consumption 
determination. 


9.7 The test shall be conducted sufficient number of 
times such that the readings for at least 5 passes (one 


pass comprising consecutive readings in the opposite 
directions), whose variation of S/Qc for that pass in not 
more than + 2.5 percent of mean and the average speed 
not varying by more than + 1 km/h from the specified 
speed can be selected. These readings shall be selected 
such that the variation of S/Qc is the minimum. 


9.8 Calculation of Fuel Consumption 


9.8.1 The quantity Q of fuel consumed in all passes 
shall be corrected to the fuel temperature from the 
following equation: 


u Q 
sa 1+0.001(7,, - 300) 


Where, 
T,= The average fuel temperature for all passes; 


O = Volume of fuel consumed for all passes, ml, 
and 

Q = Corrected volume of fuel consumed for all 
passes, ml. 


9.8.2 The fuel consumption shall be calculated in km/ 
litre as: 


Pr? 


[a 


Fuel consumption shall also be reported in L/100 km 
unit (rounded up to 4 decimal places) and it shall be 
calculated as follows: 


Fuel consumption in L / 100km = = 


where, 
F = Fuel consumption, in km/litre; 
S = total distance covered in all passes, in m; and 
O, = total fuel consumed in all passes corrected to 
the fuel temperature. 


9.8.3 The average speed (V) in km/h shall be calculated 
as: 


V =3.6x > km/h 
Where, 
S= Distance travelled in all passes, m; and 
t= Total time taken for all passes, in seconds. 


10 REPORTING OF TEST RESULTS 


Test report shall contain at least the information 
mentioned in the test report format given in Annex A. 
Test results in L/100 km reported shall be rounded to 
four places after the decimal point. 


IS 11921 : 2020 


11 CRITERIA FOR EXTENSION 
APPROVAL 


OF TYPE 


11.1 In case vehicle manufacturer changes technical 
specifications of vehicles or added variant(s), the 
following criteria shall be considered for deciding the 
extension of test / type approval. 


11.1.1 In case of following changes, constant speed 
tests are necessary for establishing extension of type 
approval: 


a) Change exceeding 10 percent in the gross vehicle 
weight /gross combination weight; 


b) Change in the engine type, swept volume 
exceeding 10 percent, number and arrangement of 
cylinders; 

c) Change in declared engine power or torque 
exceeding 5 percent; 


d) Change in the fuel system such as carburetor to 
fuel injection or vice-versa; 


e) Change in type of transmission (manual to 
automatic/semiautomatic or vice versa); 


f) Change from radial ply to cross ply tyres; 


g) Change in the overall transmission ratio (in the 
gear used for test) and change in rolling radius 
of tyre, which changes the engine rpm at the test 
speed of exceeding 8 percent (1f both parameters 
are changed, the combined effect on engine rpm at 
the test speed should be considered); 


h) Change in the No. of axles; 
3) Change in ignition/injection timing exceeding 2°; 
k) Change in the No. of tyres; 


m) Change in body shape which increases the frontal 
area of vehicle that increases the road load 
(measured through coast down test) at the test 
speed by more than 10 percent; 


n) Change in the air intake system (naturally aspirated 
to supercharged /turbocharged or vice versa); and 


p) Changes in the Engine Control Unit (ECU), 
including calibration. 


11.1.2 In case of changes other than those listed in 
11.1.1, constant speed tests shall not be repeated for 
establishing the extension of type approval. 


11.2 In case of changes in technical specifications 
listed in 11.1.1, at the request of manufacturer, the 
test agency may use computer simulation tools to get 
the fuel consumption values for those vehicles with 
changed specifications. Test agencies may use well 
established simulation tools from the market or may 
develop a new simulation tool to suit Indian conditions. 
The validation of simulation tool for the variants is to 
be established with the right degree of correlation with 
physical tests. 


IS 11921 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 10 ) 


SAMPLE TEST REPORT FORMAT 


A-1 VEHICLE CONFIGURATION DETAILS 


A-1.1 Vehicle Model 

A-1.2 GVW / GCW (kg) 

A-1.3 Number of Axles 

A-1.4 Vehicle Frontal Cross Sectional Area 
A-1.5 Gearbox 

A-1.5.1 Type 

A-1.5.2 Make 

A-1.5.3 Model 

A-1.5.4 Gear used for test 

A-1.6 Tested Gear ratio and Gear Box Model 
A-1.7 Engine 


A-1.7.1 Mode of Operation: (Eco/Power/Automatic/ 
Any other) 


A-1.8 Max. Engine power, kW @ rpm 
A-1.9 Cold Tyre Pressure(kg/cm?/psi/kPa) 


a) Front, or 
b) Rear 


A-1.10 Available Average Tyre Thread Depth for 
Test (in mm) 


A-1.11 Fuel 
A-1.12 Fuel Specific Gravity 


A-2 ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS 


A-2.1 Wind Velocity (m/s) 
A-2.2 Relative Humidity (Percent) 


A-3 TEST SITE 
A-4 ROAD SURFACE 


A-5 TEST RESULTS FOR TEST SPEED X 
KM/H 


SI | Nominal One Side Opposite Side 
No: Paan > Fuel Time Fuel Fuel Fuel Time Fuel Fuel S/Q, Variation 
Consumed, Taken, Temperature, | Consumed, | Consumed, Taken, Temperature, | Consumed, in S/Q, 
ml Seconds °C ml ml seconds °C ml 
(Observed) | (Observed) (Corrected) | (Observed) | (Observed) (Corrected) 
Q. Q. 
1 
Mean S/Q, 
Measuring stretch /pass distance, m (M) Total length of passes 
S =M x No. of passes 
Y Time, seconds > Fuel consumed, cc 
Average speed, km/h Fuel consumption, km/l 
Fuel consumption, L/100 km 


IS 11921 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Automotive Braking Systems, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, TED 04 


Organization 


National Automotive Testing and R&D Infrastructure 
Project (NATRAX), Indore 


Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai 


Association of State Road Transport Undertakings, 
New Delhi 


Automotive Component Manufacturers Association 
of India, New Delhi 

Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 

Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 

Bosch Chassis Systems India Limited, Pune 


Brakes India Pvt Ltd, Chennai 


Central Farm Machine Training & Testing Institute, 
Budni 


Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Continental Automotive Components (India) Pvt Ltd, 
Manesar, Gurugram 


Daimler India Commercial Vehicles (P) Ltd, Chennai 


Denso International India Pvt Ltd, Manesar, 
Gurugram 


Force Motors Ltd, Pune 


Federal Mogul VSP (India) Ltd, Kancheepuram, 
Tamil Nadu 


General Motors India (P) Ltd, Pune 


Global Automotive Research Centre, Chennai 


Representative(s) 


Dr N. KARUPPAIAH (Chairman) 


SHRI D. BALAKRISHNAN 
SHRI VED PRAKASH GAUTAM (Alternate) 


Dr M. TRINATH BABU 
Suri S. D SAROLE (Alternate) 


Suri UDAY HARITE 
Smt SEEMA BABBAL(Alternate) 


Suri A. AKBAR BADUSHA 
Suri P. D. BETGERI (Alternate) 


SHRI R. NARASIMHAN 
SHRI ARVIND KUMBHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUHAS S. PATIL 
Suri MILIND KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI P. VENUGOPAL 
SHRI S. SHEKHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI J. J. R. NARWARE 
Suri C. V. CHIMOTE (Alternate) 
Suri PRAMOD Yapay (Young Professional) 


Suri S. N. DHOLE 
SHRI SANTOSH GUTTE (Alternate) 
Suri D. H. PENDHARKAR (Young Professional) 


SHRI P. V. PRADEEP KUMAR 
SHRI SUDESH Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI RAHUL MARE 
SHRI RAGHAVENDRA HARIHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDERSON S. V. 
SHRI PRABHU R. (Alternate) 
SHRI ANTONY KURIAN (Young Professional) 


SHRI NOEL ALEXANDER PETERS 
SHRI ALOK KUMAR (Alternate) 
Ms ALKA SHARMA (Young Professional) 


SHRI ANIRUDDHA KULKARNI 
Suri R. M. KANITKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VENKATESH SANKARAN 
Suri R. Venkat (Alternate) 


SHRI A. TAJUDEEN 


Suri M. V. RAMACHANDRAN 
SHRI S. PERUMAL (Alternate I) 
MOHAMMAD SUHAIL (Alternate II) 


IS 11921 : 2020 


Organization 


Hero Motocorp Ltd, Dharuhera 


Honda Motorcycle and Scooter India Pvt Ltd, 
Gurugram 

ICAT, Manesar 

Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 

Knorr-Bremse Systems for Commercial Vehicles 


India Pvt Ltd, Pune 
Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Nasik 


Mahindra Trucks & Buses Ltd, Pune 
Maruti Suzuki India Ltd, Gurgaon 


Department of Heavy Industries, New Delhi 

NATRIP, Indore 

Ordinance Factory Board, Jabalpur DGQA 

PCA Motors Pvt Ltd, Chennai 

Rane TRW Steering Systems Ltd, Trichy 

Renault Nissan Tech & Business Centre, Chennai 

Representing Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways, New Delhi 

Society of Indian Automobile Mfrs, New Delhi 


Sundaram Brake Linings Ltd, Chennai 


SML Isuzu Ltd (Swaraj Mazda), Ropar 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


Toyota Kirloskar Motors Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 


Tractor Maunfacturers Association, New Delhi 


TVS Motor Co Ltd, Hosur 


Representative(s) 


SHRI FEROZ ALI KHAN 
Suri PryUsH CHOWDHRY (Alternate) 
MOHAMMAD DANISH GAZALI (Young Professional) 


SHRI SURAJ AGARWAL 
SHRI VIPIN SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI GAVENDRA SINGH 
SMT VIJAYANTA AHUJA (Alternate) 


Suri M. K. SHUKLA 
SHRI SUNIL PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN BISHT 


SHRI S. RAGHUPATHI 
SHRI DEVINDER TANGRI (Alternate) 
SHRI ARUN Kumar PRASAD (Young Professional) 


SHRI V. G. KULKARNI 


SHRI VIVEK TRIVEDI 
SHRI GURURAJ Ravi (Alternate) 
Suri RAJ Kumar Dwiwep! (Young Professional) 


SHRI R. K. JAISWAL 


Dr P. P. CHATTARAJ 
SHRI SAGAR BENDRE (Alternate) 


SHRI UMESH KUMAR 
SHRI VIKASPURWAR (Alternate) 
Cor RAJEEV CHAWLA (Young Professional) 


SHRI SUDHIR DESHPANDE 


Suri R. M. THIRUPATHI 
Suri K. V. BANUPRASATH (Alternate) 


SHRI N. BALASUBRAMANIAN 
Suri K. THANGARAJ (Alternate) 


Director (Technical) 


SHRI P. K. BANERJEE 
Suri AMIT KUMAR (Alternate) 


Dr J. GOPALAKRISHNAN 
Suri R. BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP AGARWAL 
Suri MOHIT Gupta (Alternate) 
SHRI ABHINAV SHARMA (Young Professional) 


SHRI P. GOWRISHANKAR 
SHRI UDAY SALUNKHE (Alternate) 


SHRI REVADI CHANNAPPA 
Suri Ragu M. (Alternate) 


SHRI S. LAKSHMIPATHY 
SHRI K. KANNIBARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. ANAND KUMAR 
Suri R. NAGARAJAN (Alternate) 


Organization 


Vehicles Research & Development Establishment, 
Ahmednagar 

VE Commercial Vehicles, Pithampur 

Volvo Buses India (P) Ltd, Bangalore 

Wabco India Ltd, Chennai 


ZF Steering Gear India Ltd, Pune 


Panel 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 11921 : 2020 


Representative(s) 
SHRI VINOD KUMAR 
SHRI SAM SHAIKH (Alternate) 


SHRI SHYAM BUTE 
SHRI Monan KUMAR MUTHUSAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAMOD KUMAR HUGAR 
SHRI ATUL Kumar KATTI (Alternate) 


Suri S. V. DESHMUKH 

SHRI PRABHAKARAN DURAIRAJ (Alternate) 
SHRI CHANDRAKANT K. DANGE 

SHRI SAMSON BORDE (Alternate) 
SHRI S. RAVISHANKAR 


Suri R. R. SINGH, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (TED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 
(Member Secretary) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 04 (12093). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


