( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS: 9373 -1979

Indian S tanclbrd
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO BAKERY INDUSTRY
Bakery
Chairman
SHRI R. B. RAO

and Confectionery

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

AFDC

31

Britannia Industries Limited,

Bombay

Members
SHRI M. R. BRALERAO

SHRI G. S. BAINS

Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana Indian Sugar Mills Association, New Delhi SHRI K. K. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Central Committee Standards, SRRI D. S. CHADHA for Food New Delhi SMUT D. MURHERJEE ( Alternate ) Technical Standardization Committee THE CHAIR&TAN ( Foodstuffs ), Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation, New Delhi THE SECRETARY ( Alternate ) Quartermaster General's Army Branch, COL S. K. CHIB Headauarters LT-COL K. N. AC~ARYA ( Alternate ) Brady and Morris Engineering- Company Limited, SRRI N. B. CHOU~HARY _. Bombay School of Baking, Institute of Agriculture, SHRI S. C. DUBEY University of Anand SHRI M. M. PATEL ( Alternate ) Indian Yeast Company Limited, Calcutta SHRI R. N. GIIATAK SRRI A. MAJUMDAR ( Alfsrnats ) Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore SHRI K. G. GHOSH SHRI T. K. CHAKRABARTY ( Alternate ) Wa.rner Hindustan Limited, Hyderabad Da M. C. GUPTA DR U. RAVI RAO ( Alternate ) Parry's Confectionery Limited, Madras SRR1H.R.S. IYENoAR Mohan Meakin Breweries Ltd, Ghaziabad SHRI E. K. JAYANARAYANAN SHRI JAI PAL SIN~R ( Alternate ) Institute of Hotel Management, Catering & SHRI B. K. KHANNA Nutrition. New Delhi SHRI A. F. MENDONCA ( Alternate ) Daurala Sugar Works, Daurala SHRI L. N. MATHUR SHRI K. K. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Modern Bakeries ( India ) Ltd, New Delhi DR V. B. MITBANDER DR M. M. KRISHNA ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) 0 Copyright 1980 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:9373-1979
( Continued from page1 )
Members SHRI LALIT NIRULA
SHRI &RI

Refircsenting The Federation of Hotel and Association of India, New Delhi Restaurant

K. K. MEHRA ( Alternate ) Royal Fancy Sweetmeat Saloon, Bombay G. K. NOON SHRI A. A. FIDVI ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SERI S. RAMASWAMY New Delhi SHRI S. N. PANDEY ( Altcrnata ) Indian Confectionery ManuFacturers' Association, SHRI M. G. SATHE New Delhi SBRI S. N. MAHESRWARI ( Alternate ) Pedefiae&n of Biscuit Manufacturers' of India, SHRI M. G. SATHE
SHRI M. N. KHANNA ( Alternate ) Monita Baking Corporation, Bombay SHRI J. C. SHAH SHRI PANRAJ V. SHAH ( Alternate ) Central Food Technological Research Institute SHRI S. R. SHURPALEKAR ( CSIR ), Mysore Public Analyst, Government of Uttar Pradesh, SHRI S. B. SINoH Lucknow Society of Indian Bakers, New Delhi SHRI D. V. TANDON Roller Flour Millers' Federation of India, SHRI S. P. VIRMANI New Delhi SRRI K. B. THIAGAR~JAN ( Afternate ) Director GeneraI, IS1 ( Ex-O$C~OMember ) SERI T. PURNANANDAM, Director ( Agri & Food )

Secretary SNIT SHA~HI SAREEN Assistant Director ( Agri &. Food ), IS1 Bakery Subcommittee, AFDC 31 ? 1

CTnuener
SRRI G. S. BAINS Members Quartermaster Branch, Army General's Headquarters School of Baking, Institute of Agriculture, SHRI S. C. DUBEY Universitv of Anand Dalima Biscuits Limited, Rajpura SHRI S. S. LARGAR Modern Bakeries India Ltd, New Delhi DR V. K. MEHROTRA Corn Products Company ( India ) Limited, SHRI M. G. NERURHAR Bombay SHRI A. G. BTJDIIISAGAR( Alternate ) Monita Baking Corporation, Bombay SHRI J. C. SHAH SHRI K. H. TIMBADIA ( Alternate ) Central Food Technological Research Institute SHRI S. R. SHURPALEKAR ( CSIR. ), Mysore Society of Indian Bakers, New Delhi SHRI D. V. TANDON Public Health Laboratory, Pune DR ( SMT ) L. N. VACHHA CAPT S. V. S. CHOUDHARY Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana

2

IS : 9373 - 1979

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO BAKERY INDUSTRY
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 December 1979, after the draft finalized by the Bakery and Confectionery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Various terms relating to bakery are being frequently used in bakery industry as well as by industries producing raw material for the bakery industry. In order to have a uniform terminology and to give authoritative definitions to these terms, this standard has been prepared. This standard would also help in better understanding of the terms in the international trade in bakery products. 0.3 A standard on glossary of terms relating to flour milling industry ( IS : 9374-1979 ) is also being simultaneously issued. Certain common terms have been included in both the standards as they bear relevance to both industries.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard 2. DEFINITIONS 2.1 Absorption - The amount of water absorbed and retained, as percentage, of flour mass, that is required to produce an dough. expressed optimum defines the various terms used in bakery industry.

2.2 Acetic Acid ( CH&OOH ) - An organic acid, sour in taste, colourless, and with sharp odour; fan active constituent of vinegar; used in bread formula as mold/rope inhibitor. 2.3 Acetone Peroxide - A chemical powder, which when added to flour in small quantities ( 1 to 45 mg/kg ) hasthe ability to improve its bread making quality. It is primarily a maturing agent but also has some bleaching action. 3

IS:

9373

l

1979

2.4 Acid Value - It is the number of milligrams of potassium hydroxide required to neutralize free fatty acids present in 1 g of the fat, and is an indication of the extent of free fatty acids present in an oil or fat. 2.5 Active Oxygen Method - A method for measuring fats and oils by bubbling air through the heated materials the formation of peroxides. 2.6 Additive - An ingredient perties or shelf life. 2.7 Aeration ( Fat ) bubbles in hydrogenated 2.8 Agar-Agar gelling agent. added to flour to improve the stability of and measuring its baking minute used can proair as a be

The process of incorporation of fat; also known as creaming process. of red algae ( a sea weed ) in egg,

A dried extract

2.9 Albumen -- A class of protein, present dissolved in water and is coagulable by heat.

that

term denoting the proteinaceous 2.10 Aleurone Layer - A botanical cellular layer which envelopes the endosperm and separates it from the bran or seed of the wheat kernel. 2.11 Alveograph - A dough testing instrument that measures the resistance to deformation and extensibility of a clamped disc-shaped piece of dough, by forming a bubble, by means of air pressure applied from below the test piece at a constant temperature. 2.12 Ammonia - A colloquial ammonium bicarbonate. term generally used by biscuit bakers for

2.13 Ammonium Bicarbonate ( NHdHCOa ) - A white powder which on heating vields ammonia gas, carbon dioxide gas and water vapour. It It leaves no is used in biscuit manufacture as a chemical aerating agent. residue in the baked product and., therefore, imparts no off-taste. 2.14 Amylase large molecules - An enzyme that, in the of starch to sugar ( maltose presence ) units. of water, of water, of water, converts converts converts

a) a-Amylase -- An enzyme, which, in the presence starch molecules to maltose units. b) /?-Amylase - An enzyme, which in the presence starch molecules to maltose and dextrin units. 2.15 Amylograph viscosity of a slurry

An instrument that measures the consistency or of starchy flour and water as it is heated through a 4

IS:9373

- 1979

The viscosity is measured by the resistance that pre-determined cycle. It is used to measure the amylase the slurry offers to a mixing paddle. activity of flours. 2.16 Antimicrobial mixture of chemicals, of micro-organisms. or a Agent - Any substance, usually a chemical that has the ability to prevent or retard the growth

synthetic substances or 2.17 Antioxidants - Naturally-occuring chemical compounds which can retard the development of oxidative rancidity in fats and fat-containing foodstuffs. Sugar and lecithin are while butylated hydroxy-anisole of natural antioxidants, examples ( BHA ), butylated hydroxy toluene ( BHT ) and dodecyl gallate are examples of chemical antioxidants. 2.18 Antistaling Agents - Substances polyoxyethylene monostearate and glyceryl retard the staling of baked products. 2.19 Arrowroot Starch Starch from the genus Maranta Linn, and Curcuma Linn. such as sodium stearate, mono stearate ( GMS ), that

2.19.1

2.19.2 Industrial product corresponding to 2.19.1 obtained by wet milling from tuberous roots of various species of the genus Maranta Linn. and in particular of Maranta arundinatea Linn. and Curcuma augustifolia Roxb.
NOTE 1 exist: According to its geographical origin several designations of arrowroot

a) West Indies arrowroot; b) Barbados,_Jamaica or Bermuda arrowroot; c) Saint Vincent arrowroot.

and starches should be by the name of the

NOTE 2 - The use of the term arrowroot to designate other avioded. These products should be called starch accompanied plant from which it is obtained.

2.20 Ascorbic Acid ( Vitamin C ) - A naturally occuring vitamin that is used in the baking industry as an improving agent. Its overall effect on the physical properties of dough depend both on its oxidizing and reducing actions. 2.21 Ash Content - The amount of incombustible residue, left after incinerating a weighed amount of a material and expressed as percentage. 2.22 Azodicarbonamide - A chemical when added to flour in small quantities 5 in the form of powder which, ( 1 to 45 mg/kg ) has the ability

IS:9373

-1979 quality of flour. It is presently not permitted

to improve the bread-making under the PFA rules.

2.23 Bake Test - A test designed to show the baking when subjected to the parameters of bulk production, under controlled conditions.

properties of flour and carried out

2.24 Baking Loss - The loss of mass in a product as a result of baking. In the case of non-fermented products, the difference in mass between the dough or batter from the moment when it is put in the oven and when it emerges as a baked product. This includes the loss of fat to the baking sheet or tin. 2.25 Baking Powder - A balanced mixture of sodium bicarbonate and an acid. Baking powders when moistened and heated produce a leavening gas in batters and doughs. They should leave only tasteless, harmless residues. The acid substances commonly used are tartaric acid, cream of tartar, calcium acidphosphate, sodium acid pyrophosphate, and sodium aluminium phosphate. 2.26 Baking Quality product. Bread-making 2.27 Baking Soda The capacity of flour to produce a baked quality refers to baking quality of a flour used.

See 2.175. ferment used for fermenting the doughs in

2.28 Barm place of yeast.

A local liquid

2.29 Batter - A thin mixture of flour, water `or milk, eggs, or any permitted ingredients, such as is used for making cakes.

other is

2.30 Benzoyl Peroxide ( CsH&Oa )rOa - A chemical powder that added to flour in small quantities for its beneficial bleaching action.

2.31 Biscuits - A term generally used for that bakery product which is made from a dough which is sheeted, cut and baked immediately thereafter to a low moisture. 2.32 Bleaching Agent - A substance added to flour to bleach out the yellow pigment naturally present in flour and thereby give a whiter appearance to the flour and the bread produced from it. 2.33 Blending proportion of quality. Capacity low quality The ability or capacity of a flour to carry flour and still produce bread of satisfactory 6

IS : 9373 - 1979 2.34 Bread - Baked aerated dough, the primary ingredients of which It may also contain other permitted are flour, yeast, salt and water. ingredients.

2.35 Bread-Making - The overall process of converting flour into bread which generally consists of different stages like mixing, fermentation, dough make-up, proofing and baking. 2.36 Brew - A mixture of water, yeast, yeast nutrients amounts of flour used in some bread-making processes. and varying

2.37 Brimac Process - A bread-making process developed at the Bread Research Institute of Australia which uses mechanical action ( mixing ) to develop the dough to optimum physical state. 2.38 Buckiness - A term used in baking technology that are too soft or too elastic for proper handling. 2.39 Buckling - A defect which causes the baking generally resulting in raised centres. to describe doughs

crackers

to warp during the &H

2.40 Buffering Value - The ability of a substance to maintain of a solution, batter or dough at a constant level. 2.41 Bulk Fermentation - For dough under fermentation, period from the mixing stage to the dividing stage.

this is the

2.42 Butylated Hydroxy Anisole ( BHA ) - An antioxidant which has ( through the baking stage ) in baked good `carry over' properties products. It is used either by itself or in combination with other antioxidants or synergists. 2.43 Batylated Hydroxy Toluene ( BHT ) - An antioxidant, the baking industry, either alone or in combination with BHA. used in

2.44 Calcium Propionate - An inorganic salt used in small quantities, in bread to inhibit the growth of moulds and to some extent, rope. 2.45 Caramel - A colouring matter ( dark brown colour ) obtained the action of heat ( 170-180�C ) and ammonia on sugar. by

2.46 Carbon Dioxide - The gas evolved by the action of yeast on fermentable sugars or by the action of baking powder in a baking process. For example, in a fermenting dough, carbon dioxide causes the dough to This is essential for the production of the desirable rise ( leaven ). spongy grain and texture of bread crumb. 7

IS : 9373 ~- 1979 2.47 Cassava - Roots of tapioca plant ( Manihot palmata ) that are used for the production of starchy flour. It is also used as admixture with wheat flour for certain type of bakery products. 2.48 Chorbywood Bread Process - Bread-making process developed by the British Baking Industries Research Association, Chorbywood, UK, which uses high-speed mixing for the optimal development of dough, thereby eliminating the need of bulk fermentation. 2.49 Colour ( Flour ) - A measure of the branny contaimination in flour and thereby milling efficiency. The colour of flour is determined by a special photoelectric instrument, as Kent Jones and Martin Colour Grader or Agtron Colour Instrument. Generally for this determination, Peker test is popular with bakers on account of quick colour comparison of flour. 2.50 Composite Flour of non-wheat flour with goods that are traditionally A flour made by blending varying wheat flour and used for production made from wheat flour. amounts of baked

2.51 Consistancy ( Dough ) - The feel or firmness of a dough ( also by Farniograph or a similar instrument. called viscosity ) as measured It signifies the handling properties of a dough. 2.52 Continuous Process - In relation to bread making, refers automatic process that is essentially continuous from the mixing dough to the exit of the bread from the oven. to an of the

2.53 Conventional Process - In relation to bread making, refers to older processes such as the straight dough or the sponge and dough processes involving bulk fermentation. 2.54 Cookie - A small sweet baked fancy cakes, biscuits, pastries, etc. 2.55 Corn Flour Flour obtained product. It includes items like small

by milling

of the grain of maize. maize starch by liquid glucose'

2.56 Corn Syrup - A sweetner prepared by hydrolysing It is the `commercial means of either acids or enzymes. used in sugar and flour confectionery.

means basically a 2.57 Cream - In bakery trade the term `cream' homogenous mixed preparation of hydrogenated fat or bakery shortening, icing sugar, flavours and permitted food colours with or without other ingredients in small proportions. 8

IS : 9373-

1979

- The action of whipping fat in a manner such that it 2.58 Creaming will incorporate minute air bubbles and become light and `creamy' in In bakeries, fat is generally `creamed' with other ingredients texture. creaming process. `Creaming such as sugar, which facilitates the Quality' as applied to fat is the ability to absorb air during mixing. -2.59 Cream of Tartar ( KHCdHdOe ) - Potassium acid substance, used as a chemical leavening agent. 2.60 Crispness - Eating quality bite; opposite to soggy or soft. of biscuits which acid tartarate; an to

makes it crunchy

2.61 Critical Mixing Speed - It is the lowest mixing speed of a dough mixer that can develop a dough in a mechanical development breadmaking process. 2.62 Crumb bread crumb 2.63 Crumb and silkiness Grain - The cell structure exhibiting determined by visual examination. Texture of bread - The cell structure crumb as determined exhibiting by feel. size and shape of

hardness,

coarseness

2.64 Crust - The hard crisp outer surface colour indicates the degree of baking.

of a loaf of bread.

The crust baking

2.65 Cupping - A defect which causes biscuits to warp and the sides to rise. This is the opposite of `buckling'.

during

2.66 Cutting Machine - A machine used for cutting the dough sheet into specified sizes and shapes for biscuits. It consists of one or more sets of rollers, which sheet out the dough and a cutting section which simultaneously cuts out the biscuits and embosses them with an appropriate design. 2.67 Cysteine - A naturally~occuring amino It is used in the baking industry, particularly bread-making process, because of its ability to ment for optimum dough development. It is, yet, under the PFA rules. `acid that contains sulphur. in chemical development reduce the mixing requirehowever, not permitted, as

2.68 Degradation - Breakdown of large molecules of any substance into smaller fragments. Here it pertains to the breakdown of starch by amylases or proteins by proteases. 2.69 Denaturation proteins by physical - The destruction or chemical means. 9 of the natural properties An example of denaturation of is

is : 9373

- 1979
of flour proteins in dough to produce a thermal denaturation of proteins. the semi-rigid dried kernel to structure of the the

the cooking of bread -

2.70 Desiccated Coconut - The shredded and coconut. It is often added to bakery products.

2.71 Developer Mixer - A dough mixer that is used dough to its optimal physical state for bread-making.

develop

2.72 Dextrins - Modified starch prepared from starch by heat treatment in the dry state, with or without the addition of small quantities of chemical reagents. 2.73 Diastatic Activity - In flour quality evaluation, it is the measure It can be of the activity of the starch degrading enzymes of the flour. expressed in terms of the maltose ( sugar ) produced or in terms of tlie peak viscosity in the Amylograph test. 2.74 Dilatation of Fats - When fats change from solid to liquid at the Measurement of this same temperature, there is an increase in volume. increase is used to estimate the amount of solid fat present in a mixture at any given temperature. 2.75 Divider - A machine used in bread-making of dough into desired size pieces. to divide a large piece

2.76 Dough - A mixture of flour, water and other ingredients It is used for producing to optimum consistency and viscosity. other bakery products.

developed bread or

2.77 Dough Development -- The elaboration of the physical properties This can be of a dough that are the best for the production of bread. achieved by fermentation as in dough ripening or maturing, by mixing as in mechanical development or by a combination of certain chemicals and mixing as in chemical development. 2.78 Dough Expansion Test ( Pelshenke ) - The time required for a dough ball made from wheat meal, water and yeast and suspended in water at 30�C to disintegrate. It is a rough measure of the quality of wheat protein for bread-making and is used in screening for baking quality~in new varieties of wheat during the early generations. substances such as 2.79 Dough Maturing Agents - Chemical ascorbic acid ( Vitamin C ) which potassium bromate, potassium iodate, when added to dough in small amount improve the handling and breadmaking quality of the dough. 10

IS : 9373 - 1979
2.80 Dough Tests - Tests made on doughs to obtain information on the bread-making quality of the flour or to determine the effects of various added ingredients. 2.81 Electrophoresis - A method for separating components of a complex mixture of substances by permitting them to migrate under the influence of an applied electric current. The rate of movement will depend on the charge per unit mass of each component in a mixture. 2.82 Emulsifying Agent - A substance that assists in the dispersion and suspension of an oil in water, for example, glycerol monostearate (G&IS). 2.83 Energy Input - The energy that is absorbed mechanical development by mixing. 2.84 Enzyme reaction without catalyst. by a dough during

A protein that has the ability to speed up a biological itself undergoing any change, also known as biological - It is a white crystalline synthetic powder, in flavour andis used as a substitute for it. which

2.85 Ethyl Vanillin resembles purevanilla

2.86 Extensograph - An instrument for measuring the elastic properties of bread doughs. The instrument stretches a cylinder of dough ( ~approximately 4 cm x 15 cm ) held at the two ends, by a hook engaging the dough piece in the middle and measures the resistance of the dougrl to extension. In some countries the instrument is used to measure the quality of wheat flour for bread-making. 2.87 Extraction Rate - The percentage of product obtained from a given amount of raw material. For example, 50 percent extraction rate means 500 kg of milled hour from 1 000 kg of wheat. 2.88 Farinograph - An instrument that mixes flour and water into a dough and produces a record of the resistance that the dough offers to the It also indicates the water mixing blades during the mixing cycle. absorption power of the flour under test and also the mixing tolerance. of plant or animal tissues comprising 2.89 Fat - A chemical constituent esters of various fatty acids and glycerol. In cereal technology, it may refer to the natural flour fat or the fat ( shortening ) that is added in the bread formula. 2.90 Ferment - A mixture of water, yeast, yeast nutrients and occassionally a small amount of flour that is allowed to ferment for several hours prior to being used for the production of bread dough. 11

IS:9373

- 1979 ( sugar ) that

2.91 Fermentable Carbohydrate - Any carbohydrate may be used by yeast to produce carbon dioxide.

2.92 Fermentation - Decomposition for organic substances organisms or enzymes, as of sugar by yeast to `ethyl alcohol In bread-making, fermentation is used to leaven ( dioxide. dough and to produce substances that are important for bread 2.93 Fermentation Tolerance - The ability of a dough desirable properties even after extended formentation important measure of bread-making quality of flour. 2.94 Floor Time - Short fermentation between the final mixing and dividing. 2.95 Formula - The ingredients that It is also known as recipe. dough. 2.96 Foxy red in colour time are allowed mixed in

by microand carbon raise ) the flavour. its an

to retain periods;

bread-making to form a

together

This is a term used when the baked bread comes out darksignifying either high maltose in flour or less fermentation. sugar found in sweet fruits and in in of

2.97 Fructose - A monosaccharide honey; also alled fruit sugar.

2.98 Fungus - A group of micro plants which are generally parasitic habit. The class includes moulds and mildews which are the cause spoilage in baked products. 2.99 Gas Production - The dioxide during fermentation. making quality of flour.

ability of a bread dough to produce carbon It is used in the assessment of breadgas the

2.100 Gas Retention - The ability of a bread dough to retain the ( carbon dioxide ) produced during fermentation. It is used in assessment of bread-making quality of flour.

2.101 Gassing Power - Measure of the ability of a bread dough ( including all ingredients ) to produce gas ( carbon dioxide ) that is required for leavening ( rising ). This is also a measure of baking quality of flour. 2.102 Gelatine - An animal protein, which has the property of swelling in cold water and dissolving in hot water. It is gummy by nature. When hot solutions of gelatine are cooled, they form jellies. 2.103 Gelatinizatian starch as by heating The breakdown of the granular structure of a starch slurry or a dough. The starch granules 12

IS : 9373 - 1979 swell and subsequently burst. Gela.tinization the development of crumb structure of bread. 2.104 2.105 plant. Genetic Germ Pertaining The embryo to characters is important in relation to

that are inherited. into the new

in a cereal grain which grows

2.106 Glassine - This is a super calendered, smooth, dense, transparent or semi-transparent sheet of paper used as a protective wrapper. The paper is grease resistant and has a high resistance to the passage of air and other vapours. 2.107 Gliadin - The fraction of wheat flour proteins that can be dissolved in a 70 percent solution of ethyl alcohol. It is also classified as prolamine. It provides elasticity to dough. 2.108 Globulin - The fraction dissolved in dilute salt solution. of wheat flour proteins that can be

2.109 Glucose - A monosaccharide fruits. It is the sugar that is formed by yeast enzymes.

sugar, occuring naturally in some in the degradation of starch of flour

2.110 Gluten - The rubber-like yellowish grey proteinaceous material that remains after the water solubles and starch are washed out of dough in a stream of water. It is a mixture of the two proteins glaidin and glutenin. 2.111 Gluten Swelling Test - A test for bread-making quality which determines the volume of gluten swollen in a dilute solution of lactic acid, also known as ` Rerliner test' and is similar to the `Sedimentation test'. 2.112 Glutenin - The fraction of wheat flour proteins that is insoluble in water, salt solution, or 70 percent ethyl alcohol solution, but is soluble in dilute alkali. It provides strength to dough. 2.113 Glyceryl Monostearate ( GMS ) - It is used as a `fat extender' as it has excellent emulsifying properties and and as a `bread softener', shows an affinity for both fat and water. 2.114 Golden Syrup - A partly refined sugar syrup made from partial of sugar ( sucrose ) using acid or enzyme or both. It has a inversion nice golden brown colour and is used in ~baked goods for its colour forming and flavouring qualities. 13

IS:9373-1979 -The coarseness 2.115 Granulation In baking technology, flour or sugar. size distribution of the flour. or fineness it pertains of a powder to the particle such as size and paper

2.116 Greaseproof Paper ( GP ) - This is a protective used for wrapping food products and other articles. 2.117 Hard The doughs Dough -. Doughs from which semi-sweet are fairly firm to the touch.

wrapping

biscuits

are made.

2.118 Hard Wheat - Wheat which, as a result of variety of breeding in combination with environmental factors during growth, has a vitreous endosperm, generally considered an advantage for the production of bread-making flours, as the protein content is generally superior in quality and quantity. 2.119 Hardened Oils Synonymous with hydrogenated oils.

2.120 Hops - A leavening with small bakers.

agent prepared

from hops leaves and popular

2.121 Hydration - The absorption or uptake of water by solid materials like flour. In bread-making, two aspects of hydration are important. The total amount absorbed ( hydration capacity ) by the flour and the rate at which it is absorbed ( rate of hydration ). 2.122 Hydrolysis or proteins, into in the process. 2.123 Icing of large molecules, such as starch -_ The degradation smaller fragments with the direct involvement of water

A coat of sugar that is used to dress baked products.

2.124 Improving Agent - Any substance that is added to flour or to dough to improve its performance during bread-making and to improve the quality of the bread that can be produced from the flour. 2.125 Inactivation ( Enzyme ) - The destruction of the catalytic activity -of the enzyme by chemical or physical means. 2.126 Intermediate where the dough 12 minutes between proof'. natural

Proof - The stage in the bread-making process is allowed to rest ( relax ) for short period up to the dividing and moulding. Also referred to as `first

2.127 Iodine Value - An indication of the degree of unsatura tion of oils or fats. It is measured as the percentage of iodine that is absorbed by the oil or fat on the basis of its own mass. 14

IS : 9373 - 1979 2.128 Knock Back - The punching or kneading of the dough during bulk fermentation to expel some of the carbon dioxide and improve subsequent fermentation. 2.129 Kraft - A term wrapping, manufactured sulphite process. used from for strong long-fibred papers primarily used for raw material and pulped by

2.130 Lactic Acid - The organic acid formed by Lactobacilli fermentation, for example, when milk sours. It is also produced during dough fermentation and is considered to be important in bread flavour. 2.131 Leavening Agent - Any substance such as yeast or sodium bicarbonate, used to raise or leaven dough by producing carbon dioxide. 2.132 Lecithin - Belongs to the class of substances known as lipoids, which are combinations of fat with nitrogen-containing substances and phosphorous. It is normally extracted from soyabean. It is also present in egg yolk. It acts as an emulsifier and is close to fat in chemical composition. 2.133 Loaf Volume - The volume main criteria of bread quality. of a loaf~of bread. bread-making It is one of process the from

2.134 -Make-Up Stage - A stage in the dividing to moulding of the dough pieces.

2.135 Malted Cereal Flour - Flour produced by ( sprouted or germinated and dried ) wheat and barley adjunct to bread flour to improve its gassing power.

grinding malted and used as an

sugar obtained by the action of amylases 2.136 Maltose - A disaccharide It comprises two glucose units and is the main fermentable on starch. sugar in dough. activity of 2.137 Maltose Value - An index of diastatic measured as the number of milligrams of maltose produced flour under standardized conditions. flour. It is from 10 g of

in consistency, 2.138 Margarine - A product which resembles butter colour and flavour, except that it contains no butter fat and is made from hydrogenated vegetable oils. 2.139 Maturing Agent - Any substance, usually a chemical ( for example potassium bromate ), that is added to flour or dough to improve the bread-making quality of the flour. 15

IS:9373

- 1979

2.140 Mechanical Development Baking Method - A baking method which uses vigorous mixing instead of a long fermentation period for the development of a dough with the optimum handling characteristics. 2.141 Mixing Time - Time consistency for bread-making. 2.142 Mixing Tolerance mixing without showing required to mix a dough to a proper extended

- The ability of a dough to withstand major changes in physical properties.

2.143 Mixograph - An instrument used for evaluating the dough mixing properties of wheat flour as a part of bread-making quality It measures and records the resistance that the dough offers evaluation. to the pins of the mixer while the dough is mixed. 2.144 Monocalcium Phosphate - A chemical substance added to dough as a yeast nutrient. The main nutrients provided by this substance are calcium and phosphorous. 2.145 Moulding Stage - A stage in the bread-making process where the dough piece is sheeted and rolled before being placed into the baking pan. 2.146 Oil of Lemon lemon. 2.147 Oil of Orange orange. An essential An essential oil obtained oil from the fresh from the peel peel of of

obtained

in the volume of the dough during 2.148 Oven Spring - Increase baking. This is equal to the volume of the baked loaf minus volume of the dough when put in the oven. 2.149 Oxidation - One of the ways by which the handling properties of dough can be improved so as to improve the quality of bread. It is brought about by substances referred to as oxidants, improvers or maturing agents. 2.150 Panning - The stage in the bread-making process moulded dough piece is placed in the baking pan or tins. when the

2.151 Patent Flour - The portion of a straight-run flour, better in colour and with a lower ash content than the remainder of the flour. The first processes used to make such flour were patented and hence the name. 2.152 Pekar Test - A test of flour quality colour of a flour against a standard sample. 16 made by comparing Each sample is placed the side

IS : 9373 - 1979 by side on a flat rectangular piece of wood, surface and compared with the standard. pressed down to a smooth

2.153 Physical Dough Test - Wheat quality tests that are based on a measurement of some physical properties ( for example elasticity, viscosity, resistance to extension ) of a dough produced by mixing flour and water and other ingredients as required. 2.154 Plane Sifter - A sifting machine consisting of a number of super-imposed sieves gyrating together in a horizontal plane, having a rotary motion. 2.155 Pliable - Easily bent or moulded, that can be readily moulded into loaf-size flexible. piece. It pertains to dough in the

2.156 Pneumatic Conveying - The transporting enclosed tubes using air under negative or positive conveying medium.

material of pressure as

2.157 Potassium Bromate - A chemical substance ( salt ) comprising of potassium, bromine and oxygen ( KBrOa ) that is used in the baking industry as a dough maturing agent ( improver ). It is a slow improver. 2.158 Potassium Iodate -A chemical substance comprising of potassium, iodine and oxygen ( KI03 ) that is used in the baking industry as a dough It is comparatively a fast improver. maturing agent ( improver ). 2.159 Proofing - The stage in the bread-making process when the dough is allowed to rise under the action of carbon dioxide produced by fermentation. 2.160 Protease - An enzyme ( biological catalyst ) that brings about a breakdown of proteins. In the baking industry, this enzyme from cereal or fungal sources is used to improve the handling properties of dough. 2.161 Protein .-- One of the chief constituents of plant and animal tissues containing carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and frequently sulphur. In wheat, protein is important for baking and nutritional qualities. - The spoilage of oils and fats resulting in a deterio2.162 Rancidity ration of flavour. Rancidity may be of two types. One type is caused by combination with oxygen and is known as oxidative rancidity. The other is caused by the breakdown of the fat triglyceride units and is called hydrolytic rancidity. 17

IS:9373-

1979

substance that is capable of 2.163 Reducing Agent - A chemical adding hydrogen or removing oxygen from another substance, hence reducing it. Also, in some instances it is capable of splitting chemical bonds. In baking, it usually refers to agents, for example cysteine that In chemical can break ( cleave ) the disulfide bonds in flour proteins. or ~mechanical development of doughs, it helps in reducing the mixing time. 2.164 Ripening - The doughs that are required development of for bread-making proper during physical properties fermentation. of

2.165 Rope - A bacterial infection occuring in bread during periods of hot wheather. First signof a rope is a sour `Fruity' odour followed by a stickiness in the crumb and darkening of crumb colour usually in patches. Rope can become evident within 24 hours after baking. This can be controlled by high standards of cleanliness and by use of suitable antibacterial agents. in which certain 2.166 Ropy Bread - Bread ( mostly Bacillus subtilis and related species ) storage, with the effect that the bread produces a shows in its interior characteristic signs of decay; conversion of the crumb into a moist, sticky thrc ads when extended. spore-forming bacteria have developed during characteristic smell and these may include the substance, leaving slimy

2.167 Rotary Mouldiog Machine - A biscuit Mhich an engraved roller is used to form the biscuit.

forming

machine

in

2.168 Rounding - A stage in the bread-making process when the sealed or divided dough pieces are shaped or rounded to provide a skin around the dough to hold the gas produced by fermentation and to eliminate some of the stickiness. 2.169 Rye Bread - Bread made of coarse or not too fine from rye, with no intentional addition of any other cereal. meal milled

2170 Sedimentation Test ( Zeleny ) - A wheat protein quality test ( for bread-making ) in which the flour is suspended and allowed to swell in a solution of lactic acid. The volume of the sediment ( in millilitres ) consisting of swollen gluten and starch, after standing for a predetermined period is the sedimentation value. 2.171 Shorten&g - A fat used to biscuits, and softness to bread crumbs. 18 impart crispness and flakiness to

IS : 9373 - 1979 2.172 Sifting - The process of passing pulverised substance through fine perforated screens or meshes in order either to remove large impurities or to properly blend a mixture of powders or to grade a substance according to particle size. 2.173 Slack Dough - A dough that is too loose or too weak for proper handling in the bread-making process. It is also termed as `Bucky'. 2.174 Slip Point liquid. The temperature at which a solid fat melts into a

2.175 Sodium Bicarbonate ( NaHC03 ) - A white powder much used as a chemical leavening agent. It releases only part of its carbon dioxide gas on heating. Reaction with an acid substance releases all the available carbon dioxide. It is an essential constituent of baking powders. 2.176 Sodium Diacetate - A chemical added to dough slow down the development of mould in bread. 2.177 Sodium Propionate slow down the development - A chemical added of mould in bread. to prevent or

to dough to prevent

or

or breeding in 2.178 Soft Wheat - Wheat which as a result of variety combination with environmental factors during growth, has a white opaque endosperm; generally considered more suitable for the production of cake and biscuit flours. 2.179 Solid %at Index - A property proportion of solid fat in the mixture. of a mixed fat that relates to the

2.180 Sponge and Dough Process - A bread-making process that uses In the first stage the sponge is made of two stages to prepare the dough. 50 to 75 percent of flour, 35 to 50 percent of water, part of sugar and yeast nutrients and is allowed to ferment for 3 to 4& hours. In the second stage, the fermented sponge is placed in the mixer and the remaining This is called the dough ingredients added and the final dough is mixed. stage. 2.181 Staling - The complex changes that occur inbread during storage after baking that lead to loss of freshness or hardening to the point where the bread loses it edible quality. 2.182 Starch - A major hydrogen and oxygen. constituent of wheat flour containing carbon,

19

IS:9373

-1979

2.183 Starch Damange - Disruption of the natural structure of the starch granules by biochemical ( amylases ), chemical ( alkali ) or physical ( grinding or milling ) measures. 2.184 Steoryl-2-Lactylate - A fat-like substance that is added to dough to improve its handling properties and thereby improve the quality ~of the bread. These are either sodium ( SSL ) or calcium ( CSL ) lactyiates. 2.185 Straight-Dough Process - A bread-making process in which the dough is made by a single mixing of all the ingredients. 2.186 Straight Run Flour.A grade of flour produced together all the basic flour streams made in a mill. by combining

2.187 Strength of Flour - The capacity of a flour to produce well leavened loaves of large bold volume, which is a desirable characteristic of bread-making flour. 2.188 Strong Flour - A flour that takes up a relatively large quantity of water and produces a dough that requires a relatively long mixing for proper development. Usually a flour of high quality for bread-making, but unsuitable for biscuit and cake manufacture. 2.189 Supplement -- An additive the processing, edible or nutritional added to flour or qualities. Test' dough to improve

2.190 Swift Test - Also known as `Aeration of the suitability of the fat.

and is an

indication

2.191 Viscosity Test - A test based on the determination of the viscosity ( thickness, consistency, resistance to flour) of a mixture or a sometimes used as a solution of a substance and water. In flour testing, measure of baking quality. 2.192 Votator - A heat exchanger in which it is possible to effect simultaneously all the physical treatment necessary to produce high grade smooth shortenings and margarine in a continuous operation. 2.193 Weak Flour - A flour that takes up a relatively small quantity of water and produces a dough that requires a relatively short mixing for development. Usually a flour of low quality for bread-making, but preferable for biscuits and cake making. 2.194 Wheat Bread - Bread made of flour or meal milled with no intentional addition of another cereal. 20 from wheat,

IS:9373 2.195 Wheatmeal Bread - Bread made of wheat meal, that containing part or all of the kernel, with or without the germ. 2.196 Wholemeal Bread - Bread made of whole meal, containing all parts of the kernel, including the germ. that

- 1979 is, meal is, meal

txelrisiae) that 2.197 Yeast - Any of the family of fungi ( S~~CO~OTP.YMS can grow in presence of starch or sugar to produce carbon dioxide ( and alcohol ); used as a leavening agent in bread. It is used in baking industry in compressed form ( fresh ) or dry powdered form. ( granules ) 2.198 Yeast Nutrient - Inorganic substances required for proper yeast activity ( for example, nitrogen and phosphorous ). 2.199 Yellow Pigment - A natural yellow pigment in flour which is It detracts from the desirable white colour and is mainly xanthophyll. usually bleached by chemicals such as benzoyl peroxide.

21

INDIAN ON BAKERY IS: 9664975 1008-1971 loll-1968 1159-1967 1320-1972 1483-1979 1667-1971 1668-1975 1960-1979 2397-1972 2650- 1975 3838-1966 3839-1966 6287-1971 6360-1971 6747-1972 7187-1974 7592-1975 8555-1977 8556-1977 8806- 1978 9373-1979

STANDARDS

AND

CONFECTIONERY

Desiccated coconut ( first dsion ) Hard boiled sugar confectionery Biscuits ( jirst revision ) Baking powder Baker's yeast ( Jirst revision > White bread ( second revision ) Toffees Lozenges ( second revision ) Wheatmeal bread ( second revision ) Wafers ( jirst revision ) BOMBAY HALWA ( first revision ) Self-raising flour Food yeast Method of sampling and analysis of sugar confectionery Lacto bonbon Chewing gum and bubble gum Ice cream cones Peanut candy Bread rusk Bun Pan goods ( dragees ) confectionery Glossary of terms relating to bakery industry

