( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS t 6791- 1973

Indian Standard
METHOD OF TESTING NATURAL DURABILITY OF TIMBER AND EFFICACY OF THE WOOD PRESERVATIVES AGAINST MARINE BORERS
Timber Sectional Committee, BDC 9

Chairman SHRI T. N. SRIVAETAVA
Members SHBI B. K. BHALLA Ssrar G. C. DAS SHRI V. N. DESEPANDE DIRECTOR, NAVAL CONSTRUCTION DR JOSEPH GEORQE Da D. C. ROY ( Alternate) SHRI D. P. GHOSH SHRI S. A. HEJMADI SHRI K. C. JAIN DR S. KRISHNA SWAMY SHRI K. S. LAULY

Rejmsenting Ministry of Agriculture Western India Match Company Ltd, Bombay National Test House, Calcutta Engineer-in-Chief's Branch ( Ministry of Defence ) Naval Headquarters ( Ministry of Defence ) Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, Bangalore Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) Ministry of Agriculture Forest Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh Railway Board, Ministry of Railways Federation of Indian Plywood & Panel Industry, New Delhi Directorate General of Technical Development Forest Department, Government of Himachal Pradesh Assam Railways & Trading Company Ltd, Margherita ( Assam ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) Forest Research Institute St Colleges, Dehra Dun National Buildings Organization, New Delhi Forest Research Institute & Colleges (Wood Anatomy Branch ), Dehra Dun Forest Research Institute & Colleges (Timber Mechanics Branch ), Dehra Dun ( Continued on page

SERIJ. S. MATEARU
&RI J. N. MULLICK SERI BIMAL NAG

SHRI K. S. NAIR ( AlZernote)

DR A. N. NAYER &RI U. B. KANCHAN (Alternate) PRESIDENT DR A. V. R. RAO DR R. S. RATRA ( Alternate ) SHRI K. RAMESH RAO SHRI A. C. SEKHAR

2)

BUREAU

OF

@ Copyright 1973 INDIAN STANDAI<DS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS t 6791-1973
( contimedfrompuge 1 )
Membars !hlbI SRARANSINQH SHRI F. C. SEARMA SHEI N. K. SHARMA SBBI R. C. SAXENA ( Alternnte) SHBI M; SWARUP SHRI D. AJITHASIXHA, Director ( Civ Engg )

Representing
Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals Directorate-General of Civil Aviation ( Ministry of Tourism & Civil Aviation ) Forest Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh Paharpur Timbers Private Ltd, Calcutta Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Member )

SHRI K. M. &`fATEUR Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI

Timber Seasoning and Treatment
Conoener DR A.
PIJRUSHOTE~M

Subcommittee,

BDC 9 : 3
Company,

Manufacturing Plywood Indian Dandeli ( Mysore ) OFFORESTS

Members Agriculture & Forest Department, Government of Maharashtra Agriculture & Forest Department, Government of CHIEE CONSERVATOR ov FORESTS Mysore FOREST UTILIZATION OBFICER ( Altemuts ) Forest Department, Government of Asram CHIEP CONSERVATOR OF FORESTS -DISTRICT FOREST OFFICER, SAW Eorest Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh ~MILL DIVISION, RAJAHMUNDRY Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, DR JOSEPH GEORQE Bangalore DR S. ANANTHANARAYANAN (Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DC1 ) SHRI S. K. KAPUR Railway Board, Ministry of Railways DR S. KRISANA SWA~UY Directorate General of Technical Development Sam J. S. MATHARTJ Shalimar Tar Products ( 1935 ) Ltd, Calcutta Sanr GEORQE PHILLIP National Buildings Organization, New Delhi DR R. S. RATRA Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun Da M. C. TEWARI Forest Research Institute & Colleges ( Wood SHRI S. N. SHARMA Seasoning Branch ), Dehra Dun ASCU Hickson Private Ltd, Calcutta SHRI V. R. SONTI SRRI S. SHIVAJI ( Alternate ) CHIEFCONSERVATOR

2

fSr6791.1973

Indian Standard
METHOD OF TESTING NATURAL DURABILITY OF TIMBER AND EFFICACY OF THE WOOD PRESERVATIVES AGAINST MARINE BORERS
0. FOREWORD

on 16 February 1973, after the draft finalized by the Timber Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Timber is extensively used under marine conditions for a variety of purposes, such as for jetties, piles, wharves, bulwarks, floating fenders, fishing crafts and other sea-going vessels for its anti-corrosive and antimagnetic properties, high elasticity and high salvage value. However, it is susceptible to attack by the marine organisms and this hazard is quite severe in tropical seas. In our own waters, as-many as 36 species of wood-boring organisms have so far been identified as riddling the wooden structures and causing great concern to all the users of timber in this environment, namely, the Indian Navy, the harbour authorities and the various fisheries departments. It is imperative, therefore, to assess the natural durability of various indigenous timbers under marine conditions before actually putting them to use and also to find out the efficacy of wood-preservatives which could be utilized to increase the service-life of particularly the low naturally durable timber species. These aspects of timber are considered in this standard. 0.3 Details of preservatives and method of preservative treatment of timber have been covered in IS : 401-1967*. The present standard covers the method of laboratory test for efficacy of such wood preservatives under marine conditions. 0.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 0.5 In the preparation of this standard valuable data were supplied by the Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun. `Code of practice for preservationof timber ( second r&ion
).

0.1This Indian Standard was adopted.by the Indian Standards Institution

3

IS : 6791.1973
0.6 In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the following methods of testing under marine conditions: a) the natural durability and of heartwood of indigenous timber species,

b) the efficacy of wood preservatives. 2. TESTING PROCEDURE 2.1 Size Size of the specimens to be tested shall be 30 x 5 x 5 cm.

2.2 selection of Timber for Specimens-All commercial species of timbers suitable for use in sea water should be tested from specimens taken from the heartwood for evaluating natural durability. For each If species, at least two trees should be selected for taking out specimens. any species occurs in more than one growing area and there are considerable variations in their properties, sets of two trees should be obtained from each of the growing areas, 2.3 Number of Specimens to be Taken Out for Tests -For the purpose of comparison between treated and untreated specimens, it is preferable to select one preservative belonging to the oil type, creosote, and another of the water soluble type, such as copper-chrome-arsenic composition. These should be impregnated in the timber at least at 2 different levels of absorption ( 160 kg/mS and 320 kg/m3 in case of creosote or creosote-fuel oil mixture 1 : 1, and 16 kg/m5 and 32 kg/ma dry salt in case of copper-chrome-arsenic-composition). Thus, 4 treated and 1 untreated specimens should be used for each tree of the same species. Three sets of similarly prepared test specimens shall be used for each level of absorption. 2.4 Method of Exposure - Each of the specimens so treated with these two different preservatives shall be suspended vertically at the opposite sides of a rectangular raft ( see Fig. 1 ) and the untreated specimens ( controls ) on the other two sides of the raft using suitable ropes for tying at 5 cm intervals commencing from 0.35 m below the low water mark. If the number of specimens to be tested is large, the `central hall' of the raft can also be used.
*Rules

&

for roundingoff numericalvalues ( revised).

4

-2---

-.-_-

-----_

-

_

-.

GENERAL

VIEW,

OF RAFT

--go ILOCK

m
3Dx5x5cm

~-

k__
360 .--_-__-_-_

g*--

DETAILS

OF RAFT

DESIGN
5

NoTm - There are 15 rack.s, 7 in the central hall and 8 around the raft ( each Ml-cm mnre blocks per string, thus allowing a total of 300 blocks per raft. .lII dimensions in centimetrcs. FIG. 1

long ), and capable

of holding

strings SvitIl 4 or

c

I .

RAFT

5

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 6791 2.5

- 1973

Test Sites - The number of test sites would depend upon the variation found in the fauna1 composition and also, on the intensity of their attack, As many test sites as possible should be selected.

2.6 Observations - Monthly observations in the first year, quarterly in the second year, half-yearly in the third year, and yearly later on, are considered sufficient. 2.7 Recording of Data - The number of borer holes of each major borer species in this test site are to be counted on each of the four surfaces The approximate area of the borer and the two end surfaces separately. holes made by each major borer on each of the six surfaces is then evaluated and finally the percentage of the borer holes on all the surfaces put together, as the percentage of total surface area evaluated. Even though, it is not easy to correlate the area of borer holes with the loss in strength, the specimens may be rejected when 50 percent -of the total area is covered by borer holes. If there are facilities for evaluating the strength, this additional information could also be collected, which may be useful in correlating the intensity of attack by any borer species with the corresponding damage on strength properties of the specimens. 2.8 Efficacy of Wood Preservatives - The efficacy of wood preservatives could be evaluated by using at least three levels of absorption of each preservative and employing at least two non-durable species of timber, such as Mangz~m indica (mango ); Pinus roxburghii ( chir ) which are easy to impregnate. Other details for carrying out these tests will be the same as given in 2.4 to 2.7. 2.8.1 A suitable statistical design shall-be worked out for installation of the specimens according to the number of species selected for testing. The result of the observations shall be subjected to standard statistical analysis. If tests are carried out at different times, at least two standard ( hardwood ) and the species, one belonging to the broad-leaved other to the coniferous ( softwood ) ( sfe 2.8 ) treated by two standard preservatives as in 2.3, shall be tried each time, the results of which could form a link for the purpose of evaluating the results obtained at different times. The preservatives and treatment processes shall conform to IS : 401-1967*.

-*Code of practice for preservationof timber (,&md revision ). 7

ON
SEASONING AND TREATMENT OF TIMBER

IS:
287-1973 401-1967 1141-1973 1902-1961 2683-1966 Recommendations for maximum permissible moisture content `of timber used for different purposes in different climatic zones (second revision ) Code of practice Code of practice Code of practice purposes for preservation for preservation of timber (second revision ) and cane for non-structural for seasoning of timber (first rsuision )

of bamboo

Guide for installation

of pressure impregnation

plants for timber (first revision )

2753( Part I )-I964 Method of estimation of preservatives in treated timber and in treating solutions: Part I Determination of copper, arsenic, chromium, zinc, boron, creosote and-fuel oil 2753( Part II)-1968 Methods of estimation of preservatives in treated timber and in treating solutions: Part II Determination of copper ( in copper napthenate ) and pentachlorophenol 4833-1968 4873-1968 6341-1971 6497-1972 Method Method for the field testing for preservatives for the laboratory in wood species against fungi soft rot against testing of wood preservatives

Method of laboratory testing of efficacy of wood preservatives by agar-block method Method of testing the efficacy durability of timbers in cooling of preservatives towers and

evaluating

the natural

