RAT Alte IS 3370 (Part 3) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Wells aver Garart cat afdenita at F 
feru hche wiat — ofa HaT 
HUT 3 qda cshle 
( TECH FRAT ) 


Concrete Structures for Retaining 
Aqueous Liquids — Code of Practice 


Part 3 Prestressed Concrete 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 23.020.10; 91.080.40 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay fereft — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2021 Price Group 6 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 3) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


The design and construction methods in reinforced concrete and prestressed concrete structures for retaining 
aqueous liquids are influenced by the prevailing construction practices, the physical properties of the materials 
and the climatic condition. To lay down uniform requirements of structures for the retaining liquids giving due 
consideration to the above mentioned factors, this standard has been published in four parts. The other parts in 
the series are: 


Part 1 General requirements 
Part 2 Plain and reinforced concrete 
Part 4 Design tables 


This standard was first published in 1967. This revision has been brought out with a view to keeping abreast 
with the rapid development in the field of construction technology and concrete design and also to bring further 
modifications in the light of experience gained while applying the earlier version of this standard. In this revision, 
the title of the standard has been modified from ‘Concrete structures for storage of liquids — Code of practice: 
Part 3 Prestressed concrete structures’ to ‘Concrete structures for retaining aqueous liquids — Code of practice: 
Part 3 Prestressed concrete’ for better representation of the contents of the revised standard. 


While the common methods of design and construction have been covered in this standard, for design of structures 
of special forms or in unusual circumstances, special literature may be referred to or special systems of design 
and construction may be permitted on production of satisfactory evidence regarding their adequacy and safety by 
analysis or test or by both. 


In this standard it has been assumed that the design of liquid retaining structures, whether of plain, reinforced or 
pre-stressed concrete is entrusted to a qualified engineer and that the execution of the work is carried out under the 
direction of a qualified and experienced engineer. 


The concrete used in liquid retaining structures should have low permeability. This is important not only for its 
direct effect on leakage but also because it is one of the main factors influencing durability, resistance to leaching, 
chemical attack, erosion, abrasion and frost damage and the protection from corrosion of embedded steel. The 
standard, therefore, incorporates provisions in design and construction to take care of this aspect. 


The requirements of IS 456 : 2000 ‘Plain and reinforced concrete — Code of practice (fourth revision)’ and 
IS 1343 : 2012 ‘Prestressed concrete — Code of practice (second revision)’, in so far as they apply, shall be deemed 
to form part of this standard except where otherwise laid down in this standard. For long term performance of 
the structure, use of dense, nearly impermeable and durable concrete, adequate concrete cover without macro 
defects in cover concrete, proper detailing practices, control of cracking, effective quality assurance measures in 
line with IS 456 and good construction practices particularly in relation to construction joints should be ensured. 
Designer should take appropriate measures to the need for chemical resistance while dealing with liquids or 
sewage/effluents. 


Following are the significant modifications incorporated in this revision: 


a) Scope and provisions of the standard have been updated to reflect the applicability of the standard to 
concrete structures retaining all aqueous liquids. 


b) Design recommendations are generally applicable to the retaining of aqueous liquids having temperature 
not exceeding 50 °C, and the same has been indicated. 


c) Anew sub-clause on loads has been added. 
d) Limit state method has been introduced and working stress method has been removed. 
e) All the design provisions, as per limit state method, have been revised and made comprehensive. 


f) Prestressed concrete members retaining liquid shall be designed as either Type 1 or Type 2, based on 
tensile stresses permitted. 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 3370 (Part 3) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


CONCRETE STRUCTURES FOR RETAINING 
AQUEOUS LIQUIDS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


PART 3 PRESTRESSED CONCRETE 


( First Revision ) 
ESCORE IS No. Title 
1.1 This standard (Part 3) lays down requirements 456 : 2000 Plain and reinforced concrete — 
applicable specifically to design of prestressed concrete Code of practice (fourth revision) 
structures, intended for storage or retaining of aqueous 1343 : 2012 Prestressed concrete — Code of 
liquids. A concrete structure or member can function as practice (second revision) 
liquid retaining, when the amount of liquid permeating 3370 Conse dimus toe raie 


through its thickness, under hydraulic gradient, is 
practically negligible. 


The recommendations are generally applicable to the 
storage/retaining of aqueous liquids having temperature 
not exceeding 50 °C and no detrimental action on 
concrete and steel or where sufficient precautions have 
been taken to ensure protection of concrete and steel 
from damage due to action of such liquids. 


1.2 This standard does not cover the requirements for 
concrete structures for storage/retaining of hot liquids, 
hazardous materials and liquids of low viscosity and 
high penetrating power, such as petrol, diesel and 
oil. This standard also does not cover dams, pipes, 
pipelines, tunnels and damp-proofing of basements. 


This standard does not cover all the requirements of 
pressurised tanks, floating structures and tanks having 
the additional requirement of gas tightness. The 
selection and design of coatings and linings are not 
covered in this standard. 


1.3 This standard applies to members having prestress 
in one or more direction. For liquid retaining structures, 
members not prestressed in any direction shall be 
designed conforming to IS 456, IS 3370 (Part 1) and 
IS 3370 (Part 2), and additional requirements, if any, 
given in this standard for the junction of such members 
with liquid retaining members. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


aqueous liquids — Code of practice: 


General 
revision) 


(Part 1) : 2021 requirements (second 


Plain and Reinforced concrete 
(second revision) 


(Part 2) : 2021 


(Part 4) : 2021 
12330 :1988 


Design tables (first revision) 


Sulphate resisting Portland 
cement — Specification 


3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


Design and construction of prestressed concrete liquid 
retaining structures shall comply with the requirement 
of IS 3370 (Part 1) and IS 1343, unless otherwise laid 
down in this standard. 


4 DESIGN 


4.1 General 


4.1.1 Provisions shall be made for all conditions 
of stresses that may occur in accordance with the 
principles of mechanics, recognized methods of design 
and sound engineering practice. In particular, adequate 
consideration shall be given to the effects of monolithic 
construction in the assessment of axial forces, bending 
moments and shear. 


4.1.2 Before taking up the detailed design, the designer 
should satisfy himself on the correct estimate of 
loads and adequate static equilibrium of the structure, 
particularly in regard to safety against overturning of 
overhanging members [see 10.1 of IS 3370 (Part 1)]. 


4.1.3 The design of members in contact with the liquid 
on any face or enclosing the space above the liquid 
shall be based on consideration of adequate resistance 
to cracking as well as adequate strength. 


IS 3370 (Part 3) : 2021 


4.2 Loads 


4.2.1 The provisions given in 4.2.1 to 4.2.5 and 4.2.7 
to 4.2.12 of IS 3370 (Part 2) shall apply. 


4.2.2 Allowance should be made for the effects of 
any adverse soil pressure on the walls, according to 
the compaction and/or surcharge on the soil and the 
condition of the structure during construction and in 
service. Relief may be given for beneficial soil pressure 
effects on the walls of liquid retaining structures in the 
container full condition (see 6.2). 


4.3 Method of Design 


4.3.1 General basis of design shall be in line with the 
requirements of IS 1343 and IS 456, except where 
stated otherwise in this standard. Structural elements 
that are not exposed to the retained liquid shall be 
designed in accordance with the requirements of 
IS 456 and IS 1343, as applicable. 


4.3.2 While designing the liquid retaining concrete 
structure, plastic redistribution of moments as per 
IS 456 shall not apply. For design of flat slab, estimate 
of bending moments as per direct design method of 
IS 456 shall not apply. Bending moments and stresses 
shall be worked out based on methods such as finite 
element method. 


4.3.3 Additional provisions for design of floors, walls 
and roof shall be as given in 5, 6 and 7, respectively. 


4.3.4 Prestressed members shall be designed for the 
exposure condition as per 5 of IS 3370 (Part 1). 


4.4 LIMIT STATE DESIGN 


4.4.1 Limit State Requirements 


All relevant limit states shall be considered in the 
design to ensure an adequate degree of safety and 
serviceability. 


4.4.1.1 Limit state of collapse (ultimate limit state) 
The recommendations given in IS 1343 shall be 
followed. 

4.4.1.2 Limit state of serviceability 


a) Deflection — The limit of deflection shall be as 
per IS 1343. 

b) Cracking — The cracking shall be limited by 
checking tension in concrete under limit state of 
serviceability, as per 4.4.2 and 8.1. 


4.4.2 Cracking Control 


The prestressed concrete members retaining liquid 
shall be designed either as, Type 1 or Type 2 members, 
as given in 4.4.2.3. 


4.4.2.1 For the purpose of analysis of stresses, a statically 
determinate member subjected to axial (or nearly axial) 
prestressing, should be assumed to have a minimum 
eccentricity of prestressing 20 mm or 0.05 times the 
overall thickness in the plane of bending, whichever is 
less. The requirement of minimum eccentricity need not 
be considered in case of indeterminate and cylindrical 
prestressed members. 


4.4.2.2 For the prestressed member, in the direction 
other than prestress, the crack-width requirement as 
given in 4.4.3 of IS 3370 (Part 2) with limiting crack 
width of 0.1 mm shall govern the design, in addition to 
requirements given in this standard. 


4.4.2.3 Flexural tensile stress in concrete 


In the direction of prestress, tension shall not be allowed 
at the joints in the members (cold/construction joint) or 
junctions of members (cast separately or precast) under 
design load. The criteria of tensile stress for Type 1 and 
Type 2 prestressed concrete members shall be as follows: 


Type 1 member — No tensile stress under normal 
working loads. 


Type 2 member — The design flexural tensile 
stress shall not exceed the design flexural strength 
of concrete, in case of pre-tensioned members, and 
0.8 times the design flexural strength of concrete, 
in case of post-tensioned members (these limits 
are also applicable for stress at transfer). 


The design flexural strength shall be 0.5 times 
the characteristic flexural strength of concrete, f., 
which should be determined from the test results 
on the concrete mix being used. The values given 
in Table 1 may be used in the absence of the test 
results. 


Table 1 Design Flexural Tensile Stress, f 
for Type 2 Members 


( Clause 4.4.2.3 ) 


Limiting Stress for the 


Characteristic Concrete (in MPa) 
Strength tr N —~, 
M35 M40 M45 M50 and above 
Characteristic 3.90 4.20 4.40 4.60 


flexural strength, f, 


For temporary load, which may be rare or occur few 
times in the life of structure, the design flexural tensile 
stresses may be increased by 25 percent, provided 
that the stress is compressive under normal conditions 
to ensure that any cracks which might occur would 
close. In such case, tendons should be well distributed 
throughout tension zone, in case of pre-tensioned 
members and supplemented by reinforcement near the 
tension face, in case of post-tensioning. 


Design maximum wind or design seismic loads may be 
treated as temporary loads. 


4.4.3 Exposure Conditions 


For the purpose of design, type of member should 
be decided by the designer on the basis of exposure 
conditions. However, the following guidance may be 
adopted: 


a) A member in contact with the liquid, considered 
to be subject to very severe/extreme exposure 
conditions or liquid can penetrate in the concrete in 
normal service condition at a pressure (equivalent 
to water column) more than 25 times the concrete 
thickness, shall be designed as Type 1. 


b) A concrete member in which liquid can penetrate 
at a pressure less than the limit in (a), may be 
designed as Type 2. 


4.4.4 In the direction of prestress, the member shall 
not have residual tension due to direct tension in the 
member. 


4.4.5 Shrinkage and Creep of Concrete 


The provisions regarding shrinkage and creep shall 
comply with the requirement of IS 1343. Where 
reservoirs are protected with an internal impermeable 
lining, consideration should be given to the possibility 
of concrete eventually drying out. Unless the engineer 
is satisfied that the lining has sufficient crack-bridging 
properties, allowance for the increased effect of drying 
shrinkage should be made in the design. 


4.4.6 Losses in Prestress 


While assessing the stresses in concrete and steel 
during tensioning operations and later in service, due 
regard shall be paid to all losses and variations in 
stress resulting from creep of concrete and steel, the 
shrinkage of concrete, the shortening of concrete at 
transfer, friction and slip of anchorage. Requirements 
given in IS 1343 shall be complied with. 


4.4.7 For cylindrical prestressed tanks, additional 
requirements as specified in 8 shall also be satisfied. 


5 FLOORS 


5.1 Provision of Movement Joints 


Movement joints shall be provided in accordance 
with 11 of IS 3370 (Part 1). 


5.2 Floors of Tanks Resting on Ground 


If the tank is resting directly on ground, its floor may 
be constructed of concrete with the nominal percentage 
of reinforcement conforming to IS 3370 (Part 1) and 
IS 3370 (Part 2), if not prestressed. 


5.2.1 Under normal circumstances PCC base concrete 
shall be of grade not leaner than M15; where injurious 
soils or aggressive water are expected, the base concrete 
shall be of grade not leaner than M20, and if necessary, 


IS 3370 (Part 3) : 2021 


a sulphate resisting portland cement conforming to 
IS 12330 or other special cement as given in IS 456 
may be used. 


5.3 Floors of Tanks Resting on Supports 
See 5.3 of IS 3370 (Part 2). 


6 WALLS 


6.1 Provision of Joints 


6.1.1 Sliding Joints at Base of the Wall 


Where it is desired to allow the wall to expand or 
contract separately from the floors, or to prevent 
moment at the base of the wall owing to its fixity with 
the floor, sliding joints may be employed. 


6.1.2 Considerations should be given to the positions 
of the joints in the floor affecting the spacing of vertical 
movement joints in wall. While the majority of these 
joints may be the partial or complete contraction 
type, sufficient joints of the expansion type should be 
provided to satisfy the requirements of 11 of IS 3370 
(Part 1). 


6.2 Effect of Earth Pressure 


When a tank wall is built in the ground or has earth 
fill against it, relief in bending moments due to 
simultaneous action of water pressure inside the wall 
and that due to earth pressure (up to 0.5 times the 
active earth pressure only) from outside the wall may 
be made, provided that, 


a) there is no risk of slip in the embankment or fear 
of a reduction in the earth pressure arising from 
shrinkage or future excavations or any other 
cause; and 


b 


wm 


the earth pressure allowed by way of relief in 
the bending moment caused by internal water 
pressure is the minimum which can be relied upon 
under the most unfavourable conditions possible, 
including those under which the reservoir is to be 
tested for liquid-tightness. 


7 ROOFS 


7.1 Provision of Movement Joints 


The movement joints in the roof shall correspond with 
those in walls, if roof and walls are monolithic to avoid 
the possibility of sympathetic cracking. This is not 
applicable if provision for movement between the roof 
and the wall is made by means of a sliding joint. 


7.2 Loading 


Roofs should be designed for gravity loads, such as the 
weight of roof slab, earth cover, if any, live loads and 
mechanical equipment. Imposed load arrangements 
which can give more critical bending moments should 
also be considered. 


IS 3370 (Part 3) : 2021 


They should also be designed for upward pressure, if 
the tank is subjected to internal pressure or if roof is 
subjected to upward pressure due to sloshing of liquid. 


7.2.1 An adequate load condition to ensure safety in 
case of unequal intensity of loading, which may occur 
during construction and the placing of the earth cover, 
should be considered in the design. In roof design, 
allowance should be made for the temporary condition 
of some spans loaded and other spans unloaded, even 
though in the final state the load may be small and/or 
evenly distributed. 


7.2.2 In tanks having fixed or floating covers, the gas 
pressure developed above liquid surface shall be added 
to liquid pressure for design of wall. 


7.3 Liquid-tightness 


In case of tanks intended for the retaining treated 
water or liquid for domestic purposes, the roof shall be 
made liquid-tight. This may be achieved by designing 
the roof as liquid retaining member, and by providing 
slopes to ensure adequate drainage. 


7.4 Protection Against Corrosion 


Protective measures shall be taken to prevent the 
underside of the roof from corrosion due to condensation 
and chlorine attack. It shall also be designed as a liquid 
retaining member, particular care being taken that the 
stipulations regarding minimum cover to reinforcement 
and crack width are complied with. 


8 CYLINDRICAL PRESTRESSED TANKS 


8.1 For cylindrical structures prestressed 
circumferentially and vertically, the following design 
recommendations shall apply: 


a) The jacking force in circumferential tendons 
shall not exceed 75 percent of the characteristic 
strength. 


b) The principal compressive stress in the concrete 
should not exceed 0.3 f. 


c) The temporary vertical moment induced during 
the circumferential prestressing operation in 
the partially stressed condition should also be 
considered. 


The maximum value of the flexural stress (caused 
due to moment in vertical direction) may be 
assumed to be numerically equal to 0.3 times the 
circumferential compressive stress, in the absence 
of FEM results. Where the tensile stress would 
exceed | MPa, either the vertical prestress should 
be increased or the circumferential prestress 
should be built up in stages, with each stage 
involving a progressive application of prestress 
from one end of the cylinder. 


d) When the structure is full (with liquid), there 
should be no resultant tension in the concrete 
in the circumferential direction, after making 
allowances for all losses of prestress, and on the 
assumption that the top and bottom edges of the 
wall are free of all restraint. 


e 


wm 


The bending moment in the vertical direction 
should be estimated on the basis of a restraint 
equal to one-half of that provided by a hinged 
bottom, if the bottom of the wall is free to slide. In 
other cases, where sliding at the bottom of the wall 
is prevented, the moment in the vertical direction 
should be estimated for the actual restraint at the 
bottom of the wall. The tensile stress resulting 
from the vertical moments should not exceed 
1.0 MPa in concrete. 


f) If the structure is to be emptied and filled at 
frequent intervals, or may be left empty for a 
prolonged period, the structure should be designed 
so that there is no residual tension in the concrete 
at any point when the structure is full or empty. 


Cylindrical concrete structures which are 
prestressed circumferentially and reinforced 
vertically may be allowed to have tensile stresses 
not exceeding 1 MPa. The design for the vertical 
reinforcement shall be as per IS 3370 (Part 2) with 
limiting crack width of 0.1 mm. 


S 


The average shear stress on the gross cross-section 
of the concrete under serviceability state should 
not exceed one third of the maximum shear stress 
specified in Table 9 of IS 1343. 


8 


8.2 Prestressing wires may be placed outside the walls, 
provided they are protected with pneumatic mortar. 
Prestressing shall be protected by proper coating before 
applying pneumatically placed mortar. However, in 
industrial areas or near the sea coast, where there is a 
possibility of inadequate protection against corrosion 
by such mortar, the cables should preferably be placed 
within the wall and grouted. Non-bonded tendons may 
be used provided that they and their anchorages are 
adequately protected against corrosion. 


Pneumatically placed mortar should have water 
cement ratio less than 0.40, low permeability and good 
adhesion. 


8.3 Radial tensile stress across the thickness direction 
should be checked to protect prestressed concrete 
cylindrical cell from delamination, where outer layer of 
concrete separates from inner layer, when prestressing 
cables are provided inside the thickness. Radial 
reinforcements in the form of links should be provided, 
if radial tensile stresses are more than permissible direct 
tensile stress of concrete and the following design 
recommendations shall apply: 


a) Radial force per unit length of cable can be 
estimated as P/R, where P is average prestress 
force without long term loss and R is the radius 
of curvature of prestressing cable (from the centre 
of cylinder). This shall be multiplied with clear 
spacing between the cables to get tensile stress. 


This shall be checked for post-tensioned 
cylindrical tank during construction stage before 
grouting and during tank empty condition, when 
un-grouted cables are used. This check may not 
be required in case of external prestressing cables. 
Permissible stress in reinforcing bars should be 
as per construction load case or service load case, 
whichever is applicable. 


b 


wm 


8.4 The base of wall may be designed either fixed with 
the floor or as sliding or hinged at the junction with the 
floor. 


8.5 Prestressing should be provided on the transverse 
and longitudinal cross-section so as to contain these 
effects within the critical stresses specified. 


8.6 When the stressing of the prestressing wires is 
proposed to be carried out with wires in position, 
anchorages may advantageously be staggered and 
placed at suitable points of the cylinder with a view to 
offset the heavy frictional losses. 


8.7 The worst conditions of stresses resulting from 
the pressure of retained liquid, surrounding pressure, 
if any, temperature, shrinkage, restraint from roof, etc, 
should be considered. 


8.8 Necessity of prestressing the cylinder wall in the 


IS 3370 (Part 3) : 2021 


direction of the axis of the cylinder (vertical) should 
always be investigated. 


8.9 Longitudinal prestressing may be replaced with a 
reinforced concrete section satisfying the requirements 
of IS 3370 (Part 2) with limiting crack width of 
0.1 mm. 


9 DETAILING 


9.1 Concrete Cover 


The minimum cover to prestressing rods, wires or 
cables, and to sheathings, spacers and reinforcement, 
if present, shall conform to the requirements given in 
IS 1343 and IS 456. 


9.2 The requirements of untensioned steel shall be 
as per IS 1343. For a member not prestressed in a 
direction, minimum reinforcement (in the direction 
having no prestress) shall conform to the requirement 
given in IS 1343 and IS 3370 (Part 2). 


9.3 Un-bonded cable may be used if they and their 
anchorages are adequately protected against corrosion. 


9.4 Construction joint shall not be provided along the 
prestressing wire/strand/tendon/cable/duct or within a 
distance of d from it, where d is the diameter of the 
prestressing element. 


10 WORKMANSHIP, 
TESTING 


The requirements specified in IS 3370 (Part 1) and 
IS 1343 shall be complied with. 


INSPECTION AND 


IS 3370 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


Organization 


In personal capacity (Grace Villa, Kadamankulam 
PO, Thiruvalla 689583) 


ACC Ltd, Mumbai 


Ambuja Cements Limited, Ahmedabad 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 


Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


Cement Manufacturers’ Association, Noida 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Conmat Technolgies Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 


Construction Chemical Manufacturers’ Association, 
Mumbai 


CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 

Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of 
Science and Technology, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, 
Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI Jose Kurian (Chairman) 


Suri Rasesu J. Mop 
Dr ManisH V. KARANDIKAR (Alternate) 


Suri UMEsu P. Soni 
SHRI SUKURU RAMARAO (Alternate) 


Suri L. R. BIsHNo! 
SHRI SOURAV ACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUSHANTA KUMAR BASU 
Suri D. R. SEKor (Alternate) 


Suri C. N. JHA 


DR V. RAMACHANDRA 
Ms Suasuwat! GHosH (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. GARG 
SHRI NAVEEN Kumar BANSAL (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Suri U. S. Vipyartul (Alternate) 


Director (CMDD) (N&W) 
Deputy Director (CMDD) (NW&S) (Alternate) 


Dr A. K. CHATTERJEE 
Dr Susrato CHOWDHURY (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR SURLAKER 
Suri NiıLOTPOL Kar (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. SINGH 
SHRI SUBHASH GURRAM (Alternate) 


DR RAKESH KUMAR 
Dr V. V. L. Kanta Rao (Alternate) 


Dr K. RAMANJANEYULU 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


SHRI LAXMAN SINGH 
SHRI VIJAY SHANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. S. Kou. 


SHRI RAJANII SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHRIRAM B. KULKARNI 
SHRI RAHUL BIRADAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI MuKEsH VALECHA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation 
Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, 
New Delhi 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 


Branch, Army HQ, New Delhi 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 
New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building 
Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 


Nuvoco Vistas Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Public Works Department, Govt of Tamil Nadu, 
Chennai 


The India Cements Limited, Chennai 


The Indian Hume Pipe Company Limited, Mumbai 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 
The Ramco Cements Limited, Chennai 

Ultra Tech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 

Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 


Education, New Delhi 
In personal capacity [B-803, Oberoi Exquisite, 


Oberoi Garden City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai| 


In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, 
Wardha Road, Nagpur) 


IS 3370 (Part 3) : 2021 


Representative(s) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
SHRI GANESH JUNEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK NAIK 
SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 


Dr SHASHANK BISHNOI 
Dr Dipti RANJAN Sanoo (Alternate) 


Dr Devpas MENON 
Dr Manu SANTHANAM (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. Gupta 
Dr BHUPINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. NIRMAL 
Suri R. V. PATIL (Alternate) 


Maj GEN S. K. SRIVASTAV 
SHRI MAN Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri Y. BALAKRISHNA 
SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri V. V. ARORA 
Dr S. K. Cuaturvep! (Alternate) 


Sarı D. V. S. PRASAD 
Dr Somit NEOGI! (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri RaGuHupat! Roy (Alternate) 


SHRI PRANAV DESAI 
SHRI RAVINDRA KHAMPARIA (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (A/ternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri P. R. BHAT 
Suri S. J. SHAH (Alternate) 


Dr H. C. VISVESVARAYA 
Suri S. H. Jain (Alternate) 


Sarı BALAI K. Moortuy 
SHRI ANIL Kumar Pirta (Alternate) 


SHRI SURYA VALLURI 
Dr M. R. Kataat (Alternate) 


Suri M. A. U. KHAN 
Suri B. MukHorapHyay (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. JAIN 


Suri L. K. JAIN 


IS 3370 (Part 3) : 2021 


Organization 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, 
Hari Nagar, New Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Suri R. C. WASON 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretaries 


Suri S. ARUN KUMAR 
ScIENTIST ‘E’ (Crvit ENGINEERING), BIS 


AND 


SHRI MILIND GUPTA 
SCIENTIST ‘C’? (CrvIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Concrete Subcommittee, CED 2:2 


Organization 
In Personal Capacity (Grace Villa, Kadamankulam 
PO, Thiruvalla 689583) 
ACC Limited, Mumbai 


Ambuja Cements Limited, Ahmedabad 


AFCONS Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


Bureau of Design for Hydel and Irrigation Project, 
Bhopal 


Bureau Veritas India Ltd, Mumbai 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants & Engineers Pvt Ltd, 
Ghaizabad 


CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri Jose Kurian (Convener) 


SHRI PRAHLAD MUJUMDAR 
SHRI ANIL KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Suri UMesu P. Soni 
SHRI SUKURU RAMARAO (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH MOKAL 


SHRI AVINASH D. SHIRODE 
Suri K. K. MeGHAsuyaM (Alternate) 


Suri L. R. BisHNo! 
SHRI SOURAV ACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI PANKAJ GUPTA 


SHRI S. K. KHARE 
SHRI BHAGWATI PRASAD Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri D. K. GARG 
Suri RaesH Kuare (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR 
Suri Ras Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP GARG 
SHRI MANIK CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


Dr RasesH DEOLIA 
Suri H. C. Arora (Alternate) 


SHRI J. B. SENGUPTA 
SHRI SATISH PANDEY (Alternate) 


Organization 


CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of 


Science and Technology, New Delhi 
Elkem South Asia Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Society of Structural Engineers, Mumbai 


Irrigation and Power Research Institute, Amritsar 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, ECC Division, 
Chennai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 
New Delhi 


NBCC (India) Ltd, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building 
Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Institute of Technology Warangal, 
Warangal 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, 
Mumbai 


Pidilite Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Ready Mixed Concrete Manufacturers’ Association, 


Mumbai 


Research, Designs & Standards Organisation 
(Ministry of Railways), Lucknow 


RDC Concrete (India) Pvt Ltd, Thane 


IS 3370 (Part 3) : 2021 


Representative(s) 
Dr B. H. BHARATHKUMAR 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 
SHRI S. S. KOHLI 


SHRI BRAJESH MALVIYA 
SHRI SURENDRA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDEESH RAJENDRAN 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI KHATARBATCHA JIMMETAIN (Alternate) 


Suri K. C. TAYADE 
SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 


Dr B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr SHASHANK BIsHno! (Alternate) 


Dr SUDHIR MISHRA 


Dr Manu SANTHANAM 
Dr RADHAKRISHNA G. PILLAI (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Sur! UMEsH JosuHi 
SHRI HEMANT VADALKAR (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (RESEARCH) 
RESEARCH OFFICER (A/ternate) 


Dr B. SIVARAMA SARMA 
SHRI S. MANOHAR (Alternate) 


Maj GEN S. K. SRIVASTAV 
Suri MAN Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri A. P. PATHAK 
SHRI A. K. PAnpey (Alternate) 


Sarı H. S. YADAV 
SHRI ARUN KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


Sur V. V. ARORA 
Suri P. N. Oma (Alternate) 


Dr C. B. KAMESWARA RAO 
Dr D. Rama Sestu (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri N. M. Rao (Alternate) 


Dr SuGuna NAIK 


SHRI VIJAYKUMAR R. KULKARNI 
SHRI SRIRANG SONDUR (Alternate) 


Joint Director Stprs (B&S)/CB-I 
JOINT Director Stprs (B&S)/CB-II (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL BANCHHOR 
SHRI SIMRANJIT SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 3370 (Part 3) : 2021 


Organization 


Shapoorji Pallonji and Company Private Limited, 
Mumbai 


Tandon Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 
Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 
Ultra Tech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


Water Resource Department, Govt. of Madhya 
Pradesh, Mumbai 


In personal capacity (452 Sector 14, Sonipat, 
Haryana) 


In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha 
Road, Nagpur) 


In personal capacity [B-803, Oberoi Exquisite, 


Oberoi Garden City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai| 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari 
Nagar, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (M1 FI VGN Minerva 
Apartments, Guruswamy Road, Nolambur, 
Chennai) 


Representative(s) 
SHRI GIRISH BONDE 
Suri D. N. VIsHWANATH (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
SHRI Vinay Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. N. DIwAKAR 
Suri Manos Kumar De (Alternate) 


Dr V. RAMACHANDRA 
Dr A. K. Smeu (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. KHARE 
Suri B. P. Gupta (Alternate) 
Sanrı R. K. JAIN 
Suri L. K. JAIN 
SHRI A. K. JAIN 


Suri R. C. WASON 


Dr C. RAJKUMAR 


Panel for Review/Revision of IS 3370, CED 2:2/P1 


Organization 
In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, 
Wardha Road, Nagpur 440015) 


Creative Design Consultants & Engineers Pvt Ltd, 
Ghaziabad 


CSIR—Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Gammon Engineers & Contractors Pvt Ltd, 
Mumbai 


Government College of Engineering, Pune 


Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri L. K. Jar (Convener) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP GARG 
SHRI MANIK CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 


Dr B. H. BHARATHKUMAR 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


Suri S. W. DESHPANDE 
Sarı Mukunp C. ButTata (Alternate) 


Dr Nambeo A. HEDAOO 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI Mukesh VALECHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr Dipti RANJAN SAHOO 
Dr SHASHANK BisHno! (Alternate) 


Dr AsHOoK K. JAIN 


SHRI J. B. SHARMA 
SHRI YOGESH K. SINGHAL (Alternate) 


10 


Organization 
National Council for Cement and Building 
Materials, Ballabgarh 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 


In personal capacity (Grace Villa, Kadamankulam 
P.O., Thiruvalla 689 583) 


In personal capacity (A2B/37A, Ekta Apartments, 
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur 
Apartments, Mother Dairy Road, Patparganj, 
Delhi) 


In personal capacity (K-L/2, Kavi Nagar, 
Ghaziabad) 


In personal capacity (House No. 2103, Sector 7D, 
Faridabad) 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari 
Nagar, New Delhi) 


IS 3370 (Part 3) : 2021 


Representative(s) 


SHRI V. V. ARORA 
Suri T. V. G. Reppy (Alternate) 


SHRI S. M. PALEKAR 
SHRI S. KRISHNA (Alternate) 
SHRI JOSE KURIAN 


SHRI ARVIND KUMAR 


DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 


DR A. K. MITTAL 
SHRI HARISH KUMAR JULKA 


Suri R. C. WASON 


(Continued from second cover) 


g) The clause on ‘cylindrical prestressed tanks’ has been modified to include guidance on radial tensile 
stress 


h) The title of the standard has been modified to address the actual coverage. 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the BS 8007 : 1987 Code of practice for 
design of concrete structures for retaining aqueous liquids, issued by British Standards Institute (BSI). 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 :1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 02 (13640). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


