NAT Hab IS 9311 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Ts th HERO A feu miei 


(FAT JETT ) 


Guide to Storage of Onions 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 67.080.20 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay fereft— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2021 Price Group 4 


Fruits, Vegetables and Allied Products Sectional Committee, FAD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Fruits, Vegetables and Allied Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 


To ensure fuller utilization of perishable foodstuffs such as fruits and vegetables, they should be preserved under 
conditions which will keep them fit for fresh consumption over a reasonable period. Storing them in refrigerated 
space (cold storage) is an important method of preservation. To provide guidelines for the cold storage industry 
in the country, a series of Indian Standard Guides, based on the corresponding ISO Standards, have been issued. 
These guides describe the pre-storage treatments and the optimum storage conditions for different fruits and 
vegetables to help the industry to develop on scientific lines and also to promote the export of fresh fruits and 
vegetables. 


This standard was first published in 1979, for which assistance had been drawn from the then ISO Draft 
International Standard on the subject. The first revision of this standard was brought out in 2001 to align it with 
the latest edition of the ISO 1673. 


In this second revision, the modifications have been made keeping in view the technological advancements in the 
area of storage of fresh fruits and vegetables and the practices prevailing in the Indian conditions. 


This Indian Standard provides guidance on storage of onions, however, because of the variability of the product 
according to the time and place of cultivation, local conditions may make it necessary to define other conditions 
for harvesting or other physical conditions in the store. 


Considerable assistance has been derived from the work carried out by National Agricultural Cooperative 
Marketing Federation of India Ltd. (NAFED) and Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC), India in this standard. 


The application of the guidelines contained in this Indian Standard should enable much wastage in storage to be 
avoided and thus should enable long-term storage to be achieved in most cases. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised y”. 


IS 9311 : 2021 


Indian Standard 
GUIDE TO STORAGE OF ONIONS 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard gives recommendations for the storage, 
with or without the use of artificial refrigeration, 
of onions of the species Allium cepa intended for 
long-term conservation and consumption in the fresh 
state. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


2.1 Gray — Gray (Gy) is the unit of absorbed radiation 
dose. 1 Gy is equal to 1 Joule of energy/kg of material 
being irradiated. 


2.2 D min — It is the minimum absorbed dose received 
by the food samples when subjected to radiation 
treatment. 


3 CONDITIONS OF HARVESTING AND 
PUTTINGINTO STORE 


3.1 Cultivars 


It is necessary to choose onions cultivars suitable for 
long storage. Varieties having medium bulb size with 
higher dry matter/total soluble solids content, higher 
pungency, less or no splits and thinner necks with 
retention of higher number of dry outer scales have 
better keeping quality with lower storage losses. 


NOTE — Onions of late cultivars are generally chosen. 


3.2 Harvesting 


As onions mature, their dry matter content and pungency 
increase, with a resulting increase in storage potential. 
Onion bulbs should be harvested one week after 
50 percent of plants have shown neck fall. By this time 
the bulbs are covered with well-differentiated outer 
scales signifying that they are in a state of physiological 
rest. Early harvesting would result in more sprouting 
during storage. Whereas delayed harvesting may result 
in reduction of skin quality, increased rooting and 
reduction in firmness. Harvesting of onions should be 
carried out when the weather is dry; harvesting after 
a rainfall, or when the humidity is high increases 
susceptibility to post-harvest disease. 


Plants should be pulled out along with bulbs either 
manually or mechanically (using onion diggers) in 
such a way that they are neither bruised nor otherwise 
damaged. Improper handling of onion bulbs during or 
after harvest causing mechanical injuries can severely 
affect their quality as well as their storage life. 


3.3 Quality characteristics 


Qualitative inspection of onions intended for storage 
is strongly recommended. It is necessary to choose 
onion bulbs of good quality, meeting the following 
requirements: 


a) Sound, free from cuts, bruises and mechanical 
injuries. Bruising of bulbs causes increase in 
respiration rate, thereby increasing the weight loss 
and may encourage entry of pathogens leading to 
rotting. 

b) Mature, well covered by outer scales. Naked 
onions with exposed fleshy leaves cannot be 
stored longer and their shelf life is very short. 


c) Well dried, and homogeneous. 


d) Bulbs which are not covered by outer scales, 
which are double, triple, too large or too small, 
deformed, or not fully mature, should not be 
stored. 


e) It is recommended to store only good grade onions 
without any defects. 


f) Some of the storage diseases of onions are given at 
Annex A (for information only). 


3.4 Various Treatments Before Storage 


To avoid sprouting, approved sprout inhibitors may be 
used if their use is not restricted. Onion bulbs should be 
adequately dried/ cured before storage. 


3.4.1 Curing of Onions 


Before storage, the onions should be dried to eliminate 
excess external moisture and moisture in the outer 
scales, the rootlets and the neck (Fig. 1). The process is 
called curing. It takes around two to three weeks. 


Fic. 1 ONIONS AFTER PROPER CURING 


3.4.1.1 Natural drying 


Onion bulbs should be adequately cured in the field 
by keeping the harvested/pulled plants in rows along 


IS 9311 : 2021 


with leaves which partially cover the bulbs preventing 
direct exposure to sunlight and injury (that is, sunscald) 
to the bulbs. The bulbs are considered cured when the 
neck becomes tight and the outer scales are dried until 
they rustle. This condition would be obtained (in about 
3 to 4 days in field) when the bulbs have lost about 
5 per cent of their weight. After curing, the tops are to be 
cut and removed by leaving about 2 to 3 cm length dry 
neck. Ifthe tops are cut closer to bulbs without keeping 
2 to 3 cm neck length, there is possibility of pathogens 
entering into the bulb and cause rotting. These bulbs 
should be kept under shade for 2 to 3 weeks for proper 
drying of bulbs. If not properly cured, the bulbs will 
decay in storage mainly due to neckrot. 


Onions can also be cured in shade or by artificial means 
by forced ventilation. Shade curing normally takes 
about 15 to 20 days and is done in well ventilated curing 
sheds. A properly cured onion has a dried, shrunken 
neck and dry outer scales without punctures or splits. 


3.4.1.2 Artificial drying 


If natural drying is not possible, a suitable method of 
artificial drying should be used, for example exposure 
to a current of warm dry air for a period of 4 days up 
to a maximum of 8 days, depending on the moisture 
content. The air temperature may be up to a maximum 
of 30°C and the relative humidity should, if possible, 
be from 65 percent to 70 percent. The rate of air flow 
may be from 2.0 to 2.5 m*/min per cubic meter of bulbs. 
Ventilation should be effected either with fresh air 
from outside the store or with a mixture of outside and 
inside air, with different rates of air change for the two 
different types of ventilation. Alternatively, the internal 
air may simply be recalculated in closed circuit, in 
which case the recommended air circulation ratio is 
from 40 to 50 per hour. 


Proper drying is achieved when the moisture content of 
the outer scales reaches 12 percent to 14 percent. At this 
moisture content, bulbs rustle when handled. Artificial 
drying should be carried out directly after harvesting, 
while the onions are in a state of physiological 
rest, because subsequent treatment with warm air 
(up to 30 °C) promotes sprouting. 


3.4.2 Irradiation 


Post-harvest treatment with gamma irradiation is 
successful in reducing storage losses in onion. The 
application of low doses of radiation can arrest sprouting 
of onions during storage. Application of irradiation of 
the order of 60 Gy to 100 Gy for control of sprouting and 
extension of shelf life of onion is recommended. These 
radiation doses are within the window of approved 
dose range for Bulbs (Class 1) as per the Food Safety 
and Standards Rules and Regulations. 


The irradiated onion bulbs are reported to be superior in 
quality with respect to internal and external appearance 
and firmness after 180 days storage than non-irradiated 
ones. 


3.5 Storage 


Quality of onion during storage is affected due to 
water loss, sprouting, rooting, and changes in chemical 
composition. In general, the storage losses due to 
physiological loss of weight are higher during the 
months of May to July when mean temperatures are 
high. The rotting losses are high in the high humid 
months of rainy season and the sprouting of onion starts 
in September-October when the temperature starts 
decreasing. 


Stores for keeping onions should be refrigerated 
or provided with an air-ventilation system with 
distribution of air through the floor, and should be 
perfectly dry, clean and disinfected. The onions should 
be put into store as soon as possible after drying and 
filling of stores should be carried out quickly, without 
exceeding a period of 7 days to 8 days. It is necessary 
to avoid storage of onions with other vegetables or 
fruits to which their particular taste and odour may be 
transmitted. Storage of onions and garlic in the same 
store is, however, permissible. 


3.6 Methods of Storage 


The onions may be stored in bulk, in packages on 
pallets, in box pallets, in crates, in sacks or in containers. 
Onions packed in sacks may be stored for only a short 
period of time. 


In the case of storage in bulk, the maximum depth 
to which onion can be heaped is between 0.9 to 
1.5 meters. Higher depth of bulk storage causes 
excessive damage from pressure impact/bruising. 
Onion should not be dropped on ground from higher 
than 1 to 2 meters which would damage the bulbs. 


In case of packed onions, to avoid damage, packages 
should be stacked 5 to 7 tiers high, and a gap of 15 cm 
to 20 cm in the proximity of the side walls and 5 cm to 
8 cm between the stacks of packages should be provided 
to ensure the free circulation of air. 


For long term storage of onions, proper ventilation, 
optimum temperature and humidity are of paramount 
importance. Absence of proper aeration/ventilation, 
high atmospheric humidity (75-80 percent RH) 
promotes development of pathogen/rotting, and 
promotes root growth. Low humidity (less than 
65 percent RH) leads to excessive moisture loss from 
bulbs, resulting in shriveling and loss in weight. 


3.6.1 Natural Ventilated Structures 


Various simple storage structures of onions have been 
designed traditionally and modified according to the 
local material available for their construction. Different 
types of structures like ‘Bottom ventilated storage 
structures’ and ‘Top ventilated storage structures’ 
are used for the storage of onion. In India, especially 
in Maharashtra, onions are bulk stored in storage 
structures called “chawls” (Fig. 3) with thatched roofs 


and sides of bamboo which are suitably well spaced 
to allow good air circulation. These structures were 
further improved by designing two tier system and also 
by providing better bottom ventilation, to reduce the 
losses and extend storage life. 


Several modified onion storage structures have been 
designed and tested by NRC for Onion and Garlic, 
Pune and NAFED. These structures help in reduction 
of storage losses. 


3.6.1.1 Salient features of improved storage structures 
(Fig. 2) 
a) Construction of structure on raised platform to 
prevent moisture contact and dampness; 


b) Use of Mangalore tiled roof or other suitable 
material to prevent built up of high temperature 
inside; 

c) Increased centre height and more slope for better 
air circulation and preventing humid microclimate 
inside godown; 

d) Providing bottom ventilation for free and faster air 
circulation to avoid formation of hot and humid 
pockets between the onion layers; 


e) Avoid direct sunlight on onion bulbs to 
reduce sunscald, fading of colour and quality 
deterioration; 


f) Restriction on width of each stack to 60-75 cm 
for hot and humid weather, 75-90 cm for mild and 
humid weather and 90-120 cm for mild and dry 
weather conditions; 


g) Maintenance of stacking height to 100 cm for 
small and multiplier onion and hot weather and 
120 cm for mild weather and for big onion to 
avoid pressure bruising’; 


IS 9311 : 2021 


h) Providing cubicles instead of continuous stack 
and sufficient space for ventilation from all sides; 


j) The practice of turning may be followed during 
storage when onions are packed in sacks; 


k) One cub meter area of store accommodates 
about 750 kg onion. Accordingly, construction of 
godown for required capacity and construction of 
more units instead of single big structure and in 
zig-zag manner when constructed in more rows; 


m) Providing two tier if space available is insufficient; 
and 


n) Periodical disinfections of structures and premises 
to check rotting. 


3.6.2 Cold Storage 


A temperature of 0.2 °C to 1 °C and relative humidity 
of 65 percent to 70 percent is recommended for cold 
storages of onion. The bulbs to be held in cold storage 
should be placed there immediately after curing. For 
storage of properly cured onions, maintenance of the 
recommended temperature and relative humidity 
are very important for the successful cold storage of 
onion. It is essential that the refrigeration system of 
cold storage should be efficient enough to pull down 
the produce temperature to less than 5 °C within 24 h 
once the onions are kept for storage. To obtain constant 
temperature and relative humidity, it is necessary to set 
very strict requirements for the air-circulation as well 
as dehumidification systems. 


3.6.2.1 Operation during removal from cold storage 


The onions should not be handled if they exhibit crystals 
of ice. Precautions should also be taken to avoid any 
risk of freezing of super cooled onions during handling. 


FIG. 2 IMPROVED VENTILATED ONION STORAGE STRUCTURE 


IS 9311 : 2021 


To avoid all traces of moisture on the surface of the 
bulbs, when the onions are taken out of storage, it is 
recommended that the onions must be brought to 
ambient temperature by gradually increasing the store 
temperature in a reheating room in order to avoid 
condensation of onions that lead to mould growth and 
root development. Then conditioning and packaging 
of onions for delivery may proceed. Care is also to be 
taken to avoid skin becoming brittle because of long 
exposure to low relative humidity. 


The temperature and humidity conditions should be 
maintained constant throughout the storage period. 
The maximum allowable variations in temperature 
and relative humidity are+0.5 °C and+2 prcent 
respectively. Quality control of onions should be carried 
out every 7 days to 10 days to verify the sanitary and 
behavioral state of the produce. 


In India, cold stores are not used for storage of onion 
for fresh marketing and are used only for processing 
purposes by some industries. 


3.6.3 Controlled Atmosphere (CA) Storage 


In this storage system there will be elevated levels of 
carbon dioxide and reduced levels of oxygen maintained 
continuously throughout the storage in addition to the 
recommended low temperature. This type of storage 
(now commercially being used in apples) is reported 
to increase storage life not only for cultivars with 
high storage potential, but also for cultivars with low 
storage potential kept under regular atmospheres. 


The recommended CA storage conditions includes 
5 percent carbon dioxide, 2 to 3 percent oxygen and 
92 percent nitrogen at 1°C with a storage life of 
at least 7 months with maintenance of quality and 
shelf-life when removed from the CA storage. However, 
response to CA storage varies among onion cultivars. 


3.6.3.1 General conditions for CA storage of onion 


a) CA storage rooms must be air-tight and moisture- 
tight; 

b) CA gas concentrations: 5 percent CO, and 2 to 
3 percent O,, the rest being N,; 


c) Storage temperature should be 1°C+0.5 and 


65-70 percent RH; 


d) Storage air circulation should be at 100-200 cfm/ton 
of onions; 


e) Control system to monitor temperature, humidity 
and gas atmosphere inside the CA rooms without 
entering them; and 


f) Onions must be brought to ambient temperature 
by gradually increasing the store temperature 
before removal from CA storage to prevent 
moisture condensation and to reduce incidence of 
sprouting. 


4 SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDED STORAGE 
CONDITIONS 


The technological phases and their duration, and the 
corresponding conditions that should be effected, are 
indicated in Table 1. 


Table 1 Summary of Storage Condition for Onions 


( Clause 4 ) 
Technological Phase Duration Temperature Relative Ventilation 
°C Humidity Max. Rate h/Day 
Percent 
Natural drying Up to 2-3 weeks External air 65 to 70 18 to 20 
Artificial drying 4-8 days Warm air (30 °C max) 65 to 70 18 to 20 
under ambient condition 3-4 months Ambient air 65 to 70 6 to 8 
ee under artificial refrigeration 5-6 months 0.2 to 1 (-1°C)* 65 to 70 6 to 8 


*For cultivars having resistance to cold. 


IS 9311 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Informative ) 
STORAGE DISEASES 


A-1 NECK ROT 


Neck rot is the most common storage disease. The 
symptom appears as water- decay at neck area, which 
moves down word through entire bulb. Light gray 
fungal growth is generally visible at neck infection and 
on outer scales. Seed treatment before planting, proper 
drying and curing of onion are essential to prevent this 
storage disease. 


A-2 BLACK MOULD 


Characterized by black discoloration at neck caused by 
the fungus Aspergillus niger. The black discolouration 
can also be found on the outer scales. This is often 
associated with bruising and leads to bacterial soft 
rot. Low temperature storage delays growth of fungus, 
but it is high under high temperature and high humid 
conditions. Proper curing reduces infection. 


A-3 BACTERIAL ROTS 


Several types of bacterial diseases have been reported 
to affect the onions in storage. Among them, slippery 
skin and sour skin are common. Water-soaked, foul 
smelling, viscous liquidly rot is caused by Erwinia. 
The slippery skin is generally visible only at neck area 
and upon cutting to expose inner scales. Scales have 
a watery-cooked appearance. In Sour skin, slimy, 
yellow-brown decay generally limited to inner scales, 
which give off a sour odour when exposed. 


These diseases can be controlled by pre-harvest 
fungicidal sprays, harvesting at proper maturity, 
minimizing bruises, effective curing and proper 
sanitation. 


IS 9311 : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fruits, Vegetables, and Allied Products Sectional Committee, FAD 10 


Organization 


ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, 
Bengaluru 


All India Food Processors Association, New Delhi 


Association of Food Scientists and Technologists 
India, Mumbai 


CSIR-Central Food Technological Research Institute, 
Mysore 


College of Agricultural Engineering Post-Harvest 
Technology, Gangtok 


Confederation of Indian Food Trade and Industry, 
New Delhi 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 
Dabur Research and Development Centre, Ghaziabad 
Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 


Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 


ICAR-Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, 
Bhopal 


ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, 
Bengaluru 


ICAR-Central Institute for Subtropical Horticulture, 
Lucknow 


ICAR-Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering 
and Technology, Ludhiana 


ICAR-Central Plantation Crops Research Institute, 
Kasaragod 


ITC Limited, Kolkata 


Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology, 
Thanjavur 


Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 


Jain Irrigation Systems Limited, Jalgaon 


Representative(s) 
Dr M. R. DINESH (Chairman) 


Dr R. K. BANSAL 
SHRIMATI MAMTA ARORA (Alternate) 


Dr REVATHY BASKARAN 
DRK. V. HARISH PRASHANTH (Alternate) 


DR P. VIJAYANAND 
Dr A. S. CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


DR SUJATA JENA 
Dr SAID PRASHANT PANDHARINATH (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI PRIYANKA SHARMA 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
DRM. S. KAMaArH (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH C. PANDEY 
SHRI SUMIT NARA (Alternate) 


Dr O. P. CHOUHAN 
DR A. JAGANNATH(Alternate) 


SHRI PARMOD SIWACH 


Dr C. R. MEHTA 
DRM. K. TRIPATHI (Alternate) 


DRR. B. TIWARI 
Dr D. V. SUDHAKAR Rao (Alternate) 


DR NEELIMA GARG 


DR RAMESH KUMAR 
DR SUNIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR ANITHA KARUN 
DR M. R. MANIKANTAN (Alternate) 


SHRI KANNAN B. 
SHRI PRAKASH SELVARAJ (Alternate) 


DR V. R. SINIJA 


DR TANWEER ALAM 


SHRI SUNIL GUPTA 
SHRI VINAY JAIN (Alternate) 


Organization 


Mother Dairy Fruit and Vegetable Private Limited, 
Noida 


National Institute of Food Technology 
Entrepreneurship and Management, Sonipat 


In Personal Capacity (CD 223, Ansal Golf Link I, 
Greater Noida) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 9311 : 2021 


Representative(s) 
SHRI KUMAR KALPAM 
SHRIMATI NANCY TALWAR (Alternate) 


DR SUNIL PAREEK 


SHRI PITAM CHANDRA 


SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA ,SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (FAD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI VARSHA GUPTA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (FAD), BIS 


Panel Responsible for Review of Indian Standards Related to Storage, Transport and Ripening of Fresh Fruits 
and Vegetables, FAD 10: Panel 2 


Organization 


ICAR-Central Potato Research Institute, Shimla 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticulture Research, 
Bengaluru 

ICAR-Central Institute for Subtropical Horticulture, 
Lucknow 


Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dr BRAJESH SINGH (Convenor) 
Dr SATYENDRA GAUTAM 
Dr D. V. SUDHAKAR RAO 


Dr BHARATI KILLADI 


SHRI VINAY KUMAR CHAUHAN 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 10 (17056). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


