IS 2478 : 1991 (Reaffirmed 2000)

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO INDUSTRIAL RADIOLOGY ( Second Revision )

UDC

615'849'001'4

0

BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

October 1991

Price Group 9

Non-Destructive

Testing Sectional

Committee,

MTD 21

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. This Indian Standard was first published in 1963 and revised in 1981. While reviewing this Indian Standard in the light of experience gained during these years, the committee has felt to revise it by merging various sections for ease of reference and locating the terms. This standard has been revised by taking assistance from the following publications: of terms relating to gamma of India. and

ASME Code section V . . SE 686-1986 Std, Definition X-radiography. Atomic Energy Regulatory Board -

Safety guide SG/IN-Z

:1986 Government

IS 2478:1991

Indian Standard

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO INDUSTRIAL RADIOLOGY (Second Revision )
1 SCOPE
This standard covers the definition . relating to industrial radiology. 2 DEFINITIONS Absorbed Dose - The amount of energy imparted to matter by an ionizing particle or electro magnetic radiation per umt mass of irradiated material at the place of interest. It is expressed in rads. Absorption - The removal of energy from the radiation by matter it traverses. Absorption Coefficient - Of a uniform substance for a parallel beam of homogeneous radiation, is the ratio of the rate of decrease ( in the direction of propagation ) of the intensity at any point to the intensity at that point. The coefficient may refer to total, apparent, or true absorption. The rate of change of intensity may be related to length, mass per unit area, molecule, atom or electron. The absorption co-efficients are called: Linear (p), Mass (rp), Molecular (mP), Atomic (aP) or Electronic (er) respectively. Each of these comprises one or more of the following absorption co-efficient. Photoelectric ( 7 ), Scattering ( Q ), Nuclear, and pair production ( symbol not established ). Accelerator--A device that accelerates charged atomic particles to high energies. An X-ray machine or a betatron is an accelerator. Activation - The bombard stable radioactive. process atoms by which neutrons make them to of terms second (S-1) and is given the special name Becquera1 ( Bq ). The earlier special unit of activity, still in temporary use, was rhe curie (ci ). Added Filter - Filter added to the inherent ration. filtNOTE The SI unit of activity is the reciprocal

Afterglow - The persistence of light emission from an intensifying screen or fluoresent screen after an exposure. It is a form of phosphorescent radiation. Alkali - In a developer, it is the alkaline constituent ( for example, sodium carbonate ) which is normally added to the developer to bring the solution to and maintain it at the desired level of chemical activity. Alloy Heavy - A protective material containing tungsten, copper and nickel and having a density about 50 percent greater than that of lead. Alpha Particle - A positively charged particle emitted by certain radioactive materials. It is made up of two protons and two neutrons: hence it is identical with the nucleus of a helium atom. Alpha ing of nuclei atomic Radiation - It is the radiation consista stream of alpha particles, which are of helium atoms emitted by radioactive nuclei.

Alternating Current - Alternating current is the current that reverses its direction of flow at Such current is frequently regular intervals. referred to as ac. AIumiuiun Equivalent - The thickness of aluminium affording the same attenuation under specified conditions as the material in question. Angstrom (A> - A unit of length, often used to measure wave length of X-Radiation and gamma radiation equal to lo-* cm. Annular Beam special annular circular joints. Anode - The X-ray tube. 1 X-ray anode positively beam emerging from a and used for X-raying biased electrode in

Activity - of an amount of a radionuclide in a particular energy state at a given time, the quotient of dN by dt, where dN is the expectation value of the number of spontaneous nuclear transitions from that energy state in the time interval dt: dN A = ;t

IS 2478: 1991 Anticathode - Also called target. Special metal inserted into the anode of X-ray tubes. X-ray originate from this metal surface on to which electron beam impinges. Anti Scatter Grid - A device consisting of alternating strips of radiolucent and radio-opaque materials that allow primary radiation ( useful beam ) to pass and absorb some oblique secondary radiation. Area Monitoring - The survey and measurement of types of ionizing radiation and dose levels in an area in which radiation hazards are present or suspected. Area of Interest - The specific portion of the object image on the radiograph that is to be evaluated. .Artifact - Spurious indication on a radiograph arising, from, but not limited to, faulty manufacture, storage, handling exposure or processing. Artificial Radioactivity - Radioactivity :ng from irradiation of atomic nuclei. resultactive or made radioactive and the radiation from the object is used to produce an image on the film. Auto Stereogram - Any type of stereogram which can be seen three-dimensionally with.out the need for individual viewing devices. Auto Transformer - A special type of transformer in which the output volatge can be easily varied. The auto transformer is thus employed to adjust the primary voltage applied to the step up transformer which produces the high voltage applied to the X-ray tube. Average Life - The arithmatic mean value of the lives of the atoms of a radioactive nuclide. It is the reciprocal of the decay constant. Background Radiation - The radiations of man's natural environment consisting of that which comes from cosmic rays and from the naturally radioactive elements of the earth, including that from within man's body. The term may also mean radiation extraneous to an experiment. Back Scatter - Radiation scattered from the floor, walls, equipment and other items in the area of a radiation source. This includes secondary radiations resulting from the interaction between the primary radiations. Back Scattering - The backward reflection of particles of radiation through angles greater than 90" to the original direction of motion. Banking Concept - An idea or model used to facilitate the explanation of radiation exposure permitted in a life time. Barium Clay - A moulding clay blocking material containing barium used to eliminate or reduce the amount of scattered or secondary radiation reaching the film. Barium Concrete - Concrete containing a high proportion of barium compounds. It is used as a protective building material. Barium Plaster - Builder's plaster containing a high proportion of barium compounds. It is used as a protective building material. Barn - A very small unit of area used in measuring the cross-sections of atoms, nuclei, electrons and other particles. One barn is equal to 10ec4 cm. The term is a measure of the probability that a given nuclear reaction will occur. Barrier Protective-Barrier of attenuating rails used to reduce radiations exposure. 2 mate-

Atotiic Mass Unit ( AMIJ ) - The mass of an atom. The basis of a scale of atomic weights is the oxygen atom, and the isotope of this element has arbitrarily been assigned an atomic weight of 16. Hence, the unit of the scale is l/16 the weight of oxygen 16, or roughly the mass of the proton or neutron. Atomic Number - The positive charge on the nucleus of the atom and equal to the number of protons in the nucleus. Atomic Weight - of an element is approximately equivalent to the total number of protons and neutro:ls in the nucleus. Attenuation - The reduction of a radiation quantity upon passage of radiation through matter, resulting from all types of interaction with that matter. Attenuation Coefficient - of a substance for a parallel beam of specified radiation the quantity in the expression pdx for the fraction of a radiation quantity removed by attenuation in passing through a thin layer dx of that It is the fun&on of the energy of substance. radiation. According as to whether dx is expressed in terms of length, mass per unit area, moles per unit area `atoms per unit area' p is called linear, mass, molar or atomic attenuation co-efficient. Auto Radiography - The term used to describe a test in which the object being tested is radio-

IS 2478 : 1991 Beam - A directed or matter. flow of energy into space Body Burden - - The amount of radioactive material present in the body of man or animals. Brewstrahlung - Electromagnetic radiation emitted by charged particle when they are slowed down by electric fields in their passage through matter. Literally `breaking radiation'. Broad-Beam Attenuation - The attenuation of radiation by matter when a maximum amount of the scattered radiation is included in the measurement. Build Up - An mitted through scatter. increase material in radiation transbecause of forward

Becquerel ( Bq )-It is the unit of nuclear transformation rate. One becquerel ( Bq ) is equal The earlier to one transformation per second. unit of radioactivity was the curie ( Cl ) which was defined as 3.7 x lOlo disintegration per second. Bernon Roscoe Reciprocity Law - States that the end result of a photochemical reaction is dependent only on the product of the radiation intensity ( I ) and the duration of the exposure ( t ) and is dependent on their absolute values. This implies that the resultant density of a film would depend only on the products of the radiation intensity reaching the film and the exposure time. Betatron -- A high energy electron accelerator used to produce electrons with energies of the order of 106 to 107 eV. The high energy electrons impinge on the heavy metal target to produced high energy X-rays.
Beta Particle - An electron or positron emitted from a nucleus during decay. The term beta particle is reserved for electrons and positrons.

Built Up Factor -- In calculation of protective barriers the rati. of the broad beam to the narrow beam transmission at a given depth. Byproduct Material - In atomic energy law, any radiocative material ( except source or fissionable material ) obtained in the process of producing or using source or fissionable material. Includes fission products and many other radioisotopes produced in nuclear reactors. Calcium Tuugstate - A fluorescent chemical compound which emits visible blueviolet light when activated by either X-ray or gamma sadiation. Callier Coefficient ( Q Factor ) - It is the ratio of specular to totally diffuse density. Owing to the scattering of light in photographic emulsions, the value of Q is greater than unity ( usually between 1-O and 2.0 ). Capsule Gamma Ray -- A capsule which contains a gamma ray source. It is usually of metal and of sufficient thickness to reduce B-ray transmission to a safe value. It is generally sealed. Cassette - A light proof container used for holding radiographic films in position during the radiographic exposure which may or may not contain intensifying and/or filter screens. Cathode - The negative the X-ray tube. biased electrode of

Blocking Medium - Material of appropriate radiations capacity ( for example, radiographic putty ) for applying to an object, either to round OR the edges of as a filling for holes, to reduced the effect of scattered radiation and to shield portions of the film which would otherwise be over-exposed. Blocking or Masking L Surrounding `specimens or covering their sections with absorptive material. of the numBlood Count - The determination ber of red and white cells per cubic millimeter of peripheral blood. Blooming - In radiographic real time imaging, an undesirable condition exhibited by some image conversion devices and television pick up tubes brought about by exceeding the allowable input brightness for the device, causing the image to go in to saturation, producing, a fuzzy image of degraded spatial resolution gray scale rendition. Blow Hole - A hole in a casting or a weld caused by gas entrapped during solidification normally vented to the surface. Blur - Unsharpness arising from the relative movement of the source of radiation, irradiated object and film or screen. 3

Cathode Rays - A stream of electrons emitted by a heated structure or ( by a cold structure under the influence of an electric field of high intensity ) and projected in a somewhat confined beam by means of an electric field or a changing magnetic field. Cesium-137 - A radioactive isotope of the element Cs having a half life of 30 years plus or minus three years.

IS 2478 : 1991 Characteristic Curve - The plot of optical density versus log of exposure or of relative exposure ( also called the D-log E curve ). Characteristic X-Radiation - X-radiation consisting of discrete wave lengths which are characteristic of the emitting element. Characteristic X-radiation arising from the absorption of X or gamma radiation is sometimes called fluorescene X-radiation. Chemical Fog - Fog arising from unwanted chemical reactions during processing. Examples : electron electron. resulting in a gain of energy for the

Compton Scattering - A process in which a photon. transfers a portion of its energy to an orbital electron in matter and a lower energy photon is scattered at an angle to the orgina photon path. Condenser Ionization Chamber - name given to an ionization chamber which, having been charged to a certain potential, can be irradiated and, subsequently attached to an electrometer to measure the residual charge I whereby the dose received is ascertained. Continuous Spectrum - The characteristic radiation pattern that exhibits energies for an unbroken series of frequencies over a wide range. Contrast - The relative brightness of two adjacent areas in a radiograph, photographic reproduction or fluorescent screen image. Contrast ( Film ) - The change in film density recorded on the film that results from a given change in radiation input. Contrast is determined from the sIope of the characteristic curve. of image Contrast ( Image ) - The contrast details. It depends on a number of factors, such as definition and the granuIar nature of the radiographic emulsion or fluorescent screen. Contrast ( Radiographic ) - The measurement of difference in the film bIackening resulting from various X-ray intensities transmitted by the object and recorded as density differences in the image. Thus difference in fiIm blackening from one area to another is contrast. Contrast Ratio - The relative amount of light emitted or reflected as between an indication and its background. Contrast Subject intensities passing of a specimen. The ratio of radiation through seIected portions

4 Oxidation fog - Fog caused by exposure
of a fiIm to air during development.

b) Dichroic fog -- Fog

arising from the deposition on the emulsion of a very thin layer of finely divided silver. When examined in white light, the deposit appears in compIementary colours, for example, red by transmission and blue green by reflection. Cine photography of a

Cine Fluorography fluoroScopic image.

Cine Radiography - The production of a succession of radiographs which can be viewed rapidIy in order, thus creating an iIIusion of continuity. Clearing Time - The time required for the first stage of fixing during which the whiteness of the film disappears. Cobalt 60 - A radioisotope of the cobaIt, having a half life of 5-3 years. element

Cold Cracks - appear as a straight line usually continuous throughout its length and generally exist singly. These cracks start at the surface. Cold Shut - i) A discontinuity that appears in cast metal as a result of two streams of Iiquid meeting and failing to unite. ii) A portion of the surface of a forging that is separated, in part, from the main body of the metal by oxide. Collimation - The process by which a divergent beam of energy of particles is converted into a parallel beam. Collimator - A device usualIy made of lead used to surround a radiation source and so constructed as to both minimize the scattered radiation and to direct the primary or useful radiation into a more or less paralle1 beam on to a Iocalised area. Compton Effect - The glancing collision of an X-ray or gamma ray with an outermost or free 4

Controlled Areas - A defined area in which the occupational exposure of personnel to radiation or to radioactive material is under the supervision of an individual in charge of radiation protection. ( This implies that a controlled area is one that requires contro1 of access, occupancy and working conditions for radiation protection purpose. ) Cosmic Rays - Ionizing rays entering the earth's atmosphere from unidentified extraterrestrial space and resulting in the presence

Is 2478: 1991 protons and of photons, electrons, neutrons, mesons by a collision with atoms in the atmosphere. which has a Crack -_ A separation _ _ material . . relatively large cross-section in one direction and a small or negligible cross-section when viewed in a direction perpendicuIar to the first. Crest Voltage ing voltage. The maximum vaIue of a varyin uhich it occurs or which exceeds the accept or reject criteria for this given design. Definition ( Image Definition ) - The sharpness of delineation of image details in a radiographgenerally used qualitatively. Density ( Photographic )- The degree of blackening of a film is density. Film blackening of density is usually expressed in the form of the H and D curve ( Huster and Driffield ) which is defined as the logarithm of the reciprocal of the transparency of the film. Density ( d) = log 1,/I, where Z,, is the light intensity incident on the film and I is the light intensity transmitted. Density Gradient - The change in density of a radiographic film at a particular film density per unit change in the logarithm of the exposure received by the film. The maximum density gradient of a film is usually called gamma. Density ( Optical ) of film blackening: The quantitative measure

established flaw size Critical Size - The deemed to be detrimental to the serviceability The acceptance or of the product criteria. rejection levels established by design engineering as required limits to meet design performance. Crystallography their structure. The study of crystals and

Cumulative Dose - The total dose resulting from repeated exposure to radiation of the same region or of the whole body. Curie - A ,unit of radioactive defined internationally as the quantity of any radioactive nuclide in which the number of disintegrations per second is 3*700x lOlo. Curie Pie - A colloquial name applied to a portable instrument equipped with a direct reading meter used to determine the level of radiation in an area. Curir (C) - A unit of radioactive defined internationally as the quantity of any radioactive nuclide in which the number of disintegrations per second is 3.700x lOlo. Cyclotron - A particle accelerator in which the atomic particles are whirled around in a spiral between the ends of a huge magnet gaining speed with each rotation. The cyclotron is normally used for nuclear research, but the particles can be made to collide with a target to produce X-rays.
D/t Ratio -

D=
where:
D = density,

log10 ( L/Z 1

Z. = light intensity incident on the film, and Z = light intensity transmitted. for Densitometer - An instrument photographic transmission and/or density. measuring reflection

Detail ( Radiographic ) - Detail is the degree of sharpness of outline of the image. If the the radiograph does not show a clear definition of object or a discontinuity in the object, it is of little value, although it may have sufficient contrast and density ( same as definition ). Detector - A device presence of radiation. which determines the

The working distance for the X-ray tube in relation to the film-to-object distance. The working distance D and the specimen thickness t are both measured with reference to the source side of the specimen. Decay Constant - The ratio of the rate of decay of a radioactive nuclide to the number of that nuclide present.

Deuterium - An isotope of hydrogen having mass equal to 2 AMU ( atomic mass unit ). Developing Agent - The constituent of a developer which reduces sufficient exposed silver halide grains to silver at a greater rate than unexposed or insufficiently exposed grains. Development - The conversion of a latent image into a visible image by treatment of the emulchemical solution suitable with a sion ( developer ). Dichroic Fog - Fog arising from the deposition on the emulsion of a very thin layer of lonely 5

Defects - A discontinuity whose size, shape, orientation. location or properties make it detrimental to the useful service of the part

IS 2478 :1991 divided silver. When examined in white light, the deposit appears in complementary colours, for example, red by transmission and blue green by reflection. Diffraction Mottling -- A diffuse diffraction pattern on a radiograph resulting from X-raying thin sections of a crystalline material. The physical process in which radiation is selectively transmitted or reflected in a given direction affected by the lattice structure of the crystal. Direct Current ( dc ) - As the name implies, this term refers to an electric current flowing continuously in one direction through a conductor. Such current is frequently referred to as dc. Discernible Image - Image capable of being recognized by sight without the aid magnification. Discontinuity - Any interruption in the normal physical structure or configuration of a part, such as craks, laps, seams, inclusions or porosity. A discontinuity may or may not affect the usefulness of a part. Disintegration Constant stant. Same as Decay ConEffective Absorption Co-elllcient - It is, with regard to substance, for a beam of heterogeneous radiation, the ratio of the rate of decrease ( in the direction of propagation ) of the intensity at any point to the intensity at that point. It may be related to any of the factors given in `Absorption Coefficient'. The effective absorption co-efficient is not single valued, but varies with the thickness of the absorber and the system of measurement employed. Electromagnetic Radiation - Radiation consisting of electric and magnetic waves that travel at the speed of light. Examples:-light radiowaves gamma rays, X-rays. All can be transmitted through a vacuum. Electron - One of the fundamental constiuents of atoms. The electron is a very small negatively charged particle.with a rest mass of approximately&7 that of the H atom or 9.107 x 1O-Z8 g. It has an electric charge of 4.802~ lo-lo statcoulomb ( the E. S. U. of charge ). Electron appear to be uniform in mass and charge. Electron Radiography of electrons. Radiography by means

Distortion -- The amount of geometrical departure of an image from the true reproduction of the object. Double Focus Tube - An X-ray tube having a cathode provided with two filaments, only one of which is used at a time and which generally gives two different sizes offocal spot. Dose Equivalent -- A quantity which expresses the biological effect to an exposed person on a common scale for all ionising radiations. It is defined as the product of the absorbed dose and certain modified factors. It is used for radiation protection purposes only. The special unit of dose equivalent in siervert ( Sv ) 1 Sv = 100 rem. Dose Rate - The radiation dose delivered per unit time and measured, for instance, rems per hour. Dosemeter dose, such chamber. A device that measures radiation as a film badge or ionizatian

Electron Volt ( eV ) -- A unit of energy. The kinetic energy acquired by an electron when accelerated. through a potential difference of IV. equals 1.602 x 10-l" ( One electron volt ( MeV ) equals ergs. One mega electron-volt 1.602 x 10N6 ergs ). Elementary Particle - Particle presently considered to be a non-dissociable entity as distinguished from those which are considered to be assemblies, such as nuclei and ions. Examples are: photons, electrons, protons, neutrons, mesons baryons.
Emissivity - The energy emission rate usually expressed as r/c/h at 1 m. or mr/mc/h at 1 m.

Emulsion - A gelatin and silver bromide crystal mixture coated into a transparent film base. Encapsulation - The process of sealing radioactive materials to prevent contamination. Eoilation Removal of the hair with the roots.

Dosimetry - All the methods either of measuring directly, or of measuring indirectly and computing absorbed dose, absorbed dose rate, exposure,exposure rate, dose equivalent, etc and the science associated with these methods. 6

Equivalent Penetrameter Sensitivity - That thickness of penetrameter, expressed as a percentage of the section thickness radiographed, in which a designated hole would be visible under the same radiographic conditions.

IS2418:1991
Erythema A superficial reddening of the skin, Film Badge - A package of photographic film worn like a badge by workers engaged in working with radiation sources or in a nuclear industry to measure exposure to ionizing radiation. The absorbed dose can be calculated by the degree of film darkening caused by the irradiation. Film Base - The flexible transparent or translucent support on which an emulsion is coated. Film Contrast - The effect of the eristics on radiographic contrast. this is given by the slope of the curve of the film at the relevant also Gradient G. ) Film Holder and screens. A light-tight film charactA measure of characteristic density. ( See for films

Exogram - Radiograph of metals; another term for industrial radiography. Exology - Radiology of metals; for industrial radiology. another term

Exposure - It is a term used generally to denote the incidence of radiation on any material, living or non-living. It is divided into the following two categories: a) Acute Exposure - It is used to denote any radiation exposure which gives a high dose in a short duration. b) Chronic Exposure - It is used to denote radiation exposure of long duration by fractionation or protraction. Exposure Chart - A chart indicating the radiographic exposures appropriate for different thickness of a specified material. Exposure Factor - The product of current and time divided by the distance squared for X-rays; and the product of curies and time divided by the distance squared for gamma rays. Exposure Latitude - Ratio of the `range of correct exposure; to `intensity range of image'. It expresses the limits of under exposure and over exposure within which the intensity of image remains the same. Exposure Meter - An instrument the exposure time required radiographic conditions. for predicting for specified

carrier

Film Illuminator - Equipment incorating a suitable source of illumination for viewing radiographs or other transparencies. Film Speed - Relative exposure attain a specified density. required to

Film Ring - A film badge worn as a ring to measure the dose of radiation, usually p-radiation received by the fingers. Fine Crack - A discontinuity in a solid material usually possessing Iength and depth greater than the width. Fission - The splitting of a heavy nucleus into two roughly equal parts ( which are nuclei of lighter elements ) accompanied by the release of relatively large amount of energy and frequently one or more neutrons. Fission can occur spontaneously, but is usualy caused by the abosrption of gamma rays neutrons or other particles. Fission Products of heavy elements. weight and almost Strontium-90 and Nuclei formed by the fission They are of medium atomic all are radioative. Examples cesium-137.

False Indication - In non-destructive inspection an indication that may be interpreted erroneously as discontinuity or defect.. Fast film - Radiographic film which has inherent graininess characteristics of a coarse. nature intended to increase the relative film speed. Field Size - Cross sectional ation beams. Filament cathode. The heating area of the radielement of a hot

Fissionable Material - Any material readily fissioned by slow'neutrons. Examples : uranium235 and plutonium-239. Fixer - A chemical solution which dissolves unexposed silver halide from developed film emulsions. Fixing - The chemical removal of unused silver halides from an emulsion after development. A fixing bath may be acidified ( acid fixing bath ) primarily to prolong its life. 7

Filled Crack - A crack open to the surface, but filled with some foreign material, like oxide, grease, etc. Filter .- A layer of absorptive material that is placed in the beam of radiation for the purpose of absorbing rays of certain wavelengths and thus controlling the quality of the radiograph.

IS 2478 : 1991 Flash Radiography - The method of radiography using pulses of X-rays, where each pulse is extremely short; usually employed for moving objects.
Flaw -

Focal Film Distance FFD or SFD -The distance between the focal spot of the X-ray tube or the radiation source and the film. Focal spot - The area of the target on which the electron stream impinges and from which X-rays are emitted. Fog - A chemical scattered radiation Chemical darkening of the film resulting from action of the developer, ageing, secondary radiation, pre-exposure to or exposure to visible light ( see also Pog ).

An imperfection in an item or material which may or may not be harmful. If harmful, it is a defect or discontinuity. Flow Location - Process tion and depth of defect. of getting the posi-

Flaw Sensitivity -- In a radiograph, the minimum detectable thickness of a specific flaw or defect, measured in the direction of the primary beam of radiation and expressed as a percentage of the total thickness of the irradiated object the latter being assumed to be of specified homogeneous material. For a flaw, the width or cross-section of the which is large campared to the unsharpness, the flaw senstivity approximates closely to the penetrameter sensitivity. Fluorescene -. The emission of electromagnetic radiation by a substance as a result of the absorption of electromagnetic or corpuscular radiation having greater unit energy than that of the fluorescent radiation. Fluorescene is charaterised by the fact that it occurs only so long as the stimulus responsible for it is maintained. The characteristic X-radiation emitted as a result of absorption of X-rays of higher frequency is a typical example of fluorescene. Fluorescent Screen - A suitable mounted layer of material, such as barium platino-cyanide or zinc sulphide, which fluoresces in the visible region of the spectrum under the action of X-rays or other ionizing radiation. It is commonly used to give a visual image of an irradiated object. Fluorography topic image. The photography of a fluoros-

Fog Density - A general term used to denote any increase in the optical density of a processed film caused by anything other than the direct action of the image forming radiation. Foil - Metal in sheet in thickness. form less than 0.15 mm

Foreign Materials - They may appear as isolated irregular or elongated variations of film density not corresponding to variations in thickMay be sand, ness of material or to cavities. slag, oxide or dross or metal of different density included in the material being examined.
Forward Scatter -Radiation

ximately the direction
Frilling

scattered in approof the primary beam.

- The loosening of an emulsion from its base, commencing at the edges. It is usually caused by prolonged immersion in a liquid of unsuitable chemical composition at too high a temperature. Rectification - Rectification which allows current to flow during each half cycle of an alternating supply. Full-Wave Gadolinium-153

-A

radioisotope

of the element straight

gadolinium. Gamma - The slope of the maximum portion of the characteristic furve.
Gamma ( r ) -

Fluoroscope -- An X-ray tube and fluorescent screen with or without an image intensifier, and associated equipment used for fluorosocopy. Fluoroscopy - The production of a visual image on a fluorescent screen by ionising radiation. The intensity of neutron radiation. It is expressed as the number of neutrons passing through 1 cm" in 1 s.
Flux -

The slope of the approximately curve straight portion of a characteristic between the toe and the shoulder. The steeper the slope the greater is the film contrast. Gamma Emitter - An atom whose radioactive decay process is associated with the emission of gamma rays. Gamma Infinity ( rx ) - The maximum gamma that can be reached by prolonged development. Gamma Radiography (Gammagraphy j - Radiography by means of gamma rays.

Flux Density - This term means the number of flux lines per unit of area taken at right angles to the direction of the flux. It is a measure of magnetic field strength.

IS 2478 : 1991 radiation Gamma-Rays - Electromagnetic emitted by radioactive atomic nuclei. Gamma-Rays Capsule - A capsule which contains a gamma-ray source. It is usudlly of metal and of sufficient thickness to reduce `B' transmission to a safe value. It is generally sealed. of matter Gamma-Ray Source - A quantity emitting gamma radiation and in a form convenient for radiology. Gamma-Ray Source Container - A container of dense material having a wall thickness sufficient to allow safe handling for a specified limited time. For some purposes, for example, gamma radiography, it can be designed to permit exposure being made without removing the source from the container. Gas Holes - Appear as round or elongated smooth edged, dark spots occurring indlvidually, in clusters, or distributed throught the castings. Gas Porosity - Represented by elongated dark spots corresponding voids usually distributed through casting. round or to minute the entire generated Grenz Rays - X-Radiation X-Ray tube voltage below about 20 kV. with

Grey (GY) - A basic unit of absorbed dose of ionizing radiation in the SI system. One Gy is equal to 100 rads or one joule/Kg. Grid Ratio - In radiography, the ratio of the depth of the opaque strips of a grid measured in the direction of the primary beam to the spacing between them. Grid - An assembIy of strips of metal, opaque to X-rays assembled edgewise and interleaved with materia1 of low absorbation to be placed between the patient or object and the screen or Mm, in order to reduce the effects of scattered radiation from the patient or object. Half Life - The time in which haIf the atoms in a radioactive substance disintegrate. Half lives vary from miIIionth part of a second to biIlions of years. Half Life ( Biological ) - The time required for a bioIogica1 system, such as a man or an anima1, to eIiminate, by natura1 processes, half the amount of a substance which has entered it. Half Value Layer - The thickness of a material which transmits 50 percent of the radiation incident upon it. Half Value Period ( T, T1/2, 1'2 ) - The time in which the amount of radioactive nuclide decays to half its initia1 vaIue. Half Wave Rectification - Rectification which aIIows current to flow onIy during alternate haIf cycIes of an aIternating supply. Half Value Thickness - The thickness of a specified substance which, when introduced into the path of a given beam of radiation, reduces its intensity to one half. It may be used as an indication of the quality of the beam or of the opacity of the substance. Hardener - A substance (for example, chrome alum or formalin ) used to harden the gelatine in the emulsion, commonIy added to the fixing bath. Hard X-Rays - A term used to express the quality of penetrating power of X-radiation. Hard X-rays are very penetrating. Health Physics the branch of with protection effects of ionizing 9 A term in common radiologica1 science of personnel from radiation. use for deaIing harmful

Geiger-Muller Counter - A gas filled counter operated under such conditions that the magnitude of each pulse is independent of the number of ions initiating it. Genetic Effects of Radiation - Effects that produce changes in those cells of organisms which give rise to egg or sperm cells and therefore affect offspring of the exposed individuals. Geometric - Unsharpness - Unsharpness ( blurring ) arising from the finite size of the source of radiation. Its magnitude depends on the effective source dimensions and also on the relative distance of the source to object and object to film. Gradient (G) - The slope of a characteristic curve at a specified density. Graininess - A film characteristic which consists of the grouping or clumping together of the countless small silver grains into reIatively large masses visible to the naked eye or with slight magnification. Granularity - A physical measure of the inhomogeneity in a processed emuIsion arising from the particular nature of the photographic image.

IS 2478 :

1991
material containnickel and having a 5~l!%%&t greater than that of
Radiation -A protective Image Contrast - The contrast of image details. It depends on a number of factors, such as definition and granuIar nature of the photographic emulsion or fluorescent screen. Image Intensifier - A device used in fluoroscopy and incorporating a vacuum tube in which eIectrons released by X-rays from a special screen are accelerated and focussed on to a fluorescent screen, giving an image brighter than that produced by the unaided action of the X-ray beam on a fluorescent screen. Image Quality Indicator ( IQ1 ) - A device whose image in a radiographic is used to determine radiographic quality level. It is not intended for use in judging the size nor the limits of discontinestablishing acceptance uities. Also popuIarIy known as penetrameter. Radioactivity - Radioactivity that is created by bombarding a substance with neutrons in a reactor or with charged particles produced by particle accelerators.

Heavy Alloy -

ing tungsten, density about lead.
Heterogeneous

Radiation of a particular type having a variety of wavelength or quantum energies. In the case of X-rays, it is often referred to as the continuous spectrum or white radiation.
High Radiation Area -

sible to personne1 in tion originating in licensed material at portion of the body hour a dose in excess
High Tension

Means any area acceswhich there exists radiawhole or in part within such levels that a major could receive in any one of 100 miIIirem.
-

Transformer

which supplies high anode tube.
Hot

The transformer voltage to an X-ray X-ray

Induced

Cathode Tube - A high vacuum tube with an incandescent cathode.

Hot Cell - A heaviIy shielded enclosure in which radioactive materiaIs can be handIed remoteIy through the use of manipulators and viewed through shieIded windows so that there is no danger to personne1. Hot Cracks - Appear as ragged dark lines of variable width and numerous branches. They have no continuity and may exist in groups. They may originate internalIy or at the surface. Hot Inspection -

Inherent Filtration - The filtration of an X-ray beam by any part of the tube shield through which it should pass. In-Motion Radiography

either the object source of radiation exposure.
Inspection

- A method in which being radiographed or the during the is in motion

Inspecting

forgings

directly dur-

off the hammer.
Hot Tear - A fracture ing solidification. Hyperscopic View -

- The process checking materials and defects or for deviation standards. Integration

of examining and parts for possible from establishment

formed

in a meta

which dimensions are exaggerated.
Hyposcopic View -

A stereoscopic view in in the direction of viewing

Dosemeter - The name used for a dosemeter capable of registering cumulative dose, usually in multiples of a specified dose. The instrument may be arranged to operate various eIectrica1 circuits when the pre-set dose has been delivered. Intensify Factor - The ratio of the exposure time without intensifying screens to that when screens are used, other conditions being the same. Screen - A layer of suitable material which when placed in close contact with a photographic emulsion adds to the photographic effects of the incident radiation. Two kinds of screens in common use are: Intensifying

which dimensions are diminished.

A stereoscopic view in in the direction of viewing

Identification Marker - A marker usually of heavy meta used to provide a reference point or identification mark in a radiograph. Illuminator ( Film Illuminator ) - Equipment incorporating a suitable source of iliumination for viewing radiographs or other transparencies.

device that enhances a radiographic image for the purpose of decreasing interpretation time or increasing image detail.
Image Amplifier--A

a) Salt screen -- An intensifying screen consisting of a material such as calcium or cadium tungstate which fluoresces in the visible or ultravialen region of the 10

IS 2478 : 1991 spectrum under the action other ionizing radiation. of X-rays or Iridium 192 - A radioactive isotope of the element iridium which has a half Jife of 75 days. It is used extensively as a source of gamma radiation. Irradiation -- Exposure nuclear reactors. . to radiation, as in

b) Metal

screen screen - An intensifying of metal foil, usually lead, which emits secondary radiation under the action of X-rays or other ionizing radiation.

Intensity - It relates to a point in a beam of electromagnetic radiation. The amount of energy passing per unit time per unit area at the point, the area being normal to the direction of propagation. Interlock - A device for precluding access to an area of radiation hazard either by preventing entry or by automatically removing the hazard. Interpretation - The process of detemining nature of an indication. the

Isomer - One or two or more nucIides having the same atomic number and atomic weight but existing for measurable time intervals in different quantum states with different energies and radioactive properties. Isotope - NucIides having the same number but diRerent mass number. atomic

Internal Conversion X-rays - It is the chaiacteristic X-ray produced as a result of filling up of the vacancy caused by the ejection of an orbital electron ( conversion electron ) of an atom due to the interaction of a gamma ray photon emitted by the nucleus of the same atom. Inverse Square Law - The statements that in the absence of attenuation by matter, energy Auencc rate, particle fluence rate, exposure rate or kerms rate of radiation from a point source is inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the source. Ion - An atom, MolecuIe or fragment moIecuIe possessing a net eIectric charge. of a

K-I?actor - The gamma ray dose rate in rontgens per hour at a distance of one centimetre from a point source of radiation with an activity of one miIIicurie. Each gamma emiter has its own vaIue of K-factor. Kilovolt - Unit of electromotive entia1 equal to 1 000 V. force or pot-

Kilovolt Peak ( KVP ) - The crest value of eIectromotive force or potent24 in kiIovoIts of a pulsating source of eIectrica1 potential. Laminography - A special form of radiography which is used for Iimiting an inspection to a single plane on the material : images of the condition along the pIane of interest are brought into sharp focus, whiIe other images are smeared or blurred.
-A condition produced and persisting in the image receptor by exposure to radiation which can be converted into a visibIe image by processing. Latent Image -

Ionization - The process of adding electrons to or knocking electrons from atoms or molecules, thereby creating ions, high temperature, electrical discharges and nuclear radiation can cause ionization. Ionization Chamber - An instrument that detects ionizing radiation by observing the electrical current created when radiation ionizes gas in the chamber, making it a conductor of electricity. Ionizing Radiation - Any radiation that directly or indirectIy displaces electrons from the outer domains of atom. Examples, aIpha, beta, and gamma radiation.
Jon pair - A positive ion and a negative ion or electrons having charges of the same magni-

Latitude (Radiographic ) .- Latitude most closely aIigned with contrast is commonly called the scale of the film. Latitude is the range of thickness of the materia1 that can be transferred or recorded on the radiograph within the useful reading range of film density. A high contrast film has little latitude and converseIy a low contrast film has high latitude. I,. A. W Liquid Active Waste. See `Mean Lethal Dose

LD/50-30 Dose ( MLD )'

tude, and formed from a neutraI atom or molecuIe by the action of radiation or ,by any other agency that supplies energy. 11

Lead Apron - A protective shield of lead rubber. It may be a flap suspended from the fluorescent screen of an X-ray couch or stand or a garment to be worn by the operator. In the latter case it may be caIIed a body apron.

IS 2478:1991 &ad Equivalent - The
thickness of meta& lead ( usually expressed in millimetres ) which affords the same protection as a given material under the same conditions of irradiation. Lead Glass- Glass containing a high proportion of Iead compounds. It is used as a transparent protective material. Lead Gloves - Gloves incorporating as a protective material. lead rubber Macroscopic Stresses - ResiduaI stresses which vary from tension to compression in a distance ( presumabiy many times the grain size ) which is comparable to the gauge length in ordinary strain measurements; hence detectabIe by X-ray or diffraction methods. Manipulator Rod - A rigid rod used for remote handIing of source penci1, normahy of 2 meter Iength. MAS - Miiii-ampere ardize a radiograph. seconds utilized to stand-

Lead Marker - Lead letter or number used during exposure for identification in the radiographs. Lead Protection - Protection from ionizing radiation afforded by the use of metallic lead. Lead Rubber - Rubber containing a high proportion of lead compounds. It is used as flexible protective material. Leak Test - A test on shieid sources that the radioactive material is not being released. Leakage Radiation - All radiation except the useful beam coming from the X-ray tube or other radiation housing. Leucopaenia - A decrease ieucocytes in the peripheral 5 000 per cubic miIlimeter. in the number of blood below about

Mass Miniature Radiography - Fluorography using miniature photographic fiIm. Maximum Permissible Dose - The recommended upper Iimit for the dose which may be received during a specified period ( usuaIly one week ) by a person who is exposed to ionizing radiation over an indefinite period. So far as is known, a normal person so exposed wiI1 suffer no harmful effect. For the whole body, the external radiation of the 1966 internationa1 value is 100 mr. per week at the body surface for X-or gamma-radiation of quantum energy Iess than 3 MeV. Maximum Permissible Constant Dose Rate - The dose rate which, if constant during a specified period, wouId give rise to the maximum permissible dose for that period. Mean Lethan Dose ( MLD ) - That single dose of whole body irradiation which will cause the death of 50 percent of those-receiving it within 30 days. This is aiso known as LD/50-30 dose. Mean Life - The arithmetic mean vaIue of the lives of the atoms of a radioactive nuclide. It is the reciproca1 of the decay constant. Metal Screen - An intensifying screen of metal foil, usualIy lead, which emits secondary radiation under the action of X-rays or other ionizing radiation. MeV One million electon voit.

Licensed-Material - Source material, specia1 nuclear material, or by-product materia1, received, possessed, used or transferred under a general or a special licence issued by the Atomic Energy Commission. Light Metal - One of the Iow specific gravity metals aiuminium, magnesium, titanium, beryiiium or their alloys. Line Focus Principle - The process of making the angle between the anode face and the central ray such that the effective foca1 spot is small in relation to the actual spot size, Linear Accelerator - A device that is used to acceierate electrons. The electron may be lmpwml upon a heavy metai target to produce high energy radiation. Longitudinal Direction - The principal tion of flow in a wrought material. direc-

Micro Shrinkage - Discontinuities that appear as dark feathery streaks or irreguIar patches that indicate cavities in the grain boundaries. Microtron - An electron accelerator in which the electrons are guided in circular orbits tangential to each other ( at one point ) and of increasing radii under the influence of a constant magnetic field; they are accelerated at the beginning of each orbit by transversing a carrity resonator in which there is a radiofrequency electric field. 12

Low Tension Transformer The transformer that energizes the filament of a hot cathode X-ray tube.

IS 2478:1991
Micro Radiography - A technique used to examine very sm.alI objects or minute detaiI through the use of low voltage X-rays and an uhrafine film emulsion which is examined with the aid of optica enlargement. Milliamperage - A measure of the current Aowing between the cathode and the anode in an X-ray tube. The output intensity of the radiation is a function of this current. Milliampere Second - A measure of X-ray exposure expressed as the product of the milliammeter reading and the time of exposure in seconds. The larger units `milliampere minute' and 6milliampere-hour' are sometimes used. Millicurie' Hour - A measure of gamma ray exposure expressed as rhe product of the radioactivity of the source in millicuries and the time of exposure in hours. Milligramme Hour - A measure of gamma ray exposure expressed as the product of the equivalent radium content of the source in milligramms and the time of exposure in hours. Miniature Film Radiography - Fluorography using miniature photographic film. Misruns - Discontinuities that appear as promine'nt darkened areas of variable dimension with a definite smooth outline. Moderator - In neutron radiogaphy, a material used to slow down the fast neutrons. Neutrons are slowed down when they coIIide with atoms of Iight eIement such as hydrogen, deuterium, berryIIium and carbon. Monitoring - Periodic or continuous determination of the amount of ionizing radiation or contamination present in an radioactive occupied region. Monitoring Area - The survey and measurement of types of ionizing radiation and dose IeveIs in an area in which radiation-hazards are present or suspected. Mutaion - An abrupt heritabIe genetic material. change in the Neutron - An uncharged eIementary particIe with a mass nearly equal to that of the proton. The isoIated neutron is unstabIe and &cays with a half Iife of about 13 minute into an electron proton and neutrino. Neutrons sustain the fission reaction in a nuclear reaction. Neutron Radiography - A technique in which thermal neutrons are used as a penetrating radiation to produce the radiograph. Non-Destructive Testing ( NTD ) - Testing to detect internal, surface and conceaIed defects or flaws in materiaIs using techniques that do not damage or destroy the items being tested. Non-Screen Film - X-ray film designed for use with or without metal screens, but not intended for use with saIt screens. It may be of relatively high speed and coarse grain ( ordinary nonscreen film ) or of Iower speed and finer grain ( fine grain-non-screen film ). Nuclear Activity - The number of disintegrations occuring in a given quantity of material per-unit time. The earlier special unit of Curie' is the unit of measurement. One curie is equivalent to 3.7 x 10 lo distentagration per second. Nucleus - The small positively charged core of an atom. It is only about l/100 00 the diamseter of the atom, but contains nearly a11 the mass. Nuclide - Any species of atom that exists for a measurable length of time. A nuclide can be distinguished by its atomic weight, atomic number, and energy state. The term is used synonymously with isotope. A radionuclide is a radioactive nuclide. Film Distance - The distance between the surface of the source side of object and the pIane of the recording medium. Occupancy - Praction of tota time spent by radiation workers/members of the public in the radiation fieId. Occupancy Factor - The factor by which the work load should be muItipIied to correct for the degree or type of occupancy of the area in question. This factor may be based in genera1 on the degree of occupancy averaged over a year. Occupational Dose -- Includes individua1 to radiation: a) in a restricted area; or exposure of an
Object

Neighbourhood Effect - The name given to various effects arising from the diffusion of deveIoper which has become IocaIIy exhausted or loaded with oxidation products by its action on a heavily exposed region of an emuIsion. TypicaI exampIes are developer streaks and abnorma1 density variations near the edges of regions of high density.

b) in the course of empIoyment in which individuaI's duties incIude exposure to

13

IS 2478:1991
radiations provided that occupational dose shall not be deemed to include any exposure of an individual to radiation for the purpose of medical diagnosis or medical therapy of such individual.
Occupational Exposure -- When the occupation of a person involves working with ionizing radiations, the radiation exposure received by him in carrying out his occupation is called occupational exposure. Occupational Opacity Worker -- Workers whose occupation involves working with ionizing radiation. Sensitivity - The smallest change in object thickness which can be detected in a radiograph expressed as percentage of the total thickness, the object being assumed to be of specific homogeneous material. The term applies to image details which are sufficiently large for the effects of unsharpness to be ignored, and the quantity is largely a function of radiographic contrast. Penumbra Penetrameter

to intensity
Orthoscopic

Ratio of intensity of incident of transmitted light.

light view

The shadow cast when the incident radiation is partly, but not wholly, cut off by an intervening body. The space of partial illumination between the umbra, or perfect shadow, on all sides and the full light. A marginal region of border land or partiaI obscurity.

View -- A three-dimensional seen in normal perspective.

Over Development -- Development which is greater than that required to produce the optimum results in a particular radiograph. It may arise from development for too long a time or at too high a temperature and may give rise to excessive graininess and fog. Oxidating Fog Fog caused

Dose - Dose of ionizing radiation that, in the light of present knowledge, is not expected to cause appreciable bodily injury to a person at any time during his life time. Personnel Dose -

Permissible

The dose received sonnel in the course of their work.

by

per-

Personnel Monitoring

film to air during Chemical Fog. )
Pair Production

by exposure of a development. ( see also

- The determination of dose received by a person who may be exposed, to a radiation hazard.

Personnel

- The process -whereby gamma photon with energy greater than 1.02 MeV is converted directly into matter in the form of electron and position pair. Subsequent annhilation of position results in the production of two 0.51 MeV gamma photons. Panormagram - An auto-stereogram in each vertical strip of which the image changes progressively from a Ieftward aspect of one edge to a rightward aspect at the other edge. When viewed through a line or lenticular grid, the aspect change within limits with lateral changes in the position of the observer. The orthoscopic viewing zones are of considerably greater width than the pseudoscopic zones. --- An auto stereogram consisting of a composite reproduction in which vertical strips from a <left eye' and a .`right eye' view are interdigitated and exposed to view through a screen of alternate opaque and transparent lines, or alternativeIy through a Ienticular screen ( for exampIe, a cyhndrical lentiorthoscopic screen ). The culated and pseudoscopic viewing zones are of equal width. Peak Voltage -- The maximum vaIue of a varyParallax Stereogram Parallax

Monitoring Equipment - Devices designed to be worn or carried by an individual for the purpose of measuring the dose received ( for example, film badges, pocket chambers, pocket dosemeters, film rings ).

Photographic

Emulsion - A suspension of a photo-sensitive material, such as silver halide grains in a medium, such as gelatine. Fog -

Photographic

an emuIsion arising following causes:

Unwanted blackening of from one or more of the

Development of grains which are inherexposure without ently developable ( inherent fog ). This type of fog generally varies with the age of the emulsion, and with the conditions of storage. Unintentional exposure of the emulsion to radiation or to certain gases or vapours. Chemical reactions.
Photographic Intensification - ChemicaI treatment of a processed emulsion when underexposed or under-developed to increase the overa contrast or density or both. Reduction -- Treatment of. a usuaIIy with an oxidizmg

ing voltage.
Penetrameter See `Image Quality Indicator'.

Photographic

processed 14

emulsion,

IS 2478 : 1991 agent, to less the density. change of contrast depending used. There may be a on the process seria1 oxidation and aIso serves to remove oxidation products which might otherwise retard development or produce strain. Pressure Mark - A variation in photographic density caused by the application of IocaI pressure to the emulsion. The pressure mark may be light or dark according to circumstances. The crescent shaped pressure mark due to severe Iocal bending of a film is often caIIed a crimp mark. Primary Protective Barrier - Barrier sufficient to attenuate the usefu1 beam to the required degree. Primary Radiation - Radiation arising directIy from the target of an X-ray tube or from a radioactive source. Processing - A series of operations, such as developing, fixing and washing, associated with the conversion of a Iatent image into a stable visible image. Protective Lead Glass - GIass containing a high proportion of lead compounds. It is used as transparent protective materia1. Protective Material - Material which is used to provide protection against ionizing radiation. Protective Source Housing - Enclosure for one or more sealed sources which Iimits the leakage radiation to a specified IeveI. Proton - A stable elementary particle having a positive charge of 1.602 19 x lo-l9 C and rest mass of 1.676 5x lo+ kg. Pseudo Image - The shadow cast by an irradiated object of smaIIer width than the source, in the region beyond the point of convergence of the umbra. Psuedoscopic View - A reversed steroscopic view in which near objects appear to be distant and vice versa. Q-Factor ( Callier Coefficient ) - It is the ratio of specular to totally diffuse density. Owing to the scattering of Iight in photographic emuIsions, the value of Q is greater than unity ( usualIy between 2-O and 1-O ). Quality of Radiation of penetration. A measure of its degree

Photon - The elementary quantity of energy of electromagnetic radiation, for electromgnetic energy of frequency v, the quantum energy is hv, where h is plancks constant.
NOTE - A photon out a rest mass. is an elementary particle aith-

Photosensitivity - It is the property of a photographic emulsion, by virtue of which electromagnetic or corpuscular radiation may produce chemical or physica changes in the emulsion. Plate Penetrameter - A plate of material similar to the specimen under examination, having a thickness of one or two percent of the specimen thickness and having holes of different diameters. Pocket Dosemeter or Pocket Chamber - A small fountain pen sized ionization chamber used for monitoring radiation exposures of personnel. Before use, they are given a charge and the amount .of discharge is a measure of the quantity of radiation incident. Pores i) SmaII voids in the body of a metal; cavities in a compact ii) Minute ( powder metallurgy ) sometimes international; iii) Minute perforations plated coating. in an electro-

Porosity - A field of fine holes, voids or pores within a materia1. Porosity Charts - Standard charts for comparing porosity size; spacing and number in a given area for a given thickness. Positron - A fundamental particle of nature having a mass equal to that of the eIectron and possessing a positive charge equa1 to the negative charge of the electron. The mass of the positron is therfore 9.107 x lo-28 grams; the eIectrica1 charge carried by the positron is equa1 to 4.802 x lo-lo statcouIomb ( electrostatic unit of charge ). Potter-Bucky Diaphragm - A device incorporating a grid which is kept in movement during the time of a radiographic exposure so as to eIeminate grid shadows from the radiograph. Preservative - In a deveIoper the constituent ( for example, sodium suIphite ) which minimizes the exhaustion of the deveIoper caused by

Rad - Radiation

absorbed dose. The basic unit of absorbed dose of ionizing radiation. One rad is equa1 to the absorption of 100 ergs of radiation energy per gram of matter.

15

IS 2478 : 1991 Radiation - The propagation of energy thr,ough matter or space in the form of waves. In atomic physics, the term has been extended to include fast moving particIes ( alpha and beta rays, free neutrons, etc ). Gamma rays and X-rays of particular interest in atomic physics are electromagnetic radiations in which energy is propagated in packets called photons. Radiation Area - Any area accessible to personnel in which there exists radiation originating in whole or in part within licensed material at such levels that a major portion of the body could receive in any one hour a dose in excess of 100 miIlirem. Radiation Burn - A burn exposure to radiant energy. caused by overRadiation Source - An apparatus or a material emitting or capable of emitting radiation. Radiation Survey - An investigation of factors associated with an instaIIation or process which could give rise to a radiation hazard. Radiation Trap - An indirect means of access to a room containing an installation which gives rise to radiation hazard. It is intended to permit freedom of access while ensuring that workers in adjacent regions cannot be exposed to more than the maximum permissible constant dose rate. Radiation Worker-Workers whose occupation involves working with ionizing radiation. Radioactive - Atoms which are energeticaIIy unstable and decay to a stable condition by emitting radiation are said to be radioactive. Radioactive Contamination - Deposition of any radioactive material in any pIace where it is not desired, particuIarIy where it is harmful. Radioactive Decay (Radioactive Disintegration) The spontaneous change of a nucleus resulting in the emission of a particle or a photon. The atom containing the original nucleus is sometimes called the parent atom and the resulting atom, the decay product or daughter atom. The term radioactive decay is also appIied to the decay of neutrons and mesons. Radioactive Material - Any material emitting radiation whether or not subject to licensing contro1 by the Atomic Energy Commission. Radioactive Source - Any quantity of radioactive material which is intended for use as a source of ionising radiation. Radioactive Transformation - The spontaneous change of a nucleus resulting in the emission of a particle or a photon. The atom containing the original nucleus is sometimes called the parent atom and the resulting atom, the decay product or daughter atom. The term radioactive decay is also applied to the decay of neutrons and mesons.
Radioactive
( from

Radiation Contrast - The effect of radiation quality on contrast. A measure of this is given by the absorption coefficient of the radiation in an irradiated object. Radiation Damage - A general term for the alternation of properties of a material arising from radiation exposure to X-rays, gamma heavy particle radiation of rays, neutrons, fission fragments in nuclear fuel materia1. Radiation Danger Zone --- A zone within which the maximum permissible constant doze rate or concentration is exceeded. Radiation Hazards -- A danger to health arising from exposure to ionizing radiation. It may be due to externa1 irradiation or to radiation from radioactive material within the body. Radiation Monitor - A device for measuring radiation in order to assess the radiation hazard. Radiation Protection Guide - The total amounts of ionizing radiation dose over certain periods of time which may safely be permitted to exposed industrial groups. These standards, established by the Federal Radiation Council, are equivalent to what was formerly caIIed the maximum permissible exposure. Radiation Safety Officer - A person who possesses valid RSO's Certificate duly recognised or issued by the competent authority for this specific purpose and who further meets the qualifications specified for RSO in Para 13 (1) of schedule GSR 735. Radiation Sickness - An iIIness exposure to ionising radiation. caused by

Waste - Ekpipment and m~terids nuclear operations ) which are radioactive and for which there is no further use.

Radioactivity - Spontaneous nUCkir disintegration with emission of corpuscular or electromagnetic radiations. The principal types of radioactivity are alpha disintegration, beta decay ( electron emission, positron emission 16

IS 2478 : 1991 electron and transition. capture ) and isomeric or rejectability of the materia1 is based upon the judicious application of the radiographic specifications and standards governing the materia1. Radiographic Negative - A radiograph or a print in which the darker areas correspond to regions of lower radiation opacity in the object radiographed. Radiographic Qualification Test - A procedure for determining the optimum value of d/t ratio or the proper working distance of an X-ray tube or a radioactive source. Radiographic Quality - A qualitative term used to describe the capability of a radiograph to show flaws in the area under examination. Radiographic Range - The maximum range of thickness of a specified homogeneous material or of radiation opacity of an object, which can be recorded satisfactorily in a single radiograph with a specified technique. Radiographic Sensitivity - The percentage ratio of the thickness of the smallest detectable defect to the thinckness of the specimen being examined. It is a measure of the capability to detect a smaI1 discontiniuity. Radiographic Screens - MetaIIic or fluorescent sheets used to intensify the radiation effect on films. Radiographic Stereometry - The process of finding the position and dimensions of details within an object by measurements made on radiographs taken from different directions. Radiography - The use of radiant energy in the form of neutrons, X-rays or gamma-rays for non-destructive examination of opaque objects in order to produce graphical records on sensitized fiIms which indicate the comparative soundness of the object being tested. 3-2T Radiography - Quality level of radiography in which the finished radiograph dispIays a discernible image of a penetrameter hole that has a diameter equa1 to twice the penetrameter thickness T, which equaIs 3 percent of the materia1 thickness. isotope of an Radioisotope - An unstable element that decays or disintegrates spontaneously emitting radiation. More than 1 300 natura1 and artificial radioactive isotopes have been identified. Radiological Protection - Protection being from injury by radiation. 17 of human

Radioactivity Concentration Guide - The concentration of radioactivity in any environment which results in doses equal to those in radioactive protection guide. The Federal Radiation Council term replaces the maximum permissibIe concentration. Radiobiology - The branch of biology which deals with the effect of radiation on living organisms. Radiograph - A permanent, visible image on a recording medium produced by penetrating radiation passing through the material being tested. Radiographer - A person specialising in the practical application of radiation in diagnostic radiology, radio therapy or industrial radiography. Radiographer's Assistant - Any individual who under the personel supervision of a radiographer uses radiographic exposu.re devices, sealed sources or related handling tools or survey instruments in radiography. Radiographer's Exposure Device - Any instrument containing a sealed source fastened or contained therein in which the sealed source or sou.rce sheilding thereof may be moved or otherwise changed from a shield to unshielded position for purposes of making a radiographic exposure. Radiographic Code minimum standards practices. A code for specifying related to rdiographic

Radiographic Contrast - It is the contrast in a usuaIIy expressed in terms of radiograph, density difference. Radiographic Equivalence Factor - That factor by which the thickness of a material shall be in order to determine that the multiplied thickness of a standard material ( often steel ) wiI1 have the same absorption. Radiographic Exposure - The subjection of an emulsion to radiation for the purpose of producing a latent image. Radiographic exposure is commonly expressed in terms of mflliampere-seconds or millicurie-hours. Radiographic Interpretation - The determination of the cause and significance of subsu.rface discontinuities indicated on the radiograph. The evaluation as to the acceptability

IS 2478 : 1991
Radiologist - In medical radiology, a medical specialist employing ionising radiation for the diagnosis or treatment of disease. -

Radiology

ing radiaton. and industrial
Radium

The fields of application For example medical radiology.

of ionisradiology

but enhances its preferential action by reducing the rate of development of unexposed grains to a greater extent than that of exposed grains. It thus tends to reduce the chemical fog.
- An eflect due to rupture of an emulsion coating, usually caused by rapid changes of temperature or of chemical condition of the emulsion when wet. It gives an appearance similar to the grain of leather. Reticulation Reversal -

- A radioactive element with the atomic number 88. In nature, radium is found associated with uranium, which decays to radium by a series of alpha and beta emissions. Radium is used as a radiation source. Reciprocity Failure - The departure from the reciprocity Iaw of any given emulsion under specified conditions ( for example, when salt screens are used ). Law -

The production of a positive instead of a negative image in an emulsion or viceversa.
-

Ripple-Voltage

A small periodic

variation

in

voltage. Rod Anode Tube target is situated tubular anode. An X-ray tube in which the near the end of a long

A law which states that a11 other conditions remaining constant, the time of exposure required to produce a given photographic density is inversely proportional to the intensity of the radiations.
Reciprocity Reduction Coefficient -

Same

as

`Effective

Absorption
Reduction

Co-efficient'.

Rontgen - A unit of exposure dose of ionizing radiation. It is the amount of gamma or X-ray required to produce ions carrying one electrostatic unit of electrical charge in one cubic centimetre of dry air under standard condition.

Factor - Dose rate without a shield divided by the dose rate with a shield interposed between a source and a point at which radiation is measured. Radiograph - A set of radiographs containing images of discontinuities. These can be used as comparison `standards' for acceptability of materials. Reference Reflection Density - The common logarithm of the ratio of the brightness of a non-absorbing perfect diffuser to that of the sample, both being illuminated at an angIe of 45" to the surface, the direction of measurment being normal to the surface.

REM ( Rontgen Equivalent Man ) - A unit of absorbed radiation dose in biological. matter. It is equal to the absorbed dose in rads multiplied by the relative biclogical effectiveness of the radiation.
REP ( Rontgen Equivalent

absolute unit of radiation seded by the rad.
Rhm ( Rontgens

Physical ) - An dosage, now super-

per Hour at One Metre ) - A unit of effective strength of a gamma-source, under specified condition of shielding, such that at a distance of one metre in air, its gamma-rays produce a dose rate of one rontgen per nour. R-meter - An ionization type instrument designed to measure radiation dose.

Biological Effectiveness ( RBE ) - The relative effectiveness of a given kind of ionizing radiation in producing a biologioal response as compared with 250 000 electron volt X-rays. Relative Replenisher

developer exhausted
Resolution

- A modified form of the original which when added to partially developer, restores its efficiency.

A special lamp used in dark rooms to provide working visibility without affecting the photosensitive emulsion of the radiographic film.
Safe Light Safety-Door

- The smallest distance between recognizable images on a film or screen. It may be expressed as the number of lines per millimetre which can be seen as direct image.

which switSwitch - Micro-switch ches on X-rays only when the X-ray room door is closed, cutting off hazardous radiation. used for containing a lead absorbing hazardous

Safety Glass -- Special glass

compound radiation.

Restrainer - In a developer, the constituent bromide ) which ( for example, potassium reduces the activity of the developing agent 18

Salt Screen -- An intensifying screen consisting of a material, such as calcium or cadmium

IS 2478 :1991 tungstate, which fluoresces in the visible or uhraviolet region of spectrum under the action of X-rays or other ionizing radiation. Scatter - Secondary in al1 directions. radiation which is emitted Self Rectitier - Hot cathode X-ray tube which permits electronic current to flow one way only. Sensitivity - The percentage ratio of the thickness of the smaIIest detectabIe defect to the thickness of the specimen being examined. It is a measure of the capabiIity to detect a smaI1 discontinuity. Sensitometry - Measurement of the properties of emulsions by examination of the change in photographic density produced under different conditions of exposure and processing. Sequestring Agent - A constituent (for exampIe, sodium hexametaphosphate ) which is sometimes added to a deveIoper to prevent the formuration of scum from hard water. Shield - A Iayer or mass of materia1 used reduce the passage of ionizing radiation. to

Scattering - A process that changes a particles's or photon's trajectory. Scattering is caused by coIIision with atoms, nuclei and other particles. If the scattered particles' energy is unchanged by the collision, eIastic scattering prevaiIs. If there is change in energy, the process is caIIed ineIastic scattering. Scattering Angle - The directions of propagation scattered radiations. angIe between of the primary the and

Scatter-Unsharpness - Unsharpness due to radiation scattered by an irradiated object, intensifying screen or fluorescent screen. Schwarz Child Exponent -- A mathematica1 index which may be appIied to one of the variables in order to correct for the faiIure of the reciprocity law over a Iimited range. Screening - The fiItration afforded by a container of radioactive material. It is expressed quantitativeIy in terms of the thickness and materia1 of the waI1, or the equivaIent thickness of a specified materia1. Screen-Type Film - X-ray fiIm designed for use with salt screens. It is sensitive to the fluorescent Iight emitted by such screens under the action of X-rays. Sealed Source - A discrete amount of radioactive materia1 with a light, firm and inactive enclosure which effectiveIy prevents the Ioss of radioactive substance during routine use. In the case of gaseous radioisotopes (for example, emanation ) a source wouId be regarded as sealed onIy if the encIosure is gas-tight. Secondary Protective Barrier - Barrier sullicient to attenuate the scattered radiation to the required degree. Secondary Radiation - The ionising radiation emitted by matter as a resuIt of an interaction of the primary radiation with medium under consideration. Segregation - Appear as variations in film density which can be expIained by segregation of elements of atomic numbers different from that of the matrix. Self-Rectification - The process by which the current is rectified in the X-ray tube itself. 19

Shock Proof Tube - An X-ray tube surrounded by an earthed shieId. Shrinkage Cavity - A discrete cavity in meta caused by contraction during soIidification. Shrinkage Porosity - A localized Iacy or honey combed darkened area on a fiIm that indicates porous meta1. Sievent ( SV ) - A unit of absorbed radiation dose in biologica matter in the SI system. One SV is equa1 100 Rem or one JouIe/kg. Silver Halide - A compound of silver with one of the haIogen eIements, for exampIe, silver bromide. Site-in Charge - A person who is so designated by the employer and who possesses a vaIid certificate for site-in-charge duIy recognised or issued by the competent authority for this specific purpose and who further meets the qualifications specified for site-in-charge as per gazette of India July 12, 1980. Continuous or periodic Site Monitoring measurement at IocaI exposure rate, is cornpIementary to personne1 monitoring. Sky-Shine - Gamma rays emerging from the top of a cell containing a strong gamma radiation source, that are scattered by air ceiIing and other structural parts of the buiIding and reach the area outside the cel1 wall to pr;duce a radiation fieId there. Soft Radiation - A term used to describe types of the Iess penetrating quaIitativeIy X-rays, beta-rays and gamma-rays.

IS 2478 : 1991 Soft X-rays - A term used to express the quality or penetrating power of X-radiation. Their penetrating power is relatively low. Solarization The diminution in density produced by exposure additional to that required to give maximum density or development. This may result in reversal. Somatic Effect - Of radiation Biological effect, other than hereditary and teratogenic effects, which are manifest in the exposed persons. Source - A machine that emits penetrating or radioactive radiation. materia1 Stationary Grid - A grid in which the opaque strips are so thin and so close together that it can remain stationary without the shadow of the strips interfering with the interpretation of the film ( for example, Lysholm grid ). StepDown Transformer - The transformer that energizes the filament of a hot cathode X-ray tube. Step-Up Transformer - The transformer which supplies high anode voltage in X-ray tube. Step Wedge - A bIock of material in the form of a series of steps used to compare the radiographic effects of X-ray under various conditions. Step Wedge Calibration Film - A step wedge comparison film, the densities of which are traceable to a nationally portions of the specimen. Step Wedge Peuetrameter - A penetrameter of material similar to the specimen under examination having steps ranging usually from one to five percent of the specimen thickness. Each step may contain one or more drilled holes for the assessment of definition. Stereofluoroscopy - A fluoroscopic technique which enables screen imaged to be viewed three-dimensionally. Sterogram - .4ny type of steroscopic graph, photograph or picture. Sterography The production radio-

Source Drive System - Flexible cable system to drive the source pencil to the desired positon. Source Film Distance ( SFD or also referred as film focus distance FFD ) - The distance between the local spot of an X-ray tube or radiation source and the film. Source Material - In atomic energy law, any material, except special nuclear material which contains 0.05 percent or more of uranium, thorium or any combination of the two. Source Pencil - An assembly consisting encapsulated radioactive source and times a shield plug suitably encased with sion for attachment to a camera/flexible Source Strength - Number of particles by a radiation source per unit time. of an some provicable.

emitted

Source to Film Distance ( SFD ) - The distance between the focal spot of an X-ray tube or radiation source and the film. Special Nuclear Material - In atomic energy low, includes platinum, uranium 233*, or any material artificially enriched by any of these substances. Specific Activity - Total radioactivity of source material. per gram

of stcrograms.

Stereograticule - A scale which enables direct measurements in the direction of viewing to be made during steroscopic examination. Stereo Radiography - The production of a pair of radiographs of an object from two different angles, in order that they may be viewed or measured steroscopically, so that the viewer sees a three dimensional image. Stereoscopy - The three-dimensional efl'ect resulting from binocular vision. visual

Specific Ionization - Number of ion pairs produced by an ionizing particle per unit pair length of medium traversed. Example; per cm of air or per micron of tissue. Speed - It is the characteristic of an emulsion which determines the exposure required under any given set of conditions. Stable Isotope - A nuclide undergo radioactive decay. that does not

Stop Bath - An acid bath used to arrest development and to neutralize alkaline developer in an emulsion before transfer to the fixing bath. Stripping Emulsion - A photographic emulsion for used in autoradiography which can be removed from its base and placed in contact radioactive containing specimen with a material. 20

*uranium containing more than the ance of the uranium-235.

natural abund-

IS 2478 : 1991 Subject Contrast - The intensities transmitted the specimen. ratio of th.e radiation by selected portions of Tolerance Dose - For industrial safety guidelines, 100 mr/week. ( The word `tolerance' should not be understood to have the meaning allowable, for example, toIerance on machined parts. ) Tracer - An element or compound that has been made radio-active, so that it can be easily followed ( traced ) in biological and industrial process. `Radiation emitted by the radioisotope pinpoints its location. Transformation Constant' Constant Same as `Decay

Subject Range - The range of thickness or radiation opacity of material in an object which is to be examined. Subjective Contrast - Qualitative contrast in a radiograph or fluorescent screen reproduction as estimated visually. Suppressor - Retifier device sing the negative half cycle. used for suppres-

Surface Irregularity - An image on a radiograph film that corresponds to an irregularity visible on the surface of an object being tested. Survey - Evaluation of the radiation hazards incident to the production, use, release, disposa1 or presence of radioactive materials or other sources of radiation under a specific When appropriate, such set of conditions. evaluation incIudes a physical survey of the location cf materials and equipment and measurements of levels of radiation. Survey Meter - A portable instrument which measures dose rate of exposure of radiation intensity. in which the Synchrotron - An accelerator particles are guided by an increasing magnetic field while they are accelerated several times ( in an approximately circular path ) by electric fields produced by a high frequency generator. Target - The surface of the anode of an X-Ray tube on which the electron stream impinges and from which the main beam of X-ray is admitted. Tele Radiography -. Radio;;;phy source-to-object large distance. employing source-to-film

Transmission - The process electric energy in a conductor. Transparent Permeable

of transmitting

to visible light.

Transport Index - A number expressing the maximum radiation level at 1 meter from the surface of the package measured in m r e m/h ( 1 m r e m = 0.01 msv ). Transverse - Literally `across' usually ing a direction or plane perpendicular IongitudinaI direction. signifyto the

Tube Diaphragm - A device normally fixed to a tube shieId or head to limit the divergence of the emergent X-ray beam. Tube Head - A type of tube shield which in addition to the X-ray tube may contain part of the high voltage generator. Tube Rating - The maximum electrical can be safely applied to an X-ray tube specified period.
Tube Shield X-ray tube.

load for a of an

The

shockproof

housing

Tube Stand - A support often in the form of one or more vertical pillars with adjustable attachments for hoIding an X-ray tube in position. Tungsten Alloy - A protective material containing tungsten, copper and nickel, and having density about 50 percent higher than of lead. Turoidity - Unsharpness scattered by a photographic due to radiation emulsion.

Tenth Value Layer ( TVL ) - The thickness of a specified absorbing material which, when introduced into the path of a beam of radiation: reduces the dose rate to one-tenth of its original value. Threshold Dose - The minimum dose that will produce a detectable degree of any given effect. Thulium-170 - A radioisotope of the element thulium, having a haIf life of 127 days. Timer - A device for controlling the duration of an exposure to ionizing radiation. It is usually capable of being preset. 21

Two-Film Technique - A procedure wherein two films of different relative speeds are used simultaneousIy to radiograph both the thick and the thin section of an item. Umbra - A region of radiation such from any point in the source passes behind an object in a beam that a straight line drawn this region to any point in through the object. The

IS 2478 : 1991

umbra is sometimes of total shadow.

referred

to as the region

over a suitabIe time and expressed riate units.

in approp-

Undercut - Excessive radiation intensity which may be found at the edge of an object normaIIy associated with scattered radiation. It also means a specified type of defect occurring in welding. Under-Development - Development which is Iess than that required to produce the optimum results in a particular radiograph. It may arise from development for too short a time or at too low a temperature or from the use of exhausted developer. Unrestricted Area - Any area entry into which is not controhed by the Iicences and any area used for residentia1 quarters. Useful Beam -- That part of the primary and secondary radiation which passes through the aperature cone or other device for collimation. Useful Density Range - The range of density over which the gradient is adequate for the recognition of image detaiIs. The upper density Iimit is determined mainIy by the brightness availabIe in the fiIm iIIuminator, and the lower density Iimit by the sensitivity required. Vande Graff Generator - An eIectrostatic type of X-ray generator in the million and multimiIIion volt category. Void - Discontinuities in which there is a physical separation between opposite walls. Volt - The unit of eIectromotive force which tends to cause an eIectric current to flow through a conductor. Wetting Agent - A substance that wiIl reduce the surface tension of a liquid or soIid. White Radiation - Radiation of a particuIar type having a variety of wavelengths or quantum energies. In the case of X-rays, it is often referred to as continuous spectrum or white radiation. Whole Body Irradiation ( Whole Body Exposure ) - Incidence of ionizing radiation on the entire body of the person. Wire Penetrameter - A penetrameter incorporating a series of wires graded in diameter and usually of similar materia1 as the specimen under examination. Work Load The output of a radiation machine or a radioactive a source integrated 22

Xerography - It is a compIeteIy dry photographic process which depends on the formation of an eIectrostatic ( Iatent ) image on an insulated selenium Iayer and the deveIopment of this latent image by a finely divided, electricalIy charged powder. The latest image is formed by exposure to visible light. Xero-Radiograph - The negatively charged fine obtained by xerography. latent power
*

image of formation,

Xero-Radiography - It is a special application of xerography in the X-ray field where the exciting radiation empIoyed to produce the latent image is only X-rays. X-unit ( X ) - A unit of length. The X-unit is defined by assigning the value 3029.45 X to the spacing of the ( 200 ) pIanes of calcite at 18�C. One X-unit equaIs ( 1~00202f0~00003 ) x lo-" cm. X-Ray - Penetrating electromagnetic radiation emitted when the inner orbital electrons of an atom are excited and release energy. Thus the radiation is non-nuclear in origin and is generated in practice by bombarding a metallic target with high speed electrons. X-Ray Film - A film base which is coated ( usually on both sides ) with an emulsion designed for use with X-rays. X-Ray Frequency - The number of alternations per second of the Rontgen ( A ) radiation. X-ray Paper - White paper coated with emulsion for use with or without an intensifying screen. It is suitable for some purposes as an alternative to X-ray film. X-Ray Spectrum - The orderly separation of the components of an X-ray beam according to its wavelength, frequencies or quantum energies. X-Ray Tube - A glass vacuum tube which decalerates the high velocity electrons to produce X-rays. ( see also Umbra ). X-Ray Wavelengths Rontgen (X) radiation. The wavelength, of

Zircon Sand - A highly absorptive material used as a blocking or masking medium for geometric drilled holes, slots and irregular or eliminate scattered to reduce parts radiation.

Standard Mark by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and Standard marked products are also continuously checked by operated by the producer. Details of conditions under BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

The use of the Standard

Mark is governed

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in may be possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. MTD 21 ( 3543 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 311 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95

Regional

Offices :

Central z Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western Branches : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS
: Manakalaya,

160036 600113

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri BOMBAY 400093

( East )

: AHMIQDABAD,

BANGALORE, BHOPAL, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORB, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR,

Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India

