Wdta ICE A IS 16590 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ater SAMA est gagat — RATE 


(TETI FRAT ) 


Liquid Chilling Package Units — 
Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 23.120 


© BIS 2023 


YR HAH OAT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Se ey WA VM, 9 SET BMS THK AMT, AE Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2023 Price Group 12 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard is intended to define the testing requirements for measurement of performance and energy efficiency 
of liquid chilling package units using vapour compression cycle. 


The manufacturers of liquid chilling package units offer a complex array of equipment to meet the diverse 
applications of markets. The complexity of the product offering precludes the testing of each and every model. 
However, in order to promote consistency in the representation of chiller performance by all manufacturers, this 
standard establishes uniform rating and testing methods. 


This standard was first published in 2017. The title of the standard was modified through the first amendment. 


This first revision of the standard has been contemplated with a view to incorporating the modifications and 
modify the test conditions based on the experience gained since the publication of its first edition. The major 
changes made in this first revision are as follows: 


a) The scope of the standard has been modified; 

b) Indian seasonal energy efficiency ratio (ISEER) definition has been added; 
c) The standard rating conditions are revised (see Table 1); 

d) The tolerance on the rating has been revised (see Table 2); 

e) The accuracy of the measuring instrument has been revised (see Table 3); 


f) The variation from the specified parameters for cooling capacity test has been modified (see Table 4); 
and 


g) Indian seasonal energy efficiency rating condition is revised (see Table 7). 


The minimum value of coefficient of performance (COP) and Indian seasonal energy efficiency ratio (ISEER) 
shall in no case be inferior than the value prescribed in the national regulation. 


While formulating this standard, following standards were also reviewed: 


AHRI Guideline 1997 E Fouling factors: A survey of their application in today’s air conditioning and 
refrigeration industry 


EN 14511-1 : 2022 Air conditioners, liquid chilling packages and heat pumps with electrically driven 
compressors for space heating and cooling — Part 1: Terms and definitions 


EN 14511-2 : 2018 Air conditioners, liquid chilling packages and heat pumps with electrically driven 
compressors for space heating and cooling — Part 2: Test conditions 


EN 14511-3 : 2018 Air conditioners, liquid chilling packages and heat pumps with electrically driven 
compressors for space heating and cooling — Part 3: Test methods 


AHRI 550/590 (I-P)-2020 Performance rating of water-chilling and heat pump water-heating packages using 
with addendum 3 vapor compression cycle 


AHRI 551/591 (SI)-2020 Performance rating of water-chilling and heat pump water-heating packages using 
with addendum 3 vapor compression cycle 


AHRI 370 : 2015 Standard for sound performance rating of large air-cooled outdoor refrigerating 
and air-conditioning equipment 


ANSI/ASHRAE 30-2019 Method of testing liquid-chilling packages 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 16590 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
LIQUID CHILLING PACKAGE UNITS — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the general requirements 
and method of tests for the measurement of 
performance and energy efficiency of liquid chilling 
package units using vapour compression cycle 
covering all types and sizes for the rated voltage up 
to and including 250 V, 50 Hz a.c. for single-phase 
and up to and including 415 V, 50 Hz a.c. for three- 
phase power supply. 


This standard is applicable to all positive 
temperature comfort cooling application ranging 
from 5 °C to 10 °C. 


NOTE — Liquid chilling package units are also 
commercially known as chillers. 


1.2 This standard covers full load and part load 
ratings test methods. 


1.3 This standard does not cover the following: 


a) Packages with condensing unit provided 
with heat reclaim; 


b) Systems with a remote condensing unit; 

c) Systems with an evaporative cooled 
condenser; 

d) Condenser-less chillers; 

e) Heat pumps; 

f) Liquid chilling package units used in 
process industries; 

g) Any applications related to defense or 
marine; and 


h) Any applications other than comfort 
cooling in the built environment. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 3615 shall apply, in addition to the 
following: 


3.1 Bubble Point — Refrigerant liquid saturation 


temperature at a specified pressure. It is the 
temperature at which the first bubble of vapour 
forms in liquid refrigerant (saturated liquid) 
expressed in °C. 


3.2 Condenser — A refrigeration system component 
which condenses refrigerant vapour. Sub-cooling of 
the refrigerant may occur as well. 


3.2.1 Air-Cooled Condenser — A refrigeration system 
component that condenses refrigerant vapor by 
rejecting heat to air circulated over its heat transfer 
surface causing a rise in the air temperature. Sub- 
cooling of the refrigerant may occur as well. 


3.2.2 Water-Cooled Condenser — A refrigeration 
system component which utilizes refrigerant-to- 
water heat transfer means, causing the refrigerant to 
condense and the water to be heated. Sub-cooling of 
refrigerant may occur as well. 


3.3 Condenser Heat Rejection Capacity — The 
heat removed by the heat transfer medium of the 
condenser per unit of time (kW). 


3.4 Cooling Capacity — Heat transferred from the 
liquid to the refrigerant per unit of time, in 
evaporator expressed in kW. 


3.5 Coefficient of Performance (COP) — Ratio of 
the cooling capacity in kilo watts to the total power 
input in kilo watts. 


NOTE — This definition of COP refers to chilling units only. 


3.6 Dew Point — It is the temperature at which the 
first droplet of liquid forms in refrigerant vapour 
(saturated vapour). The evaporating and condensing 
temperatures should correspond to the mean of 
bubble and dew points. 


3.7 Fouling Factor — The thermal resistance due to 
fouling on the fluid side of the heat transfer surface 
(m?.°C/kW). 


3.8 Fouling Factor Allowance — Provision for 
anticipated fouling during use, specified in 
(m?.°C/kW). 


3.9 Liquid-Chilling Packages — A refrigeration 
machine using the vapour compression cycle. 


NOTE — Liquid-chilling packages may be operated with 
any type of compressor and be equipped with air-cooled 


IS 16590 : 2023 


and/or liquid-cooled condensers. Liquid chilling packages 
can be supplied with or without pumps. 


3.10 Liquid Refrigerant Temperature — 
Temperature of the refrigerant entering the 
expansion device (°C). 


3.11 Published Ratings — A statement of the 
assigned values of those performance 
characteristics, under stated rating conditions, by 
which a unit may be chosen to fit its application. 
These values apply to all systems of like nominal 
size and type produced by the same manufacturer. 
As used herein, the term ‘Published Rating’ includes 
the rating of all performance characteristics shown 
on the unit or published in specifications, 
advertising or other literature controlled by the 
manufacturer, at stated rating conditions. 
Performance data over the operating range of the 
unit at full load in the form of performance curves 
or catalog or output from a software selection code. 


NOTE — The published ratings are the ratings declared by 
the manufacturer in any form as defined above. 


3.11.1 Standard Rating — A rating based on test 
performed at standard rating conditions (see 6.3). 


3.11.2 Application Rating — A rating based on test 
performed at application rating conditions other than 
standard rating conditions (see 6.4). 


3.12 Saturated Discharge Temperature — For 
single component and azeotropic refrigerants, it is 
the saturated temperature corresponding to the 
refrigerant pressure at the compressor discharge 
(°C). 


For zeotropic refrigerants, it is the arithmetic 
average of the dew point and bubble point 
temperatures corresponding to refrigerant pressure 
at the compressor discharge. 


NOTE — The refrigerant saturation pressure is generally 
measured at or immediately downstream of the compressor 
discharge service valve, where discharge valves are used 
(see also Table 1). 


3.13 Standard Barometric Pressure — Barometric 
pressure of 101.325 kPa (1 bar). 


NOTE — See also note under Table | and Annex F. 


3.14 Total Power Input of the System — Power 
input of all components of the unit in operation shall 
include: 


a) The power input for operation of the 
compressor (kW); 


b) The power input of all controls, safety 
devices, starters, and drives of the unit, 
including devices necessary for correct 


operation of the refrigerating circuit (for 
example oil pump, refrigerant pump) (kW); 
and 


c) The power for fans for air-cooled liquid 
chillers (kW). 


3.15 Sound 


3.15.1 Sound Pressure (P) — Difference between 
instantaneous pressure and static pressure. 


NOTE — Sound pressure is expressed in pascals (Pa). 


3.15.2 Sound Pressure Level (Lp) — Ten times the 
logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the square of 
the sound pressure, p to the square of a reference 
value po, expressed in decibels. 


Lp = 10 lg (p?/po?) dB 
where the reference value, po, is 20 uPa. 


NOTE — If specific frequency and time weightings as 
specified in IEC 61672-1 and/or specific frequency bands 
are applied, this is indicated by appropriate subscripts; Lpa 
denotes the A-weighted sound pressure level. 


3.16 Type Test — A test or series of tests made on 
one or more sample of equipment and its 
components representative of production, for the 
purpose of checking compliance of the design of a 
given product with the requirements of the relevant 
standard. 


3.17 Indian Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio 
(ISEER) — Ratio of the total amount of heat that 
equipment can remove when operated for cooling in 
active mode to the total amount of energy consumed 
by equipment during the same period. 


NOTE — A single number part-load efficiency figure of 


merit calculated as per the method described in this standard 
at standard rating conditions. 


3.18 Part Load — It is the percentage of part-load 
rated capacity to the full load capacity. 


4 CLASSIFICATION 


The liquid chilling packages shall be classified 
according to method of cooling of condenser as 
follows: 


a) Air-cooled condenser; and 


b) Water-cooled condenser. 
5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
5.1 Construction 


5.1.1 The unit shall be constructed with sufficient 
strength and rigidity to withstand normal manual 


and mechanical handling, transportation and usage 
without damage or failure. 


5.1.2 All parts that require periodic cleaning or 
maintenance shall be easily accessible when the unit 
is installed in accordance with manufacturer’s 
installation manual. 


5.1.3 Self-tapping screws shall not be used for any 
load bearing parts. 


5.1.4 All parts that constitute an accident hazard 
shall be suitably guarded. 


5.1.5 The connections to moving or resiliently 
mounted parts and pipes shall be so arranged as not 
to foul or to transmit undue vibrations to other parts 
and shall be so designed as to prevent failure due to 
fatigue. 


5.1.6 Water-cooled condenser shall have cleanable 
water passages, either by mechanical means or 
chemical or both. An opening shall be provided in 
the casing, so as to have access to passages bearing 
water, from either end, for the design amenable to 
mechanical cleaning. 


5.1.7 All valves and refrigeration piping shall be 
properly clamped so as to avoid excessive vibration. 


5.1.8 Structural construction parts shall be with 
corrosion resistive coating. 


5.1.9 Compliance of requirements given in 5.1.1 to 
5.1.8 shall be checked by inspection. 


5.2 Safety Devices 


5.2.1 The liquid chilling packages shall be provided 
with the following safety devices: 


a) Electrical safety: 
1) Overcurrent relay; 


2) Single phasing and phase reversal 
prevention (wherever applicable); 


3) Emergency power OFF (EPO)/Isolator 
switch (wherever applicable); 


4) Leakage current cut-off; and 


5) Safety alarm for errors (wherever 
applicable). 


b) Mechanical safety: 
1) High pressure cut-off; 
2) Low pressure cut-off; 
3) Freeze protection; and 


4) High pressure relief valve (wherever 
applicable). 


The compliance shall be checked by inspection. 


IS 16590 : 2023 


5.2.2 Terminal box for termination of cables to the 
chiller shall be the integral part of the chiller control 
panel. The terminal block connector shall be of 
appropriate size to connect the conductors of any 
suitable material. 


5.2.3 Condenser heat exchanger guard shall be 
provided for air-cooled condenser. 


5.3 Installation Requirements 


The liquid chilling package manufacturer shall 
provide manual for installation, operation, 
maintenance, and safety precautions. For further 
details, (see 19). 


6 RATING 
6.1 Standard Rating Conditions 


Published ratings for all liquid chilling packages 
shall include the standard ratings, corresponding to 
the standard rating conditions shown in Table 1 
within the operating limits of the unit. 


6.2 Published Ratings 


Published ratings shall meet the requirements of this 
standard. Performance ratings shall be based on test 
data or models derived from test data. Published 
ratings shall be presented in the form of a 
performance curve or catalogue or output from a 
computer selection code and shall include the 
following: 


a) Name and address of the manufacturer; 


b) Refrigerant name in accordance with 
IS 16656/ISO 817; 


c) Unit type, model number, model number 
designations providing identification of the 
liquid-chilling packages to which the 
ratings shall apply; 

d) Rated voltage, frequency, and phase; 

e) Maximum starting current in ampere (A); 

f) Full load current in ampere (A); 

g) COP at rated condition; 

h) Indian seasonal energy efficiency ratio 
(ISEER); 

j) Sound pressure level (dB); 

k) Fouling allowance — Published ratings 
shall clearly state the fouling allowance. 
Corrections and calculations for different 
fouling factors shall be made as per 
Annex B. Ratings shall be published using 
nominal fouled rating as per Table 1. 

NOTE — In air cooled condensers, if variable speed condenser 
fans or fan staging is used, the manufacturer shall publish the 


capacities and COPs taking into consideration the different 
performance parameters according to the fan control of the unit. 


IS 16590 : 2023 


Table 1 Standard Rating Conditions 
(Clauses 6.1, 6.2, 6.5.2, 17.1 and 19.1) 


SINo. Liquid/Air-Cooled Condenser Liquid-Cooled Air-Cooled 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i)  Liquid/Aiïr-cooled condenser: 
a) Entering temperature 30 °C Not applicable 
b) AT 5 °C Not applicable 
c) Liquid-side fouling factor Nominal 0.044 m?.°C/kW Not applicable 
allowance 
d) Entering dry-bulb temperature Not applicable 35 °C 
e) Air-side fouling factor Not applicable 0.000 m?.°C/kW 
allowance 


ii) Evaporator liquid temperature: 


a) Leaving EEE 

b) AT 5 °C 
iii) Evaporator fouling factor allowance: 

a) Liquid-side Nominal 0.018 m?.°C /kW 
iv) Barometric pressure 101.325 kPa 


NOTE — Air-cooled unit ratings shall be corrected to a barometric pressure (for air cooled units) of 101.325 kPa as per Annex F. 


6.3 Standard Ratings ii) Leaving condenser water 
temperature, °C; or 
The standard ratings shall be as follows: iii) Water temperature difference 


through the condenser, °C. 


a). Total powerinput:tochiller, kW; 3) Condenser water flow rate, 1/s; and 


b) Full load cooling capacity at standard 
rating conditions, kW; j) Air cooled condenser unit: 


c) COP at rated condition: 1) Entering air dry-bulb temperature, °C. 


d) Indian seasonal energy efficiency ratio 6.4 Application Rating 


(ISEER); 
e) Any two of the following: Application ratings (other than standard rating) shall 
1) Entering evaporator liquid temperature, include published ratings at full load and the range 
°C; of conditions within the operating limits of the 
2) Leaving evaporator liquid temperature, equipment which shall be presented in the form of a 
°C: or performance curve or catalog or output from a 


3) Liquid temperature difference through COMPUTES Selec HON. Code: 


the evaporator, °C. v: : Kan 
P nE The conditions and the operating limits are as 


f) For all units without integral evaporator defined below: 
pump, evaporator liquid pressure drop 
(kPa) and for units with integral pumps the a) All condenser types — Leaving chilled 
available static pressure (kPa); water temperature for evaporators shall be 
g) Chilled liquid flow rate, I/s; and 4.4 °C to 10.0 °C in increments of 2 °C or 


less and temperature difference between 
2.5 °C and 8 °C; 

b) Liquid-cooled condenser — Entering 
condenser water temperature 20 °C to 35 °C 
in increments of 2 °C or less and 
temperature difference between 2.5 °C and 
8 °C; and 

c) Air-cooled condenser — Entering 
condenser air dry-bulb temperature 20 °C 


h) Liquid-cooled condenser packages: 


1) For water-cooled units without 
integral pump condenser liquid 
pressure drop (kPa) and for units with 
integral pump the available static 
pressure (kPa); 


2) Any two of the following: 


i) Entering condenser water 
temperature, °C; 


to 46 °C dry-bulb in increments of 3.5 °C 
or less and temperature difference between 
2.5 °C and 8 °C. 


NOTE — The rating conditions and the operating limits 
other than those prescribed above shall be mutually agreed 
upon between the manufacturer and the buyer. 


6.5 Part-Load Performance Rating 


6.5.1 Part load rating data shall be published or 
available upon request over the application rating 
conditions (see Annex C). These include cooling 
capacity, power input and ISEER. 


6.5.2 100 percent load refers to the full rated 
capacity as defined by the standard rating conditions 
given in Table 1. 


For continuously variable unloading machine’s 
part load data shall be provided at a minimum of 
75 percent, 50 percent, and 25 percent or to the 
minimum load point. 


6.5.3 For discrete step unloading machines, part load 
rating data shall be provided at each stage of 
capacity. 


6.5.4 Method of representing part load performance 
as a single value shall be as described in Annex C. 
The corresponding part load rating data required in 


IS 16590 : 2023 


order to calculate this single value also shall be 
reported as described in Annex C. 


In cases where this value is declared by the 
manufacturer, all part load rating data necessary for 
its calculation shall also be published. 


NOTE — Typical examples to calculate the rating tolerance 
and COP are described in Annex D. 


6.6 Rating at Elevated Temperature (39 °C) 
See 16. 
7 TOLERANCES ON PERFORMANCE 


7.1 The tolerance cooling capacity and COP shall be 
as per Table 2. 


7.2 Ratings published and claimed to be in 
compliance with this standard shall be as specified 
in 6.2 to 6.4. 


7.2.2 Water pressure drop in the evaporator or 
condenser shall not exceed 115 percent of the rated 
pressure drop or rated pressure plus 600 mm to 
610 mm water column drop whichever is higher at 
the specified water flow rate at any rated condition. 


NOTE — The pressure drop measurement shall be as described 
in Annex G. 


Table 2 Tolerances 
(Clauses 7.1, 15.2 and 16) 


SI No. Ratings Related Tolerance Calculation 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Cooling capacity Full load minimum: 100 % — Tol; 
(full load) 
il) COP (full load and Minimum of (rated COP)/(100% + Tol,) 
part load) 
iii) ISEER (see Annex Minimum of (rated COP)/(100% + Tob) 
C) 
where 
Tol = 10.5 — (0.07 x %l d) +( 2e ) 
SE NE i Le ATy. %load 


% load = percent load; 


ÂATrL = difference between entering and leaving chilled water temperature at full-load in °C; and 
0.194 
Tol = 0.065 + 
ne ATs 
NOTES 


1 Tolerance for part load capacity shall be + 2 percent. The + 2.0 percent tolerance shall be calculated as 2.0 percent of the full 
load rated capacity (kW). For example, a nominal 50.0 percent part load point shall be tested between 48.0 percent and 


52.0 percent of the full load capacity. 


2 Typical examples on calculation are given in Annex D for guidance only. 


IS 16590 : 2023 


7.2.3 The pump head for units with integral pump(s) 
in the evaporator or condenser shall not be less than 
85 percent of the rated pump head at the specified 
water flow rate at any rated condition. 


8 TEST SETUP 
8.1 Test Room for the Air Side 


8.1.1 The size of the test room shall be so selected 
that any resistance to air flow at the air inlet and air 
outlet of the test unit is avoided. The air flow 
through the room shall not be capable of initiating 
any short circuit between these two openings. The 
ambient air velocity in the room shall not be greater 
than the mean velocity of air throughout the unit 
inlet. Unless otherwise stated by the manufacturer, 
the air inlet or air outlet of the test unit shall be at a 
distance not less than 1 m from the surfaces of the 
test room. 


8.1.2 Any direct heat radiation by heating units 
installed in the test room onto the unit or onto the 
temperature measuring probes shall be avoided. 


8.2 Installation and Connection of the Test 
Appliance 


Before carrying out the test specified in this 
standard, the liquid chilling packages shall be 
installed and suitably connected with the test 
equipment following the manufacturers instruction 
using the recommended procedures and accessories 
supplied by the manufacturer as given in installation 
and operation manual of the manufacturer. 


No alterations to the equipment under test shall be 
made except for the attachment of required test 
apparatus and instruments in the prescribed manner. 


When the water pump is an integral part of the unit 
and the external head pressure setting possible, the 
setting shall be made in order to reduce this external 
head pressure to approach zero. 


For unit with open-type compressor, the electric 
motor shall be supplied as specified by the 
manufacturer. The compressor shall be operated at 
the rotational speed specified by the manufacturer. 


If the manufacturer instruction indicates value for 
the temperature to be set on the control device for a 
given rating condition, then this value shall be used. 
NOTE — If skilled personnel with knowledge of control 
software are required for the start of the system, the 


manufacturer or the nominated agent should be available 
when the system is being installed and prepared for tests. 


8.3 Heat Transfer Surfaces 


All heat transfer surfaces of evaporator and 


condenser shall be assumed to have fouling 
allowances of 0.000 m2. °C/kW during the test. Tests 
conducted in accordance with this standard may 
require cleaning (in accordance with manufacturer’s 
instructions) of the heat transfer surfaces. 


9 MEASURMENT DEVICES 
9.1 Temperature and Pressure Measurement 


Temperature and pressure measuring points shall be 
properly arranged in order to obtain mean values. 
The accuracy and precision of the measuring 
instruments including read-out devices for 
temperature measurements shall be as specified in 
Table 3. 


To ensure adequate air distribution, thorough 
mixing, and uniform air temperature, the test room 
set up shall be properly designed and operated. The 
test room conditioning equipment airflow should be 
set such that recirculation of condenser discharged 
air is avoided. The recirculation of the condenser 
discharged air back into the condenser coil(s) shall 
be verified by method described below. 


Multiple thermocouples (at least one per sampling 
tree location) shall be installed around the unit air 
discharge perimeter so that they are below the plane 
of condenser fan exhaust and just above the top of 
the condenser coil(s). The temperature difference 
indicated by these thermocouples shall not be 
greater than 5.0 °C from the average inlet air. Air 
distribution at the test facility point of supply to the 
unit shall be verified prior to beginning of the test 
and shall be adjusted if required. Mixing fans can 
also be used to ensure adequate air distribution in the 
test room. The mixing fans shall be placed such that 
the air from fans is in a direction away from air 
intake to the condenser and mixing fan exhaust 
direction is at an angle between 90° to 270° to the 
air entrance to the condenser air inlet. Necessary 
precaution shall be taken to ensure that no 
recirculation of condenser fan exhausts air are back 
through the test unit. 


Adequate air distribution and control of air 
temperature is ensured provide the measured values 
are well within the permissible variation specified in 
Table 4. Annex E provides the check list for 
verification of air flow and temperature distribution. 
The verification shall be done before starting of any 
new test. 


9.2 Air Sampling Device 


Air sampling device is an air sampling tube assembly 
that draws air through sampling tubes in a manner to 
provide a uniform sampling of air entering the air- 
cooled condenser coil. 


The air sampling device is designed to draw an 
uniform sample of the airflow entering the air-cooled 
condenser section for measurement of air temperature. 
A typical configuration for the sampling device is 
shown in Fig. 1 for a device with overall dimensions 
of 1.2 m x 1.2 m. Other dimension and rectangular 
shapes may be used provided the aspect ratio (width to 
height) of at least 2 to 1 is maintained. The material of 
air sampling device shall be stainless steel, plastic, or 
other suitable strong and durable materials. It shall 
have a main flow trunk tube with a series of branch 
tubes connected to the trunk tube having 10 to 20 
branch tubes. The branch tubes shall have 
appropriately spaced holes and sized accordingly to 
provide equal airflow through all the holes by 
increasing the hole size which is further from the trunk 
tube to account for the static pressure regain effect in 
the branch and trunk tubes. 


The number of sampling holes shall be greater than 50. 
The average minimum velocity through the sampling 
tree holes shall 0.75 m/s as determined by evaluating 
the sum of the open area of the holes as compared to 
the flow area in the aspirating psychrometer. The 
assembly shall have a tubular connection to allow a 
flexible tube to be connected to the sampling device 
and to the aspirating psychrometer. 


The sampling device shall also be equipped with a 
thermocouple and thermopile grid to measure the 
average temperature of the airflow over the sampling 
device. The thermopile shall have at least 16 junction 
points per sampling device, evenly spaced across the 
sampling device, and connected in a parallel wiring 
circuit. On smaller units with only two sampling 
devices, it is acceptable to individually measure the 16 
thermocouple points as a determination of room 
stratification. The air sampling devices shall be placed 
within 150 mm to 300 mm of the unit to minimize the 
risk of damage to the unit while ensuring that the air 
sampling tubes are measuring the air going into the test 
unit rather than the room air around the unit. 


NOTE — The 15 mm x 25 mm slots shown in Fig. 1 are cut 
into the branches of the sampling device and are located inside 
of the trunk of the sampling device. They are placed to allow 
air to be pulled into the main trunk from each of the branches. 


9.3 Aspirating Psychrometer 


Aspirating psychrometer is a piece of equipment with 
a monitored airflow section that draws a uniform 
airflow velocity through the measurement section 
which has probes for measurement of air temperature: 


a) It consists of a flow section and a fan to draw 
air through the flow section and measures an 
average value of the sampled air stream from 
air sampling device; 

b) The flow section shall be equipped with two 
dry-bulb temperature probe connections, one 


IS 16590 : 2023 


of which shall be used for the facility 
temperature measurement and one of which 
shall be available to confirm this 
measurement using an additional or a 
reference validation temperature sensor 
probe; 


c) The psychrometer shall include a fan that can 
be adjusted manually or automatically to 
maintain average velocity across the 
temperature sensors. A typical configuration 
for the aspirating psychrometer is shown in 
Fig. 2; and 

d) The distance between the sensor probe and 
the fan shall be such that there is no abnormal 
impact of air velocity from the fan on the 
sensor probe. 


10 MEASUREMENTS 
10.1 Test Set Up Configuration 


The dry-bulb temperature shall be measured at 
multiple locations entering the condenser, based on the 
airflow nominal face area at the point of measurement. 
Multiple temperature measurements shall be used to 
determine acceptable air distribution and the mean air 
temperature. 


The use of air sampling device as a measuring station 
reduces the time required to setup a test and allows an 
additional or a reference validation temperature 
sensor(s) probe for redundant dry-bulb temperatures. 


The nominal face area may extend beyond the 
condenser coil depending on coil configuration and 
orientation, and must include all regions through 
which air enters the unit. The nominal face area of the 
airflow shall be divided into a number of equal area 
sampling rectangles with aspect ratios no greater than 
2 to 1. Each rectangular area shall have one air 
sampling device. 


A minimum of one aspirating psychrometer per side 
of a chiller shall have to be used. For units with three 
sides, two sampling aspirating psychrometers shall 
have to be used but will require a separate air sampler 
device for the third side. 


A minimum of two air sampling device should be used 
in any case, in order to assess air temperature 
uniformity. 


The air sampling device shall be located such that it is 
at geometric centre of each rectangle condenser coil; 
either horizontal or vertical orientation of the branches 
is acceptable. The sampling device shall cover at least 
80 percent of the height and 60 percent of the width of 
the air entrance to the unit (for long horizontal coils), 
or shall cover at least 80 percent of the width and 
60 percent of the height of the air entrance (for tall 


IS 16590 : 2023 


vertical coils). The sampling device shall not extend 
beyond the face of the air entrance area. It is 
acceptable to block all branch inlet holes that extend 
beyond the face of the unit. 


Fig. 3 gives examples of how an increasing 
number of air sampling devices are required for 
longer condenser coils. 


g12 
| g12 

| 210 
| 210 
| 


15 mm X 25 mm SLOTS 


1200 
140 140 140 
— 
Ill E E G 


110, 110 
Il 


140 


140 


140 


= g12 


@10 


@10 


@12 


@12 


FIG. 1 TYPICAL AIR SAMPLING DEVICE 


IS 16590 : 2023 


Location for 
qu dr Centrifugal fan 
variable speed 
Flexible tube Dry bulb sensor recommended 
connected to 
sampler trees 


air flow ——— Velocity across 


probs should be 

5.0 +/- 1.0 m/s Lo 
Aspirating Psychrometer 
header 10.16 cm. 
Clear plastic tube 


FIG. 2 TYPICAL ASPIRATING PSYCHROMETER 


L L L 
l 
2- 
2-L 
3-L 
j (==) 
= lil 

= 
w 

L O.8L< Lw<L 


= | 
m 
iig 
i 


0.6Loverall *(AL+B+C+D+,,,)"LOVERALL 


FIG. 3 DETERMINATION OF MEASUREMENT RECTANGLES AND REQUIRED NUMBER OF AIR SAMPLER TREES 


IS 16590 : 2023 


Chiller 
with coils 
on 2 sides 


Chiller 
with coils 
on 3 sides 


Tail coil 
Chiller 


A maximum of four sampling devices shall be 
connected to each aspirating psychrometer. The 
sampling device should be connected and routed to the 
aspirating psychrometer using insulated flexible 
tubing so that heat transfer to the air stream is 
prevented. In order to proportionately divide the flow 
stream for multiple sampling devices for a given 
aspirating psychrometer, the flexible tubing shall be of 
equal lengths for each sampling device. 


Fig. 4 gives some typical examples of air sampling 
device and aspirating psychrometer setups. 


Suitable measures shall be taken to ensure that the 
water temperatures are the average bulk stream 
temperatures. This shall include provisions for mixing 
of the fluid. 


10.2 Integral Pumps 

For liquid chilling packages with integral and 
adjustable water pumps, the pressure head, and 
temperature difference shall be set simultaneously. 


10.2.1 Units with Integral Pumps 


Units that include an integral evaporator fluid pump, 


DOOD PEEEEEEE 
DODD PEEGEEEE 


Large chiller 


FIG. 4 TYPICAL TEST SETUP CONFIGURATIONS 


and a condenser fluid pump shall have to be tested 
for both test condition A and test condition B as 
defined in 10.2.1.1 and 10.2.1.2. 


10.2.1.1 Test condition A — Integral water pumps 
operating 


The unit shall be run with the integral pumps 
running and the external loop resistance of the test 
facility adjusted to obtain the desired rating fluid 
flow rates. The following values shall then be 
measured: 


a) Evaporator and/or condenser entering and 
leaving water temperatures, °C; 

b) Evaporator water flow rates, m?/s; 

c) Evaporator water static pressure, kPa; and 

d) Total power input to the unit (compressor 
+ pumps + controls), kW. 


The calculated test capacities for this test will 
represent the cooling capacity and condenser heat 
rejection. 


10.2.2.2 Test condition B — Water pumps turned off 


A second test shall be run with the integral pumps 


turned off. The following values shall be measured: 
a) Evaporator and condenser entering and 
leaving water temperatures, °C; 
b) Evaporator and condenser water flow rates, 
m/s; and 
c) Total power input to the unit (compressor 
+ controls), kW. 


The calculated test capacities for this test will 
represent the cooling capacity and condenser heat 
rejection. 


Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 represent a typical arrangements of 
test facility and measurement locations for the test 
conditions A and B, respectively. 


11 COOLING CAPACITY CALCULATION 
11.1 Cooling Capacity (qev) 


It is determined from the measurement of the 


LOOP CONDENSER 
PUMP 


IS 16590 : 2023 


volume flow (Q) of the chilled liquid and the 
entering and leaving temperatures at the evaporator 
side, taking into consideration the specific heat 
capacity (c) and density (p) of the liquid. 


The cooling capacity shall be determined using the 
following equation: 


qev= (Q. p. Cp. AT)/1 000 (1) 


where 

dev = cooling capacity, kW; 

Q = volume flow rate, m*/s; 

p = fluid density, kg/m’; 

Cae specific heat at constant pressure, J/kg.°C; 
and 

AT = difference between entering and leaving 
liquid temperatures, °C. 


ADJUST VALVE TO GET 
RATED DELTA T 


LOOP HEAT EXCHANGER 


UNIT KW 
(COMP-PUMPS) —| 


UNIT EVAPORATOR 


LPUMP 


LOOP EVAPORATOR 
PUMP 


FIG. 5 TEST A CONFIGURATION — UNIT UNDER TEST WITH INTEGRAL LIQUID PUMPS ON 


s EVAPORATOR 


11 


LOOP HEAT EXCHANGER 


IS 16590 : 2023 


LOOP CONDENSER 
PUMP 


ADJUST VALVE TO GET 
RATED DELTAT 


LOOP HEAT EXCHANGER 


UNIT CONDENSER 
PUMP 


UNIT KW 
(COMP) —| 


LOOP EVAPORATOR 
PUMP 


FIG. 6 TEST B CONFIGURATION — UNIT UNDER TEST WITH INTEGRAL LIQUID PUMPS OFF 


11.2 Water-Cooled Condenser Heat Rejection (qca) 


It is determined from the volume flow of the water and 
the entering and leaving temperatures at the 
condenser, taking into consideration the specific heat 
capacity and density of the heat transfer medium. 


The heat rejection capacity shall be determined 
using the following equation: 


ded = (Q. p. Cp. AT)/1 000 …(2) 
where 
dca = heat rejection capacity, kW; 
Q = volume flow rate, m*/sec ; 
p = density, kg/m’; 
c = specific heat at constant pressure, 


J/kg.°C; and 
AT = difference between inlet and outlet 
temperatures, °C. 


Heat balance method as given in 12 shall be used for 
water-cooled condensers. 


12 HEAT BALANCE SUBSTANTIATING TEST 
12.1 Calculation of the Heat Balance 


Heat losses or gains through radiation, convection, 
bearing friction, oil cooler, etc, in most cases is 


12 


negligible and hence are not be considered in the 
overall heat balance. 


By omitting the effects of the negligible heat losses 
and gains mentioned above, the general heat balance 
equation shall be as follows: 


cd = ev + Winput (3) 
where 
Gea = heat rejection capacity; 
dev = cooling capacity; and 


Winpu = Compressor work input as defined in 
12.2 and 12.3. 


12.2 In a hermetic package, where the compressor 
motor is cooled by refrigerant, chilled liquid or 
condenser water, the motor cooling load shall be 
included in the measured condenser load. 


12.3 In packages using an open-type compressor 
with prime mover and external gear drive: 


Winput = prime mover — Ygear …(4) 
where 
Winput = power input to the compressor 
shaft, expressed, in kW; 
prime move = Power delivered by prime 
mover, expressed, in kW; and 
gear = friction loss in gear box, 


expressed, in kW. 


The value of Gprime mover Shall be determined from the 
power input to prime mover using certified data 
from the prime mover manufacturer. 


The value of qgear Shall be determined from certified 
gear losses provided by the gear manufacturer. 


12.4 Percent Heat Balance 


Heat balance, in percent, is defined as: 


(dev + W input) — ca) 


x 
(aca) 198 


(5) 
The heat balance (percent) shall be within the 
tolerance calculated as per 12.5 for the applicable 
conditions for any test of a liquid chilling packages 
unit to be acceptable. 


12.5 Verification Test Tolerance on Heat Balance 


The verification test tolerance shall be determined 
from the following equation : 


Tolerance = 10.5 — (0.07 x %Load) 
$ 833.3 
AT, X %Load 
…(6) 


where 


% Load = percent load; 


IS 16590 : 2023 


FL = load factor; and 
ATx, = difference between entering and 
leaving chilled water temperature 
at full-load, °C. 
13 INSTRUMENTATIONS 


13.1 Measurement Accuracy 


The permissible variation in measurement shall not 
exceed the values specified in Table 3. 


14 TEST PROCEDURE FOR COOLING 
CAPACITY AND POWER CONSUMPTION 
TEST 


14.1 Steady State Conditions 


Steady state condition is considered obtained and 
maintained when all the measured test parameters 
remain constant without having to alter the set 
values, for a minimum duration of 15 min, with 
respect to the tolerances given in Table 4. Periodic 
fluctuations of measured test parameters caused by 
the operation of regulation and control devices are 
permissible. However, the mean value of such 
fluctuations shall not exceed the permissible 
deviations listed in Table 4. 


Table 3 Measurement Accuracy 
(Clauses 9.1 and 13.1) 


SI No. Measurement Measurement System Display Resolution 
Accuracy 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Water temperature, °C +0.11 0.01 
ii) Air temperature, °C +0.11 0.01 
iii) Differential pressure, kPa + 1.0 % of reading 3 significant figures 
iv) Voltage 
< 400V + 1.0 % of full scale 
+2.0 % reading 4 significant figures 
(V, A, kW, Hz) 
> 400V +1.5 % of full scale 
+2.5 % of reading 
v) Atmospheric pressure, kPa + 1.0 kPa 0.1 kPa 
vi) Liquid mass flow rate, I/s + 1.0 % of reading 4 significant figures 
vii) Volume flow, m°/sec + 1.0 of reading 0.1 
viii) Static pressure, Pa +5Pa 0.1 
NOTES 


1 The cooling capacity shall be determined with a maximum uncertainty of 5 percent independent of the individual 
uncertainties of measurement including the uncertainties on the properties of fluids. 


2 Current transformers (CTs) and potential transformers (PTs) shall have a metering accuracy class of 0.3 or better. 


IS 16590 : 2023 


Table 4 Permissible Variation from Specified Value 
(Clause 9.1, 14.1 and E-1) 


SI No. Parameter Permisible Variation of the Permisible Variation of 
Arithematic Mean Values Individual Measured 
from Specified Target Test Values from Specified 
Values Target Test Values 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Water: 
a) Entering temperature,” C +0.3 +0.6 
b) Leaving temperature,° C +0.3 +0.6 
c) Volume flow, m?/sec +5% +10% 
d) Static pressure difference, Maximum of 1.15 times rated static pressure drop or rated static 
kPa pressure drop plus 600 mm to 610 mm of water column, 
whichever is higher 
ii) Air: dry bulb temperature, °C + 0.6 +1 
iii) Voltage: 
a) Single phase, V +2% +5% 
b) Three phase, V +5% +10% 
c) Frequency, Hz +1% +2% 
14.2 Output Measurement of Cooling Capacity frequency converter or motor starter. For 
liquid chilling package units for testing not 
For the output measurement it is necessary to record supplied with the starter or frequency 
all the necessary data continuously. In the case of converter, a starter or frequency converter 
recording instruments which operate on a cyclic basis, of similar type shall be used for the test; 
the sequence shall be adjusted such that a complete b) Power consumed by auxiliaries, during 


recording is monitored at least once every 30 s. 


The output shall be measured in the steady state 
condition recording 4 sets of reading at every 5 min 
interval. 


14.3 Calculation of Test Results 
14.3.1 Cooling Capacity 


Cooling capacity shall be determined from the 
average of the capacities calculated from the four 
sets of data collected as described in 14.2. 


14.3.2 Power Consumption 


The power consumption for the complete unit and 
the auxiliaries shall be measured as per the 
procedure given below: 


a) For test units with a frequency conversion 
device or motor starter supplied as part of 
the circuit, the unit power input shall be 
measured at the input terminals of the 


normal operation of the package shall be 
included in the total power consumption 
for test units which are supplied as part of 
the unit; 


c) In case of open-type compressors, where 
the motor and/or gear set is not supplied by 
the manufacturer, or for the compressor, 
shaft input shall be determined as stated in 
12.3 or 12.4; and 


d) Incase of air-cooled condensers, the power 
consumption of condenser fan shall be 
included in the total power consumption of 
the package. 

14.4 Data to be Recorded 


14.4.1 Measurement Data 


The data to be recorded for the capacity tests are as 
described in Table 5. The table provides the general 
information required but is not intended to limit the 
data to be obtained. 


IS 16590 : 2023 


Table 5 Data to be Recorded 
(Clause 17.4.1) 


SI No. Measured Quantity or Result 


(D) (2) 


Liquid-Cooled Condenser 


Air-Cooled 
Condenser 


(3) (4) 


i) Ambient conditions: 
a) Air temperature, dry bulb, °C 
b) Atmospheric pressure, kPa 
ii) Electrical quantities: 
a) Voltage, V 
b) Total power input, W (see 3.14) 
c) Frequency, Hz 
iii) Chilled liquid: 
a) Inlet temperature,°C 
b) Outlet temperature,°C 
c) Volume flow, m3/s 
d) Pressure drop/ESP, kPa 


e) Concentration, % (for fluids other 


than water) 
iv) Condenser liquid: 
a) Inlet temperature, °C 
b) Outlet temperature, °C 
c) Volume flow, m?/s 
d) Pressure drop/ESP, kPa 
v) Air: 
a) Dry bulb inlet temperature, °C 


vi) Refrigerant: 


a) Refrigerant charge, kg (if adjusted) 


vii) Heat balance, percentage 
viii) Cooling capacity, kW 
ix) COP, kW/kW 


14.4.2 Supplementary Data to be Recorded for 
General Information 


Following additional information shall also be 
recorded and reported along with test report: 


a) Nameplate data which includes but not 
limited to make, model, size and type of 
refrigerant, sufficient to completely 
identify the water chiller; 


b) For units with open-type compressors 
where motor and or gear set are not 
supplied by manufacturer, or for engine or 
turbine drives, record compressor driver or 
input rotational speed; 


c) Wherever applicable, motor nameplate 
data; and 


d) Date, place, and time of test. 


Ni 
\ 


2 2 2 2 
l 


Dir AnA 
l 


15 COMPLIANCE 


15.1 The measured cooling capacity at full load 
(100 percent) shall not be less than 10 percent of the 
value declared by the manufacturer on the rating 
plate. For power consumption it shall not be more 
than 10 percent of the value declared by the 
manufacturer on the rating plate. 


15.2 Refer Table 2 for tolerance on COP and ISEER. 


16 COOLING CAPACITY AT ELEVATED 
TEMPERATURE (FOR AIR COOLED 
CONDENSER ONLY) 


Capacity of air-cooled chiller measured at 39 °C at 
full capacity (100 percent load) at the standard rating 
conditions shall be declared and reported in the test 
report by the manufacturer. Tolerance on cooling 


IS 16590 : 2023 


capacity measured value specified in Table 2 shall 
apply for the measurement. 


NOTE — The purpose of the test is to give the buyer a prior 
information about the performance of the chiller at higher 
temperature. 


This capacity at 39 °C shall be determined by testing 
or through software. The software shall be validated 
by the appropriate authority. Declaration of cooling 
capacity and power consumption at 39 °C shall be 
through software output or catalogue. 


17 Sound Pressure Measurement Test 


17.1 The sound pressure measurement shall be done 
at rated condition specified in Table 1. In case, if the 
conditions as per Table 1 cannot be maintained, the 
sound pressure measurement shall be done at 
possible temperature conditions and data shall be 
reported in the test report. The measurement shall be 
done in accordance with either ISO 9614-1, 
ISO 9614-2, ISO 3747, or ISO 3744 for unit under 
free field condition. 


17.1.2 For sound pressure measurement test, the 
following conditions shall be used: 


a) Test unit shall be set to operate at full load 
in cooling mode; 

b) With the pump operating for units with 
integral pump; and 


c) All fans in running mode for air-cooled 
chiller. 


17.1.3 The sound level shall be as declared by the 
manufacture and shall not exceed more than 3 dB 
from the declared value. 


18 TESTS 
18.1 Type Test 
Following tests shall constitute type tests: 
a) Leakage current tests as per 13.2 of IS 302 
(Part 1); 


b) Electric strength (HV) as per 13.3 of IS 302 
(Part 1); 


c) Protection against electric shock as per 8 of 
IS 302 (Part 1); and 


d) Provision for earthing as per 27 of IS 302 
(Part 1). 
18.2 Routine Test 
Following tests shall constitute routine tests: 
a) Earthing continuity test as per A-1 of 


IS 302 (Part 1); and 


b) Electric Strength (HV) as per A-2 of IS 302 
(Part 1). 


19 MARKING 


19.1 A name plate of corrosion-resistant material 
shall be affixed on the chiller with the following 
details: 


a) Manufacturer’s name and address, and 
country of manufacture; 


b) Model number designation; 
c) Serial number; 


d) Refrigerant designation (in accordance 
with IS 16656/ISO 817); 


e) Rated voltage, phase, and frequency; 

f) Published total power input, kW; 

g) Maximum starting current, Amperes; and 
h) Refrigerant charge, kg. 


j) Full load cooling capacity at standard rated 
condition (kW) (standard rating condition 
defined in Table 1) 


19.2 The markings required by the standard shall be 
clearly legible and durable. Compliance is checked 
by inspection and by rubbing the marking by hand 
for 15 s with a piece of cloth soaked with water and 
again for 15 s with a piece of cloth soaked with 
petroleum spirit. The petroleum spirit to be used for 
the test is aliphatic solvent hexane. After the test, the 
markings shall be clearly legible. It shall not be 
possible to remove marking plates nor shall they 
show curling. 


NOTE — In considering the durability of the marking, the 
effect of normal use is taken into account. For example, 
marking by means of paint or enamel, other than vitreous 
enamel, on containers that are likely to be cleaned 
frequently, is not considered to be durable. 


19.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The liquid chilling package may also be marked 
with the Standard Mark. 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


20 INSTRUCTION MANUAL 


The information provided in (a) to (g) shall be 
furnished in the product/instruction manual by the 
manufacturer with every packaged unit sold. 


a) The liquid chilling package manufacturer 
has to submit the dimensional drawing with 


point loads including the structural 
supporting system designed for 
installation; 


b) 


c) 


d) 


Liquid chilling package manufacturer shall 
provide suitable instructions on the 
minimum spacing required for the air 
movement around the chillers and the 
suggested maintenance space including 
access to the liquid chilling package unit 
yard; 

The liquid chilling package manufacturer 
shall provide shipping weight of the unit, 
recommended handling and transportation 
method(s) including transportation from 
manufacturer location to the installation 
location; 


Commissioning of the liquid chilling 
package shall be done by qualified 
personnel as recommended by the 
manufacturer or accredited training 
organization. The qualified commissioning 


e) 


g) 


IS 16590 : 2023 


personnel shall test and provide the test 
data to the customer containing relevant 
electrical and refrigerant parameters for 
assessing the performance of the liquid 
chilling package; 

Commissioning personnel shall train 
representative of the customer/user of the 
liquid chilling package on operation and 
routine maintenance; 


Liquid chilling package manufacturer shall 
provide the complete details to the 
customer/user, for example dimensions and 
any additional information as requested by 
customer; and 


Liquid chilling package manufacturer shall 
suggest the quality of water in the closed 
loop evaporator and open loop condenser 
and the suggested make up water quality. 


IS 16590 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


IS No./Other Title 
Standards 
IS 302 (Part 1) : Safety of household and 
2008 similar electrical appliances: 


Part 1 General requirements 
(sixth revision) 


IS 3615 : 2020 Glossary of terms used in 


refrigeration and air 
conditioning (second 

revision) 
IS 15575 (Part 1): Electroacoustics — Sound 
2016/1EC 61672- level meters: Part 1 
1: 2013 Specifications (first revision) 


IS 16656 : 2017/ 
ISO 817 : 2014 


ISO 3744 : 2010 


Refrigerants — Designation 
and safety classification 


Acoustics — Determination 
of sound power levels and 
sound energy levels of noise 
sources using sound pressure 
— Engineering methods for 
an essentially free field over a 
reflecting plane 


IS No./Other Title 
Standards 
ISO 3747 : 2010 Acoustics — Determination 


of sound power levels and 
sound energy levels of noise 
sources using sound pressure 
— Engineering/survey 
methods for use in situ in a 
reverberant environment 


ISO 9614-1 : 1993 Acoustics — Determination 
of sound power levels of noise 
sources using sound intensity 
— Part 1: Measurement at 


discrete points 


ISO 9614-2 : 1996 Acoustics — Determination 
of sound power levels of noise 
sources using sound intensity 
— Part 2: Measurement by 


scanning 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 6.2) 
METHOD FOR SIMULATING FOULING FACTOR ALLOWANCE 


B-1 PURPOSE 


B-1.1 For all rated condition testing, evaporator 
water-side and condenser water-side or air-side heat 
transfer surfaces shall be considered clean during 
testing. Tests will be assumed to reflect fouling 
factors of 0.000 m?.°C/kW. To determine the 
capacity of the chiller package at the nominal 
fouling conditions, the procedure given in this annex 
shall be used to determine an adjustment for the 
evaporator and or condenser water temperatures. 


B-1.2 This annex describes the method for adjusting 
the operating conditions of a test unit to simulate the 
required rating water side fouling allowance. 


It is assumed that all heat transfer surfaces have a 
fouling allowance of 0.000 0 m*.°C/kW during the 
test. The procedure below defines a way to adjust the 
water-cooled condenser water temperatures and the 
evaporator water temperatures to simulate a desired 
field fouling allowance. 


The procedure below is only applicable to the 
waterside of evaporators and condensers and 
excludes air-cooled condensers. 


B-2 FOULING FACTOR ALLOWANCE 
PROCEDURE 


B-2.1 Obtain the log mean temperature difference 
(LMTD) for the evaporator and/or condenser using 
the following equation at the specified field fouling 
factor allowance (ff). 


R 


where 
R = water temperature range = absolute value 
(twi oan twe), 2G; and 
S = small temperature difference: 
= absolute value (fsca — tw), °C, for condenser, 
and 
= absolute value (tsev— twi), °C, for evaporator. 


B-2.2 Derivation of LMTD 


The incremental LMTD (ILMTD) is determined 
using the following equation: 


ILMTD = ff ($) as) 


Note that A (area) is the surface area on the water 
side. 


B-2.3 The water temperature difference TD, needed 
to simulate the additional fouling, TD,, can now be 
calculated as follows: 


FD SES (0) 
R 
Den ..(10) 
where 
=— 2 (1) 
LMTD-ILMTD 
R 
Se = (12) 


Sc = small temperature difference as tested in 
clean condition. 


The water temperature difference, TD,, is then added 
to the condenser entering water temperature or 
subtracted from the evaporator leaving water 
temperature to simulate the additional fouling factor. 
B-3 EXAMPLE — CONDENSER FOULING 
Fouling factor allowance, ff= 0.088 m?.°C/kW 
Condenser load, g = 850 kW 
Condenser leaving water temp, Twi = 35 °C 
Condenser entering water temp, Twe = 28 °C 
Water surface area, A = 50 m? 
Saturated condensing temperature, fsca = 40 °C 

S = tsa — tw = 40 — 35 =5 °C 


R= tw twe = 35 — 28 = 7 °C 


R 7 


= = = 0.97 
LMTD-ILMTD 7.966—0.748 
TD, =S ~~ = 5.0-=S— = 0.7°C 


IS 16590 : 2023 


The entering condenser water temperature for 
testing is then raised 0.7 °C to simulate the fouling 
factor allowance of 0.088 m?.°C/kW. The entering 
condenser water temperature will be (28 + 0.7) °C 
or 28.7 °C. 


B-4 SYMBOLS AND SUBSCRIPTS 


The symbols and subscripts used in equations (1) to 
(6) are as follows: 


a) Symbols: 


A = water heat transfer surface, m7”, 
for evaporator or condenser 


base of natural logarithm 
allowance, 


fouling factor 


m?.°C/kW 
= capacity, kW 


water temperature range 


nA Bs 
Il 


= small temperature difference 


~ 
Il 


temperature, °C 


saturated vapor temperature 
entering the condenser for single 
component or azeotrope 
refrigerants and equal dew point 
for zeotropic refrigerants (at 
compressor discharge pressure) 


fsa = 


saturated vapor temperature 
leaving the evaporator for single 
component or azeotrope 
refrigerants and average dew 
point for zeotropic refrigerants 
(at compressor average suction 
pressure) 


tsey = 


b) Subscripts: 


a = additional fouling 

c = cleaned 

cd = condenser 

e = entering (for example, twe— water 
entering temperature) 

ev = evaporator 

f = fouled or fouling 

l = leaving (for example, tw) — water 
leaving temperature) 

s = saturation 

w = water 


IS 16590 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 6.5.1, 6.5.4 and Table 2) 
INDIAN SEASONAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY RATIO (ISEER) 


C-1 GENERAL 


The annex defines a uniform procedure for the 
calculation of a single value number that is a 
representation of the part load efficiency of a chiller 
which is defined as Indian seasonal energy 
efficiency ratio or ISEER. 


C-2 OBJECTIVE 


The procedure laid in this annex is only for 
equipment covered under the scope of this standard. 
The ISEER equation and procedure are intended to 
be an average representation of a single chiller in a 
typical commercial installation with conventional 
operating parameters. The procedure is intended to 
provide a consistent uniform method for calculating 
the single number for part load operation. A fixed 
set of operating load points and conditions are 
defined to allow for equal comparison of products. 
But allowances have been made for regional values 
to be defined to allow for correlation to regional 
ambient and building operational and construction 
standards. The intent is that this single value metric 
be used by efficiency standards and certification 
programs around the world that require more than a 
full load efficiency level. 


The equation has been derived to provide a 
representation of the average part load efficiency for 
a single chiller only. However, for operating cost 
and energy analysis it is best to use a comprehensive 
analysis tool that reflects the actual weather data, 
building load characteristics, operational hours, 
economizer capabilities and energy drawn by 
auxiliaries such as pumps and cooling towers when 
calculating the applied chiller system efficiency. 
This becomes increasingly important with multiple 
chiller systems because individual chillers operating 
within multiple chiller systems can have 
significantly different load profiles than a single 
chiller. 


C-3 EQUATION AND DEFINITION OF TERMS 


C-3.1 The single value part load rating shall be 


20 


determined by using the following equation: 


ISEER = A x COP 00% + B x COP75% + C 
x COP50% + D x COP 25% 


.-(13) 
where 
COPio0% = COP at full load rating point; 
COP75% = COP at75 percent load rating point; 
COP50% = COP at 50 percent load rating point; 
COP25% = COP at25 percent load rating point; 
A = weighting factor for 100 percent 
load; 
B = weighting factor for 75 percent 
load; 
C = weighting factor for 50 percent 
load; and 
D = weighting factor for 25 percent load. 


The values of A, B, C and D are based on the 
weighted average of the building types having 
similar type of occupancy heat load across all 
climatic zones of India. Values that have been 
developed are shown in Table 6. 


Table 6 Weighting Coefficients A to D for 
Calculation of ISEER 


(Clause C-3.1) 


SINo. Load Rate Weighting Coefficients 
(%) 
(D) (2) (3) 
i) 100 A = 06 
ii) 75 B=48 
iii) 50 C= 36 
iv) 25 D=10 


The ISEER rating requires that the unit efficiency be 
determined at 100 percent, 75 percent, 50 percent 
and 25 percent at the conditions specified in Table 7. 


IS 16590 : 2023 


Table 7 Indian Seasonal Energy Efficiency Rating Conditions 
(Clause C-3.1) 


SI No. Measurement Parameters 


Water-Cooled 


Air-Cooled 


(1) (2) 


(3) (4) 


1) Evaporator water temperature: 


a) Leaving 


7 °C 


b) Flow 


Flow rate equal to a 5 °C AT at 100 percent loading 


ii) | Evaporator fouling factor allowance 


a) Water side 


0.018 m?.°C /kW 


iii) | Condenser fouling factor allowance 


a) Water side 


0.044 m?.°C /kW 


0.000 m2.°C /kW 


b) Condenser flow 


Flow rate equal to a 5 °C AT 
at 100 percent rating point 


Airflow equal to the 
full load rating 


iv) | Condenser entering temperature: 


a) 100 percent load 
b) 75 percent load 
c) 50 percent load 
d) 25 percent load 


30 °C 35 °C 
26 °C 27°C 
23 °C 19 °C 
20 °C 13°C 


For units with proportional unloading, performance 
should be obtained at the 25 percent, 50 percent, 
75 percent, and 100 percent load to calculate the 
ISEER. 


If the unit has discrete steps of unloading, but due to 
its capacity control logic cannot be operated at 
75 percent, 50 percent, or 25 percent capacity, then 
the unit should be operated at other load points and 
the 75 percent, 50 percent, or 25 percent capacity 
efficiencies should be determined by interpolating 
between the two operating points that frame the 
rating point. The required condenser entering 
temperature at the requested load point should be 
used and a capacity test run at each unloading stage 
on either side of the desired part load rating point 
then should be interpolated to obtain the desired part 
load point rating. For example, if the unit has 
capacity stages at 33 percent and 66 percent nominal 
displacement, then the 50 percent point can be 
determined by obtaining the capacity and efficiency 
at the 66 percent unloading stage at 50 percent 
entering temperature and another test, at the 
33 percent unloading stage at the 50 percent entering 
temperature. Extrapolation of data shall not be used 
and the desired rating point must be determined by 
two actual operating points. An actual chiller 
capacity load, equal to or less than the required 
loading point shall be used to plot the performance 
curve. For example, if the minimum actual capacity 
is 33 percent, then the curve can be used to 
determine the 50 percent capacity point, but not the 
25 percent capacity point. 


If a unit cannot be unloaded to the 25 percent, 


21 


50 percent, or 75 percent capacity point, then the 
unit should be run at the minimum step of unloading 
at the condenser entering temperature based on 
Table 8 for 25 percent, 50 percent, or 75 percent 
capacity points as required. The efficiency shall then 
be determined by using the following equation: 


Capacityyin 
Ca X Poweryin 


COP = (14) 


where 
Capacitymin and Powermin are the values from 
the lowest stage of unloading running at the 
desired part load rating point; and 


Cais a degradation factor to account for cycling 
of the compressor for capacities less than the 
minimum step of capacity. 


Ca should be calculated using the following 
equation: 


Ca= (— 0.13 x LF) + 1.13 ...(15) 
The factor LF should be calculated using the 
following equation: 

%Load 


Part load unit capacity 


LF = ...(16) 
where 


Percent load = standard loading point that is 
75 percent, 50 percent and 25 percent of full 
load. 


Full load capacity is the capacity at the full load 


IS 16590 : 2023 


100 percent rating point as defined in Table 8. 


The part load capacity of the unit is the capacity 
obtained when the machine is run at its lowest stage of 
capacity at the desired load point rating conditions. 


For water-cooled units where a unit has been 
selected for operating conditions that will not allow 
operation at the full load condenser entering fluid 
conditions, then an ISEER cannot be calculated. For 
these applications, ISEER can be determined, using 
the same procedures as defined above except that for 
the full load rating point the machine will be run at 
the maximum design entering condenser 
temperature. The 75 percent, 50 percent and 
25 percent points will then be run at the temperatures 
defined in Table 8 unless the unit will not operate at 
these conditions and then the maximum option 
temperature shall be used. For example, if a chiller 
was selected for 30 °C full load condenser entering 
fluid temperature, then the 100 percent loading 
would be determined at a 30 °C entering conditions. 
For ISEER rating the 75 percent would then be 
determined at a 26 °C entering temperature, the 
50 percent at 23 °C and the 25 percent point at 20 °C 
(see Table 7). 


C-4 SAMPLE CALCULATION 


Using the Table 8 data, the part load COP value can 
be calculated. 


The following is an example of an ISEER 
calculation for an air-cooled machine with 3 discrete 
stages of capacity with an ISEER determined for the 
average profile. 


The 75 percent load point is determined by 
interpolating between the 112 percent and 70 percent 
load point. 


(75 — 70) 
(112 — 70) 
= 4.29 


COP r5% = x (3.85 — 4.35) + 4.35 


The 50 percent load point is determined by 
interpolating between the 73 percent and 40 percent 
load points. 


_ (50-40) 
COP 50% = (73 — 40) 


x (4.45 — 4.59) + 4.59 = 4.54 


Because the unit cannot unload to 25 percent 
capacity or less, the following additional 
calculations are required to determine the COP25%. 
Using the minimum capacity data point listed above, 
that was determined at the minimum step of capacity 
at the 20 °C ambient conditions the following 
calculations can be made. 


__ 0.25 x 350 
~ 146.9 


LF = 0.60 


Ca= (~ 0.13 x 0.60) +1.13 = 1.05 


146.9 


COP = ——- 
1.05x33.3 


= 4.20 


Using the A, B, C and D efficiencies the ISEER 
(COP) can then be calculated as follows: 


ISEER (COP) = (0.06 x 3.79) + (0.48 x 4.29) 
+ (0.36 x 4.54) + (0.10 x 4.20) = 4.34 


Table 8 Chiller Part Load Values Data 
(Clauses C-3 and C-4) 


SI No. Rating (%) Step Capacity (kW) % Load Temp of Input (kW) COP 
Entering Air 
(°C) 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) 100 1(100 %) 350.0 100 35 92.3 3.79 
ii) 75 1(100 %) 392.0 112 27 101.8 3.85 
iii) 75 2(66 %) 245.0 70 27 56.3 4.35 
iv) 50 2(66 %) 256.0 73 19 57.5 4.45 
v) 50 3(33 %) 141.0 40 19 30.7 4.59 
vi) 25 3(33 %) 146.9 42 13 33.3 4.41 


22 


C-5 APPROACH 


ADOPTED FOR ISEER 


COEFFICIENT CALCULATIONS 


Followin 


g approach shall be adopted for ISEER 


coefficient calculations: 


a) 


b) 


Weather data is taken from bin weather file 
used for energy simulation of buildings; 
Following building types have been 
analyzed through simulation for studying 
the chiller load variation: 


1) Office building — large, 24 h use; 

2) Office building — large, daytime use; 
3) Office building — small, 24 h use; 

4) Office building — small, daytime use; 
5) Retail shopping building, daytime use; 
6) Hotel building, 24 h use; and 

7) Hospital, 24 h use. 


c) Building envelopes, occupancy, light power 
density (LPD), environmental protection 
declaration (EPD) etc are the taken from 


ri 


ecently built modern buildings; 


d) 


e) 


g) 


IS 16590 : 2023 


Models of all seven types have been 
simulated for representative cities of various 
climatic zones: hot and dry, composite, 
warm and humid, and moderate; 


Grouping of data as per bin method for 
computation of ISEER coefficients is done 
on the basis of load on chiller; 


Bin group is selected in such a way that 
average of peak bin group should be 
75 percent load and similarly average of low 
bin group and min bin group should be 
50 percent and 25 percent load respectively; 
and 


ISEER coefficients for 25 percent, 50 percent, 
75 percent and 100 percent load are first 
computed separately for each building type 
in each representative city. Average of all 
the cases has led to the final set of ISEER 
coefficients. 


Typical example for the calculation of ISEER for 
large office building is shown in Table 9. 


Table 9 Calculation of ISEER for Large Office Building 
(Clause C-5) 


SI No. Percentage Average Number kW-hr Min Low Peak Design 
Load Percent of Hours Bin Bin Bin Bin 
Load 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) 100 to 87.5 93.75 237 781.4 0 0 
ii) 87.5 to 81.25 84.37 353 1 047.3 0 d 
iii) 81.25 to 75 78.125 511 1 403.9 0 0 
iv) 75 to 68.25 71.87 642 1 622.7 0 0 
v) 68.25 to 62.5 65.625 718 1 657.1 0 0 
vi) 62.5 to 56.25 59.375 1 360 2 839.9 0 0 0 
vii) 56.25 to 50 53.125 1 404 2 623.2 0 0 0 
viii) 50 to 43.75 46.875 1411 2 326.0 0 0 0 
ix) 43.75 to 37.5 40.625 846 1 208.7 0 0 0 
x) 37.5 to 31.25 34.375 522 630.9 0 0 0 
xi) 31.25 to 25 25.125 364 321.8 0 0 0 
xii) 25 to 18.75 21.875 235 180.8 0 0 0 
xiii) 18.75 to 12.5 15.625 116 63.7 0 0 0 
xiv) 12.5 to 6.25 9.375 37 12.3 0 0 0 
xv) 6.25 to0 3.125 4 0.4 0 0 0 
8 760 16 720.2 3440 25585 16296 222.2 
weightage 12 53.8 34.3 4.7 
percent percent percent percent 
D C B A 


23 


IS 16590 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Clauses 6.5.4 and Table 2) 
SAMPLE CALCULATIONS FOR RATING TOLERNECES 


D-1 PURPOSE 


The purpose of this annex is to provide guidance for 
calculation of rating tolerance as described in 7. 


Following equation is used to calculate permissible 
tolerances on capacity (KW) and COP: 


Tolerance(percentage) 
833.3 ) 


= nd 9 AT. X %load 
10.5 — (0.07 x %load) + GE x %load 


D-1.1 FULL-LOAD EXAMPLE IN COP 


Rated capacity =35 kW 
Rated power input = 9.230 kW 
Cooling, A Tr =5K 


COP = He 3.79 
7 9230 ` 


Tolerance (percentage) 


= 10.50 — (0.07 x 100) + 


833.3 
5 x 100 
= 10.5 — 7 + 1.66 = 5.16 


Minimum allowable capacity 


100 — 5.16 
= aq 35 = 33.194 kW 
Minimum allowable COP 
3.79 
aree NSAN 


D-1.2 PART-LOAD EXAMPLE IN COP 
Assume a part load of 69.5 % of the rated capacity. 
Part load capacity = 24.325 kW 
Part load power input = 5.960 kW 
A Tr, = 5.0 °C 


24.325 
5.960 


COP = = 4.08 


Tolerance (percentage) 
10.50 — (0.07 x 69.5) + ee 
= 10.50 — (0.07 x 69. — 
5 x 69.5 


= 10.5 — 4.865 + 2.39 = 8.025 


4.08 


— X 
100 + 8.025 sap 


Minimum allowable COP = 


= 3.77 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 9.1) 
AIR DISTRIBUTION CHECK PROCEDURE AND CHECK LIST 


E-1 Following procedure shall be adopted for 
verification of the air and temperature distribution 
within the lab. This may be conducted at every test 
set up to verify the air and temperature distribution 
within the specified limits. 


a) Set up the air sampler device and the 
aspirating psychrometer around the chiller 
condensing unit based on the unit 
configuration as shown in Fig. 4. Keep the 
aspirating psychrometer’s air mixing fan 
ON; 

b) Ensure all the thermocouples mounted on 
the air sampler device measures same value 
and measures ambient. The measured 
values shall be within the allowable 
tolerance as per Table 4; 

c) Start the chiller and conditioning 
equipment of the lab. Once the appropriate 
stable conditions have been achieved, 


24 


record the temperature values as 
simultaneously as possible prior to start of 
data collection. Note the data in the table 
below; 


d) Calculate the mean air 
temperature (MADBT); 


e) Confirm that each of the aspirating 
psychrometer values are within + 1°C (for 
units < 703.4 kW or + 1.7 °C (for units 
> 703.4 kW) of MADBT; 

f) Confirm that each thermocouple values 
are within +1°C of each aspirating 
psychrometer; 


dry-bulb 


g) Confirm each recirculating thermocouple 
values shall be within + 2.7 °C of the 
MADBT; and 

h) Note the values in a sketch (see Fig. 7) as 
shown below. The data shall be noted as 
shown in Fig. 8. 


lH Chiller 


IS 16590 : 2023 


A/P#4— 


T/PHO_ 
f R/C#H0_ 
Mixing Fan 


FIG. 7 SAMPLE SKETCH 


A/P 


TZP 
T/P 
T/P 
T/P 


R/C__ 
R/c 
R/C 
R/C__ 


FIG. 8 DATA TO BE NOTED 


ANNEX F 
(Clauses 3.13 and Table 1) 
BAROMETRIC PRESSURE ADJUSTMENT 


F-1 PURPOSE 


The purpose of this annex is to prescribe a method 
of adjusting measured test data according to the 
local barometric pressure. 


F-2 BACKGROUND 


In order to ensure that performance can be uniformly 
compared from one unit to another and from one 
manufacturer to another, performance testing for air- 
cooled chillers shall be corrected for air density 
variations. To accomplish this, use the two 
correction factors (CFQ and CF») to correct test data 
at 100 percent load points back to standard 
barometric pressure at sea level. These correction 


25 


factors use an empirical method of correction based 
on industry average values across a wide variety of 
chillers. The correction factors are based on pressure 
rather than altitude, in order to include the effects of 
weather variations. Test data shall be corrected to 
standard air conditions for comparison to published 
ratings. The correction multiplier for efficiency and 
capacity at the 0 (zero) percent load point will be 1.0. 
Intermediate correction multipliers at part-load 
points will be a linear interpolation of values 
between the 0 percent and 100 percent load points 
where the percent load value is based on the 
measured capacity divided by the design capacity. 
NOTE — These factors are not intended to serve as 


selection code correction factors. For selection codes it is 
best to use component models that properly adjust for 


IS 16590 : 2023 


variation in barometric pressure as related to fan, heat 
exchanger and compressor power and capacity. 


The correction factors (CFQ and CF,) will be limited 
to a value corresponding to a barometric pressure of 
84.32 kPa (approximately 1 524 m elevation). 
Correction factors for measured barometric readings 
below the minimum will be equal to the value 
determined at 84.32 kPa. 


F-3 PROCEDURE 


Air-cooled chillers are tested at the local conditions. 
The data is then corrected to sea level and standard 
pressure by multiplying the measured data by the 
appropriate correction factor (CF). Both factors are 
in the form of a second order polynomial equations, 
see Table 10. 


Dy = AnD? + Bep + Cy (18) 


_ Qx%load 
(Re =t ee) : (Do 
— 1). exp{—0.35 x [(3.41214 x D, X Nrest,100%) 
— 9.6]} 
(19) 


= Qx%load 
(CE), =A (eo) : (Da 
— 1). exp{—0.35 x [(3.41214 x D, X Neest,100%) 


at local conditions; and 

adjusted value equivalent to 
operation at sea level with 
standard pressure. 


Corrected = 


100 percent load point example: 


A chiller has published ratings of 700.0 kW and 
3.100 COPR at sea level. The chiller is tested at an 
altitude of approximately 1 080 meters. 


The measured test results: 
Capacity, Qtestea = 693.2 kW 
Efficiency, #testea = 3.021 COPR 
Air pressure, P = 98.07 kPa 


Correction function, Dg = 0.000 023 713 x 98.072 
— 0.005 986 0 x 98.07 + 1.363 04 = 1.004 1 


Correction function, Dy = 0.000 051 135 x 98.072 
— 0.013 064 x 98.07 + 1.798 72 = 1.009 3 


Correction function, Crg = 1 + (693.2/693.2)(1.004 
1 — 1) - exp [— 0.35 x (3.412 14 x 1.009 3 x 3.021) 
— 9.6)] = 1.0031 


Correction function, Cr, = 1 + (693.2/693.2) (1.009 
3 — 1) - exp [- 0.35. (3.412 14 x 1.009 3 x 3.021) 


— 9.6]} — 9.6)] = 1.007 0 
...(20) 

Corrected test Capacity, Qcorrected,standard = 693.2 
Qcorrected,standard = Qtest(CF) pe ...(21) x 1.003 l= 695.3 kW 

Corrected test efficiency, fcorrectedstandard = 3.021 
Moreira = Test a … 4102) x 1.007 0 = 3.042 COPR a 

where Part load efficiency and capacity correction factors 

P = pressure, absolute, kPa; for the following example are determined using the 
Q = capacity, kW; same calculation process as for the O percent and 
n = efficiency; 100 percent load point example: 
CF, = it tion factor; : : 

S Ep m D ee er With a part load test result capacity of 560.0 KW and 
CFn = efficiency correction factor; : 
ABC = vol ial ; a 693.2 kW test result for 100 percent load point 

a = polynomia constants; ; capacity. The chiller is tested at an altitude of about 
Test = actual measured value during test 108 0 meters. 
Table 10 Terms Correction Factor (CF) coefficients 
(Clause F-3) 
SI No. Description Unit of Measure 
Capacity, Do Capacity, Dn 

Ag Bg Co An By Ch 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) 2.3713 E-05 -5.9860 E-03 1.36304E+00 5.1135E-05 -1.3064E-02 1.798 72 E+00 


NOTE — E indicates scientific equation, example 1E-02 = 0.01 


26 


The measured test results for the part load test: 


Capacity, Qtest = 560.0 kW 
Efficiency, #testea,100% = 3.021 

COP efficiency, ftest = 3.686 

COP air pressure, Presi = 98.07 kPa 


Correction function, Do = 0.000 023 713 x 98.072 
— 0.005 986 0 x 98.07 + 1.363 04 = 1.004 1 


Correction function, Dy = 0.000 051 135 x 98.072 
— 0.013 064 x 98.07 + 1.798 72 = 1.009 3 


IS 16590 : 2023 


Correction factor, Cra = 1 + (560.0/693.2) + (1.004 1 
—1)-exp[- 0.35 : (3.412 14 x 1.009 3 x 3.021 —9.6)] 
= 1.001 1 


Correction factor, Cr, = 1 + (560.0/693.2) : (1.009 3 
— 1) -exp[- 0.35 : (3.412 14 x 1.009 3 x 3.021 —-9.6)] 
= 1.002 6 


Corrected test capacity, Qcorrected,standard = 560.0 
x 1.001 1 = 560.6 kW 
Corrected test efficiency, fcorrectedstandard = 3.021 


x 1.002 6 = 3.029 COP 


ANNEX G 
(Clause 7.2.2) 
WATER-SIDE PRESSURE DROP CORRECTION MEASUREMENT PROCEDURE 


G-1 PURPOSE 


The purpose of this annex is to prescribe a 
measurement method for water pressure drop and, 
when required, a correction method to compensate 
for friction losses associated with external piping 
measurement sections. The measurement method 
only applies to pipe of circular cross section. 


G-2 BACKGROUND 


As a certified test point for the water to refrigerant 
heat exchangers, the water-side pressure drop needs 
to be determined by test with acceptable 
measurement uncertainty. In some cases, the 
measured pressure drop as per this standard will be 
determined by using static pressure taps external to 
the unit in upstream and downstream piping. When 
using external piping, adjustment factors are 
allowed to compensate the reported pressure drop 
measurement. Numerous studies conclude that the 
determination of a calculated correction term for 
these external components may contain significant 
sources of error and therefore the use of external 
correction factors will be restricted to limit the 
magnitude of these potential errors. For units with 
small connection sizes, it is feasible that straight 
pipe sections be directly connected to the units with 
adequate length to obtain static pressure 
measurements with acceptable systematic errors due 
to instrument installation location. This is the 
preferred connection methodology. Units with 
larger size connections may have spatial limits in the 
upstream and downstream connection arrangement 
such that elbows or pipe diameter changes may be 
necessary to accommodate the available space at the 
test facility, or to provide mechanical support for 
piping weight loads. 


27 


G-3 MEASUREMENT LOCATIONS 


Static pressure taps shall simultaneously meet all of 
the following requirements: 


a) Static pressure taps may be in either the 
unit connections (that is nozzles) or in 
additional external piping provided for the 
purpose of test measurements; 


b) If using additional external piping, the 
piping arrangement shall use rigid pipe and 
may include fittings such as elbows, 
reducers, or enlargers between the pressure 
tap locations and the unit connections. 
Flexible hose is prohibited between the unit 
connections and the pressure taps; and 


c) Static pressure taps shall maintain the 
following lengths of cylindrical straight 
pipe in the flow path adjacent to each 
pressure tap location in Table 11. 


G-4 STATIC PRESSURE TAPS 


Static pressure taps will be in a piezometer ring or 
piezometer manifold arrangement with a minimum 
of 3 taps located circumferentially around the pipe, 
all taps at equal angle spacing (see Fig. 9). To avoid 
introducing measurement errors from recirculating 
flow within the piezometer ring, each of the pipe tap 
holes shall have a flow resistance that is greater than 
or equal to 5 times the flow resistance of the 
piezometer ring piping connections between any 
pair of pressure taps. A ‘Triple-Tee’ manifold 
arrangement using 4 pipe tap holes is the preferred 
arrangement, but not required if meeting the flow 
resistance requirement (see Fig. 10). 


IS 16590 : 2023 


G-4.1 For design or evaluation purposes, flow 
resistance may be estimated by resistance 
coefficient K factor calculation. Generally, manifold 
tubing or piping can be evaluated using the K factor 


G-4.2 Provisions shall be made to bleed air out of 
the lines connected to pressure measurement 
devices. These provisions shall take into 
consideration the orientation of pressure taps and 


and pressure tap holes can be evaluated using orifice manifold connections. 


flow equations (see G-5.2). 


Table 11 Lengths of Cylindrical Straight Pipe 
(Clause G-3) 


SINo. Unit Connection, Nominal Pipe Straight Length in Flow Path 


Size 
Upstream of Pressure Tap Downstream of Pressure Tap 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) <75 mm Min 10-D Min 3-D 
ii) 100 mm, 125 mm, or 150 mm Min 6-D Min 2-D 
ili) > 200 mm Min 3-D Min 1-D 


where 


D = The greatest pipe inside diameter dimension, using the nominal pipe size and pipe schedule nominal 
wall thickness, of the following locations: 


a) The pipe diameter at the pressure tap location; 


b) The largest diameter of any reducer or enlarger fittings between the pressure tap location and unit 
connections; and 


c) The largest diameter of the first reducer or enlarger fitting between the pressure tap location and the 


test facility, if any. 


PRING 


MANIFOLD TUBING 
90° (TYPICAL) 


TAP OFFICE 


120° (TYPICAL) 


WALL STATIC PRESSURE 


PRING 


MANIFOLD TUBING/PIPING 


= ht = 
a. UD TE 


WALL STATIC PRESSURE 
TAP OFFICE 


FIG. 9 EXAMPLES OF PIEZOMETER RING/MANIFOLD 


90° (TYPICAL) 


MANIFOLD TUBING/PIPING 


IS 16590 : 2023 


PRING 


WALL STATIC PRESSURE 
TAP OFFICE 


FIG. 10 EXAMPLES OF TRIPLE-TEE PIEZOMETER RING/MANIFOLD 


G-5 CORRECTION METHOD 


Measured water pressure drop values shall be 
adjusted to subtract additional static pressure drop 
due to external piping. The additional static pressure 
drop shall be the sum of all losses between the unit 
connections and the location of static pressure taps. 
Record the original measured value, the calculated 
adjustment value, and the final calculated result for 
water pressure drop. 


G-5.1 The adjustment shall not exceed 10 percent of 
the measured water pressure drop. 


G-5.2 A Darcy friction factor is determined using 
the Swamee-Jain equation as given below: 


0.25 


Pen M 
€ 5.74 
[ogu 55+ os)” 
...(38) 
where 
€ = absolute roughness, 0.045 mm (for 
purposes of this standard); 
D = internal pipe diameter, mm; and 
Re = Reynolds number for the flow in the 


pipe. 


The pressure drop (hr) associated with a flow 
component or fitting may be calculated using the 


29 


friction factor as detailed above or the equation may 
use a K factor. These are shown in equations 8 and 9. 


L y? = ! 
h =f. do when the Darcy friction factor is 
used for straight pipe section (39) 


L v? . ; 
h, = K.=. 2 when a K factor is specified for 


d 2 
elbows and expansion/contractions  ...(40) 


where 


L = pipe length, m; 
D = internal Diameter, m; 


V = average velocity calculated at the entrance 
to the component; 


G = standard gravitational term 9.81 m/s?; and 


K = resistance coefficient. The K correction 
factor is computed for the following elbow 
arrangements as detailed in Table 12. 


The determination of the K factor for the expansion 
and contraction sections is a function of the inlet to 
outlet diameter ratio as well as the angle of 
expansion and contraction. The angle of expansion 
or contraction is detailed on the accompanying chart 
(Fig. 11) with limits placed at 45° and 10°. 


IS 16590 : 2023 


Table 12 K Factors for Elbow Arrangements 
(Clause G-5.2) 


SI No. Description K Factor 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Smooth elbow with r/D = 1 20.f 
il) Smooth elbow with r/D = 1.5 14-f 
iii) Smooth elbow with r/D = 2.0 12-f 
iv) Smooth elbow with r/D = 3.0 12-f 
v) Smooth elbow with r/D = 4.0 14-f 
vi) | Segmented with 2-45° meters 30-f 
vii) Segmented with 3-30° meters 24-f 
viii) Segmented with 6- 15° meters 24-f 

where 


r = radius of the centerline of the elbow, ft (1ft = 0.30 m) 


© 
© 
= 
< 
3 
D 
=] 
Go 
= 


ounsaBkRS& 


100 200 300 400 500 600 
Minimum pipe Diameter (mm) 


FIG. 1 1 CORRECTION TERM FOR INCLUDED ANGLE FOR EXPANSION/CONTRACTION FITTING 


30 


IS 16590 : 2023 


ANNEX H 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee 
Blue Star Limited, Mumbai 
BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Private 
Limited, Chennai 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Carrier Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Limited, 
Gurugram 


Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 


CEPT University, Anmedabad 
Copeland India Private Limited, Pune 


Daikin Air Conditioning India Private Limited, 
Gurugram 


Danfoss Industries Private Limited, Gurugram 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 


Electrical Research and Development Association, 
Vadodara 


Emerson Climate Technologies 
Limited, New Delhi 


(India) Private 


Frigoglass India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Company Limited, 
Mumbai 


Honeywell International India Private Limited, 


Gurugram 


31 


Representative(s) 


PROF RAVI KUMAR (Chairperson) 


SHRI JITENDRA BHAMBURE 
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI LOGANATHAN VIJAY KUMAR 
SHRI BALASUBRAMANIAN ANAND (Alternate) 


MS PRAVATANALINI SAMAL 
MS DEEPSHIKHA WADHWA (Alternate I) 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIK (Alternate ID 
SHRI DHEERAJ PANDEY (Alternate IID) 


SHRI BIMAL TANDON 
SHRI MANMOHAN KULASHRI (Alternate I) 
SHRI JATINDER SHARMA (Alternate II) 


DR P. CHANDRA SEKHAR 
SHRI GUJJALA B. BALARAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI YASH SHUKLA 
SHRI S. CHETHAN THOLPADY 
SHRI GAURAV MEHTANI 
SHRI MADHUR SEHGAL 
SHRI K. L. NAGAHARI (Alternate I) 


SHRI M. N. S. V. KIRAN KUMAR (Alternate ID 


LT COL DEEPAK SHARMA 
SHRI S. S. NIKAM (Alternate) 


SHRI GUATAM BRAHMBHATT 
SHRI RAKESH PATEL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
SHRI D. P. DESPANDE (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH KUMAR MAWAI 
SHRI MANDEEP SINGH (Alternate I) 
Ms RITU CHOUHAN (Alternate II) 


SHRI BURZIN WADIA 
SHRI JASVIR SINGH (Alternate I) 
SHRI NARENDRA SHEDGE (Alternate II) 


SHRI AADITYA PEGALLAPATI 
SHRI AVINASH KUMAR (Alternate) 


IS 16590 : 2023 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Chemical Engineering, Kolkata 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 

Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers, New Delhi 

Ingersoll Rand India Limited, Bengaluru 


International Copper Association India, Mumbai 


Intertek India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Johnson Controls-Hitachi Air Conditioning India 
Limited, Mehsana 


LG Electronics India Private Limited, New Delhi 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


Samsung India Electronics Private Limited, New Delhi 


Sierra Aircon Private Limited, Gurugram 


The Chemours India Private Limited, Gurugram 


UL India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Voltas Limited, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer 


Education (VOICE), New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity (H.No. 03, Savita Vihar, Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, 
Mayur Vihar, Phase-1 Extension, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR D. SATHIYAMOORTHY 
DR SUDIP K. DAS (Alternate) 


DR G. VENKATARATHNAM 
DR JYOTIRMAY MATHUR 
SHRI ASHISH RAKHEJA (Alternate I) 


SHRI V. MANJUNATH (Alternate II) 


SHRI M. VENKANNA 
SHRI J. GURUSAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI MAYUR KARMAKAR 
SHRI SHANKAR SAPALIGA (Alternate) 


SHRI C. M. PATHAK 


SHRI RAHUL RAMTEKKAR 
Ms HEENA RAMSINGHANI (Alternate) 


SHRI ADITYA ANIL 


SHRI KANWALJEET JAWA 
SHRI HARSH VARDHAN PANT (Alternate) 


SHRI KALICHARAN SAHU 
SHRI AMIT KUMAR JHA (Alternate) 


SHRI D. K. MUDGAL 
SHRI S. DHIMAN (Alternate) 


SHRI VIKAS MEHTA 
SHRI NISHIT SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI V. MANJUNATH 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SRINIVASAN MOTURI 
SHRI A.D. KUMBHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
SHRI H. S. WADHWA (Alternate) 


SHRI J. K. AGRAWAL 
SHRI P. K. MUKHERJEE 
SHRI NAVINDRA GAUTAM, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 


AND HEAD (MECHANICAL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Ms NEHA THAKUR 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


IS 16590 : 2023 


Panel for Revision of IS 16590, MED 03 : P19 


Organization 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers, New Delhi 


Blue Star Limited, Mumbai 


Carrier Air Conditioning 
Limited, Gurugram 


and Refrigeration 


Emerson Climate Technologies (India) Private 
Limited, New Delhi 


International Copper Association India, Mumbai 
Johnson Controls-Hitachi Air Conditioning India 
Limited, Mehsana 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


UL India Private Limited, Bengaluru 
Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE), New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, 
Mayur Vihar, Phase-1 Extension, Delhi) 


33 


Representative(s) 
MS PRAVATANALINI SAMAL (Convener) 
DR JYOTIRMAY MATHUR (Co-convener) 
SHRI JITENDRA BHAMBURE 
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI BIMAL TANDON 
SHRI MANMOHAN KULASHRI (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
SHRI MAYUR KARMAKAR 
SHRI SHANKAR SAPALIGA (Alternate) 
SHRI RAHUL RAMTEKKAR 
SHRI KANWALJEET JAWA 
SHRI HARSH VARDHAN PANT (Alternate) 


SHRI V. MANJUNATH 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
SHRI H. S. WADHWA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. MUKHERJEE 


(Continued from second cover) 


ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 
37-2009 


ASHRAE Standard 116- 
2010 


ASHRAE Standard 51-16 
- 2016 


AMCA Standard 210- 
2016 


Method of testing for ratings electrically driven unitary air conditioning and heat 
pump equipment 


Methods of testing for rating for seasonal efficiency of unitary air conditioners 
and heat pumps 


Laboratory methods of testing fans for certified aero- dynamic performance rating 


Laboratory methods of testing fans for certified aerodynamic performance rating 


This standard contributes to the sustainable development goal 9 — Industry, innovation and infrastructure: Build 
resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex H. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (20281). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


