( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS t 9692 (. Part II ) - 1980

Indian Standard
GUIDE ON MAINTAINABILITY OF EQUIPMENT
PART II MAINTAINABILITY REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATIONS AND CONTRACTS ~of Electronic and Equipment Sectional Electrical Components Committee, LTDC 3 IN

Reliability

and

Chairman
Union PROF S. SAMPATH Public Service Commission, New Delhi

Members

Reprer~nting

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) BRIM R.C. DEINQRA LT-COL V. K. KEANNA ( Alternate ) DrrDy;a, STANDARDS ( S & T ), Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways

)

JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( S & T )-II, RDSO ( Alternate ) JOINT DIRECTOR ELECTRICALS ( MRS ), RDSO ( Alternate ) Peico Electronics and Electricals Ltd, Bombay DR P. K. DUTTA SHRI S. P. KULKARNI ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P. GKOSH SHRI B. C. MUK~ERJEE ( Alternate ) Instrumentation Ltd, Kota SHRI A. P. GUPTA SBRI I. S. SULAKH ( Altcrnatc ) All India Radio, New Delhi SHRI H. S. JOLLY SHRI N. J. NAIR ( Alternate ) Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI K. KRISHNASWAMY SQN-LDR I. M. GANDOTRA ( Alicrnate ) The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers SHRI S. P. KUL~CARNI Association, Bombay SRRI S. M. KHURSALE ( Alternate ) Tata MANAQFR ( STANDARDIZATION ) Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur ASSISTANT MANAGER ( STANDARDIZATION ) ( Altcrnatc ) Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SRRI H. C. MATHUIZ SHRI U. R. G. ACHARYA ( Alternate )

( Continuedon
@ INDIAN Copyright 1981 INSTITUTION STANDARDS

page 2 )

This publication is protected under the fndiun Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS t 9692 ( Part II ) - 1980 -( Conlinlnd from @age 1 )
Members SERB S. R. MEHTA RcprcseRting Indian Electrical Bombay Manufacturers' Association,

personal capacity ( Department of Electrical Enginerring, Indian Institute of T6chndogy, Kharagpur 1 Department of Electronics, New Delhi SHRI E. G. NA~ARAJAN SHRI K. R. ANANDAKUMARAN Lucas-TVS Ltd,Madras NAIL SHRI C. RANQANATEAN ( Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, SHRI D. V. PETKAR Bombay Srrar A. K. BABAR ( Akrnatc ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD ISRO Satellite Centre ( ISAC ), Bangalore SHRI K. RAM~OPAL SHRI SIHARAN DE ( Allcrnalc ) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI K. S. PRAKASA RAO SHBI S. S. SONWALKAR ( Ahmats ) Directorate of Technical Development and ProducSHRI R. SO~~AS~NDA~AM tion ( AIR ), Ministry of Defcncc SHXI I. C. MATHTJR ( Alt6rsat6 ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI K. N. TIWARI SERI P. K. SHUKLA ( Alternate) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI B. VIRE~ALINQAM SHRI V. MUTHAIAH ( Alternat ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI VISWA NATE SHBI C. D. GUPTA ( Alfsrnafr ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR R. P. WADHWA Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o ,Membcr ) SHRI R. C. JAIN, Head ( Electronics ) ( Bcrcfary )

SHRI T. C. GOSALIA ( Alternate ) In Da K. B. MISRA

2

IS : 9692 ( Part II ) - 1980

Indian Standard
GUIDE MAINTAINABILITY
PART

ON OF EQUIPMENT
lN

II _MAINTAINABILITY REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATIONS AND CONTRACTS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 December 1980, after the draft finalized by the Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This guide is intended to make recommendations for the standardizand to stimulate ideas in the maination of maintainability practices, tainability field. Organizations acquiring items will find the guide useful in assisting them in defining maintainability requirements and associated programmes. Item suppliers will benefit from use of the guide, gaining an understanding of the requirements for achieving and verifying maintainability objectives. 0.3 The Part Part Part Part Part Part other I III IV V VI VII parts of this standard will be as follows:

Introduction Maintainability Test Maintainability Maintainability

to maintainability programme procedures studies of data related to design

and diagnostic

verification and presentation

Collection, analysis maintainability.

0.4 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Document 56 ( Central Office ) 69 Draft-` Guide on maintainability of equipment: Part II Maintainability requirements in specifications and contracts ' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on reliability of electronic and electrical components and equipment. A list of standards published so far in this series is given on page 10. 3

IS : 9692 ( Part I. SCOPE

11 ) - 1980

1.1 This standard ( Part II ) covers the general aspects that considered when maintainability characteristics are included ments on the development or the acquisition of an item.
NOTE - This standard ( Part II ) is not intended to be a complete to specify or to contract for maintainability.

have to be as requireguide on how

2. GENERAL

2.1 Maintainability is a characteristic defining inherent properties of an item and the corresponding discipline is concerned with how well an item may be maintained and supported during its use period. Maintainability shall be built into the item during the design and development phase and thus it is important that maintainability requirements be established as part of the initial item specification.
2.2 The development of an item may be thought of as a process evolving from a need for a certain function, all the way through a step-by-step ~definition of that item satisfying the same need, ending up with an item The process shall be controlled in order to ready for operational use. result in an item satisfving needs at the right instant of time and at a This concept is valid independent of whether a new reasonable cost. item is actually designed or a specific need is transferred into a selection of an off-the-shelf item. 2.3 The maintainability requirements in a specification may contain either quantitative or qualitative requirements or both. The methods for verifying that the requirements have been satisfied should be stated. The existence of special constraints which might affect the item's maintainability characteristics should also be stated. 3. MAINTAINABILITY

REQUIREMENTS
of maintainability characteristics requirements will cover four

3.1 A complete
broad areas:

statement

k to be achieved on the item by the item design; which will deployment

a) Maintainability

b) Constraints to be placed affect its maintenance;

c) Maintainability programme requirements the supplier to assure that the delivered maintainability characteristics; and d) Provision of maintenance support 4 planning.

to be accomplished by item has the required

IS : 9692 ( Part II ) - 1980 3.2 The maintainability specification should detail the requirements and It should also include the method to be followed to achieve them. proper references to definitions of terms used in the specification and as needed in a list of special terms. 3.3 The specification may be stated as goals or in terms of firm requirements which shall be verified in accordance with prescribed procedures. Goals or requirements may be stated in either quantitative or qualitative terms.
NOTE - In this standard a `goal' is considered as a desirable mandatory whereas a requirement shall be provided. feature which is not

3.4 A maintainability specification typically covers the various aspects of mz.intainability achievement at the operational level. However, since maintainability as an item characteristic affects maintenance and support costs and may also affect maintenance times at different maintenance levels, statements should be included in the specification covering achievements needed at all levels affected by the maintenance policy. 3.5 Maintainability Characteristics

3.5.1 Quantitative Maintainability Requkements - The most common objective is related to the time for which an item is in a non-operable status due to maintenance. Obviously, one would like to keep this time as short as possible. There is a wide range of requirements that could be used to this effect. The difference between them will be that they express different priorities between related item properties and that they allow for different flexibility concerning trade-offs to be made later in the proqramme. It is important that such factors are considered before a specific requirement is included in the specification. 3.5.1.1 Active repair and includes the following a) Diagnosis b) Technical cooling, pretation c) Kestoration etc ); and d) Final check ( failure time is often sub-elements: detection, used to specify maintainability etc ); time, inter-

localization

of cause,

delays (typical technical delays include setting interpretation and application of information, of displays, read out, etc ); ( disassembly, ( testing intercharge, reassembly, ).

alignment,

procedures

as necessary

Avariety of other maintainability characteristics may be specified for the item. Table 1 outlines some other types of requirements associated with different classes of maintenance time and verification methods. 5

.

IS : 9692 ( Part II ) - 1980
TABLE

1 EXAMPLES

OF QUANTITATIVE REQUIREMENTS ( Cfousc 3.5.1.1 )

MAINTAINABILITY

SL No. (1) i) Active time

TERM

CHARACTERISTICS

VERIFICATION METHOD

(2)
maintenance time

(3) Mean, Median or Maximum (*) Mean, Median or Maximum (a) Mean, Median or Maximum (*) Value Mean Mean

(4) Design evaluation, demonstration or operational evaluation Design evaluation, demonstration or operational evaluation Design evaluation, demonstration or operational evaluation Design evaluation, evalualion Design evaluation, evaluation Design evaluation, evaluation Design evaluation, evaluation operational operational operational

ii) iii)
iv) v)

Active repair ( corrective )

preventive Active maintenance Routine interval Maintenance operating inspection cost per hour (t)

vi)

Number of personnel maintenance Per action (t) Maintenance support cost for life cycle (t)

vii)

Mean

operational

*The maximum value shall be associated with a percentile - a commonly used value is 95 percent. tOther time bases may be selected as appropriate, that is, day, month, year, etc.

Q~alitativc Maintainability Requirements - A second achievement to is related to the degree to which the item concurs to a specific maintenance and support policy. Where the qualitative requirement contains numerical values, it should be qualified by a statement of the degree to which it should be met. This could be done by proportions of cases or events, by confidence levels or by other probabilities. Otherwise, compliance shall be judged by inspection or document review of Such policies may include statements such as the following standard. examples: 3.5.2
look for

4 Repair shall b) Repair shall c) Replaceable 4 Maintenance
established

be performed be performed

by personnel by replacement units;

of stated

skill level; units; and

of recoverable to

parts shall be plug-in shal~l be performed procedures; and

according

defined

e) Failed

part isolation shall be performed ment for 95 percent of all cases. 6

by built-in

test equip-

IS I 9692 ( Part II ) - 1980 Appendix A presents a range of other ~possible qualitative for which requirements may be specified. 3.6 Constraints 3.6.1 When writing a specification, not only should the requirements be stated on how things should be done, but in most cases there are also constraints on ways of meeting requirements which for various reasons may not be accepted ( for example, no preventive maintenance may be allowed during certain periods of time ). Failure to specify constraints might give the designer the opportunity to fulfil his maintainability requirements at the expense of the user of terms of more expensive instrumentation, etc. 3.6.2 Constraints needed in a specification depend on the nature of the maintainability requirements discussed in 3.5. It is advisable explicitly to examine this need for each objective stated. Generally such constraints may include a basic maintenance and support policy together with limits for critical resources like expensive instrumentation, high cost spares, and skill and number of personnel at each level in the organiSome statement putting requirements on the amount and the zation. nature of preventive maintenance may often be included in the specification. Special emphasis shall be given to constraining critical resources to be held on site. Emphasis shall also be given to constraining periods of time, relative to expected utilization of the equipment, when preventive maintenance may be carried out. Constraints may also be introduced by reference to relevant Indian Standards. 3.7 Programme Requirements - There are several reasons why a specification should include requirements for a formal maintainability programme to be used by the supplier in his efforts to satisfy requirements: a) It facilitates co-ordination between several suppliers items to be used in the same system; b) It may establish an interface between item development development of a maintenance and support system; delivering and the subjects

c) The customer-supplier interaction defined by a programme might be looked upon as part of a verification that requirements have been fulfilled; and for trade-offs may be allowed with a formal d) More flexibility programme requirement.
Specific details on maintainability IS : 9692 ( Part III )-1981*. *Guide on maintainability of equipment: 7

programmes

are

given
programme.

in

Part III Maintainability

IS : 9692 (-Part II ) - 1980 3.8 Engineering Support Planning To get a cost-effective system it is not sufficient to acquire an item satisfying the requirements. A maintenance and support system shall also be designed to fit the situation. Resources needed to maintain and support the system shall be acquired. This task shall as far as possible be integrated with the acquisition of the equipment to be supported. This may be achieved in the following two ways or by a combination of them: a) The supplier is given the responsibility of providing resources needed to fulfil maintenance requirements, training, manuals, test equipment, spares, etc. b) The supplier to a schedule, i) ii) iii) iv) v) Failure List~of some of the for example,

is given the responsibility of providing, according engineering support planning data, such as: rates special and repair times

tools and instrumentation

List and cost of spares Test specifications requirements developed by means of

Training

Maintenance support data are generally maintenance engineering and support analysis.

4. VERIFICATION 4.1 Verification
of maintainability requirements is the process of determining that the requirements imposed in the specification have been achieved and the verification process should be defined in the maintainability requirements. Methods of verification may range from the submission by the supplier of appropriate data or information to a a special maintainability demonstration. requirement to perform 1s : 9692 ( Part VI )* gives in some detail the alternative verification methods.

+

*Guide on maintainability ( undrr preparation ).

of equipment:

Part VI Maintainability

verification

8

IS : 9692 ( Part II )

l

1980

APPENDIX ( Clause 3.5.2 )
EXAMPLES OF OUALITATIVE REQUIREMENTS MAY

A
WHICH

SUBTECTS FOR BE "SPECIFIED

i)
iii)

Maintenance

skill level requirements. tools or test equipment.

ii) Need

for special

Need for adjustments. standardization. subsystem inspection function access. identification.

iv) Parts v) Clear vi) Visual vii) viii) ix)

Built-in Properly Colour

test facilities. marked coding test points. as appropriate.

and labels units. fasteners.

x) Use of plug-in xi) xii) xiii) xiv) Use of captive Use of handles Scope Human

on replaceable of technical

units. manuals. of the item.

and range factor

limitations

in the design

INDIAN ON

STANDARDS

RELIABILITY OF ELECTRONIC AND EQUIPMENT

AND ELECTRICAL

COMPONENTS

IS: 1885 ( Part XXXIX ).I979 Electrotechnical vocabulary: electronic and electrical items (first revision ) 2612-1965 7354 Recommendation components for type approval of electronic Part XXXIX procedures Reliability of

and sampling items:

for electronic

Guide on reliability Part I-1975 Part II-1975 Part III-1975 Part IV-1974 Part V-1975 Part VI-1975

and electrical

Part I Preliminary Part II Managerial

reliability

considerations data on electronic availability and electrical

aspects of reliability

Part III Presentation of reliability components ( or parts ) Part IV Collection of reliability, data from field performance

and maintainability in for

Part V Inclusion of lot-by-lot and periodic inspection procedures specifications for electronic and electrical components ( or parts ) Part VI components Inclusion of zeliability ( or parts ) clauses into ~the specifications

7690-1975 8161

Mathematical guide to the terms and definitions for reliability equipment and components ( or parts ) used therein reliability testing: Part I Principles and procedures

of electronic

Guide for equipment Part I-1976

Part VII-1977 Part VII Compliance test plans for failure between failures assuming constant failure rate 9185 Endurance Part I-1979 Part II-1979 9186.1979 ( life ) test for electronic Part I Thermal Part II endurance endurance and electrical items of electronic Mechanical and electrical

rate and mean time

components:

Guide for screening

