( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS

:10207 - 1982

Indian Standard
METHODS OF SAMPLING GREY IRON AND MALLEABLE IRON CASTINGS
Methods
Chairman DA DAROIJA Snroa Mmbm New Delhi

of Sampling

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

SMDC

4

Indian Agricultural

Statistics

Research

Institute,

J. N. Ga~o ( AIternars to Dr Daroga Singh ) SHRI S. N. AQARWAL SHRI M. G. BHADB SHRI H. L. CHADHA ( Alternutc DR M. M. CHAKRABORTY SHRI A.W. CHAWATEE SHRI S. K. DAM
SRRI

SHRI B. DASQ~~PTA ( Alternate ) Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd, Nagpur SHRI B. K. DHRUVA RAO Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI D. B. GHOSH Ferro Alloys Corporation Ltd, Shreeramnagar SHRI C. N. HARHAH SHRI A. SANCJAMEEWARA RAO ( AIfernare ) Italab Private Ltd, Bombay SERI S. S. HONAVAR SHRI J. P. PATEL ( Alternate ) Ministry of Railways SHRI P. K. KRISHNAMOORThY SHRI R. K. DAS~UPTA ( AIfcrnate ) Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur SHRIK.S. MAHAPATRA SRRI U. N. SARKAR ( Alfrrnate ) Mitra S. K. Private Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. K. MITRA SHRI M. N. MITRA ( AItcrnofc ) Steel Authority of India, Bhilai SHRI B. MUKHERJBB National Test House, Calcutta SHRI P. K. PAIN Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta SRRI R. J. PANDBY Therapeutics Chemical Research Corporation, SHRI B. R. PATEL Bombav SHRI M. V. VAIDYA ( Aitcrnatc ) Army Statistical Organization ( Ministry of SHRI T. R. PURI Defence . ).. New Delhi SHRI R. D. AQRAWAL ( Alternate )

Central Statistical Organization, New Delhi Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur ) The Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur Government of India Mint ( Ministry of Finance ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi

( Continued on page 2 )

@ Copyrrght 1982
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10207 - 1982
( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Members Re@senting

Essen & Co, Bangalore DRJ. RAJAR~M S~IRI V. SHANDAR NARAYAN ( Afternate I ) SHRI K. N. GURWRAJACHAR ( Alternate II ) Steel Authority of India Ltd ( R&D Organization DR M. RANQA RAO Ranchi SHRI A. K. SATSAN~I ( Alternafc ) Hindustan Zinc Ltd, Udaipur Ih B. R. L. Row SHRI G. L. JETHWANI ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Inspection ( Ministry SHRI P. M SENC~UPTA Defence ) SHRI T. K. BRATTAOHARJEE ( Alternate ) ' Bharat Aluminium Co Ltd, New Delhi SERI R. C. VIDYARTHI S~XRIS. D. JHA ( Ahnafe) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Mdmhrr ) SHRI Y. K. BHAT, Director ( Statistics ) Secretary SHRI N. SANEAR Deputy Director ( Stat ), IS1

),

of

Subcommittee Members

on Sampling

of Iron and Steel Castings,

SMDC 4 : 6

Jessop & Co Ltd, Durgapur SHRI C. L. BANEAJEE Mukand Iron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay SHRI Z. M BRATE SHRI S. R AXASWAMY ( Alternate ) Howrah Iron & Steel Works (P) SHRI UDAYADITA DATTA . . Ltd, Howrah SHRI PRADIP KUMAR M UEHER JEE ( Ahrnafe ) Bhartia Electric Steel Co Ltd, Calcutta PROF P. R. DRAR Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi SRRI M. M. G,4RoE SHRI A. S. KHOEHAR ( Alternate ) Steelcast Bhavnagar Private Ltd, Bhavnagar SHRI T. KUM 4R R. M. Engineering Works, Ahmadabad SHRI S. M \ITRA S ~RI T. G. LALL~HANDANI ( Alternate ) SRRJ K. P. MUKHERJEE . Indian Malleable Castings Ltd, Calcutta Heavy Engineering Corpora& Ltd, Ranchi SHRI B. V. PRABHU SRRI R. B. SIN~R ( Alternate ) Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation Ltd, SHRI C. S. RAY Durgapur Indian Iron 8c Steel Co Ltd, Kulti SHRI SRYM~L KUM `R ROY S `XRI S. K sn ( Allernatc ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchchirappalli SARI S ~THYANAR YINA Chittaranjan Locomotive Works, Chittaranjan SENIOR MECHANICAL ENQINEER

2

IS:10207 - 1982

Indian Standard
METHODS OF SAMPLING GREY IRON AND MALLEABLE IRON CASTINGS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This. Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 June 1982, after the draft finalized by the Methods of Sampling Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 Grey iron and malleable iron castings find extensive use in engineering and processing industries both as components as well as final products. The selection of right type and grade depends on the end use However, there are certain basic physical and of the castings. chemical properties which are common and need to be controlled during production and checked at the time of purchasing. 0.3 Proper quality control during the process of manufacture would substantially reduce the quality fluctuations of the end products. This requires frequent inspection and testing at various critical points of production and also at the finished stage. at providing unified sampling plan for 0.4 This standard aims acceptance of grey iron and malleable iron castings. For intricate and special castings the sample size could be increased on agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. Some guidelines have also been provided for process inspection. 0.5 The standard agreement between contains clause 4.4.3, 4.4.4 and the purchaser and the supplier. 5.5 which call for

0.6 In reporting the result of a test or analysis, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( wised ).

3

IS : 10207- 1982 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the methods of sampling and criteria for conformity for deciding the acceptance or rejection of a consignment of grey iron or malleable iron castings. The broad outlines regarding the controls to be exercised during the manufacturing process have also been indicated for guidance. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For apply. the purpose Individual of this standard, the following definitions shall

2.1 Item -

casting meant for inspection or testing.

2.2 Lot - The total number of iron castings of the same type, grade and size originating from the same heat treatment batch. A consignment offered for inspection may consist of one or more lots. 2.3 Lot Size lot. 2.4 Sample Item selected for inspection and/or testing from a lot. The number of items selected for inspection and/or imposed on an item with 2.5 Sample Size testing from a lot. The number of grey or malleable iron castings in the

2.6 Defect - Failure to meet the requirement respect to a single characteristic. 2.7 Defective -

A casting having one or more defects. permissible number of

2.8 Acceptance Number (a) - The maximum defectives in the sample(s) for acceptance of lot.

2.9 Acceptable Quality Level ( AQL ) - The maximum percent defective that, for the purpose of sampling of a certain grade or type of iron casting, can be considered satisfactory as a process average.
NOTE When a purchaser designates some specific value of AQL, he indicates to the supplier that his ( purchaser's) acceptance sampling plan will accept great majority of the lots that the supplier submits, provided that the process average level of percent defective in these lots is not greater than the designated value of AQL. Thus AQL is a designated value of percent defective that the purchaser indicates will be accepted most of the times ( approximately 89 to 99 percent of the times ).

3. PROCESS CONTROL 3.1 The object of inspection and testing of grey and malleable iron castings by the purchaser is to ensure their conformity to the requirements of the spec'fications agreed upon, whereas the inspection and testing carried out by the manufacturer during production is to ensure 4

IS:10207-1982.
as well as to maintain a conformity to the relevant specification Quality control duping production satisfactory control over the process. can build the quality and reliability into the ca$ting whereas inspection done at a later stage can only help decision regarding the acceptability Hence it is highly desirable that the .of a given quantity of castings. manufacturer should have his own scheme of sampling and testing during manufacturing process SO that the quality fluctuations during production can be monitored and timely action may be taken for correcting any abnormal situation. 3.2 In the manufacture of grey and malleable iron castings, testing of raw material batch-wise and also testing of sand for various characteristics is of paramount importance. Process parameters during production .as well as heat treatment also highly influence the quality of iron castings. While the degree of control as stated above is left to the individual manufacturer depending on the manufacturing process, certain minimum frequency of testing is considered desirable during production of iron castings. .3.3 The recommended frequency characteristics are given below: Characteristic a) Tensile Strength of testing for some of the important Frequency of Testing One test from each heat in the case of batch furnaces and one test from each tap in the case of cupola melting; test bars shall undergo the same heat-treatment together with the castings they represent. For small and medium castings, 5 percent of the total production in a batch shall be checked for hardness. For large castings ( above 250 kg per piece ), 100 percent checking for hardness is essential. The test bars used for tensile tests are to be examined for micro-structure wherever required. However, it has to be ensured that at least one test bar is available for each heat treatment batch. 5

b) Hardness

c) Micro-structure

IS : 10207 - 1982 d) Dimensional Check For major and critical dimensions, 100 percent of the castings shall be checked by gauges/templates or actual measurement. In respect of other dimensions, 10 percent of the castings shall be checked.

4. LOT INSPECTION 4.1 If the manufacturer has maintained an adequate and satisfactory system of quality control in the manufacture of iron castings, the resulting data and information may be made available to the purchaser along with items supplied to enable him to judge the acceptability of the consignment. When it is not possible to provide this information or if the purchaser so desires, the procedure laid down in the following clauses shall be followed for determining the conformity of iron castings to the requirements of the relevant specification. 4.2 Information regarding heat number and batch number of the castings shall be made available to the purchaser or his representative at the time of inspection. Cast/batch/melt/heat number or any suitable identification code number shall be provided on each test bar and on each casting wherever the casting size permits. On the basis of the above information, a consignment shall be constituted into one or more lots. 4.3 From each lot formed as above, samples shall be selected and tested sequentially for ascertaining the conformity to the requirements of the relevant specification. 4.4 Scale of Sampling 4.4.1 TensileStrength and Micro-Structure - The number of tensile tests shall be as per 3.3. The required test bars shall be kept ready with all details of identification at the time of inspection. Wherever required, the same test bars shall also be examined for micro-structure. 4.4.2 Hardness - The castings in each lot shall be counted and 10 percent ( subject to a maximum of 50 ) shall be subjected to hardness test. The sample castings shall be selected by random sampling procedures ( see IS : 4905-1968* ). 4.4.3 Workmanship, Finish and Freedom from Defects - All the castings in the lot shall be individually examined for the purpose of judging the workmanship, finish and freedom from defects as stipulated in respective specifications or as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier.
*Methods for random sampling.

6

IS 8 10207 - 1982 4.4.4 Dime&ma1 Requirements - All larger castings shall be individually examined and checked for dimensional requirements as specified or In the case of as per prior agreement between purchaser and supplier. smaller castings the number of samples to be selected and checked from each lot shall be as prescribed in Table 1.

TABLE 1 SCALE OF SAMPLINa AND ACCEPTANCE DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS ( Clause 4.4.4 )
4 No. LOT SIZE OF CASTINGS ) SAMPLE

NUMBER FOR

Smlr:

ACCEPTANCS NUXBEA

Up to 25 26 to 50 51 to 100 101 to 200 201 to 500 501 and above
NOTE AQL value

8 13 20 32 50 80 for the above plans is approximately

0 0 1 1 2 3 1'5 percent.

limit for phosphorus 4.4.5 Chemical Composition - In case maximum and/or sulphur is specified, two tests shall be conducted from each lot For the purpose of these tests, requisite quantity of for these elements. material may be taken from the test bars prepared for the purpose of mechanical tests. 5. CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY

5.1 Tensile, Hardness and Micro-structure - The lot shall be considered to have met the requirements of the specification if all the samples taken from, the lot satisfy the requirements of the respective characteristics. 5.2 Dimensional Requirements - In case of larger castings, all the individual items shall meet the requirements ofdimensional characteristics. In the case of smaller castings the lot shall be declared as conforming to the dimensional requirements if the number of defective items does not exceed the acceptance number given in Table 1. 7

IS : 10207 - 1982 Finish and Freedam frcm Defects - All the castings in the lot when individually examined shall Ee found satisfactory in respect of the requiren ents fcyr workmanship, finish and freedom from defects as specified in respective specifications. 5.3 Workmanship,

5.4 Chemical Requirements - The samples tested for the specified chemical characteristics shall meet the requirements given in the relevant specification or as specified by the purchaser. 5.5 If the lot is found unsatisfactory at any stage during the course of testing no further tests need be conducted unless it ir agreed otherwise between the purchaser and the supplier.

