( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard
APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ELECTRICAL RELAYS FOR ac SYSTEMS
PART VI POWER RELAYS
ETDC 35

Relays Sectional ~hahman
SWRI IL M. UUNNAPPA Menibnz SWRI G. K. THAICUR ( Altemale to

Committee,

Reprrscnling

Tata Hydra-Electric

Power Supply Co Ltd, Bombay

Shri K. M. Chinnappa ) Senr N. S. S. AROKMMXUY Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madr `Is SHRI T. B. CHIKKOEXA ( Allma& ) Maharuhtn State Electricity Board, Bombay SHRI M. M. BHNDR~ SHRi Y. N. Bx~aoava Univemal Electric Co. 24.Pareanas & Disposals Directorate Generai of S\ppliea SHRI G. R . BXATIA ( Inspection Wing ) SIIRI S. R. K. MUR~V (Al&mars ) Jyoti Limited, Baroda SHRI A. DATTA
SHRI B. L. SINWVAL(

Alkmak )

DEPUTY

DIRBXTOR STANDARDS

Railway Board, New Delhi

( SS/TI ), RDSO, Lucrnow Aasrr DIRECTOR STANDARD; ( RELAYS ) ( Altcrtiate ) DXR~CTOR, CENTRAL POWER RE-

HIARCH INS-ITTIJTE, BANOALORE

Cent$Ja~;ih

Power Commission ( Power Wing ),

D~WTY DXRLCTOR, CENTRALPOWER RE~SARM INITITUT~( Altemute )
P. s.

!jHRt

ENDLAW

Directoto;c General of Posts & Telegraphs, New New

SHRX S. GOVINDAPPA SHRI D. P. GUPTA

SHR~S. PALHAN ( Alterna& )
SHRI P. A KRtaliNAsWlurY SHRI A. D. LIMAYE

Mysore State Electricity 3oard, Bangalore Directnrate General of Technical Devclo$ment, Delhi

S~lnr A. .M.
SWRI MEANDER &RI
!&RI

KELKAR ( Altmarc )

U.P. State Electricity Board, Lucknow Bombay Electric Supply & Transport Bombay

Undertaking,

PAL SHRI K. L. MIOLANI ( Ahnate
S.
s.

)

Haryana State Electricity Board, Chandigarh

K. MIJICH~RJB~~ National Test House, Calcutta T. PATsL ASEA Electric India Pvt Ltd, Bombay Snar M. P. MOB~DJINA ( A&ma& ) ( Contin& on pug8 2 )

`INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
MAR0

9 BAHADUB SHAH WAR NEW DELHl 11ooO2

IS : 3842( Fart VI )`i 1972

Indian Standard

' .'

APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ./ " ELECTRICAL RELAYS FOR ac SYSTEMS
PART VI POWER RELAYS

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part VI ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 17 April 1972, after the draft finalized by the Relays Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 Modern power systems are designed to provide uninterrupted electrical supply, yet the possibility of failure cannot be ruled out. The protective relays stand watch and in the events of'failures, short circuits or abnormal operating conditions help de-energise the unhealthy section of the power system and restrain interference with the remainder of it and thus limit damage to equipment and ensure safety of personnel. They are also used to indicate the type and location of failure so as to assess the effectiveness of the protective schemes. 0.3 The features which the protective relays should possess are:

that is, to ensure correct action even after long periods a) Reliability, of inactivity and also to offer repeated operations under severe conditions; b) Selectivity, that is, to ensure that system is disconnected; c) Sensitivity, that is, detection ing conditions; only the unhealthy part of the operatof

of short-circuit damage

or abnormal

d) Speed to prevent or minimize rotating conditions; and

and risK of instability

e) Stability, that is, the ability to operate only under those conditions that call for its operation and to remain either passive or biased against operation under all other conditions. a.4 Power relays are inherently directional with respect to the flow of Power, They have been employed to protect equipment when abnormal operating conditions occur in a part of a system which is otherwise healthy and the'abnormality is not caused by a short circuit or an electrical fault. 3

4.5 `In the preparation of this guide considerable assistance has been derived from several published books`-z&dBorn manufacturers' trade literature. Assistance has also been rendered by State Electricity Boards in collecting actual examples. 8.6 Th&guide has been prepared mainly to assist protection engineers in the a plication of power relays. However, it is emphasiged that it is not inten x ed to specify the relay to be used or to select any particular protective system. The actual circuit conditions in all probability may be different from those illustrated here. Hence the examples cited should be regarded as mere illustration of one or the other point pertinent to the subject.

0.7@is guide is one of the series of application guides for electrical relays
foracs)tstems. The other guides in this series are: , IS : 3638-l 966 Application guide for gas-operated relays IS : 3842 ( Part I ,)-I967 Application guide for electrical relays for ac systems: Part I Overcurrent relays for feeders and transformers IS : 3842 ( Part II )-I966 Application uide for electrical relays for ac systems: Part II Overcurrent re k ys for generators and motors IS : 3842 ( Part III )-1966 Application guide for electrical relays for ac systems: Part III Phase unbalance relays including negative phase sequence relays , IS : 3842 ( Part IV )-1966 Application guide for electrical relays for ac systems: Part IV Thermal relays IS : 3842 ( Part V )-1968 Application guide for electrical relays for ac systems: Part V Distance protection relavs
\

1. SCOPE

1.1 This guide ( Part VI.) covers application ofpower relays for ac systems covered by IS : 3231-1965*.
I.2 This guide does not cover the principles of system design and system protection. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this guide, the following definitions in addition tc those given in IS: 1885 (Part IX )-1966t and IS: 1885 (Part X)-1968$ shah apply. *Specification for electricalrelays ferpowa systemprotectiea. tElectrotc&nical vocaln&uy: Part IX ~Eleetrical reluys. ~Electrotechnlcal vocabvluy: Part X Electricalpowersystemprotectlen.

is' I 3842 ( Part VI ) 11972
-The phase angle by which unity power 2.1 Angle of coantcdon Bctor balanced load current flowing in the tripping direction of rday, leads the voltage applied to relay terminals. 25 Angle of Phase Compensation ( Maximum Torque Angle ) - ?he angle of phase compensation ( of a directional relay) is the phase displacement between the current and voltage measured at the relay terminah, ,at which the relay gives the maximum torque or force. IVorx -This
term is also referred to as characteristic angle.

2.3 Ctmptnsatit~ - Phase shifting of one or more ener izing quantities by means of series or parallel connected circuit elements fg or developing a maximum positive torque in a relay supplied with specified energizing quantities. 3. ++===I= : `1

It is intentionally 34 A Power relay measures average power of a circuit. designed to be insensitive-to instantaneous.,magnitude of power lest it may operate or vibrate with network current_othtr than that having unity power factor. _-. 8J.a *Power relay designed for low setting, below 3 percent, is fast operatingtidneeds auxihary time lag relay for. time adjustment. If setting range excaed~40 percenp a relay movement can be had with adjustable inverse timc~pawercharactdristic. mayfall to a low value that the power relay therefore, useful only Application of special considerations and red positive for all phase ely 90" lagging to approxitorque position. This is y and the angle of connecque is etro in the region of a current phase leading the-maximum torque position. approxi-

relax

ue is reversed and is considered d leading the maximum

negative for current torque Position.

ection of the flow of power at the relaying positive or negative and the r&y signal- will ..!:`...: ,. * tofeQ&&cts, 5

IS : 3842 ( Pa@

VI ) - 1972

3.3 Power relay: should not be used as a discriminating protection by time .grading of two or more relays, which have inverse time-power operating characteristics. Its time characteristic is, however, an asset if transient surges of power are expected while synchronizing. 3.4 The `minimum pick-up value of a power relay is constant in watts but the pick-up current value changes according to the power factor. The value is usually specified with respect to the maximum torque position, being the lowest value. 3.5 Power relay can be used as a reactive power relay by choosing energizing.qtianii'es .1 .`T` i ,I and suitable compensation. suitable

,.I :; `~j.r:\i;~:;,~ ! i

4. GENERAL

INFORMATION

4.1 Relay Movement - Power relays are constructed employing wattmeter movement. The most common are the induction disc and the cup rnoymeqts,lSingle-phase relays have one electrical element while polyphveIrelays may have two or three electrical elements according to threeph+sc#ee+re or. fout&re circuit connections. 4.1.1 Single-phase power relay is often applied on three-phase balanced sys.@m.+s the_ abnormal conditions against which the relay provides protection, are&so: balanced conditions ( see 5.1 ). A single-phase power relay may not always'. have sufficient torque to permit very low, sensitive setting that may be required. In such a case a polyphase relay which has inherently stronger torque and which permits low, sensitive setting, becomes imperative for'use. ~

; ., :.,

4.k.2 `A two element or three-phase-three-wire type po\aer relay is applied to'ibaianced three-phase system in preference to a single-phase relay if a strong torque and low sensitive setting is necessary. 4.1.3 A three element or three-phase-four-wire ed"t.3 an unbalanced or a balanced three-phase sefting'is necessary. type power relay is applisystem where use of a low

r

4.2 Classification of Power Relays - Power relays are classified as overreverse-power, inverse-power and power regulation power, underpower, relays according to the operating range of settings and their physical arrangement of contact systems.

,

4.2.1 The overpower torque in the direction point.

land underpower relays look and develop a positive of~normal power flow in the circuit at the relaying

4.2.2 The reverse power relays look and develop positive torque in OPPOsite direction of normal power flow in the circuit at the relaying point. Their

IS : 3842 ( Part VI ) - 1972
contact systems are alike sequence of rotation. but their energizing quantities have different

4.2.3 Power regulating relays have a neutral position corresponding to zero torque and have contact systems on either side of neutral position, one which operates depending upon the sense of the operating torque, that is, whether it is positive or negative.

of

4.3 The power relays should be energized with voltage and current of tne The relay to be applied same frequency for proper torque development. in a given system should have the rated frequency equal to the nominal system frequency; this is most important when the relay is compensated with frequency dependent circuit elements.

R

I
L

I r

I I

Ir-2
I-

III

2 .

Y

YllY--l

Iti

I4
I-!

i

I i-l Ii I I

FIG. 1 REVERSE POWER PROTECTION M'ITHTWO-ELEMENT THREE-PHASE-THREE-WIRE POWERRELAY
7

!zE
CB
R Y 0 RECEIVING

I/ II

--_-`_!I -ii
"by

GUS EARS

A
"fY
lb

`Y

IS : 3842 ( Part VI ) - 1972

.c

1

RECEIVING Bus BARS

FIG. 2

REVERSE POWER PROTECTIONWITH THREE ELEMENT THREE-PHASE-FOUR-WIRE POWER RELAYS

5. APPLICATIONS 5.1 Antimotoring Protection for Generating Set 5.1 .l A prime mover driving a generator is generally required to be shut down in the event of an emergency resulting- from serious failures of mechanical type such as failure of thrust bearing, loss of bearing oil pressure, loss of cooling water for bearing oil, etc. If the driven generator is operating in parallel with other generators in an electric system, it is customary in an event of such emergency to shut off input to the prime mover first and allow the generator to idle in the electric system for a short time before the generator is isolated from the electric system by opening its breaker. This is to ensure that the -rotating system at synchronous speed does not accelerate, which may if the generator breaker is also immediately opened, and the generator load is thrown off. Further the rotating system shall be quickly isolated from the electrical side as otherwise in a brief time it begins to be driven by the generator now operating 8

IS I 3942 ( Part VZ-) `-1972 as a motor lightly loaded to the supplied from the electric system. to the prime mover, though hot to different according to the type of to 5.1 .1.4. extent of the The condition the generator, prime mover idling losses which are if prolonged is harmful the extent of harm being as explained in 5.IJ.I

5.1.1.1 Steam turbine - The cooling effect of a largt steam flow is lost as soon as the emergency stop valves close and hence the idling rotor blades, the casing on the low pressure stages and the exhaust hood begins to overheat. A dangerous temperature may be attained within 30 seconds to a few minutes according to the type of the steam turbine. A condensing turbine would take a few minutes but a back pressure turbine would not take more than 30 seconds to reach ~dangerous temperature. If vacuum braking is employed on condensing turbines, they run the same risk as back pressure turbines, and Kaplon type hydraulic 5.1;1.2 Hydraulic turbines - Reaction turbines are known to suffer from cavitation on loss of water. The heating of blades may occur but is usually not serious as the rotor speeds are not great 5.1 J.3 Gas turbine - The turbine itself does not suffer anyway when The motoring power drawn by the generator from motoring commences. the electrical system would be a major loss to a system depen$ding upon the design of the turbine ( see Table 1 ). Protection is required to avoid wastage of electrical energ) 5.1 .I .4 Diesel engine -When motoring cominences, any unburnt fuel in the midst of combustion will cause fire and possibly an explosion. ' SJo mechanical protection is available to proSect against this condition. The motoring load of the diesel engine is also high ( SIC`I'Fble 1 ) which results in sizeable loss of energy. Electrical protection fox this condition is necessary. 5.1.2 Motoring load generally imposed by the rotating system varies according to the type of the prime qover. It is approximately related with the rating of the generator as shown in Table 1. 5.1.3 Motoring condition can be detected in a steam turbine generator by pressure and steam flow switches, This method is easily applied to non-reheat turbines but for reheat' -turbines it becomes complicated. Besides, failure of these devices fo mechanical trouble (`s known to be common; hence they do not provi d e a sufficiently reliable protection. The method IS not applicable to other w of prime movers. The electrical method of detection using a power relay is available for application in all cases to which recourse is universally taken. ~5.1.4 As motoring load is.electrically smmetrical even a single elemelit type reverse power relay having a suitable range of setting will provide reliable electrical protection against motoring of steam turbine. Two and

9

TABLE 1 MOTORlNG~POWElt
~Cfaues5.1.1.9,5.1.1.4mtd5.1.2)

(1)

(2)

(3) Provided steam cut & tot8lly complete ia

Steam turbine Water turbine a) Reaction

3

>2 0.2-2

If blades arc KI under tail water If `blades are set above tail water Dependent on design of the Dependent on gu$xr cylinders governor action

b) Kaplan Ga turbine Diesel engine

co.2 10-50 15 -25

three element relays which provide more sensitive range of settings can be applied to antimotoring protection of water turbines. There are no special problems with other type of prime movers, the application to water turbines is occasional, but in the case of application to steam turbine attention is invited to the considerations given in 5.1.5 to 5.1.7. . 5.1.5 At the instant of synchronizing a turbo-generator, a -possibility exists of power inrush into the generator from the electric system with which it is synchronized. A reverse power relay would maloperate in such an event. To ensure a successful synchronizing it is customary to restrain the tripping signal of the reverse power relay by a series connected auxiliary contact of emergency stop valve of the turbine. This contact opens when the valve is open and restrains the trip signal.given by a maloperating relay. This produces another difficulty, that the auxiliary contact would not certainly close always when the emergency stop valve closes, thus jeopardizing antimotoring protection which is This is overcome by energizing an auxiliary time delay most needed. relay through the trip contact of the reverse power relay such that if the. normal tripping signal does not go through, a time delay contact ( 30 to 45 seconds ) of the auxiliary relay would secure tripping of the generator For non-condensing turbines as well as condensing turbines breaker. system this delay should not exceed equipped with vacuum brake Altemativeiy, the reverse power relay tripping contact may be 30 seconds, connected in series only with an auxiliary ( b ' type contact of the synchronizing switch to render maloperation of the relay ineffective. 5.1.6 A phenomenon encountered in steam turbine is that emergency stop valves ado not always close tightly to cut off steam completely. In : '

practice there is a little leakage of steam: On large reheat turbines there may be as many as 10 valves on the high temperature end. Thus a little leakage through as many valves will he significant. If the total leakage is up to 1 percent of the rated steam flow, the generator would not absorb motoring power from the system but on the contrary it would generate a small forward power. This operation is as dangerous as motoring because the small steam. flow'is too inadequate to provide cooling effect on the turbine blades, In this case an underpower relay having a low range of settings and permitting a comfortable setting of 0.5 percent rated power of generator should give adequate protection. The measurement of power shall be fairly accurate to permit such low setting on underpower relays having fixed compensation. The phase angle error of the instrument transformers must be controlled while selecting equipment. The algebraic sum of the phase angle errors of the current-and potential transformers shall be less than 30 -minutes. Alternatively an under-power relay having adjustable compensation shall be selected to permit site adjustment for correct measurement of power through the instrument
tl%lSfOllIlerS.

5.1.7 Motoring of water turbine generators is not as harmful as of steam turbo-generators. Hydraulic turbines operate- `at relatively low speeds and hence they can be designed to withstand larger overspeed. It is customary in attended stations to trip the generator breaker along with the water shut off valve. ReIiance is then placed on the operator taking adequate manual action for shutting the machine. In unattended stations, however, protection against motoring is provided by means of a sensitive power relay connected to trip the generator breaker subsequent to the closing of turbing shut off valve.
NATE -For faulb on -the `electrical &de in the generator, the generator breaker is tripped simultaneously with the input valve of the rime mover. Protection for thia condition ia given in IS : 3842 ( PartVII)-1972+ and PS : 9842 (Part VIII )t.

5.2 Generator

Protection

5.2.1 Synchronous generators whose neutral end connections are not accessible, cannot be protected with conventional differential protection and earth-fault protection. Such a generator can be protected by means of an inverse power relay, that is, a reverse `power relay energized with negative sequence components of voltage and current from the terminals of the generator. A negative sequence filter is employed for feeding negative sequence quantities to the relay. 5.23 The relay will protect a generator a&lnst short circuits: between phases away from -the neutral, inter-turn faults of 20 to 100 percent of

1.1

xS:3842(PartvI)-1972 KKTAGE lR.SNSFORMER,'

teGAlIVE ,sEwslcE

FUJER

POWER _---

RELAY

FIG. 3

PROTECTIONOF AN ALTERNATORWITH INACCESSIBLE NEUTRAL

phase winding and asymmetrical earth faults, double earth faults such as in the generator phase or on transmission line. The relay may not give a sensitive protection for all types of faults. 5.3 Synchronous Motor Protection 5.3.1 If power supply to a synchronous motor fails, the motor is required to be immediately disconnected from the supply, otherwise there is the risk of supply reappearing at the motor terminals out of synchronism with the motor internal voltage. 5.3.2 A single element under power relay .preferabIy with quadrature connection and a setting below the light running load of the motor can be employed to ensure isolation of the motor from the power supply, 5.3.3 Underpower relays should be used when there is no possibility of other electrical load being connected to the busbars-when the supply fails. If there is always some electrical load connected to the busbars, -a reverse power relay is better than an underpower relay as this will be more stable under small power reversals due to the loading conditions. In these applications, it is essential to incorporate a sli ht time delay to overcome momentary power reversals due to system fauYts, etc.

IS:3W~PartVI)-1972 5.3.4 Underpower relays can be applied only if power reversals do not Otherwise, underfrcqurncy occur under normal operating conditions. Glays will have to be used ($6~ IS : 3842 ( Part VII ) 1972* 1.
5.4 Switchiug

of Capacitors for Power Factor Control

5.4.1 Power relay is used for automatic switching of static capacitor The relay banks on a line feeding industrial loads of low power factor. is of single element type, connected in quadrature connection with a compensation. such that the torque on the moving element is zero when the power factor of the relayed circuit is unity. `Any change from *unity power factor will produce relay torque in the load or lag sense accordmg to the circuit power factor.
5.4.2 A power regulating type relay having a neutral position for its moving contact and fixed contact systems on either side is generally The fixed contacts have indcpcndently employed in this application. adjustable physical positions calibrated with respect to a scale and this The current coil is tapped for coarse affords fine adjustment of setting. adjustment of setting. 5.4.3 The three-phase kVA equal to 100 percent calculated from the following expression: !& setting of the relay is
x

rated relay volts x VT ratio x rated relay amps 1 000

CT ratio _._

The actual relay setting to be adopted for switching capacitor bank shall always be smaller than the three-phase kVA rating of the capacitor bank switched in the one step. The difference in the relay setting kVA and the capacitor bank step kVA switched, should not be excessive lest hunting may occur. The setting kVA should be between 80 to 85 percent of the capacitor kVA switched for satisfactory operation. 5.4.4 An illustration of a single step capacitor bank switching control is shown inFig. 4. If the hand or auto switch is on hand position, the capaciThetor bank remains switched on the line as long as the supply is present. relay control comes into action when the hand or auto switch is turned to auto position. When the load draws a lagging power factor current, the lag contact of the power relay closes, switches the capacitor bank on the line and the switching contactor seals in through its auxiliary contact `C'. If the load decreases the power factor improves to unity and the relay drops to its neutral position. With further decrease in the load, the circuit draws leading current when the lead contact of the power relay closes. It shorts the holding coil of the switching contactor. The contactor drops switching off the capacitor bank. ,/_ 5.4.5 The capacitor switching can `be ,done patit by- art by&t&&rep switching control illustt%tdd in Rg;`5, i' TI&p&&~wy 1:~t&#+.v~~~-~ ip `Appliition ._ guide for electri@ relays for 10 sysm :." )s.., i +a+II grequeae,. &s. ..j. 5`

SOURCE k R Y B

LOAD -

UIMACTOR

CAPACITOR BANK' AND WSCHARdE

FIG. 4

THREE-PHASE CAPACITOR SWITCHING SINOLU STEP

CONTROL

high torque reversible synchronous motor which driv& cam oqated .mtrcury contacts in the stepping control. In' the illustration the( switching contactors and stepped capacitor banks are not shown. Only the holding coils of the switching contactors are shown for simplicity. The .MO mercury contacts are individually wired in series with the holding coils of the contactors. A XC mercury contact is wired in series with a resulting relay R for initiating the step control. When the supply is on, the resetting relay R pickssup and prepares the motor circuit and the circuits of the holding coils. *When the load draws lagging current, the lag contact of the relay makes, the motor is energized and turns to throw the circuit of the resetting relay on its holding contact and to close the circuit of the first holding coil of the swi&&n& If the lagging current in th6 load is sufficiently reduced in cbncontactor. formity with the setting of the relay, the relay will drop to neutral position and the motor is de-energized. If not, the moCibrwil1 turn further bringing additional capacitor banks on the line until the relay drops to its neutral position and the lagging current on the load is reduced as determined by the relay setting. Thereafter if the load decreases, the load current leads due to excess capacitors on the line, the lead contact of the relay closes and the motor is energized to drive the cam shaft in reverse! direction. `The mercury ' coqtacts open one after another and the switching contactors are released, 14

IS:3842(PartVI)-1972 until the relay drops again to its neutral position. If the power supply were to fail momentarily any time the capacitors are switched on line, on reappearance of the supply, the capacitors on line would be in excess of the load which may have itself dropped out. Dangerous overvoltage may occur. To safeguard against this, the resetting relay would drop out on fatlure of supply and switch out all the holding coils. When the supply reappears, the resetting relay will not pick up, but the motor will turn .to return the cam shaft to its initial position. The resetting relay will then pick up and establish normalcy. The setting of the power relay for multistep switching should be 80 to 85 percent of the step value of the capacitor kVA switched each time. 5.5 Switching Off of Transmission Linerr for Reducing Excessive LeFding Vars - Under light load conditions, rise in voltage may take place at various points in the system. In this case it may be required to give an alarm or trip out some of the feeders at selected points by using a varmetric relay along with an overvoltage or an underpower relay. On double circuit iines, one of the circuits may be tripped out. Varmetric relays are connected to produce maximum torque when the current leads the voltage by 90". 5.6 Power Interchange in Systems - Power may .be interchanged between two systems belonging to different ownerships in which case restraints aretnecessary on the interchange for commercial or technical reasons. Power relays are often used to realise these restraints soleIy by themselves or in combination with frequency relays f S.HIS : 3842 ( Part VII )-1972* 1. 5.6.1 Major-Minor Interconnection

5.6.1.1 Frequently encountered interconnection is one between a major utility power system and a minor industrial power system. The industrial power system ( IPS ) would normally generate its own power either: a) to meet its most essential load, power for non-essential loads being drawn from utility power system ( UPS ), or b) to meet all its load with normally an interconnection being maintained with the UPS for alternate firming supply, or c) as incidental to production of low pressure steam for industrial process, reliance being mainly placed on power drawn from the UPS. 5.6.1.2 In some cases overpower relays looking towards the utility power system bus may be used instead of reverse power relays if the industrial system is~designed to feed back certain amount of power to the grid in case of emergency. For such applications, it is essential to incorporate a slight time delay to overcome momentary power reversals and to ensure co-ordinations with back-up protection on the system.
*Application guide for electrical rehy8

for aC cyttcrm: 15

Part VII Frequency relays.

IS t 3842 ( Part VI )- 1972 5.6.13 A typical system is illustrated in Fig. 6. If the supply fails at the utility bus br the utility circuit-breaker trips on line fault, the industrial power system would attempt to feed the tapped load. It may not have sufficient generating capacity even to meet all the load on its own bus. The industrial power system can be saved from instability by the use of reverse power relay which is connected to operate on reversal of power flow in the direction of the utility and arranged to trip the utility feeder circuit-breaker at the industry bus together with the circuit breakers of the non-essential load supplied from the industry power bus. The industries' generators would then continue to feed only the essential load within the To prevent maloperations during synchronizing and generating capacity. system faults, a time delay feature should be incorporated.

TAPPED LOAD

-Fxo. 6

INTERCONNECTION OF MAJORAND MINORPOWERSYSTEM

power relay finds application as 5.6.2 `Major-Ma& Intmonnection -The an auxiliary logic aid to underfrequency relay for system splitting or severance of interconnection {see IS : 3842 ( Part VII )-1972 * 1. 5.6.3 Tar$ Control- In interconnected poker networks, power exchange may take place on restricted quota basis, that is, one utility may supply a maximum of agreed power to the other utility. If power drawn by the second utility exceeds the agreed quota, control can be effected by means *Application guidefor electrlc.aI telayrfor ae systcrns : Part VII Fre~ucneyr&ys. 17

IS:3&42(PartVI)--1972 of an overpower relay looking in ihe appropriate direction and connected to an audible alarm. The relays can be. connected at both transmitting and receiving ends of lines to sound alarms. Power interchange is then controlled manually. Tripping can be arranged by auxiliary trme-delay relay which allows adequate time for the receiving party to reduce off-take. The details of application depend on commercial agreement and relationship rather than technical factors. 5.6.4 Controlof Purr- In intercoqnected'power networks, normally each utility should generate its own lagging vars and exchange of vars on tie lines should be limited. Varmetric relays may be used to give an alarm in`case excessive vars flow on the tie lines. This will ensure optimum use of lines for transferring power from one utility to another.

18

