IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2019) 


Waa HAF 


этеч aa хаса dup: fau 5 faa cud зіч wa 
aad Tel Akesa Bey pa sea cb fuferex 
ant 1 stad Чеїйтан tte (uerdbwt) Ф fed fuferei— Тале 
( #87 FRAT) 


Indian Standard 


WELDED LOW CARBON STEEL CYLINDERS 
EXCEEDING 5 LITRES WATER CAPACITY FOR 
LOW PRESSURE LIQUEFIABLE GASES 


PART 1 CYLINDERS FOR LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM 
GASES (LPG) — SPECIFICATION 


( Sixth Revision ) 


ICS 23.20.30 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 2013 Price Group 7 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Sixth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division 
Council. 


This standard was originally issued in 1965 and subsequently revised in 1968, 1974, 1982, 1992 and 2006. In 
this revision all the amendments have been incorporated and the following major changes have been made: 


a) New material as per IS 15914 : 2011 ‘High tensile strength flat rolled steel plate (up to 6 mm) sheet and 
strip for the manufacture of welded gas cylinder' has been included for the manufacture of cylinders, in 
addition to IS 6240 : 2008 ‘Hot rolled steel plate (up to 6 mm) sheet and strip for the manufacture of low 
pressure liquefiable gas cylinder (fourth revision)’. 

b) Welding and circulatory clause modified. 

c) In fatigue testing number of cycles increased to 12 000 from 10 000. 

d) Normalizing of cylinders is compulsory if manufactured from the steel as per IS 15914. 

e) The observation of ‘nominal hoop stress (0.95 of the minimum specified tensile strength)’ of cylinder 
material has been replaced by the observation of ‘measurement of bursting pressure (that is 225 percent 
of the Test Pressure, P). 

f) Cylinder body integrity impact test for cylinder manufactured from the steel as per IS 15914 has been 
added in Annex C. 


Assistance has been taken from ISO 22991 : 2004 “Саз cylinders — Transportable refillable welded steel cylinders 
for liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) — Design and construction’. 


Manufacture, possession and use of any gas, when contained in cylinders of more than 500 ml water capacity in 
compressed or liquefied state, are regulated under the Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 of the Government of India. This 
standard has been prepared in consultation and in agreement with the statutory authorities under those rules. 


Welded low carbon steel cylinders exceeding 5 1 water capacity for low pressure liquefiable gases are covered in 
1S 3196. This standard has four parts. Other parts in the series are: 


Part 2 Cylinders for liquefiable gases other than LPG 
Part 3 Method of tests 
Part 4 Cylinders for toxic and corrosive gases 


Cylinders of water capacity up to 5 1 are covered in 1S 7142 : 1995 *Welded low carbon steel gas cylinders for 
low pressure liquefiable gases not exceeding 5 litre capacity — Specification (first revision)’. 


Welded stainless steel cylinders for liquefied petroleum gases (LPG) from 0.5 1 to 250 1 water capacity are 
covered in IS 15637 : 2006 “Welded stainless steel cylinders for liquefied petroleum gases (LPG) from 0.5 litre 
to 250 litre water capacity — Specification'. 


Period inspection and testing of LPG cylinders is covered under IS 16054 *Periodic inspection and testing welded 
low carbon steel cylinders exceeding 5 litre water capacity for liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) — Code of practice’ 
(under print). 


The requirements for the inspection and re-conditioning of used LPG cylinders is covered under IS 13258 : 1991 
“Welded low carbon steel cylinders exceeding 5 litre water capacity for low pressure liquefiable gas — Code of 
practice’ for inspection and reconditioning of used LPG cylinders. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


Indian Standard 


WELDED LOW CARBON STEEL CYLINDERS 
EXCEEDING 5 LITRES WATER CAPACITY FOR 
LOW PRESSURE LIQUEFIABLE GASES 


PART 1 CYLINDERS FOR LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM 
GASES (LPG) — SPECIFICATION 


( Sixth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1) deals with welded low carbon 
steel cylinders intended for storage and transportation 
of liquefied petroleum gases (see 1S 4576) of nominal 
capacity exceeding 5 l up to and including 2501 water 
capacity. This standard lays down the minimum 
requirements for the materials, design, manufacture, 
construction, tests and marking on these cylinders. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions to this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions in addition to given in IS 7241 shall apply. 


3.1 Normalizing — Heat treatment in which, a cylinder 
is heated to a uniform temperature above the upper 
critical point (АС;) of the steel to regenerate or 
homogenize the metallurgical structure of the steel and 
then cooled in a controlled or still air atmosphere. 


3.2 Stress Relieving — Heat treatment given to a 
cylinder, the object of which is to reduce the residual 
stresses without altering the metallurgical structure of 
the steel, by heating to a uniform temperature below 
the lower critical point (AC,) of the steel and then 
cooing in a controlled or still air atmosphere. 


3.3 Stabilizing — Heat treatment given to a cylinder, 
in order to stabilize the structure of the steel by heating 
to a uniform temperature below the upper critical point 
(AC) of the steel and subsequently cooled to obtain 
the desired mechanical properties. 


3.4 Critical Temperature — The temperature at which 
phase or magnetic changes takes place [see IS 1956 
(Part 1)]. 


3.5 Test Pressure (P4) — The internal pressure 
required for the hydrostatic test and the hydrostatic 
stretch test of the cylinders. 


NOTE — It is used for cylinder wall thickness calculation. 


3.6 Burst Pressure (P,) — Highest pressure reached 
in a cylinder during the burst test. 


3.7 Batch — A batch shall consist of finished cylinders 
not exceeding 3 000 cylinders made consecutively by the 
same manufacturer using the same manufacturing 
technique, to the same design, size and material 
specifications on the same type of automatic welding 
machines and subject to the same heat treatment conditions. 
A batch shall contains material of one cast only. 


3.7.1 Inspection Lots — For acceptance purposes the 
batch shall be divided into inspection lots not exceeding 
1 000 cylinders. For selection of sample cylinders for 
either burst or mechanical tests, each lot is subdivided 
into sub-lots of 250 cylinders (see Fig. 1). The samples 
taken for ‘mechanical or burst test’ shall be alternated 
between the mechanical and burst tests. 


4 MATERIAL 


4.1 The steel used in the manufacture of cylinders shall 
conform to IS 6240 or IS 15914. 


4.1.1 Suitable low carbon steel other than those given 
in 4.1 may be used with the prior permission of the 
statutory authority. In such a case, the minimum 
specified value of yield strength guaranteed by the 
cylinder manufacturer for the finished cylinder shall 
be used for the purpose of calculating the wall thickness 
of the cylinder. Such steel should be certified by the 
steel maker to be other than of rimming quality, suitable 
for pressing or drawing, with acceptable non ageing 
properties and shall be fully killed. 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


1000 


1500 


2000 2500 3000 


Size of Symbol No. of 
Lot/ Oylinders 
Sublot 


PY > 
SE 
RELIER IRR 


One subjected to a brust test and 
one subjected to mechanical test 


One subjected to a brust test or to 
a mechanical test 


Fic. 1 SAMPLE SIZE 


4.1.2 The cylinder manufacturer shall obtain and 
provide certificate of cast (heat) analysis of the steels 
supplied for the manufacturer of the gas cylinders and 
establish means to identify the cylinders with the casts 
of steel from which they are made. 


4.2 The bung/valve pad shall be hot forged from rolled 
steel bars either conforming to Class 1A or Class 2 of 
IS 1875 or 1S 2062. The bung machined from such 
forging shall be free from surface defects such as 
fissures, surface cracks, porosity, laminations, pinholes, 
etc (see 10.3). 


4.3 The materials used for foot ring, stout metal cap 
shroud and/stay plate shall conform to Grade “О” of IS 
1079 or IS 2062 or IS 6240 or any other material as 
approved by the statutory authority. 


5 GENERAL 


A fully dimensioned sectional drawing of the cylinder, 
together with design calculations, guaranteed yield 
strength and scheme of manufacture, shall be submitted 
by the manufacturer to the inspecting authority for final 
approval by statutory authority. 


6 DESIGN 


6.1 The cylinder shall be of welded construction having 
a cold or hot drawn or pressure formed cylindrical 
portion with hemi-spherical, ellipsoidal or tori- 
spherical ends welded to it, or two halves of cold or 
hot drawn and circumferentially welded together, or 
any other construction approved by the statutory 
authority. 


6.2 The calculation of the thickness of pressure parts 
of the gas cylinder is related to the minimum value of 
yield strength guaranteed by the cylinder manufacturer 
for the finished cylinder and the test pressure. 


6.2.1 The agreed finished thickness shall not be lower 
than that calculated from the following formulae: 


a) For cylindrical portion, greater of the 
following two: 


t= Вр, 
200x0.8 J R +P, 

" P,D, 

~ 200x0.8 J R, — P, 


2) 120.136 x JD, 


NOTE — Formula (2) is not applicable for cylinders 
manufactured from the steel as per IS 15914. 


1) 


b) For semi-ellipsoidal part or end (see Fig. 2): 


- P. D, 5 K(0.65+0.1K) 

°  200x0.8J R, +P, 4 

where 

t = calculated minimum wall thickness of 


cylindrical shell in mm excluding any 
additional thickness to resist influences 
other than those of internal pressure and 
of external forces due to normal 
handling (see 8.4 ); 


t, = calculated minimum wall thickness of 
semi-ellipsoidal ends, in mm; 


P,- test pressure in kgf/cm’. The value of 
hydrostatic test pressure for LPG with 
vapour pressure not exceeding 16.87 kg/ 
cm? (gauge) at 15°C shall be taken as 
25 kg/cm?. For LPG with vapour 
pressure exceeding 16.87 kg/cm? 
(gauge) at 15°C the value of hydotestatic 
test pressure shall be taken from IS 8867 
and approved by statutory authority; 


D. = inner diameter in mm; 


JS 
I 


outer diameter in mm; 
J = weld joint factor; 
= 1.0 if each weld is to be fully radio 
graphed; 
= 0.9 for cylinders with circumferential 
seam or seam only (not radio graphed); 


= 0.9 for cylinders with seams other than 
circumferential which are spot radio 
graphed in accordance with 13.2; 


= 0.7 for all other cases; 


К. = yield strength (minimum value 
specified in 4.1 and 4.1.1 ) in kgf/mm? 
. However, the value of ‘R,’shall not be 
more than the minimum value specified 
in the material specification; 


hy = external height of domed ends, in mm; 


h, — internal height of domed ends, in mm; 
and 


K = ratio рул, [(yD,) > 0.192]. 


FiG. 2 SEMI-ELLIPSOIDAL 


6.2.2 For the cylinders made out of steel conforming 
to IS 6240 the minimum wall thickness shall not be 
less than 2 mm for cylinders up to and including 131 
water capacity and not less than 2.4 mm for cylinders 
above 13 1 water capacity. 


6.2.3 For the cylinders made out of steel conforming 
to IS 15914 the minimum wall thickness of the 
cylindrical shell, t, and of the end, г, , shall be not less 
than the value derived from any of the following 
formulae: 


for р < 100 mm: 


fmin = fau = 1-1 mm (1) 


for 100 mm « D. < 150 mm: 


Das = Las = 1-1 + 0.008 (D – 100) mm (2) 
for D.» 150 mm: 
tuin = La, = 02/250) + 0.7 mm (3) 


(with a minimum of 1.5 mm). 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


6.2.4 Not withstanding as stated above, higher 
thickness may be provided as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the manufacturer and subject to approval 
by statutory body. 


6.3 Before the design is finally approved, the statutory 
authority may require one or more prototype cylinders 
to be subjected to various tests as specified in this 
standard or such other tests, as the authority deems fit. 


6.4 Design of Openings 


6.4.1 The location of all openings shall be restricted to 
one dished end of the cylinder. 


6.4.2 Opening in the cylinder shall be reinforced, either 
by a valve boss or pad, of weldable and compatible 
steel, securely attached by welding and so designed 
as to be adequate strength and to result in no harmful 
stress concentrations. This shall be confirmed by 
design calculations or a fatigue test in accordance 
with 17.1. 


6.4.3 If the leak-tightness between the valve and the 
cylinder is assured by a metallic seal, a suitable internal 
valve boss can be fitted to the cylinder by a method 
which need not independently guarantee leak-tightness. 


NOTE — Applicable for cylinders with water capacity up to 
131only. 


6.4.4 Unless otherwise specified, valve threads shall 
conform to IS 8737 or as approved by statutory 
authority. 


6.4.5 Closure of Openings 


Apertures in the finished cylinders shall be fitted with 
the appropriate valve in the closed position or fitting 
to protect the thread from damage and to prevent entry 
of moisture into the cylinder. 


7 WELDING 
7.1 Welding Qualification 


7.1.1 The manufacturer, before proceeding with the 
production of a given design of cylinder, shall establish 
the welding procedures as per IS 7307 (Part 1), welders 
as per IS 7310 (Part 1) and IS 817 for all welding 
associated with the pressure envelope including the 
non-pressure-containing parts. Records of such 
approvals shall be retained by the manufacturer. 


7.1.2 Welding procedure approval tests shall be made 
in such a manner that the welds shall be representative 
of those made in production. 


7.1.3 Welders shall have passed the approval tests for 
the specific type of work and procedure concerned. 


7.2 Prior to welding, components shall be examined 
in accordance with the requirements of 12.2. 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


7.3 Manual arc welding shall not be employed for 
circumferential seam which shall consist of a joggle 
joint so that the external surface of the container is 
smooth. Joggle joint shall have overlap of minimum 
of three times the agreed finished thickness. A 
longitudinal seam shall consist of a butt joint without 
backing material. Manual arc welding shall not be 
employed for external longitudinal seam. For a typical 
joggled butt joint, see Fig. 3. 


7.4 Surfaces of the plates at the seams shall not be out 
of alignment with each other at any point by more 
than10 percent of the plate thickness. 


7.5 Welds, except the ends of longitudinal welds, shall 
not be dressed without the approval of the inspecting 
authority. The weld surface shall have a smooth 
contour. The weld joint shall be free from undercuts 
but slight intermittent occurrences may be disregarded 
provided that such undercut is not in the form of a 
sharp notch (see IS 817). 


7.6 All welding of the shell and attachments shall be 
completed before the final heat treatment. 


7.7 Before welding, the plates to be joined shall-be 
free from scale, grease, oil and dirt. Before the cylinders 
are closed, longitudinal welds, wherever used, shall 
be visually examined from both sides to ensure that 
the welds are satisfactory. 


7.8 Welding consumables used shall be such that the 
desired properties of the weld are obtained and the 
physical values of the welded metal are not lower than 
the specified values of the parent metal. 


7.8.1 As far as possible all welded joints shall be double 
welded butt joints. In case where second side welding 
is not possible, single welded butt joint may be used, 
provided sufficient care is taken to ensure complete 
fusion and penetration. 


7.8.1.1 Butt weld shall have full penetration. The excess 
thickness shall be such that the weld integrity is not 
compromised. 


b z15e 
a  —  bevel optional 
b  — as desired 
с  — depth of offset e, 


Fic. 3 


£25e 
d 


7.8.1.2 Joggled butt welds shall have adequate 
penetration verified by macro etch, bend testing and 
tensile testing. 


7.8.2 The fusion of the welded metal with the parent 
metal shall be smooth and free from overlapping, under 
cutting or abrupt irregularity. There shall be no cracks, 
notching or porous patches in the welded surfaces and 
the surface adjacent to the weld. The welded bead shall 
not be concave. 


8 MANUFACTURE 


8.1 The number of longitudinal seams in the welded 
cylinder shall not exceed one and the number of 
circumferential seams shall not exceed two. 


8.2 When the welded cylinder contains a longitudinal 
seam, the edges of the plate forming the longitudinal 
joint of the shell shall be rolled or formed by pressure, 
not by blows, to the required curvature. 


8.3 The end or dished part shall be of semi-ellipsoidal 
shape. The end shall have a cylindrical skirt or parallel 
portion of minimum length 20 mm or three times the 
shell thickness, whichever is greater. 


8.4 Agreed Finished Thickness 


The agreed finished thickness shall not be less than 
the minimum calculated wall thickness obtained by the 
application of formulae given in 6.2.1 and 6.2.2 or 6.2.3 
at any point and at any transverse section of the 
cylindrical portion. Additional thickness may be 
provided to cover corrosion allowance and stresses due 
to horizontal acceleration and retardation during 
transportation. The amount of the allowance shall be 
as agreed to between the manufacturer and the 
purchaser and approved by statutory authority. 


8.5 Examination of Cylinders Before Closing-in 
Operation 


Cylinders shall be examined for wall thickness, before 
the closing-in operation, circularity of the cylindrical 
shell and the skirt portion of ends, external and internal 


d  — inside of cylinder to avoid sharp break 
e  — thickness of metal which is offset 
e, _ thickness of metal which is not offset 


ILLUSTRATION OF A TYPICAL JOGGLED BUTT JOINT 


surface defects, the profile regularity of the ends, offset 
at the joints, and straightness. The manufacturer shall 
assure himself that the wall thickness is not less than 
the agreed finished thickness at any point. The 
eccentricity of bunghole centre line with respect to 
centre line of half/body of cylinder shall not be more 
than one percent of the nominal diameter of cylinder 
subject to a maximum of 2 mm. 


8.5.1 Circularity 


The out-of-roundness of the cylindrical shell shall be 
limited so that the difference between the maximum and 
the minimum outside diameter in the same cross-section 
is not more than 1 percent of the mean of these diameters, 
for two-piece cylinders, and 1.5 percent for three-piece 
cylinders. The measurement shall not be taken over any 
of the welds but shall be taken adjacent to the welds. 


8.5.2 Surface Defects 


The internal and external surfaces of the cylinder shall 
be free from defects which will adversely affect the 
safe working of the cylinder. 


8.5.3 Profile Regularity 


The contour of dished end shall not deviate from the 
approved dimensions by more than 1.25 percent of the 
nominal diameter in respect of radial dimensions and 
by more than 1 percent in respect of axial dimensions. 
Such deviations shall not be abrupt changes and shall 
be outside the specified shape. 


8.5.4 Straightness 


Unless otherwise shown on the drawing, the maximum 
deviation of the shell from a straight line shall not 
exceed 0.3 percent of the cylindrical length (see Fig. 4). 


8.5.5 Verticality 


Deviation from vertical shall not exceed 10 mm/m 
length (see Fig. 4). 


1 = Мах 0.014 
2 = Мах 0.0034 


Fic. 4 ILLUSTRATION OF DEVIATION OF CYLINDRICAL 
PART OF SHELL FROM A STRAIGHT LINE AND FROM 
VERTICAL 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


9 VALVE CONNECTION, VALVE PAD AND 
VALVE PROTECTION 


9.1 Valve Connection 


The valve connection shall consist of a welded pad/ 
bung and shall be threaded to suit the type of valve 
specified in 1S 8737. 


9.1.1 Prior to fitting the valve, the bung threads shall 
be cleaned using a machine tap of the same thread 
profile as the bung threads. The cleaning shall ensure 
freedom from grit, zinc and other foreign matter, if 
any. Also it shall ensure, breaking of scale formed on 
the thread and re-correction of any distortion, 
experienced during heat treatment. The valve shall be 
fitted using approved jointing compound at the specific 
torque, after ensuring that internal cleaning of the 
cylinder has been done for removal of any water, grit, 
welding slag, flux, metal or any other foreign particles. 


9.1.2 Any other valve connection may be provided as 
agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser 
and approved by the-statutory authority. 


9.2 Valve Pad 


Single or two runs of welding shall be employed for 
bungs which have a backing pad (either on the outside 
or one on the outside and one on the inside). In the 
case of bungs without backing pad, one run of welding 
shall be given on the inside and one on the outside. If 
the positive projection of-bung inside the cylinder is 4 
mm or more, the same may be welded with single or 
two runs of weld as per approved design and drawing. 


9.3 Valve Protection 


9.3.1 Cylinder shall have their valve protected against 
damage by the provision of a stout metal cap or shroud 
or metal cover or protective metal ring or grill as per 
approved design. Where the design of the cylinder 
provides for the valve lying wholly below the level of 
the body of the cylinder such a protection is not 
necessary. The metal cap or metal cover as per 
approved drawing when used, shall be vented and 
screwed onto the neck of the cylinder. 


9.3.2 The protective metal ring or grill shall be welded 
to the upper end of the cylinder concentric with the 
neck. The eccentricity of the welded metal ring or grill 
with respect to the valve pad/bung shall not be more 
than 1 percent of the nominal diameter of cylinder 
subject to a maximum of 3 mm. 


9.3.3 In case the protective ring is made out of tube/ 
pipe, the dimensions of tube/pipe should be as agreed 
to between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 


9.3.4 The protective device shall be of adequate 
construction to prevent such damage to the valve as 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


would cause the escape of the product. When a water 
filled container with quantity being half the nominal 
water capacity is dropped from a height of 1.2 m, so 
that the protective device struck a hard flat surface, 
there shall be no damage to the valve. 

NOTE — The drop test should only be carried out on de- 


pressurized cylinders, as it may cause release of dangerous high 
levels of energy resulting in injury or death to personnel. 


10 FITTINGS OTHER THAN VALVES 


10.1 Handle 


Handle or other suitable arrangement for lifting the 
cylinder shall be provided. It shall be capable of 
withstanding static loading in any direction equal to 
twice the weight of the cylinder when filled with water. 


10.2 Foot Ring 


The foot ring, where fitted as a separate fixture to the 
bottom end of the cylinder, shall be at least 20 mm 
away from the circumferential weld. The thickness of 
the sheet from which the foot ring is made shall not be 
less than the calculated wall thickness of the cylinder 
body. The foot ring may be intermittently welded with 
body of the cylinder. In case, the bottom edge is curled, 
the curling shall be inwards to facilitate safe handling. 
It shall be provided with holes for ventilation, and if 
curled, drainage holes to be provided to avoid 
corrosion. The maximum permissible deviation from 
the vertical shall not exceed 1?. Foot rings shall be 
sufficiently strong and made of steel (see 4.3) or any 
other material as approved by statutory authority. The 
bottom of the foot ring shall not be less than 8 mm 
below the outside bottom of the cylinder shell for 
cylinders up to 34 1 nominal water capacity. For 
cylinders of more than 34 1 nominal water capacity 
and up to 50 1 nominal water capacity, this value shall 
be minimum 15 mm and for cylinders exceeding 50 I 
nominal water capacity, this value shall be minimum 
25 mm. 
NOTE — Attachment such as VP shroud or foot ring, when 
directly welded to pressure retaining parts shall be designed to 
prevent crevice corrosion. They may have intermittent contact, 
such as scalloping or attachment by ears. However they ought 


to be continuously welded at all points of contact with the 
pressure retaining body of the cylinder. 


10.3 Bung 


The requirements of bungs shall be in accordance with 
Annex B and its material shall be as specified in 4.2. 


11 HEAT TREATMENT 


11.1 АП cylinders shall be efficiently and uniformly 
normalized or stress relieved in accordance with the 
recommendations of steel manufacturers and approved 
by the inspecting authority after manufacture and 


completion of all welding (including that of 
attachments) and before hydrostatic test is applied. A 
complete record of the heat treatment cycle shall be 
maintained (see 3.1 and 3.2). 


11.2 Cylinder manufactured from the steel confirming 
to IS 15914 shall be normalized (see 3.1) as per the 
material standard. 


11.3 Localized heat treatment shall not be permitted. 
12 INSPECTION 


12.1 General 


12.1.1 The purchaser and the inspecting authority shall 
have free access, at all reasonable time to that part of 
the manufacturer's works engaged in the execution of 
the order. They shall also be at liberty to inspect the 
construction at any stage and to reject any cylinder, or 
component of a cylinder that does not comply with 
the requirements of this standard. 


12.1.2 The manufacturer shall supply the man power 
and equipment for such inspection and tests as are 
required and for any additional checks which may be 
agreed to between the inspecting authority and the 
manufacturer. 


12.1.3 The visual inspection of cylinders should be 
carried out and the limits of defects shall be as 
per IS 9639. 


12.2 Inspection of Components 


12.2.1 АП pressings, halves and cylindrical shells shall 
be examined for surface defects before any seam is 
welded. If there are defects which in the opinion of 
the inspecting authority would be detrimental to the 
sound construction of the container, the pressing or 
shell shall be rejected. 


12.2.2 At the discretion of the inspecting authority, 2 
percent or more of the pressings halves and the cylindrical 
shells shall be selected at random to be examined for 
minimum thickness before any seam is welded. 


12.2.3 If any pressing, half or shell is less than the 
minimum specified thickness, the whole output from 
the relevant batch of material shall be examined for 
minimum thickness, and any pressing or shell which is 
less than the specified minimum thickness shall be de- 
shaped in such a way that it cannot be used at any stage. 


12.2.4 For the purpose of this clause batch of material 
is defined to mean pressings or cylindrical shells 
manufactured in а continuous production run. 


13 RADIOGRAPHIC EXAMINATION 


13.1 Radiographic examination, when required shall 
conform to the techniques and acceptability criteria 


set forth in the relevant Indian Standards. For general 
guidance, reference may be made to IS 1182, IS 2595, 
IS 3657 and IS 4853 and 8.7 of IS 2825. The 
radiographic technique used shall be sufficiently 
sensitive to reveal a defect having a thickness equal to 
2 percent of the combined thickness of the weld and 
the strip. 


13.2 Spot Radiography (see definition of J 
under 6.2.1). 


13.2.1 One out of every 50 consecutive cylinders from 
continuous production shall be taken at random for 
spot radiography. 


13.2.2 In addition, after a change in the type or size of 
cylinder or the welding procedure (including machine 
settings) or after a break in the production exceeding 
4 h, the first cylinder welded shall be taken for spot 
radiography. 


13.3 For testing details of radiography [see IS 3196 
(Part 3)]. 


14 CHECKING OF WATER CAPACITY 


The water capacity of the cylinders shall be checked. 
This shall be done by weighing method. The tolerance 
for water capacity shall be +5/0 percent for cylinders 
up to and including 131 water capacity and +3/0 percent 
or 0.65 1 whichever is more for cylinder above 13 1 
water capacity. 


15 HYDROSTATIC TEST 


15.1 Each heat treated cylinder shall be subjected to 
hydrostatic test. During the hydrostatic test the pressure 
shall be increased gradually till the required test 
pressure is reached. After the test pressure is reached 
and the external surfaces of the cylinder are dried, it 
shall be retained for a period of not less than 30 s. Any 
reduction in pressure noticed during this retention 
period or any leakage or visible bulge or deformation 
shall be treated as a case of failure in the test. Any 
cylinder which does not pass the test shall be rejected. 


15.1.1 The value of hydrostatic test pressure for LPG 
with vapour pressure not exceeding 16.87 kg/cm? 
(gauge) at 15?C shall be taken as 25 kg/cm?. For LPG 
with vapour pressure exceeding 16.87 kg/cm? (gauge) 
at 15?C the value of hydrostatic test pressure shall be 
taken from IS 8867 and approved by statutory 
authority. 


15.1.2 Hydrostatic test shall be carried out according 
to IS 3196 (Part 3). 


16 PNEUMATIC LEAKAGE TEST 


16.1 Each cylinder, after it has been dried, and fitted 
with valve using a suitable jointing material as agreed 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


to between the purchaser and the manufacturer, shall 
be tested for leakage by subjecting to air pressure of 
not less than 1.180 MPa (12 kgf/cm?) for a period of 
1 min while immersed in water and shall show no 
leakage from the body of the cylinder and valve pad 
joint. This test shall be carried out by using dry air 
after fixing the safety cap on the valve. 


NOTE — Suitable air drying methods may be adopted as long 
as they ensure no condensate is present in the cylinders. 


16.1.1 Alternatively any other method approved by the 
statutory authority may be used. 


16.1.2 Pneumatic leakage test shall be carried out 
according to IS 3196 (Part 3). 


17 FATIGUE TEST 
17.1 Fatigue Testing/Cycle Testing 


17.1.1 For the purpose of this test, three cylinders which 
are guaranteed by the manufacturer to be 
representatives of the minimum end(s) thickness set 
by design and which shall include all markings shall 
be filled with non-corrosive liquid and subjected to 
successive reversals of hydraulic pressure. This test 
shall be considered as type test. 


17.1.2 The test shall be carried out as type test an upper 
cyclic pressure, either: 


a) equal to two-thirds of the test pressure, in 
which case the cylinder shall be subjected to 
80 000 cycles without failure; and 


b) equal to the test pressure, in which case the 
cylinder shall be subjected to 12 000 cycles 
without failure. 


The values of lower cyclical pressure shall not exceed 
10 percent of the upper cyclic pressure. The frequency 
of reversals of pressure shall not exceed 0.25 Hz 
(15 cycles/min). The temperature measured on the 
outside surface of the cylinder shall not exceed 50°С 
during the test. 


17.1.3 After the test the cylinders shall be burst tested 
and meet the requirements of 17.2. 


17.2 Burst Test under Hydraulic Pressure 


One cylinder selected at random from those which have 
passed the hydrostatic test shall then be subjected to а 
hydrostatic pressure gradually till it bursts. The 
pressure at which the cylinder bursts shall be recorded. 


17.2.1 Bursting test shall be carried out according to 
18 3196 (Part 3). The rate of pumping shall not exceed 
five times the water capacity of the cylinder per hour. 


17.2.2 The criteria adopted for the interpretation of 
the burst test are as follows: 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


a) Volume of the water used between the time 
when the pressure starts to rise and at the time 
of bursting, and 

b) Difference between the volume of the 
cylinder at the beginning and the end of the 
test (see 17.2.3). 


17.2.3 Minimum Test Requirement 


The measured bursting pressure P, shall not under any 
circumstances be less than 225 percent of the test 
pressure P,, and shall conform to the following 
requirements: 


a) Cylinder shall burst without fragmentation. 
During burst test in case leakage starts from 
any welding before fracture or before 
achieving bursting pressure, the specimen 
shall be discarded and fresh test specimen 
shall be taken; 

b) The fracture shall not occur in the direction 
parallel to circumferential weld within 10 mm 
from the edge of the circumferential weld; 


c) Main fracture shall not show any brittleness, 
that is the edges of the fracture shall not be 
radial but shall be at an angle to a diametrical 
plane and display a reduction of area 
throughout their thickness; 

d) Fracture shall not reveal a visible defect in 
the metal; and 

e) The ratio of the volumetric expansion of the 
cylinder to its initial volume shall be greater 
than or equal to the following values: 

1) 20 percent, if the length of the cylinder 
is greater than its diameter; and 

2) 17 percent, if the length of the cylinder 
18 equal to or less than its diameter. 


18 ACCEPTANCE TESTS 


18.1 For every batch of heat-treated and finished 
cylinders, sample shall be taken as per 3.7.1. The test 
cylinder shall be selected at random and the various 
acceptance tests shall be carried out on test specimens 
taken from this cylinder. 


18.1.1 Number of test specimen and method of testing 
shall be in accordance with IS 3196 (Part 3). 


18.1.2 The percentage elongation and yield strength, 
wherever applicable and tensile strength thus 
determined shall not be less than the respective 
requirements for the material specified in 4. 


18.1.3 The bend test specimen having cracks or any 
other open defects, which exceed 3 mm, measured in 
any direction on the convex surface of the specimen, 
shall be treated as a failure. 


18.1.4 The weld shall show a good penetration and 
absence of lack of fusion. 


18.1.5 The thickness shall not be less than the 
calculated thickness. 


18.1.6 Where a batch contains material from more than 
one cast, the manufacturer shall arrange for samples 
tested to represent each cast of material used. 


19 ADDITIONAL TEST 


For cylinders manufactured from the steel as 
per IS 15914 additional test such as cylinder body 
integrity impact test and drop test shall be carried out 
as per Annex C. These tests shall be considered as type 
test. 


20 MARKING 


20.1 General Instructions 


a) Each cylinder shall be clearly and 
permanently marked by stamping or similar 
processes on such a part, which is inseparably 
bound with the cylinder which is not or only 
negligibly affected by stresses due to the gas 
pressure within it; 

b) Name plate shall not be affixed to the 
cylinder's shoulder, if there is a risk of 
corrosion or embrittlement; 

c) In conjunction with the original markings, 
space shall be provided for stamping the date 
of the test; 

d) Marking shall be so carried out and the letters 
and numerals used shall be of such shape and 
size that the marking is legible; and 

e) Stamps used for marking shall have small 
radii at changes of section to avoid formation 
of sharp edges in the stamped marking. 


20.2 Each cylinder shall be permanently stamped with 
the following: 


a) Serial number, abbreviated name, monogram 
of the manufacturer and identification of the 
owner; 

b) Number of this Indian Standard; 

c) Maximum working pressure, in MPa; 

d) Test pressure, in MPa and date of hydrostatic 
test as the case may be (such as 3/05 for March 
2005); 

e) Agreed finished thickness, in mm; 

f) Tare weight in kg, gross weight in kg and 
water capacity in litres; 

g) Inspecting agency's official mark; 

h) Letter ‘N’ or ‘SR’ next to IS number, if the 
cylinder is normalized or stress relieved; and 


j) Name of gas. 


NOTE — The tare weight shall include the weight of 
the valve fitted to the cylinders. 


20.2.1 BIS Certification Marking 
Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


20.2.1.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
The details of conditions under which the licence for 
the use of Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


20.3 The marking may be made at any of the following 
places: 


a) Footring; 

b) Any non-pressure part; 

c) Dished end, provided it can be demonstrated 
in the bursting test that fracture does not 
initiate in the markings; and 

d) A plate of material compatible to the body of 
the cylinder may be welded soundly at an 
appropriate place on the cylinder. 


21 COLOUR IDENTIFICATION 


The cylinder shall be painted externally in accordance 
with the signal red colour (Shade No. 537 of IS 5) or 
any other colour approved by statutory authority. 


22 RECORD 


A record shall be kept of all test made at the cylinder 
manufacturer's works and copies shall be made available 
to the inspecting authority and the purchaser of the 
cylinder (if desired). A test certificate duly approved and 
signed by the inspecting authority shall be forwarded to 
the statutory authority and the purchaser. 


23 PREPARATION FOR DESPATCH 


23.1 АП cylinders shall be thoroughly cleaned and 
dried internally before being fitted with valves. 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


23.2 The outside surface shall be grit (see IS 4683) 
blasted with minimum SA 2.5 grade of blast 
(see IS 9954) and shall be given following protective 
coatings: 


a) Spraying zinc to give a coating of minimum 
thickness of 37 microns unless otherwise 
agreed to between the purchaser and the 
manufacturer. The zinc wire used for spraying 
shall be as per IS 12447 and the zinc spraying 
shall be as per IS 6586; 


b) One coat of zinc chromate primer 
conforming to IS 2074 of agreed colour as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the 
manufacturer; 


c) One coat of synthetic enamel paint 
conforming to IS 2932 of signal red colour 
(Shade No. 537 of IS 5) or any other colour 
approved by statutory authority. Both the 
layers of the primer and paint shall have a 
total thickness of minimum 30 microns; 
and 


d) As an alternate to (a), (b) and (c) cylinders 
shall be powder coated (as per IS 13871) or 
stoving primer coated (as per IS 2074) and 
enamel coated (as per IS 2932) as per the 
agreement between the manufacturer and the 
buyer. The total minimum combined thickness 
shall be 67 microns. 


NOTE — Procedure for measurement of coating of 
thickness: 

1 Five gauge readings for each spot shall be taken 
moving the probe a short distance for each new gauge 
reading within an approximate area of 2 cm x 2 cm. 
Discard any unusually high or low gauge reading that 
can not be repeated consistently. Take the average of 
the five gauge readings as a spot measurement. 

2 Make five such spot measurements approximately 
evenly spaced over the surface of the cylinder. 


3 Each spot measurement shall not be below 80 percent 
of the specified minimum thickness and average of the 
five spot measurements shall not be below the specified 
thickness. 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


IS No. 
5:2007 


817 : 1966 


1079 : 


1182: 


1875: 


1956 (Рагї 1): 


1976 


2062: 


2074: 


2595 : 


2825 : 
2932: 


3196 (Part 3) : 


2012 


3657 : 


4576 : 


4683 : 


4853 : 


6240 : 


6586 : 


7142: 


1994 


1983 


1992 


2011 


1992 


2008 


1969 
2003 


1978 


1999 


1968 


1982 


2008 


1989 


1995 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
Title IS No. Title 


Colours for ready mixed paints and 
enamels (sixth revision) 

Code of practice for training and 
testing of metal arc welders (revised) 
Hot rolled carbon steel sheets and 


strips — Specification (sixth 
revision) 
Recommended practice for 


radiographic examination of fusion 
welded butt joints in steel plates 
(second revision) 

Carbon steel billets, blooms, slabs 
and bars for forgings (fifth revision) 
Glossary of terms relating to iron and 
steel: Part 1 General metallurgy, heat 
treatment and testing (first revision) 
Steel for general structural purposes 
(seventh revision) 

Ready mixed paint, air drying, red 
oxide zinc chrome, priming (second 
revision) 

Code of practice for radiographic 
testing (second revision) 

Code for unfired pressure vessels 
Enamel, synthetic, exterior (a) 
undercoating, (b) finishing — 
Specification (third revision) 
Welded low carbon steel cylinders 
exceeding 5 litre water capacity 
for low pressure liquefiable gases: 
Part 3 Methods of test (fifth revision) 
Radiographic image quality 
indicators (first revision) 
Liquefied petroleum gases — 
Specification (second revision) 
Chilled iron shot and grit for use in 
foundries 

Recommended practice for 
radiographic inspection of fusion 
welded butt joints in steel pipes (first 
revision) 

Hot rolled steel plate (up to 6 mm) 
sheet and strip for the manufacture 
of low pressure liquefiable gas 
cylinder (fourth revision) 
Recommended practice for metal 
spraying for protection of iron steel 
(first revision) 

Welded low carbon steel gas 
cylinders for low pressure liquefiable 


10 


7202 : 


7241 : 


7307 (Part 1): 


1974 


1981 


1974 


7310 (Part 1): 


1974 


8737: 


8867 : 


9122: 


9639 : 


9954 : 


12447 


13258 : 


13871: 
15637 : 


15894 : 


15914 : 


1995 


1978 


2008 


1980 


1981 


: 1988 
1991 


1993 
2006 


2011 


2011 


gases not exceeding 5 litre capacity — 
Specification (first revision) 
Inspection gauges for checking 
threads of gas cylinders valves for use 
with breathing apparatus 

Glossary of terms used in gas 
cylinder technology (first revision) 
Approval tests for welding 
procedures: Part 1 Fusion welding of 
steel 

Approval tests for welders working 
to approved welding procedures: 
Part 1 Fusion welding of steel 
Valve fittings for use with liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders of 
more than 5 litre water capacity (first 
revision) 

Saturated vapour pressure and test 
pressure for low pressure liquefiable 
gases contained in gas cylinders 
Inspection gauges for checking type 
2 taper threads of gas cylinder valves, 
taper 3 in 25 — Specification (first 
revision) 

Code of practice for visual inspection 
of newly manufactured low pressure 
welded steel gas cylinders during 
manufacturer 

Pictorial surface preparation 
standards for painting of steel 
surfaces 

Zinc wire for sprayed zinc coatings 
Welded low carbon steel cylinders 
exceeding 5 litre water capacity for 
low pressure liquefiable gas — Code 
of practice for inspection and 
reconditioning of used LPG cylinders 
Powder coatings — Specification 
Welded stainless steel cylinders for 
liquefied petroleum gases (LPG) 
from 0.5 litre to 250 litre water 
capacity — Specification 
Inspection gauges for checking type 
1 (sizes 1, 2 and 3) taper threads of 
gas cylinder valves and cylinder 
necks — Taper | in 16 on diameter 
High tensile strength flat rolled steel 
plate (up to 6 mm) sheet and strip for 
the manufacture of welded gas 
cylinder 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


IS No. Title IS No. Title 
16054 Periodic inspection and testing welded petroleum gas (LPG) — Code of 
(under print) ^ low carbon steel cylinders exceeding practice 
5 litre water capacity for liquefied 
ANNEX B 
(Clause 10.3) 
REQUIREMENTS OF BUNGS 
B-1 FINISH B-2 After welding and before fitting the valve, the bung 


The bung, shall be clean, even, without chatter and 
free from any visual defects and shall have the required 
machining finish. The threads shall be of smooth 
finished and shall not be broken at any point. The 
cylinder manufacturer shall check on each finished 
machined bung the dimensions that match with the 
corresponding dimensions on the cylinder, such as neck 
diameter that fits into bung hole, chamfer angle at the 
skirt, etc. Bung threads shall be inspected for 
conformity with the required sizes using all the gauges 
as laid down in anyone of the following standards 
depending upon the nominal size and specification of 
the thread: 


a) IS 7202 
b) IS 9122 
c) IS 15894 


thread shall be cleaned with appropriate tap and 
checked for conformity to threads using only taper 
thread plug gauges as laid down in anyone of the 
following standards depending upon the nominal size 
and specification of the thread: 


a) IS 7202 
b) IS 9122 
c) IS 15894 


B-3 However, the inspecting authority for the purpose 
of carrying out the inspection shall test 3 percent of 
the lot of machined bungs. In the event of any failure 
a second sample size of double the above shall be 
drawn and inspected. In case of failure of anyone out 
of the second draw, the whole lot shall be rejected. 


B-4 One bung out of the sample size shall be sectioned 
and checked for conformity to thread form and finish. 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword and Clause 19) 


IMPACT AND DROP TESTS 


C-1 CYLINDER BODY INTEGRITY IMPACT 
TESTS 


C-1.1 General 


The ability of the cylinder design (thickness, materials 
and mechanical properties) to withstand loadings other 
than internal pressure shall be demonstrated by a series 
of impact tests. 


Each type of test shall be carried out on cylinder 
without internal pressure and cylinders pressurized to 
PJ1.2. 


The specified impact energy and striking velocity shall 
be achieved by striking the test cylinder with a moving 


11 


striker or by dropping the cylinder from an appropriate 
height. In all cases, the location of the impact shall be 
as specified in the test procedure and the direction of 
impact shall intersect with the axis of the cylinder. 


The strikers (flat surface and edge) shall be of metallic 
material having a hardness higher than that of the 
cylinder and sufficiently robust to prevent the impact 
energy being absorbed by deflection of the striker. 


C-1.2 Flat Surface Impact Test 
C-1.2.1 Procedure 


The striker shall be a flat surface with a length equal 
to the overall cylinder length and width equal to the 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


cylinder diameter. 


The impact energy, F, shall be determined by: 


F=30M 
where 
F — energy, in Joules, and 
M — maximum operating mass of the 


cylinder, in kg. 
The striking velocity shall be between 7 m/s and 8 m/s. 


Two un-pressurized cylinders shall each be impacted 
with the surface parallel to the cylinder. The cylinders 
shall then be impacted on the shoulder of the end, with 
the surface at 45 to the cylinder axis (see Fig. 5). 


On completion of both impacts, the cylinders shall be 
visually examined for signs of damage and assessed 
against the rejection criteria established in accordance 
with IS 16054. 


If both cylinders show damage equal to or worse than 
these rejection criteria, then on completion of both 
impacts, both cylinders shall be subject to a burst test 
in accordance with 17.2. 


If the cylinder withstand any of the impacts with visible 
damage below the rejection criteria, or if the rejection 
criteria have not been established, then on completion 
of both impacts, one cylinder shall be subject to the 
burst test in accordance with 17.2 and the other subject 
to a fatigue test in accordance with 17.1. 


C-1.2.2 Requirement 
After impacts, the pressurized cylinders shall not leak. 


Cylinders subject to the burst test shall meet the 
requirements of 17.2. 


CYLINDER 


„< ы? 


FLAT SURFACE 


Cylinders subject to the fatigue test shall meet the 
requirements of 17.1. 


C-1.3 Edge Impact Test 
C-1.3.1 Procedure 


The profile of the striker shall be as shown in Fig. 6 
and the length shall be as shown in Fig. 7. 


The impact energy, F, shall be determined by: 


F = 12M 
where 
F — energy, in Joules, and 
M — maximum operating mass of the 


cylinder, in kg. 
The striking velocity shall be between 4 m/s and 5 m/s. 


Two un-pressurized cylinders shall each be impacted 
with the edge parallel to the cylinder axis (see Fig. 7). 
The cylinders shall then be impacted with the edge 
perpendicular to the cylinder axis (see Fig. 8). The 
position of the two impacts shall be separated by a 
minimum of 45? round the cylinder circumference. 


On completion of both impacts, the cylinders shall be 
visually examined for signs of damage and assessed 
against the rejection criteria established in accordance 
with IS 16054. 


If both cylinders show damage equal to or worse than 
these rejection criteria, then on completion of both 
impacts, both cylinders shall be subject to a burst test 
in accordance with 17.2. 


If the cylinders withstand any of the impacts with 
visible damage below rejection criteria, or if the 
rejection criteria have not been established, then on 


CYLINDER 


POINT OF 
IMPACT 


Fic. 5 Impact TEST WITH A FLAT SURFACE 


completion of both impacts, one cylinder shall be 
subject to a burst test in accordance with 17.2 and the 
other subject to a fatigue test in accordance with 17.1. 


The test shall be repeated with two further cylinders, 
which have been pressurized to P/1.2. 


C-1.3.2 Requirement 
After impacts, the pressurized cylinders shall not leak. 


Cylinders subject to burst test shall meet the 
requirements of 17.2. 


Cylinders subject to the fatigue test shall meet the 
requirements of 17.1. 


C-2 DROP TESTS 


C-2.1 Procedure 


Two finished cylinders, including any foot-ring and/ 


R3 
— 50 
16 28 | 16 | 
25 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 6 STRIKER PROFILE 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


or value protection, shall be weighted to represent the 
maximum operating mass and pressurized to P,/1.2. 


The cylinders shall each be dropped twice into a flat 
surface from 1.2 m, in each of the five different 
orientations illustrated in Fig. 9 that is, 10 drops per 
cylinder. 


TEST CYLINDER 


_ DROP TEST EDGE 
| 


Fic. 7 Impact TEST WITH CYLINDER AXIS PARALLEL TO 
EDGE, L 


IMPACT POINT TO BE 
SEPARATED BY AT LEAST 45° 


CYLINDER 


IDENTATION FROM FIRST DROP 
WELD IN THREE 


PIECE CYLINDER i DROP TEST EDGE 


L - 


Fic. 8 Impact TEST WITH AXIS PERPENDICULAR TO 
EDGE, L 


45° 


E 
у, 
‘il. 


f 


1.2 metre 


Fic. 9 ORIENTATION FOR 1.2 METRE DROP ONTO FLAT SURFACE 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


The surface shall consist of a steel plate, 10 mm thick, 
sufficiently flat so that the difference between any two 
points on the surface is no more than 2 mm. It shall be 
replaced if the surface no longer meet this requirement. 
The plate shall rest on a flat, smooth concrete bed, at 
least 100 mm thick. The plate shall be in full contract 
with the concrete so that it is fully supported. 


After each drop, the cylinders shall be visually 
examined for signs of damage and assessed against 
the rejection criteria established in accordance with 
IS 16054. 


If both cylinders show damage equal to or worse than 
these rejection criteria, then on completion of all ten 
drops, both cylinders shall be subject to a burst test in 


14 


accordance with 17.2. 


If the cylinders withstand any of the drops with visible 
damage below the rejection criteria, or if the rejection 
criteria have not been established, then on completion 
of all ten drops, one cylinder shall be subject to a burst 
test in accordance with 17.2 and the other subject to a 
fatigue test in accordance with 17.1. 


C-2.2 Requirement 
After ten drops, the cylinders shall not leak. 


Cylinders subject to the burst test shall meet the 
requirement of 17.2. 


Cylinders subject to the fatigue test shall meet the 
requirements of 17.1. 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


АП India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited, Allahabad 


BOC India Limited, Kolkata 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Limited, Kolkata 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Limited, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Limited, Mumbai/Surat 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Praxair India Ltd, Bangalore 


Research and Development Establishment (Engineers), Pune 


Sakha Engineers Private Limited, New Delhi 
SICGIL India Limited, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India Limited, Salem 


Steel Authority of India Limited, Ranchi 


Supreme Cylinders Limited, Delhi 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


15 


Representative(s) 


Suri T. R. Tuomas (Chairman) 
Suri D. К. Gurra (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


SHRI VisuNU. D. SONAWANE 
SHRI A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Suri Р. G. CHoupuury (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU 
Suri К. Р. PRADEEP Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri Р. M. SAMVATSAR 
SHRI A. К. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI М. SELVAKUMAR 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN К. PANDEY 
Suri Urwar BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA К. GARG 
Suni NikuiLgsh К. Gago (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
SHRI KuNAL KABRA (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. Dey 
Suri S. B. Borma (Alternate) 


Suri Р. KRISHNAN Коттү 
SHRIMATI KAROBI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAGHUNATH KULAI 
Suni ARUN Nayak (Alternate) 


SHRI Nitin J. THAKKAR 
SHRI А. S. ЅАКАМ (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
Suri К. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI MILAN SARKAR 
Suri ARINDAM Das (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJIT S. Кони 


SHRI FAROOQUE DADABHOY 
Suri R. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Suri К. K. GANDHI 
Suni PANKAJ Kumar КАЕМ (Alternate) 


$нк1 М. PRABAKARAN 
Suri №. К. VuAYAVARGIA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dn B. K. Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
Suri AMuL VERMA (Alternate) 


IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2013 


Organization 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 

The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 

Trans Valves (India) Private Limited, Hyderabad 

Vanaz Engineers Limited, Pune 

In personal capacity (Menon & Patel, 14/1, Mile, Mathura Road, 


Faridabad) 


In personal capacity (303, Shantikunj, Pandav Bunglows Lane, 
Athwalines, Surat) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI Y. К. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


Dr S. S. THIPSE 
Suri S. D. RARIKAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. К. JAIN 
Suri Амо JAIN (Alternate) 


Suri K. P. VELAYUDHAN 
Suri S. J. Vispute (Alternate) 


Suri EBRAHIM M. PATEL 


Suri L. D. THAKKAR 


Suri T. V. Swan, Scientist ‘F and Head (MED) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI VISHAL TOMER 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Composition of Low Pressure Gas Cylinders Sub-committee, MED 16 : 2 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Bhiwadi Cylinders Private Limited, New Delhi 


Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Ideal Engineers Private Limited, Hyderabad 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


J. R. Fabricators Limited, Halol 


Jindal Stainless Limited, Hissar 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


Sahuwala Cylinders (P) Limited, Visakhapatnam 


Shri Shakti Cylinders Private Limited, Hyderabad 


Shiv Energy India Limited, Hyderabad 
Steel Authority of India Limited, Salem 


Supreme Cylinders Limited, Delhi 


Tata Iron and Steel Company Limited, Jamshedpur 


In personal capacity (Menon & Patel, 14/3, Mathura Road, Faridabad) 


16 


SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Convener) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


SHRI VisHNu D. SONAWANE 
SHRI A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
Suri RAJNEESH CHOPRA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
Suri V. RAMASWAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
SHRI DEEPAK Kasra (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 
Ѕнк S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AsuwiN Н. МЕНТА 
Suri S. SESH Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri L. С. JAIN 
Suri PRAVAIN GOEL (Alternate) 


Suri U. V. MUNNAR 
SHRIMATI KAROBI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
Suri К. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


Suri Т. К. THOMAS 
Suri D. К. борта (Alternate) 


Suri Р. К. GUPTA 
Suri P. Srinivas (Alternate) 


Suri D. V. RAJA SEKHAR 
Suri Younus GEELANI (Alternate) 


Suri К. К. Ras 


SHRI М. PRABAKARAN 
Suri N. К. VuAYAVARGIA (Alternate) 


Suri М. L. FATHEPURIA 


Dr SUDIPTO SARKAR 
Suri А. N. Buaaar (Alternate) 


Suri Е. M. PATEL 


(Continued from second cover) 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 1S 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (1207). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


