1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

Indjan Standard MECHANICAL VIBRATION -- MEASUREMENT AND EVALUATION OF HUMAN EXPOSURE TO HANDTRANSMITTED VIBRATION
PART 1 ( GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Fkst Revkjon )

ICS 13.160

@ BIS 2007

BUREAU
MANAK November 2007

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group9

Mechanical

Vibration

and Shock Sectional Committee,

MED 28

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) which is identical with ISO 5349-1 :2001 `Mechanical vibration -- Measurement and evaluation of human exposure to hand-transmitted vibration -- Part 1: General requirements' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee and approval of the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This standard was first published as 1S/1S0 5349:1986. Due to technical this standard also revised in two parts. Other part is as under: Part 2 Practical guidance for measurement at the workplace changes in ISO Standard,

The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should

b)

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker in the International Standards, Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker.

while in

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian The corresponding Indian Standards, which are to be substituted in their Standards also exist. respective places, are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International ISO 2041 :1990 Vocabulary Standard and shock -- Corresponding Indian Standard on vibration Degree of Equivalence Identical do

Vibration

IS 11717:2000 Vocabulary and shock (first revision)

ISO 5349-2 : 2001 Mechanical vibration -- Measurement and evaluation of human exposure to hand-transmitted vibration -- Part 2: Practical guidance for measurement at the workplace ISO 8041 : 2005 Human response vibration -- Measuring instrumentation to

1S/1S0 5349-2 : 2001 Mechanical vibration -- Measurement and evaluation of human exposure to hand-transmitted vibration: Part 2 Practical guidance for measurement at the workplace 1S/1S0 8041 :2005 Human response vibration -- Measuring instrumentation to

do

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standard referred in this adopted standard and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. International Standard Electro~acoustics Title -- Octave-band and fractional-octave-band filters

IEC 61260:1995

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the in this standard.

this standard is complied with, the or analysis, shall be rounded off in values (reviseU)'. The number of same as that of the specified value

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

Indian Standard MECHANICAL VIBRATION -- MEASUREMENT AND EVALUATION OF HUMAN EXPOSURE TO HANDTRANSMITTED VIBRATION
PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS (First

Revision )

1

Scope
reporting hand-transmitted vibration band-limiting filters to allow uniform adverse effects of hand-transmitted 1000 Hz. vibration. Provisionally, this part of

This part of ISO 5349 specifies general requirements for measuring and exposure in three orthogonal axes. It defines a frequency weighting and comparison of measurements. The values obtained can be used to predict vibration over the frequency range covered by the octave bands from 8 Hz to

This part of ISO 5349 is applicable to periodic and to random or non-periodic ISO 5349 is also applicable to repeated shock type excitation (impact).

NOTE 1 The time dependency for human response to repeated shocks is not fully known. Application of this part of ISO 5349 for such vibration is to be made with cautbn. This part of ISO 5349 provides guidance for the evaluation of hand-transmitted vibration exposure, specified in terms of a frequency-weighted vibration acceleration and daily exposure time. It does not define limits of safe vibration exposure. NOTE 2 Annex C is concerned with the approximate relative importance of various characteristics of the vibration exposure which are believed to produce health effects.

2

Normative references
reference in this text, constitute provisions of to, or revisions of, any of these publications ISO 5349 are encouraged to investigate the documents indicated below. For undated applies. Members of ISO and IEC maintain

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through this parl of ISO 5349. For dated references, subsequent amendments do not apply. However, parties to agreements based on this part of possibility of applying the most recent editions of the normative references, the latest edition of the normative document referred to registers of currently valid International Standards. ISO 2041, Vibration and shock -- Vocabulary.

and evaluation of human ISO 5349-2, Mechanical vibration -- Measurement vibration -- Part 2: Practical guidance for measurement at the workplace. ISO 8041, Human response to vibration -- Measuring instrumentation. IEC 61260, E/ectroacoustics -- Octave-band and fractional-octave-band filters.

exposure

to hand-transmitted

1

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

3
3.1

Terms, definitions and symbols
Terms and definitions
the terms and definitions given in ISO 2041 apply.

For the purposes of this partof1S05349, NOTE annex B. 3.2

For the convenience of users of this part of ISO 5349, a glossaty of terms relating to medical conditions is given in

Symbols

In this part of ISO 5349, the following symbols are used. (Zhw(t) instantaneous single-axis acceleration value of the frequency-weighted at time t, in metres per second squared (m/sz); root-mean-square (r.m.s.) single-axis acceleration value transmitted vibration, in metres per second squared (m/s2); of the hand-transmitted vibration

ahw

frequency-weighted

hand-

ahwx~ahwy ahwz Uhv

values of UhW,in metres per second squared (m/s2), for the axes denoted x, y and z respectively vibration total value of frequency-weighted r.m.s. acceleration (sometimes known as the vector sum or the frequency-weighted acceleration sum); it is the root-sum-of-squares of the Uhw values for the three measured axes of vibration, in metres per second squared (m/s2); daily vibration exposure squared (rn/s2); a convenient (8-h energy-equivalent vibration total value), in metres per second

ahv(eq,8h)

A(8) DY T To Wh

alternative term fOr the daily vibration eXPOSUreUt'w(eq,8h);

group mean total (lifetime) exposure duration, in years; total daily duration of exposure to the vibration C2hv; reference duration of 8 h (28 800 s); frequency-weighting characteristic for hand-transmitted vibration.

4
4.1

Characterization of hand-transmitted vibration General considerations

The method specified in this part of ISO 5349 takes account of the following factors which are known to influence the effects of human exposure to hand-transmitted vibration in working conditions: a) b) c) d) the frequency the magnitude spectrum of vibration; of vibration;

the duration of exposure per working da~ the cumulative exposure to date. of vibration exposure, but for which standardized methods for

Other factors which may influence the effects reporting do not yet exist, are listed in annex D.

2

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

4.2
4.2.1

Measuring equipment for hand-transmitted vibration
GeneraI conforming to the and after use. The

Measurement of hand-transmitted vibration shall be undertaken using instrumentation requirements of ISO 8041. This equipment shall be checked for correct operation before calibration shall be traceable to a recognized standard maintained by an accredited laboratory. 4.2.2 Vibration transducers

The vibration transducer may be an accelerometer which may be designed to make general measurements (for non-percussive tools) or may be specifically designed for large ,peak accelerations those produced by percussive tools.

vibration such as

The vibration transducers shall be able to withstand the range of vibration magnitudes and shall have stable characteristics. The dimensions of the transducers shall be such that they do not interfere with the operation of the machine and such that the location of the point of measurement can be identified. ISO 5349-2 contains further guidance on the selection of transducers. 4.2.3 Location and orientation of transducers and reported for three directions of an orthogonal

The vibration transmitted to the hand shall be measured coordinate system such as defined in Figure 1.

For practical vibration measurements, the orientation of the coordinate system may be defined with reference to an appropriate basicentric coordinate system (see Figure 1) originating, for example, in a vibrating appliance, workpiece, handle or control device gripped by the hand (see ISO 8727 for further information). The vibration in the three directions should preferably be measured simultaneously. Measurements made sequentially along each of the three axes are acceptable, provided the operating conditions are similar for all three measurements. The measurements shall be made on the vibrating surface as close as possible to the centre of the gripping zone of the machine, tool or workpiece. The location of the transducers shall be reported. NOTE
The vibration magnitude can vary considerably with position on the vibrating surface.

Further guidance on transducer 4.2.4

positioning

is given in ISO 5349-2.

Mounting of transducers

The transducers should be mounted rigidly. Further information on accelerometer mounting is given in ISO 5348 and ISO 5349-2. Practical guidance on mounting transducers in difficult situations (such as on resilient surfaces or where the vibration is impulsive), and on the use of hand-held adaptors, is also given in ISO 5349-2.

3

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

X'h

t'

`1

Yh

a) "Handgrip"position(In this position, the hand adopts a standardized grip on a cylindrical bar)

c?h ---

Key Biodynamicscoordinate system ..-.---.----.-Basicentric coordinate system b)

"Flat palm"position(In this position, the hand presses down onto a sphere)

The origin of the biodynamicscoordinate system is the head of the third metacarpal (distal extremity). The Zh-axis NOTE (i.e. hand axis) is defined as the longitudinal axis of the third metacarpal bone and is oriented positively towards the distal end of the finger. The Xh-axis passes through the origin, is perpendicular to the .?h-axis, -and is positive in the forwards direction when the hand is in the normal anatomical position (palm facing forwards). The yh-axis is perpendicular to the other two axes and is positive in the direction towards the fifth finger (thumb). In practice, the basicentric coordinate system is used: the system is generally rotated in they-z plane so that the Yh-axisis parallel to the handle axis.

Figure1 -- Coordinatesystemsfor the hand

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

4.3

Coupling of the hand to the vibration source
characterization of the vibration exposure currently uses the acceleration of the surface in contact with the the primary quantity, it is reasonable to assume that the biological effects depend to a large extent on the of the hand to the vibration source. It should also be noted that the coupling can affect considerably the magnitudes measured.

Although hand as coupling vibration

The vibration measurements shall be made with forces which are representative of the coupling of the hand to the vibrating power tool, handle or workpiece in typical operation of the tool or process. urces between the hand and gripping zone should be measured description of the operator's posture be reported for individual annexes D and F). 4.4 Quantity to be measured (r.m.s.) and reported.l J It is also recommended that a conditions and/or operating procedures (see

The primary quantity used to describe the magnitude of the vibration shall be the root-mean-square frequency-weighted acceleration expressed in metres per second squared (m/s2).

The measurement of frequency-weighted acceleration requires the application of a frequency weighting and bandIimiting filters. The frequency weighting wh reflects the assumed importance of different frequencies in causing injury to the hand. The characteristics of the wh frequency weighting and methods for band-limiting are given in annex A. The r.m.s. value shall be measured using a linear integration method. The integration that a representative sample of the vibration signal is used (see ISO 5349-2). For additional purposes (research, prevention, technical reduction frequency spectra be obtained (see annex F for further information). 4.5 Multi-axis vibration hand contains contributions from all three the three directions is equally detrimental. The frequency-weighted r.m.s. acceleration separately (See annex F). of vibration) time shall be chosen such

it is strongly

recommended

that

It is known that on most power tools the vibration entering the measurement directions. It is assumed that vibration in each of Measurements should therefore be made for all three directions. valUes for the x-, y- and z-axes, Uh~X,ahWYand ahwr, shall be reported

The evaluation of vibration exposure (see clause 5), however, is based on a quantity that combines all three axes. This is the vibration total value, Uhv, and is defined as the root-sum-of-squares of the three component values:

ahv

=

d

afWX

+

2 2 ahwv + ahwz

(1)

In some cases it may not be possible to make vibration measurements in three axes. If measurements are made only in one or two axes, the axis of greatest vibration shall be included (where this can be identified). The vibration total value shall be estimated using the measured values available and a carefully considered multiplying factor. The vibration magnitude in the axis of greatest vibration requires a multiplying factor in the range 1,0 to 1,7 to give the vibration total value (for further advice, see ISO 5349-2). Where a multiplying factor is used to estimate the vibration total value, the multiplying factor and a justification for the choice of value shall be reported, together with the component value(s) measured.

1)

An International Standard on the measurement of gripping and pushing forces is in course of preparation.

5

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

5
5.1

Characterization of hand-transmitted vibration exposure General

Vibration exposure is dependenf on the magnitude of the vibration and on the duration of the exposure. In order to apply the guidance on health effects given in annex C, the vibration magnitude is represented by the vibration total value ah".

5.2

Daily exposure duration

Daily exposure duration is the total time for which the hand(s) is(are) exposed to vibration during the working day. The vibrafion exposure time may be shorter than the time for which the person is working with fhe power fools or workplaces. It is important to base estimates of total daily exposure duration on appropriate representative samples for the various operating conditions and durations and their intermiftency (see ISO 5349-2 for further guidance).

5.3

Daily vibration exposure
exposure is derived from the magnitude of the vibration (vibration total value) and the daily exposure

Daily vibration duration.

In order to facilitate comparisons between daily exposures of different durations, the daily vibration exposure shall be expressed in ferms of the 8-h energy-equivalent frequency-weighted vibration total valu@, am(eq,eb), as shown in equation (2). For COWXri@t_IC@,~hv(eq,ah) k denoted A(8):

(2)

where T To is the total daily duration of exposure fo the vibration ahv; is the reference durationof8h(28800 s). with different vibration

If the work is such that the total daily vibration exposure consists of several operations magnitudes, then the daily vibrafion exposure, A(8), shall be obtained using equation (3):

(3)

wbere ahv; is fhe vibration total value for the i th operation; n T, is fhe number of individual vibration exposures; is the duration of the i th operation. contributions to A(8) shall be repotted separately.

The individual

If the vibration total values for exposure times of 1 h, 3 h and 0,5 h (within the same working day) are 2 mLs2, EXAMPLE 3,5 mlsz and 10 mls2 respectively, then:

A(8) = ,

& [

(2 m/s2)2 x 1 h + (3,5 m/s2)2

x

3 h +(10 m/s2)2

x

0,5 h = 3,4 m/s2

1

6

1s/[s0 5349-1:2001

NOTE The result of the calculation in the above example is quoted to two significant figures. This does not imply an equivalent accuracy of measurement but arises from the computation. In normal measuring situations it would require great care to obtain an accuracy better than 10 O/.in the value of A(8).

It is recommended that, where criteria specified as A(8) values.

for acceptable

vibration

exposures

are to be defined,

these should

be

6

Information to be reported
to hand-transmitted shall be reported: vibration is carried out in accordance with this part of

When an evaluation of exposure LSO 5349, the following information -- -- -- --- -- -- -- --

the subject of the exposure evaluation; the operations causing exposures to vibration; involved;

the power tools, inserted tools and/or workplaces the location and orientation of the transducers; the individual root-mean-square, single-axis

frequency-weighted

accelerations

measured;

the vibration total value for each operation; the total daily duration for each operation; the daily vibration exposure. factor used to estimate the vibration

Where measurements have not been made in all three axes, the multiplying total value, and the justification for its selection, shall also be reported.
NOTE and F).

In ISO 5349-2, a more exhaustive list of recommended information to be reported is given (see also annexes D

7

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

Annex A
(normative)

Frequency-weighting

and band-limiting

filters

A.1 Frequency-weighting and band-limiting filter characteristics
The measurement of ah~ requires the application of frequency-weighting and band-limiting filters. The frequency weighting wh reflects the assumed importance of different frequencies in causing injury to the hand. The range of application of the measured values to the prediction of vibration injury (see annex C) is restricted to the working frequency range covered by the octave bands from 8 Hz to 1000 Hz (i.e. a nominal frequency range from 5,6 Hz to 1 400 Hz). Band-limiting high-pass and low-pass filters restrict the effect on the measured value of vibration frequencies outside this range where the frequency dependence is not yet agreed.
NOTE The frequency dependencies of responses to vibration are unlikely to be the same in all axes. However, it is not yet thought appropriate to recommend different frequency weighings for different axes.

The frequency-weighting and band-limiting filters may be realized by analog or digital methods. They are defined in Table A. 1 in a mathematical form familiar to filter designers and the curve is shown graphically in Figure A.1 in a schematic way. Further details and tolerances for filter characteristics are given in ISO 8041. Table A.1 -- Characteristics of band-limiting and weighting filters for the frequency Frequency weighting QI
0,71

weighting

~h

Band Iimitinga
fl

f2
1258,9

f3
15,915

f4 15,915

Q2 0,64

K
1

6,310

rhe band-limiting filter is defined by the transfer function of the filter, ffb(~): ~b(s) = ~ s24?# fzz

(s + 2zf1slQ1 + 4x2f12) (s2 + 2nf2slQ1 + 4n2f22) vheres = j2xf is the variable of the Laplace transform. rhe band-limiting filter can be realized by a two-pole filter. rhe frequency-weighting filter is defined by the transfer function of the filter, HW(S): Hw(s) = (s+ 2nf3) 27I K f42 (s2+2nfd ~heres
= S/Q2+=kt2

f~2) f~

j2nf is the variable of the Laplace transform.

The frequency-weighting filter can be realized by a two-pole filter. The total frequency-weighting function is H(s)= Hb(s) HW(S). i
Values of$ndesignateresonancefrequencies(~ = 1 to 4); Qndesignateselectivity(n = 1 or 2); K is a constantgain.

8

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

t

nn 1 ",", 1 2 4 8 16 31,5 63 125 250

500

1 000
Frequency, Hz

Figure A.1 -- Frequency-weighting

curve ~h for hand-transmitted (schematic)

vibration,

band-limiting

included

A.2 Conversion of one-third-octave band data to frequency-weighted acceleration
As an alternative to the use of the Wh filter, the r.m.s. acceleration values from one-third-octave be used to obtain the corresponding frequency-weighted acceleration. The r.m.s. frequency-weighted acceleration ah~ can be calculated as follows: (Al) band analysis can

Uhw=

p

(Whi Uhi)2

i where Wh; is the weighting factor for the i th one-third-octave Uhl is the r.m.s. acceleration (m/s2). measured band as shown in Table A.2; band, in metres per second squared

in the i th one-third-octave

The one-third-octave band frequencies from 6,3 Hz to 1250 Hz constitute the primary frequency range and the calculation of Uhw using equation (Al) shall include all one-third-octave bands within this range. Frequencies outside this primary range (i.e. those shown in the grey areas of Table A.2) do not generally make an important contribution to the value of Uhw and may be excluded from the calculation, provided it is known that there is no significant vibration energy at the high and low ends of the frequency range. If the frequency-weighted acceleration value is influenced by significant components at the high and low ends of the frequency range, the guidance in annex C for the prediction of finger blanching from vibration exposure data should be treated with caution.

9

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

NOTE If the spectrum contains dominant single-frequency components, the procedure outlined above may cause differences between the computed and directly measured values of the frequency-weighted acceleration. Discrepancies occur if these components are at frequencies which differ from the centre frequency of a one-third-octave band. For this reason, the use of the weighting filter wh or calculations based on narrower band measurements are preferred. When, in the latter case, for a certain frequency ~ or a narrow frequency band with the mid-frequency j the unweighed vibration acceleration a~ is given, the corresponding weighted acceleration ~r#) is calculated to be ~r#) = a(/) lH(j27tfil.

Table A.2 -- Frequency weighting factors whlfor hand-transmitted
conversion of one-third-octave band magnitudes Frequency band numbd' i Nominal mid frequency Hz

vibration with band iimitinga for to frequency-weighted magnitudes Weighting factor W'hj

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30

6,3 8 10 12,5 16 20 25 31,5 40 50 63 80 100 125 160 200 250 315 400 500 630 800 1000 1250

0,727 0,873 0,951 0,958 0,896 0,782 0,647 0,519 0,411 0,324 0,256 0,202 0,160 0,127 0,101 0,0799 0,0634 0,0503 0,0398 0,0314 0,0245 0,0186 0,0135 0,00894

I
)

Forfilter responsesandtolerances,see ISO 8041,
Index i is the frequencyband numberin accordancewith IEC 61260.

10

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001.

Annex B (informative) Guidance on health effects of hand-transmitted vibration

B.1 General
Powered processes and tools which expose operators' hands to vibration are widespread in several industrial activities. Occupational exposure to hand-transmitted vibration can arise from rotating and/or percussive hand-held power tools used in the manufacturing industry, quarrying, mining and construction, forestry and agriculture, public utilities and other work activities. Exposure to hand-transmitted vibration can also occur from vibrating workplaces held in the hands of the operator, and from hand-held vibrating controls such as motorcycle handlebars or vehicle steering wheels. Excessive exposure to hand-transmitted vibration can induce disturbances in finger blood flow, and in neurological and motor functions of the hand and arm. It has been estimated that 1,7 YO to 3,6 ?40 of the workers in the European countries and the USA are exposed to potentially harmful hand-transmitted vibration. The term "hand-arm vibration syndrome" (HAVS) is commonly used to refer to the complex of peripheral vascular, neurological and musculoskeletal disorders associated with exposure to hand-transmitted vibration. Workers exposed to handtransmitted vibration may be affected with neurological and/or vascular disorders separately or simultaneously. Vascular disorders and bone and joint abnormalities caused by hand-transmitted vibration are compensated occupational diseases in several countries. These disorders are also included in an European list of recognized occupational diseases.

5.2 Vascular disorders
Workers exposed to hand-transmitted vibration may complain of episodes of pale or white finger, usually triggered by cold exposure. This disorder, due to temporary abolition of blood circulation to the fingers, is called Raynaud's phenomenon (after Maurice Raynaud, a French physician who first described it in 1862). It is believed that vibration can disturb the digital circulation making it more sensitive to the vasoconstrictive action of cold. To explain coldinduced Raynaud's phenomenon in vibration-exposed workers, some investigators invoke an exaggerated central vasoconstrictor reflex caused by prolonged exposure to harmful vibration, while others tend to emphasize the role of vibration-induced local changes in the digital vessels. Various synonyms have been used to describe vibrationinduced vascular disorders: dead or white finger, Raynaud's phenomenon of occupational origin, traumatic vasospastic disease, and, more recently, vibration-induced white finger (VWF). VWF is a prescribed occupational disease in many countries. Initially attacks of blanching involve the tips of one or more fingers but, with continued exposure to vibration, the blanching can extend to the base of the fingers. Sometimes, an attack of blanching is followed by cyanosis, i.e. a bluish discoloration of the affected fingers due to increased extraction of oxygen from the sluggish digital circulation. In the recovery phase, commonly accelerated by warmth or local massage: redness, eventually associated with tingling and/or pain, may appear in the affected fingers as a result of a reactive increase of blood flow in the cutaneous vessels. The blanching attacks are more common in winter than in summer and last from a few minutes to more than one hour. The duration varies with the intensity of the triggering stimuli and the severity of the vasospasm, the attack usually ending when the whole body is warmed. If vibration exposure continues, the blanching attacks become more frequent and may occur all year around. In the rare advanced cases, repeated and severe finger blanching attacks can lead to trophic changes (ulceration or gangrene) in the skin of the fingertips. During the attack the affected workers can experience a complete loss of touch sensation and manipulative dexterity, which can interfere with work activity, thus increasing the risk for acute injuries due to accidents.

11

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

In occupational medicine, various staging systems for the classification of VWF have been developed. The Stockholm Workshop Scale (1986) is an internationally recognized grading system for classifying cold-induced Raynaud's phenomenon in the hand-arm vibration syndrome. This scale consists of four stages according to the extent, frequency and severity of finger blanching attacks and is described in Table B.1. A scale based on scores for the blanching of different phalanges has also been proposed (see reference [13]). Several laboratory tests are used to diagnose white finger objectively. Most of these tests are based on cold provocation and the measurement of finger skin temperature or digital blood flow and pressure before, during and after cooling of the fingers and hands. Epidemiological studies have demonstrated that the prevalence of VWF varies widely, from O "A to 100 `/. of individuals in a group of vibration-exposed workers. It appears that the probability and severity of white-finger symptoms is influenced by several factors, such as the characteristics of vibration exposure (frequency, magnitude, direction, impulsiveness, duration), the type of tool and work process, the environmental conditions (temperature, air flow, humidity, noise), some biodynamics and ergonomic factors (grip force, feed force, arm posture), and various individual characteristics (susceptibility, diseases and agents, e.g. nicotine and certain medicines, affecting the peripheral circulation). Thus, there is a complex relationship between vibration exposure and the development of white finger symptoms. Epidemiological studies suggest that the occurrence of VWF' increases with increasing duration of vibration exposure. There is some evidence that the cumulative exposure before the appearance of finger blanching is approximately inversely proportional to the magnitude of the vibration exposure (i.e. if vibration magnitudes are doubled, a halving of the years of exposure is required to produce the same effect). Since the Iate 1970s a decrease in the incidence of VWF has been reported among active forestry workers in Europe and Japan after the introduction of anti-vibration chain saws and administrative measures curtailing the usage time together with endeavors to reduce exposure to other harmful work environment factors (e.g. cold physical stress). Recovery from VWF has also been repoited among retired forestry workers. Similar findings not yet available for other tool types. Table B.1 -- Stockholm Workshop Vasculsr component Stage Grade Description No attacks Occasional attacks affecting only the tips of one or more fingers
Occasional attacks affecting distal and middle (rarely also proximal) phalanges of one or more fingers
I

both saw and are

Scale (1986)

o
Iv
2V

--
Mild
Moderate

3V 4V

Severe Very severe

Frequent attacks affecting all phalanges of most fingers As in stage 3 with trophic changes in the fingertips Sensorineural component

Stage OsN 1sN 2sN 3sN Exposed to vibration but no symptoms

Description

Intermittent numbness with or without tingling Intermittent or persistent numbness, reduced sensory perception Intermittent or persistent numbness, reduced tactile discrimination and/or manipulative dexterity

12

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

9.3 Neurological disorders
Workers exposed to hand-transmitted vibration may experience tingling and numbness in their fingers and hands. If vibration exposure continues, these symptoms' tend to worsen and can interfere with work capacity and life activities. Vibration-exposed workers may exhibit a reduction in the normal sense of touch and temperature as well as an impairment of manual dexterity at the clinical examination. As an other effect of hand-transmitted vibration a reduction of the vibration sensitivity of the skin of the fingertips may also be found. Epidemiological surveys of vibration-exposed workers show that the prevalence of peripheral neurological disorders varies from a few percent workers, and that sensory loss affects users of a to more than 80 Y. of individuals in a group of vibration-exposed wide range of tool types. It seems that sensorineural disturbances may develop independently of other vibration-induced disorders, probably reflecting different pathological mechanisms. A classification for the neurological component of the HAVS was proposed at the Stockholm Workshop 1986, consisting of three stages according to the symptoms complained and the results of clinical neurological examination and psychophysical testing methods such as tactile discrimination, vibrotactile perception and precision manipulation (see Table B,l ). VibrationTexposed workers may sometimes show signs and symptoms of entrapment neuropathies, such as carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS), a disorder due to compression of the median nerve as it passes through an anatomical tunnel in the wrist. CTS seems to occur in some occupational groups using vibrating tools such as rock-drillers, platers and forestry workers. It is believed that ergonomic stressors acting on the hand and wrist (repetitive movements, forceful gripping, awkward postures), in combination with vibration can cause CTS in workers handling vibrating tools.

9.4 Musculoskeletal disorders
B.4.1 Skeletal
Early radiological investigations revealed a high prevalence of bone vacuoles and cysts in the hands and wrists of vibration-exposed workers, but more recent studies have shown no significant increase with respect to manual workers not exposed to vibration. Excess occurrence of wrist and elbow osteoarthrosis as well as ossifications at the sites of tendon insertion, mostly at the elbow, have been found in miners, road construction workers and metalworking operators exposed to shock and low-frequency vibration (< 50 Hz) of high magnitude from pneumatic percussive tools. An excess prevalence of Kienbock's disease (lunate malacia) and pseudoarthrosis of the scaphoid bone in the wrist has also been reported by a few investigators. There is little evidence of an increased prevalence. of degenerative bone and joint disorders in the upper limbs of workers exposed to mid- or high-frequency vibration arising from chain saws or grinding operation. Heavy physical effort, forceful gripping and various biomechanical factors may account for the higher occurrence of skeletal injuries found in workers operating percussive tools. Local pain, swelling, and joint stiffness and deformities may be associated with radiological findings of bone and joint degeneration. In some countries (e.g. France, Germany, Italy), bone and joint disorders occurring in workers using hand-held vibrating tools are considered to be an occupational disease and the affected workers are compensated.

B.4.2 Muscular
Workers with prolonged exposure to vibration may complain of muscular weakness, pain in the hands and arms, and diminished muscle force. Vibration exposure has also been found to be associated with a reduction of handgrip strength. in some individuals muscle fatigue can cause disability. Direct mechanical injury or peripheral nerve damage have been suggested as possible etiologic factors for such m&cle symptoms. Other work-related disorders (i.e. inflammation of tendons fascial tissues of the palm of heavy manual work, and the have been reported in vibration-exposed workers, such as tendinitis and tenosynovitis and their sheaths) in the upper limbs, and' Dupuytren's contracture, a disease of the the hand. These disorders seem to be related to ergonomic stress factors arising from association with hand-transmitted vibration is not conclusive.

13

[~/[so 5349.1:2001

B.5 Other disorders
ageing

Some studies indicate that in workers affected with VWF, hearing loss is greater than that expected on the basis of and noise exposure from vibrating tools. It has been suggested that VWF subjects may have an additional risk of hearing impairment due to vibration-induced vasoconstriction of the blood vessels supplying the inner ear. In addition to peripheral disorders, other adverse health effects involving the endociine and central nervous system of vibration-exposed workers have been reported by Russian and Japanese investigators. The clinical picture, called "vibration disease", includes signs and symptoms related to dysfunction of the higher centres of the brain (e.g. persistent fatigue, headache, irritability, sleep disturbances, impotence, electroencephalographic abnormalities). These findings should be interpreted with caution and further cafefully designed epidemiological and clinical research work is needed to confirm the hypothesis of an association between disorders of the central nervous system and exposure to hand-transmitted vibration.

B.6 Glossary
Bone cyst an abnormal cavity in the bone structure. Carpa/ tunne/ syndrome: symptoms of numbness, tingling, or burning pain on the palmar surfaces of the thumb, index, middle and ring fingers, occurring mostly at night, caused by compression or irritation of the median nerve as it passes through a tunnel formed by the wrist (carpal) bones. Signs of impaired hand function and disability may develop. Cyanosis: superficial bluish discoloration capillaries. of the skin or other tissues due to the presence of deoxygenated blood in the

Dupuytren's contracture: thickening of the fibrous lining of the palm of the hand preventing fingers, mainly the ring and little finger.

the straightening

of the

Epidernio/ogy: study of the occurrence -- prevalence and incidence - of diseases or disorders in a population. Occupation/ epidemiology investigates the relation between exposure to work risk factors and their possible adverse health effects. I-/and-arm associated Kienb6ck's /ncidence: vibration syndrome: complex symptoms and signs with disorders produced by hand-transmitted vibration. disease: disorder of mineralization (neurological, vascular and musculoskeletal)

(malacia) of the lunate bone in the wrist.

number of new cases of a disease or disorder in a population over a specified period of time. bone and joint degeneration.

Osteoatihrosis: Prevalence:

number of existing cases of disease or disorder in a given population at a specified time.

/7aynaucf's phenomenon: attacks of finger blanching due to insufficient circulation of blood as a result of digital vasoconstriction usually triggered by cold or emotion. Primary /3aynaud's disease, when the symptom of finger blanching cannot be attributed to any specific cause. Secondary Raynaud's phenomenon, when some causes can be identified. Vibration-induced white finger, a secondary form of Raynaud's phenomenon caused by exposure to hand-transmitted vibration". Sensorineura/ disorders: abnormalities in the sensation of light touch, pain, temperature, pressure; impairment of discriminative sensory function (two-point discrimination, appreciation shape). Tendinitis: inflammation of a tendon. of a tendon and its sheath. of the vibration and deep of texture, size and

Tenosynovitis:

inflammation

Vasoconstrictiom narrowing of the lumen of blood vessels, especially as a result of an increased contraction muscle wall of the blood vessel.

14

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

Annex C

(informative)
Relationship between vibration exposure and effects on health

C.1 Background to the method of assessment
This annex is concerned with the approximate relative importance of various characteristics of the vibration exposure which are believed to produce health effects. It does not define limits of safe vibration exposure. The frequency weighting defined in this part of ISO 5349 is based on that in the previous version (ISO 5349:1986) and is believed to provide the best guidance available concerning the relative potential of different frequencies to produce vibration-related health effects in the hand and arm. It is not known whether this frequency weighting represents, separately, the hazard of developing vascular, neurological or musculoskeletal disorders. At present, it is used for the assessment of all biological effects of handtransmitted vibration. It is assumed that vibration in each of the three directions defined by the orthogonal axes given in Figure 1 is equally detrimental, and that the same frequency weighting may be used for each axis. The injury potential of hand-transmitted vibration is therefore estimated from the vibration total value, Uhv, formed from the three frequency-weighted component (single-axis) accelerations at a surface in contact with the hand as defined in this part of ISO 5349. It is assumed that the method given in this part of ISO 5349 for obtaining the 8-h energy-equivalent vibration total value appropriately reflects the relationship between different vibration magnitudes and daily exposure durations.
This method assumes that the daily exposure time required to produce symptoms of the hand-arm vibration NOTE 1 syndrome is inversely proportional to the square of the frequency-weighted acceleration. If, for example, the vibration magnitude is halved, then the daily exposure time can be increased by a factor of four for the same effect. There is a shortage of data relating daily exposure durations to health effects. The time dependency chosen is NOTE 2 equivalent to a constant daily vibration energy. The time dependency for the daily vibration exposure should not be extrapolated to very short durations and large NOTE 3 accelerations. Such exposures can be associated with other, acute, injuries to the hand-arm system.

C.2 General health effects
The probability of an individual developing symptoms of the hand-arm vibration syndrome (see a,nnex B) depends on his/her susceptibility, any pre-existing diseases and conditions, and the work-related, environmental and personal factors listed in 4.1 and annex D. The prevalence of symptoms in a group of persons, each of whom performs equivalent work involving a similar tool, or tools, or industrial process in which vibration is coupled to the hands, is additionally dependent on the range of individual and exposure factors in the group. For groups in which persons do not continue the same work, the prevalence of vibration-related symptoms will be also influenced by the rate at which persons leave the group.
NOTE Studies suggest that symptoms of the hand-arm vibration syndrome are rare in persons exposed with an 8-h energy-equivalent vibration total value, A(8), at a suriace in contact with the hand, of less than 2 mLs2and unreported for A(8) values of less than 1 m/s2.

15

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

C.3 Prevalence of episodic finger blanching (vibration-induced

whi~e finger)

There have been aflempts to estimate the vibration exposure required to produce different prevalence of finger blanching in groups of persons performing equivalent work involving a similar tool, or tools, or industrial process. Figure C.1 shows the daily vibration exposure, A(8), which is estimated to produce finger blanching in 107. of exposed persons. Values are shown for group mean total (lifetime) exposures of from 1 year to 10 years. Corresponding values are shown in Table C.1. Interpolation for exposure conditions between relationship may be used for this purpose: the values shown in Table C.1 is permitted. The following

= 31,8 ~

(1
m/s2

-1,06

(Cl)

where A(8) is the daily vibration exposure (8-h energy-equivalent hand); vibration total value at a surface in contact with the

DY

is the group mean total (lifetime) exposure duration, in years.

This tentative relationship between vibration exposure and finger blanchinq is consistent with that alven in annex A NOTE 1 of the previous version (ISO 53491986), and is based on reference [1O]. fiowever, cor~ection factors have bee; applied to take account of the use of the 8-h energy-equivalent vibration total value in this part of ISO 5349. NOTE 2 The guidance on vascular effects given in this part of ISO 5349 is based on epidemiological studies involving power tools with vibration predominantly above the range 30 Hz to 50 Hz (e.g. chain saws, grinders, rock drills). Therefore, measurements which are dominated by components of frequency-weighted acceleration at lower frequencies, particularly below about 20 Hz, should be treated with caution. Effects on the bones and joints of the upper limbs have been reported in operators of those types of power tool (see annex B). The relationship in equation (C. 1) does not predict the risk of finger blanching (vibration-induced white finger) NOTE 3 occurring in any particular individual within a group. NOTE 4 Figure C.1 and Table C.1 can be used to define exposure criteria designed to reduce the health hazard of handtransmitted vibration in a group of occupationally exposed persons. The values in Table C.1 and Figure C. 1 are derived from studies of groups of workers exposed to tool vibration magnitudes up to 30 rn/s2 in their occupations for up to 25 years. Almost all studies involved groups of persons"who performed, near-daily, work involving one type of power tool or industrial process in which vibration was coupled to the hands. The acceleration values are derived from studies in which the dominant, single-axis, frequency-weighted component acceleration was reported. Deviations from the values in Table C. 1 and Figure C.1 can occur for tools or processes in which the ratio of the NOTE 5 vibration total value to the greatest single axis component deviates significantly from the typical values given in the foreword to this part of ISO 5349. Deviations from the values in Table C. 1 and Figure C.1 can also occur for occupational groups in which work-related and/or environmental factors differ significantly from those commonly occurring in similar occupations.

If for a specified total (lifetime) exposure duration, the daily vibration exposure A(8) is in excess of that required to produce a 10% prevalence of white fingers, a greater prevalence of finger blanching maybe expected. Table C.1 -- Values of the daily vibration exposure A(8) which maybe expected to produce episodes of finger blanching in 10% of persons exposed for a given number of years Dy Dy, years
A(8), M/sp 1 26 2 14 4 7 8 3,7

16

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

b\ \

\

\

\

\\

\ \

I

3

456

78910

20

30 A(8) value, m/s2

Figure C.1 -- Vibration

exposure for predicted 10% prevalence of vibration-induced in a group of exposed persons

white finger

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

Annex D (informative) Factors

likely to influence the effects of human exposure to hand-transmitted vibration in working conditions

The method for evaluation of vibration exposure described in this part of ISO 5349 takes account of the vibration magnitude, the frequency content, the duration of exposure in a working day and the cumulative exposure to date. The effects of human exposure to hand-transmitted vibration in working conditions may also be influenced by the following: a) b) c) d) the direction of the vibration transmitted to the hand;

the method of working and the operator's skill; the individual's age or any predisposing factors in his/her constitution or health; of work and rest spells;

the temporal exposure pattern and working method, i.e. the length and frequency whether the tool is laid aside or held idling during breaks, etc.;

e)

the coupling forces, such as the grip and feed forces, applied by the operator through the hands to the tool or the workpiece2J and the pressure exerted on the skin; the posture joints); of the hand and arm, and body posture during exposure (angles of wrist, elbow and shoulder

f)

g) h)

the type and condition of vibrating machinery, hand-tool and fitted accessory or workpiece; the area and location of the parts of the hands which are exposed to vibration. affect the circulation changes caused by hand-transmitted of the hand or body vibration:

The following factors may specifically i) j) k) climatic conditions

and other factors affecting the temperature

diseases which affect the circulation; agents affecting environment; noise. the peripheral circulation, such as nicotine, ceitain medicines or chemicals in the working

1)

Although the importance of all the factors listed with respect to the generation of vibration disorders is not yet known in sufficient detail, and standardized methods for reporting some factors are not defined in this part of ISO 5349, reporting of all factors is considered desirable in order to enable the collection of meaningful exposure histories (see annex F).

2)

An Intemationai Standard on the measurement of gripping and pushing forces is in course of preparation.

18

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

Annex E (informative) Preventive measures to be adopted by those responsible health and safety
for occupational

E.1 Medical preventive measures associated with regular exposure to hand-transmitted vibration
The following steps should be taken. a) Any worker who may have to expose his hands to vibration should, prior to employment, -- -- b) be physically examined, and

have any previous history of vibration exposure recorded. who use vibrating equipment should be advised of the risk of exposure to hand-transmitted

All individuals vibration.

c)

Persons with the following medical conditions they use vibrating equipment: -- -- -- -- �primary Raynaud's disease; disease caused by impairment

might be at greater risk and should be carefully assessed

before

of blood circulation to the hands;

past injuries to the hand causing circulatory defects or deformity of bones and joints; other causes of secondary disorders of the peripheral Raynaud's phenomenon; nervous system; system. and arrangements made for medical check-ups, at

disorders of the musculoskeletal d)

Provision should be made for the reporting of symptoms regular intervals, of those at risk.

In some countries it is recommended
NOTE

that young people (under 18 years) do not use certain vibrating tools.

A glossary of medical terms can be found in clause B.6.

E.2 Technical preventive measures aimed at reducing the effects of vibration exposure of the hands
The following steps should be taken. a) Where there is a choice between different processes, should be used. Where there is a choice between exposure should be used. the process resulting in the lowest vibration exposure

b)

different tools, the tool (with accessories)

resulting

in the lowest vibration

19

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

c) d)

Equipment

should be carefully maintained

in accordance

with the manufacturer's

instructions.

Tools should be prevented

from expelling cold gases or fluids over the operator's

hands.

e) f) g) h)

If possible, the handles of the vibrating equipment

should be heated when working in cold conditions.

Tools with handle shapes which result in high pressures on the skin in the area of contact should be avoided.
Tools requiring the smallest contact forces (grip and feed forces) should be selected where there is a choice.

The mass of hand-held tools should be kept to a minimum, magnitude or contact forces, are not increased.

provided

other parameters,

such as vibration

Anti-vibration gloves, as defined in ISO 10819, can be beneficial where they can be shown to reduce the vibration exposure as defined in this part of ISO 5349. (However, anti-vibration gloves should not be expected to provide a sufficient means of protection from hand-transmitted vibration.)

E.3 Administrative preventive measures aimed at reducing the effects of vibration exposure of the hands
The following a) b) steps should be taken.

There should be adequate training to instruct the worker in the proper use of the equipment. It is presumed that vibration hazards are reduced when continuous vibration exposures avoided; therefore, work schedules should be arranged to include vibration-free periods. There should be provision for workers to keep warm. over long periods are

c)

E.4 Advice to individuals who use vibrating hand tools
The following a) advice is given.

Let the tool do the work and grip the tool as lightly as possible, providing that this is consistent with safe work practice and tool control. The' tool should rest on the workpiece or support as much as possible. "
NOTE In some situations, increasing the feed and grip forces can decrease the measured acceleration although this may not be beneficial.

b) c)

Inform the appropriate

work supervisor if abnormal vibration occurs.

Wear adequate clothing and suitable gloves to keep dry and warm, particularly using vibrating equipment.

when working,

traveling

or

d)

Avoid or minimize smoking tobacco or using snuff before and during work with vibrating nicotine reduces the blood supply to the hands and fingers.

equipment,

since

e)

Seek medical advice if attacks of white or blue fingers occur or long periods of finger tingling and/or numbness are experienced.

E.5 Further information
Further advice is available in CR 1030-1 and CR 1030-2.

20

1s/1s05349-1:2001

Annex F (informative) Guidelines for reporting additional information

F.1 Introduction
The principal quantities currently used to represent the severity of exposures to hand-transmitted vibration are ahv and A(8) as defined in this part of ISO 5349. However, the characteristics of vibration that cause health disorders are not fully understood; it is possible that, as understanding increases, there will be a need to amend some aspects of the evaluation method, such as the frequency weighting, frequency range, time-dependency and the approach to multi-axis vibration. It may also be necessary to specify different analysis methods for different effects of human exposure to hand-transmitted vibration. In order to maximize the future value of vibration measurements made using this part of ISO 5349, and to further the knowledge of the effects of hand-transmitted vibration, it is recommended that additional information be reported when measurements and assessments of exposure to vibration are made. This annex gives guidelines for the reporting of useful additional data.

F.2 Vibration source and tool operation
A clear description of the vibrating tool, its type, age, mass, size and condition should be given. The vibration characteristics of a vibrating tool can be highly variable. It is therefore important that the range of vibration conditions associated with different workplaces and materials, working conditions, methods of use of the tool and exposure duration patterns (including intermittence) reported. The positions and orientations of the operator's hands on the vibrating tool or workpiece surface reported. The operator's posture should be described, particularly with regard to the hands and arms. should be

The contact forces between the hand and the gripping zone are likely to affect the vibration energy transferred to the hand, although the effects are not fully understood. It is possible that future vibration standards will require these forces to be determined. Where possible, the contact forces should be measured or estimated.3J Environmental factors, where possible. such as noise, temperature, chemical agents at the workplace, etc., should be reported

F.3 Instrumentation
This part of ISO 5349 requires that the measurement or recording system shall conform to the requirements of ISO 8041. Where the requirements of this part of ISO 5349 are. exceeded (e.g. if the frequency range is greater) a full description of the instrumentation should be given. The position and orientation of the transducers on the tool or workpiece and the method of mounting should be fully described. The total mass of the transducer(s) and mounting device should be quoted. The method of mounting the accelerometer can make a major contribution to the frequency response of the instrumentation. It is important to ensure that any resonance frequencies are high enough above the upper limit of the measurement frequency range.

3)

An International Standard on the measurement of gripping and pushing forces is in course of preparation.

21

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

F.4 Axes of vibration
This part of 1S0 5349 requires that vibration is measured and reported separately
desirable that data for all three axes of measurement (including frequency-weighted spectra and time histories where available) should be reported. NOTE a) Reporting of data for all axes is advisable for the following reasons

for the three axes x, y and z. It is
r.m.s. magnitudes, frequency

some currently recommended evaluation methods are based on the vibration total value, while others use the greatest measured single-axis value; the effects of vibration direction on health are not yet fully understood.

b)

F.5 Vibration time histories
Acceleration time histories should be recorded and retained, `if possible. Recorded vibration time histories limited use unless their frequency band limits and the characteristics of the band-limiting filters are reported.
NOTE a) b) c) The preservation of the time history is desirable for the following reasons:

are of

it enables measurement artifacts to be identified (e.g. d.c. shifts, overloads); different methods of frequency analysis maybe used on the same data; root-mean-square averaging, as required by this part of ISO 5349, may not be the most appropriate method of evaluation; alternatives (e.g. peak acceleration, root-mean-quad average) may be determined from a stored vibration time history; a different form of analysis may be appropriate for impulsive vibration (e.g. with percussive tools); peak or crest factor analysis, for example, may be useful; such alternative analysis methods have not yet been agreed.

d)

F.6 Frequency

analysis
band root-

In addition to frequency-weighted magnitudes, it is desirable to report (unweighed) one-third-octave mean-square acceleration magnitudes over the frequency range of the measurement system.

In addition, constant-bandwidth spectra (e.g. power spectral densities) can provide a useful visual method for inspecting data for frequency content and for the detection of measurement artifact. (It is important that the frequency resolution be quoted where power spectra are reported.)
NOTE a) Frequency analysis is desirable for the following reasons: re-analysis using one-third-octave band data and an alternative frequency weighting is simple. (This is

subsequent

particularly useful if vibration time histories are not preserved.) b) spectral information (particularly from a constant bandwidth analysis) can be useful for detection of artifacts: overloads or d.c. shifts (evident at low frequencies) and transducer mounting problems (evident at high frequencies); narrow-band frequency analysis can assist in identifying the mechanisms causing the vibration and can thus provide engineers with the means to reduce vibration at problem frequencies.

c)

22

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

F.7 Frequency range
Although the frequency weighting Wh is defined only within a specified frequency range, it is recommended that the measurement frequency range should be as great as is practicable if time histories and/or frequency analyses are to be reported. However, transducer mounting response at frequencies above, approximately 1000 Hz can cause difficulties; the validity of any high-frequency data should, therefore, be justified. NOTE Reporting of data with a greater frequency range is desirable because some researchers believe that frequencies above 1 250 Hz may be more important than this part of ISO 5349 suggests, particularly for impulsive vibration.

F.8 Epidemiological

information

Understanding of the effects of vibration on health (including effects on the vascular, neurological and musculoskeletal systems) will be improved by the continued reporting of studies in which both vibration exposure (derived in accordance with this part of ISO 5349, and taking account of the content of this annex) and the resulting health effects are recorded. Guidance on the reporting of epidemio!ogical data is beyond the scope of this annex.

23

1s/1s0 5349-1:2001

Bibliography

[1] [2] [3] [4] [5]

ISO 5348, Mechanical ISO 5805, Mechanical

vibration and shock -- Mechanical

mounting of accelerometers.

vibration and shock -- Human exposure -- Vocabulary. of vibrations at the hand/e. systems. and

ISO 8662 (all parts), Hand-he/d portab/e power tools -- Measurement ISO 8727, Mechanical

vibration and shock -- Human exposure -- Biodynamics coordinate

ISO 10819, Mechanical vibration and shock -- Hand-arm vibration -- Method evaluation of the vibration transmissibility of gloves at the palm of the hand. CR 1030-1, Hand-arm vibration methods by design of machinery. CR 1030-2, Hand-arm vibration measures at the workplace. CR 12349, Mechanical
BOVENZI,

for the measurement

[6]

-- Guidelines

for vibration

hazards

reduction

-- Patt 1: Engineering

[7]

-- Guidelines

for vibration

hazards

reduction

-- Pati 2: Management

[8] [9]

vibration -- Guide to the health effects of vibration on the human body. vibration syndrome. /nternationa/ Jouma/ of /ndustria/

M. Medical aspects of the hand-arm Ergonomics, 6, 1990, pp. 61-73.
BRAMMER, A.J. Dose-response

[10]

Environment [11]

relationships for hand-transmitted and Health, 12, 1986, pp. 284-288. International

vibration.

Scandinavian

Journa/ of Work

CHRIST, E. et al. Vibration at work (ISSA brochure). de recherche et de securite (INRS), Paris, 1989. DUPUIS, H., CHRIST, E.,

Section Research

of ISSA, Institut national

[12]

SANDOVER, J., TAYLOR, W.

/nternationa/ [13] [14]

Conference on Hand-Arm

and OKADA, A. (eds.). Proceedings of the 6th Vibration, Bonn, 1992. HVBG, Sankt Augustin, Germany, 1993.

GRIFFIN, M.J. Handbook GRIFFIN, M.J.

of human vibration. Academic

Press, London, 1990. to hand-transmitted

vibration. [15]

Measurement, evaluation and assessment of occupational exposures Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 54 (2), 1997, pp. 73-89.

Health and Safety Executive HS(G)88: Hand-Arm 1994.
NELSON, C.M.

Vibration. HSE Books, Sudbury, Suffolk, United Kingdom,

[16]

Hand-transmitted vibration assessment � A comparison of resu/ts using sing/e-axis and triaxia/ methods. Presented at the United Kingdom Group Meeting on Human Response to Vibration held at the ISVR, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 1997.
OKADA, A., TAYLOR, W. and DUPUIS, H. (eds.). Proceedings Arm Vibration, Kanazawa, Japan, 1989. Published 1990. PELMEAR, P. L., TAYLOR, W. and WASSERMAN, D.E. (eds.).

[17]

of the 5th /nternationa/

Conference

on Hand-

[18]

occupation/ [19]

hea/th professiona/s.

Hand-arm vibration � A comprehensive Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1992. and diagnostic methods in the hand-arm vibration and Hea/th, 4 (special issue), 1987, pp. 271-388. syndrome -- Diagnostic and quantitative

guide for

Stockholm Workshop 86: Symptomatology Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment

syndrome.

[20]

Stockholm Workshop 94: Hand-arm vibration exposure, 1994. Arbete och Hii/sa, 5, 1995. 7th International Conference on Hand-Arm Hea/th, 3, Supplement, 1995, and 4, 1996.

relationships

to

[21]

Vibration,

Prague, 1995. Centra/ European

Journa/ of Pub/it

24

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of /rtdian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in any BIS has the copyright of all its publications. form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Amendments also reviewed indicates that for revision. amendments Additions'. Standards

are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly

This Indian Standard

has been developed Amendments

from Dot: No. MED 28 (0896)& Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

Amendment

No.

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 23230131, 23233375, 23239402 Website Regional Central : Offices: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme Vll M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 www.bis.org. in Telephones 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 22542519,22542315 ~

Eastern :

{

Northern : SCO 335-336,

Southern : C.I.T. Campus,

IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113 {

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Branches: AHMEDABAD. GHAZIABAD. PARWANOO.

~ 28329295,28327858 ~ 28327891,28327892

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

Ankita Art Printers Ph.: 26814834,41406468

