**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8916 (1978): Spherometer [PGD 22: Educational 
Instruments and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SPHEROMETER 



l$i»l6-t*7B 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



UDG fitl'2: 531-7177 




© Copyright 1979 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
HANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR HARG 




1 



NEW DELHI UOWte 



Ftbruatj 1979 



IS t8916 -1978 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SPHEROMETER 

— ^^ m— — i iii ii w min i ■■!■■ ■ — — ' " ' ■ 'iim 

Educational Instruments and Equipment Sectional Committee, EDC 77 

Chairman Representing 

Dr B. Sharan National Council of Educational Research & 

Training, New Delhi 

Members 

Shri C. L. Batra Towa Optics ( India ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri Rajesh K. Batra ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Bhandari Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi 

Shri P. K. Bhattacharya National Council of Educational Research & Training 

( Department of Education in Science & Mathe- 
matics), New Delhi 
Dr M. M. Chakravarty AH India Federation of University & College 

Teachers* Organizations, Calcutta 
Prof M. Bhattacharyya ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Chopra Planning Commission ( Education Division ), New 

Delhi 
Shri K. M. Daroar Ministry of Industry & Civil Supplies 

Prof N. R. Dave Directorate of Technical Education, Gujarat State 

Dr K. Gopalan Ministry of Education & Social Welfare 

Dr P. K. Katti Department of Science & Technology, New Delhi 

Shri Lakshmi Saoar The Scientific Instruments Manufacturers' & Dealers' 

Association ( Regd ), Ambala Cantt 
Shri S. P. Tuteja ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. L. Madan Ambala Scientific Instruments Manufacturer's 

Association ( Regd ), Ambala Cantt 
Shri S. N. Dhawan ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Manivannan Director of Industries, Government of Haryana, 

Chandigarh 
Shri P. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. L. Mehandru Directorate of Industries, Delhi Administration, Delhi 

Shri B. P. Mittai* Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( CSIR ), 

Chandigarh 
Shri D. S. Pathania ( Alternate ) 
Commander V. B. Nair Ministry of Defence ( NHQ ) 

Lt Cdr V. N. Narayanan ( Alternate ) 
Prof A. V. Patankar University Grants Commission, New Delhi 

Shri B. N. Sinha The Scientific Instrument Co Ltd, Allahabad 

Dr A. S. Rajput ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1979 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 8916.1978 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Shri Ved Prakash 
Shri H. C. Verma 

Prof V. N. Wanchoo 

Shri R. K. Mohta ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Chandrasekharan, 
Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ) 



Representing 

Modern Equipment Company, Ambala Gantt 

AH India Instrument Manufacturers & Dealers 

Association, Bombay 
All India Science Teachers* Association, New Delhi 

Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member) 

Secretary 
Shri S. P. Abbey 



Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ), ISI 



IS 1 8916 -1978 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SPHEROMETER 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 26 September 1978, after the draft finalized by the Educational 
Instruments and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 Spherometer is generally used for measuring the thickness of thin 
plates and for determining the radii of curvature of spherical ( concave and 
convex ) surfaces, such as lenses or mirrors. It works on the principle of a 
micrometer screw. The nomenclature of the various parts of spherometer 
is shown in Fig. 1. 

GRADUATED DISC 

LINEAR SCALE 



GLASS PLATE 




MICROMETER 
SCREW 



Fig. 1 Nomenclature for Spherometer 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 

3 



IS 2 8916-1978 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the general and functional requirements and tests 
of spherometer, 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 Tor the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Back Lash — It is the lack of motion or lost motion of the screw when 
its direction of rotation is changed. 

2.2 Graduated Disc — It is a circular scale attached to the head of the 
screw. 

2.3 Least Count — It is the value of one division on the circular scale 
which can be correctly read with the help of the spherometer. 

2.4 Legs — Three in number, the bottom points of which are in one 
plane and the lines joining them form an equilateral triangle. 

2.5 Micrometer Screw — An accurately cut screw terminating at the 
top into a milled head. This forms the fourth leg of the spherometer. 

2.6 Pitch — It is the distance between corresponding points on adjacent 
threads of the screw measured parallel to the axis in the same axial plane. 

2.7 Scale — The vertical linear scale fixed normal to the plane of the 
table. The position of the screw can be read by means of this scale. 

2.8 Table — A frame-work supported by the three legs, the centre of 
which has a threaded hole for the movement of the micrometer screw, 

3. MATERIAL 

3.1 The material of the various part shall be as under: 
Component Material 

Graduated disc Brass, aluminium 

Legs Mild steel with hardened tip or 

stainless steel 

Scale Stainless steel, brass or aluminium 

Screw Stainless steel or high grade tool steel 

Table Brass or aluminium 

4. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 The minimum length and dfameter of leg shall be 25 mm and 4 mm 
respectively. Legs shall be 40 mm apart from each other. 



IS : 8916 - 1978 

4.2 The measuring range of scale shall be 20 mm with zero in the middle, 
+ 10 mm at the top and —10 mm at the bottom. 

4.3 The graduated disc shall be divided into 100 equal divisions with 
numbering at every tenth division. 

4.4 The pitch of the screw shall be £ mm or 1 mm. 

5. FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 The ends of the three legs shall have sharp points and shall be made in 
a manner that the points are co-planer and form an equilateral triangle. 

5.2 The screw shall be cut accurately and shall work smoothly through the 
threaded hole at the centre of the table, without jerks or backlash, through- 
out the length of its travel* 

5.3 The legs shall be tightly fitted on the table. 

5 S 4 The screw and the threaded portion of the table shall be so cut that 
the graduated disc moves up and down along the scale truly vertically and 
in a manner that the edge of the graduated disc moves just along the 
vertical scale but without actually touching the same. The scale and the 
graduated drsc shall be bevelled at the periphery. 

6. TESTS 

6.1 The distances between the lower points of the three legs shall be equal 
to each other to within 0'5 mm. 

6.2 The distances from the three legs to the central screw shall be equal 
to each other to within 0*5 mm. 

6.3 When the three legs and the screw are resting on a flat surface without 
rocking, the upper plane of the circular scale shall be parallel to the fiat 
surface to within 0*5 mm and the zero error shall not exceed the least 
count value. 

6.4 When the three legs are resting on a flat surface, the central screw and 
the vertical linear scale shall be square to the flat surface to within 2 mm. 
The squareness shall be checked throughout the range of movement of the 
screw. 

6.5 The linear and circular scales shall be accurate to within the least 
count value. 

7. FINISH 

7.1 All parts made of mild steel or aluminium shall be properly coated or 
plated to prevent corrosion. The screw shall be provided with a thin light 
non-corrosive oil at its place of movement in the threads. 



IS: 8916 -1978 

8. MARKING 

8.1 Each spherometer shall be legibly marked with the name or trade-mark 
of the manufacturer, its serial number and month and year of manufacture. 

8.1.1 The jspherometer may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys 
the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that 
standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is 
devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI marked products are 
also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. 
Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark 
may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian 
Standards Institution. 

9. PACKING 

9.1 Each spherometer shall be packed in a suitable protective case. 

9.2 A separate 5 mm thick glass plate ( 100 X 100 mm) with its edges 
properly ground shall be provided with the spherometer. 



