**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12137 (1987) : General requirements of wagon 
puller/pusher [MED 7 : Material Handling Systems and 
Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 629-4-0t4-3 : 629-44 



18:12137-1^7 



O 
00 

o 

Q 

Ui 






00 

o 
a 

HI 



E 
B 
o 

3 



G9 



g 

'5 
rj 
lit 

o> 

.E 

c 

CO 

X 



3 
CO 



o 
o 

00 

o 
o 



4) 

E 

a 



c 



Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2002) 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF 
WAGON PULLER/PUSHER 



1. Scope — Covers general and safety requirements, field of application, types and ttmiting 
dimensions of the wagon pullers/pushers for hauling/spotting broad gauge top open railway 
wagons, 

1.1 This standard Js not aF^licabte to hopper type wagons. 

1.2 Wagons suitable only for mechanical handling shall be handled by the wagon pullersf/pushers 
covered by this standard. 

1.3 The maximum gross load of rake of wagons to be hauled by the wagon puller/pusher shall be 
limited to 2 000 tonnes, 

2. Types of Wagons — Broad gauge wagons shall be classified on the basis of gross weight as 
follows: 

Type Gross Weight in Tonnes 

325 

OZ 40-6 

BOI 813 

BOX 81-3 

BOY 91-4 

BOZ 81/3 

BOXN 81-3 

2.1 Type$afW§gon Pul/er I Pusher 

2.1.1 Continuous wire rope type — Wagons hauled by means of a winch driven wire rope 
hooked to for6[fnost wagons of the rake at the centre buffer coupler to be hauled. The wire rope 
forming a clos^^oop runs parallel to and outside both rails of the railway track. 

2.1. 3E Trolley type — Wagons hauled by means of a wihch driven trolley running over its own 
rail track teside- the main rail track and having extending and retracting lever arms fitted with 
rollers. In extended condition, the rollers get engaged with rims of rearmost pair of the wheels 
of nearest wagon in the rake and prope) these wheels resulting in the haulage. 

3. Limiting Boundary Dimensions — The limiting boundary dimensions of various types of 
railway wagons lelevant to the wagon puller/pusher shall be in accordance with Fig. 1 of 
IS ; 10464-1983 'Data sheet for selection of wagon puller/pusher'. £ ? 

4. Basic Design Parameters/Features 

4.1 The wagon puller/pusher shall be designed for hauling!a maximum gross load of 2 000 tonnes 
taking into consideration a loaded wagon with a maximum axle load of 225 tonnes. 

4.2 For optimum utilization, wagons are placed on and removed from the placement location with 
the help of wagon puller of the continuous wire rope type. These machines operate either in 
between main^ rail tracks or by the side of rail track. 

4.3 In order to avoid damage to the railway rolling stock and/or to the wagon puller/pusher, it is 
essentia! that the wagon puller/pusher is designed and installed in a manner that it does not 
interfere with the movement of rolling stock on the railway tracks, 

5. Field of Application 

5.1 Continuous Wire Rope Type 

a) Rake of wagons required to be hauled in a particular zone of the rail track. 

b) Wagons to be spotted at a predetermined point, 

c) Wagon loading installations. 



Adoptad 3 August 1987 



© January 1 988, BIS | Gr 2 



B U R€ A U OF INDIAN S T A N D A R D $ 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



18:12137 "1987 

5.2 Tro/fey Type — Wagons of trolley type to be hauled. Individual wagon to be spotted and 
empty wagon which is pushed out or can be objected by the equipment called 'ejector' by the 
next incoming loaded wagon. 

6. General Requirements 

6.1 The design and construction of components of wagon puller/pusher coming in contact with 
any part of wagon shall be such that no damage whatsoever is caused to the wagon or any of its 
parts and/or infringes with the clearances specified by statutory or any other rules and regulations. 

6.2 Rake of wagons shall be placed on the rail track within the reach of the inhaul trolley by 
means of a shunter/wagon hauler, 

6.3 The inhaul trolley shall move towards the rake, shall go underneath the wagons and shall stop 
at such a place wherein its forward travel shall get engaged with the rearmost pair of wheels of 
the wagon to be placed on the wagon tippler table. The rearmost pair of wheels of the wagon 
shall be placed at predetermined location. 

6.4 After receiving the rake on the inhaul track, brakes of all the wagons shall be fully released 
before spotting is done. This is essential because braked wagons shall result in increased pulling 
force applied by the wagon puller/pusher and in such a case hauling trolley shall lift the pair of 
wheels engaged with the trolley rollers, thus lifting the wagon which may lead to derailment of 
the wagon or damage to the wagon puller/pusher. 

6.5 Both manual and automatic modes of operation shall be provided in the control system of the 
wagon puller/pusher. Signalling system shall be provided to co-ordinate the operation between 
decoupling point and the operator's cabin of the complete wagon handling system. 

6.6 Specified number of wagons shall be decoupled from the full rake and hauled to a predeter- 
mined point called 'decoupling point' where wagons are stopped and the forward most wagon 
shall be decoupled. After decoupling, a signal shall be given from the decoupling point to the 
operator's cabin of the control room for forward travel of the wagon puller/pusher. It shall haul 
one wagon and place it at a predetermined location, stop for few seconds and return back. On 
the return travel, the haulage trolley shall get engaged with rearmost pair of wheels of the next 
wagon to be spotted and cycle shall repeat. 

6.7 Rotary limit switches shall be provided with the winch of the puller/pusher to limit forward and 
reverse travel of the trolley, to stop it at the decoupling point and to provide a pause to the trolley 
before it returns after placement of loaded wagon. Besides this, track limit switches shall also be 
provided as a back-up protection in regard to travel and over tension in the haulage rope. 

6.8 In case of continuous rope type, the rake shall be hauled by means of a winch driven wire 
rope hooked to buffer coupler of the wagon in the rake. Alternatively, a dummy wagon with the 
necessary hooking arrangement may be coupled to the rake for hauling. 

6.9 Control room for proper and safe operation of the hauler shall be installed near the winch 
house, the location of which shall depend on the travel of the wagon puller/pusher required. 

6.10 Limit switches shall be provided for normal and safe operation of the puller. Arrangement 
shall be made for protecting the rope from over tension and back-up protection limit switches 
shall be provided. 

7. Safety Requirements 

7.1 Construction Stage 

7.1.1 The design of the wagon puller/pusher shall avoid, as far as possible, any heavy jerk to 
wagon being hauled. 

7.1.2 The design shall ensure that no derailment and over-runs of wagons take place while 
being hauled. 

7.1.3 Electrical interlocking shall be provided to prevent operation of loading/unloading device 
while the puller shall be spotting the wagon on the tippler and also the tippler cannot part with 
till the puller returns back to a predetermined safe distance away from it. 

7.1.4 Sharp edges and corners in all working spaces shall be avoided. 

7.1.5 Parts projecting into working spaces shall be as small as possible. 



18:12137-1987 

7.1.6 All the lubrication points used frequently shall be accessible without it being necessary 
to remove the guards, 

7.1.7 The equipment shall be so designed that its maintenance and cleaning is facilitated. 

7.2 Installation Stage 

7.2.1 All the wagon puller/pusher installations shall be marked permanently and legibly in a 
clearly visible place with the following information; 

a) Maximum gross weight to be hauled, 

b) An instruction forbidding the wagon puller/pusher to be operated as long as brakes of 
wagons are not properly released, and 

c) Sick jammed wagons are to be taken out from the rake to the manual unloading point. 

7.3 Utilization Stage 

7.3.1 The inspection, adjustment, maintenance, cleaning and greasing of moving components 
shall be carried out regularly according to the manufacturer's instructions. 

7.3.1.1 The operations specified in 7.3.1 shall not be undertaken when the wagon pullers/ 
puihers are in motion. 

7.3.2 No person, other than a qualified/trained person, so authorized, shall operate the wagon 
puller/pusher. 

7.3.3 Normal and emergency stopping devices shall be made known to all authorized personnel 
and be easily accessible. All areas giving access to them shall be kept clear of obstacles. Their 
pre per working shall be periodically checked. 

8. Marking -~ All the wagon pullers/pushers shall be marked permanently and legibly at a clearly 
visible place with the name of the manufacturer, serial number, the year of manufacture, type and 
capacity of the wagon puller/pusher. 

9. Information Required for Selection of Wagon Puller/Pusher — The information shall be 
provided by the purchaser in accordance with IS : 10464-1983 as this may help the manufacturer 
to supply a suitable wagon puller/pusher. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard may be used by the manufacturers and the purchasers for selection and use of 
Wcgon puller/pusher. IS : 10464-1983 may serve as an adjunct to this standard. 



Printed at Printograph, New Delhi, India 



