IS 14638:1998

ISO/IEC 9126:1991
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY - SOFTWARE PRODUCT EVALUATION - QUALITY CHARACTERISTICS AND GUIDELINES FOR THEIR USE

ICS

35.080

0 BIS 1998

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

December

1998

Price Group

7

Software

Systems,

Languages

and Methodologies

Sectional

Committee,

LTD 33

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO/IEC 9126:1991 `Information technology - Software product evaluation - Quality characteristics and guidelines for their use' issued jointly by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Software Systems, Languages and Methodologies Sectional Committee (LTD 33) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The text of the ISO/IEC standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. CROSS REFERENCES In this Indian Standard, the following the following: International Standard International Standard is referred to. Read in its respective place Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be

Corresponding Indian Standard IS/IS0 8402 Vocabulary : 1994 Quality -

Degree of Equivalence Identical

IS0 8402 Vocabulary

: 1986

Quality

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of the following standard referred in this adopted standard and has decided that this is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: ISO/IEC 2382-20 : 1990 Information technology Vocabulary-Part 20: Systems development

IS 14636 : 1996 ISO/IEC 9126 : 1991

Indian Standard
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY-SOFTWARE PRODUCT EVALUATION -QUALITY CHARACTERISTICS AND GUIDELINES FOR THEIR USE
1

Scope

This International Standard defines six characteristics that describe, with minimal overlap, software quality. These characteristics provide a baseline for further refinement and description of software quality. Guidelines describe the use of quality characteristics for the evaluation of software quality. This International Standard does not provide subcharacteristics and metrics, and method for measurement, rating, and assessment. This International Standard adheres to the definition of quality in IS0 8402. NOTE - A proposal for definitions of subcharacteristics
is provided for information in annex

A.

The defini?ion of the characteristics and associated quality evaluation process model in this International Standard are applicable when specifying the requirements for and evaluating the quality of software products throughout their life cycle. Its characteristics may be applicable to every kind of software, including computer programs and data contained in firmware. This International Standard is intended for those associated with acquisition, development, use, support, maintenance, or audit of software.

2

Normative

references

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International Standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below. Members of IEC and IS0 maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. ISO/IEC 2382-20 :1990, lnformafion technology -- Vocabulary - Parf 20 : Systems development. IS0 8402 : 1986, Qualify -Vocabulary.

3

Definitions

For the purpose of this International Standard, the following definitions apply 3.1 assessment : An action of applying specific documented assessment criteria to a specific software module, package, or product for the purpose of determining acceptance or release of the software module, package or product. 3.2 features : Features are identified properties of a software product which can be related to the quality characteristics. NOTE - Examples of features include path length, modularity, program structure, and comments.

IS 14636: 1996 ISO/IEC 9126 : 1991

3.3 flrmware : Hardware that contains a computer program and data that cannot be changed in its user environment. The computer program and data contained in firmware are classified as software; the circuitry containing the computer program and data is classified as hardware. 3.4 level of performance : The degree to which the needs are satisfied, represented by a specific set of values for the quality characteristics. 3.5 measurement : The action of applying a software quality metric to a specific software product.

3.6 quality : The totality of features and characteristics of a product or service that bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs (IS0 8402:1986). NOTE - In a contractual
be identified environment, needs are specified, whereas and defined (IS0 8402 : 1986, note 1). in other environments, implied needs should

3.7 ratlng : The action of mapping the measured value to the appropriate rating level. Used to determine the rating level associated with the software for a specific quality characteristic . 3.8 ratlng level : A range of values on a scale to allow software to be classified (rated) in accordance with the stated or implied needs. Appropriate rating levels may be associated with the different views of quality i.e. Users, Managers or Developers.These levels are called rating levels. NOTE - These rating levels are differentfrom the "grades" defined in IS0 8402. 3.9 software : Programs, procedures, rules and any associated documentation pertaining to the operation of a computer system. 3 s 10 software product : A software entity designated for delivery to a user. 3.1 1 software quality : The totality of features and characteristics of a software product that bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs. 3.12 software quality assessment criteria : The set of defined and documented rules and conditions which are used to decide whether the total quality of a specific software product is acceptable or not. The quality is represented by the set of rated levels associated with the software product. 3.1 3 software quality characteristics : A set of attributes of a software product by which its quality is described and evaluated. A software quality characteristic may be refined into multiple levels of sub-characteristics. 3.1 4 software quality metric : A quantitative scale and method which can be used to determine the value a feature takes for a specific software product.

4

Software quality characteristics

Software quality may be evaluated by the following characteristics. 4.1 Functionality A set of attributes that bear on the existence of a set of functions and their specified properties. The functions are those that satisfy stated or implied needs.

IS 14638 : 1998 ISO/IEC 9126 : 1991

NOTES 1 This set of attributes characterizes characterize when and how it does. 2

what the software does to fulfil needs, whereas

the other sets mainly

For the stated and implied needs in this characteristic, the note to the definition of quality applies, (see 3.6).

4.2 Reliability A set of attributes that bear on the capability stated conditions for a stated period of time. N,OTES

of software

to maintain

its level of performance

under

1 Wear or ageing does not occur in software. Limitations in reliability are due to faults in requirements, design, and implementation. Failures due to these faults depend on the way the software product is used and the program options selected rather than on elapsed time. 2 In the definition of IS0 8402, reliability is "The ability of an item to perform a required function...". In this document, functionality is only one of the characteristics of software quality. Therefore, the definition of reliability has been broadened to "maintain its level of performance... " instead of "...perform a required function" (see also 3.4).

4.3

Usability
assessment of such use,

A set of attributes

that bear on the effort needed for use, and on the individual by a stated or implied set of users. NOTES

1 "Users" may be interpreted as most directly meaning the users of interactive software. Users may include operators, end users and indirect users who are under the influence or dependent on the use of the software. Usability must address all of the different user environments that the software may affect, which may include preparation for usage and evaluation of results. 2 Usability defined in this International Standard as a specific set of attributes of software product differs from the definition from an ergonomic point of view, where other characteristics such as efficiency and effectiveness are also seen as constituents of usability.

4.4 Efficiency A set of attributes that bear on the relationship between the amount of resources used, under stated conditions.
NOTE - Resources disks) and services

the level of performance

of the software

and

may include other software products, hardware of operating, maintaining, or sustaining staff.

facilities,

materials,

(e.g. print paper, floppy

4.5

Maintainability
that bear on the effort needed to make specified
or adaptation

A set of attributes

modifications.
of software to changes in environment,

NOTE - Modification may include corrections, improvements and in requirements and functional specifications.

4.6
NOTE

Portablllty
that bear on the ability of software to be transferred
may include organizational. hardware

A set of attributes

from one environment

to another.

- The environment

or software environment.

3

Is 14638 : 1998

ISO/IEC 9126 : 1991

5
5.1

Guidelines
Usage

for use of quality characteristics

This International Standard is applicable to defining software quality requirements (measuring, rating and assessing) software products including

and evaluating

- Defining the software product quality requirement. - Evaluating software specification to see if it will satisfy the quality requirement during development. - Describing features and attributes of the implemented software, (e.g. in users' manuals). - Evaluating developed software before delivery. - Evaluating the software before acceptance Currently, only a few generally accepted metrics exist for the characteristics described in this International Standard. Standards groups or organizations may establish their own evaluation process models and methods for creating and validating metrics associated with these characteristics to cover different areas of application and lifecycle stages. In those cases where appropriate metrics are unavailable and cannot be developed, verbal descriptions or "rule of thumb" may sometimes be used. To use the six quality characteristics for definition and evaluation purposes it is also necessary to establish rating levels and criteria specific to the organization or the application or both. Metrics, rating levels, and criteria applied for quality evaluation should be stated when the evaluation results are communicated. Though there is no widely accepted software classification system there are some classes of software that are widely accepted. The importance of each quality characteristic varies depending on the class of the software. For example, reliability is most important for a mission critical system software, efficiency is most important for a time critical real time system software, and usability is most important for an interactive end user software. The importance of each quality characteristic also varies depending on the view points considered. 5.2

Views

of software

quality

There are several views of quality, some of which are discussed below.
5.2.1 Users' view The definition of quality in IS0 8402 reflects the users' view, as do the characteristics defined in this International Standard.

Users are mainly interested in using the software, its performance and the effects of using the software. Users evaluate the software without knowing the internal aspects of the software, or how the software is developed. Users' questions may include - Are the required functions available in the software? - How reliable is the software? - How efficient is the software? - Is the software easy to use? - How easy is it to transfer the software to another environment?

IS 14638 : 1998 ISO/IEC 9128 : 1991

5.2.2 Developers' vlew The process of development requires the user and the developer to use the same software quality characteristics, since they apply to requirement and acceptance. When developing off-the-shelf software, the implied needs must be reflected in the quality requirement, Since developers are responsible for producing software which will satisfy quality requirements they are interested in the intermediate product quality as well as in the final product quality. In order to evaluate the intermediate product quality at each phase of the development cycle, the developers have to use different metrics for the same characteristics because the same metrics are not applicable to all phases of the life cycle. For example, the user thinks of efficiency in terms of response iime, while the developer has to use terms of path-length and access and waiting time in the design specification. Generally speaking, metrics applying to the external interface of a product are replaced by those applying to its structure. The developers' view must also incorporate the view of the quality characteristics maintaining the software. required by those

5.2.3 Manager's vlew A manager may be more interested in the overall quality rather than in a specific quality characteristic, and for this reason will need to assign weights, reflecting business requirements, to the individual characteristics. The manager may also need to balance the quality improvement with management criteria such as schedule delay or cost overrun, because he wishes to optimize quality within limited cost, human resources and time-frame.

5

IS 14636 : 1996

lSO/lEC 9126:1991

5.3

Evaluation process model

Figure 1 shows the major steps required to evaluate software quality starting with the quality characteristics defined in this International Standard. Due to the high-level nature of figure 1, a number of detailed procedures such as analysis and validation of metrics are not shown.

Steted or implied needs ISOilEC 9126 8 other technical information Managerial requirement

I

Requirement definition

Metric selection

1 Preparation

Products

or

Software development L

intermediate products

ww Measurement

Measured value I

i Evaluation

\
Rating I

Rated level

Result

Figure 1 _ Evaluation process model

Quality Requirement Definition, Evaluation Preparation and The process consists of three stages: Evaluation Procedure. This process may be applied in every appropriate phase of the life cyle for each component of the software product. 6

IS 14638 : 1998 ISWIEC 9126:1991

53.1 Quality requirement definition The purpose of the initial stage is to specify requirements in terms of quality characteristics and possible subcharacteristics. Requirements express the demand of the environment for the software product under consideration, and must be defined prior to the development. As a software product is decomposed into major components, the requirements derived from the overall product may differ for the different components. 53.2 Evaluatlon preparation The purpose of the second stage is to prepare the basis for evaluation. 5.3.2.1 Quality metrics selectlon The manner in which quality characteristics have been defined does not allow their direct measurement. The need exists to establish metrics that correlate to the characteristics of the software product. Every quantifiable feature of software and every quantifiable interaction of software with its environment that correlates with a characteristic can be established as a metric. Metrics can differ depending on the environment and the phases of the development process in which they are used. Metrics used in the development process should be correlated to the user respective metrics, because the metrics from the user's view is crucial. 5.3.2.2 Ratlng levels deflnltlon Quantifiable features can be measured quantitatively using quality metrics. The result, i.e. measured value, is mapped on the scale. This value does not show the level of satisfaction. For this purpose these scales must be divided into ranges corresponding to the different degrees of satisfaction of the requirements (see figure 2). Since quality refers to given needs, no general levels for rating are possible. They must be defined for each specific evaluation.

7

IS 14638 : 1998 ISO/IEC 9126 : 1991

Excellent Measured value c Satisfactory

Fair

Poor

Scale for metric

Rating levels

J

? Unsatisfactory

figure 2

-

Measured value and rated level

5.3.2.3 Assessment criteria definition To assess the quality of the product, the results of the evaluation of the different characteristics must be summarized. The evaluator has to prepare a procedure for this, using, for instance, decision tables or weighted averages. The procedure usually will include other aspects such as time and cost that contribute to the assessment of quality of a software product in a particular environment. 5.3.3 Evaluation procedure The last stage of the Evaluation Process Model is refined into three steps, namely measurement, rating and assessment. 5.3.3.1 Measurement For measurement, the selected metrics are applied to the software product. The result are values on . the scales of the metrics. 5.3.3.2 Rating In the rating step, the rating level is determined for a measured value (see figure 2). Assessment 5.3.3.3 Assessment is the final step of the software evaluation process where a set of rated levels are summarized. The result is a statement of the quality of the software product. Then the summarized qualrty is compared with the other aspects such as time and cost. Finally managerial decision will be made based on the managerial criteria. The result is a managerial decision on the acceptance or rejectiotr, or on the release or no-release of the software product.

IS 14638 : 1998 ISO/IEC 9126 : 1991

Annex A (informative) Quality subcharacteristics
A.1 lntroductlon

This annex provides an illustrative quality model which defines the characteristics of IS0 9126 into terms of subcharacteristics. This is a necessary step towards quality measurement using the quality evaluation process model described in IS0 9126. Subsequent related documents will deal with the measurement of s&characteristics. There are a number of such quality models in the literature and applied in practice. the models, terms and definitions does not yet allow them to be included Nevertheless, they are published to encourage use in practice and to collect further editions. The key point is that there should be a quality model subcharacteristic level for a software product, not that it should be of the precise in this annex. A.2 Definition The maturity of in a standard. experience for to at least the form described

of quality

subcharacterlstlcs

A-2.1 A.2.1 .l

Functionality Sultablllty
and appropriateness of a set of functions for

Attribute of software that bears on the presence specified tasks.
NOTE - Examples of appropriateness functions, capacities of tables.

are task oriented

composition

of functions from constituent

sub-

A.2.1.2
Attributes
NOTE

Accuracy
of software that bear on the provision of right or agreed results or effects.
values. - For example, this includes the needed degree of precision of calculated

A-2.1.3
Attributes

lnteroperablllty
of software that bear on its ability to interact with specified systems.
with in order to avoid possible ambiguity

NOTE - Interoperability is used in place of compatibility replaceability (see A.2.6.4).

A.2.1.4

Compliance
related standards or

Attributes of software that make the software adhere to application conventions or regulations in laws and similar prescriptions. A.2.1.5 Security Attributes of software that bear on its ability to prevent unauthorized or deliberate, to programs and data.

access, whether

accidental

A.2.2

Reliability

A-2.2.1
Attributes

Maturlty
of software that bear on the frequency of failure by faults in the software.

9

IS 14636: 1996 ISO/IEC 9126 : 1991

A.2.2.2 Fault tolerance Attributes of software that bear on its ability to maintain a specified level of performance in cases of software faults or of infringement of its specified interface. NOTE - The specified level of performance includes fail safe capability. A.2.2.3 Recoverablllty Attributes of software that bear on the capability to re-establish its level of performance and recover the data directly affected in case of a failure and on the time and effort needed for it.

A.2.3

Usability

A.2.3.1 Understandability Attributes of software that bear on the users' effort for recognizing the logical concept and its applicability. A.2.3.2 Learnability Attributes of software that bear on the users' effort for learning its application (for example, operation control, input, output). A.2.3.3 Operablllty Attributes of software that bear on the users' effort for operation and operation control.

A.2.4

Efficiency

A.2.4.1 Time behavlour Attributes of software that bear on response and processing times and on throughput rates in performing its function. A.2.4.2 Resource behavlour Attributes of software that bear on the amount of resources used and the duration of such use in performing its function.

A.25

Malntalnablllty

A.251 Analysablllty Attributes of software that bear on the effort needed for diagnosis of deficiencies or causes of failures, or for identification of parts to be modified. A.2.5.2 Changeablllty Attributes of software that bear on the effort needed for modification, fault removal or for environmental change. A.253 Stability Attributes of software that bear on the risk of unexpected effect of modifications. A.2.5.4 Testability Attributes of software that bear on the effort needed for validating the modified software. NOTE - Values of this subcharacteristic may be altered by the modifications under consideration.

10

IS 14638 : 1998 iSO/iEC 9126 : 1991

A.2.6 A.2.6.1

Portability Adaptability

Attributes of software that bear on the opportunity for its adaptation to different specified environments without applying other actions or means than those provided for this purpose for the software considered. A-2.6.2 instaiiabiiity Attributes of software that bear on the effort needed to install the software in a specified environment. A.2.6.3 Conformance Attributes of software that make the software adhere to standards or conventions relating to portability. A.2.6.4 Replaceability Attributes of software that bear on the opportunity and effort of using it in the place of specified other software in the environment of that software. NOTES
1 Replaceability (see A.2.f .3).
is used in place of compatibility in order to avoid possible ambiguity with interoperability

2 Replaceability with a specific software under consideration.

does not imply that this software

is replaceable

with the software

3 Replaceability may include attribut8.s of both installability and adaptability. introduced as a subcharacteristic of its own because of its importance.

The concept

has been

11

IS 14636 : 1996 ISO/IEC 9126 : 1991

Annex B (informative) History of the work
B.l Background

The software industry is entering a period of some maturing, while at the same time software is becoming a crucial component of many of today's products. This pervasive aspect of software makes it a major new factor in trade. Furthermore, with new global demands for safety and quality, the need for international agreements on software quality assessment procedures is becoming important. There are essentially two approaches that can be followed to ensure product quality, one being assurance of the process by which the product is developed, and the other being the evaluation of the quality of the end product. Both avenues are important and both require the presence of a system for managing quality. Such a system identifies the management commitment to quality, and states its policies, as well as the detailed steps that must be in place. To evaluate the quality of a product through some quantitative means, a set of quality characteristics that describe the product and form the basis for the evaluation is required. This International Standard defines these quality characteristics for software products.
8.2 History

State of the art in software technology does not yet present a well established and widely accepted description scheme for assessing the quality of software product. Much work has been done since about 1976 by a number of individuals to define a software quality framework. Models by McCall, Boehm, the US Air Force, and others have been adopted and enhanced over the years. However, today it is difficult for a user or consumer of software products to understand or compare the quality of software. For a long time, reliability has been the only way to gauge quality. Other quality models have been proposed and submitted for use. While studies were useful, they also caused confusion because of the many quality aspects offered. Thus, the need for one standard model came about. It is for this reason that the ISO/IEC technical committee began work to develop the required consensus and encourage standardization on a worldwide basis. First considerations originated in 1978, and in 1985 the development of this International Standard was started. The models proposed initially introduced properties of software that depend on application or implementation aspects (or both), to describe the quality of software. The first step of the IS0 technical committee to arrange these properties systematically failed for lack of definitions. Terms were interpreted in different ways by different experts. All structures discussed were, therefore, of an arbitrary nature, without a common basis. As a result it was decided that the best chance for establishing an International Standard was to stipulate a set of characteristics based on the definition of quality that later became part of IS0 8402. This international definition is accepted for all kinds of products and services. It starts with the user's needs.

12

IS 14638 : 1998 ISO/IEC 9126 : 1991

8.3

Six IS0

software

quality

characteristics

The requirements for choosing the characteristics described in this International Standard were as follows: - To cover together all aspects of software quality resulting from the IS0 quality definition. - To describe the product quality with a minimum of overlap. - To be as close as possible to the established terminology. - To form a set of not more than six to eight characteristics for reason of clarity and handling. - To identify areas of attributes of software products for further refinement. The work of the technical committee resulted in the above set of characteristics. However, a pure terminology International Standard, containing definitions of characteristics would not have provided sufficient support to users in assessing software quality. Therefore, a description on how to proceed with evaluating the quality of a software product was included. Evaluating product quality in practice requires characteristics beyond the set at hand, and requires metrics for each of the characteristics. The state of art at present does not permit standardization in this area. Waiting for enhancements would have delayed the publication of this International Standard substantially. Furthermore, it was felt that with the ongoing work in many countries, numerous different individual solutions would have been established, the harmonization of which would later be costly and time consuming. For this reason, the technical committee issues this International Standard in its present form to harmonize further development. Work to determine a set of quality subcharacteristics structured below the six characteristics defined herein is currently underway within the technical committee. The issuing of a number of software engineering and software quality related standards is planned.

13

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indiarr Startdurds Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course 01 implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the hasis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes arc needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. LTD 33 ( 1661 ). Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN STANDARDS Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 32376 17,3233841 337 84 99,337 85 61 337 86 26,337 9120 60 38 43 { 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 { 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 { 832 78 91,832 78 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zrrfar Marg

NEW DELHI 110002
: l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA

700054 160022

: SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

: Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHCPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THJRUVANANTHAPIJRAM.
Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi, India

