**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12396 (1988): Paddy Cleaner [FAD 20: Agriculture and 
Food Processing Equipments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 631-362-3 : 664782'44 |S . ^23S6 - IMS 



Indian Standard 
SPECIFICATION FOR (Reaffirmed 1999) 

PADDY CLEANER 



1. Scope — Specifies material, constructional, performance and other requirements of paddy cleaners. 

2. Terminology — For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 2 of IS : 8440-1977 'Test 
code for paddy cleaners' shall apply. 

3. Materials 

3.1 Mild steel [ see IS : 226-1975 Specification for structural steel ( standard quality) ( fifth revision ) or 
IS : 1977-1975 Specification for structural steel (ordinary quality) {second revision) ], cast iron [see 
18:210-1978 Specification for grey iron castings {ttilrd revision) ] and wood (see 18:399-1963 
Classification for commercial timbers and their zonal distribution ) shall be used in fabrication of various 
components of the cleaners. The sheets used shall be not less than 07 mm thick, 

3.2 Sieves used in the cleaners shall be manufactured from the material specified in IS : 2405 ( Part 2 )- 
1980 'Specification for industrial selves: Part 2 Perforated plates ( first revision)', 

3.3 The material for various components shall be declared by the manufacturer. 

4. Perfermance Requirements 

4.1 The cleaner shall be operated at no load as given in 7.1 of IS : 8440-1977. During the no-load run, 
the visual observations shall not indicate the following: 

a) Presence of any marked vibration during operation, 

b) Presence of undue knocking or rattling sound, 

c) Frequent slippage of belts, 

d) Non-smooth running of shafts in their respective bearings, 

e) Any marked unusual wear or slackness in any component, 

f ) Any marked rise in bearing temperature, and 

g) Vibration in fan running. 

4.2 The rated input capacity in quintals per kWh energy consumed, with 5 and 10 percent foreign matter 
in the paddy mass, shall be declared by the manufacturer. The various adjustments, clearances and 
speeds for that capacity shall also be declared. When tested in accordance with the method given 
In 8.1.9 of IS : 8440-1977, the declared capacity shall not differ by ±5 percent, 

4.2.1 During and after the capacity test, the visual observation shall not indicate the following: 

a) Observations given under 4.1 (a) to (g); r 

b) Frequent clogging of screen perforations; 

c) Non-smooth flowing of material through different components; 

d) Frequent clogging of grain in elevator unit; 

e) Frequent clogging of aspiration unit; 

f ) Any marked wear, deformation and breakdown; 

g) Frequent losening of fasteners; and 

h) Leakage of grains from the cleaner, while in operation. 

4.3 When tested in accordance with 8.2 of IS : 8440-1977. no breakdown shall occur in any unit of the 
cleaner. 

5. Constructional Requirements 

5.1 Frame shall be made of suitable size mild steel angle section or wood and shall be provided with 
proper bracings. 



ft 



Adopted 16 May 1988 



O December 1988, BIS 



6r 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAR6 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 12396-1988 

5.2 Hopper shall be provided with a feed regulating device capable of distributing the feed evenly to 
the cleaner. 

5.3 One or Xho oscillating and/or rotary screens, depending on the size of the cleaners, shall be used. 

5.4 Blower shall be provided with a control to regulate air flow rate. 

5.5 Suitable system for transmitting the power shall be provided. It may consist of V-belt and pulley, 
gears or sprocket and chain. 

5.5.1 Transmission guards shall be provided to prevent accidental contact of persons or parts of 
clothing being caught in the transmission system, unless the system is so constructed or placed as to be 
safe without guards. 

5.5.2 The guards shall be so designed as not to hinder in easy adjustment, servicing and operation 
of cleaner. 

5.5.3 It is preferable that ail guards shall be either permanently attached or firmly secured to prevent 
their removal without the aid of tools. The servicing and adjustments should be possible without 
complete removal of the guards. 

5.5.4 The guards shall have sufficient strength to support load of 1 200 N applied at any point over 
an area of 01 m^ without permanent set. 

Note — Depending upon space available, the area and load may be correspondingly increased or decreased 
for testing purposes. 

5.6 The shafts and eccentrics shall be supported on ball or roller bearings at both the ends 

6. Other Requirements 

6.1 Provision for the adjustments of the following shall be made: 

a) Feed rate, and 

b) Air displacement. 

6.2 Various controls shall be easily accessible and capable of being locked in a choosen position, 

6.3 In case of belt drive, provision for belt tightening shall be made. 

a A K/tannatc chall Ka r\rf\\t\MaA fr\ arrad irr\n r»rtntaminantc 

6.5 Provision for cleaning the screen and to avoid clogging shall be provided, 

6.6 Suitable inspection window may be provided to inspect the process of cleaning, 

6.7 The cleaner shall be provided with the operators manual [see 4.2 of IS : 8132-1983 Guidelines for 
presentation of operator manual and technical publications for agricultural tractors and machinery 
{first revision )]. (Vlanual shall also contain the information given in Appendix A of IS : 8440-1977. 

7. Workmanship and Finish 

7.1 Welding used for joining different components shall not be porous and shall be smooth [see 
IS : 816-1969 Code of practice for use of metal arc welding for general construction in mild steel ( first 
revision ) ]. 

7.2 The components of the cleaner shall be free from cracks, pits and other visual defects which may be 
detrimental for their use. The rust preventive coating to the steel components and varnish to the 
wooden components shall be provided. 

8. Marking and Packing 

8,1 Marliing — Each cleaner shall be marked with the following particulars on the main body: 

a) Manufacturers' name and recognized trade-mark; 

b) Model number; 

d) Power rating, kW; 



18:12396-1988 

e) Rated input capacity; and 

f) Direction of rotation of rotating parts. 

8.1.1 A minimum cautionary notice worded as follows shall be written in vernacular language legibly 
and prominently on the main body of the cleaner: 

a) DO NOT WEAR LOOSE DRESS, BANGLES, WATCH, ETC, WHILE WORKING; 

b) DO NOT WORK UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF INTOXICANTS LIKE LIQUOR, OPIUM, 
ETC; 

c) CHILDREN AND AGED PERSONS SHOULD BE DISCOURAGED FOR WORKING ON 
CLEANER; 

d) DO NOT CROSS OVER MOVING BELTS; 

e) DO NOT OPERATE CLEANER WITHOUT GUARDS AND SAFETY DEVICES; 

f) DO NOT MAKE ADJUSTMENT WHEN CLEANER IS WORKING; AND 

g) DO NOT PUT OR TAKE-OFF BELT WHILE PULLEY IS RUNNING. 

8.1.2 Standard marking — Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards. 

8.2 Packing — The cleaner or its components shall be packed as agreed to between the purchaser and 
the supplier for safe handling in transit and storage. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The freshly harvested paddy often contain inert matter like chaff, stems, stones, deteriorated and 
damaged grain, and weeds and other crop grain. In order to remove these from the basic grains, paddy 
cleaners are being manufactured and used in the country. A need was, therefore, felt to prepare this 
Indian Standard to guide the manufacturers and users in production and purchase of quality cleaner. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from Post-Harvest Technology 
Centre, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be jounded off 
in accordance with IS ; 2-1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values {revised)\ The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified values 
in this standard. 



Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi. India 



