INATA Ah IS 7314 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


qaa sit Urata sttsraitercht — 
uraa srecractt 


( TET TAT ) 


Port and Harbour Engineering — 
Glossary of Terms 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.140 


© BIS 2023 


ameda HAH OAT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Se EECA HM, 9 ER ME AHL AM, AE Feet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2023 Price Group 14 


Ports, Harbours and Offshore Installations Sectional Committee, CED 47 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Ports, Harbours and Offshore Installations Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


A series of Indian Standards covering various aspects of port and harbour engineering have been published. These 
include a large number of terms relating to ports and harbour engineering. The extensive use of these terms has 
necessitated the preparation of this glossary. 


This standard was first published in 1974. In this revision, following changes have been effected: 


a) New terms have been added; and 
b) Definitions of many terms used in the standard have been elaborated and modified. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international coordination among the standards 
and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


PORT AND HARBOUR ENGINEERING — GLOSSARY OF 
TERMS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers definitions relating to port and 
harbour engineering. 


2 TERM AND DEFINITIONS 


2.1 Accretion (also Aggradation) — The growth or 
increase by the gradual accumulation of additional 
layers water borne or airborne materials or matter. 


NOTE — Natural accretion is the build up of land solely by 
the action of forces of nature, on a beach by deposition of 
water borne or airborne materials. Artificial accretion is a 
similar build up of land by reason of an act of man, such as 
accretion formed by a groin, break-water, or beach fill 
deposited by mechanical means. 


2.2 Admiralty Tide Tables — The Tide Tables 
published annually by the admiralty giving daily 
tidal predictions for standard ports and data for 
predictions for each day of the year at secondary 
ports either in the form of harmonic constants or 
non-constants, such as time differences and ratio of 
ranges on in the Indian Ocean, UK and other ports 
of the world. 


2.3 Advance (of a Beach) (also Progression) 


a) A continuing seaward movement of the 
shoreline 


b) A net seaward movement of the shoreline 
over a specified time. 


2.4 Aggradation — see Accretion. 


2.5 Air Chamber 


A hollow watertight chamber provided in caisson in 
which ballast to the required amount is placed, to 
have the required floatation of the caisson for its 
operation. 


2.6 Altar Course 


Steps provided on the inner faces of the two 
longitudinal walls of a graving dock to receive the 
side shores for keeping the vessel in position. In 
modern dry docks the usefulness of the altar courses 
is much reduced as the vessel rests on a cradle 
formed by the keel and bilge blocks. 


2.7 Amplitude (of a Wave) (also Wave 
Amplitude) 


a) The magnitude of the displacement of a 
wave from a mean value. 


NOTE — An ocean wave has an amplitude equal to 
the vertical distance from still water level to wave 
crest. For a sinusoidal wave, amplitude is one-half the 
wave height. 


b) The semi range of a constituent tide. 
2.8 Analogue Model 


A model based on the identity of the equations 
describing two or more systems, and carrying out 
measurements on that system which appears most 
convenient for this purpose, interpreting the results 
of the measurements in terms of one or more of the 
other systems. 


2.9 Anchor 


An implement for retaining or fastening a ship by 
chaining it to the bed of a water course. 


2.10 Anchorage 


A place or location for anchoring a vessel. For every 
port there are some such fixed places where vessels 
are anchored, waiting for their turn to enter the port 
or sail out of the port area. 


2.11 Angle of Repose 


The angle between the horizontal and the plane of 
contact between two bodies when the upper body is 
just about to slide over the lower. Also known as 
angle of friction. 


2.12 Antidunes 


Bed forms that occur in trains, and are in phase and 
strongly interact with gravity water surface waves. 


2.13 Antinode (also Loop) 


The part of a standing wave where the vertical 
motion is greatest and the horizontal velocities are 
least. Antinodes are associated with clapotis, and 
with seiche action resulting from wave reflections. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.14 Approach Channel 


The navigational channel from deep water where 
vessels get sufficient draft, to the dock or 
harbours. 


2.15 Apron 


An apron is the area immediately in front of or 
behind a wharf shed on which cargo is lifted. It is 
a surface, generally paved, provided wharf surface 
and the transit space. 


2.16 Apron Conveyor 


A type of conveyor made from individual apron 
plates that are linked together with hinges on its 
underside, thus creating a continuous and looped 
carrying surface where materials can be placed. 
These are widely employed for handling both 
heavy and light miscellaneous packages. 


2.17 Armour Stone 


Armour stone is a general term used to refer to a 
range of natural or sometimes artificial stone 
applications used for wave protection of shorelines 
and erosion protection of stream banks from the 
eroding action of waves and flowing water as well 
as in retaining walls and slope buttressing related 
to construction. 


2.18 Arrastre 


A person/entity who/which performs portside 
cargo handling operations, e.g. receiving, 
handling, custody, security and delivery of cargo 
passing over piers, quays or wharves, transit 
sheds/warehouses and open storages within the 
jurisdictional area of responsibility of the 
authorized contractor/operator. 


2.19 Artificial Harbour 


An arrangement, which is so constructed to 
perform the functions of a port. 


2.20 Artificial Nourishment 


The process of replenishing a beach with material 
(usually sand) obtained from another location. 


2.21 Astern 


In or towards the hind-part of a vessel. 


2.22 Atoll 


A ring shape coral reef, often carrying low sand 
islands enclosing a lagoon. 


2.23 Atoll Lagoon 


The body of water enriched by coral islands and 
reefs. 


2.24 Attenuation 


a) The process of the gradual reduction in the 
intensity of an oscillatory waves or a water- 
particle motion with respect to the depth 
which propagates through a material 
medium. 


b) The decrease of water-particle motion with 
increasing depth. Particle motion resulting 
from surface oscillatory waves attenuates 
rapidly with depth and practically 
disappears at a depth equal to a surface 
wave length. 


2.25 Audible Signals 


A signal made by a distinct sound or series of sounds 
used as a warning medium when lighting is 
practically ineffective, such as in dense fog for safe 
and rapid navigation in channels. 


2.26 Automatic Tide Gauge 


The instrument with mechanical/electrical 
arrangements for continuous recording of the 
variations of tidal heights above a fixed datum in a 
tidal course. 


2.27 Average Draft of Vessel 


Derived by adding the drafts upon arrival and upon 
departure of all vessels and dividing them by 2. 


2.28 Awash 


Situated so that the top is intermittently washed by 
waves or tidal faction. Condition of being exposed 
or just bare at any stage of the tide between high 
water and chart datum. 


2.29 Backbeach (Backwash) (also Backshore) 


That zone of the shore or beach lying between the 
foreshore and the coastline and acted upon by waves 
only during severe storms, especially when 
combined with exceptionally high water. It 
comprises the berm or berms. 


2.30 Backhaul 


To haul a shipment back over part of a route which 
it has already travelled; a marine transportation 
carrier’s return movement of cargo, usually opposite 
from the direction of its primary cargo distribution. 


2.31 Backrush 


The seaward return of the water following the 
uprush of the wave. For any given tide stage the 
point of furthest return seaward of the backrush is 
known as the limit of backrush. 


2.32 Backshore 
See Backbeach. 
2.33 Backwash 
a) Same as Backrush. 


b) The movement of water back into the sea 
after waves thrown by an obstruction, such 
as a ship, breakwater or cliff. 


2.34 Balance Dock 


A form of floating dock which is kept level by 
pumping water out of, or letting it into, the 
compartments of side chambers. 


2.35 Ballast 


Materials that is used to provide stability to a vehicle 
or structure as on a ship, or to limit buoyancy. 


2.36 Bank 


a) The rising ground bordering a lake, river or 
sea; of a river or channel, designated as 
right or left as it would appear facing 
downstream. 


b) An elevation of the sea floor of large area, 
located on a continental shelf and over 
which the depth is relatively shallow but 
sufficient for safe surface navigation; a 
group of shoals. 


c) In its secondary sense, a shallow area 
consisting of shifting forms of silt, sand, 
mud and gravel, but in this case it is only 
used with a qualifying word, such as ‘sand 
bank’ or ‘gravel bank’. 


2.37 Bank, Sand (also Sandbank) 
A shallow area consisting of shifting forms of sand. 
2.38 Bar 


A submerged or submersible area of sand, gravel, or 
other unconsolidated material built on the sea floor 
or river bed in shallow water by waves, currents, 
tidal flow, etc. This could either be built or naturally 
occurring due to accretion. 


2.39 Barge 


A barge is a long, narrow boat with flat-bottomed 
vessel traditionally used to transport goods and 
people through inland waterways. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.40 Barrier Beach or Offshore Barrier or 
Barrier Island 


A bar essentially parallel to the shore, the crest of 
which is above normal high water level. 


2.41 Barrier Lagoon 


A bay roughly parallel to the coast and separated 
from the open ocean by barrier islands. 


2.42 Barrier Lagoon 


Bodies of water that are separated from larger 
bodies of water by a natural barrier. 


2.43 Barrier Reef 


A coral reef parallel to and separated from the coast 
by a lagoon that is too deep for coral growth. 
Generally, barrier reefs follow the coasts for long 
distances, and are cut through at irregular intervals 
by channels or passes. 


2.44 Basin 


An area of naturally or artificially partially enclosed 
water in free communication with the sea. The 
functions of basins in many cases coincide with 
those of docks, so that some elasticity of 
nomenclature is not without justification. 


2.45 Basin, Boat 


A naturally or artificially enclosed basin or nearly 
enclosed in and harbour area for small craft. 


2.46 Basin, Filling Out 


A recirculation basin used for filling in and draining 
out water from dock basin. 


2.47 Basin, Tidal 


A non-enclosed basin used for speedy and 
unrestricted arrival and departure of vessels in an 
area which is subjected to tidal fluctuations. 


2.48 Basin, Turning 


An area provided in an impounded dock or harbour 
for turning and manoeuvring of the ships during 
berthing and deberthing. The diameter of the turning 
basin is kept at one and a half times to two times the 
length of the largest vessel calling at the port. 


2.49 Basin, Wet (also Wet Dock) 


Areas of impounded water within which vessels can 
remain afloat at a uniform level, independent of 
external tidal action. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.50 Bathymetry 


The measurement of depths of water in oceans, and 
lakes; also information derived from such 
measurements. Bathymetry is also the study of 
underwater depth of ocean floors or lake floors. 


2.51 Bay 


A bay is a recessed, coastal body of water that 
directly connects to a larger main body of water, 
such as an ocean, a lake, or even another bay. A 
large bay is usually called a gulf, sea, sound, or 
bight. 


2.52 Baymouth 


A bar extending partly or entirely across the mouth 
of a bay. 


2.53 Bayou 


A minor sluggish waterway or estuarial creek, 
tributary to, or connecting other streams or bodies of 
water. Its course is usually through low lands or 
swamps. Sometimes called slough. It may refer to an 
extremely slow-moving stream or river (often with a 
poorly defined shoreline). 


2.54 Beach 


The zone of unconsolidated material that extends 
landward from the low water line to the place where 
there is marked change in material or physiographic 
form, or to the line of permanent vegatation (usually 
the effective limit of storm waves). The seaward 
limit of a beach L — unless otherwise specified — 
is the mean low water line. A beach includes 
foreshore and backshore. 


2.55 Beach Berm 


A nearly horizontal shore parallel ridge formed on 
the beach due to the landward transport of the 
coarsest fraction of the beach material by the wave 
uprush (swash). 


2.56 Beach Building 
Deposition of beach materials either by natural wave 


action or artificial process. 


2.57 Beach Cusp (also Cusp) 


Beach cusps are shoreline formations made up of 
various grades of sediment in an arc pattern. The 
horns are made up of coarser material and the 
embayment contains finer sediment. 


2.58 Beach Erosion 


The carrying away of beach materials by wave 
action, tidal currents, littoral currents, or wind. 


2.59 Beach Face 


The section of the shore/beach which is wetted due 
to the varying tide andswashunder normal 
conditions. 


2.60 Beach Ridge 


A beach ridge is a wave-swept or wave-deposited 
ridge running parallel to a shoreline. It is commonly 
composed of sand as well as sediment worked from 
underlying beach material. 


2.61 Beach Scarp 


An almost vertical slope along the beach caused by 
erosion by wave action. It may vary in height froma 
few centimetres to several metres depending on 
wave action and the nature and composition of the 
beach. 


2.62 Beach, Spending 


To break up and disperse heavy seas, preventing 
them from exerting their destructive influence upon 
the beach, the waves are sometimes made to run up 
a long sloping beach, the spending beach, their 
energy then being absorbed gravitationally in surges 
and a tumult of broken water, by movement of loose 
beach material and by percolation of water through 
the material. 


2.63 Beacon 


Any prominent objects or structures, natural or 
artificial, on a coastline or river bank, which act as 
an aid to navigation. 


2.64 Beacon, Miscellaneous 


Types of navigational aids, as distinct from buoys, 
luminous beacons and lighthouses, used as a means 
of alignment or as an indication of change of 
direction for navigation. May be natural objects, 
such as lofty isolated trees, tropical features like the 
edge of a cliff or the summit of a hill or prominent 
structures of any kind. 


2.65 Beam of Vessel 


The width of a vessel at the widest point, or a point 
alongside the ship at the midpoint of its length. 


2.66 Beaufort Scale 


A wind force scale classified by Admiral Beaufort in 
1805 for maritime purposes. The intensity of winds 
is expressed in twelve numbers forming a scale, each 
number representing a wind strength of a designated 
range of velocities. 


2.67 Bench 


a) A level or gently sloping erosion plane 
inclined seaward. 


b) A nearly horizontal area at about the level 
of maximum water on the sea side of a dike. 


2.68 Berth 


A ship's station in the water where a ship stops and 
stays when anchored or at a wharf or alongside a 
structure. 


2.69 Berth-Cargo 


A berth for loading and unloading of cargo to from 
the ship. 


2.70 Berth, Container 


A berth for loading and unloading of containerized 
cargo to and from the ship. 


2.71 Berthing/Docking 


Manoeuvring of a vessel from anchorage position or 
from a pilot station to a berth, including the process 
of stationing the vessel alongside the pier, quay or 
wharf. 


2.72 Container berth 


Container berth means any berth at a state dock or 
pier designated by the State for preferential use by 
vessels primarily loading or unloading shipping 
devices. 


2.73 Berth Occupancy (also Occupancy Factor of 
Berth) 


The duration over which a ship lies anchored at the 
berth for loading and unloading operations in a 
specified period of time. It is usually expressed as a 
ratio of the actual time of occupation of the berth by 
ships to the total period specified. 


2.74 Bilge Block 


Blocks provided for the purpose of affording a 
support to the ship's hull. 


2.75 Bill of lading 


A contract between a shipper and carrier listing the 
terms for moving freight between specified points. 


2.76 Bilge Block 


One of the blocks supporting the bilge of a ship at 
the turn of the bilge while in a dry dock or under 
construction. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.77 Blocks, Keel 


base for the ship's keel and in order to give ready 
access thereto and transferring the ship's load to the 
foundation in a dry dock, these blocks of hard base 
of hard wood, cast iron or steel and a capping of 
soft wood, are placed on the floar of the dry dock. 


2.78 Bold Coast 


A prominent land mass that rises steeply from the 
sea. 


2.79 Bollard 


It is the anchor point for mooring lines to be fixed 
to the quay, berth and jetty at cope level in order 
to secure the vessel. These also provide a means 
of checking vessels entering or leaving the dock. 
These may be of concrete, cast iron or steel of 
different sizes and shapes. 


2.80 Bore (Tidal Bore) (also Eager) 


A very rapid rise of the tide in which the advancing 
water presents an abrupt front of considerable 
height. In shallow estuaries and river sections, 
where the range of tide is large, the high 
water is propagated inward faster than the low 
water because of the greater depth at high water. If 
the high water overtakes the low water, an abrupt 
front is presented with the high water crest finally 
falling forward as the tide continues to advance. 


2.81 Bow-Well Dredger 


A type of bucket-ladder dredger in which the ladder 
and buckets protrude some distance in front of the 
hull so that the dredger may cut its own floatation 
for a twenty four hours dredging in a shallow water 
where neither the dredger, tug, nor spoil barges can 
float at low water over the area before dredging. 


2.82 Box Dock 


A continuous floor pontoon carrying two side 
walls, that is, it is the only form of modern 
floating dock which cannot be divided into three or 
more parts for the purpose of self docking. It is of 
the simplest form and earliest type used mainly 
for small docks for dealing with relatively light 
craft, tugs, trawlers, coasting vessels, patrol 
and escort vessels and destroyers. 


2.83 Breakbulk 


Cargo that is handled in units, packages, crates, bags 
and the like. 


2.84 Breaker 


A heavy sea wave that breaks into white foam on the 
shore. Breakers may be classified into four types: 


IS 7314 : 2023 


a) Spilling — Bubbles and turbulent water 
spill down front face of wave. The upper 25 
percent of the front face may become 
vertical before breaking. Breaking 
generally across over quite a distance. 


b) Plunging — Crest curls over air pocket; 
breaking is usually with a crash. Smooth 
splash up usually follows. 


c) Collapsing — Breaking occurs over lower 
half of wave. Minimal air pocket and 
usually no splash up. Bubbles and foam 
present. 


d) Surging — Wave peaks up, but bottom 
rushes forward from under wave, and wave 
slides up beach face with little or no bubble 
production. Water surface remains almost 
plane except where ripples may be 
produced on the beach face during runback. 


2.85 Breaker Depth (also Breaking Depth) 


The still water depth at the point where a wave 
breaks. 


2.86 Breaker Line 


The line along which waves break down in front of 
an obstruction or a shoaling beach. 


2.87 Breaking Wave 


See Breaker. 


2.88 Breakwater 


A structure protecting a shore area, harbour, 
anchorage or basin from wave disturbance. 


2.89 Breakwater, Composite 


A breakwater constructed by combination of a 
rubble — mound base and vertical wall or other 
form of superstructure. It is adopted at a location 
where the depth of water is great or there is a wide 
tidal range so that the quantity of rubble stone 
required to construct a mound breakwater of the 
full height would be too large and uneconomical. 
Of these, there is wide variety of types. 


2.90 Breakwater, Floating (also Bombardon) 


A removable breakwater constructed by caissons or 
pontoons with valves for trimming whilst afloat and 
for sinking when in position and pump connections 
for refloating, moored to the sea bed. 


2.91 Breakwater, Mound (also Rubble Mound 
Breakwater) 


A breakwater constructed by a heterogeneous 


assemblage of natural rubble or undressed stone, in 
pieces of varying size, supplemented in many cases 
by artificial blocks of bulk larger than can be 
conveniently quarried in the natural state, the whole 
being deposited pell-mell without any regard to 
bond or bedding. The material may, however, be 
graded as to sizes. 


2.92 Breakwater, Pneumatic 


A pipeline specially designed as to arrangement of 
air holes, flexible couplings, floats, and means of 
controlling the level, to introduce a continuous 
stream of air under pressure for dispersion of waves 
in the undulatory stage, located at least 9 m under 
water surface to provide sufficient air lift. These are 
used in anchorages, temporary protection for 
harbour construction, lifeboat sites, control of 
erosion and silting, protection for stationary 
lightships, salvage work and so on. 


2.93 Breakwater, Vertical Wall 


A breakwater formed by the construction in a regular 
and systematic manner of a vertical wall of steel 
sheet piles either as single unit or as cellular 
construction, concrete blocks or mass concrete, with 
vertical or nearly vertical harbour and seaward faces. 


2.94 Bridge, Bascule 


A bridge, usually in two leaves, meeting at the centre 
of the span, revolving round a horizontal axis and 
provided with a counterpoise in the form of a 
weighted prolongation of the bridge, whereby the 
power required for working the bridge is reduced to 
the minimum. The rolling variety has got the tail-end 
in the form of a circular segment upon which the 
bridge rolls in a manner similar to the action of a 
rocking chair. 


2.95 Bridge, Swing 


Constitutes a very numerous bridge for dock work. 
This includes all movable movement of rotation is 
horizontal. This may be ‘centre bearing’ type in 
which the bridge turns upon a centre pivot or which 
the bridge turns entirely upon rollers. 


2.96 Bridge, Traversing 


Bridges of this type are supported by the quay at or 
about the coping level and are projected forward or 
withdrawn in a straightline in other their motion is 
rectilinear and words, approximately horizontal, or 
with just sufficient inclination to enable them to 
clear the edge of the roadway abutting on their 
recesses. 


2.97 Bucket Ladder Dredger 


An endless chain connecting a series of buckets 
which traverse in succession on inclined orbit, 
approximately elliptical, about two pivots or 
tumblers, excavating material at the lower tumbler 
and discharging it into a chute while passing over the 
upper tumbler. Bucket dredgers of this type have 
either one or two ladders (the central ladder type and 
the side ladder type respectively), that is, the flame, 
with its roller bearings, on which the buckets travel. 
This dredger is especially suitable for steady 
continuous work in hard material and in very stiff 
clay. 


2.98 Bucket Ladder Dredger 


A Stationary dredger that is equipped with a 
continuous chain of buckets, which are carried 
through a structure, the ladder. 


2.99 Bulk Cargo 


A shipping term for items that are shipped loosely 
and unpackaged as opposed to being shipped in 
packages or containers. 


2.100 Bulk Carriers 


Vessels of larger capacity specially designed for 
carrying bulk cargoes in large quantities for 
economic transportation. 


2.101 Bulk Handling Plants 


Mechanical appliances like conveyor, grain 
elevator, crane, transporter, staiths, trimmer, hoist, 
power shovel, straddle carriers, etc, which are used 
in docks for quick and efficient handling of bulk 
cargoes for quick turn-round of vessels. 


2.102 Bulk Head 


A structure separating land and water areas, 
primarily designed to resist earth pressures. 


2.103 Bunkering 
The facility for supplying fuel to ship. 
2.104 Buoy 


A floating object that is anchored to the seabed or 
attached to another object. It is used as a 
navigational aid, surface marker, or a loading point 
for cargoes (see single point mooring buoy). Floats 
that warn of hazards such as rocks or shallow 
ground, to help ships manoeuvre through unfamiliar 
harbours. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.105 Buoy, Anchorage 


A buoy used for anchoring of vessels. 


2.106 Buoy, Mooring 


A transit buoy for mooring a vessel. It may be of any 
shape or colour (except green). 


2.107 Buoy, Pillar 


Pillar Buoys are typically the largest of all floating 
buoys and consist of a tall central structure on a 
broad base and is used to mark special positions on 
a coast or in harbour approaches. 


2.108 Buoy, Radar-Reflecting 


A device designed to reflect radar waves well in 
order to make it clearly visible on radar screens. 


2.109 Buoy, Spar 


A spar buoy is a tall, thin buoy that floats upright in 
the water and is characterized by a small water plane 
area and a large mass. 


2.110 Burtoning System 


The system of cargo handling, in which both derrick 
booms of a vessel are used in conjunction, one of 
them being rigged and fixed so that its head ‘plumbs’ 
the hold, and the other with its head over the ship's 
side, the ends of the two falls being joined to one 
hook so as to make one lifting unit. 


2.111 By-passing, Sand 


Hydraulic or mechanical movement of sand from the 
accreting updrift side to the eroding downdrift side 
of the inlet or harbour entrance. The hydraulic 
movement may include natural as well as movement 
caused by man. 


2.112 Caisson 


Caisson is boxlike structure used in construction 
work underwater or as a foundation. It is usually 
rectangular or circular in plan but its meaning 
has been extended, in maritime engineering, to 
include all hollow structures. 


2.113 Caisson Breakwater 


A caisson is a box made out of steel-reinforced 
concrete that are constructed in a sheltered place, 
temporarily strutted in the interior, launched and 
towed out to site of construction, sunk in position 
by admitting water to the interior, filled with fluid 
concrete, stone rubble, small blocks or sand so as 
to form ultimately a solid monolith. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.114 Caisson, Floating 


May be either ‘box’ or ‘ship’ type caisson with air 
chambers, ballast chambers and tidal chambers, and 
moved entirely by floatation, without guides or 
rollers. 


2.115 Caisson, Pneumatic 


Caisson constructed of steel or concrete with 
working chamber, ballast chamber and vertical 
shafts for passage of workmen and materials, a 
continuous amount of air at the required pressure 
being supplied to the working chamber to balance 
the hydrostatic pressure at the lower or cutting edge 
of the chamber. This is used for construction of 
underwater foundations and may be removed after 
construction or all or part of this may be 
incorporated in the structure built. 


2.116 Caisson, Rolling 


A caisson with rectilinear motion achieved by rollers 
which are attached either to the underside of the 
caisson or to the pathway on which the caisson 
travels, whereby abrasion is reduced due to lesser 
friction than a sliding motion, but may get jammed 
diagonally due to slight side clearance between the 
caisson and its sliding ways. 


2.117 Caisson, Sliding 


A caisson with keels or rubbing plates on its 
underside by which this is hauled over sliding ways 
set on the floor of the caisson berth. This method 
gives rise to a certain amount of friction which may 
be diminished by suitable floatation adjustment. 


2.118 Caisson, Swinging 


This is an intermediate class of structure possessing 
characteristics common to both gates and caissons. 
Like the gate, it turns or swings upon a vertical axis 
fixed at one side of a waterway and requires 
excessive length of side recess for its 
accommodation when out of use. On the other hand 
this is built with much broader beam than a gate and 
this gives it the compensating advantage of a wide 
roadway at quay level. 


2.119 Caisson, Traversing 


This includes all those whose motion is rectilinear 
and, according to the mode of travelling it may be 
the sliding, rolling or floating type but in any case it 
occupies a rectangular recess in a side wall at right 
angle to the axis of the waterway and in direct line 
with the path along which the caisson travels to close 
the entrance. It is almost universally of the box type 
consisting of a floor, side and end plating, and a 
watertight deck, the whole being divided into 
compartments. 


2.120 Camel 


Special craft employed for lifting sunken vessels. 
2.121 Capillary Wave 


A wave whose velocity of propagation is controlled 
primarily by the surface tension or the liquid in 
which the wave is travelling. Water waves of length 
less than about 25 mm are considered capillary 
waves. Waves longer than 25 mm and shorter than 
50 mm are in an intermediate zone between capillary 
and gravity waves. 


2.122 Cap Log 


A horizontal timber on a quay or pier, bolted to the 
vertical timbers or secured to the masonry to receive 
the impact of vessels lying alongside. 


2.123 Capstan 


A quay side mechanical appliance, consisting 
primarily of a drum which rotates about a vertical 
axis, used for shunting and manoeuvring railway 
wagons alongside ships for the purpose of receiving 
and discharging cargoes (and to assist the movement 
of vessels through entrance locks and passages, 
together with the warping of vessels into and out of 
graving docks and floating docks). 


2.124 Cardinal System of Buoyage 


Or the ‘compass’ system of buoyage to indicate 
dangers existing in confined coastal waters by true 
bearing of the navigational mark, from danger, on 
the charts to the nearest cardinal point of the 
compass. In order to determine the bearing of a 
danger from a buoy the four quadrants of the 
compass are divided into sectional areas and 
bounded by the bearing N.E., SE., S.W., and N.W., 
taken from the point of danger. 


2.125 Cargo Vessel 


The goods or merchandise carried on board a trading 
vessel. 


2.126 Cargo, Bulk 


Includes materials like food grain, coal, oil, 
fertiliser, ore, gravel, sand and similar other, which 
are transported in bulk quantities and generally 
handled by special complete mechanical appliances 
for quick and efficient loading and unloading. 


2.127 Cargo, Container 


General cargo consisting of small packages and the 
like, which are transported in special metallic 
containers of definite sizes for quick handling, 
saving manpower and money and with minimum 
wastage. 


2.128 Cargo Density of Ships 


The content of the ship per lineal metre. This is 
used for calculating the storage space and shed 
capacity at the berth. 


2.129 Cargo, General 


General merchandise in packages or in quantities, 
the handling of which cannot be completely 
mechanised. 


2.130 Cargo Handling Gear 


Includes mechanical appliances for loading and 
unloading cargoes to and from a ship, which 
includes cranes of all forms, fork lift trucks, piling 
and stacking machineries, conveyers, elavators, 
straddle carriers, etc. 


2.131 Cargo Mast 


A ship's gear for cargo-handling situated on each 
side of the vessel, and each respectively in such 
positions as to command each hatchway. Also called 
Samson Posts. These along with derricks or booms, 
winches, blocks, runners, and preventers constitute 
the ship's cargo handling gear. 


2.132 Cargo, Palletised 


General cargo, preferably of a more or less 
homogeneous character, is successfully handled in 
standard packages or ‘pallets’, also used for 
handling small or frail packages. The pallet is 
strongly constructed of wood in the form of a 
shallow square or rectangular box usually with two 
open ends and with the top and bottom formed of 
open boarding separated by three or more stringers, 
according to the size of the pallet. 


2.133 Cargo Terminal 


A transportation facility in which quantities of goods 
or container cargo are stored without undergoing 
any manufacturing processes, transferred to other 
carriers or stored outdoors in order to transfer them 
to other locations. 


2.134 Cargo Throughput 


Total volume of cargo discharged and loaded at the 
port. It includes break bulk, liquid bulk, dry bulk, 
containerized cargo, transit cargo, and trans 
shipment. 


2.135 Caustic 


In refractions of waves, the name given to the curve 
to which adjacent orthogonals of waves refracted by 
a bottom whose contour lines are curved, are 
tangents. The occurrence of a caustic always marks 


IS 7314 : 2023 


a region of crossed orthogonals and high wave 
convergence. 


2.136 Central Pressure Index 


The estimated minimum barometric pressure in the 
eye (approximate centre) of a particular hurricane. 
This is considered the most stable index to intensity 
of hurricane wind velocities in the periphery of the 
storm; the highest wind speeds are associated with 
storms having the lowest central pressure index. 


2.137 Channel 


a) A natural or artificial waterway of 
perceptible extent which either periodically 
or continuously contains moving water, or 
which forms a connecting link between two 
bodies of water. 


b) The part of a body of water deep enough to 
be used for navigation through an area 
otherwise too shallow for navigation. 


c) A large strait. 


d) The deepest part of a stream or stream 
through which the main volume or current 
of water flows. 


2.138 Charmel Demarcation 


Safe and speedy navigation within coastal waters 
depends — apart from charts — upon the 
establishment of a number of navigational aids of 
various types to give the ship master warning of 
rocks, shoals, sandbanks, etc, to assist in the safe 
movement of vessels within restricted navigable sea 
approaches, rivers, channels and entrances to ports 
and also to indicate the alignment of navigational 
tracks. This is called channel demarcation. 


2.139 Channel, Navigable 


The channel, properly demarcated by navigational 
aids, used by ships for navigation. 


2.140 Characteristic Wave Height 
See Significant Wave Height. 
2.141 Chart Datum 


The plane or level to which soundings (or 
elevations) or tide heights are referenced (usually 
low water datum). The surface is called a tidal datum 
when referred to a certain phase of tide. To provide 
a safety factor for navigation, some level lower than 
mean sea level is generally selected for 
hydrographic charts, such as Mean Low Water or 
Mean Lower Low Water or Lowest Astronomical 
Tide. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.142 Chelura 


A genus of marine amphipod crustacean 
resembling a shrimp which undercuts woodwork 
and causes it to fall away in flakes. This insect 
manifests a decided partiality for pure sea water and 
is, consequently, more often found along the open 
coast than in enclosed harbours. 


2.143 Chop (also Wind Chop) 


The short-crested waves that spring up quickly in a 
moderate breeze and break easily at the crest. 


2.144 Clapotis 


The French equivalent for a type of standing wave. 
It is usually associated with the standing wave 
phenomenon caused by the reflection of a non- 
breaking wave train from a structure with a face that 
is vertical or vertical. Full clapotis is one with 100 
percent reflection of the incident wave, partial 
clapotis is one with less than 100 percent reflection. 


2.145 Clearance 


The space allowance between the keel of a vessel 
and the bed surface of a navigable channel to prevent 
a grounding of the vessel. 


2.146 Cnoidal Wave 


A type of wave in shallow water (depth of water less 
than 1/8" to 1/10" the wave length). The surface 
profile is expressed in terms of the Jacobian elliptic 
function ‘Chu’, hence the name Cnoidal. 


2.147 Coast 


A strip of land of indefinite width (may be several 
kms) that extends from the shoreline inland to the 
first major change in terrain features. 


2.148 Coastwise/Domestic Trade 


A term applied in a general sense to the trade carried 
on between ports of the same country. 


2.149 Coastal Area 


The land and sea area bordering the shoreline. 
2.150 Coastal Plain 


The plain composed of horizontal or gently sloping 
strata of elastic materials fronting the coast, and 
generally representing a strip of sea bottom that has 
emerged from the sea in recent geologic time. 


2.151 Coast Line 


a) Technically, the line that forms the 
boundary between the coast and the shore. 


b) Commonly, the line that forms the 
boundary between the land and the water. 


2.152 Coffer Dam 


A temporary dam constructed of timber, either 
single skin or double skin, parallel-sided with 
puddled clay or other filling, or interlocking steel 
sheetpiling, either single skin or double skin, 
parallel—sided with the interior pumped dry and 
strutted, enclosing the site of structure to be built, for 
the exclusion of water from the site for an 
underwater construction. 


2.153 Comber 


a) A deep water wave whose crest is pushed 
forward by a strong wind; much larger than 
a whitecap. 


b) A long period breaker. 
2.154 Combined Service Vessel 


Vessels specially designed and equipped for 
carrying out the various combination of services, 
comprising surveying, buoyage, salvage work, fire- 
fighting and general conservancy duties. 


2.155 Compound Gate 


Lock gates are constructed either of wood, iron or 
steel. But since wood is not durable above water and 
iron or steel below water, a compound gate is 
designed with the lower part under water of wood 
and the upper part of steel. 


2.156 Container Berth 


A berth generally with a large stacking yard for 
handling containerised cargo, which may also be 
used as a general cargo berth. 


2.157 Container Freight Station 


A warehouse or transit shed adjacent to the container 
yard used for stuffing and stripping of container 
cargo. 


2.158 Container Terminal 


A port facility designed to provide an integrated use 
of berthing facilities for containership and harbour 
transport system for containers and their contents. 


2.159 Container Yard (CY) 


A designated area in a container terminal usually 
adjacent to the marshalling yard where containers 
and chassis are received stacked and dispatched. 


2.160 Containerisation 


The process of handling some types of general cargo 
in small packages or the like, in containers for rapid 
and economical transport. Full containerisation not 
only uses such containers for transport of the 
cargoes, but the containers are transhipped in 
specially designed vessels and handled at special 
container berths also for most economical and quick 
operations. 


2.161 Containerized Cargo 


Cargo packed in vans or containers for easy handling 
and transporting of the same as a unit. 


2.162 Continental Shelf 


The zone bordering a continent and extending from 
the low water line to the depth (usually about 200 m) 
where there is a marked or rather steep descent 
toward a greater depth or as notified by the country 
specifically delineating the continental shelf. 


2.163 Controlling Depth 


The least depth in the navigable parts of a waterwhy, 
generally over a crossing or bar, governing the 
maximum draft of vessels that can enter. 


2.164 Convergence 


a) In refraction phenomenon, the decreasing 
of the distance between orthogonals in the 
direction of wave travel. Denotes an area of 
increasing wave height and energy 
concentration. 


b) In wind set up phenomenon, the increase in 
set up observed over that which would 
occur in an equivalent rectangular basin of 
uniform depth, caused by changes in 
planform or depth, also the decrease in 
basin width or depth causing such increase 
in set up. 


2.165 Coping 


The top protective covering with hard material like 
granite, rich concrete, etc, provided at the berthing 
side of a dock or wharf wall. The top level of this at 
the water side is the coping level which is fixed with 
respect to the design water level in the dock. 


2.166 Coral 


a) Marine coelenterates, solitary or colonial 
which form a hard external covering of 
calcium compounds, or other materials. 
The corals which form large reefs are 
limited to warm, shallow waters, while 
those forming solitary, minute growths 


IS 7314 : 2023 


may be found in colder water to great 
depths (Biology). 


b) The concretion of coral polyps, composed 
almost wholly of calcium carbonate, 
forming reefs, and tree-like and globular 
masses. May also include calcareous algae 
and other organisms producing calcareous 
secretions, such as bryozoans and 
hydrozoans (Geology). 


2.167 Cradle 


A framework on which a ship or boat rests during 
construction or repairs. 


2.168 Crane, Floating 


A crane mounted upon a pontoon, dumb or 
self-propelled, according to local requirements. 
These may be of wide range of capacity varying 
from 5 tonnes to 350 tonnes but generally the 
capacity varies from 50 tonnes to 200 tonnes. These 
are mobile and can be propelled or towed from and 
to the ship; can travel with the lift from shop to 
quay and vice-versa; can be employed on other 
works also besides loading and discharging ships 
and can be employed for off shore loading and 
unloading. 


2.169 Crane, Level Luffing 


A crane, whose jib moves inwards and outwards 
without raising or lowering the load, this offering a 
valuable economy in both power and time, due to 
economical working and low maintenance coast. 
Other advantages of this type of crane are that there 
is a large clearance underneath the jib, which is of 
particular value when bulky loads are handled; and 
owing to the small radius of arc covered by the jib 
when luffing, the crane can be operated more freely 
in restricted spaces. 


2.170 Crane, Portal 


A portal structure carrying a travelling trolley with a 
hook or a portal structure with a cantilever jib to lift 
and move the load. It is mostly used in quays, 
wharves, factory sheds, etc. 


2.171 Crane, Semi-Portal 


A crane with rear legs supported on rails which may 
be part of the shed structure, if there is one. It has got 
the advantage of minimizing obstruction of the quay. 
Trouble, however, is sometimes caused by unequal 
settlement of the two foundations unless special 
means are taken to overcome it. 


2.172 Crane, Wharf 


A crane provided at a quay or wharf for loading and 
discharging of vessels. Generally, majority of quay 


IS 7314 : 2023 


cranes of modern origin are electrically operated and 
of the travelling portal cantilever jib type. All have 
slewing and luffing motion, and most are fitted with 
level luffing gear. 


2.173 Crest Length, Wave 


The length of a wave along its crest. Sometimes 
called crest width. 


2.174 Crest of Wave 
a) The highest part of the wave; and 


b) That part of the wave above still water 
level. 


2.175 Crest Width, Wave 
See Crest Length, Wave. 
2.176 Crib 


A hollow box-shaped structural unit constructed 
with headers and stretchers of timber, bamboo or 
reinforced concrete filled up with stone rubble, 
bricks, and brickbats, lean concrete, or earth. These 
are extensively used in river training works like 
spurs, groynes, etc. Also used for retaining tipped 
materials as in dock walls to be constructed in 
advance of a shoreline or river bank. 


2.177 Crossing 


A shallower stretch of a navigable channel over 
which a vessel navigates from one deeper channel to 
another deeper channel, generally at the opposite 
banks of a river or a water course. 


2.178 Cunnette 


An artificial channel excavated in the bed of a river 
or water course to channelize and guide the flow and 
to improve the hydraulic condition. 


2.179 Current, Coastal — One of the offshore 
currents flowing generally parallel to the shoreline 
in the deeper water beyond and near the surf zone. 
They are not related generally to waves and resulting 
surf, but may be related to tides, winds, or 
distribution of mass. 


2.180 Current, Drift 


A broad, shallow, slow-moving ocean or lake 
current. Opposite of current, stream. 


2.181 Current, Ebb 


The tidal current away from shore or down a tidal 
stream. Usually associated with the decrease in the 
height of the tide. 


2.182 Current, Eddy 
See Eddy. 
2.183 Current, Feeder 


The parts of the near shore current system that flow 
parallel to shore before converging and forming the 
neck of the rip current. 


2.184 Current, Float 


A floating object drifting upon the surface of water 
to determine the set or direction and velocity of a 
current. But since the surface is affected by wind and 
the surface layer of water may flow in a different 
direction as well as with a different velocity to the 
lower layers or main body of water, floats should 
extend some depth into the water so as to partake of 
the influence of bottom layers. A float, then, 
generally consists of a floating body submerged to 
the required depth with an indicator projected above 
the surface for taking observations. 


2.185 Current, Flood 


The tidal current toward shore or up a tidal stream. 
Usually associated with the increase in the height of 
the tide. 


2.186 Current, Inshore 
Any current in or landward of the breaker zone. 
2.187 Current, Littoral 


Any current in the littoral zone caused primarily by 
wave action, for example, longshore current, rip 
current. 


2.188 Current, Longshore 


The littoral current in the breaker zone moving 
essentially parallel to the shore, usually generated by 
waves breaking at an angle to the shoreline. 


2.189 Current, Periodic 
See Current, Tidal. 
2.190 Current, Permanent 


Current that runs continuously, independent the 
tides and temporary causes. Permanent currents 
include the freshwater discharge of a river and the 
currents that form the general circulatory system of 
the oceans. 


2.191 Current, Rip (also Rip Surf) 


A strong surface current flowing seaward from the 
shore. It usually appears as a visible band of agitated 
water and is the return movement of water piled 


upon the shore by incoming waves and wind. With 
the seaward movement concentrated in a limited 
band its velocity is somewhat accentuated. A rip 
consists of three parts: the feeder current flowing 
parallel to the shore inside the breakers; the neck, 
where the feeder currents converge and flow through 
the breakers in a narrow band or ‘rip’; and the head, 
where the current widens and slackens outside the 
breakers line. A rip current is often miscalled a rip 
tide. 


2.192 Current, Stream 


A narrow, deep, and swift ocean current. Opposite 
of current, drift. 


2.193 Current System, Nearshore 


The current system caused primarily by wave action 
in and near the breaker zone, and which consists of 
four parts. The shoreward mass transport of water; 
longshore currents; seaward return flow, including 
rip currents; and the longshore movement of the 
expanding heads of rip currents. 


2.194 Current, Tidal (also Current, Periodic) 


The alternating horizontal movement of water 
associated with the rise and fall of the tide caused by 
the astronomical tide producing forces. 


2.195 Cusp (also Beach Cusp) 


One of the series of low mounds of beach material 
separated by crescent shaped troughs spaced at more 
or less regular intervals along the beach face. 


2.196 Cuspate Bar 


A crescent shaped bar uniting with the shore at each 
end. It may be formed by a single spit growing from 
shore and then turning back to again meet the shore, 
or by two spits growing from the shore and uniting 
to form a bar of sharply cuspate form. 


2.197 Cutter Suction Dredger 


A dredger which works on principle of suction with 
a cutter head fitted at the end of the suction pipe for 
removing materials like clays, and indurated 
cohesive materials other than rock. 


2.198 Cycloidal Wave 


A deep, symmetrical wave whose crest forms an 
angle of 120 degrees. The wave form is that of a 
cycloid. A trochoidal wave of maximum steepness 
(see also Trochoidal Wave). 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.199 Cyclones (Elevating Plant) 


A dust chamber attached to a pneumatic grain 
elevating plant to catch the dust present with the 
grain which otherwise would be lost through the 
exhausts after passing through air pumps. 


2.200 Daily Retardation (of Tides) 


The amount of time by which corresponding tidal 
phases grow later day by day (about 50 min). 


2.201 Dead Weight Tonnage (DWT) 


It is the weight in tons of 2 240 lb of cargo, stores, 
fuel, passengers and crew carried by the ship when 
loaded to her maximum summer load line. 


2.202 Deadweight Tonnage (DWT) 


The total carrying capacity of a ship expressed in 
long tons (1 016.047 kg) on a specified draft. The 
deadweight tonnage includes the total weight of 
cargoes, fuel, water in tanks, stores, baggage, 
passengers, crew, and their effects but exclude the 
water in the boilers. 


2.203 Dead Weight Tonnage 


A measure of how much weight a ship can carry. It 
is the sum of the weights of cargo, fuel, fresh 


water, ballast water, provisions, passengers, 
and crew. 
2.204 Debris Line 


A line near the limit of storm wave uprush marking 
the landward limit of debris deposits. 
2.205 Decay Distance 


The distance waves 
generating area (fetch). 


travel after leaving the 


2.206 Decay of Waves 


The change waves undergo after they leave a 
generating area (fetch) and pass through a calm, or 
region of lighter winds. In the process of decay, the 
significant wave height decreases and the significant 
wave length increases. 


2.207 Deck 


The top working platform of a structure/ship. A ship 
may have several decks used for accommodation, 
storage of cargo and as working decks. 


2.208 Deck Load 
The dead and live load on the deck. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.209 Deep Water 


Water so deep that surface waves are little affected 
by the bottom configuration. Generally, water 
deeper than one half the surface wave length is 
considered deep water. 


2.210 Deflation 


The removal of loose material from a beach or other 
land surface by wind action. 


2.211 Deflection (of Wave) 


The change in the direction of propagation of wave 
when the wave is interrupted by a barrier. 


2.212 Depositing Dock 


A floating dock in which one of the sides 
is suppressed. It is utilized to lift and deposit 
vessels upon fixed stagings set up on the shore 
line and also for launching purposes in the case 
of large hollow reinforced concrete blocks for 
harbour construction work, though the use is very 
limited. 


2.213 Depression, Bay 


A low pressure zone over sea which may give rise to 
high velocity winds which may develop into a 
cyclone. 


2.214 Depth 


The vertical distance measured at the middle of the 
vessel’s length from top of keel or top of ceiling to 
top of upper deck at sides or amidships. 


2.215 Depth of Breaking (also Breaker Depth) — 
The still water depth at a point where the waves start 
breaking. 


2.216 Design Wave — The wave whose 
characteristics are considered for the design of a 
maritime structure to withstand the wave action. 


2.217 Diffraction (of Water Waves) — 
The phenomenon by which energy is 
transmitted laterally along a wave crest. When a 
part of a train of waves is interrupted by a 
barrier, such as a breakwater the effect of 
diffraction is manifested by propagation of 
waves into the sheltered region within the 
barrier’s geometric shadow. 


2.218 Dike (Dyke) 


A wall or mound built around a low lying area to 
prevent flooding. 


2.219 Disembarkation 
The act of landing or going ashore from a ship. 


2.220 Diurnal Tide 


A tide with one high water and one low water in a 
tidal day (24 h and 50 min). 


2.221 Divergence 


a) In refraction phenomenon, the increasing 
of distance between orthogonals in the 
direction of wave travel. Denotes an area of 
decreasing wave height and energy 
concentration. 


b) In wind set-up phenomenon, the decrease 
in set—up observed under that which 
would occur in an equivalent rectangular 
basin of uniform depth, caused by changes 
in planform or depth. Also the increase in 
basin width or depth causing such decrease 
in set up. 


c) In tidal phenomenon, the difference in the 
direction of ebb and flood flow at a section 
of a river or waterway. 


2.222 Dock 


A basin or area of water for ships partially enclosed 
or unenclosed and open to the tides. It is an artificial 
basin into which vessels are brought for 
inspection and repair. 


2.223 Dockage Report 


A form used by computerized and noncomputerized 
port which specifies the name of vessel, voyage 
number, flag registry, ship operator/owner, vessel 
particulars (GRT, LOA) port calls, (last/next) and 
vessel movement from anchorage up to departure 
from berth. 


2.224 Dock Basin 
See Basin. 
2.225 Dock, Dry (also Graving Dock) 


A dock from which water can be temporarily 
excluded by natural or artificial means, in order that 
repairs to the hulls and keels of vessels may be 
effected. 


2.226 Dock Sill 


The platform or flooring at the entrance of a dry 
dock. The timber or foundation against which the 
gates of a dock or lock shut. 


2.227 Dock, Wet 


Area of impounded water within which vessels can 
remain afloat at a uniform level, independent of 
external tidal condition. 


2.228 Dolphin 


An isolated marine structure for mooring or guiding 
vessels. 


2.229 Dolphin, Mooring 


A dolphin with a head upon a cluster of piles, which 
may be either vertical or a combination of vertical 
and rakers, used for offshore mooring of vessels. 


2.230 Dolphin, Berthing 


A dolphin with a head upon a cluster of piles, which 
may be either vertical or a combination of vertical 
and rakers to assist in berthing of vessels by taking 
up some berthing loads and to keep the vessel from 
pressing against the pier structure. 


2.231 Doodson's Machine (Tide Prediction) 


A machine adopted by Doodson on the principles 
suggested by Lord Kelvin for the prediction of daily 
times and heights of tides at a location, from the 
different harmonic constituents of the tide. 


2.232 Double Tides 


Occurrences of high water in pairs within a period 
of 24 h to 25 h, as against the usual two, separated 
by a slight interval, that is, the tidal curve shows a 
double headed high water. 


2.233 Down/Idle Time 


The total time work on the vessel actually comes to 
a stop. 


2.234 Down Drift 


The direction of predominant to which movement of 
littoral materials. 


2.235 Draft (Draught) 


The depth to which a vessel is submerged above the 
keel in water during navigation. 


2.236 Draft Maximum 


The deepest draft of a vessel measured upon arrival 
and upon departure. 


2.237 Draft of Vessel 


The depth of the ship measured vertically from the 
waterline to the lowest part of the vessel’s hull, 
propellers or other reference point. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.238 Dragline Dredger (Tension Cable Dredger) 


Developed on the principles of dragline and used 
primarily for digging sand and gravel out of deep 
pits. 


2.239 Dredger 


A plant employed for an operation involving the 
removal of material under water from the bed of a 
water area whether the mode of action be dragging, 
sucking or digging. 


2.240 Dredger, Bucket Ladder 
See Bucket Ladder Dredger. 
2.241 Dredger, Cutter Suction 
See Cutter Suction Dredger. 
2.242 Dredger, Dipper 


It consists of a single bucket at the end of a long arm 
and mounted upon a barge in any suitable position 
and usually held in position for dredging by means 
of three or four spuds, without any external mooring. 
The bucket after being lowered at the required 
location makes a curved upward cut, the contents 
being discharged into a hopper through the bottom 
of the hinged bucket. It has a large degree of 
mobility and can dig its own floatation through a 
bank not only below water level but extending a few 
metres above that level. 


2.243 Dredger, Grab (Grapple or Clam—Shell 
Dredger) 


This consists of segmental scoops, generally formed 
of two quadrants which rotate about a central pivot 
and which on meeting in closed position, forms a 
semi-cylindrical receptacle or bucket. May also be 
constructed with spherical sides in two or three 
parts, which is adapted to excavation for circular 
well foundation. 


2.244 Dredger, Jet 


A dredger operated by agitating the bed at the region 
of operation by means of a jet of water under high 
pressure injected from a nozzle, whereby the bed 
material is brought into suspension which is either 
carried away by current or removed by a suction 
dredger according to the site condition. This is 
suitable for dredging fine grain sandy bed. 


2.245 Dredger, Suction (Hydraulic or Sand Pump 
Dredger) 


Consists essentially of a continuous pipe or tube 
through which, by means of suitable machinery, 
sand or other light material is sucked up from the 


IS 7314 : 2023 


bottom, which may be directly pumped out to the 
disposal site or delivered into hopper from where 
the material is disposed of after settling. The 
suction dredger is most suitable for operation in 
deep deposit of sand so that the suction nozzle 
may obtain a full and continuous feed without 
much need to traverse the dredger, and also with 
materials of great fineness and low specific 
gravity, such as silt and mud. 


2.246 Dredging 


It is periodic removal of material from the seabed in 
approach channels to port and harbour basins to 
maintain widths and depths in previously dredged 
areas to ensure the safe access for vessels. 


2.247 Drift 


a) Sometimes used as a short form for littoral 
drift. 


b) The speed at which a current runs. 
c) Floating material deposited on a beach. 


d) A deposit of a continental ice sheet, as a 
drumlin. 


2.248 Drift Current 


A broad, shallow, slow moving ocean or lake 
current. 


2.249 Drift, Littoral 


Sedimentary material moved in the littoral zone 
under the influence of waves and current. 


2.250 Drill Boat — A craft in the form of 
rectangular, flat-bottomed and decked barges, 
usually without propulsion, and held in position 
by spuds at each corner. This carries four or five 
drilling rigs consisting of vertical frames on rails, 
each with its own power-driven drilling winch for 
drilling and blasting hard bed rock under water. 


2.251 Dry Bulk 
This pertains to unpacked solid goods. 
2.252 Duration 


In wave forecasting, the length of time the wind 
blows in nearly the same direction over the fetch, 
that is the generating area. 


2.253 Duration, Minimum 


The time necessary for steady state wave conditions 
to develop for a given wind velocity over a given 
fetch length. 


2.254 Dwell Time 


The number of hours spent by a vessel from waiting 
time to berth until the time of completion of the un- 
berthing process on final departure. 


2.255 Eager 


See Bore. 


2.256 Ebb Current 


The tidal current away from shore or down a tidal 
stream caused by the falling tide. It is seaward flow 
in estuaries or tidal rivers during a tidal phase of 
lowering water level. 


2.257 Ebb Tide 


The period of tide between high water and the 
succeeding low water; a falling tide. 


2.258 Echo Sounder 


An electronic instrument used to determine the 
depth of water by measuring the time interval 
between emission of a sonic or ultrasonic signal and 
the return of its echo from the bottom. The process 
of determining the depth by such appliance is known 
as echo sounding. 


2.259 Eddy (also Eddy Current) 


A circular movement of water formed on the side of 
a main current. Eddies may be created at points 
where the main stream passes projecting 
obstructions or where two adjacent currents flow 
counter to each other. 


2.260 Edge Wave 


An ocean wave parallel to a coast, with crests normal 
to the shoreline. An edge wave may be standing or 
progressive. Its height diminishes rapidly seaward 
and is negligible at a distance of one wavelength 
offshore. 


2.261 Elevator, Bucket-Belt 


A mechanical grain handling elevator consisting of 
a series of mild steel buckets, rivetted to an endless 
belt, working round top and bottom drums, the top 
one being the driving drum and the bottom one 
tensioning drum. 


2.262 Elevator, Floating Grain 


Bucket elevator mounted on pontoon or barge for 
discharging grain from ship to shore at places where 
there is no fixed shore plant, or for discharging from 
ship to barge or other vessel. Such floating 
appliances generally include sacking spouts and 
weighing machines. 


2.263 Elevator, Pneumatic 


An elevator for raising the grain from the ship's hold 
through pipes in which it is entrained in an air 
current induced by vacuum pumps. The pipes are 
flexible and terminate in a special form of suction 
nozzle, which can be placed by hand in any part of 
the ship's hold. 


2.264 Embarkation 
The act of boarding a vessel or ship. 
2.265 Energy Coefficient 


The ratio of the energy in a wave per unit crest 
length transmitted forward with the wave at a point 
in shallow water to the energy in a wave per unit 
crest length transmitted forward with the wave in 
deep water. On refraction diagrams this is equal to 
the ratio of the distance between a pair of 
orthogonals at a selected point to the distance 
between the same pair of orthogonals in deep water. 
Also the square of the refraction coefficient. 


2.266 Energy, Wave 


Average energy of a wave over one wave length and 
is a combination of kinetic and potential energies. 


2.267 Entrance 


The avenue of access or opening to a navigable 
channel. 


2.268 Entrance Channel 


The navigation channel from deep water to the dock. 


2.269 Entrance Width 


The minimum width provided for the entrance 
channel at the entry to dock either between 
breakwaters enclosing the dock or in the lock 
entrance. 


2.270 Erosion 


The wearing away of land by the action of natural 
forces. On a beach, the carrying away of beach 
material by wave action, tidal currents, littoral 
currents, or by deflation. 


2.271 Estuarine Pollution 


The contamination of the estuary of a river causing 
danger to human and marine life by sewage and 
industrial by products discharged into water in the 
vicinity. 


2.272 Estuary 


The wide stretch of a river near the sea, which is 
affected by the tides. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.273 Estuary, Stratified 


An estuary where the fresh water of the river and the 
saline water of the sea form distinct layers or strata. 


2.274 Estuary, Well-Mixed 


An estuary where the fresh water of the river and the 
saline water of the sea are in a well mixed condition 
without forming any distinct strata. 


2.275 Eye (of a Hurricane) 


The roughly circular area of comparatively light 
winds and fair weather found at the centre of a 
severe tropical cyclone. 


2.276 Faggotting 


A type of bank protection work formed of twiggy 
branches of thorn, willow, hazel, birch, oak or elm, 
usually 1.2 to 15 m long and 0.9 m in 
circumference, laid normally to the shoreline, 
usually horizontally or with a slight slope 
backwards. These are used usually in situations 
where grass and other plants are unsuitable and 
where there is little or no wave action or wash and 
in silt-laden water. 


2.277 Fairlead 


Small, horizontal, single sheaves appliance fixed on 
the quay surface on lock sides and at dry docks for 
altering the lead of ropes to capstans. 


2.278 Fairway 


The parts of a waterway that are open and 
unobstructed for navigation. The main travelled part 
of a waterway; a maritime thoroughfare. 


2.279 Feeder Beach 


An artificially widened beach serving downdrift 
beaches by natural littoral currents or forces. 


2.280 Fender 


A type of resilient buffer system provided at a 
berthing face to protect the structure and the ship 
from damage due to force of impact of berthing 
vessel. 


2.281 Fender, Floating 


A floating body, like a timber truss, tied in front of a 
quay surface and extending quite a distance from the 
quay surface, so that the impact force of a berthing 
vessel is first taken up by the floating body without 


IS 7314 : 2023 


the vessel coming in direct contact with the quay 
edge. 


2.282 Fender, Pile 


A system of piles, vertical and/or raker, provided in 
front of a quay surface to take up the direct impact 
force from a berthing vessel. 


2.283 Fender, Suspended 


These are fenders making use of gravitational forces 
to oppose the impact blow. There are a variety of 
types, the majority aiming at complete absorption of 
the kinetic energy of the berthing vessels. The 
commonest form is made of ballasted steel tubes of 
heavy weight suspended by links from the main 
structure so that the tubes rise vertically during 
horizontal motion from impact force thus absorbing 
the kinetic energy of impact. 


2.284 Fetch (also Generating Area) 


The area in which seas are generated by a wind 
having a rather constant direction and speed. 
Sometimes used synonymously with fetch length. 


2.285 Fetch Length 


The horizontal distance (in the direction of the wind) 
over which a wind generates seas or creates a wind 
set up. 


2.286 Flexible Wall 


A wall, like a sheet pile wall, which can take 
considerable deflection with differential movements 
induced in the active and passive wedges of soil, 
without failure of the structure. 


2.287 Fleeting 


The area at which barges, towboats and tugs are 
berthed until needed. The operation of building or 
dismantling barge tows. 


2.288 Floating Breakwater 
See Breakwater, Floating. 
2.289 Floating Caisson 

See Caisson, Floating. 
2.290 Floating Crane 

See Crane, Floating. 


2.291 Floating Dock 


A repairing dock working on hydraulic lift principle. 
It is a hollow structure of steel or reinforced concrete 
with air chambers to fill with water to sink the dock 


to the requisite depth for receiving its charge, the 
water being pumped out when the vessel is berthed. 
It has the advantage of mobility and less 
maintenance cost but requires a large depth of water 
inside a sheltered area for it so peration. 


2.292 Flood Tide 


The period of tide between low water and the 
succeeding high water; a rising tide. 


2.293 Flourescent Tracer 


A tracer obtained by dyeing materials having the 
same specific gravity and grain size as the bed 
materials with fluorescent dye. Used for studying the 
mode of sediment transport (bed load) in a river, 
estuary or coastal area. 


2.294 Foam Line 


The front of a wave as it advances shoreward, after 
it has broken. 


2.295 Following Wind 


Generally, same as tailwind; in wave forecasting, 
wind blowing in the direction of ocean wave 
advance. 


2.296 Fore Runner 


Low, long period ocean swell which commonly 
precedes the main swell from a distant storm, 
especially a tropical cyclone. 


2.297 Foreign Trade 


A term applied to the trade carried on between a Law 
of land (location) port and a foreign port. 


2.298 Foreshore 


The part of the shore lying between the crest of the 
seaward berm (or upper limit of wave wash at high 
tide) and the ordinary low water mark, that is 
ordinarily traversed by the uprush and backrush of 
the waves as the tides rise and fall (see also Beach 
Face). 


2.299 Forward Speed (of Hurricane) 


Rate of movement (propagation) of the hurricane 
eye in km/h or knots. 


2.300 Free Board 


a) The additional height of a structure above 
design high water level to prevent 
overflow. Also, at a given time, the vertical 
distance between the water level and the 
top of the structure. 


b) Ona ship, the distance from the waterline 
to the top of the deck line. 


2.301 Freight 


The price paid to a ship owner for the transport of 
goods or merchandise by sea from one specific port 
to another. The word freight is also used to denote 
goods which are in the process of being transported 
from one place to another. 


2.302 Freshet Flow 


The quantity of water discharge at the upstream end 
of a river or channel. 


2.303 Front of the Fetch 


In wave forecasting, the end of the generating area 
toward which the wind is blowing. 


2.304 Full Container Load (FCL) 


A container loaded with cargoes belonging to one 
consignee covered by one bill of lading and meant 
for door-to-door delivery. 


2.305 Gang 


A group of cargo workers employed to work in a 
hatch. 


2.306 Gate, Lock 


A gate used for maintaining a constant water level in 
enclosed water area. 


2.307 Gate, Mitre 


A lock gate with two hinged flaps meeting at a point 
when the gate is closed. 


2.308 Gate, Sector 


A lock gate used for canal locks and lock entrances 
to dock system with reversible water levels on either 
side of the gate so that the gate has to withstand 
resultant water pressure from either side. In such a 
gate the single skin plating resisting the water 
pressure is struck to an arc of a circle, so that the 
resultant force passes through the vertical axis on 
which the gates revolve. 


2.309 Gate, Storm 


Employed in entrances subjected to periodic floods 
and exceptionally high tides accompanied by 
cyclones and stormy weather. During such periods 
it is often necessary to exclude part of the tidal 
water from a dock, and the gates consequently point 
in the opposite direction to those used for 
impounding water. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.310 Gate, Vertical Lift 


A gate with the leaf lifted vertically upwards during 
opening the entrance as in a sluice. This is suitable 
for small entrances as in canals, etc. 


2.311 Generating Area (also Fetch) 


In wave forecasting, the continuous area of water 
surface over which the wind blows in nearly a 
constant direction. Sometimes used synonymously 
with fetch length. 


2.312 Generation of Wave 


a) The creation of waves by natural or 
mechanical means. 

b) The creation and growth of waves caused 
by wind blowing over a water surface for a 
certain period of time. The area involved is 
called the generating area or fetch. 


2.313 Geometric Shadow 


In wave diffraction theory, the area outlined by 
drawing straight lines paralleling the direction of 
wave approach through the extremeties of the 
protective structure. It differs from the actual 
protected area to the extent that the diffraction and 
refraction effects modify the wave pattern. 


2.314 Geomorphology 


That branch of both physiography and geology 
which deals with the form of the earth, the general 
configuration of its surface, and the changes that 
take place in the evolution of land form. 


2.315 Grab Dredger 
See Dredger, Grab. 
2.316 Graving Dock 


Synonymously used with dry dock. Rigorously 
defined, when the vessel is floated into the dock, and 
the water removed by natural or artificial means, the 
term graving dock is appropriate. 


2.317 Gravity Wave 


A wave whose velocity of propagation is controlled 
primarily by gravity. Water waves more than 50 mm 
long are considered gravity waves. Waves longer 
than 25 mm and shorter than 50 mm are in 
intermediate zone between capillary and gravity 
waves. 


2.318 Gribble 


A species of shipworm (limmoria/terebrans) much 
smaller than the teredo navalis, very much 


IS 7314 : 2023 


destructive to submerged timber. It bores its way to 
and fro in the wood. 


2.319 Gross Gang — Hours 


The total number of hours rendered by gangs in 
discharging and loading cargo, including the gangs 
idle time. This is computed by obtaining the 
difference between the time the gang started and the 
time they finished work. 


2.320 Gross Registered Tonnage (GRT) 


The total measured cubic contents of a vessel 
expressed in units of 2.83 m°. 


2.321 Gross Registered Tonnage or Gross 
Tonnage 


This is the volume of all enclosed spaces of a ship. 
The measure of the internal volume of space within 
a vessel expressed in terms of 100 cubic feet a ton, 
except for the following spaces: shelter deck spaces 
with permanent middle line openings at least four 
feet long, lavatories for officers and crew, shelters 
for deck passengers on short voyages, condensed 
space, close-in spaces solely for machinery, 
cookhouse and bakeries, wheelhouse. Since 1994 
when theresults of the 1969 International Tonnage 
Measurement Convention came into force, Gross 
Registered Tonnage (GRT) has been referred to as 
Gross Tonnage (GT). 


2.322 Grounding 


The phenomenon of a vessel getting struck at the 
bottom of a waterway due to shallow depth. 


2.323 Groyne (also Groin) 


A short protection structure of permeable or 
impermeable type, built usually perpendicular to the 
shore line or at a small angle from the perpendicular 
to trap littoral drift or retard bank or shore erosion. 


2.324 Groyne System 


A series of parallel groins constructed at a fixed 
spacing acting together to protect a section of river 
bank or sea beach. Commonly called a groyne field. 


2.325 Ground Swell 


A long high ocean swell; also this swell as it rises to 
prominent height in shallow water. 


2.326 Group Velocity 


The velocity of wave group. In deep water it is equal 
to one half the velocity of individual waves within 
the group. 


20 


2.327 Gut 
a) A narrow passage, such as a strait or inlet. 


b) A channel in otherwise shallower water, 
generally formed by water in motion. 


2.328 Half Tide Level 
See Mean Tide Level. 
2.329 Harbour 


A protected part of the sea, lake or other body of 
water used by vessels as a place of safety. 


2.330 Harbour, Artificial 


A harbour constructed artificially by protective 
works at a seaface, estuary or on a navigable river to 
provide necessary shelter and protection to vessels, 
where there is little or no pronounced natural feature 
around the locality to afford any protection. 


2.331 Harbour, Commercial 


This forms essential feature of ports engaged in 
foreign and coastal traffic. This constitutes the great 
terminus of the highways of the sea, providing 
accommodation for the mercantile marine during the 
operations of loading and discharging cargoes and 
for the transaction of trade. 


2.332 Harbour, Estuarine 


A natural or artificial harbour situated at the estuary 
of a river. 


2.333 Harbour, Island 


A harbour situated on an island, which usually can 
accommodate very deep drafted vessels like tankers. 
Generally it is associated with the handling of oil 
which is pumped to the main land area through 
submarine or floating pipelines. 


2.334 Harbour, Natural 


A harbour formed entirely by an inlet from the sea. 
This may be constituted by headlands or projecting 
parts of a coast converging towards each other, with 
more or less narrow entrance leading to a sheltered 
expanse of water, also by coral reefs fringing along 
coast line or series of islands, forming lagoons, with 
gaps in the reef as entrances. This does not require 
protective or formative works. 


2.335 Harbour of Refuge 


The principal duty of such harbour is to provide a 
refuge for vessels overtaken by sudden stress of 
weather, or otherwise hard pressed or disabled. The 
term is now a little out of date because there are not 


many such harbours in existence and few are likely 
to be constructed. Those originally contrived for this 
purpose are now associated with other port and 
harbour facilities. 


2.336 Harbour 
Surging) 


Oscillation (also Harbour 


The non-tidal vertical water movement in a harbour 
or bay. Usually the vertical motions are low, but 
when oscillations are excited by a tsunami or storm 
surge, they may be quite large. Variable winds, air 
oscillations, or surf beat may also cause oscillations. 


2.337 Harbour, Protected 


Formed primarily in bays or such like indentations 
in the coast line and by the construction of 
breakwaters or entrance moles, give protection from 
wave-action to vessels using or entering the harbour. 


2.338 Harbour Resonance 


Oscillation induced in a harbour from a 
disturbance like tide storm, tsunami, etc, the 
oscillation being much amplified to the outside 
disturbance due to the harbour having the same 
natural frequency as the outside disturbance due 
to defective design which leads to great damage 
to harbour structures and vessels anchored the 
harbour. 


2.339 Harbour, Riverine 


A harbour situated inland on a river away from the 
sea. 


2.340 Hatch 


An opening in a vessel’s deck through which cargo 
can be lowered. 


2.341 Head of Rip 


The part of a rip current that has widened out 
seaward of the breakers (see also Current, Rip; 
Current, Feeder; Rip). 


2.342 Height of Wave 
See Wave Height. 
2.343 Hexapod 


A reinforced concrete structural unit with six 
projecting legs from a central core. 


2.344 Hi-Fix 


An electronic arrangement used for finding out the 
position of vessels. 


21 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.345 High Tide, High Water (HW) 


The maximum elevation reached by each rising tide 
(see Tide). 


2.346 High Water Line 


In strictness, the intersection of the plane of mean 
high water with the shore. For specific occurrences, 
the highest elevation on the shore reached during a 
storm or rising tide, including meteorological 
effects. 


2.347 High Water of Ordinary Spring Tides 
(HWOST) 


A tidal datum based on high water of ordinary spring 
tides. 


2.348 Higher High Water (HHW) 


The higher of the two high waters of any tidal day. 
The single high water occurring daily during periods 
when the tide is diurnal is considered to be a higher 
high water. 


2.349 Higher Low Water (HLW) 


The higher of two low waters of any tidal day. 
2.350 Hind Casting, Wave 


The use of historic synoptic wind charts to calculate 
wave characteristics that probably occurred at some 
time past. 


2.351 Hinterland 


The hinterland of a stretch of coast or a large river is 
the area of land behind it or around it, which directly 
influences the commerce through a port. 


2.352 Hook 


A spit or narrow cape of sand or gravel which turns 
landward at the outer end. 


2.353 Hopper 


A hollow structure usually with a large capacity to 
which material is discharged. 


2.354 Hopper Barge 


A hopper barge is a marine vessel designed for 
transporting dry bulk goods, ranging from garbage 
to grains. 


2.355 Hopper Dredger 


A dredger provided with one or more hoppers for 
holding the dredged materials prior to final 
disposal. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.356 Hull 


A hull is the watertight body of a vesselexclusive of 
masts, yards, sails, rigging, machinery and 
equipment. The hull may open at the top, or it may 
be fully or partially covered with a deck. 


2.357 Hurricane 


An intense tropical cyclone in which winds tend to 
spiral inward toward a core of low pressure, with 
maximum surface wind velocities that equal or 
exceed 120 km/h for several minutes or longer at 
some points. Tropical storm is the term applied if 
maximum winds are less than 120 km/h. 


2.358 Hurricane Path or Track 


Line of movement (propagation) of the eye of the 
hurricane through an area. 


2.359 Hurricane Stage Hydrograph 


A continuous graph representing water level stages 
that would be recorded in a gauge well located at a 
specified point of interest during the passage of a 
particular hurricane, assuming that effects of 
relatively short—period waves are eliminated from 
the record by damping features of the gauge well. 
This includes effects of astronomical tides, 
barometric pressure differences and all other factors 
that influence water level stages. 


2.360 Hurricane Surge Hydrograph 


A continuous graph representing the difference 
between the hurricane stage hydrograph and the 
water stage hydrograph that would have prevailed at 
the same point and time if the hurricane had not 
occurred. 


2.361 Hurricane Wind Pattern (Isovel Pattern) 


An actual or graphical representation of near surface 
wind velocities covering the entire area of a 
hurricane at a particular instant. Isovels are lines 
connecting points of simultaneous equal wind 
velocities, usually referenced 9 m above the surface 
in km/h; wind direction at various points are 
indicated by arrows or deflection angles on the 
isovel charts. Isovel charts are usually prepared | at 
each hour during a hurricane, but for each half-hour 
during critical periods. 


2.362 Hydrographic Survey 


Hydrographic survey isthe survey of physical 
features present underwater. It is the science of 
measurement and description of features which 
affect maritime navigation, marine construction, 
dredging, offshore oil exploration/offshore oil 
drilling and related activities. 


22 


2.363 Hydrography 


a) A configuration of an underwater surface 
including its relief, bottom materials, 
coastal structures, etc. 

b) The description and study of seas, lakes, 
rivers and other waters. 


2.364 Hyperbolic Navigational Aids 


Navigational aids which in their operation are based 
upon measurement of the difference in time taken by 
a radio signal wave travelling from two fixed 
stations on shore to a ship, which gives a 
measurement of the difference in range of the two 
stations, since points at which the difference is 
constant lie on a position line which is in the form of 
a hyperbola. A similar measurement from another 
pair of stations provides another position line and 
hence a ‘fix’. 


2.365 Hypothetical Hurricane (Hypo-Hurricane) 


A representation of a hurricane, with specified 
characteristics, that is assumed to occur in a 
particular study area, following a specified path and 
timing sequence. 

a) Transposed — A hype-hurricane based on 
the storm transposition principle is 
assumed to have wind patterns and other 
characteristics basically comparable to a 
specified hurricane of record, but is 
transposed to follow a new path to serve as 
a basis for computing a hurricane surge 
hydrograph that would be expected at a 
selected point. 


b) Hype-Hurricane Based on Generalised 
Parameters — Hypo-hurricane estimates 
based on various logical combinations of 
hurricane characteristics used in estimating 
hurricane surge magnitudes corresponding 
to a range of probabilities and 
potentialities. 


c) Standard Project Hurricane (SPH) — A 
hypothetical hurricane intended to 
represent the most severe combination of 
hurricane parameters that is reasonably 
characteristic of a specified region, 
excluding exrtremely rare combinations. It 
is further assumed that the SPH would 
approach a given project site from such 
direction, and at such rate of movement as 
to produce the highest hurricane surge 
hydrograph, considering pertinent 
hydraulic characteristics of the area. 


d) Probable Maximum Hurricane — A hypo- 
hurricane that might result from the most 
severe combination of hurricane 
parameters that is considered reasonably 


possible in the region involved, if the 
hurricane should approach the point under 
study along a critical path and at optimum 
rate of movement. 


e) Design Hurricane — A representation of a 
hurricane with specified characteristics that 
would produce hurricane surge 
hydrographs and coincident wave effects at 
various key locations along a proposed 
project alignment. It governs the project 
design after economics and other factors 
have been duly considered. 


2.366 Impact Force on Berthing 


The force exerted on a berth or quay face or dolphins 
of jetty or on the ship by a berthing vessel due to its 
great momentum. A good quantum of the impact 
force is generally absorbed by adequate fendering 
system so that the structure is not damaged. 


2.367 Impermeable Groin 


A groin through which sand and sediment cannot 
pass. 


2.368 Impounded Dock 


A dock, the entrance to which is closed by structures 
like lockgates or caissons, to maintain a constant 
level of water inside the dock irrespective of the 
outside water level and tidal or wave effects. 


2.369 Indian Spring Low Water (also Indian Tide 
Plane) 


A tidal low water datum, designed for regions of 
mixed tides, that is depressed below mean sea level 
by the sum of the amplitudes of the principal 
semidiurnal lunar and solar tides and the principal 
diurnal tides, originally developed for parts of the 
Indian Ocean and along the east coast of Asia. 


2.370 Indian Tide Plane 
The datum of Indian spring low water. 


2.371 Infrastructure 


The fixed and immoveable parts of a harbour such 
as land, roads, quay walls and breakwaters. 


2.372 Inshore (Zone) 


In beach terminology, the zone of variable width 
extending from the low water line through the 
breaker zone. 


2.373 Inshore Current 


See Current, Inshore. 


23 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.374 Insular Shelf 


The zone surrounding an island extending from the 
line of permanent immersion to about 180 m of 
depth, where a marked or rather steep descent 
toward the great depths occurs. 


2.375 Intermediate Port 


An intermediate port which is intermediate between 
the big major ports and the small minor ports, as 
defined by the proper authority in a country. 


2.376 Internal Waves 


Waves that occur within a fluid whose density 
changes with depth, either abruptly at a sharp 
surface of discontinuity (an interface) or gradually. 
Their amplitude is greatest at the density 
discontinuity or in the case of gradual density 
change, somewhere in the interior of the fluid and 
not at the free upper surface where the surface waves 
have their maximum amplitude. 


2.377 Irrotational Wave 


A wave with fluid particles that do not revolve 
around an axis through their centres, although the 
particles themselves may travel in circular or nearly 
circular orbits. L-rotational waves may be 
progressives, standing, oscillatory or translatory 
(see Trochoidal Wave). 


2.378 Island Harbour 
See Harbour, Island. 
2.379 Isobath 


An imaginary line or a line on a map or chart that 
connects all points having the same depth below a 
water surface. 


2.380 Isovel Pattern 
See Hurricane Wind Pattern. 


2.381 Jet Dredger 


See Dredger, Jet. 
2.382 Jetty 


a) A Structure jetting out from the shore at 
which vessels are berthed either at the head 
of the structure or alongside. Often used 
synonymously with pier. 

b) On open sea coasts or rivers, a structure 
extending into a body of water and 
designed to prevent shoaling of a channel 
by littoral materials or sediment discharge, 


IS 7314 : 2023 


and to direct and confine the stream or tidal 
flow (American usage). 


2.383 Keel 


The chief structural member of a boat or ship that 
extends longitudinally along the center of its 
bottom and that often projects from the bottom. 


2.384 Keel Block 
See Blocks, Keel. 


2.385 Key 


A low insular bank of sand, coral, etc. 


2.386 Knoll 


A submerged elevation of rounded shape rising less 
than 1 000 metres from the ocean floor, and of 
limited extent across the summit (see Sea Mount). 


2.387 Lagging 
See Daily Retardation (of tides). 


2.388 Lagoon 


A shallow body of water, as a pond or lake, usually 
connected to the sea. 


2.389 Landing Stage 


A landing stage is a platform built over water where 
boats stop to let people get off, or to load or unload 
goods as well as passenger traffic from a vessel to 
land and vice versa in tidal water which rises and 
falls with the tide and is connected to the shore. It 
provides a landing place at a constant level in respect 
to the vessel. 


2.390 Lash 


Lighter aboard ship. A modern design in ship 
construction in which a large carrier with a deep 
draft accommodates several small crafts within it. 


2.391 Lateral System of Buoyage 


The system, decided at the International Conference 
at Geneva in 1936 of marking buoys with visible and 
night signals to indicate the lateral limits and axes of 
navigable channels, natural dangers, wrecks and 
similar obstructions, and certain other points of 
importance to mariners within or near a navigation 
channel. 


2.392 Leading in Lights 


Lights placed at each side of dock and harbour 
approach channels to enable pilots to position 
vessels in channels. 


24 


2.393 Leading Jetty (Warping Jetty) 


A structure provided at the entrance of a dock or lock 
for easy manoeuvring of vessels to and out of the 
dock. The structure may be a solid masonry 
monolith, piled or sheet piled as in a dock wall. This 
is provided with necessary appliance like capstans, 
fairleads, etc, for stowage, and with adequate 
fendering arrangement. 


2.394 Length of Wave/ Wave Length 


The horizontal distance between similar points on 
two successive waves measured perpendicularly to 
the crest. 


2.395 Length Overall (LOA) 


The total length from the foremost to the aftermost 
points of a vessel’s hull. 


2.396 Less Container Load (LCL) 


A container loaded with cargoes belonging to two or 
more consignees. 


2.397 Levee (Dike, Embankment, 
Floodbank, or Stop Bank) 


Dyke, 


A structure that is usually earthen and that often runs 
parallel to the course of a river in its floodplain or 
along low-lying coastlines. 


2.398 Light Float 


A boat like structure (smaller than a light vessel and 
usually unmanned) used instead of a light buoy in 
waters where strong streams or currents are 
experienced, or when a greater elevation than that of 
a light buoy is necessary. 


2.399 Light House 


A structure situated in a vantage position and rising 
to a considerable height above water level and 
provided with a light at the top of the structure for 
navigational guidance. 


2.400 Light Orders 


For the purpose of classification, the lights of light 
houses, light beacons and light vessels are divided 
into a series of orders according to their focal 
distances. But now it is more usual to identify a lens 
merely by stating its focal distance in millimetres. 
These are divided into the categories like 
hyper-radial, meso-radial, Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 
6th order with focal length varying from 140 mm to 
1 330 mm. 


2.401 Light Vessel 


A vessel used for marking certain navigational 
dangers like sands, shoals, small submerged 
pinnackle rocks, etc, which are most easily and 
economically marked by such a floating craft in 
heavy seas and strong currents where a luminous 
buoy is inadequate and unsafe. 


2.402 Lighter 


A lighter is a type of flat-bottomed barge used to 
transfer goods and passengers to and from moored 
ships. 


2.403 Littoral 

Pertaining to a shore, especially of the sea. 
2.404 Littoral Current 

See Current, Littoral. 


2.405 Littoral Deposits 


A marine deposit laid down between low and high 
tide marks usually consisting of boulders, pebbles 
and coarse sand. 


2.406 Littoral Transport 


Littoral transport is the term used for the transport of 
non-cohesive sediments, i.e. mainly sand, along the 
foreshore and the shore face due to the action of the 
breaking waves and the longshore current. The 
littoral transport is also called the longshore 
transport or the littoral drift. 


2.407 Littoral Transport Rate 


Rate of transport of sedimentary material parallel to 
or perpendicular to the shore in the littoral zone. 
Usually expressed in cubic metres per year. 
Commonly used as synonymous with Longshore 
Transport Rate. 


2.408 Littoral Zone 


The littoral zone or nearshore is the part of a sea, 
lake, or river that is close to the shore. In coastal 
environments, the littoral zone extends from the 
high water mark, which is rarely inundated, to 
shoreline areas that are permanently submerged. 


2.409 Load 


The quantity of sediment transported by a current. It 
includes the suspended load of small particles and 
the bed load of large particles that move along the 
bottom. 


2.410 Loading 


The operation of transferring cargo from the quay of 
barge into the hold or on to the deck of a ship. It is 


25 


IS 7314 : 2023 


not complete until the cargo has been removed from 
the slings and placed in the hold or on the deck of a 
vessel. 


2.411 Lock (also Lock Entrance) 


The structure provided at the entrance of an 
impounded dock for maintaining the required level 
of water in the dock for easy and safe berthing of 
vessels in the dock, by means of gates or caissons. 


2.412 Lock Entrance 

Same as Lock. 

2.413 Lock Gate 

See Gate Lock. 

2.414 Lo-lo (lift-on lift-off) 


Cargo handling method by which vessels are loaded 
or unloaded by either ship or shore cranes. 


2.415 Longshore Bar 


A ridge of sand, gravel, or mud built on the seashore 
by waves and currents, generally parallel to the 
shore and submerged by high tides. 


2.416 Longshore Current 
See Current, Longshore. 
2.417 Longshore Transport Rate 


Rate of transport of sedimentary material parallel to 
the shore. Usually expressed in cubic metres per 
year. Commonly used as synonymous with littoral 
transport rate. 


2.418 Loop 


That part of a standing wave where the vertical 
motion is greatest and the horizontal velocities are 
least. Loops (sometimes called antinodes) are 
associated with clapotis and with seiche action 
resulting from wave reflections. 


2.419 Low Water, Low Tide (LW) 


The minimum elevation reached by each falling tide 
(see Tide). 


2.420 Low Water Datum 


An approximation to the plane of mean low water 
that has been adopted as a standard reference plane 
(see also Chart Datum). 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.421 Low Water Line 


The intersection of any standard low tide datum 
plane with the shore. 


2.422 Low Water of Ordinary Spring Tides 
(LWOST) 


A tidal datum based on low water of ordinary spring 
tides. 


2.423 Lower High Water (LHW) 


The lower of the two high waters of any tidal day. 


2.424 Lower Low Water (LLW) 


The lower of the two low waters of any tidal day. 
The single low water occurring daily during periods 
when the tide is diurnal is considered to be a lower 
low water. 


2.425 Luffing (Level Luffing) 


A modern and widely accepted operation of a crane, 
in which the jib of the crane is moved inwards and 
outwards without raising or lowering the load and 
thus achieving valuable economy in both power and 
time. 


2.426 Major Port 


A port providing almost all the facilities required for 
a standard port and declared by the proper authority 
of the country as a major port. 


2.427 Manifest (Clearance or Entrance for Cargo 
and Passenger) 


A document containing a listing of a commodity 
items/passengers carried by a vessel. The manifest is 
one of the requirements for clearance/entrance of 
vessel. 


2.428 Marigram 


A graphic record of the tide levels at a particular 
coastal station. 


2.429 Marine Borers 


Any mollusc or crustacean that lives usually in warm 
seas and destroys wood by boring into and eating it. 
The gribble and shipworm are the best known since 
they penetrate any wood in favourable water. 


2.430 Marshalling Yard 


A place where containers are stacked and arranged 
according to the sequence or withdrawal to 
consignee or transferred to CY—CFS or CY inside 
Port/Customs Zone. It is also where the containers 
are arranged prior to loading to a carrying vessel in 
accordance with the sequence of loading in the 
storage plan. 


26 


2.431 Mass Transport 


The net transfer of water by wave action in the 
direction of wave travel. 


2.432 Mattress 


A cushioning and soling layer usually made of 
bamboo, soft wood, brush wood, or even concrete, 
etc, provided at the bottom of a river training or 
bank protection work. 


2.433 Mean High Water (MHW) 


The average height of the high waters over a 19-year 
period. For shorter periods of observations, 
corrections are applied to eliminate known 
variations and reduce the results to the equivalent of 
a man 19-year value. All high water heights are 
included in the average where the type of tide is 
either semidiurnal or mixed. Only the higher high 
water heights are included in the average where the 
type of tide is diurnal. So determined, mean high 
water in the latter case is the same as mean higher 
high water. 


2.434 Mean High Water, Neaps (MHWN) 


The average height of the high water occurring at the 
time of neap tides. 


2.435 Mean High Water, Springs (MHWS) 


The average height of the high water occurring at the 
time of spring tides. Frequently abbreviated to high 
water springs. 


2.436 Mean Higher High Water (MHHW) 


The average height of the higher high waters over a 
19 year period. For shorter periods of observation, 
corrections are applied to eliminate known 
variations and reduce the result to the equivalent of 
a mean 19 year value. 


2.437 Mean Low Water (MLW) 


The average height of the low waters over a 19 year 
period. For shorter periods of observations, 
corrections are applied to eliminate known 
variations and reduce the results to the equivalent of 
a mean 19 year value. All low water heights are 
included in the average where the type of tide is 
either semidiurnal or mixed. Only lower low water 
heights are included in the average where the type of 
tide is diurnal. So determined, mean low water in the 
latter case is the same as mean lower low water. 


2.438 Mean Low Water, Neaps (MLWN) 


The average height of low waters occurring at the 
time of neap tides. 


2.439 Mean Low Water, Springs (MLWS) 


The average height of low waters occurring at the 
time of spring tides. It is usually derived by taking a 
plane depressed below the half tide level by an 
amount equal to one half the spring range of tide, 
necessary corrections being applied to reduce the 
results to a mean value. This plane is used to a 
considerable extend for hydrographic work. 
Frequently abbreviated as low water springs. 


2.440 Mean Lower Low Water (MLLW) 


The average height of the lower low waters over a 
10 year period. For shorter periods of observations, 
corrections are applied to eliminate known 
variations and reduce the result to the equivalent of 
a mean 19 year period, Frequently abbreviated as 
lower low water. 


2.441 Mean Sea Level (MSL) 


The average height of the sea level for all stages of 
the tide over a 19-year period, usually determined 
from hourly height readings. 


2.442 Mean Tide Level 


A plane midway between mean high water and mean 
low water. Also called half-tidal level. 


2.443 Megaripple 
See Sand Wave. 


2.444 Metric Ton — The weight measurement 
equivalent to 2 204.6 lbs or 1 000 kilograms. 


2.445 Middle—Ground Shoal 


A shoal formed by ebb and flood tides in the middle 
of the channel of the lagoon or estuary end of an 
inlet. 


2.446 Minimum Duration 
See Duration, Minimum. 
2.447 Minimum Fetch 


The least distance in which steady state wave 
conditions will develop for a wind of given speed 
blowing for a given duration of time. 


2.448 Minor Port 


A port providing a very few facilities required for a 
standard port and mostly owned by local authorities. 


2.449 Mixed Tide 


A type of tide in which the presence of a diurnal 
wave is conspicuous by a large inequality in either 


27 


IS 7314 : 2023 


the high or low water heights with two high waters 
and two low waters usually occurring each tidal day. 
In strictness, all tides are mixed, but the name is 
usually applied without definite limits to the tide 
intermediate to those predominantly semidiurnal 
and those predominantly diurnal. 


2.450 Mole 


A mole is a massive structure, usually of stone, used 
as a pier, breakwater, or a causeway separating two 
bodies of water. 


2.451 Monochromatic Waves 


Monochromatic wave refers to a wave with single 
wavelength and frequency. 


2.452 Monolith 


A hollow foundation piece of concrete; brickwork, 
or masonry with a number of open wells passing 
throught it. It is sunk in a manner similar to the 
cylindrical caisson, the wells being finally filled 
with concrete to form a solid foundation. 


2.453 Mooring 


The place in a river, harbour or dock in which a 
vessel may be moored and also, that to which vessels 
may be secured. 


2.454 Mooring Buoy 

See Buoy, Mooring. 

2.455 Mooring Dolphin 
See Dolphin, Mooring. 
2.456 Mound Breakwaters 
See Breakwater, Mound. 
2.457 Natural Harbour 
See Harbour, Natural. 

2.458 Nautical Almanac 


Astronomical ephemeris containing more or less 
similar data are prepared and published in advance 
by seven countries — India, U.K., U.S.A., U.S.S.R., 
France, Spain and Japan. A nautical almanac is a 
publication describing the positions of a selection of 
celestial bodies for the purpose of enabling 
navigators to use celestial navigation to determine 
the position of their ship while at sea. 


2.459 Navigation 


The science of ascertaining the position of ships and 
directing their course by astronomical observation 


IS 7314 : 2023 


and other calculations — the general process 
involved in operating ship. 


2.460 Navigational Aids 


For safe and speedy navigation in coastal waters or 
in restricted channels, various types of aids are 
necessary, such as lighthouses, beacons, light 
signals, semaphores, buoys, radar, etc, all of such 
equipment and accessories constituting navigational 
aids. 


2.461 Navigation Channel 


A channel in a river or waterway used by a ship for 
navigation, having the required depth for the safe 
movement of the vessel. 


2.462 Navigation Tracks 


Paths or tracks marked in a river course or waterway 
along the navigable channel. 


2.463 Neap Tide 


Either of the two tides that occur at the first or last 
quarter of the moon when the tide-generating forces 
of the sun and moon oppose each other and produce 
the smallest rise and fall in tidal level 


2.464 Nearshore (Zone) 


In beach terminology an indefinite zone extending 
seaward from the shoreline well beyond the breaker 
zone. It defines the area of nearshore currents. 


2.465 Nearshore Circulation 


One ocean circulation pattern composed of the 
nearshore currents and coastal currents. 


2.466 Nearshore Current System 


The current system caused primarily by wave action 
in and near the breaker zone, and which consists of 
four parts. The shoreward mass transport of water, 
longshore currents, seaward return flow including 
rip currents, and the longshore movement of the 
expanding heads or rip currents (see also Nearshore 
Circulation). 


2.467 Neck 


a) The narrow band of water flowing seaward 
through the surf (also Rip). 

b) The narrow strip of land connecting two 
larger bodies of land as an isthmus. 


2.468 Net gang-hours 


The total number of hours actually spent by gangs in 
discharging and loading cargo, excluding the gangs’ 


28 


idle time. This is computed by obtaining the 
difference between gross gang hours and idle gang 
hours. 


2.469 Net Registered Tonnage (NRT) 


This is derived from gross tonnage by the deduction 
of space allowed for navigation, machinery, and 
crew accommodation. The total enclosed space of a 
vessel expressed in 100 cubic feet to a ton, excluding 
the following spaces: 


a) Propelling space which includes machinery 
and boiler spaces, and shaft trunks in crew 
ships excluding store rooms and cabin; 


b) Master and crew spaces; 


c) Spaces for helm capstan, anchor gears and 
spaces used for the navigation of the ship, 
such as chart room, signals and boatswain 
stores; 


d) Donkey boiler and engine if connected to 
main pimps; 


e) Water ballast spaces other than the double 
bottoms; 


f) Sail room which is limited to 2.5 % of the 
gross tonnage of ships wholly propelled by 
sails. 


Since 1994 when the results of the 1969 
International Tonnage Measurement Convention 
came into force, Net Registered Tonnage (NRT) has 
been referred to as Net Tonnage (NT). 


2.470 Net Service Time 
This refers to the vessel working time. 
2.471 Net Tonnage 


The carrying capacity of vessels as ascertained 
according to Government regulations and arrived at 
by measuring the cubic contents of the space 
intended for revenue earning. Also called net 
registered tonnage. 


2.472 Nip 
The cut made by wave in a shoreline of emergence. 
2.473 Node 


That part of a standing wave where the vertical 
motion is least and the horizontal velocities are 
greatest. Nodes are associated with clapotis and with 
seiche action resulting from wave reflection (see 
also Loop). 


2.474 Nodal Zone 


An area in which the predominant direction of the 
longshore transport changes. 


2.475 Nose (of Spur) 
The top end of a spur projecting into water. 
2.476 Nourishment 


The process of replenishing a beach. It may be 
brought about naturally, by longshore transport, or 
artificially by the deposition of dredged materials. 


2.477 Occupation Factor (of Port) 


The probable frequency of full cargoes both inwards 
and outwards in a port within any specified time, on 
which depends the planning of berths and ancillaries 
like transit sheds, open space, etc, to be provided. It 
is the ratio of the number of berths, jetties and 
moorings occupied in a port within any specified 
time to the total number of berths, jetties and 
moorings. 


2.478 Oceanography 


The study of the sea, embracing and indicating all 
knowledge pertaining to the sea’s_ physical 
boundaries, the chemistry and physics of sea water 
and marine biology. 


2.479 Offshore 


a) In beach terminology, the comparatively 
flat zone of variable width, extending from 
the breaker zone to the seaward edge of the 
continental shelf. 


b) A direction seaward from the shore. 
2.480 Offshore Barrier 
See Barrier Beach. 
2.481 Offshore Current 

a) Any current in the offshore zone. 

b) Any current flowing away from the shore. 


2.482 Offshore Moaring 


A mooring located away from the shore where a 
vessel awaiting berthing is moored, or from where 
loading and unloading of cargoes are done by means 
of lighters, barges, etc. 


29 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.483 Offshore Terminal 


A terminal for berthing a vessel located away from 
the shore, generally for oil tankers with deep drafts, 
wherefrom the cargo is transported to the main land 
by means of pipelines or lighters, etc. 


2.484 Oil Terminal 


An oil terminal (also called a tank farm, tankfarm, 
oil installation or oil depot) is an industrial facility 
for the storage of oil, petroleum and petrochemical 
products, and from which these products are 
transported to end users or other storage facilities. 


2.485 Openwork and Island Harbour 


A harbour formed in deep water out of the range of 
littoral drift and connected with the shore by means 
of openwork jetties to avoid the problem of accretion 
and erosion at solid protective structures provided 
for a harbour at the shore. 


2.486 Opposing Wind 


In wave forecasting, a wind blowing in a direction 
opposite to the ocean wave advance; generally same 
as headwind. 


2.487 Orbit 


In water waves, the path of a water particle affected 
by the wave motion. In deep-water waves, the orbit 
is nearly circular and in shallow-water waves the 
orbit is nearly elliptical. In general, the orbits are 
slightly open in the direction of wave motion giving 
rise to mass transport. 


2.488 Orbital Current 


The flow of water accompanying the orbital 
movement of the water particles in a wave, which is 
not to be confused with wave-generated littoral 
currents. 


2.489 Orthogonal 


On a wave-refraction diagram, a line drawn 


perpendicularly to the wave crests. 
2.490 Oscillatory Wave 


A wave in which each individual particle oscillates 
about a point with little or no permanent change in 
mean position. The term is commonly applied to 


IS 7314 : 2023 


progressive oscillatory waves in which only the 
form advances, the individual particles moving in 
closed or nearly closed orbits (see also Orbit). 


2.491 Overlapping Tide 


A tide which engulfs the previously generated tide 
before the former’s time period is over, which is a 
sort of superimposing of one tide over the other. 


2.492 Overtopping 


Passing of water over the top of a structure as a result 
of wave run up or surge action. 


2.493 Overwash 


Overwash is the flow of water and sediment over a 
coastal dune or beach crest during storm events. 


2.494 Packing or Stuffing 

Loading of cargoes inside a container. 

2.495 Pallet 

A shallow square or rectangular box strongly 
constructed of wood, usually with two open ends 
and with the top and bottom formed of open 
boarding separated by three or more stringers, 
according to the size of the pallet, used for handling 
general cargo. This in combination with forklift 
trucks is useful in handling cargo of a more or less 
homogeneous character. 


2.496 Perched Beach 


A beach or fillet of sand retained above the 
otherwise normal profile level by a submerged dyke. 


2.497 Periodic Current 

See Current, Periodic. 

2.498 Period, Tidal 

See Tidal Period. 

2.499 Period, Wave 

See Wave Period. 

2.500 Permanent Current 

Set Current, Permanent. 

2.501 Permanent Dunnage 

Strips of timber fixed to the frames of a ship to keep 


cargo away from the sides of the ship to avoid 
damage and condensation. 


30 


2.502 Permeable Groin 

A groin with openings large enough to permit 
passage of appreciable quantities of sediment-laden 
water or littoral drift. 


2.503 Pharology 


The science of light house construction, the name 
derived from the lighthouse or tower built at the 
island of Pharos in Alexandria by about 270 B.C. 


2.504 Phase Velocity 


Propagation velocity of an individual wave as 
opposed to the velocity of a wave group. 


2.505 Pier 


A structure, usually of open construction, extending 
out into the harbour with sufficient depth from the 
shore, to serve as a landing place, a recreational 
facility, etc, rather than to afford coastal protection. 


2.506 Pier Apron 
The apron or open paved area adjacent to a pier. 


2.507 Pier Head 


The termination of a breakwater, mole or training 
work extending into water from the shore, which is 
generally wider than the main body of the structure, 
with a definite geometrical shape, like circular, 
octagonal, hammerhead, etc, as convenient. This 
part of the structure is open on three sides. 


2.508 Pilot Vessel (also Pilot Boat) 


A steam, motor or sailing vessel of small dimensions 
specially built and equipped for dropping or picking 
up pilots who serve the large deep-water vessels 
entering or leaving port. 


2.509 Pitching 


A method of bank/shore protection work in which 
one or more layers of rubble stone, granite, concrete 
blocks or brickwork are provided on the bank 
generally in the natural slope of the bank or 
embankment and above low water level. 


2.510 Pitching (of Ship) 


The angular motion which a ship makes about a 
transverse axis through her centre of gravity in a 
seaway due to wave action, wind, tidal action, etc, 
for which sufficient clearance must be allowed 
below its keel in a shallow channel. 


2.511 Planform 


The outline or shape of a body of water as 
determined by the still water line. 


2.512 Plunge Point 


a) Fora plunging wave, the point at which the 
wave curls over and falls. 


b) The final breaking point of the waves just 
before they rush up on. 


2.513 Plunging Breaker 

Set Breaker. 

2.514 Pneumatic Breakwater 
See Breakwater, Pneumatic. 


2.515 Pneumatic Tide Recorder 


An automatic tide recording machine consisting of 
an airtube of about 6 mm internal diameter 
connected to a small air chamber fixed below low 
water level and at the other end to the recording 
apparatus. Air is supplied by means of a cylinder of 
compressed air or a small compressor, and slowly 
escapes from the chamber; the varying pressure in 
the tube due to the height of water is a measure of 
the rise and fall of tide which is recorded by pressure 


gauge. 
2.516 Pocket Beach 


A beach, usually small, in a coastal re-entrant or 
between two littoral barriers. 


2.517 Point of Reversal (Tide) 


The point of time at which the direction of current 
changes from flood to ebb or vice versa. 


2.518 Port 


A terminus of great ocean trunk lines of 
communication; a place where vessels may 
discharge or receive cargo; may be the commercial 
part of a harbour where the quays, wharves, jetties 
facilities for transfer of cargo, docks and repair 
shops are situated, or may be the entire harbour 
including its approaches and anchorages. 


2.519 Portal Crane 


See Crane, Portal. 
2.520 Port Anchorage 


An anchorage often provided in a port for shipping 
before proceeding to a dock or quay for such 
purposes as customs and quarantine inspection, the 
discharge of explosives (and on the outward voyage 
for loading such material) and in time of war for 
defensive purposes. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.521 Port Dues 


Charge against vessel engaged in foreign trade, 
including those engaged in barter trade, that enter 
any port whether private or government on each 
bases in gross registered tonnage (GRT) of the 
vessel. 


2.522 Port of Origin 

The last port of call. 

2.523 Port, Major 

See Major Port, 

2.524 Port, Minor 

See Minor Port. 

2.525 Ports, Intermediate 

See Intermediate Port. 

2.526 Potential Energy (of Wave) 


In a progressive oscillatory wave, the energy 
resulting from the elevation or depression of the 
water surface from the undisturbed level. 


2.527 Prediction of Tide 


Prediction of tidal time and heights and ranges at a 
location for the future, depending upon the past 
observations of the tides for a 19 year period (a 
saros), or if the records be available for a shorter 
period, by applying required corrections by a system 
of harmonic analysis generally done by means of 
tide-predicting machines. 


2.528 Prism, Tidal 
See Tidal Prism. 
2.529 Probable Maximum Water Level 


A hypothetical water level (exclusive of wave run up 
from normal wind generated waves ) that might 
result from the most severe combination of 
hydrometeorological, geoseismic and other 
geophysical factors that is considered reasonably 
possible in the region involved, with each of these 
factors considered as affecting the locality in a 
maximum manner. This level represents the physical 
response of a body of water to maximum applied 
phenomena, such as hurricanes, moving squall lines, 
other cyclonic meteorological events, tsunamis and 
astronomical tide combined with maximum 
probable hydrological conditions. It is a water level 
with virtually no risk of being exceeded. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.530 Profile, Beach 


The intersection of the ground surface with a vertical 
plane; may extend from the top of the dune line to 
the seaward limit of sand movement. 


2.531 Progression (of a Beach) 
See Advance. 
2.532 Progressive Wave 


A wave that moves relative to a fixed Coordinate 
system in a fluid. The direction in which it moves is 
termed the direction of wave propagation. 


2.533 Protected Harbour 
See Harbour, Protected. 
2.534 Quay 


A stretch of paved bank, or a solid artificial landing 
place parallel to the navigable waterway, for use in 
loading and unloading vessels. 


2.535 Quay Crane 
Same as Crane, Wharf. 


2.536 Quick Release Mooring Hook (QRMH) 


Fixed to the Berthing and Mooring Dolphins, 
consisting of a set of 2 or 3 hook configuration, to 
hold the ropes from the Vessel. This is provided with 
an electrically operated capstan to pull the ropes 
from the vessel. 


2.537 Quay walls 

The basic physical infrastructure provided to berth 
ship. 

2.538 Radius of Maximum Winds 


Distance from the eye of a hurricane where surface 
and wind velocities are zero to the place where 
surface wind speeds are maximum. 


2.539 Rail and Water Terminal 


A terminal for loading and unloading of cargoes to 
and from vessels, where railway terminus also is 
provided for quick transport of the cargo. 


2.540 Rail Road Wharf 

A wharf with rail and roadways provided on the 
wharf structure for quick transport of cargo. 

2.541 Range of Tide 


The difference in height between consecutive high 
water and low water (or higher high and lower low 
waters). 


32 


2.542 Ray, Wave 
See Orthogonal. 
2.543 Reach 


A straight course between the bends of a river. A 
straight part in a navigable river. 


2.544 Recession (of a Beach) (also Retrogression) 


a) A continuing landward movement of the 
shoreline. 


b) A net landward movement of the shoreline 
over a specified time. 


2.545 Recirculation System (in Docks) 


The system of recirculation of water by pumps in an 
impounded dock to maintain the required level of 
water in the dock. 


2.546 Reaf, Sand 
Synonymous with bar. 
2.547 Reflected Wave 


That part on an incident wave that is returned back 
when a wave impinges on a steep beach, barrier, or 
other reflecting surface. 


2.548 Reflection (of a Wave) 


The returning back of a part of or a full incident 
wave on meeting a steep beach, barrier, a vertical 
wall or other reflecting surface, that is, the 
momentum of the incident wave is arrested and 
some of the wave energy is absorbed at the reflecting 
surface and some is returned back with the reflected 
wave. This reflected part on meeting another 
advancing wave gives rise to standing wave, 
clapotis, etc. 


2.549 Refration Coefficient 


The square root of the ratio of the spacing between 
adjacent orthogonals in deep water and in shallow 
water at a selected point. When multiplied by the 
shoaling factor and a factor for friction and 
percolation, this becomes the wave height 
coefficient or the ratio of the refracted wave height 
at any point to the deepwater wave height. Also the 
square root of the energy coefficient. 


2.550 Refraction Diagram 


A drawing showing position of wave crests and/or 
orthogonals in a given area for a specific deep water 
wave period and direction. 


2.551 Refraction (of a Wave) 


a) The process by which the direction of a 
wave moving in shallow water at an angle 
to the contours is changed. The part of the 
wave advancing in shallower water moves 
more slowly than that part still advancing 
in deeper water, causing the wave crest to 
bend toward alignment with the underwater 
contours. 

b) The bending of wave crests by currents. 


2.552 Resonance 


The phenomenon of amplification of a free wave or 
oscillation of a system by a forced wave or 
oscillation of exactly equal period. The forced wave 
may arise from an impressed force upon the system 
or from a boundary condition. In case of an enclosed 
harbour, when the natural frequency of the harbour 
coincides with the frequency of an outside 
disturbance like a storm wave, the disturbance 
within the harbour is much more amplified and may 
cause disaster to ships and structures within the 
harbour, when it is called harbour resonance. 


2.553 Retardation (also Daily Retardation) 


The amount of time by which corresponding tidal 
phases grow later day by day (about 50 minutes). 


2.554 Retrogression (of a Beach) 

See Recession. 

2.555 Ridge, Beach 

See Beach Ridge. 

2.556 Rill Marks 

Tiny drainage channels in a beach, caused by the 
flow seaward of water, left in the sands of the upper 


part of the beach after the retreat of the tide or after 
dying down of storm waves. 


2.557 Rip 
A body of water made rough by waves meeting an 
opposing current, particularly a tidal current; often 


formed where tidal currents are converging and 
sinking. 


2.558 Rip Current 
See Current, Rip. 
2.559 Rip Surf 
See Current, Rip. 
2.560 Riparian 


Pertaining to the banks of a body of water. 


33 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.561 River Training 


The process of regulating a river for improvement of 
navigable and/or hydraulic conditions by deepening 
the flow channel or confining a shifting, unstable or 
diverging flow to a single channel at one site by 
structures like spurs, groynes, etc, encroaching a part 
of the waterway, and/or dredging, embankment, etc. 


2.562 Roadstead A sheltered area of water near 
shore where vessels may anchor in relative safety 
shore. 


2.563 Rock Breakers 


Employed in dredging operation in rock beds for 
breaking up of hard masses of rock into small 
fragments so that the material may be removed 
either by multibucket dredger, dipper or grab 
dredger, and also where blasting operations are 
impracticable. The breaker is usually in rectangular 
pontoon form, self propelled or dummy, very similar 
to a pile barge in its equipment, having a tripod 
derrick with winches for hoisting long pointed steel 
rams which are allowed to fall freely, and by 
succession of blows pierce the rock, compressed air 
or steam-operated hammers being also used in 
modern crafts. Some modern type of rock breakers 
combine dredging facilities with rock breaking. 


2.564 Roller 


An indefinite term, sometimes considered to denote 
one of a series of long crested, large waves which 
roll in on a shore, as after a storm. 


2.565 Rolling Caisson 
See Caisson, Rolling. 
2.566 Rolling of Ship 


The transverse oscillating rotation of a vessel about 
a longitudinal axis, which results when it meets 
waves with crests approximately parallel to the 
length of the ship and which offers resistance to its 
propulsion. 


2.567 Roll-On Roll-Off Vessels 

Vessels through which vehicles can be driven. 
2.568 Rose, Wind 

See Wind Rose. 


2.569 Rubble 


a) Loose angular waterworn stones along a 
beach. 


b) Rough, irregular fragments of broken rock. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.570 Rubble Mound Breakwater 
See Breakwater, Mound. 
2.571 Rubble Mound Structure 


A mound of random shaped and random placed 
stones protected with a cover layer of selected stones 
or specially shaped concrete armour units, usually 
used for marine works to windstand wave action. 


2.572 Runnel 


A corrugation, or trough formed in the foreshore or 
in the bottom just offshore by waves or tidal 
currents. 


2.573 Runup (also Uprush) 


The rush of water up a structure or beach on the 
breaking of a wave. The amount of run up is the 
vertical height above still water level that the rush of 
water reaches. 


2.574 Saltation 


The method of sand movement in a fluid in which 
individual particles leave the bed by bounding 
nearly vertically and, because the motion of the fluid 
is not strong or turbulent enough to retain them in 
suspension, return to the bed at some distance. The 
travel path of the particles is a series of hops and 
bounds. 


2.575 Sand Bar 


a) See Bar. 
b) Inariver, a ridge of sand built up to or near 
the surface by river currents. 


2.576 Sand Bypassing 
See Bypassing, Sand. 


2.577 Sand-Pump Dredger 


A dredger in which the material to be dredged is 
pumped up through a pipe by a centrifugal pump 
either direct or after previous mechanical erosion or 
disintegration and delivered into hoppers with a 
large quantity of water for settling. Such dredgers 
were originally designed to deal with sand only, but 
later modifications and improvements have enabled 
them to be used for other materials also. Entrance 
channels to harbours with heavy littoral deposits are 
sometimes kept free by means of sand pump dredger 
which pumps the sand from the accreting side of the 
entrance to the eroding side. 


2.578 Sand Reef 


Synonymous with bar. 


34 


2.579 Sand Wave (Megaripple) 


A large wave like sediment feature composed of 
sand in very shallow water. Wave length may reach 
100 m; amplitude is about 0.5 m. 


2.580 Scrap, Beach 
See Beach Scrap. 
2.581 Scraping and Scuttling 


Method of maintaining a fairway having tendency to 
silt up. The method consists of stirring the deposit 
by mechanical means, to enable it to be carried away 
by an existing outward current. Harrows are 
employed for the purpose, aided by high pressure 
water jets worked from a small tug during the ebb 
tide. The same method with a larger vessel has been 
employed for removing sandy bars at the mouths of 
rivers. 


2.582 Screw Moorings 


Screw piles of steel usually of large diameter (of the 
order of 1.2 m) used for mooring of vessels with the 
help of chains and mooring buoys. 


2.583 Sea Cliff 

A cliff situated at the seaward edge of the coast. 
2.584 Sea Level 

See Mean Sea Level. 

2.585 Sea Mount 


An elevation rising more than 1 000 metres above 
the ocean floor, and of limited extent across the 
summit. 


2.586 Sea Puss 


A dangerous longshore current, a rip current caused 
by return flow; loosely, the submerged channel or 
inlet through a bar caused by those currents. 


2.587 Sea Wall 


A structure separating land and water areas, 
primarily designed to prevent erosion and other 
damages due to wave action (see also). 


2.588 Sea Way 
A navigable portion of the sea. 
2.589 Sector Gate 


See Gate, Sector. 


2.590 Seiche 


a) A standing wave oscillation of an enclosed 
water body that continues, pendulum 
fashion, after the cessation of the 
originating force, which may have been 
either seismic or atmospheric. 

b) An oscillation of a fluid body in response 
to a disturbing force having the same 
frequency as the natural frequency of the 
fluid system. Tides are now considered to 
be seiches induced primarily by the sun and 
moon. 


2.591 Seismic Sea Wave (Tsunami) 


A long period wave caused by an underwater 
seismic disturbance or volcanic eruption. 
Commonly misnamed ‘tidal wave’. 


2.592 Semaphore, Tidal 


A navigational aid indicating the rise of tide at 
different stages of tide in a tidal river. The rises are 
indicated by a set of symbols (lights during night) on 
a tall structure constructed on the shore. 


2.593 Semi-Diurnal Tide 


A tide with two high and two low waters in a tidal 
day with comparatively little diurnal inequality. 


2.594 Set of Current 
The direction toward which a current flows. 
2.595 Set Up, Wave 


Super elevation of the water surface over normal 
surge elevation due to onshore mass transport of the 
water by wave action along. 


2.596 Set Up, Wind 
See Wind set up. 
2.597 Shallow Water 


a) Commonly, water of such a depth that 
surface waves are noticeably affected by 
bottom topography. It is customary to 
consider water of depths less than one half 
the surface wavelength as shallow water. 

b) More strictly, in hydrodynamics with 
regard to progressive gravity waves, water 
in which the depth is less than 1/25 the 
wavelength. 


2.598 Shear Legs (also Sheer-Legs, Sheers) 


A large lifting device used in shipyards etc, 
resembling a crane in which a pair of inclined struts 
take the place of a jib. 


35 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.599 Shelf, Continental 

See Continental Shelf. 

2.600 Shelf, Insular See Insular Shelf. 

2.601 Ship Channel 

A channel in a waterway used for navigation. 
2.602 Ship Worm 

See Teredo Navals. 

2.603 Shipcalls 


The number of vessels which call or arrive at a 
particular port at any given time. 


2.604 Shoal 


A detached elevation of the sea bottom or river bed, 
comprised of any material except rock or coral, 
which may endanger surface navigation. 


2.605 Shoaling Coefficient 


The ratio of the height of a wave in water of any 
depth to its height in deep water with the effects of 
refraction, friction and percolation eliminated. 
Sometimes termed as shoaling factor or depth factor. 


2.606 Shoreface 


The narrow zone seaward from the low tide 
shoreline covered by water over which the beach 
sands and gravels activity oscillate with changing 
wave conditions. 


2.607 Significant Wave 


A Statistical term relating to the one-third highest 
waves of a given wave group and defined by the 
average of their heights and periods. The 
composition of the higher waves depends upon the 
extent to which the lower waves are considered. 


2.608 Significant Wave 
Characteristic Wave-Height) 


Height (also 


The average height of the one-third highest waves of 
a given wave group. In wave record analysis, the 
average height of the highest one-third of a selected 
number of waves, this number being determined by 
dividing the time of record by the significant period. 


2.609 Significant Wave Period 


An arbitrary period generally taken as the period of 
the one-third highest waves within a wave group. In 


IS 7314 : 2023 


wave record analysis, this is determined as the 
average period of the most frequently recurring of 
the larger well-defined waves in the record under 
study. 


2.610 Sill 
See Dock sill. 
2.611 Slack Tide (Slack Water) 


The state of a tidal current when its velocity is near 
zero, especially the movement when a 
reversing current changes direction and its 
velocity is zero. Sometimes considered the 
intermediate period between ebb and flood 
currents during which the velocity of the currents 
is less than 0.2 km/h (see Stand of Tide). 


2.612 Sliding Caisson 

See Caisson, Sliding. 

2.613 Slip 

A berthing space between two piers. 
2.614 Slip Dock 


A repairing dock in which the vessel is partially 
withdrawn from the water by means of ways, 
the remaining water being removed by natural 
or artificial means, for repair to the hull and keel of 
the vessel. 


2.615 Slipway 


A sloping platform used for hauling up and 
repairing of vessels, usually of smaller capacity 
than those repaired in dry docks. 


2.616 Slough 
See Bayou. 


2.617 Sluices, Gate 


Sluices provided in a lock or dry dock for levelling 
water on both sides of a pair of lock gates 
preparatory to opening them. May be fitted in the 
gates themselves or located in the side walls. 


2.618 Solitary Wave 


A wave consisting of a single elevation (above the 
original water surface), its height not necessarily 
small compared to the depth, and neither followed 
nor preceded by another elevation or depression of 
the water surface. 


36 


2.619 Sound 


a) A wide waterway between the mainland 
and an island, or a wide waterway 
connecting two sea areas (see also Strait). 

b) A relatively long arm of the sea or ocean 
forming a channel between an island and a 
mainland or connecting two larger bodies, 
as a sea and the ocean, or two parts of the 
same body; usually wider and more 
extensive than a strait. 


2.620 Sounding 


A measured depth of water. On hydrographic charts 
the soundings are adjusted to a specified plane of 
reference. 


2.621 Sounding Datum 


The plane to which soundings are referred (see also 
Chart Datum). 


2.622 Spacing Factor 
It is an arbitrary rate (expressed in percent) which is 
being used to indicate the spacing between vessels 


when at berth. The normal factor is ten percent of 
LOA. 


2.623 Spending Beach 
See Beach, Spending. 


2.624 Spilling Breaker 
See Breaker. 


2.625 Spit 


A small point of land or a narrow shoal projecting 
into a body of water from the shore. 


2.626 Spring Tide 

A tide that occurs at or near the time of new or full 
moon (syzygy), and which rises highest and falls 
lowest from the mean sea level. 


2.627 Spur 


A permeable or impermeable structure constructed 
from the bank in a river, estuary or any waterway, 
built usually perpendicular to the shore line or at a 
small angle from the perpendicular, for river training 
and bank protection works. 


2.628 Squatting (of a Ship) 


The tendency of a vessel to settle down in shallow 
water as she moves through it, for which sufficient 
clearance depending upon the speed of the vessel 
must be allowed between the keel of the vessel and 
the bed of the waterway. 


2.629 Staith 


Used for loading of coal/ore into vessel and worked 
on principle of gravity. It is a jetty on to which the 
coal/ore wagons gravitate and discharge their loads 
into hopper from which the coal/ore runs on to a 
short belt conveyor or down a spout or chute into the 
vessel. 


2.630 Standard Project Hurricane 
See Hypothetical Hurricane. 
2.631 Standing Wave 


A type of wave in which the surface of the 
water oscillates vertically between fixed 
points, called nodes, without progression. The 
points of maximum vertical rise and fall are 


called antinodes or loops where the 
underlying water particles have no 
horizontal motion but maximum vertical 


motion while at nodes these have no vertical 
motion but maximum horizontal motion. This 
may be the result of two equal progressive 
wave trains travelling through each other 
in opposite directions. Sometimes called 
clepotis or stationary wave. 


2.632 Stand of Tide 


An interval at high or low water when there is no 
sensible change in the height of the tide. The water 
level is stationary at high and low water for only an 
instant, but the change in level near these times is so 
slow that it is not usually perceptible (see Slack 
Tide). 


2.633 Stationary Wave 


A wave of essentially stable form which does not 
move with respect to a selected reference point; a 
fixed swelling. Sometimes called standing wave. 


2.634 Stern 
The after-part of a ship or boat. 
2.635 Stevedore 


Person who provides cargo handling service. In the 
Philippines, the term refers to a person of company 
engaged in cargo handling on-board a vessel as 
opposed to arrastre. 


2.636 Stevedoring Services 


All works performed on board vessel, that is, 
the process or act of loading and unloading 
cargo, stowing inside hatches, compartments and 
on deck or open spaces on board vessel. 


37 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.637 Still Water Level 


The elevation that the surface of the water would 
assume if all wave action were absent. 


2.638 Stockpile 


Sand piled on a beach foreshore to nourish downdrift 
beaches by natural littoral currents or forces (see 
Feeder Beach). 


2.639 Stone Pitching 
See Pitching. 
2.640 Storm 


A wind of intensity less than a hurricane but higher 
than a gale, occupying No. 11 position in Beufort 
scale of wind forces with an average velocity 
between 103 to 117 km/h. 


2.641 Storm Gate 
See Gate, Storm. 
2.642 Storm Surge 


A rise above normal water level on the open coast 
due to the action of wind stress on the water surface. 
Storm surge resulting from a hurricane also includes 
that rise in level due to atmospheric pressure 
reduction as well as that due to wind stress (see 
Wind Set Up). 


2.643 Storm Tide 
See Storm Surge. 
2.644 Strait 


A relatively narrow waterway between two larger 
bodies of water (see also Sound). 


2.645 Stripping 

Unloading goods from a container. 
2.646 Suction Dredger 

See Dredger, Suction. 

2.647 Surf 


The wave activity in the area between the shoreline 
and the outermost limit of breakers. 


2.648 Surf Beat 


Irregular oscillations of the nearshore water level, 
with periods of the order of several minutes. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.649 Surf Zone 


The area between the outermost breaker and the 
limit of wave uprush. 


2.650 Surge 


a) The name applied to wave motion with a 
period intermediate between that of the 
ordinary wind wave and that of the tide. It 
is of low height, usually less than 0.1 m (see 
also Seiche). 

b) In fluid flow, long interval variations in 
velocity and pressure, not necessarily 
periodic, perhaps even transient in nature. 

c) See Storm Surge. 


2.651 Surging Breaker 


See Breaker. 


2.652 Suspended Fender 
See Fender, Suspended. 


2.653 Suspended Load 


a) The material moving in suspension in a 
fluid, being kept up by the upward 
components of the turbulent currents or by 
colloidal suspension. 

b) The material collected in or computed from 
samples collected with a suspended load 
sampler. 


2.654 Swale 


The depression between two beach ridges. 


2.655 Swash (also Uprush, Runup) 


The rush of water up onto the beach face following 
the breaking of a wave. 


2.656 Swash Channel 


a) Onthe open shore, a channel cut by flowing 
water in its return to the parent body, for 
example, a rip channel. 

b) A secondary channel passing through or 
shoreward of an inlet or river bar. 


2.657 Swash Mark 


The thin wavy line of fine sand, mica scales, bits of 
seaweed, etc, left by the uprush when it recedes from 
its upward limit of movement on the beach face. 


2.658 Swell 


Wind generated waves that have travelled out of 
their generating area. Swell characteristically 
exhibits a more regular and longer period, and has 
flatter crests than waves within their fetch (Seas). 


38 


2.659 Swinging Caisson 
See Caisson, Swinging. 
2.660 Synoptic Chart 


A chart showing the distribution of meteorological 
conditions over a given area at a given time. 
Popularly called a weather map. 


2.661 Syzygy 


The two points on the moon’s orbit when the moon 
is in conjunction or opposition to the sun relative to 
the earth; time of new or full moon in the cycle of 
phases when or nearly when spring tides occur. 


2.662 Tainter Gate 
See Sector Gate. 
2.663 Teredo Navals (Shipworm) 


A burrowing lamelli-branch molluse causing 
damage to timber structures used in marine work. 
The burrow of the teredo enter the surface of the 
wood generally at right angles to the grain and then 
curves upward or downward and follows the grain 
of the wood. The attacks extend down below high 
water mark to almost any depth. 


2.664 Terminal Management Office (TMO) 


Refers to an administrative unit overseeing the 
operation of a terminal in delivering frontline 
services. 


2.665 Tetrapod 


A patented form of concrete block consisting of four 
legs disposed in triangular form so that when three 
points are resting on the ground the fourth leg is 
vertical. This shape possesses excellent interlocking 
qualities and provides high roughness as well as 
permeability effecting a very great degree of 
dissipation of wave energy. This is extensively used 
for revetting the exposed faces of rubble mound 
breakwaters and beach protection works. 


2.666 Thalweg 


In hydraulics, the line joining the deepest points of 
an inlet or stream channel. 


2.667 Tidal Basin 
See Basin, Tidal. 
2.668 Tidal Current 


See Current, Tidal. 


2.669 Tidal Datum 
See Chart Datum. 


2.670 Tidal Day 


The time of the rotation of the earth with respect to 
the moon, or the interval between two successive 
upper transits of the moon over the meridian of a 
place, approximately 24.84 solar hours or 1.035 
times the mean solar day. Also called lunar day. 


2.671 Tidal Flats 


Marshy or muddy land areas which are covered and 
uncovered by the rise and fall or the tide. 


2.672 Tidal Flow 


Oscillating flow of water due to tidal action. 


2.673 Tidal Inlet 


A natural inlet maintained by tidal flow. 


2.674 Tidal Levels 


The levels attained by water in a tidal area during 
different stages of tide, like high water, low water, 
etc. 


2.675 Tidal Period 


The interval of time between two consecutive like 
phases of the tide. 


2.676 Tidal Pool 


A pool of water remaining on a beach or reef or bank 
after recession of the tide. 


2.677 Tidal Prism 


The total amount of water that flows into a harbour 
or estuary and out again with movement of the tide, 
excluding any fresh water flow. 


2.678 Tidal Range 

See Range of Tide. 

2.679 Tidal Rise 

The height of tide as referred to the datum of a chart. 
2.680 Tidal River 

A waterway connecting the sea or estuary at the 
downstream end and a fluvial river at the upstream 
end where tide plays. 


2.681 Tidal Wave 


a) The wave motion of the tides. 


39 


IS 7314 : 2023 


b) In popular usage, any unusually high and 
destructive water level along a shore. It 
normally refers to storm surges or tsunami. 


2.682 Tide 


The periodic rising and falling of the water that 
results from gravitational attraction primarily of the 
moon and sun, acting upon the rotating earth. 
Although the accompanying horizontal movement 
of the water resulting from the same cause is also 
sometimes called the tide, it is preferable to 
designate the latter as Tidal Current reserving the 
name tide for the vertical movement. 


2.683 Tide, Daily Retardation of 
See Daily Retardation of Tides. 
2.684 Tide, Diurnal 

See Diurnal Tide. 

2.685 Tide, Ebb 

See Ebb Tide. 

2.686 Tide, Flood 

See Flood Tide. 


2.687 Tide Gauge 

An appliance used for indicating changes in the 
water surface level during different stages of tide. In 
the simplest form it consists of an upright stake or 
post driven into the shore, bank, or bed and 
graduated to linear measure. 

2.688 Tide, Mixed 

See Mixed Tide. 

2.689 Tide, Neap 

See Neap Tide. 

2.690 Tide, Prediction 

See Prediction of Tide. 

2.691 Tide, Semi-diurnal 

See Semi-diurnal Tide. 

2.692 Tide, Slack 

See Slack Tide. 

2.693 Tide, Spring 


See Spring Tide. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.694 Tide Station 


A place at which tide observations are being taken. 
It is called a primary tide station when continuous 
observations are to be taken over a number of years 
to obtain basic tidal data for the locality. A 
secondary tidest action is one operated over a short 
period of time to obtain data for a specific purpose. 


2.695 Tide, Storm 
See Storm Tide. 
2.696 Tide Table 


A table giving the predicted daily heights and times 
of the tide for a specific period at one or more 
stations in a locality. 


2.697 Time on Berth 


This is also described as the service time. It is the 
number of hours a vessel spent from the time of 
completing the berthing process to the time of 
completion of the un-berthing process on final 
departure. It may include the downtime/ idle time of 
the vessel while on berth. 


2.698 Tombolo 


A bar or spit that connects or ‘ties’ an island to the 
mainland or to another island. 


2.699 Track Marks 


Artificial marks on shore or in water showing the 
alignment of navigation route in a waterway. 


2.700 Track, Navigation 

See Navigaton Tracks. 

2.701 Training Wall 

A wall or jetty to direct current flow. 
2.702 Training Work 

See River Training. 

2.703 Transit Cargo 


Cargo discharged and loaded from a port of origin to 
a port of destination through another port. 


2.704 Transit Marks 


Prominent objects or structures on a coastline or 
river bank, which act as a means of alignment or as 
an indication of change of direction in a navigating 
channel. 


40 


2.705 Transit Shed 


A shed provided at a cargo berth for temporary 
accommodation and protection from weather of 
cargoes deposited on dock quay or of freights on the 
eve of shipment. A transit shed may be single or 
more storied according to the requirements and the 
covered area depends upon the quantum and types 
of cargo handled at the berth. 


2.706 Transitional Zone (Transitional Water) 


In regard to progressive gravity waves, water whose 
depth is less than 1/2 but more than 1/25 the 
wavelength. Often called Shallow Water. 


2.707 Translatory Wave 
See Wave of Translation. 


2.708 Transporter 


An appliance for cargo handling consisting of a 
long arm or track, placed horizontally or very 
nearly so, along which travels a carriage with a 
hook for the attachment of loads. 


2.709 Transposed Hurricane 
See Hypothetical Hurricane. 
2.710 Transshipment 


The shipment of goods or containers to an 
intermediate country of destination then to yet 
another country of final destination. The port 
intermediate country is referred to as transshipment 
port. 


2.711 Traversing Caisson 

See Caisson, Traversing. 

2.712 Trochoidal Wave 

A progressive oscillatory wave whose form is that 
of a prolate cycloid or trochoid; it is approximated 
by waves of small amplitude. 

2.713 Tropical Cyclone 

See Hurricane. 


2.714 Tropical Storm 


A tropical cyclone with maximum winds less than 
34 km/h. 


2.715 Trough of Wave 


The lowest part of a wave form between successive 
crests. Also that part of a wave below still water 
level. 


2.716 Tsunami 


See Seismic sea wave. 
2.717 Tug 


A small vessel of adequate power and a high degree 
of seaworthiness used primarily to drag a craft or to 
render the necessary assistance to ocean going 
vessels in docking and undocking, berthing in the 
docks and at jetties, etc, and in navigating and 
manoeuvring in narrow and congested waters. The 
type and power of a tug will be determined by the 
duties required for it. 


2.718 Turnround (of Vessels) 


The whole series of operations connected with the 
arrival and departure of a vessel, including the 
discharge of its cargo and the process of reloading. 


2.719 Turning Basin 
See Basin, Turning. 


2.720 Typhoon 
See Hurricane. 
2.721 Undertow 


A current, below water surface, flowing seaward; 
also the receding water below the surface from 
waves breaking on a shelving beach. Often a 
misnormer for rip current. 


2.722 Universal Buoyage System 


A uniform system of buoyage in regard to colours, 
shape and sizes of buoys used for navigational aids 
adopted over all the ports of the world as per 
international agreement of 1936. 


2.723 Unmanned Light Vessel 


Small light vessel varying in length and fully decked 
over and equipped with light and sound signals 
suitably divided into compartments to provide some 
measure of safety in case of damage by collision (see 
also Light Vessel). 


2.724 Upcoast 


The coastal direction generally tending toward the 
north. 


2.725 Updrift 


The direction opposite that of the predominant 
movement of littoral materials or bed materials. 


2.726 Upland 


The land area in the upstream direction of a river or 
channel section. 


41 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.727 Upland Discharge 


The discharge through a river or channel section 
coming from the upland area. 


2.728 Uprush (also Swash, Runup) 


The rush of water up onto the beach following the 
breaking of a wave. 


2.729 Upstream 


Opposite to the direction in which the river normally 
flows. For tidal rivers, it is the direction of flood 
flow. 


2.730 Variability of Waves 


a) The variation of heights and periods 
between individual waves within a wave 
train. 


b) The variation in direction of propagation of 
waves leaving the generating area. 


c) The variation in height along the crest, 
usually called ‘variation along the wave’. 


2.731 Velocity of Waves 
The speed at which an individual wave advances. 
2.732 Vertical Exaggeration (in Models) 


The ratio of the horizontal scale to the vertical scale 
used in a hydraulic model. 


2.733 Vertical Lift Gate 

See Gate, Vertical Lift. 

2.734 Vertical Wall Breakwater 

See Breakwater, Vertical Wall. 

2.735 Vessel 

Includes any ship or boat or any description of a 
vessel or boat, or any artificial contrivance used or 


capable of being used as a means of transportation 
on water. 


2.736 Waiting Time 


The number of hours spent by a vessel from the time 
of first reporting at the port to the time of completion 
of the berthing process before working. 


2.737 Wall Breakwater 


See Breakwater, Vertical Wall. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.738 Warehouse 


Accommodation provided in the dock area or in the 
near vicinity for the reception of discharged cargoes 
or goods for shipment, which are to be stored for 
periods of longer and perhaps indefinite duration. 
Bonded warehouses, where dutiable goods are 
stored, are of special help to importers. 


2.739 Water Line 

A juncture of land and water or sea. This line 
migrates, changing with the tide or other fluctuation 
in the water level. Where waves are present on the 
beach, this line is also known as the limit of 
backrush. 

2.740 Wave Age 

The ratio of wave speed to wind speed. 

2.741 Wave Amplitude 

See Amplitude (of Wave). 

2.742 Wave, Capillary 

See Capillary Wave. 

2.743 Wave, Cnoidal 

See Cnoidal Wave. 

2.744 Wave, Crest 

See Crest of Wave. 

2.745 Wave, Crest Length 

See Crest Length, Wave. 

2.746 Wave Cycloidal 

See Cycloidal Wave. 

2.747 Wave Decay 

See Decay of Waves. 

2.748 Wave Deflection 

See Deflection (of Wave). 

2.749 Wave Diffraction 

See Diffraction (of Water Waves). 

2.750 Wave Direction 


The direction from which a wave approaches. 


42 


2.751 Wave Forecasting 


The theoretical determination of future wave 
characteristics, usually from observed or predicted 
meteorological phenomena. 


2.752 Wave Generation 
See Generation of Wave. 
2.753 Wave, Gravity 
See Gravity Wave. 

2.754 Wave Group 


A series of waves in which the wave direction, wave 
length, and wave height vary only slightly (see also 
Group Velocity). 


2.755 Wave Height 


The vertical distance between a crest and the 
preceeding trough (see also Significant Wave 
Height). 

2.756 Wave Height Coefficient 


The ratio of the wave height at a selected point to the 
deepwater wave height. The refraction coefficient 
multiplied by the shoaling factor. 


2.757 Wave Hindcasting 
See Hindcasting, Wave. 


2.758 Wave, Irrotational 


See Irrotational Wave. 


2.759 Wave, Length 
See Length of Wave. 


2.760 Waves, Monochromatic 


See Monochromatic Waves. 


2.761 Wave, Oscillatory 
See Oscillatory Wave. 


2.762 Wave Period 


The time for a wave crest to traverse a distance equal 
to one wave length. The time for two successive 
wave crests to pass a fixed point (see also Significant 
Wave Period). 


2.763 Wave Pressure 


Pressure exerted by a wave on a structure 
obstructing the path of wave motion. It is composed 
of an impact pressure and a static pressure. 


2.764 Wave, Progressive 

See Progressive Wave. 

2.765 Wave Ray 

See Orthogonal. 

2.766 Wave, Reflected 

See Reflected Wave. 

2.767 Wave Refraction 

See Refraction (of a Wave), 

2.768 Wave Runup 

See Runup. 

2.769 Wave Set up 

See Set up, Wave. 

2.770 Wave, Significant 

See Significant Wave. 

2.771 Wave, Solitary 

See Solitary Wave. 

2.772 Wave, Standing 

See Standing Wave. 

2.773 Wave, Stationary 

See Stationary Wave. 

2.774 Wave Steepness 

The ratio of the wave height to the wave length. 
2.775 Wave Train 

A series of waves from the same direction. 
2.776 Wave of Translation 

A wave in which the water particles are permanently 
displaced to a significant degree in the direction of 
wave travel. Distinguished from Oscillatory Wave. 
2.777 Wave, Trochoidal 

See Trochoidal Wave. 

2.778 Wave Trough 

See Trough of Wave. 


2.779 Wave Variability 


See Variability of Waves. 


43 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.780 Wave Velocity 
See Velocity of Waves. 
2.781 Wave, Wind 
See Wind Waves. 
2.782 Waves, Internal 
See Internal Waves. 
2.783 Weir Jetty 


An updrift jetty with a low section or weir over 
which littoral drift or sediment moves into a 
predredged deposition basin which is dredged 
periodically. 


2.784 Wet Dock 
See Dock, Wet. 
2.785 Wharf 


A continuous structure built parallel to the margin of 
the sea or alongside riverbanks, canals, or 
waterways where vessels may lie alongside to 
receive or discharge cargo, embark or disembark 
passengers, or lie at rest. 


2.786 Wharf Apron 
See Apron. 
2.787 Winch 


A mechanical gear used for hauling or hoisting other 
bodies by the winding of rope on a drum. 


2.788 Wind Chop 

See Chop. 

2.789 Wind, Following 
See Following Wind. 
2.790 Wind, Opposing 
See Opposing Wind. 
2.791 Wind Rose 


A diagram used on a pilot chart or weather 
chart to indicate clearly and concisely the 
average direction and force of the wind. The 
arrows which accompany each rose fly the 
wind and indicate by their length and thickness 
the frequency and force, also the direction of 
the wind. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


2.792 Wind Set up 


a) 


b) 


c) 


The vertical rise in the still water level on 
the leeward side of a body of water caused 
by wind stresses on the surface of the water. 
The difference in still water levels on the 
windward and leeward sides of a body of 
water caused by wind stresses on the 
surface of the water. 

Synonymous with wind tide and storm 
surges. Storm surge is usually reserved for 
use for ocean and large bodies of water. 
Wind set up is usually reserved for use of 
reservoirs and smaller bodies of water. 


44 


2.793 Wind Tide 
See Wind Set up, Storm Surge. 
2.794 Wind Waves 


a) Waves being formed and built up by the 
wind. 
b) Loosely, any wave generated by wind. 


2.795 Zone Tidal 


The reach of a river or waterway where tidal 
phenomena are observed. 


IS 7314 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSTION 


Ports, Harbours and Offshore Installations Sectional Committee, CED 47 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (3353, Sector D, Pocket 3 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi — 110070) 

AECOM India Private Limited, Noida 

Afcons Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai 

Aurobindo Reality Infrastructure Private Limited, 
Hyderabad 

Central Institute of Coastal Engineering for Fishery, 
Bengaluru 

Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune 


Chennai Port Trust, Chennai 


Consulting Engineering Services, New Delhi 


CSIR - National Institute of Oceanography, Panaji 


CSIR - Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Directorate General Naval Projects, Mumbai 
Directorate General Naval Projects, Vishakhapatnam 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Gujarat Maritime Board, Gandhinagar 


Howe Engineering Projects Limited, Mumbai 


India Meteorological Department, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


ITD Cementation India Limited, Kolkata 


45 


Representative(s) 


DR M. HARIHARAN (Chairperson) 
SHRI SANJEEV GUPTA 
SHRIJ. K. AHLUWALIA (Alternate) 


SHRI V. RAMAMURTY 
MS VASUSMITHA JOSHI (Alternate) 


SHRIN. SUNIL KUMAR 
SHRIN. VENKATESH PRASAD 
SHRI M. B. BELLIAPPA (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT CHANDRA 
DR J. D. AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (CIVIL) 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (CIVIL) (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DR SUKOMAL MANDAL 
SHRI D. ILANGOVAN (Alternate) 


Dr. P. HARIKRISHNA 

DR. S. VISHNUVARDHAN (Alternate) 

DR. A. SUBBULAKSHMI (Young Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI BHASKAR PAL 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI B. B. TALAVIA 
SHRI HARISH SOLANKI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DR S. K. PESHIN 
DR S. D. ATTRI (Alternate) 


DR R. SUNDARAVADIVELU 
DR S. A. SANNASIRAJ (Alternate) 


SHRI PRODYOT KUMAR 
SHRI PINAKI ADAK (Alternate) 


IS 7314 : 2023 


Organization 


Institute of Engineering & Ocean Technology, Panvel 
(Part of ONGC) 


Jawahar Lal Nehru Port Trust, Navi Mumbai 

Kolkata Port Trust, Kolkata 

Larsen & Toubro Infrastructure Engineering Limited, 
Chennai 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 


New Delhi 


Ministry of Ports, 
New Delhi 


Shipping and Waterways, 


Mumbai Port Trust, Mumbai 


National Centre for Coastal Research, Chennai 


National Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 


Royal Haskoning DHV India, Noida 


Stup Consultants Private Limited, Mumbai 


Visakhapatnam Port Trust, Vizag 


In Personal Capacity (A 307, Casa Ansal Apartments, 
18 Bannerghatta Road, Bengaluru — 560076) 


In Personal Capacity (Plot 8, PSR Avenue, Allipuram, 
Nellore — 524002) 


In Personal Capacity [C-401, Greenfield Tower CHS, 
Kadamwadi, Vakola, Santcruz, (east) Mumbai — 


400055] 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI DINESH GUPTA 
MANAGER (PPD) 
DEPUTY MANAGER (PPD) (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. MEHERA 
SHRI AMITABHA CHATTOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI T. SRINIVASAN 
SHRIP. R. RAJESH (Alternate) 


BRIG S. K. SHARMA 


SHRIH. N. ASWATH 
SHRI ANIL PRUTHI (Alternate) 


DEPUTY CHIEF ENGINEER (D) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (D) (Alternate) 


DR M. V. RAMANAMURTHY 
DR R. S. KANKARA (Alternate) 


DR BASANTA KUMAR JENA 
DR VIJAYA RAVICHANDRAN (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRIR. SARAVANAN 
SHRI KRISHAN KUMAR (Alternate) 


MOHD. ASLAM BIJAPUR 
SHRI SATYANAND KUNTA (Alternate) 


SHRI MUNISH KOTWAL 
SHRI RAJARAMA RAO (Alternate) 


SHRIG. V. SATYANARAYANA 


SHRI VEDAGIRI K. 


SHRIJ. VENKATESWARA RAO 


SHRI V. N. HEGGADE 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) (REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


46 


IS 7314 : 2023 


Planning and Design of Ports and Harbours, CED 47/WG1 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
AECOM India Private Limited, Noida 
Afcons Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai 


Aurobindo Reality Infrastructure Private Limited, 
Hyderabad 


Howe Engineering Projects (India) Limited, Mumbai 
ITD Cementation India Limited, Kolkata 

Kolkata Port Trust, Kolkata 

L&T infrastructure, Chennai 

Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, New Delhi 
National Centre for Coastal Research, Chennai 


National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management, 
Chennai 


National Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai 


Ocean Engineering & Consultancy Private Limited, 
Chennai 


47 


Representative(s) 
DR R. SUNDARA VADIVELU (Convener) 


SHRI SANJEEV GUPTA 
MS VASUSMITHA JOSHI 


SHRI N. SUNIL KUMAR 


SHRI ABHISHEK BASU 
SHRI PINAKI ADAK 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI T. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI H. N. ASHWATH 
DR M.V. RAMANAMURTHY 
DR RAMESH 
DR B. K. JENA 
DR K.M. SIVAKOLUNDU 


SHRI S. SAKTHIVEL 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 47 (18847). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


