( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 11864- 1986

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED CONSTRUCTION PRACTICE OF APPARATUS FOR VARIOUS
Metallic and Non-Metallic

FOR SPRAY CABINET SALT SPRAY TESTS
Finishes Sectional Committee,
Company,

SMDC

23

Chairman
DR R. C. SHARMA

Representing
Eveready Flashlight

Lucknow

Members
SHRI G. S BHATTACHARJEE Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI I. N. BHATIA ( Alternate ) SHRI A. T. BORATE Premier Automobiles Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. G. PRABHU ( Alternate ) SHRI M. S. CHAKRAVORTY Premier Metal Finishers ( P ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI R. K. CHATTERJEE ( Alternate ) CHEMIST& METALLURGIST-I, Ministry of Railways RDSO, LUCKNOW CHEMIST& METALLURGIST, ICF, MADRAS ( Alternafe ) SARI JAYENDRA K. DALAL Kohinoor Electra-Gilders, Bombay DR R. P. DAMBAL Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI E. D. DHARMARAJ Platewell Processes & Chemicals Ltd, Vadodara SHRI KAUSHIK GOKALDAS Canning Mitra Phoenix Ltd, Bombay Institute DR S. GIJRUVIAH Central Electrochemical Research ( CSIR ), Karaikudi SHRI S. KONGOVI Kongovi Electronics Pvt Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. R. RAO ( Alternate ) DR S. KRISHNAMURTHY In personal capacity ( `Shubhodaya' 38, XI Main SHRI V. KRISHNAMURHY NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SHRI ASWATAHANARAYANA ( Alternate I ) SHRI M. K. ALAGE ( Alternate II ) SHRI V. S. KULKARNI Grauer & Weil ( India ) Ltd, Bombay SHRI SUSHIL GOINKA ( Alternate ) SHRI M. PRABHAKAR MAHANDALE HMT Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. R. SATHYANARAYANA ( Alternate )

Road, Mulleswaram

West, Bangalore )

( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyrighil987
BUREAU OF JNDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Zndian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole are in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 11864- 1986 ( Co&rued from page 1)
Members SHRI R. C. MATHUR
SHRI M. R. GHOSH ( Xternate SHRI K. L. MUTHU DR S. K. NARANG SHRI R. S. RAGHAVAN SHRI R. SOMASEKHARA

)

Inspectorate (DGI)

Representing of Metals,

Ministry

of Defence

T. I. Cycles of India, Ambattur, Madras National Metallurgical Lab, Jamshedpur Development Commissioner ( Small Industries Services Institute ), New Delhi Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore Peico Electonics and Electricals Ltd, Pune Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) Secretary

SHR~ K. NAGESH ( Alternate ) DR J. VAID SHRI K. RAGHAVENDRAN, Director ( Strut & Met )

SHRI S. K. GUPTA Deputy Director ( Metals ), BIS

2

Is:11864-1986

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED CONSTRUCTION PRACTICE OF APPARATUS FOR SPRAY CABINET FOR VARIOUS SALT SPRAY TESTS
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 August 1986, after the draft finalized by the Metallic and NonMetallic Finishes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 The requirements regarding corrosion resistance test, exposure duration and evaluation of corrosion of electroplated coatings have been specified in the relevant Indian Standards on electroplating. In this standard, the construction details of apparatus have been prescribed, wherein a common recommendation for apparatus may satisfy the requirements of different salt spray tests stipulated in IS : 5528-1985*, IS : 6910-1985t and IS : 9844-1981: for corrosion resistance of electroplated components and anodized aluminium coatings. 0.3 The reliability, reproducibility and accuracy of the salt spray corrosion tests depends on proper and consistent control of a number of factors, including: a) cleaning of test specimens, b) positioning of specimens and samples in spray cabinet, c) rate of condensation e) temperature of salt spray within the spray cabinet, and d) maintenance of spray cabinet, 0.4 While preparing this standard, from the following:

control in spray cabinet. necessary assistance has been derived

*Method of testing corrosion resistance of electroplated and coating by copper accelerated acetic acid salt spray ( CASS ) test tMethod of testing corrosion resistance of electroplated and coatings by acetic acid salt spray test (first revision ). $Methods of testing corrosion resistance of electroplated and coatings by neutral salt spray test.

anodized aluminium (first revision ). anodized aluminium anodized aluminium

3

IS:11864

- 1986

IS0 3769-1976 (E) Metallic coatings - Copper accelerated acetic acid salt spray test ( CASS TEST ). International Organization for Standardization. ANSI/ASTM B 117-73 ( Reapproved 1979 ) - Standard method of salt spray ( FOG ) teSting. American Society for Testing and Materials. Euronorm 175 - Salt spray test on flat steel products with metal. British Standards Institution.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard recommends the construction salt spray tests prescribed in IS : 5528-1985*, This apparatus may be used 9844-1981:. decorative coatings of copper plus nickel plus chromimum and anodic coatings on aluminium.

of apparatus required for IS : 6910-19857, and IS : for corrosion testing of chromium or nickel plus

1.2 This standard does not specify the type of test specimen, the exposure period to be used for a particular product and the interpretation of results. Such details are provided in the appropriate coating/method of test specifications. 2. TEST APPARATUS
REQUIREMENTS

2.1 The apparatus consists essentially of a fog chamber ( test cabinet ) with compressed air inlet, a solution reservoir, a solution atomizing device, specimen supports and temperature control equipment.

2.1.1 The method of construction shall be such that they shall not get corroded by the fog/spray in the chamber. Jn general, all component of the apparatus that come in contact with spray or test solution shall be of materials resistant to the corrosive solution. 2.2 Test Cabinet - The dimensions, shape and construction of this cabinet are not strictly laid down but it shall meet the following requirements: a) The capacity shall be at least 0.43 m3 since smaller volumes create dificulties for ensuring even distribution of the spray. coating by copper accelerated acetic acid salt spray ( CASS ) test (first
*Method of testing corrosion resistance of electroplated and anodized
revision ).

may

aluminium aluminium aluminium

tMethod of testing corrosion resistance of electroplated and anodiied coatings by acetic acid salt spray test ( first revision ). fMethods of testing corrosion resistance of electroplated and anodized coatings by neutral salt spray test.

4

IS : 11864 - 1986

b) Accessories, such as suitable adjustable baffle or central fog tower, automatic level control for salt reservoir and automatic ievel control for air saturator tower are pertinent parts of the apparatus. c) The chamber may be made of inert materials such as plastic, or stone or any sbitable corrosion resistant material. glass

d) The test cabinet shall be shaped suitably such that drops of sprayed solution do not fall from ceiling, the side walls and the baflles into the test pieces. This can, for example, be achieved, if the ceiling is inclined by at least 30 degree to the horizontal. 2.3 Means of Supplying and Controlling Heat

2.3.1 Suitable measuring and control equipment must be available to supply and control the prescribed test temperature. An even temperature distribution shall be achieved by adequate thermal insulation of the test cabinet. 2.3.2 The temperature shall be controlled by thermostat placed either within the test cabinet at a distance of at least 100 mm from the walls or in a water jacket around the cabinet. In either case, a thermometer, capable of being read from the outside shall be placed within the test cabinet at a distance of at least 100 mm from the walls. 2.4 Spray Apparatus
2.4.1 Spray apparatus consists of a supply of clean air of controlled pressure and humidity, a reservoir to contain the test solution and one The compressed air supplied for atomizing the soluor more atomizers. tion shall be free from contaminants such as oil and dirt. In order to prevent evaporation of water from the sprayed solution, the air shall be saturated with water before entering the atomizer; to this end, it is passed through air humidifier which contains water, the properties of which satisfy the requirements of test solution and the temperature of which is higher than the temperature in the test cabinet. The appropriate temperature depends on the pressure used and the type of atomizer nozzle. The temprature shall be capable of regulation and shall be adjusted such that the quantity and concentration of the salt solution collected in the test cabinet corresponds to what is prescribed in the test. 2.4.2 The atomizer shall be made of inert materials, for example, plastic. It should be noted that the spray must not be aimed directly into the test pieces. To achieve this, it will be useful to direct the spray against a baffle or directing plate in such a way that a uniform distribution of the spray through the entire test cabinet is obtained.

5

IS : 11864 - 1986 2.4.3 An illustration and details of a typical cabinet are given in Appendix A. 2.5 Collecting Device 2.5.1 At least two collecting devices ( or even 4 numbers ) are being used. They shall be in the form of glass funnels of approximately 10 cm diameter ( that is, with a horizontal collecting area of approximately 80 cmz) fixed to a graduated measuring glass cylinder of 50 ml capacity. 2.5.2 The collecting devices shall be placed in the zone of the cabinet where the test specimens areplaced, one close to an inlet of spray and one remote from an inlet. They shall be so placed that only spray and not liquid falling from specimens or from part of the cabinet is collected. 2.5.3 If the test equipment has been used for one type of spray test, the equipment should be thoroughly cleaned prior to conducting the other type of spray test. 2.6 Provision for Exposure of Test Specimens 2.6.1 Suitable provision should be made for placing one or two rods in the chamber at a convenient height for the suspension of test specimens by means of synthetic fibre. 3. RECOMMENDATIONS APPARATUS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF THE

3.1 Chamber - The chamber may be constructed with a double wall system with suitable insulating material or any other suitable practice. Interior lining may be of polypropylene sheets of sufficient thickness. The top lid is fixed to the chamber; a hydraulic seal may be provided to avoid escape of fog into the atmosphere of the room. An exhaust line may be provided for the escape of fog, if found necessary. 3.2 The entire unit may be on castor wheels for portability. 3.3 Compressed air at adjustable pressure may be heated up in a preheating chamber, passed through a hot water tower which shall have a level control device. Air and water solenoid system may be provided for effective controls. Level of salt solution in the tray inside the chamber shall be controlled with the aid of a plastic float valve. Similarly, provision of a float valve in the water tank helps water flow into the air humidifier tower. 3.4 A drain hole may be provided at the bottom of the chamber away the condensed salt solution. 6 to drain

IS : 11864 - 1986 3.5 All piping which comes in contact with the salt solution or spray shall be of inert materials such as plastic. Water used in the entire process shall be pure - for example, deionised water. 3.6 Capacities of water tank and salt solution reservoir shall be such as to permit a continuous'operation for the duration required, day and night, when the persons conducting the test are not there. 4. MAINTENANCE 4.1 Periodical maintenance performance. of the unit is important for a trouble-free

4.2 The correct functioning of the unit may be judged by the rate of condensation of spray ( 1 to 2 ml per hour ) and the concentration of condensate shall be as per the prescribed specification.

7

IS : 11864 - 1986

APPENDIX ( Clause
ILLUSTRATION

A 2.4.3 )
SALT

AND DETAILS OF A TYPICAL SPRAY CABINET

1

8 Angle of Lid, 90 to 125" 1 Thermometer and thermostat for controlling heater ( Item 8 ) in base 2 Automatic water levelling device 3 Humidifying tower 4 Automatic temperature regulator for controlling heater ( Item 5 ) 5 Immersion heater, non-rusting 6 Air inlet, multiple openings 7 Air tube to spray nozzle 8 Strip heater in base 9 Hinged top, hydraulically operated, or counter balanced 10 Brackets for rods supporting specimens, or test table 11 Internal reservoir 12 Spray nozzle above reservoir, suitably designed, located, and baffled 12A Suray nozzle housed in dispersion tower located preferably in centre of cabinet Water seal Combination drain and exhaust. Exhaust at opposite side of test space from spray nozzle ( Item 12), but preferably in combination with drain, waste trap, and forced draft waste pipe ( Items 15,16 and 18) Complete separation between forced draft waste pipe ( Item 16 ) and combination drain and exhaust ( Items 14 and 18 ) to avoid undesirable suction or back pressure Forced draft waste pipe Automatic levelling device for reservoir Waste trap Air space or water jacket Test table or rack, well below roof area FIG. 1 TYPICALSALT SPRAY CABINBT

8

Is:llS64-1986

*__-_

240 cm ____L

NOTE - The controls are the same in general ( Fig. 2 ), but are sized to care for the larger cube. features:

as for the laboratory cabislet The chamberhas the following

a) b) c)

Heavy insulation; Refrigeration door with drip rail, or pressure door with drip sloping sill; and Low temperature auxiliary heater. FIG. 2 WALK-IN CHAMBEP.

rail, inward

SOLUTION

t

FIG. 3

TYPICAL SPRAY NOZZLE

9

INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS )
Base

units
QUANTITY

UNIT metre kil0gCUll second
kehn

SYMBoL m kg
S

Length

MZISS

Time Ezkctric current Thermodynamic : temperature j Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary Units QUANTITY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QUAN~Y Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

A K cd mol

I

candela mole

UNIT radian steradian

SYMaoL rad sr

UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz

SYMBoL N J W Wb T Hz S V Pa 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

DEFINITION N = J = W = Wb = T = Hz = S=l V= Pa = 1 kg.m/ss 1 N.m 1 J/s 1 V.s 1 Wb/mt 1 c/s (s-l) A/V 1 W/A 1 N/m*

