( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 7310 ( Part I ) - 1974

Indian Standard
APPROVAL TESTS FOR WELDERS WORKING TO APPROVED WELDING -PROCEDURES
PART I FUSION WE-LDING OF STEEL

Welding
Chairman
SHRI R. GHOSH

General

Sectional

Committee,

SMDC

14

RePresenting

Indian Oxygen Limited, Calcutta

Mem hers SHI+IJ. K. AHLUWALIA
SHRI M. M. GHOSH ( Alternate ) SHRI N. C. BAGCHI

Stewarts & Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta National Test House, Calcutta Binny Ltd, Madras Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam Braithwaite & Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Jamshedpur Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Durgapur Government of Haryana,

SHRI B. c. RISWAS ( Alternate) SHRI ~.BALASUBRAHMANYAM SHRIK.BALMANOHAR SXRIR.N.CIIAKRABORTY SHRIB.N. DAS SHRI S. P. DASCUPTA

SHRI B. SEN ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR, RESEARCH AND DESIGN, Public Works Department,

B & R~BRANCH, CHANDXGARH Chandigarh EXECUTIVE ENGINEER ( ELECTRI- Central Public Works Department, ELECTRICAL DIVISION CAL ), No. 1, NEW DELHI EXECUTIVE ENGINEER ( ELECTRICAL ), CENTRAL ELECTRICAL DIVISIONNo. 1, CALCUTTA ( Alternate ) Philips India Ltd, Bombay SHRI H. D. GOVINDARAJ DR J. VAID ( Alternate ) Malik Electricals Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. K. HARI SHRI M. K. SINHA ( Alternate )

New Delhi

( Continued on page 2 )

@ Copyright 1974 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 7310 ( Part I) - 1974 ( Continuedfrom page 1 )
Members
DR J. JAIN

Representing Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur Indian Society for Technical Education, New Delhi

PROF A. P. JAMBULINGA~I

JOINT DIRECTOR ( M & C ), RDSO, Ministry of Railways LUCKNOw CHEMIST AND METALLURGIST, INTEGRAL COACH FACTORY, PERAMBUR( Alternate I ) PRODUCTION ENGINEER ( SIIELL ), INTEGRAL COACH FACTORY, PERAMBUR (Alternate II ) SHRI M. V. D. KAMATH Indian Engineering Association, Calcutta Directorate General of Suoolies and SHRI M. T. KANSE

SHRI S. N. BASU ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Plate & Vessels Ltd, Visakhapatnam SHRI G. S. KODIKAL SHRI A. P. SANYAL ( Alternate ) Advani-Oerlikon Private Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. V. NADKARNI SHRI P. S. VISWANATH (Alternate ) SHRI A. C. MUKHERJEE Power Cables Private Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. M. POLE Walchandnagar Industries, Walchandnagar SHRI G. D. APTE (Alternate ) SHRI H. L. PRABHAKAR Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay SHRI J. R. PRASHER Bharat Heavy Electric& Ltd, Hardwar SHRI S. S. RAGIIAVAN Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI K. S. HANS ( Alternate ) SHRI P. B. RAO Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI S. C. ROY Central Boilers Board, New Delhi SHRI V. V. SATHYANARAYANA Mining & Allied Machinery Corpn, Durgapur SHRI S. K. BANERIIA ( Alternate 1 SHRI S. K. SENCUPTAa ' ' Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHRI V. V. KAVISWAR ( Alternate ) SHRI H. K. SHARMA Directorate General of Technical Development, New SHRI K. C. SHARMA ( Alternate j SHRI A. SRINIVASALU ' ' Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchirapalli SIIRI B. PATTAR~IIRAMAN ( Alternate ) SHRI R. K. SRIVASTAVA Mukand Iron and Steel Works Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. R. SUBRAMANIAN Indian Oxvaen Limited. Calcutta ._ SHRI J. C. ACHARYA ( Alternate ) SHRI S. SUNDARESAN Directorate General of Employment and Training,

( Inspection Wing ), New-Delhi

Disnosals

Delhi

New Delhi

SUPERINTENDINGENGINEER, CEN- Public Works Department, Government TRAL MECHANICAL CIRCLE, Nadu, Madras MADRAS SHRI C. R. RAMA RAO, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oj'icio Member )

of

Tamil

Director ( Strut & Met )

Secretary SHRI M. S. NAGARAJ Deputy Director ( Strut & Met ), IS1 ( Continued on page 18 )

2

IS : 7310 ( Part I) - 1974

Indian Standard
APPROVAL TESTS FOR WELDERS WORKING TO APPROVED WELDING PROCEDURES
PART I FUSION WELDING OF STEEL

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 March 1974, after the draft finalized by the Welding General Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on the approval testing of welders and welding procedures, the latter having a bearing on This link has been used as a means the former for certain applications. of arranging the series of standards into: a) approval testing of welding procedures, procedure approval is required, to be b) ~welder approval and when, welding

c) welder approval when the welding procedure is not required approved ( for either technical or contract reasons ).

0.3 For the purpose of this standard, a welder working to an approved procedure or a procedure being approved is considered to be sufficiently experienced in the appropriate welding process and hence already capable of passing training tests such as those contained in IS : 817-1966*. 0.4 To indicate the philosophy behind this series of standards, it is considered useful to give details of the practices relating to welding procedure approval. Depending upon the emphasis placed on quality control in the production of welded components, so may the approval of welding procedures be administered in one of several ways which should be stipulated at the enquiry and/or order stage. The alternatives currently employed are the following: a) Each individual contractor ( or sub-contractor ) might have proved by actual test pieces, every weld form he wishes to use, in every thickness and material; or *Code of practice for training and testing of metal arc welders ( revised ).

3

IS : 7310 ( Part It) - 1974
b) Each individual contractor ( or sub-contractor ) might have proved by actual test pieces, a set of welds representative on a group basis, of all the various thicknesses and materials to be used in production; or c) Each individual contractor ( or sub-contractor ) need not make procedure test pieces provided he can prove by appropriate authentic documentation of an independent nature that he has previously welded the type of joint and material in question satisfactorily. In respect of ( a ) and ( b ) it should be appreciated that once the welding procedure tests have been approved, they need never be repeated unless there is a change in certain variables. As an extension beyond ( c ), it may be possible in the future for fully documented welding procedures, developed independently of the particular contractor, to be employed without the need for further approval tests. 0.5 In preparing this standard the practices being followed in the country Assistance has also been derived in this field have been kept in view. from draft British Standard Specification for approval testing of welders working to approved welding procedures, Part 1: Fusion Welding of Steel, ( Dot: 73/41348DC ) issued by the British Standards Institution. 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded off IS : 2-1960*. value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE
( Part I ) specifies requirements for the approval testing semi-automatic or automatic of welders to be engaged on the manual, fusion welding of structural steel or austenitic stainless steel fabrications, except castings, for which an approved welding procedure is required. 1.2 This standard is applicable to the following and automatic fusion welding processes: a) Manual b) Inert-gas metal-arc, tungsten arc ( TIG or ), manual, semi-automatic

1.l This standard

c) Gas metal arc ( MIG d) Submerged-arc, e) Electra-slag, f)
*Rules

CO, ),

and
values (revised).

Gas welding.
for rounding off numerical

4

IS : 7310 ( Part I ) - 1974 1.3 Where the approval of a welder and a welding procedure are to be covered in one test, the provisions contained in IS : 7307 ( Part I )-1974* shall apply. 2. DEFINITIONS 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply.

2.1 Welding Procedure?-A specified course of action followed in welding including a list of materials and, where necessary, tools to be used. 2.2 Welding Procedure Test - The making and testing of a welded joint representative of that to be used in production in order to prove the feasibility of a welding procedure.
term is not usually applied to any tests that may have been made NOTE -This during the development of a welding procedure.

2.3 Approved Welding Procedure - A documented welding procedure that has been approved by an inspecting authority either by means of a of authentic documented exwelding procedure test or as a result perience gained with the welding of joints similar to that to which the welding procedure applies. 2.4 Test Piece? - Components welded together in accordance with a specified welding procedure, or a portion of a welded joint detached from a structure, for test. 2.5 Test Specimen? as required for testing. 3. INFORMATION TO A portion detached from a test piece and prepared

BE

GIVEN

TO

THE

WELDER

3.1 The welder shall be provided with full written details according to 3 of IS : 7507 ( Part I )-1974* of the approved welding procedure which he shall follow in making his test weld ( see also 7 ). 4. ITEMS TO BE RECORDED to 3 of IS : 7307 ( Part I )-1974* test. shall be recorded

4.1 The items according for each welder approval 5. EXTENT

OF APPROVAL

5.1 General - The extent of approval for a welder shall be the same as that for the approved welding procedure. When a change in the welding
*Approval tests for welding procedures: tThis definition has been extracted welding and cutting of metals `. Part I Fusion welding of steel. from IS

: 812-1957

`Glossary of terms relating to

5

IS : 7310 ( Part I ) - 1974 procedure according to 4 of IS : 7307 ( Part I )-1974* requires a new welciing procedure test, this shall entail re-approval of the welder except in the following cases: a) A change in parent metal within the following group of steels: 6 percent total Carbon steels and low alloy steels with less than alloy content.

b) A change in deposited metal composition for welding steels within the group given in ( a ) above. c) A change e) A change from a basic to a rutile covered in preheating temperature. in post-weld heat treatment. electrode. d) A reduction

any bf the

5.2 Position -The approval of a welder on a test joint welded in one of the fundamental welding positions shall give approval for welding in the following positions:

a) b)

A test in the flat position

gives approval

only for that position; includes approval approval for the

A test in the horizontal-vertical position horizontal-vertical and flat positions;

A test in the overhead position includes c> horizontal-vertical and flat positions;

for the overhead, for the vertical-

4

A test in the vertical-up position includes approval up and flat positions; and in vertical-down

e) A test

position gives approval only for that position.

In addition, the approval of a welder on a test joint inclined at 45" to the horizontal involving the overhead position, shall include approval for all welding posit'ons. 5.3 Thickness - For gas welding, the approval of a welder on material of thickness t shall include approval for thicknesses in the range 0.5 t to 1 t. For processes other than gas welding, the approval of a welder on material of thickness t shall include approval for thicknesses in the range 0.75 t to I.5 t. 5.4 Pipe Outside Diameter or Dimension on pipe? of outside diameter or dimension D diameters or dimensions in the range 0.5 D to 1.5 sections D shall be the dimension of the smaller The approval of a welder shall include approval for D. For rectangular hollow side.

*Approval tests for welding procedures: Part I Fusion welding of steel. Tin this standard the word ` pipe `, alone or in combination, is used to mean ` pipe ' or ` tube ' or ` structural hollow section ' ( circular or rectangular ), although these terms are often used for different categories of product by different industries.

IS : 7310 ( Part I ) - 1974 6. TEST PIECES
procedure will relate in production ( see Fig. 1 or 2 ); angle 8 of each type preferably

6.1 The welder shall make a test piece or pieces representative
of joint to which the welding selected from the following:

.

a) A butt joint

( plate or pipe)

b) A fillet weld ( plate ) ( see Fig. 3 ); and c) A branch connection ( pipes* ) forming the minimum likely to be involved in production ( see Fig. 4 ).

The test weld shallbe stopped and restarted within the central 50 mm of the length of the test piece shown in Fig. 1 and at about 75 mm from one end of the test piece shown in Fig. 3. In the case of manual metal-arc Edge preparation welding the restart shall be made with a fresh electrode. and fit-up shall be as given in welding procedure ( see 5.1 ). 6.2 If the production joint design or application is such that none of the above types of test piece could be regarded as representative, for example, surfacing or attachment welds to thin pipes, then the welder shall make a special test piece which simulates the production joint in all essential features, such as dimensions, restraint, access, heat sink effects and any special surface protection. 6.3 Tack welds shall be made from the side to be welded and their location shall be identifiable after the test weld has been completed. Subsurface defects that break the surface or which are revealed as the result of any grinding specified in the welding procedure shall not be repaired and there shall be no other repair welding of a completed test piece. 7. SUBMISSION

'

OF TEST

WELD

7.1 If the welder realizes that for some reason the test weld he has made
is likely to fail the subsequent examination and testing, he may withhold the submission of the test piece and make a second test weld. If the welder does choose to make a second test weld! it is the second test piece that shall be examined and tested, the first test piece being scrapped. 8. EXAMINATION 8.1

AND TESTING
shall be: and assessed in accordance to assist in the interpretation testing; and testing

General

-

Test welds for welder approval

a) examined by non-destructive with 8.2.2, supplemented by:

1) macro-examination if necessary of the results of non-destructive

oRen used for different categories

*In this standard the word `pipe', alone or in combination, is used to mean `pipe' or `tube' or `structural hollow section' (circular or rectangular ), although these terms are
of product by different industries,

7

IS : 7310 ( Part I ) - 1974 2) when radiography is used, the bend tests given in Table 1 to detect any lack of side fusion that could occur when the dip transfer technique, TIG welding or gas welding has been used; or

b)

tested using the test specimens given in Table 1 when the test piece material is to the same specification as that to be used in production or when the use of non-destructive testing is not feasible.

8.1.1 When both non-destructive and destructive testing are to be applied, the same test piece(s) for the welder approval test shall satisfy the requirements for both methods of testing. 8.1.2 Unless otherwise specified, the first and last 25 mm of the length of a butt joint in plate shall be ignored in both non-destructive and destructive testing. 8.1.3 If the test piece fails to satisfy any of the requirements for nondestructive testing given in 8.2.2, one further test piece shall be welded If this additional test piece does and subjected to the same examination. not meet the required standard, the cause of failure shall be established. If this failure is established as being the result of metallurgical or extraneous causes and is not attributable to the welder's workmanship, then a If the failure is established as further repeat test shall be undertaken. being attributable to the welder's workmanship, then the welder shall not be regarded as capable of meeting the requirements of this standard without further training. 8.1.4 If any test specimen fails to satisfy the relevant requirements given in 8.3.3, two further test specimens for each one that failed shall be obtained, either from the same test piece if there is sufficient material available or from a new test piece, and subjected to the same test. If either of these additional test specimens does not meet the required standard, the cause of failure shall be established. If this failure is established as being the result of metallurgical or extraneous causes and is not attributable to the welder's workmanship, then a further repeat test shall If the failure is established as being attributable to the be undertaken. welder's workmanship, then the welder shall not be regarded as capable of meeting the requirements of this standard without further training.

8.2 Non-destructive

Testing

8.2.1 Examination - After any post-weld heat treatment and prior to the cutting of any test specimens, all test pieces shall be examined visually. 8

IS : 7310( Part I ) - 1974

LIOO

MIN-I

k-100

MIN --i

Jt WELD TO BE STOPPED AND RESTARTED WITHIN CENTRAL 50mm
All dimensions in millimetres.

FIG. 1 TEST PIECE FOR BUTT WELD IN PLATE

T M

-

R R T M

'

F s 1

0

R

' All dimensions in millimetres.

R 0

M

R

FIG. 2

TEST PIECE AND LOCATIONOF TEST SPECIMENS FOR BUTT WELD IN PIPE

9

IS :`7310 ( Part I ) - 1974

rFULL

225

L::-* 100 ------_--_ -iii%TlON WELD THIS

LENGTH OF THIS SIDE

WELD

/ROOT RUN TO BE STOPPED AND RESTARTED ABOUT 75mm FROM END 1ONE MICRO -EXAMINATION POSITION) CUTTING LINES FOR SPECIMENS WHEN ONLY ONE SIDE WELDED

I,.

OF FRACTURE FORCE

SIDE

Jt LENGTH SECOND

OF WELD WHEN SIDE. WELDED

All dimensions

in millimetres.

FIG. 3

TEST PIECE FOR FILLET WELD IN PLATE

10

LS : 7310( Part I ) - 1974

200 MIN

\
I
b-350

-7-3 F -----j-JQ I
I

MIN All dimensions in millimetres.

-4

FIG. 4
When

TEST

PIECE FOR BRANCH CONNECTION IN PIPE testing is to be used, visual examination (see IS : 5334~~1969* ) and/or or penetrant shall be

followed

non-destructive by:

a) magnetic particle ( see IS : 3658-1966t);

testing

b) ultrasonic (see IS : 4260-1969: ) and/ or radiographic (see IS : 1182-19679 and IS : 4853196811) depending production

examination

material and the requirements for upon joint geometry, work, using the appropriate application standard-where it exists.

8.2.2 Acceptance Levels - Defects that are detected by visual examination and the other relevant methods of non-destructive testing shall be assessed in accordance with the details specified in Table 2. The existence of any * Code of practice for magnetic particle flaw detection of welds. t Code of practice for liquid penetrant flaw detection.
$ Recommended practice for ultrasonic testing of welds in ferritic steel. 3 Recommended practice for radiographic examination of fusion welded butt joints in steel plates (&t revision ) . 11 Recommended practice for radiographic examination of fusion welded circumferential joints in steel pipes.

IS : 7310 ( Part I ) - 1974 defect greater than the maximum permitted by Table 2 shall be sufficient cause for rejection.
NOTE 1 -Multiple type faults contained with the same weld, either superimposed or interposed, which are individually acceptable as isolated imperfections may be considered acceptable provided that investigation shows that there is nothing fundamentally wrong with the welding procedure.
NOTE 2 - It should be appreciated that the details given in Table 2 may be different from those specified for a particular application.

TABLE

1

DESTRUCTIVE

TESTS - NUMBER REQUIRED* (Clauses 8.1 and 8.3.1 )

OF TEST

SPECIMENS

SL No.

TEST SPECIMEN

Burr JOINT
P;:TITE

BUTT JOINT IN PIPE OF OIJT~IDE DIA OR DIMENSION
p---h----y

FILLET WELD

up to and Including 839 mm (1) i) ii)

Over 88.9 mm

PIZE

BRANCH CONNECTION IN PIPE OF OUTSIDE DIA OR DIMENSION r-A.---#

up to and In$t9dmg_ (6) 2 (7) 4t -

Over 88.9 mm (8) 8t -

.

(2)
Macro-examination Root bend ( for material less than 10 mm thick and for all welds made from one side only ) Face bend ( for material less than 10 mm thick ) Side bend ( for material at least 10 mm thick ) Fillet weld fracture (only for single side weld )

(3) 1 1

(4) 2 2 1 -

(5) 2 3

iii) iv) v)

1 2 -

1 1 -

3

-

-

*When more than one specimen of a particular type is required, the specimens shall be taken as far apart as possible, with one specimen for macro-examination taken from that part ofthe joint considered to have been welded in the most difficult welding position or from a stop/ start position. tFor purely structural applications the number of specimens may be reduced to 2 and 4 respectively.

8.3 Destructive Tests 8.3.1 Test Specimens -The specimens to be obtained when certain destructive tests are required ( see 8.1 ) shall be as given in Table I. When the size and thickness of a pipe butt joint are such that the specified test specimens cannot be obtained, then some other method of test agreed between the contracting parties shall be used, for example, a full size tensile test or a pressure test. 12

IS : 7310 ( Part I ) - 1974
TABLE 2 NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTING ( Clause 8.2.2 ) DEFECT TYPE 11 Planar Defects a) b) c) d) e) Cracks and lamellar tears Lack of root fusion Lack of side fusion Lack of inter-run fusion Lack of root penetration Not Not Not Not Not permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted PERMITTED MAXIMUM ACCEPTANCE LEVELS

2) Cavilies a) Isolated pores ( or individual in a group ) pores 0 > t/4 and r# 1'5 mm for t up to and including @ 3.0 mm for t over 25 mm including 50 mm Q 45 mm for t over 50 mm including 75 mm 9 6.0 mm for t over 75 mm b) Uniformly porosity distributed or localised 1 percent area ( as seen in a radiograph ) for t > 25 mm and pro rata for ~greater thicknesses Linear porosity parallel to the axis of the weld may indicate lack of fusion or lack of penetration and is therefore not permitted ( as seen in the 1 > 6mm w > 1.5 mm up 25 mm to and

up to and

c) Linear porosity

d) Wormholes, isolated radiograph ) e) Wormholes, f) Crater pipes 3) aligned

As linear porosity As wormholes isolated

Solid Inclusion ( Slag Inclusions ) a) Individual and parallel to weld axis t > 1.8mm t>18> 75mmt>75mm 1 > t/2 6 mm 1 > t/3 1>25mm w> 1'5mm ( as seen in t~e?a~i~~~h ) w ' la5 mm Aggregate length should not exceed 8 percent of length of group, which in turn should not exceed 12 tin length Maximum 6mm dimension in any direction ( Continued)

b) Linear group*

c) Individual and randomly orientated ( not parallel to weld axis )

13

IS : 7310 ( Part I ) - 1974
TABLE 2 NON-DESTRUCTIVE DEEYECT TYPE 4) Tungsten Inclt&ns a) Isolated b) Grouped 5) Copper Inclwions 6) Pro& Defects Undercut (detected by visual mination or radiography) exaSlight intermittent undercut permitted provided it does not form a sharp notch; depth should not exceed 0.4 mm As for undercut, depth should not exceed I 1.2 mm h k 3 mm. Occasional local slight excess is allowable The reinforcement shall blend smoothly with the parent metal and dressing is not normally required provided the shape does not interfere with the specified NDT techniques Not permitted h k t/10,3mmMax As isolated pores As uniformly porosity distributed or localized TESTING ACCEPTANCE LEVELS Co&

PERMITTED MAXIMUM

Not permitted

4 b) c) 4

Shrinkage grooves and root conca\jity Excess penetration Reinforcement shape

f) Linear misalignment

e) Overlap

A *Individual inclusions within the group should not exceed the sizes in 3(a) above. linear group is defined as a number of inclusions in line and parallel to the weld axis where the spacing between their adjacent ends does not exceed 6 times the length of the longest inclusion within the group. With parallel groups, all inclusions count towards the aggregate. Abbreviatiorzsused: t F parent metal thickness. component. w = width. 1 E length. h = height. Q = diameter. In the case of dissimilar thicknesses 6 applies to the thinner

8.3.2 Preparation and Testing - The preparation, shape and dimensions of test specimens ( except for dimensions of bend test specimens from pipe ) and the methods of testing them shall be as specified in IS : 3600-1973*.
prior If backing material forms part of a butt joint, it shall be removed Each bend test specimen from a butt joint in pipe to bend testing.

*Code of procedure for testing of fusion welded joints and weld metal in steel.

14

IS : 7310 ( Part I ) - 1974
shall be a parallel t + D 10 strip of width:

, for pipes up to and including

60.3 mm outside

diameter;

t + where

and D 2u, with a maximum diameter

of 40 mm, for pipes over 60.3 mm outside and D is the outside diameter at least 3t 4t Diameter equal to It greater than that required to test the parent metal of the same thickness of pipe. a

t is the wall thickness

Each bend test specimen shall be bent through former of a diameter as specified below: For Group For Group FE1 FE2 steels ( see IS : 7307 steels (see IS : 7307 ( Part I )-1974* ( Part I )-1974* For other steels

90" round

where 8.3.3

t is the thickness

of the specimen.

Test Results

a) Macro-examination andjillet weld fracture test - The etched ~face for macro-examination and the fracture surface from the fillet weld test shall be assessed in accordance with the requirements of 8.2.2. 6) Bend tests - If the specimen bends through 90" without failure, slight opening-out ( 1.5 mm Max) at the corners or on the tension surface shall not be cause for rejection. If the specimen fails across the surface in tension, it shall be broken open and assessed in accordance with the requirements of 8.2.2. 9. STATEMENT

-OF RESULTS

of the results of assessing each test piece, including repeat for each welder. The item required under 4 tests, shall be made shall be included together with details of any features that would be rejectable by the requirements of 8.2.2. If no rejectable features are found, a statement, that the test piece made by the particular welder satisfied the requirements of this standard in respect of that type of test weld, shall be signed by the person conducting the test. 9.2 The welder's employer should hold and regularly maintain adequate records of all approval tests for each welder. A typical record sheet is given in Appendix A for information. *Approval tests for welding procedures: Part I Fusion welding steels. 15

9.1 A statement

IS:731O(PartI)-1974 9.3 It is recommended that welder approval tests carried out in accordance with this standard and witnessed by an independent inspecting authority should be accepted by other inspecting authorities provided that all the provisions have been fulfilled. 10. RE-APPROVAL OF WELDER

10.1 A welder's approval to weld to a particular procedure shall remain valid provided that it can be shown, as certified at intervals of six months by a senior responsible person in the firm that employs the welder, that the welder has, subsequent to the test, been employed with reasonable continuity on that procedure and has continued to produce satisfactory welds as verified by non-destructive examination. Re-approval shall be required if any of the following apply: a) A new welding procedure is to be approved, except for the cases given in 5. b) The welder changes his employer without the transfer of his test ret-ords. c) Six months or more have elapsed since the welder was engaged in welding to the approval procedure or a similar procedure. Subject to the agreement of the inspecting authority, a re-approval test may be waived provided the first production weld by the welder is non-destructively tested and complies with the requirements of this standard. d) There is some specific reason to question the welder's ability.

IS : 7310 ( Part I ) - 1974

A APPENDIX ( Clause 9.2 )
TYPICAL
NOTE -

WELDER

APPROVAL )

TEST

RECORD

One sheet should be completed for each test.

Welder's Name Approval test No. Welding procedure lSo. Parent material(s) : Type Thickness Pipe outside diameter or dimension Welding position Type of joint with sketch of weld preparation
Approval test results ( State

Welder's Identity No. Date of test Shop or site test

Welding process and polarity Welding consumables: Electrode or filler material Specification Type of flux or electrode covering Shielding gas composition Pipe position Weld dimensions required Additional information

: Satisfactory, unsatisfactory any results of re-tests )
tests

or not applicable

and clearly indicate

Non-destructive

Visual Magnetic particle Liquid penetrant Radiography/ultrasonics
Destructive tests

Macro- examination Root bend Face bend Side bend Fillet weld fracture Result of test with any remarks Inspecting authority Witnessed by Date Endorsements ( intervals of
six

Employer's signature Position Date months > 17

IS : 7310 ( Part I ) - 1974 ( Continuedfrom page 2 )
Subcommittee
Convener SHRI S. V. SAMBAMURTI Members SHRI J. K. AHLUWALIA SHRI GAJENDER SINCH PROP A.P.JAMBULINGAM SHRI S. V. NADKARNI dtewarts & Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta Indian Institute of Technology, Madras Indian Society for Technical Education, New Delhi Advani-Oerlikon Private Ltd, Bombay

for Training and Testing of Welders; Handbooks and Other Publications, SMDC 14 : 4
Representing

Indian Oxygen Limited, Calcutta

18

