anda HAF IS 17428 (Part 1) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


CARIE GIRGIR IE IESG] 
at 1 NAAA STR teaa orasah 


Data Privacy Assurance 


Part 1 Engineering and Management Requirements 


ICS 35.030 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 5 


Information Systems security and Privacy Sectional Committee, LITD 17 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
Information Systems Security and Privacy Sectional committee had been approved by the Electronics and 
Information Technology Divisional council. 


Other parts in this series are: 


Part 2 Engineering and management guidelines 


It is imperative for any organization processing personal information as part of its in-house business function, or 
its customer solution offering, to provide privacy assurance to those whose data it processes. The trigger for this 
is not only from data privacy regulations but also from market differentiation, enhanced consumer experience 
and employee satisfaction. This Indian Standard is intended to serve as a privacy assurance framework for such 
organizations. Implementation of this standard will help organizations to provide privacy assurance to customers, 
employees and also to achieve and sustain privacy compliance to regulatory and contractual requirements. 


This standard will help in providing data privacy assurance to individuals whose personal data the organization 
processes, in an environment of rapidly changing technology and regulatory landscape. It is important that the data 
privacy management system is part of, and integrated with the organization’s processes and overall management 
structure and that data privacy is taken into account right from the stage of design of processes, information 
systems, and controls, wherever personal information is involved. 


The implementation of a privacy standard by an organization is a strategic decision influenced by the organization’s 
business objectives, types of personal information processing involved, regulatory environment it is exposed to, 
complexity, structure and size of the organization. 


Implementing this standard is not a substitute for regulatory compliance. Depending on applicable jurisdiction, 
nature of business and type of personal data processed, various data protection related laws may apply to an 
organization, which needs to be determined and complied with, by the organization. Besides providing certain 
level of assurance to consumers on data privacy, this standard will also help organizations in developing better 
understanding of such privacy requirements, embedding them into design and sustaining privacy assurance. 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following standards: 
IS/ISO/IEC 29100: 2011 Information Technology — Security Techniques — Privacy framework 
IS/ISO/IEC 27001 : 2013 Information Technologies — Security Techniques — Information Security 
Management Systems — Requirements 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A 


CONTENTS 


1 SCOPE 
2 REFERENCES 
3 DEFINITIONS 


4 PRIVACY ENGINEERING 


4.1 Development of Privacy Requirements 
4.2 Privacy Principles Based Design considerations 
4.3 Verification and Testing 


5 PRIVACY MANAGEMENT 


5.1 Privacy Objectives 
5.2 Data Privacy Function 
5.3 Data Privacy Management System 
5.4 Policies and Processes 
5.5 Records and Document Management 
5.6 Privacy Impact Assessments 
5.7 Data Processor Management 
5.8 Privacy Risk Management 
5.9 Privacy Incident Management 
5.10 Data Subject’s Request Management 
5.11 Grievance Redress 
5.12 Staff Competency and Accountability 
5.13 Ongoing Regulatory Compliance 
5.14 Periodic Audits 
5.15 Measurement and Continuous Improvement 


6 COMPLIANCE 


ANNEX A COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Page No. 


A NA‘ aa ‘os AAA AANA m A HL HR HR WwW W 


oo 


IS 17428 (Part 1) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


DATA PRIVACY ASSURANCE 
PART 1 ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1) provides specific 
requirements — both management and engineering 
- for establishing, implementing, maintaining and 
continually improving a Data Privacy Management 
System. Personal information may be obtained by 
organizations directly from individuals either for the 
purpose determined by the organization or on behalf 
of another entity under contractual obligations. This 
standard is applicable in both these cases, and for 
any industry domain such as retail, banking, logistics, 
entertainment, telecommunications, healthcare etc. 
where the individuals in business association provide 
their personal information, whether as a consumer, 
vendor, employee or prospect. 


1.2 Organizations which have multiple business entities 
or entities located in different geographic locations may 
choose to implement this standard for the organization 
as a whole or only for an individual entity. However, 
depending on the extent to which the personal data 
processing operations of such entity is dependent on 
other entities, certain parts of the standard may also 
apply to those entities which do not intend to implement 
this standard. 


1.3 The order in which requirements are presented in 
this standard does not reflect their importance or imply 
the order in which they are to be implemented. 


1.4 This standard shall apply to organizations 
that process personal data but shall not apply to 
organizations that process personal data only in non- 
electronic form. This standard will also exclude non - 
personal information. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard given below contains provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreement based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed as follows: 


IS No Title 

17428 Data privacy assurance Part 2 
Part2:2020 Engineering and Management 

Guidelines 
IS/ISO/IEC Information Technology — 
27000 Security Techniques — 
Information Security Management 
Systems-Overview and Vocabulary 

3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS/ISO/IEC 27000 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Automated Decision Making — When a data 
subject is subjected to a decision solely on automated 
processing 


3.2 Consent— Data subject's freely given, specific and 
informed agreement to the processing of their personal 
information. 


3.3 Data Controller — Any organization that 
determines the means and purposes of processing the 
personal Information. 


NOTES 


1 Organizations may or may not directly collect data from 
individuals (although that is the case most often), but at times 
a third party organization may be entrusted to collect data, and 
even in such cases the organization outsourcing the collection 
process becomes data controller. 


2 Depending on the jurisdiction and the particular data 
protection and privacy legislation, the synonym ‘PII controller” 
or “data exporter’ or ‘data fiduciary’ can also be used in some 
countries instead of the term “Data controller”. 


3.4 Data Portability — The right of an individual to 
receive the personal data concerning him or her, which 
he or she has provided to a controller, in a structured, 
commonly used and machine readable format and have 
the right to transmit those data to another controller 
without hindrance from the controller to which the 
personal data has been provided. 


3.5 Data Processor — Any organization that 
processes personal information on behalf of and in 
accordance with the instructions of a data controller. 


IS 17428 (Part 1) : 2020 


NOTE — Depending on the jurisdiction and the particular data 
protection and privacy legislation, the synonym ‘PII processor’ 
or ‘Data Importer’ may also be used in some countries instead 
of the term ‘Data processor’. For an entity to become data 
processor, it shall also be a separate entity from Data Controller. 


3.6 Data Subject — Any natural person to whom the 
personal Information relates. 
NOTE — Depending on the jurisdiction and the particular data 
protection and privacy legislation, the synonym ‘PII principal’ 
or ‘Individual’ may also be used in some countries instead of 
the term ‘Data subject’. 


3.7 Function — Any department, unit or formal group 
in an organization formed with an intent to meet certain 
objectives for example human resources, accounting 
and finance etc. 


3.8 Non-personal Information — Any information 
that is not personal information as per 3.14 is non- 
personal information. 


3.9 Notice — Information regarding processing of 
personal information. 


3.10 Omnibus law — Omnibus laws are overarching 
laws and are sector agnostic. They apply to all sectors in 
a country or geographical territory for example FDPA 
in Germany, PDPA in Singapore, GDPR in Europe, etc. 


3.11 Opt-in — Process or type of policy whereby 
the Individual is required to take an action to express 
explicit, prior consent for their personal information to 
be processed for a particular purpose. 


3.12 Opt-out — Process or type of policy whereby 
the PII principal is required to take a separate action 
in order to withhold or withdraw consent, or oppose a 
specific type of processing. 
NOTE — The use of an opt-out policy presumes that the data 
controller has the right to process the Personal information in 
the intended way. This right can be implied by some action of 
the Individual different from consent (for example, placing an 
order in an online shop). 


3.13 Organization — Any organization, both for profit 
or otherwise, private or public, playing the role of a data 
controller, data processor or even both in few scenarios. 


3.14 Personal Information — Any information that 
(a) can be used to identify the Individual to whom such 
information relates to, or (b) is or might be directly or 
indirectly linked to an Individual. 


NOTES 


1 Definition of personal information may vary between 
countries, and may include both personal data collected and 
generated within an organization. Examples of personal 
information are: 


a) Telephone Number (when it is allotted to a specific 
individual). 


b) Date of birth. 
c) Email ID. 
d) Address. 


e) Meta data such as telephone call logs, weblogs. 

f) Identification numbers such as Aadhaar, PAN, and Social 
Security Number. 

2 Depending on the jurisdiction and the particular data 
protection and privacy legislation, the synonym ‘Personally 
Identifiable Information’, ‘Personal Data’, ‘PII’ may also 
be used in some countries instead of the term ‘Personal 
Information’. In this standard, both the terms ‘Personal Data’ 
and ‘Personal Information’ have been used interchangeably. 


3.15 Privacy Incidents and Breaches — Any 
situation or instance where personal information 
is processed in violation of one or more relevant 
requirements of data privacy regulations, privacy 
principles, contracts or policies, is a privacy incident. 


When the incident pertains to accidental or unlawful 
destruction, loss, alteration, un-authorized disclosure 
of, or access to, personal data transmitted, stored or 
otherwise processed, it also qualifies as a personal data 
breach. 


3.16 Privacy Controls — The measures that protect 
personal or sensitive personal information by reducing 
the likelihood of occurrence of privacy risk. 


NOTES 

1 Privacy controls include strategic, tactical and operational 
measures, for example, policies, procedures, guidelines, 
legal contracts, management practices or organizational 
structures. 


2 Control is also used as a synonym for safeguard or 
countermeasure. 


3.17 Privacy Risk Assessment — It is the overall 
process of risk identification, risk analysis and risk 
evaluation with regard to the processing of personal 
information. 


3.18 Processing — Any operation or set of operations 

performed upon personal information, whether or not 

by automatic means. 
NOTE — Examples of processing operations of personal 
information include, but not limited to collection, recording, 
organizing, analyzing, storage, adaptation or alteration, 
retrieval, consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, 
dissemination or otherwise making available, masking, 
alignment or combination, blocking, erasure or destruction. 


3.19 Profiling — Activity or analysis of an individual’s 
behaviour or certain aspects based on past trends solely 
on automated decision making which produce legal 
effects concerning him or her or significantly affects 
him or her. 


3.20 Sectoral law — These laws apply to a particular 
industry sector such as health, banking, IT and may 
contain specific data privacy requirements among 
several other requirements that may or may not be 
related to data privacy. Examples of such sectoral 
laws are: HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act) in USA, GLBA (Gramm-Leach- 
Bliley Act) in USA and Reserve Bank of India Act in 
India. 


3.21 Secondary Use — Constitutes processing of 
personal information in conditions which differ from 
the primary use initially communicated to or agreed 
with the individual. 


3.22 Sensitive Personal Information — A special 
category of personal information, whose nature is either 
sensitive, such as those that relate to the Individual’s 
most intimate sphere, or that might have a significant 
impact on the Individual. 


NOTES 


1 The kind of data categories that constitute Sensitive Personal 
Information may vary between countries as per the regulations 
but organizations are best placed to determine what constitute 
sensitive personal information among various data that they 
collect or process. In context of India it shall include health 
records, biometrics, password, financial information, sexual 
orientation as per Information Technology Act. 


2 Depending on the jurisdiction and the particular data 
protection and privacy legislation, the synonym ‘Sensitive PII’ 
or simply ‘SPT’ may also be used in some countries instead of 
the term ‘Sensitive Personal Information’. 


3.23 Territorial Law — These laws are applicable to 
geographical territory or a region, for example state 
laws, CCPA (California Consumer Privacy Act) applies 
to California, USA. 


4 PRIVACY ENGINEERING 


In the development life cycle of any product, service or 
solution that involves processing of personal data, the 
organization shall introduce data privacy aspects during 
the design stage and it shall cover the entire personal 
data life cycle including data collection, processing 
operations, decommissioning, archival stages, etc. 
The need to fulfill each of the data privacy principles 
specified in 4.2 shall be evaluated by the organization. 


4.1 Development of Privacy Requirements 


The organization shall determine the data privacy 
requirements that are relevant for the product, solution 
or service. 


While determining the privacy requirements, the 
organization shall take into consideration the following: 


a) Applicable jurisdiction, both territorial and 


sectoral; 


b) Various regulatory, statutory and contractual 
requirements; 


c) Privacy and security controls from organization’s 
own business needs, privacy and security policies 
and processes. 


4.2 Privacy Principles Based Design considerations 


4.2.1 Personal Data Collection and Limitation 


The organization shall determine the lawful basis for 
collection and processing of personal data and shall 


IS 17428 (Part 1) : 2020 


ensure that collection of such personal data is fair, 
intended for specific and identified purposes and is 
proportional to the purpose. Collection shall be done at 
the right stage and in lawful manner, without coercion. 


The lawful basis for collection of personal data shall be 
one of those required by relevant regulation, including 
consent if permitted. Such lawful basis determined for 
each purpose prior to commencement of processing, 
shall be documented as part of data inventory. In any 
case, organizations shall provide a notice to individual 
as in 4.2.2. 


4.2.2 Privacy Notice 


The organization shall provide privacy notice to 
the individual prior to collection of personal data. 
When data collection is indirect or does not involve 
participation from the individual, the organization 
shall identify appropriate mechanisms to notify the 
individual about such collection. 


While deploying Privacy notices, the organization shall 
take into consideration the following as per established 
procedure: 


a) The contents of notice; 

b) Mode of delivery of notice; 

c) Timing of providing notice; 

d) Accessibility and comprehensibility, keeping in 
view diversity of individuals; 

e) Ease of readability. 


The contents of a privacy notice at the minimum shall 
include the following: 


1) Name and Address of entity collecting the 
personal data; 


2) Name and Address of entity retaining the 
personal data, if different from above; 


3) Types and categories of personal data collected; 
4) Purpose of collection and processing; 


5) Recipients of personal data, including any 
transfers. 


The key objective of providing a privacy notice to 
individuals is to make the data privacy practices 
transparent, and in order to achieve this effectively, 
the organization shall adopt suitable modes of 
communicating the privacy notices, including 
displaying them in prominent places and websites. 


4.2.3 Choice and Consent 


When consent is the lawful basis of collection of data, 
the organization shall provide individuals with privacy 
notice as in 4.2.2 and choice on the data intended to 
be collected, purpose of processing, and obtain lawful 
and fair consent in accordance with established policy. 
While obtaining consent, the organization shall evaluate 
the following aspects and include them as appropriate: 


IS 17428 (Part 1) : 2020 


a) Whether Opt-in or Opt-out. 
b) Default settings in case of Opt-out consent. 
c) Provision for individual to revoke consent. 


d) Timing of obtaining consent in order to give fair 
choice. 


The organization shall not use an individual’s consent 
as a substitute for accountability. 


4.2.4 Use Limitation 


The use of personal data collected by organization 
shall be done only for purposes which are legitimate 
and agreed with individual. If personal data needs to be 
processed for a purpose that was not agreed or stated, the 
organization shall do so only with individual’s consent. 
Notice will suffice if either the basis of processing does 
not require consent or if the new purpose is compatible 
with the original purpose. 


4.2.5 Data Accuracy 


The organization shall ensure that personal information 
is kept accurate throughout the life cycle of personal 
data, and any incorrect information is promptly 
corrected. Provision shall be given by the organization 
to individuals to update their personal information 
when required. 


4.2.6 Security 


The organization shall adopt and implement an 
information security program to ensure confidentiality, 
integrity and availability of personal information. 
The degree of protection provided to various types of 
personal data shall be commensurate with the privacy 
risks. 


4.2.7 Disclosure and Transfer 


Disclosure of personal data to external parties shall be 
only when necessary, and with consent of individual 
unless required by law. 


The organization, when using services of an external 
party to process personal data, shall transfer such data 
only after fulfilling the requirements mentioned in 5.7. 


4.2.8 Personal Data Storage Limitation 


The organization shall ensure that personal information 
is retained only for the duration as required by the law or 
business purpose according to a documented personal 
data retention policy. Deletion of personal data shall 
also be done on specific request from individual unless 
applicable regulations do not permit. Use of irreversible 
de-identification techniques such as anonymization 
shall be adopted by the organization when data needs 
to be preserved for statistical, or research purpose. 


4.2.9 Design Considerations to Fulfil Other Rights of 
Data Subjects 


The organization shall take into account design 
requirements emerging out of the need to fulfill any 
rights of individuals as applicable, such as those 
mentioned below and ensure the same are part of 
privacy requirements of 4.1: 


a) Right to personal data Portability; 
b) Right to Object to Profiling and Automated 
Decision Making; 

c) Right to Object to processing. 
The organization shall define circumstances under 
which such rights may not be fulfilled due to reasons 
such as disproportionate effort or cost, technological 
limitations, over-riding and legitimate business 
interests. 


4.3 Verification and Testing 


The organization shall ensure that the applicable data 
privacy controls are verified and tested, as applicable, 
prior to deployment of a solution or product and at 
regular intervals, according to defined procedures. 


5 PRIVACY MANAGEMENT 


5.1 Privacy Objectives 


The organization shall determine and define data 
privacy objectives and when doing so, the organization 
shall at a minimum take into account the following: 


a) Nature of business operations 
processing of personal information; 


involving 


b) Industry domain of the business and the regulatory 
landscape of the same; 


c) Type of individuals; 

d) Nature of personal information involved; 
e) Organization’s business objectives; 

f) Geographical distribution of its operations; 


g) Extent to which the personal 
processing is outsourced; 


information 


h) Alignment with privacy policy. 
5.2 Data Privacy Function 


The organization shall create a data privacy function, 
identify a competent and qualified person to be 
accountable on data privacy for the organization, its 
products, services or solutions. In order to enable this 
function, the organization shall, 


a) provide adequate resources; 


b) define structure of the function to ensure 
independence; 


c) define responsibilities and accountability on data 
privacy and various in-house functions involved; 


d) create a cross-functional data privacy council, 
as applicable, that helps communicating with 
all internal functions involved in processing or 
controlling personal information; 


e) ensure governance and oversight by senior 
leadership; 


f) demonstrate commitment from senior leadership 
in order to run a successful program. 


5.3 Data Privacy Management System 


The organization shall establish a data privacy 
management system (DPMS) that acts as a baseline 
and reference point for determining the data privacy 
requirements for the organization. 


The organization’s DPMS shall include: 
a) Criteria for classifying personal information; 


b) Inventory of personal information with level of 
details enough to help in determining data privacy 
controls; 


c) Representation of personal information flow 
within, from and to the organization; 


d) Procedure to introduce processing of new personal 
data element or change in any existing personal 
data element attribute; 


e) Triggers for updating DPMS. 
5.4 Policies and Processes 


5.4.1 Privacy Policy 


The organization shall establish and document a privacy 
policy that applies to all business entities and locations 
of the organization as determined in the scope and shall 
be authorized by the senior management representative 
or a member of Board of Directors overseeing the data 
privacy function. Such policy shall be communicated 
to all stakeholders setting out the approach to manage 
the privacy objectives. 


The privacy policy shall be aligned with the privacy 
objectives as per 5.1 apart from it, the policy shall 
include the following: 


a) Commitment of the top management towards 
fulfilment of data privacy objectives and 
requirements; 


b) Privacy principles that organization adopts to 
guide all activities related to personal information 
processing. 


5.4.2 Processes and Guidelines 


The organization shall define, document and implement 
processes, procedures and guidelines on how the 
organization intends to achieve privacy objectives and 
comply with privacy policies. 


IS 17428 (Part 1) : 2020 


While developing processes, the organization shall 
ensure that, 


a) the level of details and the content format is 
appropriate for the understanding of those 
functions or individuals that need to execute; 


b) responsibility is clearly defined for every activity; 


c) procedure to handle deviation and exceptions is 
included. 


5.5 Records and Document Management 


The organization shall maintain records of processing 
activities that demonstrate accountability towards its 
data privacy compliance. In order to achieve this, the 
organization shall establish and implement procedures 
that help identify various records along with the 
retention period. While establishing such procedures, 
the following shall be considered: 


a) Record of logs that demonstrates affirmative 
action and options chosen by individual on privacy 
consent and notice; 


b) Evidence that captures events related to access, 
use, addition or change to personal information; 


c) Policy on preservation of obsolete policies and 
process documents; 


d) Retention period for the records and documents. 


5.6 Privacy Impact Assessment 


The organization shall conduct privacy impact 
assessment for various changes that get triggered from 
time to time and which may impact data privacy of 
individuals. In order to achieve this, the organization 
shall establish privacy impact assessment methodology 
for ensuring consistency and rigour in carrying out data 
privacy impact for any change. 


While defining such methodology, organization shall, 


a) define types of triggers that require such 
assessments for example new solution 
development, change in existing process/product; 


b) provide procedures, tools and techniques to carry 
our privacy impact assessments; 


c) provide template for capturing the outcome of the 
assessment. 


The methodology to manage risks arising out of 
privacy impact assessment shall be in accordance 
with 5.8. 


5.7 Data Processor Management 


The organization shall define and document how data 
processors which process personal information on 
behalf of the organization are evaluated, determined to 
be suitable and made accountable to minimize the risk 
ofa personal data breach or data privacy incident. 


While establishing the mechanism, the organization 
shall ensure, 


IS 17428 (Part 1) : 2020 


a) an effective process to evaluate and shortlist 
its data processors based on their data privacy 
practices and ability to meet organization’s data 
privacy requirements; 


b) data privacy obligations are reasonably transferred 
to the data processors contractually; 


c) periodic re-evaluation of their capability in 
ensuring data privacy. 
5.8 Privacy Risk Management 


The organization shall establish and document privacy 
risk management methodology that defines how risks 
related to data privacy are managed and to ensure, at 
any time residual risks are kept at an acceptable level. 


Such methodology shall include: 
a) Triggers for initiating risk assessment; 
b) Criteria for risk evaluation; 
c) Privacy risk response strategy. 


5.9 Privacy Incident Management 


The organization shall establish and document 
mechanism to manage data privacy incidents and 
personal data breaches. 


Such process shall include: 


a) Incident discovery from both within the 
organization and from outside; 


b) Investigation methodology, including root cause 
analysis, corrective and preventive action planning 
and implementation; 


c) Incident reporting process, to all relevant 
stakeholders including individuals and data 
privacy authority, where applicable. 

5.10 Data Subject’s Request Management 


The organization shall establish and document 
mechanisms to respond to and serve requests from an 
individual. 


Such mechanisms shall include: 
a) Means to verify identity of an individual; 
b) Providing access to data subject’s information; 
c) Means to update data subject’s data, including 
deletion; 
d) Service level agreement including aspects on time 
and cost as applicable. 


5.11 Grievance Redress 


The organization shall implement and document a 
grievance redress mechanism to handle grievances 
promptly. 


Such mechanism shall include: 


a) Identification and Publication of contact 


information of grievance officer; 


b) Channels for receiving complaints or requests 
from individuals; 


c) Provision for escalation and appeal, wherever 
applicable; 


d) Timelines for resolution of grievance as specified 
by applicable regulation, contract or as set by the 
organization. 


5.12 Staff Competency and Accountability 


The organization shall ensure that the staff and 
contractors handling personal information shall be 
competent, kept aware and their accountability is 
established for any actions related to processing of 
personal information. 


Staff handling personal information or activities related 
to processing personal information shall: 


a) Be trained and kept aware about developments 
depending on their role; 


b) Be aware of their responsibility in protecting data; 
c) Be traceable to their actions or inactions; 


d) Subject to appropriate disciplinary actions when 
proved to be in violation of responsibility. 


The organization shall determine suitable criteria for 
qualification, competency and evaluate staff before 
assigning them responsibility related to data privacy. 


5.13 Ongoing Regulatory Compliance 


The organization shall put in place mechanisms that 
allow management to periodically monitor and review 
the compliance of the Data Privacy Management 
System with the applicable regulations and to ensure 
that the privacy features and controls built into solutions 
and products are updated based on changing privacy 
regulations and contracts. 


5.14 Periodic Audits 


The organization shall institute periodic audits for the 
data privacy management system and allocate resources 
and authority to the audit group. 


Such audits shall, 


a) focus on compliance of organizations’ practices 
with DPMS, effectiveness of DPMS in meeting 
regulatory and contractual obligations; 


b) be conducted by an independent group of auditors 
competent in data privacy, internal or external to 
the organization, at a periodicity appropriate for 
the organization, at least once in a year. 


5.15 Measurement and Continuous Improvement 


The Organization shall implement a documented 
process for measuring and continuously improving 
the DPMS. Any improvements shall be based on pre- 
defined metrics, whether qualitative or quantitative, 


IS 17428 (Part 1) : 2020 


and appropriate initiatives may be taken up in areas that 5. Excluding any of the requirements specified in 4 
require improvement. and 5 is not acceptable when an organization claims 
its compliance to this standard, unless it demonstrates 
that certain sub clause does not apply based on an 
evaluation and the same shall be documented. 


Metrics chosen by the organization shall be those that 
are most likely to reflect the effectiveness of DPMS. 


6 COMPLIANCE 


In order to be considered compliant to this standard, 
the organization shall fulfill the requirements of 4 and 


IS 17428 (Part 1) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Information Systems Security and Privacy Sectional Committee, LITD 17 


Organization 


Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 
New Delhi 

Bharat Electronics Ltd (BEL), Bengaluru 

Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 

Centre for Internet & Society 

Data Security Council of India (DSCI) 


Department of Science and Technology 


HCL 
Indian Cellular & Electronics Association (ICEA) 


Infosys Technologies Limited 


In Personal Capacity 


Indian Statistical Institute 
KCPIL 
Larsen & Toubro Limited 


Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Defence (DRDO) 
National Accreditation Board for Certification Bodies 


Narnix Technolabs Pvt Ltd 
NEC India Pvt Ltd 


Oxygen Consulting Services Pvt Ltd 


Patanjali Associates Pvt Ltd 
Qualcomm India Pvt Ltd 
ReBIT 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ARVIND Kumar (Chairman) 


SHRIMATI SANGEETHA MANGAL 
SHRI DEVESH KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr M. SASIKUMAR 


SHRIMATI P. R. LAKSHMI Eswart (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL ABRAHAM 
SHRI AMBER SINHA (Alternate I) 
SHRI GURSHABHAD Grover (Alternate II) 


SHRI ADITYA 


SHRI SUJIT BANERJEE 
DR RAJEEV SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV CHHABRA 


SHRI BUESH KUMAR ROUL 
SHRI RAJESH SHARMA (Alternate) 


MR SRINIVAS POOSARLA 
Suri RAJEEV THYKATT (Alternate I) 
Ms Asuwatuy Asok (Alternate ID 


Dr GARGI KEENI 
Ms AMUTHA ARUNACHALAM 


Pror BimaL K. Roy 
Dr V. K. KANHERE 


Suri N. SATHYAN 
SHRI TIRUMALA Rao K. (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH MAHESHWARI 
SHRI TARUN PANDEY (Alternate I) 
SHRI SANTOSH SoNI (Alternate II) 
DR SomnatH CHANDRA (Alternate III) 
Suri S. K. NEHRA (Alternate IV) 


Ms NOOPUR SHROTRIYA 
Suri G ANIL (Alternate) 


SHRI A. S. BHATNAGAR 
Ms Anana JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI NARANG N. KISHORE 


Ms JIDNYA SHAH 
SHRI ABHAY PIMPLIKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIV KUMAR AGARWALA 
SHRI SACHIN JADHAV (Alternate) 


Suri KANTI MOHAN RUSTOGI 
SHRI VINOSH BABU JAMES 


SHRI PRASHANT LOTLIKAR 
SHRI DEEPNARAYAN TIWARI (Alternate) 


Organization 


Smart Chip Private Limited 


Standardisation, Testing & Quality Certification 
(STQC) 


Tata Communications Pvt Ltd 


Tata Consultancy Services 


Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC), DOT 


THE PERSPECTIVE 
Unique Identification Authority of India 


WYSE Biometrics Systems Pvt Ltd 
BIS Directorate General 


IS 17428 (Part 1) : 2020 


Representative(s) 


MR DIVANSHU GUPTA 
MR Ankit Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. SHARMA 
Suri A. K. UPADHAYAY (Alternate I) 
SHRI NAKUL AGGRWAL (Alternate II) 


SHRI MAHESH KALYANARAMAN 


SHRI SATEESH SRINIWSAIAH 
SHRI NATARAJAN SWAMINATHAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI ABHIK CHAUDHURI (Alternate II) 
SHRI ANUPAM AGRAWAL (Alternate ID, 


SHRI ARVIND CHAWLA 
SHRI S. SRIDHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAHUL SHARMA 


SHRI Y ASHWANT SINGH 
SHRI ANUP KUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri Y. D. WADASKAR 


SHRIMATI REENA GARG, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (LITD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Suri Ksuitiy BATHLA 
ScIENTIST ‘C’, BIS 


Panel 3 “Privacy Information Management System” LITD 17/P-3 


Organization 
Infosys Technologies Limited 
Reliance Jio 
Centre for Internet & Society 
Data Security Council of India (DSCI) 
Genpact 
HCL 


Infosys Technologies Limited 


In Personal Capacity 


KPMG 


Larsen & Toubro Limited 


Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Tata Consultancy Services 
THE PERSPECTIVE 
Unique Identification Authority of India 


Representative(s) 
SHRI SRINIVAS POOSARLA (Convener) 
SHRI Mouit MALIK 
SHRI GURSHABAD GROVER 
SHRI ADITYA 
SHRI SRINJOY BANERJEE 
SHRI SANJEEV CHHABRA 


SHRI RAJEEV THYKATT 
Ms Nena AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


Ms AMUTHA ARUNACHALAM 
Ms DIMPLE SANTWAN 


SHRI SRINIVAS POTHARAJU 
SHRI MERRIL CHERIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMALA Rao K. 


SHRI RAKESH MAHESHWARI 
SHRI PRAFUL Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAYANAND BANAHATTI 
SHRI RAHUL SHARMA 


SHRI Y ASHWANT KUMAR 
SHRI ANUP KUMAR (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 17 (12162). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


