UDC

622'673'2

: 624'042 : 614'8

IS : 12450

( Part 1 ) - 1988

Indian

Standard

( Reaffirmed 1999 )

STEEL
PART 1 PRINCIPLES

HEADFRAMES
OF LOAD FACTORS

FOR MINES
AND APPLICABLE

COMPUTATION OF SAFETY

1. Scope - Lays down the principles of load computation and applicable factors steel headframes for mines used under normal and special operating conditions. 1.1 This standard is not applicable qf\the headframe structure. 2. yypes of Headframes three- types: -' Based to winding towers where winding engine

of safety for an top in

is installed

on functional

requirements,

headframes

may be grouped

normally used for men~mineral/material winding. a) Type A - Headframes for installations installations where winding speed does not ,:b) Type B - Headframes for such winding exceed 2 m/s_ or for such winding installations which are not normally used for mineral/ material windmg and are occasionally used for men winding for the purpose of inspection and maintenance, and the winding speed does not exceed 4 m/s. c) Type C 3?qAssumptions Headframes of Loads used for shaft sinking operations,

3.1 All loads to be considered in relation to headframes shall be treated as static loads. For dynamic effects certain multiplying factors shall Abeused depending on the specific case. For the purpose of headframe design, the working load on the rope and the rope breaking load-shall be as defined-in 3.1.1 and 3.1.2. * 3.1.1 Working load of the rope - It is the static I-oad on the rope in the worst situation ed by ten percent for starting resistance and acceleration/retardation. increas-

3.1 .I .I The static load shall include maximum possible load due to self-weight of suspension gear, cage or other conveyance or counter-weight, payload, weight of mine cars/mine tubs, suspension gear for balance rope and weight of balance rope. 3.1.2 Rope breaking load - It is the breaking recommendations and increased by five percent. 3.2 Analysis of a structure for working load stipulated that analysis for the rope breaking load of the rope according to manufacturers it has been like wind

shall be made only in cases where load for the structure is not needed.

3.3 While analyzing a structure under working load, all other loads acting on the frame load, live load, etc, shall be taken into account taking the most unfavourable situations.

3.4 While analyzing a structure under exceptional cases like rope breaking conditions, only one exceptional case shall be considered at a time. For example, in case of headframes serving more than one winding rope, breaking situation shall be considered in any one rope or ropes attached to a single conveyance. Smilarly, when rope breaking loads are considered, wind loads shall not be-considered simultaneously. 3.5 On platforms and stairways a live load of 2 kPa shall be assumed for general maintenance. For heavy maintenance involvrng replacement of components for normal rnining operations, higher loads may be considered. These foads shall not be taken into account for the design of the complete frame but shall be used for design of the platforms and stairs affected by these loads. 4. Load Combinations 4.1 Type A for Design of Headframes Deploying Safety Detaching Hook

Headframes Serving Single Winder Installation

4.1.1 Headframe shall be analyzed for rope breaking load in the rope(s) attached to the ascending cage/conveyance assuming that the cage/conveyance gets stuck-up; ( a ) in the shaft, In the other rope, load equal to one-third of rope breaking load shall and ( b ) in the headframe. be considered. The self-weight of the frame and other loads supported by the frame like rope guides, rigid guides, etc, shall also be taken into account.
Adopted 18 July 1388

@ Januiry 1989. BIS I OF
BHAVAN,

Gr 2

BUREAU
MANAK

INDIAN

STAN.DARDS
MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH, ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 12450 ( Part 1 I-

1988 to withstand
Safety

4.1.2 The beams supporting the bell box or bell plate shall be designed the load supported by the corresponding safety detaching hooks. 4.2 Type A ing Hooks Headframes Serving More than One Winder Installation

five times
Detach-

Deploying

4.2.1 Headframe shall be analyzed for rope breaking load of one of the winding installation taking one-third of the rope breaking load for the second rope of same installation and working The worst case shall be considered. Rope loads on the ropes of other winder installation. breaking load shall be considered for the rope/ropes connected to the ascending cage/conveyance assuming that it gets stuck-up; ( a ) in the shaft, and ( b ) in the headframe. The self-weight of the frame and other loads supported by the frame like rope guides, rigid guides, etc, shall also be taken into account.

4.2.2 The beams supporting the bell box/bell plate shall be designed the load supported by the corresponding safety detaching hook. 4.3 Type A 4.3.1 Headframes Serving a Single Friction Winder Installation

to withstand

five times

Headframes

shall be analyzed

on the same lines as specified for rope breaking

in 4.1.

4.3.2

The buffer beams shall also be analyzed

load.

4.3.3 The beams supporting the catches provided of rope failure shall be designed to withstand five them. 4.4
Type A Headframes Serving

for holding the cage/conveyance in the event times the load required to be supported by
Winder Installation

More than One Friction

4.4.1

Headframe

shall be analyzed

on the same lines as specified for rope breaking

in 4.2. load.

4.4.2

The buffer beams shall also be analyzed

4.4.3 The beams supporting the catches provided of rope failure shall be designed to withstand five them.

for holding the cage/conveyance in the event times the load required to be supported by

4.5 Type B - Headframes - These shall be designed for the working load in the winding ropes enhanced by a multiplying factor of two. The self-weight, other supported loads and wind loads If These frames shall not be analyzed for rope breaking loads. shall also be taken in&o account. safety detaching hooks are used, the beams supporting bell plate/bell box shall be designed as specified for the same in 4.1.2 and 4.2.2. 4.6
Type C Headframes

4.6.1

Type C headframes

shall be designed taking

into account the following

two conditions:

a) The suspended platform supported by the ropes passing over pulleys installed on the headframe stationary and the winding in operation - working load in the winding ropes shall be enhanced by a multiplying factor of two and only working load shall be considered in the ropes supporting the suspended platform. b) The suspended platform in motion with winding rope stationary - In this condition, the working load in the ropes supporting the platform shall be enhanced by a multiplying factor of two while for the winding ropes only the working load shall be considered with the buckets empty as the winder in this case will not be in operation. 4.6.2 In both conditions specified shall be taken into consideration. 4.6.3 The headframes in 4.6.1, self-weight, other supported situation. bell plate/bell box shall be loads and wind loads

are not to be analyzed

for the rope breaking beams supporting

4.6.4 If safety detaching hooks are used, the designed as specified in 4.1.2 and 4.2.2. 5. Factor of Safety

5.1 Except for the exceptional cases like rope breaking and falling of cage/conveyances on the catches, the permissible stresses in the members are to be taken as specified in IS : 800-l 984 Code of practice for general construction in steel ( second revision )`. 2

IS : 12450

( Part 1 ) - 1988

5.2 For the purpose of design of the beams supporting the winding sheaves and the shaft beams, if any, supporting the headfram-es and the corresponding rivets, bolts, pins, etc, the permissible stresses as specified in IS : 806 1984 shall be reduced-by 25 percent.
5.3 The permissible stresses in the catches as indicated in Table 1 shall specified in IS : 816-1969 `Code of in mild steel ( first revision )' shall bolted joints, stresses shall be taken welding shall be used.
TABLE 1 PERMISSIBLE

case of rope breaking and cage/conveyance falling on the be consideled. For shop welded joints, permissible stress as practice for use of metal arc welding for general construction be increased by 50 percent and for high tension pre-stressed as 10 percent higher than those specified in Table 1. No field

STRESSES CONVEYANCE

FOR LOADING DUE TO FALLING ON CATCHES Allowance 26 000

ROPE

RUPTURE

AND

Components

in Headframe

Kind of Stress Tensile, compressive* and bending Tensile compressive* and bending

Stress MPA

Remarks

General components

Pully supporting beams, columns and supporting beams at shaft mouth, if any Riveted joints+

19 500

Shearing Bearing Tensile -Shearing Bearing Tensile

19 500 39 000 8 000

Acting on the crross cross section of rF vet

~_._

~___---p--J~;;~~v$h machined bolts

.__-I__
19 500 39 000 16 000 Acting on the gross cross section of the rivet Acting on the (:ross section of the ba!Seof the thread Acting on the cross -section at the base o f the thread

Anchor bolts

Tensile

15 500

NoteAllowable stresses given in the table are based on quality of steel according to IS : 226-1975 `Structural steel ( standard quality ) ( fifth rev/s/on )' and any other material not inferior in quality to that Specified in IS : 226-l 975 may be used. *Members under compression may be checked for buckling according to IS `fFor field riveting, allowab!e stresses may be reduced by 20 percent.

: 800-1984.

5.4 The factor of safety of the headframe against tilting shall be 1`5 considering the self-weight with and ~without working and wind loads, and 1.3 with loading through half the rope breaking load and self weight and other suspended loads but without wind load. 6. General

Considerations
of anti-corrosive paint shall be applied reduction in strength due to rusting. to headframes in accordance with IS : 80()_

6.1 A coating
1984 to avoid

6.2 Where the steel is drrectly exposed to weather and is not ordinanly accessible for cleaning and repamting, the minimum thickness of metal shall be selected in accordance with IS : 800-l 984.

EXPLANATORY
In the preparation of this Indian Standard, 4118-I 981 `Headframes and winding towers lnstut fur Nwmung. considerable for mines

NOTE
assistance has been drawn from DIN Design loads' issued by Deutsches

3 Prlnted at Printograph, New Delhi, India

