**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 6421 (1972): Perforators, Paper, Double Hole [PGD 14: 
Consumer Products and Allied Equipments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 MARCH 1996 

TO 

IS 6421 : 1972 SPECIFICATION FOR PERFORATORS, 

PAPER, DOUBLE HOLE 

( Page 1, clause 5.1 ) — Subslilule '500 HVMln' for '500 to 550 WV. 

( Page 2, clause 1 0, second line ) — Delete the words 'and its wight'. 

( U4D 15 ) 



Repl^ognpby Unil, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS : 6421 - 1972 

UDC 686.865.3 (Ke ( RcalTlrmed 20W ) 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
PERFORATORS, PAPER, DOUBLE HOLE 

(Incorporating Amendment No. 1) 



O 
Ql 

GO 



1. Scope — Specifies requirements of double hole paper perforators. 

2. Types — a) Light duty, and 

b) Heavy duty. 

3. Terminology — For the purpose of this standard, nomenclature for various parts as indicated in 
Fig. 1 shall apply. 



HANDLE 




BAS6 



OPERATING^ 
SHAFT ^ 

FIG. 1 PERFORATOR. PAPER, DOUBLE HOLE, LIGHT DUTY 

4. Shape and Dimensions — As shown in Fig. 2. 

5. Material — DifTercnt components shall be made of the following materials and shall satisfy the 
requirements mentioned therein. 

6.1 Punches — Shall be made of carbon steel or alloy steel and shall have a hardness of 500 HV Min. 

6.2 Dies — In case of light duty perforators the dies shall form a part of the base which shall be made 
from cold roiled steel suitably case hardened. For heavy duty perforators the dies may form a part of 
the base or an insert in the form of a carbon steel sleeve with a rigid fitting to the base. 

6.3 Punch Operating Shaft — - Shall be made of steel having a minimum hardness of 240 HV. 

6.4 Springs — ShaL be made of spring steel which shall satisfy the performance requirements 
specified in 8. 

5*6 Receptacle — A suitable receptacle shall be provided below the punch hole for collection of 
cuttings which shall be easily removable. Light duty perforators shall be provided with receptacle at 
the base which shall be enamel painted, electroplated, galvanized or tinned. 

5.6 Handle — Heavy duty perforator shall be made of cast metal or cold rolled steel sheet while light 
duty perforator shall be made of cold rolled steel sheet. The handle shall be of such design that there 
shall be no permanent set or break-down when the performance test is carried out as given in 7. 

5.7 Paper Guide — Heavy duty perforator shall be provided with paper guide. It shall be made of 
carbon steel strip having width 10 ± 5 mm and thickness 1.0 mm. It shall be bent at one end and 
graduated to provide for the centring of A-4, A-5, B-5, C-^ and A-6 sizes of the paper [see 
IS : 1064-1961 Specification for paper sizes ( revised ) ]. 



Adopted 25 January 1972 



© BIS 2002 



Price Group 1 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 6421 ' 1972 



STOP 



7 



CENTRAL 
MARK 



i 






-W 



D OIA 



DIE 



Type 

Light duty 
Heavy duty 




PUNCH 

PUNCH 
GUIDE 



L W D 

80.0 ±0.6 12 ±1 6.0 ±0.5 

80.0 ±0.5 12 ±1 6.0 ±0.5 

All dimensions in millimetres. 



1.5 
3.0 



FIG. 2 DIMENSIONS OF PERFORATOR, PAPER DOUBLE HOLE 

6. Workmanship and Finish — Perforators shall be free from sharp edges (except the die and the 
punch), burrs, blemishes, cracks and other surface defects. The punching action shall be smooth and 
free from jerks and shall have no side play. The two punch shall operate and cut simultaneously. 
For orientation purpose, the punch shall have a central mark on the body between the two punches. 

6.1 Finish — Unless otherwise specified exterior surfaces of the perforator with the exception of 
machined and other operating parts shall be finished with stove enamel paint. The paint shall 
adhere uniformly and shall not readily peel or chip. The paint shall be such as to withstand at a 
temperature of 130**C for one hour without appreciable discolouration. The machined and other 
operating parts shall be oiled. 

7. Performance Test — The perforator shall punch a bunch of 10 sheets of 75 g/m2 paper for 
light duty perforator and 20 sheets of 75 g/m^ paper for heavy duty perforator simultaneously by 
pressing the handle down. The force shall be applied at the centre of the handle with even pressure 
m downward direction, approximately, vertical to the base. The resulting perforations shall be 
entirely and neatly punched out without being torn or ragged. The form of punch hole shall be 
even and circular. Wnen the handle is released, the spring and punch shall automatically return to 
its original position. There shall not be any permanent bending of parts nor any damage that will 
affect the serviceability of the perforator. The test shall be repeated for 100 times. 

8. Test for Spring — The handle shall be pressed for 200 times for light duty perforators and 500 
times for heavy duty perforators without putting the paper sheets between punch and die. There 
shall not be any permanent set on the spring, when measured at the free end of the handle. 

9. Drop Test — With the base at an angle between 30 and 60° from horizontal the perforator shall 
be dropped three times from a height of one metre on concrete floor or slab so as to strike on one 
end. Tne test shall be repeated the same number of times with the perforator striking at the 
opposite end. The perforator shall not be damaged. 

10. Markinc^ — Each perforator shall be clearly and indelibly marked with the manufacturer's 
name, initials or registered trade-mark. 

10.1 ISI Certification Marking — Details available with the Indian Standards Institution. 

11. Packing — Each perforator shall be suitably preserved and packed in appropriate cartons. 
They may also be packed as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 



IS : 6421 - 1972 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 



This edition 1.1 incorporates Amendment No. 1 (March 1996). Side bar indicates modification of 
the text as the result of incorporation of the amendment. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



