INATA Ah IS 11970 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


heade atA (Carat te gr feu 
GIEBEA 


(Teel FRAT ) 


Guide for Condensate Polishing 
(Power Plant) 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.060.25 


© BIS 2023 


cl RISC st 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 get Me AHL AMT, Ag ect - 110002 
ee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2023 Price Group 7 


Water Quality for Industrial Purposes Sectional Committee, CHD 13 


FOREWORD 


‘This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Water Quality for Industrial Purposes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council’. 


In the power industry, both nuclear and thermal, concentration of impurities coming in from condenser tube 
leaks in certain localized areas of steam generators/boilers could be of several orders of magnitude higher 
than that indicated by routine bulk boiler water analysis. As boiler operating pressures and steaming rates 
have continually increased, this localized impurity concentration effect has become increasingly 
predominant. Surveys conducted on the operating experiences of high pressure boilers/steam generators all 
over the world have indicated that in addition to engineering and metallurgical choices like design, 
appropriate selection of constructional materials and fabrication techniques as well as good operational 
practices, an efficient boiler water chemistry control played a very major role in ensuring boiler tube 
integrity. It is now well recognized that an efficient boiler water and steam chemistry control should 
necessarily start at boiler feed water stage itself. With the present day knowledge and understanding of the 
complex nature of local concentration mechanisms occurring in power station boilers, particularly in nuclear 
steam generators, and the attendant specific corrosion problems, namely, general wastage and gouging, 
pitting, denting corrosion, crevice corrosion, transgranular and intergranular corrosion, etc, use of high purity 
feed water (Na < 2 ppb; chloride < 2 ppb; sulphate < 2 ppb; specific conductivity < 0.1 us/ cm; silica as 
SiO2 < 10 ppb), with all volatile treatment (AVT) for alkalinity and dissolved oxygen control, is currently 
recommended for maintaining proper boiler water and steam chemistry regime. 


Recently some of the turbine manufacturers are also specifying steam quality (SiO2 < 10 ppb; Na < 3 ppb; 
chloride< 5 ppb; cationic conductivity < 0.2 us/cm) to avoid stress corrosion cracking in certain high strength 
steels used in modern compact high rating turbines. To meet the above-mentioned feed water and steam 
quality specifications it becomes essential to opt for full flow condensate polishing. Thus, incorporation of 
a full flow condensate polishing plant (CPP) is today considered advisable for plants using sea water for 
condenser cooling and even for those where condenser cooling water has salinity more than 2 000 ppm. In 
those cases where the cooling water is of less than 2 000 ppm salinity, it is now considered worthwhile to 
review the requirement of a CPP. Although the concept of full flow condensate polishing emerged with 
boiling water nuclear power reactors (BWRs), it is now being increasingly employed for pressurized water 
and pressurized heavy water nuclear power reactors (PWRs and PHWRs), fast breeder reactors and large 
modern thermal power plants using once-through or high pressure boilers. For once-through boilers in 
particular, full flow condensate polishing becomes inevitable as there exists no drum for accumulation and 
consequent blow down of harmful impurities. 


This standard was first published in 1987. In this first revision the following changes have been incorporated: 


a) Amendments issued have been incorporated; 

b) Online monitoring for CPU monitoring has been incorporated; 

c) Condensate polishing units (CPU) chemical parameters have been incorporated; 

d) References, ICS No. have been updated; and 

e) Other editorial changes have been done to bring the standard in the latest style and format of Indian 
Standards. 


The composition of committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


IS 11970 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
GUIDE FOR CONDENSATE POLISHING (POWER PLANT) 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This guide prescribes objectives, performance 
criteria and possible methods of condensate 
polishing for boilers for power plants. 


2 OBJECTIVES 


2.1 Condensate polishing plants have two following 
basic functions: 


a) To cope with the ionic and non-ionic or 
dissolved and suspended impurities 
entering into the steam condensate due to 
ingress of impure cooling water through 
condenser tube leakages; and 


b) To remove impurities generated by 
corrosion or erosion of constructional 
materials. These corrosion products could 
be both soluble and insoluble. 


2.2 The performance criteria of such plants are that 
they should provide the required quality and 
quantity of water and be able to cope with changing 
operational conditions, for example, from 
commissioning to base load, to allow continuous 
operation with minor condenser leak, and to provide 
time for safe shut-down in an emergency, such as a 
large ingress of cooling water. With drum-type 
boilers, the inclusion of CPP reduces the frequency 
of chemical cleaning of the boiler and cycle heat 
rates can be improved as a result of reduced blow 
down. 


3 CONDENSATE POLISHING SYSTEMS 


3.1 The soluble contaminants can be removed by 
demineralization and insoluble by filtration. 
Conventional sand filters have been found to be 
inadequate for removal of corrosion products in the 
particle sizes encountered in the steam condensate 
and for the high flow rates they also occupy too 
much space. On the other hand, pressure 
pre-coat candle type of filters (using inert cellulose 
fibrous material, for example, alpha cellulose 
material for pre-coat) have very good removal 
efficiencies for 5 um size particles and in addition, 
occupy much lesser space. However, the system has 


been almost abandoned due to uneven precoating, 
resulting in unsatisfactory removal of crud, 
sloughage from the pre-coat filter causing fouling of 
the anion resin and heavy capital cost. 


3.2 The dual purpose of filtration and 
demineralization can be achieved by the 'powdex 
process' by using finely ground cation and anion 
resins (about 25 um size) as the pre-coat material 
along with alpha cellulose. The pre-coat normally 
consists of 0.5 kg/m? each of cation and anion resins 
and 0.2 kg/m’ of the fibrous inert material (like alpha 
cellulose) and has a retention capacity of about 65 g 
iron/m*. One clear advantage of the finely ground 
resin is its capacity to withstand higher temperatures 
and its better efficiency for the removal of colloidal, 
hydrated iron oxide. This make it possible to install 
finely ground resin filter just upstream of the 
deaerator, thus helping in the removal of crud 
picked up from the tube side of the low-pressure 
heaters. However, these filters/ demineralizers are 
non-regenerable type and the resins have to be 
discarded after exhaustion. Hence, the operating 
costs of these units are about 10 times higher than 
that of deep bed demineralizers. In addition, these 
are not able to fully cope with the ionic impurities 
coming in from condenser tube leakages, and this is 
particularly true for sea water cooled plants. 


3.3 Experience has shown that deep (about 1 m bed 
depth) mixed bed demineralizer units provide 
optimum cost benefit ratio while realizing adequate 
protection against ionic impurity ingresses into the 
team condensate from condenser tube leaks. 
However, with these units, crud removal efficiency 
is relatively low, and their use requires proper design 
and establishment of correct operating practices for 
smooth functioning and minimizing/avoiding resin 
fouling by crud. In addition, reliability of process 
instrumentation (conductivity meters, flow 
integrators, differential pressure indicators, etc) is an 
essential requirement. 


3.4 A comparative account of the 
advantages/disadvantages of powdex system 
vis-a-vis deep bed system is given as specified in 
Table 1. 


IS 11970 : 2023 


Table 1 Comparative Account of the Advantages/Disadvantages of Powdex System 
Vis-A-Vis Deep Bed System 


(Clause 3.4) 
SI No. Powdex System Deep Bed System 

UI (2) (3) 

i) Removes crud, and colloidal particle efficiently Not so efficient in removal of crud. 
because of large surface area. 

ii) Unit is ready in a short time (back washing and Takes longer time for regeneration and a 
pre-coating) and not very elaborate equipment is complete regeneration system is required. The 
required for this. system has to be located outside of turbine 

building to avoid damage to other equipment 
in turbine building by regenerant chemicals, 
fumes, etc. 

iii) Waste effluents are harmless and small in Unspent and exchanged chemicals go as waste 
quantity. effluents during regeneration and their 

quantity is also large. 

iv) Since always fresh resin coat is used, so resin is Regeneration efficiency is limited due to 
in highly regenerated state every time resin is incomplete separation of cation and anion 
replaced. components. 

v) Influent water temperature can be high (up to Temperature restriction is 60 °C. 

80 °C). 

vi) Resins cannot be regenerated and are to be Resins are regenerated and indigenously 
discarded. available. 

vii) Resin shelf life is very short (about 6 Shelf life is around 5 yr if properly maintained. 
months) and filter cartridge life also is limited 
(about 1 year). 

viii) Pre-coat requires vacuum holding pump, which if No such problem here. 
gets interrupted due to power supply failure, gets 
disturbed. 

ix) Cation/anion resins ratio has to be varied with No such problem here. 
respect to types and concentration of impurities 
and plant conditions (ratio to be different at start- 
up, normal service time, during condenser tube 
leakage, etc). 

x) Silica removal efficiency is low. Silica removal efficiency is high. 

xi) Operating capacity is limited. Operating capacity is large. 


3.5 In addition to the above two methods, namely 


powdex 


process and deep bed demineralization, 


combinations of these two and other methods are 
also employed. These methods are as follows: 


a) 


b) 
c) 


d) 


Pre-coat cellulose filter + strong acid cation 
unit + mixed bed unit; 


Strong acid cation unit + mixed bed unit; 


Pressure pre-coat filter using powdex + 
mixed bed unit; 

Magnetic and/or deep graphite bed 
filters/mixed bed units; 


e) Cation layered mixed bed; 


f) Activated carbon filter + strong acid cation 
unit + mixed bed unit; and 


g) Hollow fibre filter in conjunction with a 
deep mixed bed demineralizer. 


4 CPU CHEMICAL PARAMETERS 


4.1 Chemical control specifications regarding 
typical condensate polishing plant effluent for 
power plant are specified in Table 2. 


IS 11970 : 2023 


Table 2 Chemical Control Specifications Regarding Typical Condensate Polishing Plant 
Effluent for Power plant 
(Clause 4.1) 


SI No. Parameter Hydrogen Cycle Ammonia Cycle 
Operation Operation 
0) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Cation conductivity after removal of 0.1 0.1 
ammonia/amine (us/cm at 25 °C), Max 
ii) Sodium, ppb, Max 2 2 
iii) Chloride, ppb, Max 1 2 
iv) Silica (as SiO2), ppb, Max 10 10 
v) Soluble iron (as Fe), ppb, Max 5 5 
vi) Crud, ppb, Max 10 10 


4.2 CPU Service Cycle Termination: 
4.2.1 For drum type units 


4.2.1.1 CPU vessel should be cut off from service if 
any one of the following changes is observed: 


a) In-service CPU effluent specific 
conductivity > 2.0 uS/cm (preferably 
online value); 


b) In-service CPU effluent cation 
conductivity > 0.10 uS/cm (preferably 
online value); 


c) In-service CPU effluent sodium > 2ppb 
(preferably online value); 


d) In-service CPU effluent chloride > 2ppb 
(offline value); 


e) DP across the in-service CPU vessel 
(including DP of resin trap) > 3.5 kg/cm? or 
as specified by original equipment 
manufacturer (OEM); 


f) In-service CPU throughput reaches to its 
design capacity; and 


g) Boiler water chloride continuously 
increasing and maintained above 
recommended limit and there is 
requirement of frequent CBD opening. 


4.2.1.2 Under extreme emergency condition, if fresh 
mixed resins bed is not available and except 4.2.1.1 
(a) as above (that is, CPU outlet specific 
conductivity > 2.0 uS/cm), all other parameters are 
within limit, then that CPU may be re-taken in 
service after in-situ remixing of resin bed followed 
by thorough demineralization (DM) water rinse to 
get rinse water turbidity < 1 no of transfer units 
(NTU). However, re-mixing and service of already 


in-service CPU should not be adopted as regular 
practice. 


4.2.1.3 After service, CPU effluent water quality to 
be kept under observation for any deviation 
(as specified above) and in case of deviation the 
particular CPU should be cut-off from service and 
should be considered as exhausted. 


4.2.2 For drum-less units (once through unit) 


4.2.2.1 CPU should be cut off from service if anyone 
of the following changes observed: 


a) In-service CPU effluent specific 
conductivity > 0.10 uS/cm (online value), 
when unit is operating in OT feed water 
regime or > 0.50 uS/cm (online value), 
when unit is operating in AVT-O feed 
water regime; 


b) In-service CPU effluent cation 
conductivity > 0.10 uS/cm (preferably 
online value); 


c) In-service CPU effluent sodium > 2 ppb 
(preferably online value); 


d) In-service CPU effluent chloride > 2 ppb 
(offline); 

e) DP across the in-service CPU vessel 
(including DP of resin trap) > 3.5 kg/cm? or 
as specified by OEM; and 


f) In-service CPU throughput reaches to its 
design capacity. 


4.2.2.2 If any one of the above changes observed in 
an in-service CPU, then that particular CPU should 
be declared exhausted and replaced with fresh 
mixed resins bed. Remixing of resin bed of 
already in-service CPU is not recommended for 
once-through units. 


IS 11970 : 2023 


4.3 Recommended CPU Flow for Sea Water 
Cooled Units 


For sea water cooled units, both CPU should be kept 
in service during start-up and during normal 
operation of unit and 100 percent condensate flow 
through CPU should always be ensured except CPU 
changeover period. CPU Cut-off parameters are 
same as indicated above. 


5 CONDITIONING METHODS 


5.1 Chemical Conditioning and Condensate 
Polishing Plant Operation/Performance 


5.1.1 The feed water chemical conditioning regime 
has a considerable influence on CPP 
Operation/performance. In utilities using AVT, 
hydrazine or morpholine exchange by cation resins 
can hamper polishing function. As very scanty 
information is available in the literature regarding 
the effect of hydrazonium (N2Hs*) and 
morpholinium ion on cation exchange resin 
performance, subsequent discussion is restricted to 
the effect of ammonium ion alone. 


5.1.2 Originally low ammonia levels [0.2 ppm to 
0.5 ppm (as NH3); pH 8.8 to 9.2] were specified in 
the condensate, but to take account of world wide 
experience of erosion/corrosion, various utilities 
have considered the possibility of operating at 
higher pH (9.2 to 9.6) provided the system is free of 
copper bearing alloys in the feed train. 


5.1.3 The adoption of high pH conditioning would 
impose an additional load of ammonium ion on a 
CPP operating in the hydrogen/hydroxide form. 
There would be approximately a three-fold increase 
in the concentration of ammonium ions to be 
removed by raising the pH from (9.0 to 9.2) or a 
seven-fold increase if the pH were increased to 9.6. 
The following are four main approaches for treating 
condensate: 


a) Operation could continue with the cation 
resin in the hydrogen form thus greatly 
increasing the number of regenerations. 
Ammonia dosing has to be ensured in auto 
mode so that pH of condensate is maintained 
in the range of 8.8 to 9.0 in hydrogen cycle 
mode of operation; 


b 


wm 


The system could operate with the cation 
resin in the ammonium form, so that 
ammonium ion would no longer be 
removed, and the service period would then 
be dictated by pressure drop, conductivity, 
silica slip, etc; 


c 


< 


The initial operation has the cation resin in 
hydrogen form and after ammonia 
break-through, the cycle is continued in 
ammonium form; and 


d) To operate with the CPP on stand-by until 
condenser leaks occur. 


5.2 Hydrogen Cycle Operation 


5.2.1 Two factors control the ability of a CPP 
(hydrogen form cation operation) to operate 
satisfactorily with increased ammonia loadings. 
These are as follows: 


a) The running period that is, possible before 
exhaustion of the bed; and 


b) The time required to regenerate the bed. As 
on a regular basis regeneration of one bed 
takes substantially long time, any changes 
that could be made to offset the decreased 
service run lengths due to higher ammonia 
content in the condensate would be 
beneficial. 


Increasing the regeneration level of the acid used for 
the cation resin has been considered as one 
possibility. 


5.2.2 For the CPP with cation resin units preceding 
the mixed bed, it has been found that by applying an 
increased regeneration level (200 kg/m°) sulphuric 
acid, an increased service run length could be 
achieved while treating condensate containing 
2.2 ppm ammonia (pH 9.6), provided the inflow 
water characteristics are the same. Hydrochloric 
acid is also used widely for regeneration. On the 
other hand, for the CPP with finely ground resin unit 
and mixed bed, there is a much less inventory of 
cation resin and this restricts the ability of the plant 
for treating condensate of higher ammonia levels. 
Applying the concept of increasing the capacity of 
cation resins by employing higher regeneration 
levels, it should be possible to treat condensate 
containing 1.1 ppm ammonia (pH 9.4). Thus, under 
hydrogen cycle operation, increasing the level of 
cation resin regenerant chemical could provide a 
viable option for operating CPP at higher pH levels 
in condensate. However, it is essential to emphasize 
for the design provision for adequate cation removal 
capabilities to cope with flexibility of operation with 
respect to the conditioning of feed water with 
ammonia. 


5.3 Ammonia Cycle Operation 


5.3.1 Another chemical option for operating CPP 
treating condensate at pH 9.6 would be to use the 
cation resin in ammonium form. In the absence of 
condenser leaks very long service lengths would be 
possible and the regeneration will then be dictated 
by differential pressure across the bed due to 
accumulation of filtered crud. However, one 


has to consider two important points, namely, 
(a) production of water of required quality, and 
(b) ability of such a system to cope with cooling sea 
water ingress from condenser leaks. It should be 
noted that there is very little experience anywhere in 
the world on the use of ammonium form resins with 
sea water cooled power stations. However, it is 
known that use of cation resins in ammoniated form 
to reduce ammonia consumption results in higher 
sodium leakage during condenser tube leakage 
periods. Also, there is a general agreement in the 
literature that in this mode of operation the resins 
will have to be in a very high state of regeneration. 
It has been estimated that less than 0.08 percent of 
cation sites can be in the sodium form and less than 
1.9 percent of anion sites in the chloride form in 
order to achieve a condensate containing less than 
1 ppb sodium and 2 ppb chloride at pH 9.6. 
Comparative figures for hydrogen cycle operation 
are quite large for cation and anion resins. 


5.3.2 These figures clearly indicate that extremely 
good separation of resins prior to regeneration and 
very effective regeneration techniques are essential 
for operation in the ammonium form, if stringent 
conditions for high purity feed water are to be 
maintained. 


5.3.3 With proper separation of cation and anion 
resin and sufficient (approx. 200 percent) 
regeneration with pure regenerants (Cl less than 
150 ppm in NaOH), the CPP effluent water quality 
mentioned in 4.1 may be easily achieved. 


5.4 Operation with CPP By-passed 


A third approach for operating under a high pH 
regime would be to by-pass the CPP until condenser 
leakage occurs. In the absence of the CPP unit there 
would be no extra dosing of chemicals and the bed 
would be maintained in a highly regenerated state. 
However, in this mode of operation, the 
disadvantage is the difficulty in deciding when to 
reinstate CPP, particularly if cooling water leakage 
is at a very low level. There is also a need to have a 
satisfactory working mechanism to ensure that the 
plant goes into service immediately when it is 
required. 


6 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
6.1 Flow Rates 


6.1.1 Condensate polishing involves processing of 
quite high flow rates. To optimize on resin and 
equipment cost and to reduce space requirement, it 
is necessary to have high flow rate demineralizers. 
Mechanical design, resin attrition loss, acceptable 
impurities, leakage past demineralizer and pressure 
drop considerations have led to the acceptable 


IS 11970 : 2023 


process flow rates of 120 m/h velocity and resin bed 
depth of about 1 m. 


6.1.2 In CPP, where mixed bed is utilized for 
filtration as well as ion exchanger, provision has to 
be kept by incorporating a recirculation pump to 
see that flow rates do not drop below 60 m/h to 
provide an optimum filtration efficiency during start 
up conditions. Flow rates below this value will result 
in poor filtration efficiency. 


6.1.3 Non-steady flow rates can introduce ionic 
impurity leakages in the effluent due to disturbance 
of the kinetic equilibrium of the bed. 


6.2 Resin Type Selection and Ratio 


6.2.1 High flow rate deep bed demineralization 
imparts certain limitations on physical 
characteristics of the ion exchange resin use. Particle 
size and grading are important from the point of 
view of reducing pressure drops. In addition, higher 
attrition strength is required. Particle size and 
grading are normally specified and require careful 
selection. The beads should be perfectly spherical 
without any surface cracks (when viewed under 
magnifying glass) and there should be no organic 
color throw after initial regeneration. 'Slide-test' or 
'Chattillion test' are normally followed for checking 
the bead strength. By field experience it has been 
observed that on an average if the resin beads require 
350 g or more to deform or break, attrition strength 
of the resin can be considered satisfactory (no more 
than 5 percent of the tested water swollen beads 
should require below 200 g for deforming or 
breaking). 


6.2.2 Normally resins used for condensate polishing 
are strongly acidic cation and strongly basic anion 
polystyrene - divinyl benzene type with 8 percent to 
10 percent cross linking. The choice of the resin to 
be used is between macroporous and gel type. The 
former has frequently been chosen on the basis of 
their greater physical strength and for their capacity 
to take care of any organic fouling, if expected in the 
power plant condensate. However, conventional gel 
type of resins have advantage of (a) their higher 
operating capacity (macroporous resins generally 
have 10 percent to 20 percent less operating capacity 
for cation resins and about 30 percent less operating 
capacity for anion resins), (b) better kinetic 
performance, and (c) being less affected by cross 
contamination of regenerants. Investigations are still 
in progress all over the world to determine the 'best' 
resins for particular conditions in condensate 
polishing plants. 


6.2.3 Resin ratio is to be decided on the basis of 
whether the plant is to be primarily used for crud 
removal or for protection under condenser leakages. 


IS 11970 : 2023 


Depending upon the specific use situation and the 
amounts of chemicals (hydrazine and ammonia or 
cyclohexylamine or morpholine) being added to the 
feed water, the cation to anion resin ratio could vary 
from 2: 1 by volume (capacity ratio 3 : 1) to 2 : 3 by 
volume (capacity ratio 1 : 1). 


6.3 Regeneration System 


6.3.1 The aim of the regeneration system is to both 
remove particulate matter and chemically regenerate 
the resin beds. The process can be time consuming 
especially if significant amounts of particulate 
CRUD have to be removed. In earlier years, 
regeneration of a mixed bed polisher was carried out 
in situ. However, nowadays, it has become a rule 
rather than an exception to carry out the regeneration 
externally. Complete resin transfer from service 
vessel to regeneration vessel and vice versa to be 
ensured. External regeneration not only reduces the 
total outage time required for regeneration but has 
the greatest advantage of completely eliminating the 
danger of regenerants entering the system and also 
helps in achieving more thorough cleanup of the 
resins. The cleaning of the resins can be carried out 
by one of the following methods: 


a) Back Washing — Prior to and after acid or 
caustic injection. Back washing flow rates 
are such that bed expansion is 100 percent 
and whole beads are not lost. During this 
process fine/broken beads are also 
eliminated; 


b) Air Scrubbing/Rinsing Operation — Air 
scrubbing of resins is done in the tank with 
water up to resin top surface (for one 
minute), vessel pressurized with air 
(0.4 kg/cm? to 0.5 kg/cm?) and down flow 
rinse given by releasing pressure through 
rinse outlet for two minutes. This cyclic 
operation is repeated a number of times; and 


c) Ultrasonic Cleaning — Ultrasonic cleaning 
devices have now been developed to clean 
the resins by ultrasonic transducers mounted 
outside a cleaning tank. The resin slurry is 
introduced from top of the tank with reverse 
water flow from bottom to top to carry away 
loosened crud and resin fines. 


6.3.2 When a CPP is operating with high impurity 
burden, it is the regeneration time that ultimately 
governs the availability of the CPP. Therefore, a 
complete regeneration system plus storage for a 
regenerated spare charge of resin should be 
considered for each individual CPP. The leakage of 
trace impurities from CPP is a function of the 
regeneration procedure, particularly the degree of 
contamination of mixed bed resins by the wrong 


regenerant and the methods to minimize such 
contamination are quite important. The pertinent 
factors are: 


a) Sodium removal from all the cation resin has 
to be of a very high degree. This calls for 
complete transfer of all resin charges and 
better resin separation; 


b) Anion resin contamination of cation resin 
must be avoided in order that the sulphate 
leakage immediately after regeneration is 
prevented; 


c) The chosen regeneration levels must achieve 
the correct degree of conversion of both 
cation and anion resins; and 


d) The rinse procedures must he satisfactory. 


6.3.3 In the past the usual design philosophy has 
been to accept some anion resin in cation in order to 
minimize cation resin contamination of anion. The 
commonly used technique of sluicing anion resin 
after separation into a separate vessel, usually causes 
sufficient turbulence to lift some anion resin into the 
rise space; this resin then settles down on top of the 
cation resin at the end of the anion resin transfer 
period. 


6.3.4 The desire to avoid anion contamination of 
cation resin has led to the concept of hydraulic 
separation of the two resins followed by hydraulic 
removal of the cation resin from beneath the anion. 
This development was aided considerably by the 
introduction of an inert bead form resin of 
intermediate particle size and density between the 
cation and anion resins. This introduction required 
special grading of the ion exchange resins, in which 
the fine beads of cation resin and the large beads of 
anion resin have been removed in order that three 
distinct sharply divided layers are obtained on 
backwash. Generally, now, use of inert resin is not 
recommended especially during initial stages (plant 
commissioning stage) because inert resin gets 
affected by the coating given on turbine blades, etc 
for preservation during its erection, etc. The coating 
makes the inert resin lighter than anion resin so that 
during mixed bed back-wash for separation, inert 
resin comes on top of the anion resin. 


6.3.5 Cross contamination of resin to be tested after 
every five regenerations. Screen testing of resin to 
be tested after every ten regenerations. Chloride 
content in caustic used for anion regeneration should 
be compatible with rayon grade and preferably 
analytical grade (A.R.) grade ammonia to be used 
for boosting pH in condensate in hydrogen cycle. 
Both cation and anion resin quantities are to be made 
up to the design quantities so as to maintain their 
interface level in resin separation unit. 


7 OPERATING GUIDELINES AND 
ANALYTICAL INSTRUMENTATION 


7.1 An effluent conductivity of 0.07 us/cm means a 
total maximum leakage of about 7 ppb of soluble 
sodium chloride, sulphate and metals, etc. Ability of 
condensate polishing units to maintain this level of 
effluent quality under normal and abnormal (during 
condenser leakage) conditions for sufficient length 
of time depends on (i) cleanliness of resins, 
(ii) extent of condenser tube leak, and (iii) residual 
ion exchange capacity of the resins at the time of 
leak. 


7.2 It is thus necessary to have established 
guidelines to help the operator at the right judgement 
under various conditions of condensate polisher bed 
and condenser tube leaks. Cleanliness of the bed is 
ascertained by differential pressure (dP) 
measurements across the bed. For a specific design 
and resins used the dp depends on the flow rate 
through the demineralizers and resin cleanliness. 
Hence, the relationship between 'dP' and flow rates 
has to be established. When the 'dP' approaches dirty 
limits, the bed is to be transferred to the regeneration 
facility, cleaned by air scrubbing/rinsing operation 
and brought back for rinse. 


7.3 CPU Service vessel- fresh bed and dirty bed dP 
normal value is < 2.1 kg/cm? and < 3.5 kg/cm? 
respectively. 


7.4 Provision of online sodium and chloride 
analyzers and provision of air mixing in service 
vessel to be envisaged. 


7.5 The high quality of feed and steam generator 
water cannot be achieved without adequate online 
instrumentation and back up laboratory analysis 
techniques and schedules. Online analyzers for 
sodium (using glass membrane electrodes and 
buffering techniques) with detection limit of 1 ppb 
have been developed and methods up to 0.1 ppb are 
likely to be developed. Similar work is going on for 
development of chloride ion selective electrodes. 
Online silica analyzers with detection limit up to 
10 ppb are already available. It is felt that with 
proper sampling and calibration procedures, reliance 
can be put on the online conductivity meters with 
online sodium analyzers and pH meters serving a 
secondary function. These online instruments 
should be used to indicate trends and do alarm 
functions while exact control should be by proper 
plant design backed-up by precise laboratory 
measurement methods and good analysis schedules. 
CO content measurement in condensate come in 
handy to ascertain the ionic load on resin. 


IS 11970 : 2023 


7.6 In addition, it would be advantageous to have an 
ion chromatographic system available for trace level 
analysis of important chemical control parameters 
namely, Chloride, Sodium and Silica. 


8 ONLINE INSTRUMENTATIONS FOR CPU 
MONITORING 


8.1 For monitoring of CPU parameters, following 
online instruments should be available: 


a) Specific conductivity meter at outlet of 
each service vessel and common outlet; 


b) Cation conductivity meter at outlet of 
each service vessel and common outlet; 


c 


wm 


Sequencer based sodium analyzer, 
common for one unit for measurement 
of sodium at outlet of each CPU; 


d) DP (Differential pressure) transmitter 
across each service vessel; 


e) DP transmitter for resin trap of each 
service vessel; and 


f) CPU flow transmitter with integrator 
and reset facility for each service 
vessel. 


9 MONITORING OF CPU RESINS DURING 
SHUT-DOWN PERIOD 


9.1 In an idle condition/shut-down period, each CPU 
service vessel must be rinsed once in a week with 
minimum two to three resin bed volume of water. 
Air mixing/scrubbing and rinsing of each CPU 
service vessel should also be done on fortnightly 
basis. After rinsing, vessel should be kept in 
pressurized condition by using DM water pump. 


9.2 If any CPU has experienced Unit startup, that 
CPU should be declared exhausted if Unit startup is 
delayed. 


10 ADVANTAGES AND LIMITATIONS OF 
CONDENSATE POLISHING SYSTEM 


10.1 Advantages 


a) The water chemistry of the Unit can be 
maintained within specified limits and the 
system can be kept free of corrosion 
products, deposits, dissolved and suspended 
impurities. In nuclear power plants (BWRs) 
this will go a long way in keeping the 
inventory of activation products low; 

b 


ma 


Since make-up joins return condensate 
before CPU, some contamination of DM 


IS 11970 : 2023 


c 


d 


e 


8 


wa 


wm 


wm 


wa 


water in storage tanks or deterioration in 
DM water quality due to leaks from DM 
plants can be taken care of by CPP without 
having to reject the DM water; 


Provision of CPP will reduce the need of 
blow down of boiler, thus resulting in saving 
of DM water; 


Since by providing CPP, Unit can be taken 
on full load quickly from cold start-up, so 
there will be time saving as well as DM 
water saving as condensate dumping will be 
considerably reduced; 


Points (c) and (d) will also obviously result 
in fuel saving; 


In case of condenser leaks not being major, 
Unit can be still kept on load without 
adversely affecting the water chemistry of 
the Unit and without having to dump 
condensate or boiler water; and 


Attemperation spray water quality will be 
uniformly maintained. 


10.2 Limitation 


Suitable precautions should be taken to avoid the 
following: 


a) In case of deep bed condensate polishing 


b 


c 


d 


<~ 


Kai 


Ke? 


system, immediately after regeneration, the 
bed may leak-out some residual regenerant 
chemicals thus contaminating feed water 
quality; 


Any disintegration of resin in CPP will 
directly cause contamination of feed water 
by disintegrated resin; 


Since CPU is installed in the main steam 
water circuit, it may result in operational 
disturbances such as excess pressure drop 
across CPU; and 


Pressure and temperature of influent to CPU 
may not be always compatible with the 
design conditions. This may impair the resin 
characteristics. 


IS 11970 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Water Quality for Industrial Purpose Sectional Committee, CHD 13 


Organization(s) 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, Thiruchirapali 


ClI-Triveni Water Institute 


Central Ground Water Board, Faridabad 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute, Sharanpur 


Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute, 
Bhavnagar 


CECRI, Karaikudi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Chennai 


Consumer education and Research Centre, 


Ahmedabad 
Delhi Jal Board 


Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, New 
Delhi 


Department of Science and Technology, 
New Delhi 


Grasim Industries Limited, Nagda 


Indian Chemical Council 


Indian Farmers Fertilizer Limited, 


Allahabad 


Cooperative 


Ion Exchange India Limited, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI K. P. BHATTACHARYYA (Chairperson) 
SHRI SHIVAYYANAMATH S. 
SHRI T. K. DEY (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILENDRA KUMAR 
K. ANANDA BABU (Alternate) 


SHRI KAPIL K. NARULA 
DR SIPIKA CHAUHAN (Alternate) 
DR NEELAM NIGAM 
SHRIMATI POOJA MEHROTRA (Alternate) 


DR C. MURALIDHARAN 
DR K. SRI BALA KAMESWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI NAZIMUDDIN 
SHRI VISHAL GANDHI (Alternate) 


DR NITIN ENDLAY 
DR SANJAY TYAGI (Alternate) 


DR SOUMYA HALDAR 

DR D. N. SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 
DR S. VASUDEVAN 

DR R. MALINI (Alternate) 
SHRI S. SHANKAR 


MS ANINDITA MEHTA 
Ms DOLLY JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK 


SHRI T. S. G. NARAYANAN 
SHRI UDAY SINGH MINA (Alternate) 


DR NEELIMA ALAM 
DR SANJAI KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. N. SASTRY 
SHRI ALOK SINGH (Alternate) 


DR MRITUNJAY CHAUBEY 
SHRI KEDAR OKE (Alternate) 


SHRI GORAKH SINGH 
SHRI K. S. S. MOORTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI SACHIN SAHA 
DR RENU SARAPH (Alternate I) 
SHRI ANIL K. KHERA (Alternate ID) 


IS 11970 : 2023 


Organization(s) 


Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Chandrapur 


Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation , New Delhi 


Ministry of Urban Development 
Alleviation, New Delhi 


and Poverty 
National Environment Engineering Research Institute, 
Nagpur 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Padarsh Pharmaceuticals Private Limited, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


The Energy and Resource Institute, New Delhi 


The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 


Water and steam Chemistry Division, 
BARC facilities, Kalpakkam 


In Personal Capacity (307, Dwarka Palace, Nipania 
opp to Samar Park Colony Indore -452010) 

In Personal Capacity (6/66, 5th Street, Ahemed Colony, 
Woraiyur, Tiruchirapalli- 620003) 


In Personal Capacity (5/4, Veer apt Sector 13 Rohini 
Delhi-110085) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI V. P. GHODMARE 
SHRI RAJESH DATTATRAYA CHIVANE (Alternate) 


SHRI D. RAJASEKHAR 
SHRI SUMIT PRIYADARSHI (Alternate) 


DR RAMAKANT 
Ms CHAITRA DEVOOR (Alternate) 


SHRI G. K. KHADSE 
DR V. ATUL MALDHURE (Alternate) 


SHRI. L. K. NAYAK 
SHRI ANKIT VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI MUNEESHCHADDA 
SHRI MAHON MANOHAR KHANDEKAR (Alternate) 


DR VIVEK NARAYAN SINGH 
DR JAGDISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ANSHUMAN 
DR SUNEEL PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH GOSWAMI 
SHRI VIJAY KUMAR GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR B. ANUPKUMARDIRECTOR 


SHRI R. S. BAGHEL 


DR A. LAWRENCE 


SHRI D. K. JAIN 


SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(CHEMICAL), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 13 (21228). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern ` ` 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


