( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard
APPLICATION GUIDE FOR POWER TRANSFORMERS
( First Reprint AUGUST 1995 )

UDC 621.314.222.6 (026)

Q Copyright 1984 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Mm& BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR- SHAH WAR MARG
NEW DELI-I1 110002

Februaiy 1984

IS : 10561- 1983

Indian Standard
APPLICATION GUIDE FOR POWER TRANSFORMERS
Transformers Sectional Committee, .ETDC 16
ChairftlUIl

Rcprcsenting
Crompton ( Altrrnatr to Directorate General of Supplies (Inspection Wing), New Delhi & Disposala Greaves Ltd, Bombay

SHRI c. R. vAW?.R Members
SERI S. V. M~BIKAB Shri C. R. Varier ) Snar R. S. AnOnA

SERI D. R. CHANDEAN ( Alternate ) Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd, Srznr P. K. BHATTACHABYA Calcutta SH~I 3. C. GEOEE ( Alternate ) Gujarat Electricity Board, Vadodara SEEI A. V. BHEE~~~ARAO SERI S. H. MAKEIJANI ( AIterna:s ) The General Electric Co of India Ltd, Allahabad SHSI D. DEAB Saab B. A. SUBRA~ANYA~.~ ( Alternate ) Central Electricity .4uthority, New Delhi DIBECTOB ( SUBSTATIONS ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( SUBSTATIONS ) ( Alternate ) ' Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore DIRECTOR, CPRI SENIOR DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS, CPRI, BEOPAL ( Alternafc I ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR, SC, CPRI ( Alternute II ) Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI G. L. DUA SHRI S. C. KHURANA ( Alternate ) JOINT DIRECTOR TI (SUBSTATIONS) Research, Designs and Standards Organization (Ministry of Railways), Lucknow DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS (ELEC-C,) ( Aflemule ) Electrical Research and Development AssociaDR M. V. JOSHI tion, Bombay SHRI P. K. JOSHI ( Altcrnafe ) Bharat Bijlee'Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. S. KHODE SHRI R. G. PARDHANAN~ ( Altcrnute ) Tata Hydro Electric Power Supply CO Ltd, SHRI D. B. MEHTA Bombay SHRI R. CHANDRAMOULI (Afternafe)

( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1984
$lriREAir OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian copvright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall ba deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

.I8 ; 10561 - 1983
( Continuedfrom page 1 )

Repesentmng Members Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SERI M. L. MITTAL SHRI PREY CEAND ( Ahmate 1 1 SHRI D. P. GUPTA ( Alternate 11 ) NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SERI T. OXKUXAR SHRI P. S. RAMAN ( Alternate ) Transport Bombay and SHRI Y. K. PALVANKAR Undert~i~~~oombSaUypply , SHRI J. L. RODRI~UES ( AZternate ) Indian Electrical Manufacturer's Association, DR G. M. PEADI~E Bombav SHRI P. K. PEILIP ( Alternate ) Voltas Ltd ( Motor and Transformers Plant ), SHRI V. N. PRAHLAD Bombay SHRI T. B. SEN ( Afternate ) Pradip Lamp Works, Patna SHRI CAANDRA K. ROHAT~I Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi SHBI P. S. SAWHNEY SHRI B. B. .DASS ( Alternate ) Bombay Suburban Electric Supply Ltd, Bombay SERI R. K. SEHQAL SHRI H. S. NATARAJAN ( Alternate ) Pradesh State Electricity DepartS~JPERINTENUIX~ E N Q I N E E R Andhra ment (Electricity Projects and Board), TECHNICAL (PROJECTS) Hyderabad STJPERINTENDIN~ ENUINEER TECHNICAL ( GRID OPERATIONS ) ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, DR VAXIL Amusn New Delhi SHRI S. K. PALHAN ( Alternate ) Kirloskar Electric Co Ltd, Bangalore SHRI T. V. VIDYARATNA RAJ SHRI P. RANQARAJAN ( Alternate ) Indian Transformer Manufacturers' Association, SHRI VISHVAJIT M. MEHTA New Delhi Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI S. P. SACEDEV Director ( Elec tech ) Secretary K. M. BHATIA Senior Deputy Director (Elec tech), IS1
SHRI

2

IS : 10561 - I983

Indian Standard
APPLICATION GUIDE FOR POWER TRANSFORMERS
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards on 20 May 1983, after the draft finalized by the Transformers Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Institution Sectional Council.

0.2 This application guide is intended to assist in the determination and selection of transformer characteristics. The recommendations given herein are not mandatory, and are solely for the guidance of purchasers at the time of purchase and during subsequent usage. 0.3 General recommendations are given in IS : 6600-1972*. for loading of oil-immersed transformers

0.4 This guide is based on IEC Publication for power transformers' issurd by the Commission.

606 ( 1978 ) `Application guide International Electrotechnical

1. SCOPE 1.1 This application guide is applicable to power transformers with IS : 2026 ( Part 1 l-1977?, IS : 2026 ( Part 2 )-1977f, ( Part 3 )-19815 and IS : 2026 ( Part 4 )-1977/j.
2. SPECIFICATION complying IS : 2026

OF TAPPING

QUANTITIES

2.1 Introduction 2.1.1 Purpose of This Clause
2.1.1.1 The main purpose of this clause is to help the purchaser to determine from the on-load operating conditions of the transformers, the tapping quantities to be specified in accordance with IS : 2026 (Part 4)197711.
*Guide for loading of oil immersed transformers. +Specification for power transformers : Part I General (Jirst reuision ). fSptcihcation for power transformers : Part 2 Temperature-rise ( jirst revision ). SSpecification for power transformers : Part 3 Insulation level and dielectric tests ( second reuision ) . i/Specification for power transformers : Part 4 Terminal marking, tappings and connections ( first revision ).

3

IS t 10561 - 1983 2.1.1.2 Since the tapping quantities are used as a basis for the manufacturer's guarantees and for tests, they should not be unduly complex, since that would make the assessment of guarantees too difficult. 2.1.1.3 A transformer complying with this Standard should be capable of operating under the expected on-load conditions without being needlessly oversized ( see Note ). Amongst all the solutions meeting this condition, the simplest ones should be sought, taking into account the information given in 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 of IS : 2026 (Part 4)-1977* rekting to `constant flux voltage variation', `variable flux voltage variat: n and combined voltage variation'.
and simplification, the theoretically NOTE-For the urpose of standardization data. etc) resulting from assumed on-load calculated data (rat J power, voltage operating conditions may be adjusted when deciding the final transhrmer data. Such considerations, which can result in an `oversized' transformer, are mostly disregarded in thir guide.

2.1.2 Field of A@lication-In this guide, the only ease considered i! the most commbn, of a transformer having only one tapped winding.
NOTE-TO simplify demonstration, consideration `is to two to two-winding formen (to which can be added a stabilising or auxiliary winding). traas-

2.1.3 Abbreviations Used in This Clause-To shorten the text and the figures, the following abbreviations are used for certain quantities which often appear (sub-script A referl to the tapped winding and sub-script B to the untapped winding) : Ua = tapping voltage of the tapped winding I* = tapping current of the tapped winding = tapping voltage of the untapped winding UB IB - tapping current of the untapped winding = tapping factor [ see definition in 2.5.3 of IS : 1885 (Part KA 38 )-1977t ] n = voltage ratio = voltage ratio on the maximum voltage tapping nu = voltage ratio on the maximum current tapping nl = voltage ratio on the principal tapping (rated voltage patio) nR 2.2 First Stage of Determina tion of Tapping Duties ( Converting From `On Load' Voltages to `No-Load' Voltages ), Calculation of Voltage Ratios 2.2.1 To determine from on-load quantities, the tapping quantities to be specified and particularly the tapping voltages (see definition in 2.5.8.3 of IS : 1885 ( Part 38)-1977t, it will be necessary to replace the on-load
*Specification for power transformers : Part 4 Terminal connections ( Jrst revision ). tElectrotechnica1 vocabulary : Part 38 Transformers, marking, tappings and

4

IS : 10561 - 1983 voltages of the various voltage corrections. windings by no-load voltages by making sui&le ( see 6 ),

First of all, voltage drop ( or voltage rise ) AU is calculated taking into account the following information: a) Load in MVA, b) Direction c) Variation d) Variation 2.2.2 Voltage range power factor co+ and sin$; (HV); (LV). by multiplying the and of the power flow; of the high voltage are then made range of the low voltage corrections

on-load

voltage by &!$-=

, where AU is expressed

in percentage. values are thefi

2.2.3 The voltage ratios and particularly their extreme obtained from these calculated `no-load voltages'.

,

NOTE-The voltage drop or rise calculations can be based on approximate impedance values. More accurate calculations can be made when the final impedance values are known, but this is not often necessary.

2.3 Choice of the Tapped Winding preferable for tappings to be located :

For technical

reasons the

it is usually low-voltage

4 b)

on the high voltage winding rather than on winding, particularly if the voltage ratio is high; on a star-connected winding; and winding rather than on

a data-connected

C) on

the winding of which This factor is less important (a) and (b).

the tapping voltage varies the most. than the factors mentioned in Items Separate

2.4 Determination of the Tapping Quantities of a Winding Transformer ( The Six Parameter Method ) 2.4.1 General

2.4.1.1 The tesult of the first stage of the calculation will generally to several tapping duties per tapping, but generally such a complication is not justified in practice and is therefore disregarded in this guide. The simplification of using only one tapping duty per tapping may result in a slight oversizing of the transformer compared with one which fulfils only and exactly the assumed loading conditions. As in practice, these assumed loading conditions can be only approximations, onlv in exceptional cases should more than one tapping duty per tapping be ksed. lead 2.4.1.2 A furthur simplification is to use tapping currents and tapping voltages following the simple laws of variation, as a function of 5

IS:10561-

1983
3.3 and 3.4 in and 2.4.2

the tapping factor, which are considered in 3.2, illustrated in Fig. 9 to 11 of IS : 2026 ( Part 4 ) -1977*. These to 2.4.4. simplifications are used in the method

described

2.4.1.3 As a preliminary, some explanations follow relating to the `maximum voltage tapping' of the combined voltage variation and to the `maximum current tapping'; `Maximum voltage tapping' in the case of `combined voltage variation' In transformers employing `combined voltage variation' there is a maximum voltage tapping, above which the tapping voltages of the tapped winding remain constant. In the untapped winding, `tapping voltages' are constant up to this tapping and decrease for higher tappings. The introduction of a `maximum voltage tapping' eliminates the specification of unrealistically high tapping voltages which may otherwise even considerably exceed the `highest voltage for equipment'. This iimitation of the means, on these tappings, short-circuit current for of the transformer has to tapping voltages of certain tappings also a limitation of the calculated maximum which the mechanical withstand ability be guaranteed.

b)

LMaximum current tapping' and temperature rise 3.2.2.2, 3.3.2.2 and 3.4.2.2 of IS : 2026 (Part 4)-1977* and particularly Fig 9b, lob and 1 lb which illustrate them, present .&nple laws of the variation of tapping currents as a function of the tapping factor, based upon a `maximum current tapping'. For this tapping, the tapping current of the two windings are simultaneously a maximum. On each side of this tapping one of the tapping currents remains constant and maximum while the other decreases so that, in practice, it follows that the total losses and the temperature-rise of the windings decrease on either side of this tapping. Therefore, this maximum current tapping is also the maximum temperature-rise tapping:

2.4.2 winding

The Six Parameters of a Two-Winding transformers are considered (see 2.1.2).

Transformer-Only

twoof the

In the following method, the data used for the determination tapping quantities are limited to the following six parameters: a) The extreme
connections

voltage

ratios

: nmin and nmax;
Part 4 Terminal marking, tappings and

*Specification

( first revision).

for power transformers:

6

IS : 10!561- 1983 b) Maximum
(11~~)~~;

voltage and current

of

each

winding

:

( UHv)mx

and

c)

Maximum

of each winding:

(Inv) msx and ( ZLv) max.

The numerical values of these six parameters are known when the first stage of the calculation has been completed (see 2.2). 2.4.3 Calculation Procedure for the Tab&ng Quantities, Based on the Six values of the six parameters are used for Parameters - The numerical preparing a table of tapping quantities as a function of the voltage ratio n and of the tapping factor II A such as in Table 1. The calculation procedure is as follows: a) Give in the first column the four voltage ratios

:
and nmax

%ta

ni-

(ILv)maJ(Inv)max.,

nu= (Unv)mex/(~Lv)max

Enter them in numerical order (Table 1 assumes increasing order from the top and nII is supposed to be higher than ni but in some cases ni can be higher than or equal to n,). Prepare also a line for the principal tapping which, for the reasons reiterated in 2.4.3(d), will be placed between the lines n=nl and n=nn. Write 100 as the value of KA, the value of n, namely np, being still undetermined.

b)

Enter in the table the maximum voltage each winding as shown in Table 1, 1) ( ULV)~~~ 2)
from nmln to n,and (URV)~~~

and
from

current
nu to

values
nmax;

for

(IHv)ma, from nmtn to ni and (1~")~~~ from ni to nmax.

4

Complete the table with those missing values of voltage and current marked (t) in the table. The appropriate voltage or current value is deduced from the value of voltage or current of the other winding and of the value of voltage ratio n. The tapping power is then calculated. Choose the tapped winding and the principal tapping. From the definitions of the principal tapping and of the full power tappings, this is one of the full-power tappings, that is, one of the tappings ranging from the ` maximum voltage tapping ' to the ` maximum current tapping `. The simplest solution is to take the mean tapping if it is a full-power tapping or, if not, the full-power tapping which is the closest to the mean tapping.

4

e) The

tapping

factor k^A can then be calculated. and

K,-n/r+, if the tappings are on the HV winding; K,= nD/n if the tappings are on the LV winding.
7

TABLE

1 TAPPING

QUANTITIES TAPPING DESICJNATI~N

w cb _

( Clause 2.4.3 )

B
POWER LV' 16) t ULv)max (kv)max (kv)max (kv)max Smaxt. Smax Smaxt $ Minimum voltage ratio tapping Maximum tapping Principal Maximum tapping current tapping voltage

?l*

K-A

(1)
nmln= ._

percent
�

(2)

__---h_ HV 0)
t

VOLTAGE

-__ LV (4) (ULv)max (ULv)max

,--_h `HV (5)

CURRENT ----

(IHv)max Uav)max I[ t t

n,= _. 06 np=... lI
au=...

� 100

t `B (Urrv)max (Uuv)max

(U~v)rnax

3
8

(ULv)max
t

nmax=...

Maxi num voltage ratio tapping or current of

*The table assumes an > nt. deduced from the voltage tTo be completed with the appropriate values of voltage current, the other winding and of the voltage ratio n. IPower is calculated from voltage and current values. �After choosing the tapped winding and the principal tapping, tapping factors KA are calculated. ~To be filled in after choosing the principal tapping, that is, n .

IS : 10561 - 1983 Furthermore, completed. This power. np being known, the line 6 principal tapping ' can be line gives the rated values of voltages, currents and

The table is thus complete.
NOTE-The preceding method generally leads to combined voltage variation. However, if nu is equal to an extreme value of n, the category of voltage variation is `constant flux voltage variation' of `variable flux voltage variation', according to whether the maximum voltage tapping is the extreme plus tapping or the extreme minus tapping. Furthermore, if the maximum voltage tapping, without being the extreme plus tapping, is close enough to it, lhe combined voltage variation can be changed into constant flux voltage variation in order to simplify still more the specification of the tapping quantities (see 2.7).

f) The various values can now be rounded off, particularly the rated power. This rounding off and the use of a suitable number of steps naturally affects somewhat the voltage and current values. the possibility of operation at voltages higher than Furthermore, the tapping voltage can be considered (see 2.6). When the preceding calculations have led to the choice of an extreme tapping as the maximum current tapping, it may_ be advisable to re-examine this choice as indicated in A-4 of Appendix A. as the g) For specification purposes, the table can be abbreviated, numerical data of the table can actually be obtained from the according to 3.4.2.1 of following more concentrated data, IS : 2026 (Part 4)-1977*. 1) Rated 2) Which power and rated voltages; winding is the tapped winding, and its tapping range;

3) The number of tapping positions or the value of the tapping steps; voltage tapping ' with the 4) Which tapping is the ` maximum corresponding tapping voltages; and 5) Which tapping is the ` maximum current tapping `. 2.4.4 Examples in Appendix A. 2.5 Tapping of Ajplication of This Method-Three examples are given

Currents

of Auto-Transformers

winding transformers, 2.4.2(c) considered two parato the maximum currents of the windings, namely auto-transformers, the windings to be consi(Axv~~ and (Lv) max. For dered are the series winding and the common winding. The maximum current of the series winding is equal to (&Y)~~~, but the maximum current of the common winding is equal to the maximum value of the difference (II,v - I,,).
*Specification far powe_r transformers: connections ( jirst reuision ). Part 4 Terminal marking, tappings and

2.5.1 For separate meters corresponding

9

IS:10561-

1983

For this reason, the ` maximum current tapping `, based on (ZHV),,,aX it has for separate and (ZLV)~~~ does not have the physical meilning winding transformers (see 2.4.1). As a consequence, it would in theory be inappropriate to base the current requirements on such a tapping, and a more elaborate specification of the tapping quantities would be needed. However, in practice, auto-transformers can generally be treated in the same manner as separate winding transformers, provided it is verified that the common winding meets the standard temperature rise guarantees throughout the tapping range. This verification can normally be provided by calculation from one single temperature-rise test with the transformer connected on a suitable tapping. An example is given in A-5 of Appendix A.

2.6 Possibilities of Operation at Voltages Higher Than the Tapping Voltages - The possibilities of continuous operation at increased voltage at full current or at reduced current are given in 4.3 of IS : 2026 (Part l)-1977*. 2.6.1 Possibilities During Full-Current Operation - AS a general rule, the 5 percent overvoltage margin allowed in IS : 2026 (Part I)-1977* is used to meet exceptional circumstances, for instance system voltages, 2.6.2 Possibilities During Reduced Current Ojeration-The purchaser may pecify that the transformer shall be capable of operation at voltages bigher than the tapping voltage, for example, of operation at 110 percent of this voltage at no-load and at 108.75 percent at half-load. 2.7 Conversion of 6 Combined Voltage Variation ' into Flux Voltage Variation ' - The principle of this conversion tapping voltage UB of the untapped winding, instead of maximum value for only some tappings, retains this value tappings. The voltage U* of the tapped winding is no longer top `. 6 Constant is that the reaching its for all the ` cut at the

Resulting from this conversion, voltages UB and UA, and thereby the tapping power, are increased for the whole of the former ` variable flux range `. The main advantage is simplification. Moreover, this conversion can also lead to a better indication of the overall voltage and power capability of the transformer when operated on those tappings of which the voltage and power have been increased. On the other hand, this conversion may lead to abnormally high tapping voltages for these tappings, and also to needlessly increasing the requirements with regard to the ability to withstand short circtuts. *Specification for power transformers: Part 10
1

General (Jim1 reuision ).

IS : 10561 - 1983
The conversion can also lead to difficulties with regard to temperature-rise requirements if, for ` combined voltage variation `, the ` maximum current tapping ' is in the ` variable flux range ' since the conversion leads to increasing the tapping voltages assigned to this tapping. It should also be noticed that, in the latter case, the tapping power which means that the of the ` maximum current tapping ' is increased, rated power assigned to the transformer is increased (see Fig. 1). As a conclusion, it is recommended that constant flux voltage variation (CFVVj be utilised every time the voltage increase that this implies does not exceed 5 percent. In other cases, the final choice between the combined voltage variation and the constant flux voltage variation (CFVV) will depend on the comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of each solution.

KA

Fro. 1

EFFECT OF CONVERSION OF COMBINED VOLTACE VARIATIOV TO CONSTANT FLUX VOLTAGE VARIATION 11

1s:105f31-1983 3. SELECTION OF TRANSFORMERS WINDING CONNECTIONS FOR FOR THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS

3.1 The selection

of the connections for the windings of a three-phase transformer and single-phase transformers intended to be associated in a three-phase bank is determined by their service requirements, for instance parallel operation with other transformers, the provision of brought-out neutral points and any necessity of neutral loading.

3.2 The connections chosen influence the design of the transformer and the amount of material required. In certain cases, the type of magnetic circuit (that is, with or without magnetic return limbs) has also to be considered when choosing the connections. 3.3 The winding connections most commonly used are star, delta and zigzag or intaconnected star. The star connection is particularly suitable for high-voltage windings with graded insulation, for windings to be equipped with on-load tap-changers, and when a neutral point is required for loading purposes. The delta connection is advantageous for high currents. The zigzag connection is, in general, only used for the lowvoltage windings in transformers with low rated power, when the neutral neutral electromagnetic couplers point may be loaded for three-phase and for earthing transformers. Table 2 contains a summary of these three connections. 4. of the most important characteristics

PARALLEL OPERATION PHASE SYSTEMS

OF TRANSFORMERS

IN TAHREE-

4.0 General-Parallel operation applies to the operation of transformers with direct terminal-to-terminal connections for two of their windings. In the following, only two-winding transformers will be considered. In other cases, parallel operation should form the subject of a special study.
NOTE-For the purpose of this plus a stabilizing winding is considered Claus-, a transformer with two main windings as a two-winding transformer.

4.1 In order that two transformers

ean operate in parallel under the conditions specified above, the conditions as given iri 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4 have to be met for the pairs of windings to be connected in parallel. connections shall be compatible with each

4.2 Connection-The other:

a) Transformers of the same phase-angle relations, that is, having the same clock hour figure for t.he vector diagram, can be operated in parallel by connecting together, on the primary and secondary sides respectively, the terminals with the same symbol; 12

rs:10!%1-1983

TABLE 2

CHARACTERISTICS ( Clause 3.3 )

OF CONNECTIONS

STAR

CONNECTION -

DELTA CONNECTION

ZIGZAG

CONNECTION

Zan be loaded with the rated current of the winding

L o ad

on the connection of the capability ofI other winding(s) and on the zerothe neutral I sequence impedance(s) of the i network(s) to which the transformer point 1 is connected ( see 5.2 )
i n g

/ Depends

,

Either Or Third harnomic currents can flow in at least one winding of the transformer Third harmonic currents can circulate in deltathe connected winding

I
Magnetizing currents

Third harmonic currents cannot HOW ( neutral isolated; no .winding in delta connection present ) Contains harmonic tages* third vol-

-

Phase voltage Sinusoidal

I -

--

*These third harmonic voltages are insignificant in three-phase core-type transformers with three limbs. In three-phase core-type transformers with five limbs, three-phase shell-type transformers and single-phase transformers connected together in three-phase banks, they may take on high values and lead to corresponding displacements of the netural point.

b) From the point of view of possibilities of operation in parallel when the clock hour figures are different, connections can be classified in groups : Group Group I : clock hour figures 0,4 and 8;

II : clock hour figures 6, 10. an'd 2;

Group III : clock hour figures 1 and 5; and Group IV : clock hour figures 7 and 11. 13

The parallel operation of two transformers belonging to the same group is always possible under substantially balanced load conditions. If they have different clock hour figures, then the difference between the clock hour figures in the same group has always to be 4 or 8, that is, a difference in phase angle of 120" or 240", which is `the same as between two lines of a threephase system. The terminals having the same marking on the two transformers will then be connected together on the one side (high-voltage or low-voltage), whilst on the other side, the terminals will be connected in cyclic rotation according to the appropriate diagram in Fig. 2.

4

A transformer of Group III can be operated in parallel with a transformer of Group IV if the phase sequence of one transformer is reversed relative to that of the other. The change of terminal connections is as given in Fig. 3. The parallel operation of two transformers belonging to different groups (the III and IV combination mentioned above excepted) is not possible. The following combinations therefore cannot be operated in paraIle1 : Group Group Group I : with II or with III II : with I or with III III or with IV; or with IV;

e)

: with I or with II; and : with I or with II.
having different is understood for

Group IV

NOTE 1 - In the case of parallel operation of transformers connection symbols satisfactory operation in the above conditions the case of virtually balanced loads. The case of unbalanced

loads should form the subject of a special study.

NOTE 2 - It is also advisable to consider the effect of the connections on the behaviour of the transformers working in parallel during single phase-to-earth faults.

4.3 Voltage Ratios-The voltage of the permissible tolerances.

ratios

shall

be equal within

the limits

NOTE - However, if the conditions given in 4.4 are not complied with, the load sharing may be improved by a difference between the voltage ratios of the two transformers. The efficacy of this mean varies with the power factor of the circuit supplied.

14

IS : 10561 - 1983 4.4 Short-Circuit Sharing Impedance, or Impedance Voltage, and load

4.4.1 Transformers Without Tapping Does Not Exceed &ts the impedance voltages at of the permissible tolerances, formers whose tapping range

la&pings and Tajped Transformers Whose percent - For transformers without tappings, rated current shall be equal within the limits The same condition applies to tapped transdoes not exceed f 5 percent.

are NOTE 1 - This assumes that the rated voltages of the two transformers equal, not merely the rated voitage ratio. The ratio <kI / zk, of the ohmic short-

circuit impedances is then equal to the inverse ratio Sap / Sal of the rated powers, since,

where

their respective

UN is the rated voltage Therefore, the load is shared between the two transformers rated powers.

in proportion

to

NOTE Z-To be strictly correct, the resistive and reactive components of .the impedances should be separately considered, but in practice it is generally sufficrent to consider only the total impedance value. NOTE 3-When considering parallel operation of two transformers having widely different rated powers (particularly if the ratio of the rated powers is not between 0.5 and 2) caution should be exercised, since variations in load sharing, even though within the limits set by the above-mentioned tolerances, may nevertheless result in overloading of the smaller transformer. This can be caused either by operation of the tolerances in opposite directions on the two transformers or because of differences in the relative values of the resistive and reactive components of impedance referred to in Note 2.

4.4.2 Taj$ed Transformers Whose Tapping Range Exceeds &5 percent For acceptably equal load sharing between two transformers of equal rated power, operating on full power tappings, the short-circuit impedances in ohms per phase, referred to the same side of each transformer, should have the same value with a tolerance of f 10 percent (in other words each of the two values should not differ more than 10 percent from their mean value). Bigger differences between the two impedances are sometimes acceptable but a special study is then needed. When considering two transformers of unequal rated powers, operating on full power tappings, the total load will be shared in the inverse ratio of their ohmic impedances, that is :

QI =

and Qa= zkz>zk
Q
1 2

zk$>k,

Q whence $

= 2. 1

where Qis the total load, & the ohmic impedance and suffices and 2 refer to the respective individual quantities for each transformer. Each transformer proportion to its rating will take if <k /,&, e

a part of the total load acceptably in is approximately equal to the ratio 17

IS:105612 of SN,ISN the same formers.

1983
the two rated powers, with a tolerance in other words if the product of f 10 percent for the & two SN has trans-

lralue,

In the particular case of both transformers being on the principal tapping, where the impedance can be quoted as a percentage voltage (impedance voltage at rated current) instead of the short-circuit impedance in ohms per phase, each transformer will take a part of the total load acceptably in proportion to its rating if the impedance voltages at rated current of the two transformers have the same va.lue with a tolerance of f 10 percent. If at least one transformer operates on a reduced power tapping, the tapping power St of each transformer is to be used instead of the rated power SN and the load sharing will then be acceptable if the product <k St has the same value, with a tolerance of &IO percent for the two transformers ( at the tappings used ).
NATE l--In all the above text it i; asssumed that the tapping voltages of the two transformers are equal at the tappings used. If this should not be the case, it is not the rated powers or tapping powers which should be considered but the tapping currents (It). At the tappings used the product ,$ It of short-circuit impedance and tapping current should have the same value, with a tolerance of f 10 percent for the two transformers ( all values of .& and It being referred to the same side ). NOTE ~--TO be strictly correct, the resistive and reactive components of the impedances should be separately considered, but in practice it is generally ru5cient to consider only the total impedance value. NOTE 3-When considering parallel operation of two transformers having widely different rated powers ( particularly if the ratio of the rated powers is not between 0'5 and 2 ), caution should be exercised, since variations in load sharing, even though within the limits set by the abovementioned tolerances, may nevertheless result in over-loading of the smaller transformer. This can be caused either by operation of the tolerances in opposite directions on the two transformers or because of differences in the relative values of the resistive and reactive components of impedance referred to in Note 2.

5.

LOADING WINDING -

CAPABILITY OF THE NEUTRAL IN STAR OR ZIGZAG CONNECTION
The neutral point under the conditions

POINT

OF

5.1 General

may be loaded

of star or zigzag-connected given below.

windings

5.1.1 If, under neutral loading conditions, the windings does not exceed the values corresponding currents, the normal temperature-rises apply.

current in the phaseto rated or tapping

5.1.2 If these currents are exceeded in any phase-winding, as they may be if neutral loading - for example, with an arc-suppression coil - is added to a winding already symmetrically fully loaded, this may lead to the

IS:10561normal temperature-rises being exceeded zero-sequence current, and also in the oil. in any winding ,which

1983
carries

5.2 Star Connection-The loading capability of the neutral point depends on whether or not the zero-phase sequence current flowing in. the winding under consideration is balanced by corresponding ampereturns in at least one of the other windings of the transformer, The following cases should be distinguished. 5.2.1 Star-Star Connection Without an Additional Winding in Delta Connection, the Neutral Point of the Prakary Winding Being Isolated : a) Three-phase shell-type formers with five transformers : The loading be avoided. b) Three-phase transformers, three-phase core-type translimbs and banks of three single-phase point of the secondary winding should

of the neutral core-type

transformers

with three limbs :

1) The neutral point of the secondary winding may be loaded through an arc-suppression coil with 25 percent of the rated current for a highest duration of 1.5 hours or with 20 percent of the rated current for a duration of not This causes, besides considerable more than 3 hours. stray losses in the transformer, a zero-sequence voltage drop of about 5 percent to 10 percent of the line-to-neutral voltage. 2) In three-phase systems with four-wire loads on the secondary winding, the neutral point may, with due regard to the voltage symmetry, for example, for lighting supply, be loaded continuously up to 10 percent of the rated current. 5.2.2 Star-Star Connection Without tion, the .Neutral Point of the Primary of the System - If the zero-sequence sufficiently `mall, the neutral point loaded with the rated current of the an Additional Winding in Delta-ConnecWinding being Connected to the J\`eutral impedance of the primary system is of the secondary winding may be winding.

5.2.3 Star-Star Connection with an Additional Winding in Delta Connection ( Third Winding or Stabilizing Winding ) - If the delta-connected winding is not loaded externally, the neutral point of star-connected windings may be loaded so as not to exceed the rated current of the delta-connected winding. For instance, if the additional winding is rated at one-third of the rating of the winding in star connection, one of the neutral points may be loaded with the rated current of its winding. I9

IS : lO!ql - 1983

In the case of a winding in delta connection nally, the loading capability of the neutral points separately for each case of loading.
5.2.4 Star-Delta Connection or Delta-Star may be loaded with the rated current. 5.2.5 Star-zigzag Connection-The winding may be loaded as described

being loaded exterhas to be determined neutral point

Connection-The point of the

neutral in 5.2.1.

star-connection

5.3 Zigzag Connection-The neutral point of a winding in zigzag connection can be loaded with the rated current because the required counter-ampere-turns of the zero-phase-sequence system will be produced in the winding itself.
NOTE-In the event of the line-to-earth faults on the connected systems, the earthed neutral points of windings in star or zigzag connection carry fault currents, the intensity of which has to be considered when designing the windings, &Tossing the neutral bushings and dimensioning their connections to the windings. Calculation of fault currents flowing in the neutral points requires information as to the earthing conditions of the systems and their impedances, the possible locations where faults may &cur and the number of transformers connected in parallel. In the case of a transformer with two windings in star connection joining two earthed systems, the calculation of the currents has to be carried out separately for faults on each system. The possibility of a bushing flashover on a neutral point which is isolated should not be ignored.

6. CALCULATION OF VOLTAGE SPECIFIED LOAD CONDITION

DROP

( OR

RISE

) FOR

A

6.1 Two-Winding Transformers - The voltage drop ( or rise ) with load between no-load and rated symmetrical load of any assumed value and power factor ca'n be c lculated from the measurement of the shortvoltage circuit impedan$e (or, for h e principal tapping, of impedance at rated current) and the load loss [ see 16.4 of IS : 2026 ( Part 1 )1977* 1. 6.1.1 no-load Transformer Untapped voltage of a winding or Connected is assumed on the Principal Tapping-The to be its rated voltage : as percentage of rated of rated of transof rated

let uz = impedance voltage at rated currsnt voltage, consisting of components ;

u, = resistance

voltage at rated current as percentage voltage=Ioad loss as percentage of rated power former; .: voltage I-at rated current as percentage

uX = reactance voltage

*Specification

for power transformers:

Part 1 General

( Jirsl r&ion

/.

20

IS : 10561 - 1983
The voltage drop for an assumed fractional ( or rise ) as a percentage of the rated voltage, load value n and power-factor cos 4, is :

where u'd =ur cos 4 + u'9 =ur sin + u,. sin 4, and u, cos +. If

If ua is less than 20 percent, the third term may be ignored. ua is less than 4 percent, the second term may also be ignored.

6.X.2 Transformer Connected on a Tabping Other Than the Principal Tapping The no-load voltage of a winding is assumed to be its tapping voltage. For a given tapping the equation in 6.1.1 can be used to calculate the voltage drop (or rise) expressed as a percentage of the tap uzt, urt and ping voltage if uz, ur and uX are replaced by the quantities uxt respectively corresponding to that tapping :

uzt =
-where
<kt ut St -

100 &t

Aut"

short-circuit impedance given winding, tapping tapping voltage power

at this tapping and

related

to

a

= =

of this winding, to the tapping

ud is equal to the load loss related as a percentage of the tapping power I--

current

expressed

uxt =

2/ t& --

u:,

For calculating the fractional current should be the tapping current. 6.2 Three-Winding Transformers

value

n of the

load,

the reference

6.2.1 Application of Formulae-The formulae given above for twowinding transformers can be applied to three-winding transformers, and their voltage drop (or rise) calculated with an accuracy compara.ble to that of the data available by assuming the currents in the windings remain constant, both in magnitude and phase angle, even though the output terminal voltages change, due to voltage drop or rise, from their no-load values. 21

IS:10!561-

1983

On a three-winding transformer the open-circuit no-load voltage of a winding will change with current in the other windings ( even though it remains itself unloaded ) . Therefore the voltage drop (or rise) of a winding on a three-winding transformer is expressed with reference to its no-load voltage obtained from the voltage ratio. For the frequent case of two output windings (Ws and K's) and one input winding (WI), the voltage drop' (or rise) is usually required for three loading conditions, namely : w, only loaded; H's only loaded; both Ws and Ws loaded. For each condition, two separate figures should be quoted, that is, the voltage drop (or rise ) of each output winding Ws and Ws ( whether carrying current or not) for constant voltage supplied to the first Winding WI.
NOTE-The voltage drop (or rise) between W's and Ws relative to each ot_her for this simple and frequent case is implicit in the values WI to W, and WI to Ws, and nothing is gained by expressing it separately.

6.2.2 Data Required-The data required are the following quantities, determined for each pair of windings and related to the same basic apparent power ( S, ) which can conveniently be the tapping power ( rated power for the principal tapping ) of the winding of the lowest rating ( these data should be determined from the transformer as built ). a) Load loss corr&gonding after as w; b) Impedance tity U'zt u'st where ugEt,& impedance voltage as percentage of the given winding; at this tapping related to a = short-circuit impedance given winding; and voltage to the power & tapping) and designated herefollowing quan-

(firincipal
sb

or the

loo ><kt

7

Ut = tapping voltage of this winding. 22

IS

I

10561

-

1983

4

Resistance voltage ( principal tapping ) or the following u'tt.
u'fi 5

quantity

100 -

W

sb

4

Reactance U'&

voltage ( principal tapping ) or the following quantity

From the data an equivalent circuit is derived as shown in Fig. 4.

b2

a2
t

WP

Fro. 4

EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT
Transformer -

6.23 Equivalent Circuit for Three-Winding circuit is derived as follows :

The

equivalent

let aIs and bll be respectively the percentage resistance and reactance voltages, or more generally, the quantities u'* and u'd, referred to the basic power and obtained on a test, short-circuiting either winding WI or W, and supplying the other, with the third winding Ws on open circuit; let a63 and bm similarly apply to a test on the pair of windings and Ws ( with WI on open circuit ); let aal and ba similarly apply to a test on the pair of windings and WI ( with W, on open circuit ); let d = the sum ( 01s + am +. a31 ); letf = thesum(bls + bs3 + bn).
23 W,

Ws

IS : 10!%1- 1983
are : Then the mathematical al = a, = as = d/2 d/2 d/2 values to be inserted a,3 as1 all
bl = f/2 -

in the equivalent
bz3

circuit

arm WI

arm Ws
arm Ws

bs = bs =

f/2 - h f/2 - bl,

quantities may be negative or may even be zero ( depending on the actua1 physical relative arrangement of the windings on the core ). For the desired loading conditions, the power operative in each arm of the equivalent circuit is determined and the voltage drop ( or rise ) of each arm is calculated separately. The voltage drop ( or rise ) with respect to the terminals of any pair of windings is the algebraic sum of the voltage drops ( or rises ) of the corresponding two arms, of the equivalent circuit. 6.2.4 Detailed Procedure-The detailed procedure to case of two output windings and one supply winding mation, as f0llOWS : be followed in the is, as a first approxi-

It is to be noted that some of these mathematical

a) Determine the power in each winding corresponding to the loading being considered : for the output windings W, and Ws this is the specified loading under consideration; b) Deduce n, and ns where n is the ratio of the actual loading to' the basic power used in the equivalent circuit for each arm; and c) The input power of the winding WI should be taken as the vectorial sum of the outputs from the windings W, and Ws. The corresponding power-factor and quadrature factor ( sin 4 ) are deduced from the in-phase and quadrature components.

When greater accuracy is required in the determination of the apparent power of the winding WI, an addition should be made to the abovementioned vectorial sum, as follows : add to the quadrature component, to obtain the effective input power to winding WI the following quantities :

( the output power from winding

W, ) x - 4 100 Ws ) x

x -$F

% x ns

pIus ( the output power from winding

A still more accurate solution is obtained by adding the corresponding quantities (a x n x output power) to the in-phase component of the vectorial sums of the outputs, but the difference is rarely appreciable. 6.2.4.1 Method ofcaZcuZation--Apply the formula to each arm of the network taking separate values defined above. of 6.1.1 separately of n for each arm as

13 : 10561-1963 6.2.4.2 V&age drap ( OYyise )-To obtain the voltage drop ( or rise ) between the supply winding and either of the loaded windings, and the separate voltage drops (or rises) determined for the corresponding two arms, noting that one of these may be negative (note that the summation is algebraic, but not vectorial),
NOTE-A positive value for the sum determined indicates a voltage drop from no-load to the loading considered, while a negative value for the sum indicates a voltage rise.
Repeat the operation described above for the other loaded winding.

6.2.5 Su,b/dy to Two Winhings and output from division of loading

In the case of a supply to two windings one'winding, the above procedure can be applied if the between the two supplies is known.

6.2.6 Auto-Transformers-The above procedure is appIicabIe to autotransformers if the equivalent circuit is based on the effective impedances and load losses measured at the terminals of the auto-transformer. 7. LOSS CALCULATION TRANSFORMER 7.1 A method of calculation former is given in Appendix 8. INHERENT VOLTAGE OF A THREE-WINDING of winding B. losses for a three-winding trans-

REGULATION regulation of two and

8.1 A method of calculation of inherent voltage three winding transformers is given in Appendix C.

,APP-ENDIX

A

( Clauses 2.4 and 2.5 )
EXAMPLES CURRENT OF THE METHOD BASED AND MAXIMUM VOLTAGE EXAMPLE deliwith ON THE MAXIMUM OF EACH WINDING

A-l. FIRST

A-l.1 Step-down transformer supplied with a variable voltage and vering a variable power with a secondary voltage which increases the load. The transformer system : is assumed ranging to supply a 20 kV system from a from 107 kV to 123 kV; and

115 kV

a) applied voltage

25

IS : 10561- 1983 b) load conditions duties : A-1.1.1 Full-Current Duty I LV
-

ranging

between

the

two

following

extreme

1 600 A.

On-load LV voltage : 21 kV, which gives, after correction for the voltage drop, a `no-load voltage' equal to 22 kV (consequently, n varies from 123/22=5*591 to 107/22=4*864 and (lnv)maX = 1 000/4*864 8: 205.6 A). A-1.1.2 No Load Duty ILV = 0. LV voltage : 20 kV. ( n varies from 123/20 to 107/20, that is, from 6.15 to 5.35 ). For the intermediate duties; it will be sufficient to consider the halfcurrent duty ILv = 500 A. Corresponding c no-load ' LV. voltage : 21 kV. A-U.3 The six required quantities are now determined : First, the HV maximum voitage is : (U,v),, Then, the `no-load' duty gives : ha = 123/20 = 6.15. = 123 kV.

Then the full-current duty gives the values of the last four quantities : = 107122 = 4.864; 4 %dn b) (U~v)max = 22 kV; cl (ILV)max = 1 000 A and (InV) mai = whence a) the maximum voltage tapping : n, = 123/22 = 5.591; b) the maxlmum current tapping : q = 1 000/205*6 = 4.864 (this tapping is the same as the tapping with the minimum voltage ratio). From this the tapping quantities given in Table 3, are deduced except those between parenthesis, relating to the co1 2 `KA' and the line `principal tapping'. If the tappings are located on the high vohage winding if the principal tapping is the mean tapping n= 5.507, which is a full power tapping, the values between brackets can be calculated and Table 3 can be completed. Figure 5 is a graph illustrating Table 3. The table can be summarized as follows for specification purposes : I a) Rated power : 38 MVA; 26 205.6 A.

IS : 10561 - 1983

b) 4 4 e)

Rated

voltages

: 121.15 kV and 22.0
high voltage

kV; ( tapping range f 11.5

Tappings on percent ) ; Maximum Maximum

winding

voltage current

tapping tapping

: KA = 101.5 percent, and : extreme minus tapping.

The specification or the value of the previous values ) .

should also include the number of tapping positions, tapping step (this can lead to slight changes in the

TAB&E 3 EXAMPLE NO. 1 TAPPING QUANTITIES AS A FUNCTION THE VOLTAGE RATIO n AND OF THE TAPPING FACTOR K,. TAPPINGS ON THE HIGH VOLTAGE WINDING ( Clause A-l ) (Abbreviations
n

OF

KA*

VOLTAGES C--A--T

: Incr.=increases:
C--A--_

'

Decr.=decreases) CURRENTS POWER LV (6) A 1 000 (7) MVA 22.\r31-

'

HV (1) 4.aS4t

LV (4) kV 22

HV
(5) A 205'6

TAPPING DESICJNATION (6) Maximum current tapping Principal topping Maximum voltage : tapping

(2)
percent (88'5)

(3) kV bO7

1ncr.t (5*507)t 1ncr.t 5'591t

Incr. 100 Incr.

Incr. (121'15) Incr.

22 22 22 22

Deer. (181.6) Deer. 178.8

1 000 1 000 I 000 1 000

22 43F 22437 22 d3F 22437 Deer. 201/3-

(101.5)`123

Incr. 6'150

Incr. (111.5)

123 123

Deer. 20

Deer. 162.7

1 000 1 000

NOTE-The values between parenthesis are those which are known only after the principal tapping and the tapped winding have been chosen. *The mean tapping n=5*507, which is a full-power tapping, has been chosen as the principal tapping ( KA= 100 ). from a=4864 to n=5.591, are full-power tappings, tThe tappings ranging (o&v maximum and ILv maximum).

A-2.

SECOND

EXAMPLE

A-2.1 In the previous example, the `maximum current tapping' was the same as the extreme minus tapping. The second example corresponds to the case in which this `maximum current tapping' is distinct. Another difference from Example No. 1 is that the principal tapping cannot be the mean tapping because the latter is not a full-power tapping.

27

IS : 10561- 1983 The example chosen is a step-down transformer connecting a 400 kV system to a 132 kV system, supplied at a voltage varying from 380 kV to 420 kV and which has to be capable of delivering, at a voltage varying from 128 kV to 136 kV, a load between the two following limits :

A-2.1.1 Full Load Operation-The power absorbed at the primary terminals is 3C0 MVA. The voltage drop is 5.7 percent (8 kV) and consequently the LV `no-load' voltage ranges from 136 kV to 144 kV.
A-2.1.2 A-2.1.3

No-Load Operation-LV
The six required

voltage

ranging

from 128 kV to 136 kV.

quantities

are now determined

:

First ( U,,) max = 420 kV. The ` no-load The `full-load operation = operation' 3801144 = =

' gives :
3.281; gives the other four required 2.639; at 380 kV); at 136 kV). 420/144 1 273/456 = 2.917; = 2.792. and and values :

a) nmaX = 420/128

b) nmin
c) d) (&)m,,

=

(I~v)msx=

144 kV; 456 A (300 MVA 1 273 A (300 MVA

e) (4,~) max = whence: f) maximum g) maximum

: n, = current tapping : ni =

voltage

tapping

This gives, as a function of the voltage ratio, the tapping quantities of Table 4 except the values between parentheses of co1 2 ` K* ' and of the line ` principal tapping `. It is now assumed that the tapped winding is the HV winding. The mean tapping which corresponds to n=2.96 is not a full-power tapping. The closest full-power tapping is the ` maximum current tapping ' which corresponds to n-420/144=2*917. This tapping will be chosen as the principal tapping (np = 2.917). A-2.1.4 It is then possible to complete Table 4, Fig. 6 is a graph illustrating Table 4. The table can be summarised as follows for specification purposes : a) Rated b) power Rated voltages

: 31-8 MVA; : 420 kV and 144 kV;
9.5

C) Tappings on HV winding (tapping range+ 12.5 percent percent) ; d) Maximum voltage tapping : principal tapping; and e) Maximum current tapping

: K~=95*7 28

percent.

IS: The specification or the value of the previous values). A-3. A-3.1 THIRD

10561-1983

should also include the number of tapping positions tapping step ( this can lead to slight changes in the

EXAMPLE to more complex load conditions

Corresponding

:

The load conditions are as for Example No. 2 with the addition of a step-up condition with a reduced value of the power absorbed by the primary winding limited to 200 MVA. In this condition the LV applied voltage varies from 128 kV to 136 kV and the HV ` no-load voltage `, taking into an account a voltage drop of 4. percent, varies from 395 kV to 437 kV. In comparison with Example of the calculation are modified : No. 2, two of the six basic quantities

which increases and becomes 437 kV; a) (GIVE,, nmax, which increases and becomes 4371128. b) Figure 6 shows the curves of tapping voltage, current and power. They are identical to those of Example No. 2 for K* < 100 percent, but for Ic, > 100 percent divergences from Example No. 2 are shown by broken lines ( it has been assumed that the tapping n-420/144 was still used as the principal tapping ) . A-4. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION RELATING TO THE OF ` MAXIMUM CURRENT TAPPING ' OTHER THAN EXTREME TAPPINGS USi THE

A-4.1 Even in a case such as Example No. 1, it may be judicious to use, in the final specification of the tapping quantities, a ` maximum current tapping' other than an extreme tapping. In particular, if the extreme tapping is seldom used (for instance, if it has to be used only for extreme and rare system voltage conditions), it may be advisable to permit for this tapping a temperature rise slightly exceeding the guaranteed limit, by choosing another tapping as the `maximum current tapping' and thereby avoiding needless oversizing A-5. FOURTH EXAMPLE, CURRENTS OF AN SPECIFICATION OF AUTO-TRANSFORMER No. THE ( Fig. TAPPING 7 ) that the

A-5.1 This transformer

example is the same as Example is now an auto-transformer.

2 except

A-5.2 The simplest solution is to specify the same tapping currents as for the separate winding transformer. This leads to the curves S1 (thick lines) of Fig. 7 : the LV and series currents are the same as the LV and HV

29

IS t lOs61- 1983 currents of Table 4 and Fig. 6, the current in the common winding is equal to &-I eerresand increases when n increases.
TABLE 4 EXAMPLE NO. 2 - TAPPING QUANTITIES AS A FUNCTION 09 THJZ VOLTAGE RATIO II AND OF THE TAPPING FACTOR A-*. TAPPINGS ON THE HV WINDING ( Clause A-5 )
(Abbreviations
?I KA'

: Incr. = increases; Deer. - decreases)
CURRENT

VOLTAQE
-7 HV (3) kV 380 Incr. 402 LV (4) kV 144 144 144

r---? HV (5) A 456 456 456

PowxR LV (6) A 1200 Incr. 1 273 (7) MVA 300 Incr. 318t

TAPPINO DESIGNATIVE

(1)
2.639
Incr. 2*792t

(2) percent (90'5) Incr. (95.7)

(8)

Maximum current tapping

1ncr.t
2.917t

Incr. (100)

Incr. 420

144 144

Deer. 438

1 273 1 273

318t 318t Maximum voltage tapping and principal tapping

Incr.

Incr. (112'5)

420 420

Deer. 128

Deer. 388

1 273 1 273

Deer. 282

3.28 1

NOTE -The values between parenthesis are those which are known only after the principal tapping and the tapped winding have been chosen. *The mean tapping n = 2.96 is not a full-power tapping. The tapping chosen M the principal tapping is the full power tapping which is closest to the mean tapping (which is here the `maximum voltage tapping' ). tappings *The tappings ranging from a ES 2.792 to II = 2.917 are the full-power (UL~ and Zr,v maximum).

A-S.3 Considering the possible disadvantages of this solution : a) The tappings above n - 420/l 36 - 3.088 are intended for operation at reduced load (no-load for nmax) : see the thin lines marked `load'. Thus the real maximum value of Ioommon is 861 A and consequently the solution Sr, which gives 885 A, leads in theory to a needless oversizing of the transformer. 30

cc

a
--1-

$
p....--.--.....-+--------------
-..+.. . . -*..

g
G

}

.. ....... . . .. ........ -------

\ -""-"----"-`---&

s ......._ ----........----------------------- -~.-----.. ------- _ -- -- ------------ --"

8j

I

/:!'=-:"--"-"-<O' ~ :-----I

i'

(/-)1

I

~d

I 1

. . . . . . . .. ..----
q

\ .?. ... .-- --- ., . . . . . ......R..L.. ....-" ------030?

--
cn~

---

._._.. ....?- 1..
.
W cd

. M .-J WW

IS : 10561-

1983

The lines S, (broken lines), which differ from $1 for the abovementioned tappings, show a solution which would avoid this over-estimation of (laomme,Jmar, loomme,, being limited to 861 A, but would lead to more complicated current requirements. 4 Theoretically, the solution Ss is more appropriate to the autotransformer than Sr. However, the differences between $1 and Ss are small, 2.7 percent for (Icomm,,n)msx,and it can be judicious, in such a case, to use the same simple requirements as for a separate winding transformer. NOTE-with the solution S, the maximum temperature-rise of the common windingprobablyoccurs on the highest tapping ( n=ntaex ). With the solution S,, it

b)

probably occura on the tapping n 13.088,

beyond which Icommon is limited to 861 A.

APPENDXX ( Clause 7.1 )
LOSS CALCI/LATION

B

OF THREE-WINDING

TRANSFORMEZ

B-1. A three-winding transformer can have 3 separateo windings, nar?.~`iy~ high voltage winding (N), intermediate voltage winding (I), low v~~tagc winding (L) or two windings having a common part and a third iow voltage winding (auto-transformer). Single phase representation `-t tic two types is given in Fig. 8.

1

3-2. Load losses arr IT.. 1'. ir.g to 16.4 of IS : 21; !; : ?x* r a) Between H and .' (f.! :
*Specification for power ::a;!

' between win :iiss taken i: pa. c tc,, ;rit-1977* as belt ' II : -1 : Part 1 Cener,.. ( $r!l reuisro7!

i :

33

IS I 10!561- 1983 b) Between Z and L (PIjL) c) Between H and L (P=p) All loss measurements are converted to a common preferably of H. rated kVA base

L are separated out aslgiven below :
&I PI PL B-4. = -

B-3. Applying the principle of 3 winding, losses corresponding to ZZ, Z and t (&/I
) (&/I * i%,I~

+ PI/L + PHIL) + PI/L PI/L + + PHIL) PHIL) -

PI/L PIilL &III

Three winding losses are computed as under : p = pa (Rated kVA of H)s + p I (Base LVA) + pL (Rated kVA of L)g (B-A) (Rated kVA of I)8 (Base kVA)

APPENDIX C ( Clause 8.1 )
CALCULATION C-l. ' TWO WINDING OF INHERENT VOLTAGE REGULATION

TRANSFORMERS

C-1.1 The inherent voltage regulation from no-load to a load of any assumed value and power factor may be computed from the impedance voltage and corresponding load loss measured with rated current in the windings as follows : Let Z == rated current in winding excited; rated voltage of winding excited; (impedance

E
Z 80 &se Pm ,?&o

-

a current measured in winding excited; - voltage ' measured across winding excited voltage); - watts measured across winding excited; reactance
Voltage =

J

Eaeao

_

_

P@C a-

Zaa

;

P

-

Pea corrected to 75"C, and from current Zsc to Z; 34

Ex E,

= +;

Exsa .+;
80

Ex% = 100 EJE;
Er% n III P 100 E,/E; I& and current in the winding excited during the short circuit test corresponding to that obtained when loading at the assumed load on the output side and with rated voltage on the input side. the percentage regulation is

C-l.2 For rated load at unity power factor, approximately equal to :
E,% +

( E=% 1' (200)
( E& cos 9 - Es% sin 4 )s 200

C-l.3 For rated load at any power factor cos 4, the percentage regulation is approximately equal to :

W,

~0s # +

J%% sin ++

C-l.4 For any assumed load other than rated load and unity power factor, the percentage regulation is approximately equal to :

C-l.5 For any assumed load other than rated load and at any _power factor cos 4, the percentage regulation is approximately equal to : n.E,% cos 4 f n.E,% sin 4 + C-l.6 The above formulae covered by this specification. C-2. THREE WINDING are ( n. E,O/, cos +n.E,O/, 200 accurate sin 4 )' for transformers

sufficiently

TRANSFORMERS

for two-winding transformers can be applied to three-winding transformers, and their regulation calculated with an accuracy comparable to that of the data available, by assuming that the currents in the windings remain constant both in magnitude and phase angle even through the output terminal voltages change, due to the regulation, from their no-load values.

C-2.1 The formulae given in C-l

35

18-i 10361~ - 1983
On a three winding transformer the no-load voltage of a winding will change with current in the other windings (even though it remains itself unloaded). Therefore, the voltages regulation of a winding on a three-winding transformer is expressed with reference to its no-load open-circuit terminal voltage when only one of the other windings is supplied and the third winding is on no-load, that is the basic voltage for each winding and any combination of loading is the line no-load voltage obtained from its turns ratio. For the frequent case of two output windings (W, and W$ and one input winditig (WI) the voltage regulation is usually required for three loading conditions, namely :

Only W, loaded, Only Ws loaded,
Both

and

W, and W, loaded.

For each condition two separate figures should be quoted, that is the regulation of, each output.winding W, and W, (whether carrying current or not) for constant voltage supplied to the winding WI. and frequent case is si'mplicit in the values is gained by expressing it separately.
NoT+The regulation b&ween Ws and Ws relative to each other for this simple ( WI to Ws ) and ( W, to W3 ) and nothing

C-2.2 The data. required are the impedance voltage and load IOSS~S derived by testing the three windings in pairs and expressing the results on a basic kVA, which can conveniently be the rated kVA of the smallest winding. It should be determined from the transformer as built. `From C-2.3 the data, an equivalent circuit circuit is derived as shown in Fig. 4.

The equivalent Let

is derived

as follows :

aIll and ble be respectively the percentage resistance and reactance voltage referred to the base kVA and contained on a test, short-circuiting either winding WI and W, atid supplying the other, with the third winding Ws on open circuit; ass and bls similarly apply to a test on the winding and Ws (with WI on open circuit); us1 and WB and f=the pair Ws

:
Il

WI (with W+J on open circuit);
and

bsl similarly

apply to a test on the pair of windings

d= the sum (all t u3s-;us1);
sum (bl,fb~+bbS1). 3'6

3s : 10561* 1983 Then the mathematical
h

are :

values to be inserted in the equivalent circuit
ass, and b1 = f/2 bgg

WI al = d/2 -

Arm W, aa = d/2 - asl, a+ bs = f/2 Arm W, a3 = d/2 - ala, ani!l bs = f/2 -

bar
61%

It is to be noted that some of these mathematical values may be negative or may even be zero (depending on the actual physical relative arrangement of the windings on the core). For the desired loading conditions the kVA operative in each arm of the equivalent circuit is determined and the regulation of each arm is calculated separately. The regulation with respect to the terminals of any pair of windings is the algebraic sum of the regulations of the corresponding two arms of the equivalent circuit. C-2.4 The detailed procedure to be followed in the case of two output windings and one supply winding is as follows : 4 Determine the kVA in each winding corresponding to the loading being considered.

b)

4

For the output windings W, and Ws, this is the specified loading under consideration; deduce nl and n3, where n is the ratio of the actual loading to the base kVA used in the equivalent circuit. For the input winding WI, kVA should be taken as the vectorial sum of the outputs from W, and Ws windings, and the corresponding power factor and quadrature factor (sin 4) deduced from the in-phase and quadrature components.

C-2.5 When greater accuracy is required, an addition should be made to the above vectorial sum of the outputs as follows : Add to the quadrature kVA to winding WI; component, to obtain the effective input

(output kVA from winding W,) x -&

x n2+
WxbsXn
100 *

( output kVA from winding Ws ) loading network.
n for each arm being the ratio of the magnitude

of the actual kVA of the winding to the base kVA employed in determining the

A more accurate solution is obtained by adding the corresponding quantities (a x n x output kVA) to the in-phase component of the vectorial sums of the outputs, but the difference is rarely appreciable. 37

IS : 10561- 1983
C-2.6 Apply the final formula of C-l.5 separately to each arm of network, taking separate values of n for each arm as defined in C-2.5.

the

C-2.7 To obtain the regulation between the input winding and either of the loading windings, add the separate regulations determined under C-2.6 for the corresponding two arms, noting that one of these may be negative. ' ( Note that the summation is algebraic, and not vectorial ).
NOTE - A positive value for the sum determined indicates a voltage drop from no-load to the loading considered, while a negative value for the sum indicates a voltage rise.

C-2.8 Repeat winding.

the operation

described

in C-2.7

for the

other

loaded

C-2.8.1 The above procedure is applicable to auto-transformers if the equivalent circuit is based on the effective impedances measured at the terminals of the auto-transformer.
can be ing, the above procedure between the two supplies is known. C-2.8.3 ExamHe of A#ication

C-2.8.2

In the case of input to two windings and load from one windapplied if the division of loading

to a Three-Winding

Transformer :

Assume that :
WI is a 66 kV primary winding, Ws is a 33 kV output winding

loaded at 2 000 kVA having power factor cos 4 of 0.8 lagging, and W, is a 11 kV output winding loaded at 1 000 kVA having power factor cos + of O-6 lagging.

a a

The following information is available, having been calculated test data and is related to a base kVA of 1 000 : al9 = 0.26 b II = 3.12 as = 0.33 b$9 = l-59 asI = 0.32 bS1 = 5.08 It can be deduced that d = O-91, andf - 9.79 It follows, therefore, that for arm WI, al = 0.125 and bl - + 3.305 arm W,, al - 0.135 and be = - O-185 arm Ws, as = O-195 and b9 = + 1.775
The effective full load input kVA to winding W, loaded WI is :

from

a) With only output winding

= 2 COO kVA at power factor 0.8 lagging

38

IS :10561-1963
b) With only output winding W3 loaded = 1 000 kVA at power factor @6 lagging c) With both output windings W, and = 2 980 kVA at power factor @74 lagging. W3 loaded Applying the formula of C-l.5 separately to-each arm of the network we have for the regulation of that arms alone.
WI under condition

(a) where nl = 2.0

is -+ 4.30 percent

WI under condition (b) where nr - 1.0 is + 2.74 percent WI under condition (c) where nr = 2.98 is + 7.15 percent
Ws Ws Therefore For condition unloaded. where ns = 2.0 is 0.005 percent where ns = 1 *O is + l-54 percent the total transformer regulation is : (a) With output winding

W,

fully

loaded

and

Wa

At terminals WB = 4.30 At terminals pa;eydition
0

0.005 = 4.295 percent

Ws = 4.30 + 0 = 4.30 percent.
output winding

(b)-With

W, unloaded

aad

Ws fully

At terminals W, = 2.74 + 0 = 2.74 percent At terminals W, = 2.74 + l-54 = 4.28 percent For condition (c)-With both output windings W, and W, loaded : 0.005 = 7.145 percent = 8.69 percent.

At terminals WI = 7.15 -

At terminals Wn = 7.15 + 1.54

39

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

thadqllutem: ManakBhavan,9 Bahadur Shah Zafaf Marg, NEW DELHI-1 10002 Tetetphones : 33101 31
331 1375 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephone 33101 31 331 1375 `Eastern : .1/14 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 70005437 86 62 693843 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 169 022 23523 16 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 690113 TWestern : Manakelaya, E9 MIDC, Mard, Andheri (East), BOMBAY 499093 832 92 95 Rqplonelomcee: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110902 Bmch OMcee: `Pushpek', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 SPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangaiore-Tumkur Road,, BANGALORE 660958 Gangotrl Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 21 Satyanagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751097 Kalaikathir Building, 6/48 Avanashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex. 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 291091 53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 C856C L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampatty Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 R 14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 1171418 B Satvodaya Nagar. KANPUR 298905 Seth Bhawan. 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, LUCKNOW 226091 Patiiputra lndustriai Estate, PATNA 800013 C/o Smt. Sunlta Mirakhur,, 66 D/C Annexe, Gandhi Nagar, JAMMU TAWI 180004 T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., P&yam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695934 /nspcffon Offkes(With Sale Point): Pushpanjaii, 1stfloor, 205-A, West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers (India) Building 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 * Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, CALCUTTA 700072 tSales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, BOMBAY 400007 *Sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, BANGALORE 560002

30 1348 39 49 55 55 40 21 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8-71 1996 54 11 37 20 1'0 83 38 1374 21 68 76 23 89 23 26 23 05

6 21 17

525171 32 36 35 *:

27 99 65 309 65 28 223971

Printed at Printograph, Karol Bagh, New Delhi.

