( Reaffirmed 2001 )

U DC 621`317'39 : 621'039.564

1s : 11796-1985 IEC Pub 295 (1969)

SPEClFlCATlON (IEC Title

FOR DC PERIODMETERS : DC Periodmeters : Characteristics and Test Methods)

Natiolaal Foreword This Indian Qandard, which is identical with IEC Pub 29.5 (1969) `DC Periodmeters : Characteristics and Test Methods' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the recommendation of., the Nuclear Instrumentation Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. Wherever the words `International Standard'. Stand&' appear referring to this standard, they should be read

as `Indian

Cross References In this Indian Sfandard, the respective places *he ~following: following International Standards are referred to. Read in their

International Starldurd
IEC Pub

Corresponding India)] Standard used IS : 11600-1985 Index of electrical measuring apparatus used in connection with ionizing radiation

1X1(1964) Index of electrical measuring in connection with ionizing radiation

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this Indian Standard has reviewed the provisions of the following IEC standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard.
IEC Pub 231 (1967) General

principles

of nuclear

reactor

instrumentation. reactor instrumentation. while adopting it in

IEC

Pub 232 (1966) General language

characteristics

of nuclear

Only the English this Indian Standard.

text of the International

Standard

has been retained

Adopted 28 August 1985

-@I April 1987, BIS I
I

Gr

8

BUREAU
hlANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

CONTENTS
Page

INTRODUCTION

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

SECTION ONE CIWSC 1. Scppe

GENERAL

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SECTION Two 2.

-

ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS

3. 4.

D.C.log amplifier. ................................ Time derivative unit ................................ .................................... Periodmetrr

4 7 9

SECTION THREE 5. 6. 7. 8. .......................... General standard test conditions ................................. D.C. log amplifier Time derivative unit ................................ ................................... Periodmeter

TEST METHODS 11
11

14 16

APPENDIX -

Under

consideration

. . . . . . . . . . .

. .

. . . . . .

. . . . . .

.I8

IS : 11796-1985 IEC Pub 295 (1969)

INTRODUCTION a) Interpretation of this Recommendation

The moods

of verbs used in this Recommendation

have the following

implications:

Mandatory -

In English:

"shall"

or "must".

Recommendation -

In English:

"should".

Acceptable -

method,

example

of good practice

In English:

"may".

Alternatively,

the item may be titled

"Acceptable

method"

or "Example

of good practice".

6)

Terminology

In this Recommendation, conditions to be supplied by the manufacturer

required by the user are termed is termed "given" or "stated".

"specified"

and information

SECTION Scope

ONE

-

GENERAL

The aim of the present Recommendation is to establish recommendations concerning the particular characteristics and test methods of d.c. periodmeters. (General characteristics and principles are given in IEC Publications 231, General Principles of Nuclear Reactor Instrumentation, and 232, General Characteristics of Nuclear Reactor Instrumentation.)

A periodmeter is an "electronic sub-assembly which, in association with one or more detectors, is used to indicate the time constant (period) of a nuclear reactor. Its indication may be given in units of time-constant, doubling time, decades per minute, etc." (IEC Publication 181, Index of Electrical Measuring Apparatus used in connection with Ionizing Radiation, definition 305020.)

IS : 11796-1985 IEC Pub 295 (1969)
In particular, detector to : on a logarithmic an indication scale the neutron flux Q, of a nuclear T determined reactor; of the form: measure provide the d.c. periodmeter is a sub-assembly used in combination with a radiation

of the time constant

(period)

by an equation

1 .T where : @O is a constant with dimension considered of neutron flux. consists essentially of:

The periodmeter -

in this Recommendation

a d.c. log amplifier with a voltage output, including possibly a preamplifier and connecting cable. In the following, this assembly is treated as a unit and termed "amplifier"; a time derivative unit with a voltage output.

-

SECTION 2. 2.1 .D.C. log amplifier

TWO

-

ELECTRICAL

CHARACTERlSTlCS

Principle A d.c. log amplifier voltage : is a basic function unit which, for an input current b, develops an output

v2 = A4 loglo r,
where: A is a constant lo is the input expressed current in volts per decade of the input current which produces a zero output detector: voltage. it should be proportional

11

0)

The current Ir is the output of a radiation to which the detector is subjected.

to the flux @

2.2

Measurement

range

The measurement range of a d.c, log amplifier is defined by the limits of the input current between which the instrument conforms to the specifications hereafter. The range is expressed by these limit values: Zim minimum hill maximum input input current; current, Vsm and VZM correspond. of output yoltage. TO a

to which the output

voltages

The errors associated with the log amplifier are given in terms small variation AZ, corresponds a variation AI's such that: AI -=---Z 1 A AI'2 logroe

4

1s : 11796-1985 IEC Pub 295 (1969)
2.3 Static error signal Vz and the input signal

The static error is defined by the difference between the output expressed ih terms of a calculated output voltage Vzl. The static error is expressed in per cent by the equation:
I/:2 '

v2:

Eha.

=:

100 ----y

where : VP is the measured V21 is co..~puted output voltage (1). when 1~ is the input current

from equation

2.4

Response

time time of a log amplifier is the time taken by the output change in the output signal to attain, for the

The response first time,

90% of the final value of the incremental

the instant of addition of an input current step of 9 ZI to an initial The input time shall be stated for each decade of the input current. particular its capacitance, shall be those specified under test methods Recommendation.

voltage measured from value of 4. This response circuit characteristics, in in Section Three of this

2.5

Dynamic

error error is defined as the maximum value attained by the ratio:

The dynamic

AVz __
A where : Ar/, is the difference between the output signal and the input signal expressed in units of output voltage when the input current Zl varies according to an exponential law:

where : IQ, is the initial T, current of the injected is expressed signal.

is the time constant The dynamic error

in per cent by:

Av2 E,l, = 100 I_

A The input circuit characteristics, test methods in Section Three. in particular

I max shall be those specified under

its capacitance,

The dynamic error shall be stated, in particular for the current &, = Zlrn and for Ts = TM which is the time constant corresponding to the extreme of the periodmeter measurement range for positive periods.

IS : 11796-1985 IEC Pub 295(1969)
2.6 Amplitude of output signal Jiuctuation of output signal due to purely fluctuation electronic causes electronic causes, expressed in

The amphtud.e

d.ue to purely SVZ

per cent, is d.efined by: F, where : 6Vr is the maximum peak-to-peak deviation of the output signal, when The value of 6Ve shall be determined I, is injected by a d.c. generator. period of observation, which shall be stated. lnput methods circuit in Section input characteristics, Three. of output current values signal fluctuation due to purely electronic and, in particular, for In,, and 1111. causes shall be statec in particular its capitance, shall be those an input current after a reasonable specified under tesi -= 100 A

The amplitude for several 2.7 DriJi

The drift, expressed temperature by :

in per cent, is defined for a constant AVz D, == 100 ~ A

input current

and a constant

ambien

where : AVz is the difference between the maximum and minimum values of the recorded output signal when an input current 11 is injected by a d.c. generator. Drift measurement 2.8 Oli:put shall be stated per hour, per 24 h and per week after a warm-up time range limit values /rm and 11~1. average and for

variation

due to temperature due to iemperature, expressed A Ve v,, == 100 A in per cent. is defined for a constant

input

The output variation current by:

where : AVe is the difference between the maximum and minimum values of the recorded output signal, when an input current 11 is injected by a d.c. generator and the ambient ature is changed within specified limits. Test conditions Output variation 11~ and II M. 2.9 Output variation due to maim variation voltage voltage, expressed by: AV? V IL&~~ 100 where : AV2 is the difference between the maximum and minimum values signal, when an input clrrrent /I is injected by a d.c. generator changed within specified limits. The output II,,, and II &I. variation due to mains voltage shall be stated
and

average temper-

shall be given,

particularly shall

input

circuit

characteristics. range limit values

due to temperature

be stated

for measurement

The output input current

due to mains ambient

in per cent, is defined

for a constant .

and a constant

temperature

A of the recorded average the mains voltage is range limits

for meltsurement

6

IS : 11796-1985 IEC Pub 295 (1969)
2.10 Output rnriatiorz due to mains frequency Same as Sub-clause 2.9, but the mains frequency is changed within specified limits.

2.1!

Output variation due to load The output currents impedance than shall be such that the accuracy a specified value. to the output shall be stated. specifications are met for all load

no greater

The maximum

capacitance

which may be connected

U n&r

consideration.

3 ..

Time

derivative

unit

3.1

Prifrciplr A time derivative unit develops an output voltage V3 which is proportional 01` the input k,oltage C'Z_ according to the equation: to the time deri-

vati\e

(2)
where : k is a coefficient with the dimension signal for a constant of time and a specified input signal (infinite tolerance of periodmeter).

F's0 is the output

period

3.2

Measfiremwi

tmge

The limits of the meastlrement by the term:

range of a time derivative

unit are the extreme values expressed

dV2 dt of equation (2). signal is a voltage proportional by T,,, and TN. to the extreme periods. 07 the periodmeter measurement range to the inverse of the period l/T, the measurement

If the output range is expressed

TM is the time constant corresponding for positive periods and T,, for negative

7

IS : 1179619$5 IEC Pub 295 (1969)
3.3 Response time and overshoot time of a time derivative unit is the time taken by the output signal to attain,

The response

for the first time, 90% of its final value measured from the instant to at which the linearily rising The amount of overshoot beyond the final amplitude of the voltage is injected at its input. output signal shall be stated in per cent of this amplitude. If the response time and overshoot beyond the final amplitude of the output signal are functions value

of the slope of the rising voltage injected at the time derivative unit input and of its initial they shall be stated as such and their maximum values shall be given.

3.4

Amplitude

of output signal jktuation of output signal

due to purely fluctuation,

electronic

causes is defined by:

The amplitude

expressed

in per cent,

w,here : &b's is the maximum peak-to-peak deviation of the output signal with the time aerivative unit input terminated in a specified impedance typical of the log amplifier output impedance

V'~JIis the output

voltage

corre>ponding

to limit T&l of the measurement duration of observation

range.

fiV3 is determined 3.5 Drift The drift, expressed temperature by:

after a reasonable

which shall be stated.

in per cent, is defined for a constant
AV3

input signal and a constant

ambient

Dd = where: AVs is the difference dutput signal V3al is the output Drift between

loOV3ni

the maximum

and

minimum

values

of the

recorded

average

voltage

corresponding per hour,

to limit TM of the measurement

range. time.

shall be stated

per 24 h and per week after a warm-up

3.6

Output

variation due to temperuture due to temperature, expressed in per cent, is defined for a constant

The output variation input signal by:

AV3 VQj =

100 -~v3 TV1

where : AV3 is the difference between the maximum and minimum values of the recorded output signal when the ambient temperature is changed within specified limits V3nf is the output Te t conditions voltage and, corresponding in particular, to limit TM of the measuremedt the input circuit characteristics range. shall be stated. average

8

IS : 11796-1985 IEC Pub 295 (1969)
3.7 Output variation due to mains voltage variation due to mains ambient voltage, expressed by: in per cent, is defined * for a constant

The output input signal

and a constant

temperature

AV3

where: and minimum AVs is the difference between the maximum output signal when the mains voltage is changed within
V3M

values specified

of the limits

recorded

average

is the output Test conditions

voltage and,

corresponding in particular,

to limit the input

TM of the measurement circuit characteristics

range. shall be stated.

3.8

Output

variation due to mains frequency 3.7, but the mains frequency is changed within specified limits,

Same as Sub-c!ause

3.9

Output

variation

due to load specifications are met for all load

The output impedance shall be such that the accuracy currents not greater than a specified value. ~The maximum capacitance which may be connected

to the output

shall be stated.

3.10

Output

variation

due to humidity

Under

consideration.

4.

Periodmeter

4.1

Princjple A d.c. periodmeter equation : is a sub-assembly which gives an output signal VZ determined by the

k A log,,,e
v3 = + v3()

T

(3)

when the input

current

Zt varies according

to an exponential

law:

9

IS : 11796-1985 IEC Pub 295 (1969)

The response time of a per:odmetrr is the time taken by the output signal of the time derivative unit to attain for the first time, 90 >( of its tinal value after iri,jection of an input current It according to the law:

where : h r, is a stated initial current (period) of the injected signal overshoot signal shall be stated.

is the time constant The amplitude

of the output

If response time and overshoot are functions of initial current It,, or period T., they shall They shall be stated in particular for initial current values /I,, lower than be stated as such. range of the log amplifier and for periods bctwcen 7-11 the minimum fr m of the measurement and 10 TM. Input circuit characteristics and, in particular, the capacitance shall be given.

4.3

Response

to a fast-rising

transient input signal

The response to a fast-rising transient input signal of a periodmeter is defined for positive periods shorter than TJ~ in terms of the delay introduced by the periodmeter in reaching the limit Tl, of the measurement range after the injection of an input current whose variation is given by:

where 11, and

TS are specified. signal versus time during the transient until recovery

The form of the curve of the output shall be given.

4.4

Amplitude

of output signal jluctuation

due to purely

electrottic

causes

The amplitude of output signal fluctuation of a periodmeter due to purely electronic causes. expressed in per cent, is defined for a constant input current, a constant mains voltage and a constant ambient temperature by:

BV3 F, =

100 ~--v3 >I

where:
h`V3 is the maximum

peak-to-peak

deviation

of the output

signal to the limit Tar of the period-

Vaar is the maximum value of the output meter measurement range.

signal and corresponds

The amplitude of output signal fluctuation shall be stated for several input current values and, in particular, for Zrm and for zero input current. input circuit characteristics and, in particular, the capacitance shall be stated.

10

IS : 11796-1985 JEC Pub 295 (1969)

SECTION

THREE

-

TEST

METHODS

5.

General standard test conditions

5.1

Influence

conditions periodmeter

Unkss specified otherwise, it is necessary that the tests on the units and complete shall be conducted so as to show that the characteristics are maintained: -

when ambient temperature varies from + 10 `C to i- 45 "C (relative humidity between 45 % and 75%), although reduced performance may be acceptable between the wider limits 0 `C and + 55 "C; from an a.c. mains with voltage variations from - 12 % to + 10% of the nominal or from a d.c. mains with voltage variations from - 5% to + 15 y0 of the nominal with maximum output current. value, value;

-

The actual atmospheric conditions shall be stated on the test sheet. In conformity with good practice, they shall not be subject to large or rapid variations during a series of measurements. A practical method to avoid such variations is to place the instrument in a climatic chamber at constant temperature of i- 30 "C.

5.2

Warm-up time Measurements shall be carried out after a period of continuous operation at least equal to If not specified, the warm-up time shall be 1 h for instruments that stated by the manufacturer. using electronic tubes and 30 min for other instruments.

5.3

P&lion The test position shall be that of normal use.

6.

D.C. log amplifier

All the tests described below shall be performed with a capacitance The value of this capacitance shall be stated for each measurement. A and I, constants The test begins after a warm-up time.

in parallel

with the input.

6.1

The input current is obtained from a low noise current generator, whose accuracy than & 2% for currents greater than lo-l1 A and & So/, for currents less than lo-" test, the calibration currents are supplied by the generator. The d.c. log amplifier is adjusted with calibrated currents, noting accurately

is no worse A. In this

the output voltage.

11

IS : 11796-1985 IEC Pub 295 (1969)
Output decade. For example, ordinate, coordinate points (II, v,>"may be plotted the functional using a logarithmic relation: abcissa and linear and a straight line representing voltages V2 are measured corresponding to applied input currents Zr at least each

I1

is drawn

within

the norma'

measurement

range

of the amplifier.

FIGURE 1

The constant

A, in volts per decade,

is equal

to the slope of the straight

line:

A=--

AVz
Woglo

11)

A ~may be positive The straight

or negative.

line is extrapolated value

to its intersection

with the h axis.

The corresponding

of Zl is la.

6.2

Measurement

range

and static error

Same test method

as in Sub-clause

6.1. quantity and VZI corresponds 2.3. to a point on the straight

Voltage VZ corresponds to the measured line for an input current Zr. Static error is calculated

as given in Sub-clause

The accuracy of an internal calibration current, Zc, is measured by comparing the output voltage Vc, corresponding to Zc, with the output voltage VS, corresponding to a standard current, Is, obtained from a high accuracy standard current generator. Calibration current accuracy is calculated as given in Sub-clause 2.3.

12

IS : 11796-1985 IEC Pub 295 (1969)
6.3 Response time The input current 9 Zr, added to the initial value Zr, is injected at a given instant. is measured as given in Sub-clause 2.4. The response time shall be stated for each decade of input current. Measurement may be made using a high-speed recorder or oscilloscope. In the case of addition of a very low current step (by resistance), it is necessary to ensure that the effects of parasitic capacitance do not affect the measurement. In this test method, the characteristics of input signal injected in practice and the injecting device, if any, shall be stated. 6.4 Dynamic error The current Zr is injected according to the exponential law given in Sub-clause 2.5. The output signal is recorded, for example, with a high-speed recorder. The dynamic error is calculated as given in Sub-clause 2.5. 6.5 Amplitude of output signal fluctuation due to purely electronic causes The input current Zr is obtained from a low noise current generator. The peak-to-peak amplitude 8Ve of the amplifier output signal is measured, for example, with an oscilloscope sensitive from zero frequency to several megahertz, and a normal spot brilliancy. The amplitude of output signal fluctuation is calculated as given in Sub-clause 2.6. The time

6.6

Drift The input current Zr is obtained from a low noise current generator with stability equal to 1% or better. Drift measurement of the d.c. log amplifier is performed at an ambient temperature of 30 & 2 "C and begins after a warm-up time at this temperature. The amplifier shall be off for at least 24 h prior to warm-up. Amplifier output signal variation AVa may be measured, for example, with a millivolt recorder. The drift is calculated as given in Sub-clause 2.7.

6.7

Output variation due to temperature Same test method as for drift but the temperature is varied from 25 `C to 35 OC and from 10 `C to 45 "C. Prior to each output signal measurement, the temperature shahbe- held constant for at least half an hour. The output variation due to temperature is calculated as given in Sub-clause 2.8.

6.8

Output variation due to mains voltage Same test method as for drift, but the mains voltage is varied within limitsspecified in Sub-clause 5.1; dynamic effects are neglected. Output' variation due to mains voltage is calculated as given in Sub-clause 2.9.

13

IS : 11796-1985 IEC Pub 295(1969)
6.9 Output variation due to mains frequency Same test method nominal value. variation due to mains frequency is calculated as given in Sub-clause 2.10. Output as for drift, but the mains frequency is varied % 2% about its specified

6.10

Output variation due to -load Same test method maximum Output value. impedance value is: AV A(load Output variation due to humidity Under consideration. current) as for drift, but the output load current is varied from 0% to 100 % of its

Za =

6.11

7.

Time derivative unit

7.1

k and VjO constants

The input voltage is injected with a ramp voltage generator whose accuracy shall be no worse than & 2%, and output voltages corresponding to rising voltages with rates of change within limits of normal operation of the unit are measured. For example, the coordinates:

may be plotted using linear coordinates. given in Sub-clause 3.1 is then drawn The constant

The straight line, representing the functional within the measurement range of the unit. line and V30 is the ordinate

relation at:

(2)

k is equal to the slope of the straight

d'z -dt

x2=

0

7.2

Measurement range Same test method Negative as in Sub-c!ause limit values 7.1. dVz of dt as defined in Sub-clause 3.2 are noted.

and positive

1s : 1C796-1985 IEC Pub 295 (1969)
7.3 Response time and overshoot In the general case where the response value and the rate of change each initial The time derivative of constant For example, The response output time of the time derivative the corresponding selected. to an adjustable initial value. recorder. initial voltage and a ramp voltage unit depends output on the initial for of the input voltage, curve is plotted

value and for each rate of change unit input is connected for each different signal rate is injected

may be recorded are obtained

with a high-speed

time and overshoot

from this recording.

Final

amplitude

lOO%--

-

-

-

-

---------

Response time FIGURE 2 7.4 Amplitude of output signal J-luctuation due to purely electronic causes

Time t

The peak-to-peak amplitude 8Vs of the output signal of the time derivative unit, whose input shall be connected to an impedance equal to the output impedance of the log amplifier, may be measured, for example, with an oscilloscope sensitive from zero frequency to several megahertz and a normal spot brilliancy. The amplitude 7.5 Dr$t The drift measurement of the time derivative unit is performed at an ambient temperature of 30 f 2 "C and begins after a warm-up time at this temperature. The time derivative unit shall be off for at least 24 h prior to warm-up. The input of the time derivative impedance of the log amplifier. The output signal variation unit shall be connected to an impedance equal to the output recorder. of output signal fluctuation is calculated as given in Sub-clause 3.4.

AVs may be measured, 3.5.

for example,

with a millivolt

The drift is calculated 7.6

as given in Sub-clause

Output variation due to temperature Same test method as for drift, but the temperature is varied from 25 "C to 35 *C and from Prior to each output signal measurement, the temperature shall be held constant 10 `C to 45 "C. for at least half an hour. Output variation due to temperature is calculated as given in Sub-clause 3.6.

IS : 11796-1985 IEC Pub 295 (1969)
7.7 Output variation due to mains voltage but the mains voltage is varied as specified in Sub-clause 3.7.

Same test method 5.1; dynamic Output variation

as for drift, due to mains

effects are neglected. vo';tage is calculated as given in Sub-clause

7.8

Output

variation

due to mains frequency as for drift, but the mains due to mains frequency frequency is varied & 2",!, about its specified 3.8.

Same test method nominal value. Output variation

is calculated

as given in Sub-clause

7.9

Output

variation

due to load to T,,, and T&f, the

Same test method as for drift, but, with output voltages corresponding output load current is varied from 0% to 100% of its maximum value.

Output

impedance

value

is:

AV & = A(load current)

7.10

Output

variution

due to humidity

Under

consideration.

8.

Periodmeter All the tests described below are performed with the same capacitance in parallel with the input of the log amplifier and the value of this capacitance shall be stated with each measurement.

Tests may be carried

out with several

capacitance

values.

8.1

Noise measurement

without

radiation

(without JEux,)

The input of the amplifier, or preamplifier when it exists, is connected to a low noise current generator able to supply decade currents within the over-all d.c. log amplifier range.

The high vottage supplies are each connected to the input-plug collector electrode by a capacitor equal to the detector interelectrode

pin corresponding capacitance.

to the

16

IS : 11796-1983 IEC Pub 295 (196))
8.2 Noise measurement with radiation (with flux) when it exists, is connected to a neutron ionization considered,

The input of the amplifier,

or preamplifier

chamber having given characteristics and whose type, consistent shall be stated with the test results.

with the periodmeter

This chamber is irradiated by a stated neutron flux such that it is able to operate in the first Moreover the neutron source used shall not induce fluctuations decade of the d.c. log amplifier. which would increase the shot effect of the detector. For each of the two previous tests, the peak-to-peak sensitive noise voltage of the output may be megahertz

measured, for example, with an oscilloscope and a normal spot brilliancy. Equivalent period noise is.calculated

from zero frequency

to several

by the formula: 2 k A log,,e & --_I~__ h\Vz

T =

where : 8V3 is the peak-to-peak noise voltage.

'

8.3

Response

time and overshoot current given in Sub-clause 4.2 is injected into in stand-by position with initial current Zr,. output may be connected, for example, is increased the input of the d.c. log

The exponential amplifier previously The periodmeter

to a d.c. oscilloscope. in decades and the operator notes,

Starting from ZrO = Irm the initial current for several values of T,, from TM to 10 TM: a) b) 8.4 the time taken if overshoot to fast by the output signal

to attain

90% of its stable final value; expressed as a percentage of final amplitude.

appears,

the value of the overshoot input signal

Response

rising transient

The exponential current given in Sub-clause 4:3 and covering a range OP three decades is injected into the input of the d.c. log amplifier previously in stand-by position with initial current II,, The periodmeter Starting from:
Ilo =

output

may be connected,

for example,

to a recorder.

1o-2

Il,

the transient until recovery is recorded for a value of T, = 0.1 TM. increased in one decade increments -and the measurement is repeated.

The

starting

current

is

The response time is the time taken by the output signal to reach the end of the measurement range, T&I, and is measured from the time when the exponential current is injected. The recovery time is the time taken by the output signal to return to the beginning of the measurement range (infinity) and is measured from the time when the exponential current generator is stopped.

17.

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 11796-1985 IEC Pub 295 (1969)

APPENDIX

EXAMPLIZS OF PERIODMETER CHARACTERISTICF; Under consideration.

