INRA Arh IS 16601 : 2016 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2021) 


Prater strat e fea fara 
TIA ZiT Hear Haiei 
savanna — feon-Freést 


Habitat and Welfare 
Requirements for Construction 
Workers — Guidelines 


ICS 03.040; 91.040.01 


© BIS 2016 


ada AM AR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF YS, 9 FGM WAL Art, ae fereit-110002 
SEE aa” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2016 Price Group 4 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Construction 
Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


Housing provided to construction workers as part of the employment contract should meet certain minimum 
requirements in respect of the nature and standard of the accommodation and facilities to be made available. 
National or state regulation will often set baseline requirements as part of housing, labour, health and fire safety 
regulations; which need to be adhered to. 


This standard is aimed at providing practical guidance to user, consultants, clients and construction organizations 
on the processes and norms that should be applied to the provision of accommodation of construction workers. 


This standard on habitat and welfare requirements of construction workers enumerates the essential habitat 
requirements of construction workers like well-lit and well-ventilated dwelling space, sanitation, health-care, water 
including drinking water provisions, child care facilities, and security of lives and properties. 


While formulating this standard, practices prevailing in the country in this field have been kept in view. Assistance 
has also been derived from the following publications: 


Workers’ Housing Recommendation, 1961, Helpdesk No. 6, International Labour Organization, Geneva; 


Workers’ accommodation: processes and standards, a guidance note by International Finance Corporation (IFC), 
Washington D.C. and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), London. 


The provisions given in this standard are without prejudice to the provisions of The Building and Other 
Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 and the rules and regulations 
framed there under, which have to be necessarily complied with. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16601 : 2016 


Indian Standard 
HABITAT AND WELFARE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
CONSTRUCTION WORKERS — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers general guidelines for the 
habitat and welfare requirements for the construction 
workers. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
2470 (Part 1): Code of practice for installation of 
1985 septic tanks: Part | design, criteria and 

construction 

10500 : 2012 Drinking water — Specification 
(second revision) 

13727 : 1993 Guide for requirements of cluster 
planning for housing 

SP 7:2016 National Building Code of India 2016 


3 HABITAT AND WELFARE REQUIREMENTS 
FOR CONSTRUCTION WORKERS 


3.1 The following aspects relating to habitat and welfare 
requirements for construction workers at site shall be 
met with, in accordance with 3.2 to 3.14: 

a) Habitat site selection criteria; 


b) Area requirements for the various facilities of 
the habitat; 


c) Design of the habitat including the 
construction materials; 


d) Specifications of living area, height of the 
rooms, windows and doors, ventilation; 


e) Specifications and requirements for kitchen 
and other sanitary facilities such as toilets, 
bathrooms, etc, and drinking water 
requirements; 


f) Crèches; 

g) Fire and safety requirements; 

h) First aid and medical requirements; 
j) Habitat operation and maintenance; 


k) Security; 
m) Recreational facilities; 
n) Waste management; and 


p) Habitat inspection and monitoring; 


3.2 Habitat Site Selection Criteria 


3.2.1 The criteria given in 3.2.1.1 to 3.2.1.5 shall be 
met while selecting habitat site for construction 
workers. 


3.2.1.1Workers habitat shall be located away from 
overhead electrical lines. If due to non-availability of 
space, the habitat need to be located in the proximity 
of electrical line, sufficient distance shall be maintained 
depending upon the voltage rating. The workers’ 
habitat or any additions or alterations to the same shall 
have the following minimum clearances from an 
overhead electric supply line, in accordance with the 
current Central Electricity Authority (Measures 
Relating to Safety and Electric Supply) Regulations, 
2010 as amended from time-to-time: 


a) Clearance of buildings from lines of voltages 
and service lines not exceeding 650 V: 


1) An overhead line shall not cross over an 
existing building as far as possible and 
no building shall be constructed under 
an existing overhead line. 


2) Where an overhead line of voltage not 
exceeding 650 V passes above or adjacent 
to or terminates on any building, the 
following minimum clearances from any 
accessible point, on the basis of maximum 
sag, shall be observed: 


i) For any flat roof, open balcony, 
Verandah roof and lean-to-roof: 


a) where the line passes above the 
building a vertical clearance of 
2.5 m from the highest point, and 

b) when the line passes adjacent 
to the building a horizontal 
clearance of 1.2 m from the 
nearest point. 


ii) For pitched roof: 


a) where the line passes above the 
building a vertical clearance of 


IS 16601 : 2016 


2.5 m immediately under the line, 
and 

b) when the line passes adjacent 
to the building a horizontal 
clearance of 1.2 m. 

3) The horizontal clearance shall be 
measured when the line is at a maximum 
deflection from the vertical due to wind 
pressure. 

4) Any conductor so situated as to have a 
clearance less than that specified above 
shall be adequately insulated and shall 
be attached at suitable intervals to a bare 
earthed bearer wire having a breaking 
strength of not less than 350 kg. 

b) Clearances from buildings of lines of voltages 

exceeding 650 V: 


1) An overhead line shall not cross over an 
existing building as far as possible and 
no building shall be constructed under 
an existing overhead line. 


2) Where an overhead line of voltage 
exceeding 650 V passes above or adjacent 
to any building or part of a building, it 
shall have on the basis of maximum sag a 
vertical clearance above the highest part 
of the building immediately under such 
line, of not less than, 


i) For lines of > 3.7m 
voltages exceeding 
650 V up to and 
including 33 kV; 

il) For lines of : 3.7m plus 
voltages 0.30 m for 
exceeding 33 kV every 

additional 
33 kV or part 
thereof. 


3) The horizontal clearance between the 
nearest conductor and any part of such 
building shall, on the basis of maximum 
deflection due to wind pressure, be not 
less than, 

1) For lines of : 1.2m; 
voltages 

exceeding 650 V 

up to and 

including 11 kV 


For lines of 
voltages 
exceeding 11 kV 
and up to and 
including 33 kV 


ii : 2.0 m and 


YE 


it) For lines of : 2.0mplus0.3 m 


voltages for every 
exceeding 33 kV additional 
33 kV or part 
thereof 


4) For High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) 
systems, vertical clearance and horizontal 
clearance, on the basis of maximum 
deflection due to wind pressure, from 
building shall be maintained as below: 


SI No. d.c. Voltage Vertical Horizontal 
kV Clearance Clearance 
m m 
a) Q) 3) (4) 
i) 100 46 29 
ii) 200 58 4.1 
iii) 300 70 53 
iv) 400 70 6.2 
v) 500 9.1 74 
vi) 600 10.3 8.6 
vii) 800 12.4 10.7 


3.2.1.2 Workers habitat shall be located sufficiently 
away from areas like sewage channels, effluent 
treatment plants, garbage dumping yards, etc. 


3.2.1.3 The site selected shall be such that it does not 
get flooded during monsoon and drainage system is 
available around the site for run-off water. 


3.2.1.4 The site shall be separated from the construction 
site/public area by physical barrier such as fences. 


3.2.1.5 Appropriate provisions shall be made for 
access to the site; and depending upon the location 
thereof, transportation of workers from their habitat to 
work locations. 


3.3 Minimum Area Requirements 


The area and other requirements as given in Table 1 
shall be adopted in a construction workers’ habitat. 


For female workers and if workers’ accommodation is 
provided for families of workers, separate sanitation 
facility for women with adequate privacy shall be 
provided as per Table 1. 


3.4 Minimum Facilities to be Provided in Room/ 
Dormitories 
Following minimum facilities shall be provided in rooms 
of construction workers: 
a) Adequate natural light during the day time 
and adequate artificial light; 
b) Adequate ventilation to ensure sufficient 
movement of air in all conditions of weather 
and climate; 


Table 1 Requirements in Construction 
Workers’ Habitat 
(Clause 3.3) 


SI No. Description Requirements 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Minimum floor area per 3.6 m? 
person 
ii) Maximum number of 10 
persons per room 
iii) Minimum height of the a) 2.7 m, 
room b) 3.0 m, if two tier beds 
are provided 
iv) Minimum area of kitchen 0.60 m? 


per person 
v) | Number of lavatories, Min 
vi) | Number of bathrooms, Min 
vii) | Number of urinals, Min 


1 per 10 person 
1 unit per 15 person 
1 per 25 person 


c) Lockable doors and windows, provided with 
mosquito screens where conditions warrant; 


d) A separate bed for each worker; 


e) Adequate furniture for each worker to secure 
his or her personal belongings, such as a 
ventilated clothes locker which can be locked 
by the occupant to ensure privacy; 


f) Separate storage for work boots and other 
personal protection equipment may need to 
be provided depending on conditions; 


g) As far as practicable, sleeping rooms should 
be arranged so that shifts are separated and 
that no workers working during the day share 
a room with workers on night shifts; and 


h) Beds should not be arranged in tiers of more 
than two. 


3.5 Design and Construction of the Habitat 


Design and construction of the workers’ habitat meeting 
the guidelines given in 3.2 to 3.4 shall be structurally 
sound and may be constructed at site or as 
prefabricated single/two storied accommodation. 


3.6 Sanitary Facilities 


Following sanitary facilities shall be provided at habitat 
for construction workers at site: 


a) Every lavatory shall be under cover and so 
partitioned off as to secure privacy, and shall 
have a proper door and fastenings. 


b) Where both male and female building workers 
are employed, separate sanitary facilities shall 
be provided for female workers. There shall 
be displayed outside each block of lavatories 
or urinals a notice containing therein “For Men 
Only’ or ‘For Women Only’, as the case may 
be, written in the language understood by the 
majority of such workers. Such notice shall 


IS 16601 : 2016 


also bear the figure of a man or of a woman, as 
the case may be. 


c) Every lavatory or urinal shall be conveniently 
situated and accessible to building workers 
at all times. 


d) Every lavatory or urinal and washing facilities 
shall be adequately lighted and shall be 
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition 
at all times. 


e) Every lavatory or urinal other than those 
connected with a flush sewage system shall 
comply with the requirements of the public 
health authorities. 


f) Water seal lavatories may be provided on the 
basis of community toilets or shared toilets 
as per the recommendation given in IS 13727. 


g) Water shall be provided by means of a tap or 
otherwise so as to be conveniently accessible 
in or near every lavatory or urinal. 


h) The walls, ceilings and partitions of every 
lavatory or urinal shall be white-washed or 
colour-washed once in every period of six 
months. 


j) | Waste water from wash areas, bathrooms and 
toilets shall be drained in septic tanks/soak 
pits and suitably disposed in municipal 
sewerage systems. For very large habitat, 
sewage treatment plant may be installed. No 
waste water shall be discharged to ground or 
other sources without proper treatment. 


k) Septic tanks/soak pits shall be located at a 
minimum distance of 18 m from the wells. 
Location of septic tank shall meet the 
requirements of IS 2470 (Part 1). 


3.7 Drinking Water Requirements 


3.7.1 Sufficient quantity of potable water shall be made 
available for drinking. Drinking water shall meet the 
requirements of IS 10500 and water quality shall be 
monitored regularly. 


3.7.2 Drinking water outlet shall be so located such 
that the distance to travel to nearest outlet shall not be 
more than 30 m. Drinking water tanks should be legibly 
marked ‘Drinking Water’ in a language understood by 
a majority of the workers and shall be located at least 
6 m away from washing place, urinal or lavatory. 


3.7.3 Sampling and testing of drinking water for 
checking its conformity to meet the requirements 
of 3.7.1 should be carried out quarterly through 
accredited laboratory. 


IS 16601 : 2016 


3.7.4 Storage tanks shall be cleaned as part of regular 
maintenance procedure to prevent growth of slime and 
collection of sediments. 


3.8 First-Aid and Medical Facilities 


3.8.1 First-aid centre shall be established in the habitat 
with the required medical facilities. Trained first 
aiders/male nurse/doctor shall be employed in the first- 
aid centre depending on the number of workers 
accommodated. Sufficient number of first-aid boxes shall 
be provided and maintained and the box shall be 
distinctly marked ‘First-aid’ and shall be equipped with 
specified articles. 


3.8.2 An emergency vehicle shall be provided or an 
arrangement shall be made with identified nearby hospital 
for providing ambulance for transportation of serious 
cases of accident or sickness of workers to the hospital 
promptly. Such vehicle should be maintained in good 
repair and should be equipped with standard facilities. 
The contact details, including phone numbers of such 
nearby hospital shall be readily available to different 
managers/supervisors/first-aid facility in-charge. These 
phone numbers shall also be suitably displayed at site. 


3.8.3 Details of all the first-aid/medical treatments shall 
be logged in the first-aid register. 


3.8.4 Lighting of 300 lux shall be maintained in the 
first-aid centre. 


3.8.5 Health check-up of all the workers shall be done 
at least once in six months by a registered medical 
practitioner. 


3.8.6 The medical facilities shall meet the provision of 
Building and other Construction Workers (Regulation 
of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 1996 
and rules framed thereunder. 


3.9 Cooking Area 


3.9.1 Cooking shall not be permitted in the living area. 
Separate designated kitchen shall be provided meeting 
the minimum area requirements given in 3.3. Canteen 
and cooking facilities should provide sufficient space 
for preparing food and eating, as well as conform to 
hygiene and safety requirements. When workers can 
individually cook their meals, they should be provided 
with a space separate from the sleeping areas. Facilities 
must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 


3.10 Créches 


3.10.1 In every place where in more than fifty female 
building workers are ordinarily employed, there shall 
be provided and maintained, a suitable room or rooms 
for the use of children under the, age of six years of 


such female workers. Such rooms shall, 


a) provide adequate accommodation; 

b) be adequately lighted and ventilated; 

c) be maintained in a clean and sanitary 
condition; and 

d) be under the charge of women trained in the 
care of children and infants. 


3.11 Habitat Operation and Maintenance 


3.11.1 A detailed plan shall be prepared for the 
operation and maintenance of the habitat facilities. The 
plan shall cover all aspects of the operation, preventive 
and routine maintenance. 


3.11.2 Qualified and experienced in-house electrical/ 
maintenance personnel shall be present and available. 
A supervisor shall be appointed to supervise hygiene 
in the habitat facilities. Sufficient cleaners shall be 
employed to ensure that the buildings and sanitary 
facilities are always clean and hygienic. 


3.11.3 Regular pest and insect control measures shall 
be taken up to avoid mosquito/pest breeding. This may 
be done through an approved agency. 


3.11.4 Worker’s transportation may be done with 
standard passenger vehicle/bus, where required. 


3.12 Fire Prevention 


3.12.1 Fire extinguishers shall be provided such that 
one should not have to travel more than 15 m distance 
to access a fire extinguisher. 


3.12.2 Diesel generator shed and inflammable liquid 
storage areas shall be provided with foam type fire 
extinguishers and fire buckets. 


3.12.3 Electrical fittings in the inflammable storage areas 
shall be flame proof. 


3.12.4 ‘No Smoking’ boards shall be displayed in gas 
cylinder and flammable liquid storage areas. 


3.12.5 All the security and habitat maintenance 
personnel, habitat residents and site workers shall be 
trained on use of fire extinguishers. 


3.12.6 Fire safety requirements as per Part 4 of 
SP 7: 2016 shall also be complied with. 


3.13 Recreational Facilities 


Internal and external recreational facilities may be made 
available depending on the number of workers to be 
accommodated. Reasonable access to telephone or 
other modes of communications, with any charges for 
the use of these services being reasonable in amount, 
shall be provided. 


3.14 Security 


3.14.1 Adequate number of security personnel shall 
be deployed. Specific security personnel shall be 
deployed at the main entry gate for restricting 
unauthorized entry and checking vehicle/material exit 
and entry. 


3.14.2 Security staff shall receive adequate training on 
first aid, firefighting and emergency preparedness. 
Security staff shall have a good understanding about 
the importance of respecting workers’ rights and the 
rights of the communities. Security staff shall have the 
emergency lights, torches and other accessories 
required to facilitate during emergency situations. 


3.14.3 A minimum of 50 lux lighting shall be maintained 
in the roads, parking area, boundary wall and other 
general areas of the habitat. 


3.15 Other Facilities 


Other facilities like provisional stores with separate 
counters for vegetables, etc, may also be provided in a 


IS 16601 : 2016 


construction workers habitat. 


Facilities like induction/initiation room may be planned 
as the part of habitat for awareness, education and 
other related work site requirements. 


3.16 Habitat Inspection 


Periodical inspection of the habitat shall be carried out 
by an identified team preferably once in a month. The 
team shall record their findings on the inspection report 
form and team shall also review and follow-up 
implementation of the suggested measures. The above 
periodic inspection report of the habitat should be 
submitted to project-in-charge. 


3.17 Notwithstanding the requirements given in 3.1 
to 3.16, all provisions given in relevant Act/Rules/ 
Regulations as amended from time-to-time shall be 
followed; in this regard, reference shall also be made to 
the Building and other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Condition of 
Services) Act, 1996 and the rules/regulations framed 
thereunder. 


IS 16601 : 2016 


ANNEXA 
( Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, 
New Delhi) 


AECOM India Private Limited, Noida 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 


CentralBuilding Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, 
New Delhi 


Construction Skill Development Council (CSDCI), 
New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, 
Ghaziabad 


Cushman & Wakefield India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Railway Corporation, New Delhi 
Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development 
Corporation, New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, New Delhi 
Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 
Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Kaleidoscope, New Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 


M. N. Dastur and Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics and Programme 


Implementation, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. KrisHNAN (Chairman) 


SHRI PAWAN JAIPURIYAR 
SHRI ARVIND AGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR 
SHRI S. SREEKUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. PASRICHA 
Suri SANJAY Soni (Alternate) 


Dr SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 
Suri Pankas Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr AcHAL K. MITTAL 
Suri Asay CHAuRASIA (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CSQ) 
Suri SANJEEV Rastoc! (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. Swarup 
Suri O P Gupta (Alternate) 


CoL ANIL KUMAR POKHRIYAL 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


SHRI HARLEEN OBEROI 


ENGINEER MEMBER 
Cuter ENGINEER (DeEsicN) (Alternate) 


Suri DALJEET SINGH 
Suet Pramit Kumar GARG (Alternate) 


Suri VIVEK BANSAL 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri T. K. SEN 
SHRI S. N. BHATNAGAR (Alternate) 


SHRI AVINASH HARDE 
SHRI RAJENDRA SAWHNI (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN AND MANAGING DIRECTOR 
Suri S. K. Jain (Alternate) 


Suri DEEPAK NARAYAN 


Dr K. C. IYER 
Dr K. N. Jua (Alternate I) 
Dr J. Uma ManesHwaRI (Alternate 11) 


SHRI AMOR Kooi 


Suri M. P. Natpu 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. GUHA 
Sarı Gosinpa PaL CHoupuury (Alternate) 


Bric MANOJ KUMAR 
CoL M. K. Prasan (Alternate) 


Dr DEVENDRA VERMA 


Dr D. Sai Basa (Alternate) 


Organization 
National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


National Institute of Construction Management and 
Research, Mumbai 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Planning Commission, New Delhi 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, VasantKunj, 


New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (411, Technology Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 

In personal capacity (7A, Autumn Hue, Seasons, PPD 
Apartments, Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, Trivandrum) 


Ir 


B 


personal capacity (411, Sector A, Pocket-C, 
VasantKunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, 


Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, 


Patparganj, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16601 : 2016 


Representative(s) 


Suri Hem Ras 
Sarı H. K. Duawan (Alternate) 


DR ANIL AGARWAL 
Dr ARUN CHANDRAMOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL KAPOOR 


SHRI SHATRUGHAN LAL 
Suri SANJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI LEENA GUPTE SAMANT 
Suri TEJAS Sura (Alternate) 


SHRI PAWAN CHOUDHARY 
Sarı M. D. Josui (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. PauL 
SHRI MANoJ Kumar MITTAL 


Suri S. A. REDDI 
Suri Birn CHAND (Alternate) 
DR VANITA AHUJA 
Suri R. P. LAHIRI 
SHRI JOSE KURIAN 
SHRI KRISHNA KANT 
SHRI A. K. SHARMA 


DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Suri B. K. Smaa, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
Scientist ‘B?’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


Panel for Construction Project Management, CED 29/P1 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (103, Charak Sadan, 
Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, 
Ghaziabad 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development 
Corporation, New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. KrisHNAN (Convener) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CSQ) 
Suri SANJEEV Rastoc! (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


SHRI SHISHIR BANSAL 


SHRI A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri A. K. MISHRA 
Sarı D. Jana (Alternate) 


Dr K. C. Iver 


Suri M. P. Napu 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH UPADHYAY 
Suri Amit TRIVEDI (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. PauL 


IS 16601 : 2016 


Organization 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 


In 


In personal capacity (E-9, Gaur Green Avenue, Abhay Khand-II, 


personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, VasantKunj, 
New Delhi) 


Indirapuram, Ghaziabad) 


In 


In 


In 


In 


In 


In 


personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


personal capacity (411, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant 
Kunj, New Delhi) 


personal capacity (608, Technology Apartment, 
I. P. Extension, Delhi) 


personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 
personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


personal capacity (7A, Autumn Hue, Seasons, PPD 
Apartments, Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, Trivandrum) 


Representative(s) 


SHRI Manos KUMAR MITTAL 


DR VANITA AHUJA 


SHRI [FTIKHAR A. DRABU 


SHRI CHANDRA PAL 


SHRI KRISHNA KANT 


Dr S. N. MANDAL 


SHRI A. K. SHARMA 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


SHRI JOSE KURIAN 


Working Group on Habitat and Welfare Requirements for Construction Workers 


Organization 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Schneider Electric Gurgaon, 


Ultratech Cement Limited, Chandrapur, Maharashtra 


Delhi International Airport (P) Ltd, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Suri A. K. Tripatut (Convener) 
Suri A. K. Gupta 
SHRI VIPIN KUMAR UPADHYAY 
SHRI RAVIKANT DUBEY 


SHRI ANOOP PANDEY 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (8069). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


