"тая КЕЛ IS 3043 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


sp-Wueh4 ch few Ufa «ат 
( «чт Jre ) 


Code of Practice for Earthing 
( Second Revision ) 


ICS 91.140.50 


© BIS 2018 


ada AM em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM чая, 9 ETE TAL n ae fereit-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2018 Price Group 18 


IS 3043 : 2018 


CONTENTS 

Page 
FOREWORD m ———————————————— (iii) 
1. “SCOPE e —————————— ——— P 1 
PNE indio et erc 1 
JS. TERMINOLOGY а а ннан ec ee ets es Er ariete eee ees 1 
4. STATUTORY PROVISIONS FOR EARTHING ынан каннын канак ннн БЕЙНЕЫ СЫЫН ЕНШЕ 3 
5. FACTORS INFLUENCING THE CHOICE OF EARTHED OR UNEARTHED SYSTEM ............. eee 6 
Ov “SAFETY-IN BARTHING ннан cepe be e ee iecur eec esed rete tud 7 
7. RANGE OF TOLERABLE CURRENT ..sscccccssesssececesessescececeeasceccecssaeseccecsessececesesseeeececesseaeeseceessaesececeseseeeeeeseneetecesensea 7 
S: TOLERABLE BODY CURRENT D LUE TR еее ао аеро ааа CEN 8 
9. ACCIDENTAL GROUND CURRENT ..s.ccscessssssesecesesseaeececesseaececcecssuececeecseseececesessuecececesseaeeeeesessaesecceesesseeeeeesenseetesesensea 9 
10. CRITERIA OF TOLERABLE, VOLTAGE. саноа ална Ынаар d ee er Pec ded 12 
Il. SYSTEM BARTHING terrre Н Н cete et te RE О О О О Г qe ce 15 
12. EQUIPMENT EARTHING мыннан нынын ныне ракы ыйынан рыны КЫ ЫКЫ A ыыы ЫКЫ АДЕН 19 
13. RESISTANCE TO: EARTH m NE ———————————Á—À 20 
14, EARTH ELECTRODES (i. ылын A ы ны КЫ ннн РН ЕНБЕККЕ ЕРЕ ЕЕ ТЕЙТ E РЫНЫН ЕРЕН РЕЛЕ 24 
15. CURRENT DENSITY AT THE SURFACE OF AN EARTH ELECTRODE .......ccssessescecesessscececessceeececessnaececescsaaeaetesessteaerecens 32 
16. VOLTAGE GRADIENT AROUND EARTH ELECTRODES ............ аиын enne enne ЫЛЫЫ seen nene 36 
17. CONNECTIONS TO EARTH ELECTRODES — EARTHING AND PROTECTIVE CONDUCTORS ............. eene 37 
18. EARTHING ARRANGEMENTS FOR PROTECTIVE PURPOSES ......scccecesssseseeceessseceeceesssececeseseeeececesesseeecensssaeceecesneaeeeeees 41 
19. EARTHING ARRANGEMENTS FOR FUNCTIONAL PURPOSES ......sscsesesssseseeseessseeeeceeeaeeecceeseseeececesesuseeecesessaeececesssaeeeeees 41 
20. EARTHING ARRANGEMENTS FOR COMBINED PROTECTIVE AND FUNCTIONAL PURPOSES ............... eee 42 
21. EQUIPOTENTIAL BONDING CONDUCTORS .....scssscssesesseseseceeesssecececessaseececeseausaeccecesussecceceessaesescecssaseeeceesenseeeeeesensanees 43 
22. TYPICAL SCHEMATIC OF EARTHING AND PROTECTIVE CONDUCTORS ........... isses ener ener entren 43 
23. EARTH FAULT PROTECTION IN INSTALLATIONS ............ ыны ны ЙЫНЫН ыкы EEO EANES EREE АЫ 43 
24. SELECTION OF DEVICES FOR AUTOMATIC DISCONNECTION OF SUPPLY нынын ынын ннн ннн 50 
25. EARTHING IN. POWER STATIONS AND: SUBSTATIONS сунар keep Ee ER ER EYE ERE SERE LESER ERE T EVER E EEG H EVER ERU EE EEPE EE SERRE UR 53 
26. EARTHING ASSOCIATED WITH OVERHEAD POWER LINES ............. essen eene nennen retentis annee ннн ннн. 63 
27. GUIDELINES ON EARTHING OF INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL INSTALLATION .......... cerent enne ныннан ннн. 64 
28. UNEARTHED GENERATING SETS (RATINGS BELOW 10 КМ)... 68 
29. EARTHING IN STANDBY GENERATING PLANTS (INCLUDING PORTABLE AND MOBILE GENERATORS) .................. eee 69 
30. PROTECTIVE MEASURES THROUGH EARTHING IN MEDICAL ESTABLISHMENTS ннн ынын нынын ннн 74 
31. SUPPLY CHARACTERISTICS AND PARAMETERS .....scsssssceseessssecesesseseeeecesesaececeseseaueeceseseaueecececesueaeececeaueaeeeeceessaeeeeees TT 
32. EARTHING IN POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS AREAS... optet HE Crece EUER ERE EE ER LEER eue Ee CE Ce ey up CE ee QU CELA Eve нона 81 
33. TELECOMMUNICATION CIRCUITS AND APPARATUS ..cssssccseessseseeeeessssseececeesusececcsessaeeeceseseaueececesesueaeececesusaeececeessaesesees 82 
34. BUILDING SITES. iii cene m ie ee oed aie aem te e ea etc e e ede e e de da 83 
35. MINES AND QUARRIES ives secs sexx cvs iare e pee rx EEE Ee ee i ee E breve EE Eg eeepc ne pe ne des 84 
36. STREET LIGHTING AND OTHER ELECTRICALLY SUPPLIED STREET FURNITURE анынын ынын ннн 86 
37, EARTHING. OF CONDUCTORS FOR SAFE WORKING: ences eel vessel o de i EY e e Be er e PEU ER ERE EYE Pu Yu нА 87 
38. MAINTENANCE OF EARTH ELECTRODES ......sccccccsssssseececsscceececsessaececcsensaesesesessaesesesesesauececesesueeececessaaeeeecsessaeaeeeeees 88 
39; ‘CALCULATION GE EARTH FAULT CURRENTS «iio iE arer Evo EE CER EE e S CE sarees us Но CE FER E TE еее UR ЫЫ 89 
40. MEASUREMENT OF EARTH RESISTIVITY .......cescccssssscesssceecsceceesseecseceeeceeecsesececeseesesueeecesuecesaeesesaeeeseaaeeceeaeeeesaeeesags 89 
41. MEASUREMENT OF EARTH ELECTRODE RESISTANCE .......... esses анааан ананна нын. 92 
42. MEASUREMENT OF EARTH LOOP IMPEDANCE ауны азаи ннн лой ЫКЫ КЫНКЫ tiie АЧЕН 95 
43. EARTHING REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTALLATIONS OF DATA PROCESSING EQUIPMENT ................ esee 95 
24. EXAMPLE OF THE USE OF TRANSFORMERS Sce Dicere Енды ҮКЕ: e Ee rere er eL er ves bee eere cov EH deve 98 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Electrical Installations Sectional Committee, ETD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Electrical Installations Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 


The Indian Electricity Act, 2003, together with the Central Electricity Authority (Measures Relating to Safety and 
Electric Supply) Regulations, 2010 and amendments, govern the electrical installation work in generating stations, 
substations, industrial locations, buildings, etc, in the country. To ensure safety of life and apparatus against earth 
faults, it was felt necessary to prepare a code of practice for earthing. The code of practice for earthing was 
formulated with the intention to serve as a consolidated guide to all those who are concerned with the design, 
installation, inspection and maintenance of electrical systems and apparatus. 


This standard was first published in 1966 and revised in 1987. Subsequently, several comments were received 
and the National Electrical Code was revised in 2011. Also, the Code of practice of Electrical Wiring Installation 
(IS 732) has been revised in 2018. Therefore, the revision of this standard was undertaken to align with the latest 
practices. 


The subject of earthing covers the problems relating to conduction of electricity through earth. The terms earth 
and earthing have been used in this Code irrespective of reliance being placed on the earth itselfas a low impedance 
return path of the fault current. As a matter of fact, the earth now rarely serves as a part of the return circuit but is 
being used mainly for fixing the voltage of system neutrals. The earth connection improves service continuity and 
avoids damage to equipment and danger to human life. 


The object of an earthing system is to provide as nearly as possible a surface under and around a station which 
shall be at a uniform potential and as nearly zero or absolute earth potential as possible. The purpose of this is to 
ensure that, in general, all parts of apparatus other than live parts, shall be at earth potential, as well as to ensure 
that operators and attendants shall be at earth potential at all times. Also by providing such an earth surface of 
uniform potential under and surrounding the station, there can exist no difference of potential in a short distance 
big enough to shock or injure an attendant when short-circuits or other abnormal occurrences take place. The 
recommendations in this Code are made in order that these objects may be carried out. 


Earthing associated with current-carrying conductor is normally essential to the security of the system and is 
generally known as system earthing, while earthing of non-current carrying metal work and conductor is essential 
to the safety of human life, animals and property, and is generally known as equipment earthing. 


Since the revision of this standard in 1987, considerable experience has been gained through the implementation 
of its various stipulations. Moreover, several new concepts have been introduced the world over, on the 
understanding of functional and protective earthing with a view to take into account a variety of complex problems 
encountered in actual practice. In the context of increased use of electric power and the associated need for safety 
in the design of installations, it had become necessary to prepare an overall revision of the earlier version of the 
Code. 


In this Code, the terms ‘earthing’ and ‘grounding’ are used synonymously. 


This Code includes comprehensive guidelines on choosing the proper size of the various components of the 
earthing system, particularly earthing and protective conductors as well as earth electrodes. Guidance included on 
determination of relevant ‘k’ factor depending on material properties and boundary conditions, and the associated 
minimum cross-sectional area would assist in a more scientific design of the earthing system under various 
circumstances. 


The Code also includes comprehensive guidelines on earth fault protection in consumers’ premises to commensurate 
with the provisions of Central Electricity Authority (Measures Relating to Safety and Electric Supply) Regulations, 
2010 and amendments. It includes specific guidelines on earthing system design to achieve the desired degree of 
shock hazard protection from earth leakages. The rules given in the Code should be read in conjunction with 
corresponding regulations given in the wiring code (see IS 732). 


(iii) 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Protection against shock, both in normal service (direct contact) and in case of fault (indirect contact) can be 
achieved by several measures. Details of such protective measures and guidance on their choice are provided in 
IS 732. Earth fault/leakage protection sought to be achieved through equipotential bonding and automatic 
disconnection of supply is envisaged to prevent a touch voltage from persisting for such a duration that would be 
harmful to human beings. Guidance on achieving this protection is covered in this Code. 


While detailed guidelines are covered in specific portions of the Code, the following shall be noted: 


a) For solidly grounded systems, it shall be sufficient to check whether the characteristics of protective 
device for automatic disconnection, earthing arrangements and relevant impedances of the circuits are 
properly coordinated to ensure that voltages appearing between simultaneously accessible, exposed and 
extraneous conductive parts are within the magnitudes that would not cause danger; 


b) Forsystems where the earthing is deemed to be adequate, it shall be checked whether the main overcurrent 
protective device is capable of meeting the requirements in the wiring code; and 


c) Where the main overcurrent protective device did not fulfil the requirements or where the earthing is 
considered inadequate, then a separate residual current device would be necessary to be installed the 
earth fault loop impedance and the tripping characteristics so chosen that they comply with safe touch 
voltage limits. 


The revision of the Code aims at consolidating in one volume all the essential guidelines needed for preparing a 
good earthing design in an electrical installation. The revision also attempts to be more elaborate than the earlier 
version, especially in areas of specific interest keeping in view the need and wide experience gained the world 
over. 


For convenience of identifying areas of interest by any specific users of the Code, the information contained in 
this Code cover the following aspects: 
a) General, 
b) Connections to earth, 
c) Earth-fault protection in consumer’s premises, 
d) Power stations, substations and overhead lines, 
e) Industrial premises, 
f) Standby and other private generating plant, 
g) Medical establishments, 
h) Miscellaneous installations and considerations, 
j) Measurements and calculations, and 
k) Data processing installations. 


The major changes in this revision from the previous standard are as follows: 


a) Reference to Static and Lightning Protection Earthing under Section 8, has been removed as separate 
BIS Standards IS/IEC 62305 (Part 1 to 4) based on IEC 62305 series on Protection against lightning; 


b) Amendments of the earlier IS 3043 : 1987 have been incorporated; 
c) Updating of cross-referred standards; 
d) Soil treatment and earthing resistivity enhancing materials updated (13.5); 


e) Resistance of an electrode encased in low resistivity material, for example, conducting concrete has been 
included (14.2.5); 


f) Matter updated for structural steelwork earthing (14.2.7); 

g) Mesh (grid) resistance added (14.2.10); 

h) Matter for miscellaneous electrodes has been added (14.2.11); 

j) Calculation of ground surface potentials included (16.4); 

k) Earthing for unearthed generating sets (ratings below 10kW) has been included (28); 
m) Supply system for street lights updated (36); 

n) Soil resistance test methods has been updated (40); and 

p) Measurement of earth electrode resistance (Fall of potential method) updated (41). 


(iv) 


IS 3043 : 2018 


In the preparation of the Code, assistance has been taken from the following: 
IEC Pub 60364 (all Parts) Electrical installations in buildings. International Electrotechnical Commission. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


(v) 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Indian Standard 
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR EARTHING 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Code of practice provides recommendations 
and guidance on meeting the requirements for the 
earthing of electrical installation for the purpose of: 


a) protective earthing that is equipment earthing 
of low voltage installation to IS 732 to limit 
the potential (with respect to the general mass 
of earth) of non-current carrying metal work 
associated with equipment, apparatus and 
appliance connected to the system. 

b) system earthing of low voltage installation to 
IS 732 to limit the potential (with respect to 
general mass of earth) of current carrying 
conductor forming part of the electrical 
system. 

c) protective earthing and changeover switching 
arrangement for generator supplying low 
voltage installation. 


The earthing of an electrical system or installation is 
generally provided for reasons of safety. 


1.2 This Code applies only to land-based installations 
in and around the building. 


It does not apply to: 


a) ships, aircrafts, off shore installations; 
b) equipments sensitive to static electricity; and 
c) the internal earthing of the equipment. 


2 REFERENCES 


2.1 The standards listed below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed below. In case the standards are to be 
referred in this clause they are to be listed as follows: 


IS No. Title 


732 : 2018 Code of practice for electrical 
wiring installations (fourth 
revision) 

4736 : 1986 Hot dip zinc coatings on mild 
steel tubes (first revision) 

9409 : 1980 Classification of electrical and 


electronic equipment with regard 


IS No. Title 


to protection against electric 
shock 


11353 : 1985 Guide for uniform system of 
marking and identification of 
conductors and apparatus 
terminals 

13234 Short-circuit currents in three- 


phase a.c. systems: 

Calculation of currents 

Factors for the calculation of 
short-circuit currents according 
to IS 13234 (Part 0) 

Data of electrical equipment for 
short-circuit current calculations 
Current during two separate 
simultaneous line-to-earth short 
circuits and partial short-circuit 
currents flowing through earth 
Examples for the calculation of 
short-circuit currents 

13252 (Part 1) : 2010 Information technology equip- 
ment — Safety : Part 1 General 
requirements 

Effects of current on human 
beings and livestock: 

General aspects 

Special aspects 

Effects of currents passing 
through the body of livestock 
Effects of lightning strokes on 
human beings and livestocks 
Touch voltage threshold values 
for physiological effects 
Electrical accessories — Circuit 


(Part 0) : 2017 
(Part 1) : 2017 
(Part 2) : 2017 


(Part 3) : 2017 


(Part 4) : 2017 


IS/IEC 60479 
(Part 1) : 2005 
(Part 2) : 2007 
(Part 3) : 1998 
(Part 4) : 2004 
(Part 5) : 2007 


IS/IEC 60898-1 : 


2015 breakers for overcurrent 
protection for household and 
similar installations : Part 1 
Circuit-breakers for ac 
operation 
SP 30: 2011 National Electrical Code 2011 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Arc-Suppression Coil (Peterson Coil) — An 
earthing reactor so designed that its reactance is such 


IS 3043 : 2018 


that the reactive current to earth under fault conditions 
balances the capacitance current to earth flowing from 
the lines so that the earth current at the fault is limited 
to practically zero. 


3.2 Bonding Conductor — A protective conductor 
providing equipotential bonding. 


3.3 Class I Equipment — Equipment in which 
protection against electric shock does not rely on basic 
insulation only, but which includes means for the 
connection of exposed conductive parts to a protective 
conductor in the fixed wiring of the installation. 


NOTE — For information on classification of equipment with 
regard to means provided for protection against electric shock 
(see IS 9409). 


3.4 Dead — The term used to describe a device or 
circuit to indicate that a voltage is not applied. 


3.5 Double Insulation — Insulation comprising both 
basic and supplementary insulation. 


3.6 Reference Earth — The conductive mass of the 
earth, whose electric potential at any point of this mass 
of earth is taken as zero with reference to an earthing 
system of electrical power system or electrical 
installations in a building. 


3.6.1 Earthing System — Arrangement of connections 
and devices necessary to earth equipment or a system 
separately or jointly. 


3.6.2 Global Earthing System — Equipment earthing 
System created by the interconnection of local earthing 
system that ensures, by the proximity of the earthing 
system, that there is no dangerous touch voltage. 


NOTES 


1 Such system permit the devices of the earth fault current in a 
way that results in a reduction of the earth potential rise at the 
local earthing system. Such a system could be said to form a 
quasi equipotential surface. 


2 The existence of global earthing system may be determined 
by simple measurement or calculation for such system. Typical 
examples of global earthing systems are in city centre, urban or 
industrial areas with distributed low and high voltage earthing. 


3.7 Earth Electrode — A conductor or group of 
conductors in intimate contact with and providing an 
electrical connection to earth. 


3.8 Earth Grid — Earth electrode in the form of two 
over lapping groups of buried, parallel, horizontal 
electrodes usually laid approximately at right angle to 
each other with the electrodes bonded at each inter- 
section. 


Earth grid provides common ground for electrical 
devices and metallic structures. 


3.9 Earth Electrode Resistance — The resistance to 
earth of an earth electrode or earth grid. 


3.10 Earth Fault Loop Impedance — The impedance 
of the earth fault current loop (phase-to-earth loop) 
starting and ending at the point of earth fault. 


3.11 Earth Leakage Current — A current which flows 
to earth or to extraneous conductive parts in a circuit 
which is electrically sound. 

NOTE — This current may have a capacitive component 

including that resulting from the deliberate use of capacitors. 
3.12 Earthed Concentric Wiring — A wiring system 
in which one or more insulated conductors are 
completely surrounded throughout their length by a 
conductor, for example, a sheath which acts as a PEN 
conductor. 


3.13 Earthing Conductor — A protective conductor 
connecting the main earthing terminal (see 3.2) (or the 
equipotential bonding conductor of an installation when 
there is no earth bus) to an earth electrode or to other 
means of earthing. 


3.14 Electrically Independent Earth Electrodes — 
Earth electrodes located at such a distance from one 
another that the maximum current likely to flow through 


one of them does not significantly affect the potential 
of the other(s). 


3.15 Equipotential Bonding — Electrical connection 
putting various exposed conductive parts and 
extraneous conductive parts at a substantially equal 
potential. 
NOTE — In a building installation, equipotential bonding 
conductors shall interconnect the following conductive parts: 
a) Protective conductor; 
b) Earth continuity conductor; and 
c) Risers of air-conditioning systems and heating systems, if 
any. 
3.16 Exposed Conductive Part — A conductive part 
of equipment which can be touched and which is not a 
live part but which may become live under fault 
conditions. 


3.17 Extraneous Conductive Part — A conductive 
part liable to transmit a potential including earth 
potential and not forming part of the electrical 
installation. 


3.18 Final Circuit — A circuit connected directly to 
current-using equipment or to a socket outlet or socket 
outlets or other outlet points for the connection of such 
equipment. 


3.19 Functional Earthing — Connection to earth 
necessary for proper functioning of electrical equipment 
(see 30.1). 


3.20 Live Part — A conductor or conductive part 
intended to be energized in normal use including a 
neutral conductor but, by convention, not a PEN 
conductor. 


3.21 Main Earthing Terminal — The terminal or bar 
(which is the equipotential bonding conductor) 
provided for the connection of protective conductors 
and the conductors of functional earthing, if any, to the 
means of earthing. 


NOTE —tThe conductors of the functional earthing may be 
connected to main earthing terminal (which is the equipotential 
bonding conductor) only if the same is recommended by original 
electrical equipment manufacturer. 


3.22 Neutral Conductor — A conductor connected to 
the neutral point ofa system and capable of contributing 
to the transmission of electrical energy. 


3.23 PEN Conductor — A conductor combining the 
functions of both protective conductor and neutral 
conductor. 


3.24 Portable Equipment — Equipment which is 
moved while in operation or which can easily be moved 
from one place to another while connected to the supply. 


3.25 Potential Gradient (At a Point) — The potential 
difference per unit length measured in the direction in 
which it is maximum. 


NOTES 


1 When an electric force is due to potential difference, it is 
equal to the potential gradient. 


2 Potential gradient is expressed in volts per unit length. 


3.25.1 Earth Potential — Electric potential with respect 
to general mass of earth which occurs in, or on the 
surface of the ground around an earth electrode when 
an electric current flows from the electrode to earth. 


3.25.2 Earth Potential Rise — voltage between an 
earthing system and reference earth. 


3.25.3 Hot Site — Substation where the rise of earth 
potential under maximum earth fault condition can 
exceed the value either 430V or 650 V depending upon 
the fault clearance time. 


3.25.4 Transferred Potential — Potential rise of an 
earthing system caused by a current to earth transferred 
by means of a connected conductor (for example a 
metallic cable sheath, PEN conductor, pipeline, rail) 
into areas with low or no potential rise related to 
reference earth resulting in a potential difference 
occurring between the conductor and its surroundings. 


NOTES 


1 The definition also applies where a conductor which is 
connected to reference earth, leads into the area of the potential 
rise. 


2 Transferred potential can result in electrocution path through 
the human body other than the ‘touch voltage’ path that is hand 
to hand. 


3.26 Protective Conductor — A conductor used as a 
measure of protection against electric shock and 
intended for connecting any of the following parts: 


IS 3043 : 2018 


a) Exposed conductive parts, 
b) Extraneous conductive parts, 
c) Main earthing terminal, and 


d) Earthed point of the source or an artificial 
neutral. 


3.27 Reinforced Insulation — Single insulation 
applied to live parts, which provides a degree of 
protection against electric shock equivalent to double 
insulation under the conditions specified in the relevant 
standard. 


NOTE — The term ‘single insulation’ does not imply that the 
insulation has to be one homogeneous piece. It may comprise 
several layers that cannot be tested singly as supplementary or 
basic insulation. 


3.28 Residual Current Device — A mechanical 
switching device or association of devices intended to 
cause the opening of the contacts when the residual 
current attains a given value under specified conditions. 


3.29 Residual Operating Current — Residual current 
which causes the residual current device to operate 
under specified conditions. 


3.30 Resistance Area (for an Earth Electrode only) 
— The surface area of ground (around an earth 
electrode) on which a significant voltage gradient may 
exist. 


3.31 Safety Extra Low Voltage (see IS 9409). 


3.32 Simultaneously Accessible Parts — Conductors 
or conductive parts which can be touched 
simultaneously by a person or, where applicable, by 
livestock. 


NOTES 

1 Simultaneously accessible parts may be: 
a) live parts, 

b) exposed conductive parts, 

c) extraneous conductive parts, 

d) protective conductors, and 

e) Earth electrodes. 


2 This term applies for livestock in locations specifically 
intended for these animals. 


3.33 Supplementary Insulation — Independent 
insulation applied in addition to basic insulation, in 
order to provide protection against electric shock in 
the event of a failure of basic insulation. 


3.34 Switchgear — An assembly of main and auxiliary 
switching apparatus for operation, regulation, 
protection or other control of electrical installations. 


NOTE — A more comprehensive definition of the term 
*Switchgear' can be had from IS 1885 (Part 17). 


3.35 Voltage, Nominal — Voltage by which an 
installation (or part of an installation) is designated. 


3.36 Touch Voltage — Voltage between conductive 


IS 3043 : 2018 


parts when touched simultaneously that is the potential 
difference between an earthed conductor part of 
equipment, (that is exposed conductive part) which can 
be touched and which is not a live part but which may 
become live under fault condition and a point on a 
conductive part (that is extraneous conductive part) 
liable to transmit a potential including earth potential 
and not forming part of the electrical installation or a 
point on earth’s surface separated by a distance equal 
to the maximum normal reach (hand to hand or hand to 
foot) approximately one metre (see Fig. 1). 

NOTE — The value of the effective touch voltage may be greatly 


influenced by the impedance of the person in electrical contact 
with these conductive parts. 


xX 


СУ 


ХХ 


X 


ххх хх 


XX 


X XXX! 


SZ 


E TOUCH 


OX 


XXX 


XXXPO 


3.36.1 Prospective Touch Voltage — Voltage between 
simultaneously accessible conductive parts (exposed 
conductive parts when energised under fault condition 
and extraneous conductive parts or mass of earth) when 
those conductive parts are not touched simultaneously 
by a person. 


3.37 Step Voltage — The potential difference between 
two points on the earth’s surface, separated by distance 
of one pace, that will be assumed to be 1 m in the 
direction of maximum potential gradient (see Fig. 1). 


3.38 Equipotential Line or Contour — The locus of 
points having the same potential at a given time. 


POTENTIAL RISE ABOVE 
REMOTE EARTH DURING 
SHORT CIRCUIT 


POTENTIAL RISE ABOVE 
REMOTEEARTH DURING 
SHORT CIRCUIT 


TOUCH VOLTAGE AT A GROUNDED STRUCTURE 


Fic. 1 STEP AND TOUCH VOLTAGES 


4 


3.39 Mutual Resistance of Grounding Electrodes — 
Equal to the voltage change in one of them produced 
by achange of one ampere of direct current in the other 
and is expressed in ohms. 


3.40 Earth Grid — A system of grounding electrodes 
consisting of inter-connected connectors buried in the 
earth to provide a common ground for electrical devices 
and metallic structures. 


NOTE — The term ‘earth grid’ does not include ‘earth mat’. 


3.41 Earth Mat — A grounding system formed by a 
grid of horizontally buried conductors and which serves 
to dissipate the earth fault current to earth and also as 
an equipotential bonding conductor system. 


4 STATUTORY PROVISIONS FOR EARTHING 


4.1 Earthing shall generally be carried out in accordance 
with the requirements of Central Electricity Authority 
(Measures Relating to Safety and Electric Supply) 
Regulations, 2010, as amended from time-to-time and 
the relevant regulations of the Electricity Supply 
Authority concerned. 


NOTES 


1 When the earthing of a consumer's installation is being 
planned, prior consultation should take place between the 
consultant or contractor and the supply authority. Where 
necessary, precaution will be taken in order to avoid any 
interference with the telecommunication system. 


2 The regulations made by CEA required that every electrical 
network at whatever voltage be connected with earth and that 
the connection is maintained under fault conditions in a sound 
manner. This requirement is primarily to preserve the security 
of the system by ensuring that the potential on each conductor 
is restricted to such a value as is consistent with the level of 
insulation applied. Every supply neutral conductor of electrical 
network of voltage 650 V and below is required to be connected 
with earth generally at the source of voltage. 


Where the neutral and protective conductors of 
electricity supply system of Electrical supply 
undertaking are combined, it is in protective multiply 
earthed (PME) system, also called TN-C-S system. The 
PEN conductor, which is referred to as a combined 
neutral and earth (CNE) conductor, is earthed at the 
source and extremities of the distribution mains and 
point in between. The PME is the most common system 
adopted by Electrical supply undertakings. 


Multiple earthing of the CNE conductor ensures that if 
the conductor becomes open circuit for any reason 
(probably cut or snapped), exposed-conductor parts 
remain connected to earth; under such conditions the 
supply voltage between the installation line and neutral 
conductor is substantially reduced and consumer will 
experience unacceptable voltage variations. 


4.2 All equipment of voltages of 250 V to 650 V shall 
be earthed by two separate and distinct connections 
with earth. In the case of high and extra high voltages, 


IS 3043 : 2018 


the neutral points shall be earthed by not less than two 
separate and distinct connections with earth, each 
having its own electrode at the generating station or 
substation and may be earthed at any other point 
provided no interference 1s caused by such earthing. If 
necessary, the neutral may be earthed through suitable 
impedance. Where the neutral and protective 
conductors of Electricity supply system of Electrical 
supply undertaking, are combined it is in protective 
multiply earthed (PME) system, also called TN-C-S 
system. The PEN conductor, which is referred to as a 
combined neutral and earth (CNE) conductor, is earthed 
at the source and extremities of the distribution mains 
and points in between. The PEN is the most common 
system adopted by Electrical supply undertaking. 


Multiple earthing of the CNE conductor ensures that if 
the conductor becomes open circuit for any reason 
(probably cut and snapped), exposed — conductive parts 
remain connected to earth; under such condition the 
supply voltage between the installation line and neutral 
conductor is substantially reduced and consumer will 
experience unacceptable voltage variation. 


4.2.1 In cases where direct earthing may prove harmful 
rather than provide safety (for example, high frequency 
and mains frequency coreless induction furnaces), 
relaxation may be obtained from the competent authority. 


4.3 Earth electrodes shall be provided at generating 
stations, substations and consumer premises in 
accordance with the requirements of this Code. 


4.4 As far as possible, all earth connections shall be 
visible for inspection. 


4.5 All connections shall be carefully made; if they are 
poorly made or inadequate for the purpose for which 
they are intended, loss of life or serious personal injury 
may result. 


4.6 Each earth system shall be so devised that the testing 
of individual earth electrode is possible. It is 
recommended that the value of any earth system 
resistance shall be such as to conform to the degree of 
shock protection desired. 


4.7 It is recommended that a drawing showing the main 
earth connection and earth electrodes be prepared for 
each installation. 


4.8 No addition to the current-carrying system, either 
temporary or permanent, shall be made which will 
increase the maximum available earth fault current or 
its duration until it has been ascertained that the existing 
arrangement of earth electrodes, earth bus-bar, etc, are 
capable of carrying the new value of earth fault current 
which may be obtained by this addition. 


4.9 No cut-out, link or switch other than a linked switch 
arranged to operate simultaneously on the earthed or 


IS 3043 : 2018 


earthed neutral conductor and the live conductors, shall 
be inserted on any supply system. This, however, does 
not include the case of a switch for use in controlling a 
generator or a transformer or a link for test purposes. 


4.10 All materials, fittings, etc, used in earthing shall 
conform to Indian Standard specifications, wherever 
these exist. 


5 FACTORS INFLUENCING THE CHOICE OF 
EARTHED OR UNEARTHED SYSTEM 


5.1 Service Continuity 


5.1.1 A number of industrial plant systems have been 
operated unearthed at one or more voltage levels. This 
is basically guided by the thought of gaining an 
additional degree of service continuity varying in its 
importance depending on the type of plant. Earthed 
systems are in most cases designed so that circuit 
protective devices will remove the faulty circuit from 
the system regardless of the type of fault. However, 
experience has shown that in a number of systems, 
greater service continuity may be obtained with earthed- 
neutral than with unearthed neutral systems. 


5.2 Multiple Faults to Ground 


5.2.1 While a ground fault on one phase of an unearthed 
system generally does not cause a service interruption, 
the occurrence of a second ground fault on a different 
phase before the first fault is cleared, does result in an 
outage. The longer a ground fault is allowed to remain 
on an unearthed system, greater is the likelihood of a 
second one occurring in another phase and repairs are 
required to restore service. With an unearthed system, 
an organized maintenance programme is therefore 
extremely important so that faults are located and 
removed soon after detection. 


Experience has shown that multiple ground faults are 
rarely, if ever, experienced on earthed neutral systems. 


5.3 Arcing Fault Burndowns 


5.3.1 In typical cases, an arcing fault becomes 
established between two or more phase conductors in 
an unearthed system or between phase and ground ina 
solidly earthed-neutral system. This would result in 
severe damage or destruction to equipment. However, 
arcing fault current levels may be so low that phase 
overcurrent protective devices do not operate to remove 
the fault quickly. Such faults are characteristic of open 
or covered fuses, particularly in switchgear or metal- 
enclosed switching and motor control equipment. It is 
generally recognized that protection under such 
circumstances is possible by fast and sensitive detection 
of the arcing fault current and interruption within 10- 
20 cycles. In solidly earthed-neutral systems, this is 
possible as an arcing fault would produce a current in 


the ground path, thereby providing an easy means of 
detection and tripping against phase-to- ground arcing 
fault breakdowns. 


5.4 Location of Faults 


5.4.1 On an unearthed system, a ground fault does not 
open the circuit. Some means of detecting the presence 
of a ground fault requires to be installed. In earthed 
system, an accidental ground fault is both indicated at 
least partially located by an automatic interruption of 
the accidentally grounded circuit or piece of equipment. 


5.5 Safety 


5.5.1 Whether or not a system is grounded, protection 
of personnel and property from hazards require thorough 
grounding of equipment and structures. Proper grounding 
results in less likelihood of accidents to personnel. Other 
hazards of shock and fire may result from inadequate 
grounding of equipment in unearthed and earthed 
systems. However, relatively high fault currents 
associated with solidly earthed system may present a 
hazard to workers from exposure to hot arc products 
and flying molten metal. This protection is, however, 
reduced because of use of metal-enclosed equipment. 


5.6 Abnormal Voltage Hazards 


5.6.1 The possible over-voltages on the unearthed 
system may cause more frequent failures of equipment 
than the system, earthed. A fault on one phase of an 
unearthed or impedance-grounded system places a 
sustained increased voltage on the insulation of 
unearthed phases in a 3-phase system. This voltage is 
about 1.73 times the normal voltage on the insulation. 
This or other sustained over-voltages on the ungrounded 
system may not immediately cause failure of insulation 
but may tend to reduce the life of the insulation. Some 
of the more common sources of over-voltages on a 
power system are the following: 


a) Lightning, 

b) Switching surges, 

c) Static, 

d) Contact with a high voltage system, 
e) Line-to-ground fault, 

f) Resonant conditions, and 

g) Restriking ground faults. 


5.6.2 Surge arresters are recommended for lightning 
protection. Neutral grounding is not likely to reduce 
the total magnitude of over-voltage produced by 
lightning or switching surges. It can, however, distribute 
the voltage between phases and reduce the possibility 
of excessive voltage stress on the phase-to-ground 
insulation of a particular phase. A system ground 
connection even of relatively high resistance can 


effectively prevent static voltage build-up. Even under 
conditions of an HV line breaking and falling on an LV 
system, an effectively grounded LV system will hold 
the system neutral close to the ground potential thus 
limiting the over-voltage. An unearthed system will be 
subjected to resonant over-voltages. Field experience 
and theoretical studies have shown the world over that 
arcing, restriking or vibrating ground faults on 
unearthed systems can, under certain conditions, 
produce surge voltages as high as 6 times the normal 
voltage. Neutral grounding is effective in reducing 
transient build up by reducing the neutral displacement 
from ground potential and the destructiveness of any 
high frequency voltage oscillations following each arc 
initiation or restrike. 


5.7 Cost 


5.7.1 The cost differential between earthed and 
unearthed neutral system will vary, depending on the 
method of grounding the degree of protection desired, 
and whether a new or an existing system is to be earthed. 


6 SAFETY IN EARTHING 
6.1 Basic Problem 


In principle, a safe grounding design has the following 
two objectives: 


a) to provide means to carry electric currents into 
the earth under normal and fault conditions 
without exceeding any operating and 
equipment limits or adversely affecting 
continuity of service. 

b) to reduce the risk of a person in the vicinity of 
grounded facilities being exposed to the 
danger of critical electric shock. 


6.2 Condition of Danger 


During typical ground fault conditions, the flow of 
current to earth will produce potential gradients within 
and around a substation. Figure 2 shows this effect for 
a substation with a simple rectangular ground grid in 
homogeneous soil. 


Unless proper precautions are taken in design, the 
maximum potential gradients along the earth’s surface 
may be of sufficient magnitude during ground fault 
conditions to endanger a person in the area. Moreover, 
dangerous voltages may develop between grounded 
structures or equipment frames and the nearby earth. 


The circumstances that make electric shock accidents 
possible can include the following: 


a) relatively high fault current to ground in 
relation to the area of ground system and its 
resistance to remote earth; 


b) soil resistivity and distribution of ground 


IS 3043 : 2018 


currents such that high potential gradients may 
occur at points at the earth's surface; 

с) presence of an individual at such a point, time, 
and position that the body is bridging two 
points of high potential difference; 

d) absence of sufficient contact resistance or 
other series resistance to limit current through 
the body to a safe value under circumstances 
(a) through (c); and 

e) duration of the fault and body contact, and 
hence, ofthe flow of current through a human 
body for a sufficient time to cause harm at the 
given current intensity. 


The relative low frequency of accidents is due largely 
to the low probability of coincidence of all the 
unfavourable conditions listed above. 


7 RANGE OF TOLERABLE CURRENT 


Effects of an electric current passing through the vital 
parts of a human body depend on the duration, 
magnitude, and frequency of this current. The most 
dangerous consequence of such an exposure is a heart 
condition known as ventricular fibrillation, resulting 
in immediate arrest of blood circulation. 


7.1 Effect of Frequency 


Humans are very vulnerable to the effects of electric 
current at frequencies of 50 Hz. Currents of approximately 
0.1 A can be lethal. Research indicates that the human 
body can tolerate a slightly higher 25 Hz current and 
approximately five times higher direct current. 


7.2 Effect of Magnitude and Duration 


Current of 1 mA is generally recognized as the threshold 
of perception; that is, the current magnitude at which a 
person is just able to detect a slight tingling sensation 
in his hands or fingertips caused by the passing current. 


Currents of 1 mA to 6 mA, often termed let-go currents, 
though unpleasant to sustain, generally do not impair 
the ability of a person holding an energized object to 
control his muscles and release it. 


In the 9 mA to 25 mA range, currents may be painful 
and can make it difficult or impossible to release 
energized objects grasped by the hand. For still higher 
currents muscular contractions could make breathing 
difficult. These effects are not permanent and disappear 
when the current 1s interrupted, unless the contraction 
Is very severe and breathing is stopped for minutes 
rather than seconds. 


In the range of 60 mA to 100 mA currents may cause 
ventricular fibrillation, stoppage of the heart, or 
inhibition of respiration might occur and cause injury 
or death. 


IS 3043 : 2018 


bao? 

" tn 
Lupe 
NS 


Fic. 2 EQUIPOTENTIAL CONTOURS OF TYPICAL GROUND GRID 


If shock currents can be kept below this value by a 
carefully designed grounding system, injury or death 
may be avoided. 


The non-fibrillating current of magnitude /, at durations 
ranging from 0.03 s to 3.0 s is related to the energy 
absorbed by the body as described by the following 
equation: 


Saige ... (1) 
where 
I, = the rms magnitude of the current through the 
body, in A, 
t, = the duration of the current exposure, in sec, 
and 


Sp = the empirical constant related to the electric 


shock energy tolerated by a certain percent 
of a given population. 


8 TOLERABLE BODY CURRENT LIMIT 


The magnitude and duration of the current conducted 
through a human body at 50 Hz should be less than the 
value that can cause ventricular fibrillation of the heart. 


8.1 Duration Formula 


The duration for which a 50 Hz current can be tolerated 
by most people is related to its magnitude in accordance 
with Equation (1). It is assumed that 99.5 percent of all 
persons can safely withstand, without ventricular 
fibrillation, the passage of a current with magnitude 
and duration determined by the following formula: 


k 
vis 


where, in addition to the terms previously defined for 
equation (1) 


k = /5в 


The formula for the allowable body current for 
approximately 50 kg person weight (Sy = 0.013 5 and 
k 5, = 0.116) becomes 


b= .. (2) 


1 0.116 ' 
B = — = 
E for 50 kg body weight .. (3) 


8.2 Alternative Assumptions 


Fibrillation current is assumed to be a function of 
individual body weight, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The 
figure shows the relationship between the critical 
current and body weight for several species of animals 
and a 0.5 percent common threshold region for 
mammals. 


Thus, the formula for the allowable body current for 
approximately 70 kg person weight (S, = 0.024 6 and 
kz = 0.157) becomes 


0 


0 2 


0 40 


11 CALVES 


Мы ке шы 
H 300 2-8 — 
ME P A 


P^ I 


IS 3043 : 2018 


h- 0.157 І 
B= QE for 70 kg body weight .. (4) 
8.3 Equation (2) indicates that much higher body 
currents can be allowed where fast-operating protective 
devices can be relied upon to limit the fault duration. A 
judgment decision is needed as to whether to use the 
clearing time of primary high-speed relays, or that of 

the back-up protection, as the basis for calculation. 


9 ACCIDENTAL GROUND CURRENT 
9.1 Resistance of Human Body 


For d.c. and 50 Hz a.c. currents, the human body can 
be approximated by a resistance. The current path 
typically considered is from one hand to both feet, or 
from one foot to the other one. The internal resistance 
ofthe body is approximately 300 €2, whereas values of 
body resistance including skin range from 500 Q to 
3 000 Q. 


Thus, for the purposes of this standard, the following 
resistances, in series with the body resistance, are 
assumed as follows: 


a) Hand and foot contact resistances are equal 
to zero. 


ly (DOGS) 
lave (4 SPECIES) 


0.5% MINIMUM 
FIBRILLATING 
CURRENT 


0.5% MAXIMUM 
91mA NONFIBRILLATING 
CURRENT 


60 80 100 120 


BODY WEIGHT - Kg 


VALUE OF CONSTANT k FOR 
EFFECTIVE RMS VALUES OF 


lg (k = lg vt): 


К = 0.091 43 2 0.157 
kso = 0.067 43 = 0.116 


k50 = 0.107 ¥3 = 


0.185 


FIBRILLATION 


Fic. 3 FIBRILLATING CURRENT VERSUS Вору WEIGHT FOR VARIOUS ANIMALS BASED ON A 3 s 
DURATION OF ELECTRICAL SHOCK 


IS 3043 : 2018 


b) Glove and shoe resistances are equal to zero. 


A value of 1 000 € in Equation (5), which represents 
the resistance of a human body from hand-to-feet and 
also from hand-to-hand, or from one foot to the other 
foot, will be used throughout this standard. 


Ry-1 000 Q ... (5) 
9.2 Accidental Circuit Equivalents 


Using the value of tolerable body current established 
either by Equation (3) or (4) and the appropriate circuit 
constants, it 1s possible to determine the tolerable 
voltage between any two points of contact. 


The following notations are used for the accidental 
circuit equivalent shown in Fig. 4: 

I, isthe total fault current, in A; 
I, is the current flowing in the grid, in A; 


I, is the body current (body is part of the 
accidental circuit), in A; 


is the resistance of the body, in W; 


w 


U 15 е total effective voltage of the accidental 
circuit (touch or step voltage), in V; and 


H and F are points of contact of the body. 


The tolerable body current, /5, defined by Equation (3) 
or Equation (4), is used to define the tolerable total 
effective voltage of the accidental circuit (touch or step 
voltage). The tolerable total effective voltage of the 
accidental circuit is that voltage that will cause the flow 
of a body current, Jb, equal to the tolerable body 
current, Jp 


Figure 4 shows the fault current If being discharged to 
the ground by the grounding system of the substation 
and a person touching a grounded metallic structure at 
H. Various impedances in the circuit are shown in 


Z(SYSTEM) 


Fig. 5. Terminal H is a point in the system at the same 
potential as the grid into which the fault current flows 
and terminal F is the small area on the surface of the 
earth that is in contact with the person's two feet. The 
current /,, flows from Н through the body of the person 
to the ground at F. The Thevenin theorem allows us to 
represent this two terminal (H, F) network of Fig. 5 by 
the circuit shown in Fig. 6. 


The Thevenin voltage V4, is the voltage between 
terminals H and F when the person is not present. The 
Thevenin impedance 41, is the impedance of the system 
as seen from points H and F with voltage sources of 
the system short-circuited. The current /, through the 
body of a person coming in contact with H and F is 
given by: 
Vin 


p 
Кг = b= 
f 4b b LE ... (6) 


where 
Ry = the resistance ofthe human body in О. 

For most practical cases, the effects of Zy, grid 
resistance and the mutual resistance between the grid 
and the person's feet can be neglected on the total circuit 
Thevenin equivalent impedance. Thus, Z,, is 
represented by the equivalent impedance ofthe person's 
feet. 


Figure 7 shows the fault current /; being discharged to 
the ground by the grounding system of the substation. 
The current, /,, flows from one foot F; through the body 
of the person to the other foot, F,. Terminals F; and F, 
are the areas on the surface of the earth that are in 
contact with the two feet, respectively. The Thevenin 
theorem allows us to represent this two-terminal (Е, 
F,) network in Fig. 8. The Thevenin voltage V. is the 
voltage between terminals F, and F, when the person 
is not present. The Thevenin impedance Zy is the 


STATION GRID 


Fic. 4 EXPOSURE TO TOUCH VOLTAGE 


Zsys 


TRUE 
GROUND 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Fic. 5 IMPEDANCE TO TOUCH VOLTAGE CIRCUIT 


Zm = TOUCH VOLTAGE 


TERMINAL H 


Rg = BODY RESISTANCE 


TERMINAL F 
Zm = Ry 
2 


Fic. 6 TOUCH VOLTAGE CIRCUIT 


impedance of the system as seen from the terminals F; 
and F, with the voltage sources of the system short- 
circuited. The current /, through the body of a person 
is given by Equation (6). 


In this standard, the following formulas for the Thevenin 
equivalent impedance are used. 


For touch voltage accidental circuit 


Zm--— 
2 


And for the step voltage accidental circuit 
Zm —2Rt 


where 
К, 


the ground resistance of one foot (with 
presence of the substation grounding system 
ignored). 

For the purpose of circuit analysis, the human foot is 
usually represented as a conducting metallic disc and 


the contact resistance of shoes, socks, etc, is neglected. 
The ground resistance in ohms of a metallic disc of 
radius b (m) on the surface of a homogeneous earth of 
resistivity p (Q-m) is given. 


TU 
4b 


Traditionally, the metallic disc representing the foot is 
taken as a circular plate with a radius of 0.08 m. With 
only slight approximation, equations for 41, can be 
obtained in numerical form and expressed in terms of 
p as follows. 


Rr 


For touch voltage accidental circuit 


Z," 1.59 
And for step voltage accidental circuit 
Zm = 6.09 


The permissible total equivalent voltage (that is, 
tolerable touch and step voltage), using above 
Equations, is: 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Z (SYSTEM) 


V-m = STEP VOLTAGE 


TERMINAL Е, 


21 = 2R, 


Fic. 8 STEP VOLTAGE CIRCUIT 


E ен Б 1 (Ry ш 1.5р) 
Апа 
E ouch = 1 (Ry E 6.0p) 


10 CRITERIA OF TOLERABLE VOLTAGE 
10.1 Criteria of Tolerable Voltage Definitions 
10.1.1 Ground Potential Rise (GPR) 


The maximum electrical potential that a sub-station 
ground grid may attain relative to a distant grounding 
point assumed to be at the potential of remote earth. 
This voltage, GPR, is equal to the maximum grid current 
multiplied by the grid resistance. 


10.1.2 Mesh Voltage 


The maximum touch voltage within a mesh ofa ground 
grid. 


10.1.3 Metal-to-Metal Touch Voltage 


The difference in potential between metallic objects or 
structures within the sub-station site that may be bridged 
by direct hand-to-hand or hand-to-feet contact. 


10.1.4 Step Voltage 


The difference in surface potential experienced by a 


12 


person bridging a distance of 1 m with the feet without 
contacting any other grounded object. 


10.1.5 Touch Voltage 


The potential difference between the ground potential 
rise (GPR) and the surface potential at the point where 
a person is standing while at the same time having a 
hand in contact with a grounded structure. Touch 
voltage measurements can be ‘open circuit? (without 
the equivalent body resistance included in the 
measurement circuit) or ‘closed circuit’ (with the 
equivalent body resistance included in the measurement 
circuit). 


10.1.6 Transferred Voltage 


A special case of the touch voltage where a voltage is 
transferred into or out of the sub station from or to a 
remote point external to the substation site. 


10.2 Typical Shock Situations for Air-Insulated Sub- 
stations 


Figure 9 and Fig. 10 show five basic situations involving 
a person and grounded facilities during a fault. For a 
foot-to-foot contact, the accidental circuit equivalent 
is that of Fig. 7, and its driving voltage U is equal to E, 


(step voltage). For the three examples of hand-to-feet 
contact Fig. 9 applies, and U is equal to Е, (touch 
voltage), Е, (mesh voltage), or Eq (transferred 
voltage), respectively. The accidental circuit involving 


M 

б 

5j y 
E 

$ g FL 
SX ч af 
KR & S Oc 
ш E MX 
SS ox 


RX 


ХАДАХ 


ГА 
<< 


= af E 


HIHN 
(ЕШ ШЕШУ 
HE Н ТШ im S 

Hi T ИН ИН на ИН Ий ИН ИН ИН Ин И En 


IS 3043 : 2018 


metal-to-metal contact, either hand-to-hand or hand- 
to-feet, is shown in Fig. 11 where U is equal to the 
metal-to-metal touch voltage, E м 


@ 

& 

ш G y 
re $9 
BK ek 
#9 ёё 


SURFACE 

POTENTIAL 

PROFILE 

Etna =GPR 


h 
Їй. 


Ee EARTH = 


Fic. 9 Basic SHOCK SITUATIONS 


—--—— — |. 


CONDUCTING PATH 


BETWEEN SUBSTATIONS 


ZERO POTENTIAL 


STATION 2 


SURFACE POTENTIOL PROFILE 


Fic. 10 TYPICAL SITUATION OF EXTENDED TRANSFERRED POTENTIAL 


13 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Fic. 11 ТҮРІСАІ METAL TO METAL TOUCH SITUATION IN GIS 


During a fault, the earth conducts currents that emanate 
from the grid and other permanent ground electrodes 
buried below the earth’s surface. The resulting potential 
gradients have a primary effect on the value of U. 


10.3 Step and Touch Voltage Criteria 


The safety ofa person depends on preventing the critical 
amount of shock energy from being absorbed before 
the fault is cleared and the system de-energized. The 
maximum driving voltage of any accidental circuit 
should not exceed the limits defined as follows. For 
step voltage the limit is: 


Estep = (Rs + 2Rr)Ip 
for body weignt of 50 kg 
0.116 


NA 


Estepso = (1 000 + 6С х ps) 


for body weignt of 70 kg 
0.157 


Jis 


Similarly, the touch voltage limit is 


Estep70 = (1 000 + 6С х ps) 


Evouch = (Ав + Sh 


for body weignt of 50 kg 
0.116 


Jis 


Evouchso = (1 000 + 1.5Cs x ps) 


for body weignt of 70 kg 
0.157 


М 


Evouch70 = (1 000 + 1.5Cs x ps) 


14 


where 
Ер = the step voltage in V, 
such = the touch voltage in V, 
C, = 1 due to uniform soil resistivity, 
Р, =the resistivity of the surface material in 
Q-m, and 
f, = the duration of shock current in seconds. 


If no protective surface layer is used, then p, = p. 


With the substitution of o, = 0 in the foot resistance 
terms of Equation Eouchso and Ёст» the metal-to- 
metal touch voltage limit is 


for body weignt of 50 kg 
116 
E'mm-touch = 
М 
for body weignt of 70 kg 
Emm-touch = E 


vis 


where 
E „m İS the metal-to-metal touch voltage in V 


The actual step voltage, touch voltage, or metal-to- 
metal touch voltage should be less than the respective 
maximum allowable voltage limits to ensure safety. 
Hazards from external transferred voltages are best 
avoided by isolation or neutralizing devices and 
labelling these danger points as being equivalent to live 
lines. 


10.4 Effect of Sustained Ground Currents 


After the safe step and touch voltage limits are 
established, the grounding system can then be designed 
based on the available fault current and overall clearing 
time. The designer should also consider sustained low- 
level (below setting of protective relays) fault 


magnitudes that may be above the let-go current 
threshold. Some sustained faults above the let-go 
current, but below the fibrillation threshold, may cause 
asphyxiation from prolonged contraction of the chest 
muscles. However, it would not be practical to design 
against lesser shocks that are painful, but cause no 
permanent injury. 


11 SYSTEM EARTHING 
11.0 Basic Objectives 


11.0.1 Earthing of system is designed primarily to 
preserve the security of the system by ensuring that the 
potential on each conductor is restricted to such a value 
as is consistent with the level of insulation applied. 
From the point of view of safety, it is equally important 
that earthing should ensure efficient and fast operation 
of protective gear in the case of earth faults. Most high 
voltage public supply systems are earthed. Approval 
has been given in recent years to unearthed overhead 
line systems in certain countries, but these have only 
been small 11 kV systems derived from 33 kV mains, 
where the capacity earth current 1s less than 4 A and 
circumstances are such that the system will not be 
appreciably extended. 


11.0.2 The limitation of earthing to one point on each 
system is designed to prevent the passage of current 
through the earth under normal conditions, and thus to 
avoid the accompanying risks of electrolysis and 
interference with communication circuits. With a 
suitable designed system, properly operated and 
maintained, earthing at several points may be permitted. 
This method of earthing becomes economically 
essential in systems at 200 kV and upwards. 


11.0.3 The system earth-resistance should be such that, 
when any fault occurs against which earthing is 
designed to give protection, the protective gear will 
operate to make the faulty main or plant harmless. In 
most cases, such operation involves isolation of the 
faulty main or plant, for example, by circuit-breakers 
or fuses. 


11.0.4 In the case of underground systems, there is no 
difficulty whatever but, for example, in the case of 
overhead-line systems protected by fuses or circuit- 
breakers fitted with overcurrent protection only, there 
may be difficulty in arranging that the value of the 
system earth-resistance 1s such that a conductor falling 
and making good contact with the ground results in 
operation of the protection. A low system-earth 
resistance is required even in the cases where an arc- 
suppression coil is installed, as its operation may be 
frustrated by too high an earth-electrode resistance. 


11.0.5 Earthing may not give protection against faults 
that are not essentially earth faults. For example, if a 


IS 3043 : 2018 


phase conductor on an overhead spur line breaks, and 
the part remote from the supply falls to the ground, it 1s 
unlikely that any protective gear relying on earthing, 
other than current balance protection at the substation, 
will operate since the earth-fault current circuit includes 
the impedance of the load that would be high relative 
to the rest of the circuit. 


11.0.6 For the purposes of this Code of practice, it is 
convenient to consider a system as comprising a source 
of energy and an installation; the former including the 
supply cables to the latter. 


11.1 Classification of Systems Based on Types of 
System Earthing 


11.1.1 Internationally, the earthing systems are 
classified as TN System, TT System and IT System. They 
are: 


a) TN System — has one or more points of the 
source of energy directly earthed, and the 
exposed and extraneous conductive parts of 
the installation are connected by means of 
protective conductors to the earthed point(s) 
of the source, that is, there is a metallic path 
for earth fault currents to flow from the 
installation to the earthed point(s) of the 
source. TN systems are further sub-divided 
into TN-C, TN-S and TN-C-S systems. 

TT System — has one or more points of the 
source of energy directly earthed and the 
exposed and extraneous conductive parts of 
the installation are connected to a local earth 
electrode or electrodes are electrically 
independent of the source earth(s). 


b) 


c) JIT System — has the source either unearthed 
or earthed through a high impedance and the 
exposed conductive parts of the installation 
are connected to electrically independent earth 


electrodes. 


11.1.2 It 1s also recognized that, in practice, a system 
may be an admixture of type for the purposes of this 
Code, earthing systems are designated as follows: 


a) TN-S System (for 240 V single phase 
domestic/ commercial supply) — Systems 
where there are separate neutral and protective 
conductors throughout the system. A system 
where the metallic path between the 
installation and the source of energy is the 
sheath and armouring of the supply cable (see 
Fig. 12). 

TN-S System (for 415 V three-phase domestic 
commercial supply) — An independent earth 
electrode within the consumer's premises is 
necessary (see Fig. 13). 


b) 


IS 3043 : 2018 


SOURCE OF ENERGY 


LJ 
L2 
L3 
N 
PE 
TE p= 7 EXPOSED 
= | | CONDUCTIVE 
g | | PART 
EQUIPMENT IN 
CONSUMER 
INSTALLATION LL... nll INSTALLATION 
NOTES 
1 The protective conductor (PE) is the metallic covering (armour or load sheath of the cable supplying the installation or a separate 
conductor). 


2 All exposed conductive parts of an installation are connected to this protective conductor via main earthing terminal of the installation. 


Fic. 12 TN-S SYSTEM SEPARATE NEUTRAL AND PROTECTIVE CONDUCTORS THROUGHOUT THE SYSTEM, 230V 
SINGLE PHASE. DoMESTIC/COMMERCIAL SUPPLY FOR 3~TN-S (see Fig. 13) 


SOURCE OF ENERGY 


NOTES 
1 415 V Three phase domestic/commercial supply having 3 ~ and 1 ~ loads. 
2 All exposed conductive parts of the installation are connected to protective conductor via the main earthing terminal of the installation. 


An independent earth electrode within the consumer’s premises is necessary. 


Fic. 13 INDIAN-TN-S SvsTEM 


c) TN-C System — The neutral and protective transformer primary (see Fig. 16). 
functions are combined in a single conductor f) TT System (for 415V three-phase industrial 
throughout the system (for example earthed supply) — Same as 11.1.1 (b) (see Fig. 17). 
concentric wiring) (see Fig. 14). g) ITSystem — Same as 11.1.1 (c) (see Fig. 18). 


d) TN-C-S System — The neutral and protective 
functions are combined in a single conductor 11.1.3 Installation Earthing — 250 V but not Exceeding 
but only in part of the system (see Fig. 15). 650 V Installation Earthing 

e) T-TN-S System (for 66/11 kV three-phase bulk 
supply) — The consumers installation, a TN- 
S system receiving power at a captive 
substation through a delta connected 


The purpose of earthing the non-current carrying metal 
work of plant and equipment of 250 V but not exceeding 
650 V is to: 


16 


IS 3043 : 2018 


SOURCE OF ENERGY 


L1 
L2 


L3 


COMBINED 
Е РЕ AND N 
1 = CONDUCTOR 
| 


ADDITIONAL 


SOURCE 
EARTH 1 SOURCE EARTH 


"a Ed do m. MAY BE PROVIDED) 
3~CONSUMER ED pen , 


CONDUCTIVE ~INSTALLATION 
PART. 


NOTE — All exposed conductive parts are connected to the PEN conductor. For 3 ~ consumer, local earth electrode has to be provided 
in addition. 


Fic. 14 INDIAN TN-C System (NEUTRAL AND PROTECTIVE FUNCTIONS COMBINED IN 
A SINGLE CONDUCTOR THROUGHOUT SYSTEM) 


COMBINED 
PE AND N 
CONDUCTOR 


NOTES 
1 The usual form of a TN-C-S system is as shown, where the supply is TN-C and the arrangement in the installations in TN-S. 


2 This type of distribution is known also as Protective Multiple Earthing and the PEN conductor is referred to as the combined neutral 
and earth (CNE) conductor. 


3 The supply system PEN conductor is earthed at several points and an earth electrode may be necessary at or near a consumer’s 
installation. 


4 All exposed conductive parts of an installation are connected to the PEN conductor via the main earthing terminal and the neutral 
terminal, these terminals being linked together. 


5 The protective neutral bonding (PNB) is a variant of TN-C-S with single point earthing. 


Fic. 15 TN-C-S SYSTEM, NEUTRAL AND PROTECTIVE FUNCTIONS COMBINED IN A 
SINGLE CONDUCTOR IN A PART OF THE SYSTEM 


17 


IS 3043 : 2018 


SOURCE OF ENERGY 


L1 
L2 
L3 
— —-—- 
F | ql 
сомзимЕв  ! 3% LOAD | CONSUMER 
INSTALLATION | INSTALLATION 
| 
is PE 
4 
2 
3 
NOTE — 6:6/11 kV Three-phase bulk supply. 
Fic. 16 T-TN-S SYSTEM 
SOURCE OF ENERGY 
14 
L2 
L3 
N 


pre ee cs. GRE 
gel | INSTALLATION 
= > < 1 | — EARTH 
SOURCE 2 3 | | ELECTRODE 
EARTH éb! | 
021 + | 
ee Re ae TEN. В, 


NOTES 

1 415 V Three-phase industrial supply having 3 ~ and 1 ~ loads. 

2 All exposed conductive parts of the installation are connected to an earth electrode which is electrically independent of the source 
earth. Single phase TT system not present in India. 


Fic. 17 TT System 


SOURCE OF ENERGY 


EARTHING 
IMPEDANCE 


| 1 


NOTES 
1 All exposed conductive parts of an installation are connected to an earth electrode. 
2 The source is either connected to earth through deliberately introduced earthing impedance or is isolated from earth. 


Fic. 18 IT System 


18 


a) provide for a low earth fault loop impedance 
to facilitate automatic disconnection of supply 
in the event of a fault to exposed conductive 
parts, and 

b) limit the rise of potential under earth-fault 

conditions of non-current carrying metal work 

with respect to earth to increase safety of 
persons and animals in proximity to such metal 
work. 


Extending the earth arrangement of an installation 
within a building by use of protective equipotential 
bonding of exposed-conductive parts and extraneous- 
conductive parts increases safety of persons and animals 
by reducing touch voltage between such parts and it 
can eliminate dangerous sparking. 


The performance requirements for earthing of 250 V 
but not exceeding 650 V installation (for example 
disconnection times, conductor sizes) are specified in 
IS 732. 


Where automatic disconnection according to Table 13 
of 18.0.5 of IS 732 cannot be achieved, supplementary 
equipotential bonding (Local equipotential bonding) 
shall be provided in accordance with 18.0.10 and 18.3.4 
of IS 732. Also, 19.1 of IS 732 permits RCD protection 
to be used to satisfy the requirement of the 18.0.4 
and 18.0.5 of IS 732 and maximum values of earth fault 
loop impedance are provided in Table 13 for given 
touch voltages for two different conditions — (a) Dry 
or moist condition, dry skin and significant floor 
resistance; and (b) wet locations, wet skin and low floor 
resistance. 


11.1.4 Equipment Using Current 


The purpose of earthing of current-using equipment is 
similar to that for earthing electrical installation of 
250 V but not exceeding 650 V. Accessible metal parts 
of Class I appliances/equipments that may become live 
in the event of an insulation fault shall be permanently 
and reliably connected to an earthing terminal within 
the appliance or to the earthing contact of the appliance 
inlet. Earthing terminal and earthing contact shall not 
be connected to the neutral terminal. 


However, Class II equipment, in which double 
insulation (insulation comprising both basic and 
supplementary insulation) or reinforced insulation are 
provide, may not have provision for connection of 
exposed metal work of the equipment to a protective 
conductor and no reliance upon precautions to be taken 
in the fixed location of installation. 


11.2 Marking of Earthing/Protective Conductor 


11.2.1 The earthing and protective conductor shall be 
marked as given in Table 1 (see also IS 11353). 


19 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Table 1 Marking of Conductors 
(Clause 11.2.1) 


Designation Identification by Colour 
of Alphanumeric | Graphical 
Conductor Notation Symbol 


(1) Q) (4) 


Earth Е No colour other 
than colour of 
the bare 
conductor 
Protective PB Green and yellow 
conductor 


11.2.2 Use of Bi-Colour Combination — Green and 
Yellow 


The bi-colour combination, green and yellow (green/ 
yellow), shall be used for identifying the protective 
conductor and for no other purpose. This is the only 
colour code recognized for identifying the protective 
conductor. 


Bare conductors or bus bars, used as protective 
conductors, shall be coloured by equally broad green 
and yellow stripes, each 15 mm up to 100 mm wide, 
close together, either throughout the length of each 
conductor or in each compartment or unit or at each 
accessible position. If adhesive tape is used, only bi- 
coloured tape shall be applied. 


For insulated conductors, the combination of the 
colours, green and yellow, shall be such that, on any 
15 mm length of insulated conductor, one of these 
colours covers at least 30 percent and not more than 
70 percent of the surface of the conductor, the other 
colour covering the remainder of that surface. 
NOTE — Where the protective conductor can be easily 
identified from its shape, construction or position, for example, 
a concentric conductor, then colour coding throughout its length 
is not necessary but the ends or accessible positions should be 


clearly identified by a symbol or the bi-colour combination, 
green and yellow. 


12 EQUIPMENT EARTHING 
12.0 Basic Objectives 


12.0.1 The basic objectives of equipment grounding 
are: 


a) to ensure freedom from dangerous electric 
shock voltages exposure to persons in the area; 
b) to provide current carrying capability, both in 


magnitude and duration, adequate to accept 
the ground fault current permitted by the 
overcurrent protective system without creating 
a fire or explosive hazard to building or 
contents; and 


IS 3043 : 2018 
c) to contribute to better performance of the 
electrical system. 


12.0.2 Voltage Exposure 


When there is unintentional contact between an 
energized electric conductor and the metal frame or 
structure that encloses it or is adjacent, the frame or 
structure tends to become energized to the same voltage 
level as exists on the energized conductor. To avoid 
this appearance of this dangerous, exposed shock 
hazard voltage, the equipment grounding conductor 
must present a low impedance path from the stricken 
frame to the zero potential ground junction. The 
impedance should also be sufficiently low enough to 
accept the full magnitude of the line-to-ground fault 
current without creating an impedance voltage drop 
large enough to be dangerous. 


12.0.3 Avoidance of Thermal Distress 


The earthing conductor must also function to conduct 
the full ground fault current (both magnitude and 
duration) without excessively raising the temperature 
of the earthing conductor or causing the expulsion of 
arcs and sparks that could initiate a fire or explosion. 
The total impedance of the fault circuit including the 
grounding conductor should also permit the required 
current amplitude to cause operation of the protective 
system. 


12.0.4 Preservation of System Performance 


The earthing conductor must return the ground fault 
current on a circuit without introducing enough 
additional impedance to an extent that would impair 
the operating performance of the overcurrent protective 
device, that is, a higher than necessary ground-circuit 
impedance would be acceptable if there is no 
impairment of the performance characteristics of the 
protective system. 


12.1 Classification of Equipment with Regard to 
Protection against Electric Shock 


12.1.1 Table 2 gives the principal characteristics of 
equipment according to this classification and indicates 


the precautions necessary for safety in the event of 
failure of the basic insulation. 


13 RESISTANCE TO EARTH 
13.0 Nature of Earthing Resistance 


13.0.1 The earthing resistance of an electrode is made 
up of: 


a) resistance of the (metal) electrode, 

b) contact resistance between the electrode and 
the soil, and 

c) resistance of the soil from the electrode surface 


outward in the geometry set up for the flow of 
current outward from the electrode to infinite 
earth. 


The first two factors are very small fractions of an ohm 
and can be neglected for all practical purposes. The 
factor of soil resistivity is discussed in 13.1. 


13.1 Soil Resistivity 


13.1.1 The resistance to earth of a given electrode 
depends upon the electrical resistivity of the soil in 
which it is installed. This factor is, therefore, important 
in deciding which of many protective systems to adopt. 


The type of soil largely determines its resistivity and 
examples are given in Table 3. Earth conductivity is, 
however, essentially electrolytic in nature and is 
affected, by the moisture content of the soil and by the 
chemical composition and concentration of salts 
dissolved in the contained water. Grain size and 
distribution, and closeness of packing are also 
contributory factors since they control the manner in 
which the moisture is held in the soil. Many of these 
factors vary locally and some seasonally so that the 
table should only be taken as a general guide. 


Local values should be verified by actual measurement, 
and this is especially important where the soil is 
stratified as, owing to the dispersion of the earth current, 
the effective resistivity depends not only on the surface 
layers but also on the underlying geological formation. 


Table 2 Classification of Equipment 
(Clause 12.1.1) 


Protective earthing 
means provided 


Connection to the 
protective earthing 


Principal characteristics of 
equipment 


No means of protective 
earthing 


Precautions for safety Earth free environment 


Class III 


Additional insulation 
and no means for 
protective earthing 


Designed for supply at 
safety extra low voltage 


None necessary Connection to safety 


extra low voltage 


20 


Table 3 Examples of Soil Resistivity 
(Clause 13.1.1) 


IS 3043 : 2018 


SI Type of Soil Probable Climatic Condition 
No. Value Normal and High Low Rainfall and Underground 
О.т Rainfall (for Desert Condition (for Waters (Saline) 
Example, Greater Example, Less than 
than 500 mm a 250 mm a Year) 
Year) 
Range of values Range of values Range of values 
encountered encountered encountered 
Q.m О.т О.т 
(1) (2) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Alluvium and lighter clays 5 D D 1 to 5 
ii) Clays (excluding alluvium) 10 5 to 20 10 to 100 
iii) Marls (for example, keuper 20 10 to 30 50 to 300 
marl) 
iv) Porous limestone (for 50 30 to 100 
example, chalk) 
v) Porous sandstone (for 100 30 to 300 
example, keuper sandstone 
and clay shales) 
vi) Quartzites, compact and 300 100 to 1 000 
crystalline limestone (for 
example, carboniferous 
marble, etc.) 
vii) Clay slates and slatey shales 1 000 300 to 3 000 1 000 upwards 30 to 100 
viii) Granite 1 000 
ix) Fossil slates, schists gneiss 2 000 1 000 ards 
igneous rocks 


P? Depends on water level of locality. 


It should also be noted that soil temperature has some 
effect (see 13.7), but is only important near and below 
freezing point, necessitating the installation of earth 
electrodes at depths to which frost will not penetrate. 
It is, therefore, recommended that the first 0.5 m of 
any earth electrode should not be regarded as being 
effective under frost conditions. 


While the fundamental nature and properties of a soil 
in a given area cannot be changed, use can be made of 
purely local conditions in choosing suitable electrode 
sites and methods of preparing the site selected to secure 
the optimum resistivity. These measures may be 
summarized as in 13.2 to 13.7. 


13.2 Where there is any option, a site should be chosen 
in one of the following types of soil in the order of 
preference given: 


a) Wet marshy ground (see 13.3); 

b) Clay, loamy soil, arable land, clayey soil, 
clayey soil or loam mixed with small quantities 
of sand; 


c) Clay and loam mixed with varying proportions 
of sand, gravel and stones; and 


d) Damp and wet sand, peat. 


Dry sand, gravel chalk, limestone, granite and any very 


stony ground should be avoided, and also all locations 
where virgin rock is very close to the surface. 


13.3 A site should be chosen that is not naturally well- 
drained. A water-logged situation is not, however, 
essential, unless the soil is sand or gravel, as in general 
no advantage results from an increase in moisture 
content above about 15 to 20 percent. Care should be 
taken to avoid a site kept moist by water flowing over 
it (for example, the bed of a stream) as the beneficial 
salts may be entirely removed from the soil in such 
situations. 


13.4 Where building has taken place, the site conditions 
may be altered by disturbance of the local stratification 
and natural geological formation when the electrodes 
have to be installed in this disturbed area. 


If a cut and fill exercise has been carried out then the 
top layer may be similar to the natural formation but 
increased in depth, whether it is good or bad in terms 
of resistivity. 


If an imported fill exercise has been carried out, the 
conditions of the upper layers may be altered 
considerably. 


In these cases, deeper driving of the electrode may be 
necessary to reach layers of reasonable resistivity and 


21 


IS 3043 : 2018 


also to reach stable ground, such that the value of the 
electrode resistance remains stable if the top layers of 
the ground dry out. 


13.5 Soil treatment to improve earth electrode contact 
resistance may be applied in special or difficult 
locations, but migration and leaching of applied 
chemicals over a period of time reduces the efficiency 
of the system progressively, requiring constant 
monitoring and replacement of the additives. Ecological 
considerations are inherent before such treatment is 
commenced and any deleterious effect upon electrode 
material has to be taken into account. However, for 
some temporary electrical installations in areas of high 
ground resistivity, this may be the most economic 
method for obtaining satisfactory earth contact over a 
short period of working. If a greater degree of 
permanence is envisaged, earth electrodes packaged 
in material such as bentonite are preferable. 


Bentonite or similar material may be used to advantage 
in rocky terrain. Where holes are bored for the insertion 
of vertical electrodes or where strip electrodes are laid 
radially under shallow areas of low resistivity 
overlaying rock strata, bentonite packing will increase 
the contact efficiency with the general mass of ground. 


There are commercially available materials to achieve 
the earth resistivity enhancement effectively but care 
should be taken to understand how they work during 
installation to ensure that they remain in contact with 
the rod or strip and do not shrink or swell away after 
drying out. It is to be noted that chemical treatment of 
soil has environmental implications and should not be 
considered as a long-term solution in order to meet a 
specified level of resistance, apart from the risk of 
corrosion to the earthing system. Coke breeze should 
also not be used due to its highly corrosive nature. 


13.6 Effect of Moisture Content on Earth Resistivity 


Moisture content 1s one of the controlling factors in 
earth resistivity. Figure 19 shows the variation of 
resistivity of red clay soil with percentage of moisture. 
The moisture content is expressed in percent by weight 
ofthe dry soil. Dry earth weighs about 1 440 kg/m?and 
thus 10 percent moisture content is equivalent to 144 kg 
of water per cubic metre of dry soil. It will be seen 
from Fig. 19 that above about 20 percent moisture, the 
resistivity is very little affected, while below 20 percent 
the resistivity increases very abruptly with the decrease 
in moisture content. A difference of a few percent 
moisture will therefore, make a very marked difference 
in the effectiveness of earth connection if the moisture 
content falls below 20 percent. The normal moisture 
content of soils ranges from 10 percent in dry seasons 
to 35 percent in wet seasons, and an approximate 
average may be perhaps 16 to 18 percent. 


22 


400 


300 


200 


100 


RESISTIVITY OF SOIL IN OHM METRE 


0 [1 - - 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 
MOISTURE IN SOIL, PERCENT 


70 


Fic. 19 VARIATION OF SOIL RESISTIVITY WITH 
MOISTURE CONTENT 


It should be recognized, however, that moisture alone 
is not the predominant factor in the low resistivity of 
soils; for example, earth electrodes driven directly in 
the beds of rivers or mountain streams may present very 
high resistance to earth. If the water is relatively pure, 
it will be high resistivity and unless the soil contains 
sufficient natural elements to form a conducting 
electrolyte, the abundance of water will not provide 
the soil with adequate conductivity. The value of high 
moisture content in soils is advantageous in increasing 
the solubility of existing natural elements in the soil, 
and in providing for the solubility of ingredients which 
may be artificially introduced to improve the soil 
conductivity. 


13.6.1 Corrosion Allowance 


On an average, steel corrodes about six times as fast as 
copper when placed in soil. The extent of corrosion 
depends upon the properties of soil. The generally 
accepted correlation between the electrical resistivity 
of soil and its corrosivity is as indicated in Table 4. 


The following methods can be adopted to safeguard 
conductor against excessive corrosion: 


a) Use of cathodic protection; 


b) Use current conducting, corrosion resistant 
coating on steel (for example, zinc coating). 
The zinc coating on the tubes shall be in 
accordance with IS 4736 with coating 
thickness 150 microns, Min; and 


Table 4 Soil Resistivity and Corrosion 
(Clause 13.6.1) 


SI Range of Soil Class of Soil 

No. Resistivity 

(O.m) 

d) (2) (3) 
1) Less than 25 Severely corrosive 
ii) 25-50 Moderately corrosive 
ili) 50-100 Mildly corrosive 
iv) Above 100 Very mildly corrosive 


c) Use steel conductor with large cross-section 
having allowance for corrosion. 


Based on the results of the field studies on rates of 
corrosion, the following allowances in cross- sectional 
area of the earthing conductor are recommended to take 
the effect of corrosion into account (see Table 5). 


Table 5 Allowances in Cross-sectional Area of the 
Earthing Conductor to take the Effect of 
Corrosion into Account 
(Clause 13.6.1) 


SI 
No. 


Allowances to 
be Considered 
in Sizing 


Type of Laying of the Earth 
Conductor 

i) | Conductors laid in soils having 0 
resistivity greater than 100 ohm- (No 
meters allowance) 
ii) | Conductors laid in soils having 
resistivity from 25 to 100 ohm- 
meters 


15 percent 


iii) 


Conductors laid in soils having 
resistivity lower than 25 ohm- 
meters or where treatment of soil 
around electrode is carried out 


30 percent 


For the purpose of determining the allowance to be 
made for corrosion, the minimum resistivity of the soil 
encountered at the location of grounding electrodes to 
be considered. The resistivity will be the minimum in 
wet weather. Thus, for very mildly corrosive soils, steel 
conductors meeting the stability and mechanical 
requirement are adequate. However, the steel 
conductors in the soil of other types should be at least 
6 mm thick if it is steel flat and have a diameter of at 
least 16 mm if it is in the form of steel rod. 


13.7 Effect of Temperature on Earth Resistance 


The temperature coefficient of resistivity for soil is 
negative, but is negligible for temperatures above 
freezing point. At about 20°C, the resistivity change is 
about 9 percent per °C. Below 0°C the water in the soil 
begins to freeze and introduces a tremendous increase 
in the temperature coefficient, so that as the temperature 
becomes lower the resistivity rises enormously. It is, 


23 


IS 3043 : 2018 


therefore, recommended that in areas where the 
temperature is expected to be quite low, the earth 
electrodes should be installed well below the frost line. 
Where winter seasons are severe, this may be about 
2 m below the surface, whereas in mild climates the 
frost may penetrate only a few centimetres or perhaps 
the ground may not freeze at all. Earth electrodes which 
are not driven below the first depth may have a very 
great variation in resistance throughout the seasons of 
the year. Even when driven below the frost line, there 
is some variation, because the upper soil, when frozen, 
presents a decided increase in soil resistivity and has 
the effect of shortening the active length of electrode 
in contact with soil of normal resistivity. 


13.8 Artificial Treatment of Soil 


Multiple rods, even in large number, may sometime 
fail to produce an adequately low resistance to earth. 
This condition arises in installations involving soils of 
high resistivity. Treatment of soil can be one solution 
to these conditions. 


Soil treatment to improve earth electrode contact 
resistance may be applied in special or difficult 
locations, but migration and leaching of applied 
chemicals over a period of time reduces the efficiency 
of the system progressively, requiring constant 
monitoring and replacement of the additives. Ecological 
considerations are inherent before such treatment is 
commenced and any deleterious effect upon electrode 
material has to be taken into account. However, for 
some temporary electrical installations in areas of high 
ground resistivity, this may be the most economic 
method for obtaining satisfactory earth contact over a 
short period of working. If a greater degree of 
permanence is envisaged, earth electrodes packaged 
in earth enhancing materialare preferable. 


Earth enhancing material may also be used to advantage 
in rocky terrain. Where holes are bored for the insertion 
of vertical electrodes or where strip electrodes are laid 
radially under shallow areas of low resistivity 
overlaying rock strata, earth enhancing material packing 
will increase the contact efficiency with the general 
mass of ground. 


Earth enhancement materials, some with a resistivity 
of less than 0.12 Q.m, are typically placed around the 
rod in an augured hole or around grounding conductors 
in a trench, in either a dry form or premixed іп a slurry. 
Some of these enhancement materials are permanent 
and will not leach any chemicals into the ground. Other 
available ground enhancement materials are mixed with 
local soil in varying amounts and will slowly leach into 
the surrounding soil, lowering the earth resistivity. There 
are commercially available materials to achieve the 
earth resistivity enhancement effectively but care should 


IS 3043 : 2018 


be taken to understand how they work during 
installation to ensure that they remain in contact with 
the rod or strip and do not shrink or swell away after 
drying out. It is to be noted that chemical treatment of 
soil has environmental implications and should not be 
considered as a long term solution in order to meet a 
specified level of resistance, apart from the risk of 
corrosion to the earthing system. Coke breeze should 
also not be used due to its highly corrosive nature. 


The alternative is to reduce the resistivity of the soil 
immediately surrounding the earth electrode. To reduce 
the soil resistivity, it is necessary to dissolve in the 
moisture, normally contained in the soil, some 
substance which is highly conductive in its water 
solution. The most commonly used substances are 
sodium chloride (NaCl), also known as common salt, 
calcium chloride (CaCl,), sodium carbonate (Na,CO,), 
copper sulphate (CuSO,), salt, and soft coke, and salt 
and charcoal in suitable proportions. 


13.8.1 With average or high moisture content, these 
agents form a conducting electrolyte throughout a wide 
region surrounding the earth electrode. Approximately 
90 percent of the resistance between a driven rod and 
earth lies within a radius of about 2 m from the rod. 
This should be kept in mind when applying the agents 
for artificial treatment of soil. The simplest application 
is by excavating a shallow basin around the top of the 
rod, 1 m in diameter and about 30 cm deep, and 
applying the artificial agent in this basin. The basin 
should subsequently be filled several times with water, 
which should be allowed each time to soak into the 
ground, thus carrying the artificial treatment, in 
electrolyte form, to considerable depths and allowing 
the artificial agent to become diffused throughout the 
greater part of the effective cylinder of earth 
surrounding the driven rod. 


13.8.2 The reduction in soil resistivity effected by salt 
is shown by the curve in Fig. 20. The salt content is 
expressed in percent by weight of the contained 
moisture. It will be noted that the curve flattens off at 
about 5 percent salt content and a further increase in 
salt gives but little decrease in the soil resistivity. The 
effect of salt will be different for different kinds of soil 
and for various moisture contents but the curve will 
convey an idea of how the soil conductivity can be 
improved. Decreasing the soil resistivity causes a 
corresponding decrease in the resistance of a driven 
earth electrode. 


13.8.3 In close texture soils, the artificial treatment may 
be effective over a period of many years. However, it 
is recommended that annual or biannual measurements 
of earth resistivity should be made to find out if 
additional treatment is needed. 


24 


RESISTIVITY OF SOIL IN OHM METRE 


2 4 6 8 10 12 
PERCENT OF SALT IN MOISTURE 
Fic. 20 VARIATION OF SOIL RESISTIVITY WITH 

SALT (NaCl) Сомтемт, CLAY боп, HAVING 
3 PERCENT MOISTURE 


14 16 


13.8.4 In using artificial treatment, the possible 
corrosive effect of the salt on the driven rods and 
connections should be considered. The possible 
contamination of the domestic water supply should also 
be considered. 


14 EARTH ELECTRODES 
14.1 Effect of Shape on Electrode Resistance 


With all electrodes other than extended systems, the 
greater part of the fall in potential occurs in the soil 
within a few feet of the electrode surface, since it is 
here that the current density is highest. To obtain a low 
overall resistance the current density should be as low 
as possible in the medium adjacent to the electrode, 
which should be so designed as to cause the current 
density to decrease rapidly with distance from the 
electrode. This requirement is met by making the 
dimensions in one direction large compared with those 
in the other two, thus a pipe, rod or strip has a much 
lower resistance than a plate of equal surface area. The 
resistance is not, however, inversely proportional to the 
surface area of the electrode. 


14.2 Resistance 
Earthelectrodes 


14.2.1 Plates 


of Common Types of 


The approximate resistance to earth of a plate can be 
calculated from: 


RE | ohms 
4VA 
where 
p = resistivity of the soil (assumed uniform) 
(in Q.m), and 
A = area of both sides of the plate (in m?). 


Where the resistance of a single plate is higher than 
the required value, two or more plates may be used in 
parallel and the total resistance is then inversely 
proportional to the number employed, provided that 
each plate is installed outside the resistance area of any 
other. This normally requires a separation of about 10 m 
but for sizes of plate generally employed, a separation 
of 2 m is sufficient to ensure that the total resistance 
will not exceed the value obtained from the above 
formula by more than 20 percent. Even at the latter 
spacing, it is generally more economical to use two 
plates in parallel, each of a given size, than one of twice 
that size. The size employed is, therefore, normally not 
greater than 1.2 m x 1.2 m. 


Plate electrodes shall be of the size at least 60 cm x 
60 cm. Plates are generally of cast iron not less than 
12 mm thick and preferably ribbed. The earth 
connection should be joined to the plate at not less than 
two separate points. Plate electrodes, when made of 
GI or steel, shall be not less than 6:3 mm in thickness. 
Plate electrodes of Cu shall be not less than 3:15 mm 
in thickness. 


Suitable methods of jointing are a taper pin driven into 
areamed hole and riveted over or a copper stud screwed 
into a tapped hole and riveted. Such joints should be 
protected by a heavy coat of bitumen. The connection 
between the earth plate and the disconnecting link 
should be set vertically and the depth of setting should 
be such as to ensure that the surrounding soil is always 
damp. The minimum cover should be 600 mm except 
that where the underlying stratum is solid, for example, 
chalk or sandstone and near the surface, the top of the 
plate should be level with the top of the solid stratum. 
Sufficient solid stratum should be removed and replaced 
with fine soil or other suitable infill to ensure as low a 
resistance as possible. 


The use of coke breeze as an infill is not recommended 
as it may result in rapid corrosion not only of the 
electrode itself but also of cable sheaths, etc, to which 
it may be bonded. 


The resistance R (in О) ofa 1.2 m x 1.2 m plate is given 
approximately by the following formula: 


Se 
2.75 


For conventional sizes, the resistance is approximately 
inversely proportional to the linear dimensions, not the 
surface area, that is a 0-9 m x 0:9 m plate would have a 
resistance approximately 25 percent higher than a 
1.2 m x 1.2 mplate. The current loading capacity of a 
1.2 m x 1.2 m plate is of the order of 1 600 A for 2 s 
and 1 300 A for 3 s. 


Plate electrodes shall be buried such that its top edge 


25 


IS 3043 : 2018 


is at a depth not less than 1-5 m from the surface of the 
ground. However, the depth at which plates are set 
should be such as to ensure that the surrounding soil is 
always damp. Where the underlying stratum is solid, 
for example chalk or sandstone and near the surface, 
the top of the plate should be approximately level with 
the top of the solid stratum. 


14.2.2 Pipes or Rods 


The resistance of a pipe or rod electrode is given by: 


R= BOE ee 2 ohms 


2a d 
where 
1 = length of rod or pipe, in cm; 
d = diameter of rod or pipe, in cm; and 


resistivity of the soil, in Q.m (assumed 
uniform). 


The curves of Fig. 21 are calculated from this equation 
for electrodes of 13, 25 and 100 mm diameter 
respectively in a soil of 100 Q.m respectively. Change 
of diameter has a relatively minor effect and size of 
pipe is generally governed by resistance to bending or 
splitting. It is apparent that the resistance diminishes 
rapidly with the first few feet of driving, but less so at 
depths greater than 2 to 3 m in soil of uniform resistivity. 


250 


CALCULATED RESISTANCE Q 


0 12 24 36 48 
LENGTH OF PIPE (m) 


Fic. 21 EFFECT or LENGTH OF PIPE ELECTRODE ON 
CALCULATED RESISTANCE FOR SOIL RESISTIVITY OF 
100 О m (ASSUMED UNIFORM) 


A number of rods or pipes may be connected in parallel 
and the resistance is then practically proportional to 
the reciprocal of the number employed so long as each 
is situated outside the resistance area of any other. In 
practice, this is satisfied by a mutual separation equal 
to the driven depth. Little is to be gained by separation 
beyond twice the driven depth. A substantial gain is 
effected even at 2 m separation. Copper clad mild steel 
rods can be used in place of normal mild steel rods 
where the soil is corrosive. 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Pipes may be of cast iron of not less than 100 mm 
diameter, 2.5 to 3 m long and 13 mm thick. Such pipes 
cannot be driven satisfactorily and may, therefore, be 
more expensive to install than plates for the same 
effective area. Alternatively, mild steel water-pipes of 
38 to 50 mm diameter are sometimes employed. These 
can be driven but are less durable than copper rods. 
Alternatively, 40 mm diameter GI pipe in treated earth 
pit or 40 mm diameter mild steel rod can be directly 
driven in virgin soil. The earth rod shall be placed at 
1.250 m below ground. The thickness of pipe used for 
earthing shall not be less than 1.6 mm thick for 
Gl/copper/SS pipes. 


Driven rods generally consist of round copper, steel- 
cored copper or galvanized steel 13, 16 or 19 mm in 
diameter from 1 220 mm to 2 440 mm in length. 


Cruciform and star shaped sections are also available 
and are more rigid while being driven, but the apparent 
additional surface does not confer a noticeable 
advantage in current-carrying capacity or reduction of 
resistance. In circumstances where it is convenient to 
do so, the addition of radial strips will be advantageous. 


Such rods may be coupled together to give longer 


200 


100 


RESISTANCE Q 


lengths. Except in special conditions, a number of rods 
in parallel are to be preferred to a single long rod. 
Deeply driven rods are, however, effective where the 
soil resistivity decreases with depth or where substrata 
of low resistivity occur at depths greater than those with 
rods, for economic reasons, are normally driven. In such 
cases the decrease of resistance with depth of driving 
may be very considerable as is shown by the 
measurements plotted in Fig. 22 for a number of sites; 
for curves A, and А,, it was known from previously 
sunk boreholes that the soil down to a depth between 
6 mand 9 m consisted of ballast, sand and gravel below 
which occurred London clay. The rapid reduction in 
resistance, when the electrodes penetrated the latter, 
was very marked. The mean resistivity up to a depth of 
8 m in one case was 150 О.т; at 11 m the mean value 
for the whole depth was 20 Q m moving to the low 
resistivity of the clay stratum. Similarly for curve C, 
the transition from gravely soil to clayey at a depth of 
about 1.5 m was very effective. In the case of curve В, 
however, no such marked effect occurred, although 
there was a gradual reduction in average resistivity with 
increase in depth, as can be seen by comparison with 
the dotted curves, which are calculated on the 
assumption of uniform resistivity. 


LENGTH OF DRIVEN ELECTRODE m 


— —Jóm 


Fic. 22 CALCULATED AND EXPERIMENTAL CURVES OF RESISTANCE OF 13 mm ОА DRIVEN ELECTRODES 


Other factors that affect a decision whether to drive 
deep electrodes or to employ several rods or pipes in 
parallel are the steep rise in the energy required to drive 
them with increase in depth and the cost of couplings. 
The former can be offset by reducing the diameter of 
the rods, since a 13 mm diameter rod can be driven to 
considerable depths without deformation or bending if 
the technique of using a large number of comparatively 
light blows is adopted rather than a smaller number of 
blows with a sledge hammer. Power-driven hammers 
suitable for this purpose are available. 


In cases where impenetrable strata or high resistivity 
soil occur at relatively small depths, considerable 
advantage may result from driving rods at an angle of 
about 30° to the horizontal, thus increasing the length 
installed for a given depth. 


14.2.3 Strip or Conductor Electrodes 


These have special advantages where high resistivity 
soil underlies shallow surface layers of low resistivity. 
The minimum cross-sectional area of strip electrodes 
shall be according to 12.1.1. If round conductors are 
used as earth electrodes, their cross-sectional area shall 
not be less than the sizes recommended for strip 
electrodes. The resistance R is given by: 


R= awe a ohms 


2a d 
where 
р = resistivity of soil (О.т) (assumed uniform); 
1 = length ofthe strip in cm; and 
d = width (strip) or twice the diameter 


(conductors); in cm. 


Care should be taken in positioning these electrodes, 
especially to avoid damage by agricultural operations. 


Figure 23 shows the variation of calculated earth- 
resistance of strip or conductor electrodes with length 
for a soil resistivity of 100 Q.m. The effect of conductor 
size and depth over the range normally used is very 
small. 


If several strip electrodes are required for connection 
in parallel in order to reduce the resistance, they may 
be installed in parallel lines or they may radiate from a 
point. In the former case, the resistance of two strips at 
a separation of 2.4 m is less than 65 percent of the 
individual resistance of cither of them. 


14.2.4 Water Pipes 


Water pipes shall not be used as consumer earth 
electrodes. 
NOTE — In urban districts and other areas where piped water 


supply is available the use of water pipes for consumers' earth 
electrodes has been common in the past. Though this was 


27 


IS 3043 : 2018 


generally very effective when consumers' pipes and water mains 
to which they were connected were all metal-to-metal joints, 
the use of public water-pipes for this purpose has not been 
acceptable for many years because of the use of non-conducting 
material for pipes on new installations and for replacement 
purposes. Jointing techniques now being used do not ensure 
electrical continuity of metallic pipes. 


G 12 
O 

2 10 
ы 8 
ш 6 
x 

Q 4 
be 

3 9 
2 

О 

- 

5 о 60 120 180 240 300 


LENGTH (m) 


Fic. 23 EFFECT OF LENGTH OF STRIP OR CONDUCTOR 
ELECTRODES IN CALCULATED RESISTANCE FOR SOIL 
REsISTIVITY OF 100 © · т (ASSUMED UNIFORM) 


For new installations, therefore, a public water pipe 
may not be used as a means of earthing. Metallic pipe 
systems of services other than water service (for 
example, for flammable liquids or gases, heating 
systems, etc) shall not be used as earth electrodes for 
protective purposes. Bonding of the water service with 
the exposed metalwork of the electrical installation (on 
the consumers’ side of any insulating insert) and any 
other extraneous metalwork to the installation earthing 
terminal is, however, permissible and indeed necessary 
in most circumstances subject to the provision of 
earthing facilities that are satisfactory before these 
bonding connections are made. 


For existing installations in which a water pipe is used 
as a sole earth electrode; an independent means of 
earthing should be provided at the first practicable 
opportunity. 


14.2.5 Resistance of an Electrode Encased in Low 
Resistivity Material, for Example, Conducting 
Concrete 


The resistance of a backfilled electrode R, in ohms (Q) 
may be calculated from: 


1 8L 
R, = ок 0) [log, EX 
8L 
Pllog, (=) —1]} 
where 


the resistivity of soil, in ohm metres (Q.m); 


IS 3043 : 2018 


р. = the resistivity of the conducting material used 
for the backfill, in ohm metres (Q.m); 

L = the length of rod, in metres (m); 

d = the diameter of the rod in metres (m). 


14.2.6 Cable Sheaths 


Where an extensive underground cable system is 
available, the lead sheath and armour form a most 
effective earth-electrode. In the majority of cases, the 
resistance to earth of such a system is less than 1 QA 
freshly installed jute or hessian served cable is insulated 
from earth, but the insulation resistance of the jute 
deteriorates according to the moisture content and 
nature of the soil. However, cable sheaths arc more 
commonly used to provide a metallic path to the fault 
current returning to the neutral. 


14.2.7 Structural Steelwork 


The resistance to earth of steel frames or reinforced 
concrete buildings will vary considerably according to 
the type ofsoil and its moisture content, and the design 
ofthe stanchion bases. For this reason, it is essential to 
measure the resistance to earth of any structural 
steelwork that it is employing and at frequent intervals 
thereafter. 


On the assumption that a representative value of a 
footing resistance can be obtained, the combined effect 
of all similar footings R,, in ohms (О), assumed to be 
arranged in an approximately rectangular plan, may be 
obtained from the following: 


in which & = OnR,s 


where 
R, = the resistance of one footing, in ohms (Q); 
à = the factor from Table 6; 
p = the resistivity of the soil, in ohm metres 
(Om); 
s = the spacing of footings, in metres (m); 
n = the number of footings used as electrodes. 


NOTE — This equation is based on the assumption that the 
spacing between adjacent electrodes is such that the ratio 
@/2тЁ |5 is less than approximately 0.2. 


The larger proportion of the resistance is due to the 
concrete to earth immediately around the metal work 
and is dependent on its moisture content. After 
construction and with the passage of time this moisture 
content will approach equilibrium with that of the soil, 
and will usually be drier than when first laid. 


The resistance to earth of a reinforced concrete 


28 


Table 6 Factors for Vertical Electrodes Arranged 
in a Hollow Square 
(Clauses 14.2.7 and 14.2.11.5) 


SI Number of Electrodes (л) Factor à 
No. Along the Side of the 
Square 

a) (2) (3) 
i) 2 2.71 
ii) 3 4.51 
iii) 4 5.46 
iv) 5 6.14 
v) 6 6.63 
vi) 7 7.03 
vii) 8 7.30 
viii) 9 7.65 
ix) 10 7.90 
x) 12 8.22 
xi) 14 8.67 
xii) 16 8.95 
xiii) 18 9.22 
xiv) 20 9.40 


NOTE — The number of electrodes around the square is 
4(n-1). 


foundation R, in ohms (Q) may be estimated by 
assuming that only the vertical reinforcing rods are 
bonded to the building structure or to the earthing 
system. It may be assumed that the rods are equally 
spaced in symmetrical pattern. 


1 б 21, 
R=—|p, — p|log,| 1+— |+ plog,| — 
ar^ p] ef J p е [= 


where 


p = the resistivity of the soil, in ohm metres 
(Q.m); 

p, = the resistivity of the concrete, in ohm metres 
(Q.m); 

L = the length of reinforcing rod below ground 
level, in metres (m); 

А = the thickness of the concrete between rods 
and soil, in metres (m); and 

z = the geometric mean distance of rod cluster, 


in metres (m) (see Table 7). 


14.2.8 Reinforcement of Piles 


At power stations and large substations, it is often 
possible to secure an effective earth-electrode by 
making use of the reinforcement in concrete piles. 
The earth strap should be bonded to a minimum of 
four piles and all the piles between the bonds should 
be bonded together. Each set of four piles should be 
connected to the main earthing-strap of the 
substation. 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Table 7 Geometric Mean Distance z for Closely Spaced Reinforcing Rods in a Symmetrical Pattern 
(Clause 14.2.7) 


Key : 


a is the radius of a reinforcing rod, in metres (m) 
s is the distance between adjacent rods, in metres (m) 
z is the geometric mean distance, in metres (m) 


NOTE — Special care is necessary where the construction includes prestressed concrete. 


14.2.9 Cathodically Protected Structures 


Cathodic protection is normally applied to ferrous 
structures in order to counteract electrolytic corrosion 
at a metal to electrolyte interface. 


The electrolyte is generally the ground in which the 
structure is either wholly or partially buried and the 
protection system relies upon maintaining the 
metalwork at a slightly more negative potential than it 
would exhibit by half cell measurements, if no 
corrective action had been taken. 


The application of cathodic protection varies according 


29 


to circumstances between bare metal in contact with 
ground and metal that has been deliberately coated or 
wrapped against corrosion. In the latter case, cathodic 
protection is used to supplement the coating and guard 
against localized corrosion due to coating flaws or 
faults. Protective system current drain is proportional 
to the area of bare metal in earth contact and ifa normal 
earthing electrode is attached to a cathodically protected 
structure, the increased drain current taken by the 
electrode could be completely unacceptable. This is 
especially true where the system has been designed to 
protect a well wrapped or coated structure. 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Nevertheless, there may be a necessity to connect earth 
electrodes to cathodically protected structures, 
especially where the coating or wrapping tends to 
electrically insulate the structure from ground, for 
example: 


а) diversion of earth fault currents from electrical 
apparatus mounted on the structure; 

b) diversion of stray current to ground, a problem 
often met where well coated pipelines are 
substantially parallel to the route of a high 
voltage overhead line; 

c) prevention of elevated voltages where 
structures encroach into hazardous 
(flammable) areas; and 

d) prevention of power surges into the apparatus 
providing cathodic protection, or similar 
invasion of delicate low current 


instrumentation circuits. 


In addition to the guidance given in 14.3, selection of 
metals for earth electrodes and determination of their 
ground contact area is most important where 
cathodically protected structures are involved. 


The material selected should exhibit a galvanic potential 
with respect to ground as nearly equal to that exhibited 
by the structure in its natural or unprotected condition. 
For ferrous structures, austenitic iron (austenitic cast 
nickel chromium alloy with spheroidal graphite present) 
is often used. Vertically driven rods of this material are 
preferred in order to minimize contact area and thus 
reduce cathodic protection drain, whilst obtaining 
optimum performance from the electrode. Copper 
should be avoided, wherever possible, not only for its 
increased drain but also for its ability to become 
cathodic to the protected structure. Magnesium or zinc 
electrodes have been used successfully, but are anodic 
to the protected structure and thus sacrificial in action. 


14.2.10 Mesh 


The resistance of mesh (grid) R,, ohms (Q) may be 
calculated from: 


Rm = 0.443 L+ £ 
L 


VA 


where 
p = the resistivity of the soil, in ohm metres 
(О.т); 
А = the actual area covered by the mesh, in 
square metres (m°); and 
L = the total length of strip used in the mesh, in 


metres (m). 
14.2.11 Miscellaneous Electrodes 


There are many configurations that can be set out, but 


30 


only a few which are most likely to try first in order to 
achieve the required value are included. 


14.2.11.1 Three rods at the vertices of an equilateral 
triangle 


The resistance А, in ohms (О) of three interconnected 
rods set out at the vertices of an equilateral triangle 
(see Fig. 24) of side s metres length may be calculated 
from: 


К, = lp ов, (SES =1]-1+215} 
3 d 
where 
p = resistivity of the soil, in ohm metres (О.т); 
L = length of the rod, in metres (m); 
d = diameter of the rod, in metres (m); and 
s = lengthofone side of the equilateral triangle, 


in metres (m). 
14.2.11.2 Two strips set at right angles to each other 
meeting at one corner 


The resistance R, in ohms (€2) of two strips of equal 
length set at 90? with one corner touching (see Fig. 24) 
may be calculated from: 


p L 
5а ee (iz 
where 
p = resistivity of soil, in ohm metres (Q-m); 
L  - total length of strip, in metres (m); 
h = depth of the burial in metres (m); 
d = diameter of the round conductor or diameter 


of the equivalent cross-sectional area of the 
strip in metres (m). 


14.2.11.3 Three strips set at 1200 meeting at the star 
point all of equal length 


The resistance R, in ohms (Q) of a star arranged strip 
(see Fig. 24) may be calculated from: 


R = £ о | | 
2zL 0.767 hd 
where 
p = е resistivity of soil, in ohm metres (О.т); 
L =the total length of strip, in metres (m); 
h =the depth of the burial in metres (m); and 
d =the diameter of the round conductor or 


diameter of the equivalent cross-sectional 
area of the strip in metres (m). 


14.2.11.4 Four strips set in a cruciform 


The resistance R,, in ohms (О) of four strips set out in 


a cruciform (see Fig. 24) may be calculated from: 


Ra = p log. [ L ) 
2zL 0.217 6 hd 


p = the resistivity of soil, in ohm metres (О.т); 
L = the total length of strip, in metres (m); 

h = the depth of the burial in metres (m); 
d 


— the diameter of the round conductor or 
diameter of the equivalent cross-sectional 
area of the strip in metres (m). 


14.2.11.5 Vertical rods in a hollow square 


The resistance Ryo, of rods set out in a hollow square 
(see Fig. 24) may be calculated from: 


nc [Жол 
п 
where 
R, = the resistance of one rod, in ohms (Q); 
à = the factor in Table 6; 
p = the resistivity of soil, in ohm metres (Q m); 
s = the spacing of rods, in metres (m); and 


— the number of rods used as electrodes 
(see note of Table 6). 


s 


a) THREE RODS AT THE VERTICES 
OF AN EQUILATERAL TRIANGLE 


L/3-J 


c) THREE STRIPS SET AT120* RIGHT 


MEETING AT THE STAR POINT 
ALL OF EQUAL LENGTH 


IS 3043 : 2018 


14.3 Selection of Metals for Earth-Electrodes 


Although electrode material does not affect initial earth 
resistance, care should be taken to select a material that 
Is resistant to corrosion in the type of soil in which it 
will be used. Tests in a wide variety of soils have shown 
that copper, whether tinned or not, is entirely 
satisfactory (subject to the precautions given in this 
sub clause), the average loss in weight of specimens 
150 mm x 25 mm x 3 mm buried for 12 years in no 
case exceed 0-2 percent per year. Corresponding 
average losses for unprotected ferrous specimens (for 
example, cast iron, wrought iron or mild steel) used in 
the tests were as high as 2:2 percent per year. 
Considerable and apparently permanent protection 
appears to be given to mild steel by galvanizing, the 
test showing galvanized mild steel to be little inferior 
to copper with an average loss not greater than 
0-5 percent per year. Only in a few cases was there any 
indication in all these tests that corrosion was 
accelerating and in these cases the indications were not 
very significant. 


The possibility on damage to cables and other 
underground services and structural metalwork in the 
vicinity of earth-electrode due to electrolytic action 
between dissimilar materials should not be overlooked 
when the material for earth-electrodes is selected. 
Materials compatible with other metal structures in the 


L/2-J 


b) TWO STRIPS SET AT RIGHT ANGLES TO 
EACH OTHER MEETING AT ONE CORNER 


L/4 


d) FOUR STRIPS SET IN A CRUCIFORM 


e) VERTICAL ELECTRODES ARRANGED IN A HOLLOW SQUARE 


Fic. 24 MISCELLANEOUS ELECTRODE CONFIGURATIONS 


IS 3043 : 2018 


vicinity should be selected or other remedial action 
taken. 


It may be essential to use materials of types other than 
those mentioned earlier in special circumstances, when 
cathodically protected structures such as pipelines are 
encountered. 


A modern high pressure gas pipeline, wrapped and 
cathodically protected may have a galvanic potential 
of —0.5 V, the accepted material of copper for an earth 
electrode with a galvanic potential of —0.2 V decreases 
the total galvanic voltage and increases the need for 
current from the corrosion protection impressed current 
system, when the earth electrode is connected to the 
pipeline. 


An earth electrode with a galvanic potential nearer to 
the protected structure has to be used to overcome the 
above and be certain the pipeline is being protected. 
Such a material is termed an austenitic iron and is an 
austenitic cast nickel-chromium alloy, with spheroidal 
graphite present. 


It may be necessary to earth the pipeline for one or 
more of the following reasons: 


a) It should not on its own be a carrier of any 
low voltage fault current, 
b) Itmay havelow voltage equipment connected 
to it, for example, for the purpose of valve 
operation; 
It may have instrumentation connected to it 
that require it to be earthed for this purpose 
and to provide a signal reference earth as well 
as for earthing requirement relative to 
electrical equipment used in hazardous areas; 
and 
d) Itmay require connection to earth at points to 
discharge unwanted induced currents and 
voltages from other sources such as overhead 
lines. 


These four points lead to a compromise between the 
need to have a low earth value for instrumentation 
reference purposes, which may require a lot of buried 
metal, and a reasonable earth value for electrical 
purposes against the corrosion protection requirement 
to have a minimum of buried bare metal connected to 
the pipeline, and thus drawing a corrosion protection 
current that may be required by the pipeline. 


14.4 Typical installations of pipe earth electrode and 
plate earth electrode are shown in Fig. 25 and Fig. 26. 


14.5 Typical Method for Jointing of Conductors — 
Methods of jointing conductors are shown from 
Fig. 27A to Fig. 27 F. 


32 


15 CURRENT DENSITY AT THE SURFACE OF 
AN EARTH ELECTRODE 


15.1 An earth electrode should be designed to have a 
loading capacity adequate for the system of which it 
forms a part, that is, it should be capable of dissipating 
without failure the energy in the earth path at the point 
at which it is installed under any condition of operation 
on the system. Failure is fundamentally due to excessive 
temperature rise at the surface of the electrode and is 
thus a function of current density and duration as well 
as electrical and thermal properties of the soil. 


In general, soils have a negative temperature coefficient 
of resistance so that sustained current loading results 
in an initial decrease in electrode resistance and a 
consequent rise in the earth fault current for a given 
applied voltage. As soil moisture is driven away from 
the soil-electrode interface, however, the resistance 
increases and will ultimately become infinite if the 
temperature-rise is sufficient. 


15.2 Three conditions of operation require 
consideration, that is, long-duration loading as with 
normal system operation; short-time overloading as 
under fault conditions in directly earthed systems, and 
long-time overloading as under fault conditions in 
systems protected by arc-suppression coils. 


15.3 The little experimental work which has been done 
on this subject by experts at the international level has 
been confined to model tests with spherical electrodes 
in clay or loam of low resistivity and has led to the 
following conclusions: 


a) Long-duration loading due to normal 
unbalance of the system will not cause failure 
of earth-electrodes provided that the current 
density at the electrode surface does not 
exceed 40A/m?. Limitation to values below 
this would generally be imposed by the 
necessity to secure a low-resistance earth. 

b) Time to failure on short-time overload is 
inversely proportional to the specific loading, 
which is given by 2, where i is the current 
density at the electrode surface. For the soils 
investigated, the maximum permissible current 
density, i 1s given by: 


‚_7.57х10° 


1 
Ja 


A/m? 


where 
t = duration ofthe earth fault (in s); and 
p = resistivity of the soil (in Q.m). 


Experience indicates that this formula is appropriate 
for plate electrodes. 


IS 3043 : 2018 


C.I. COVER 
HINGED 


TO C | FRAME 


"Ай > 
АУА, ЛУ УЛУ AV AV УЛУ. |, 


А 
[E RS 


@65 PVC CONDUIT 
EMBEDDED TO 
GROUNDING CONDUCTOR 


AFTER FIXING SURFACE 
SHOULD COVERD WITH 
BITUMIN OR GREASE 


HOMOGENOUS 
LAYER OF COMMON 
EARTH / EARTH 
RESISTIVITY 
ENHANCING 
MATERIAL WHERE 
REQUIRED 


50X6G.. 3000 


STRIP 50X3GI. C I PIPE 100 ID 
13 THICK 
910 BOLT STRIP 
AND NUTS 
DETAIL A 


NOTE — After laying the earth from the earth bus to the electrode through the PVC conduits at the pit entry conduits should be sealed 
with bitumen compound. 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 25 TvPICAL ARRANGEMENT OF PIPE ELECTRODE 


33 


IS 3043 : 2018 


WELDED 


150 


COPPER PLATE 


CHARCOAL 
AND SALT 


600 X 600 X 3 
COPPER PLATE 


DETAIL-A 


600 X 600 X3 
COPPER PLAT 


@ 10 BRASS BOLT 
LENGTH 30 (AFTER 

FIXING, THE OUTSIDE 
SURFACE SHOULD 
BE COVERED WITH 
BITUMEN) 


35 X 6 COPPER STRIP Ø 12 X 40 LONG BRASS 
BOLTS & NUTS, CHECK 
NUT & WASHER (AFTER 
FIXING, THE OUTSIDE 

SURFACE SHOULD BE 


COVERED WITH BITUMEN) 


DETAIL-B 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


26A Earthing with Copper Plate 


WELDED 


INSPECTION 
CHAMBER 


CEMENT 
CONCERET 


1200 X 1200 X 12 
G.I. PLATE 


CHARCOAL 


AND SALT 
1200 X 1200 X 12 


СІ. PLATE 
DETAIL-A 


1200 X 1200 X 12 
G.I. PLATE 


Ø 1061. BOLT 
LENGTH 50 (AFTER 

FIXING, THE OUTSIDE 
SURFACE SHOULD 
BE COVERED WITH 
BITUMEN) 


Ø 12 X60 LONGG! 
BOLTS & NUTS, CHECK 
NUT & WASHER (AFTER 
FIXING, THE OUTSIDE 
SURFACE SHOULD BE 
COVERED WITH BITUMEN) 


50 X 1261. 
STRIP 


DETAIL-B 


26B Earthing with Galvanized Iron Plate 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 26 EARTHING WITH PLATE EARTH ELECTRODE 


34 


150 


35 X 6 COPPER 


BRASS BOLTS & 
NUTS, CHECK NUT 

& WASHER (AFTER 
FIXING, THE OUTSIDE 
SURFACE SHOULD 
BE COVERED 

WITH BITUMEN) 


25 X 4 COPPER 
STRIP FOR 
CLAMP 


DETAIL-C 


50 X 1261. 
STRIP 


G.I. BOLTS & 
NUTS, CHECK NUT 

& WASHER (AFTER 
FIXING, THE OUTSIDE 
SURFACE SHOULD 
BE COVERED 

WITH BITUMEN) 


50 X 1261. 
STRIP FOR 
CLAMP 


DETAIL-C 


IS 3043 : 2018 


PUSH BUTTON 
STATION/ STARTER 


27A Earthing Arrangement for Motors with Push Button Station/Starter Earth Connections to Starter Looped from Earth 
Connections of Motor 


GI BOLTS AND NUTS, FLAT 
WASHER AND GI SPRING 
WASHER (AFTER FIXING, THE 
OUT SIDE SURFACE SHOULD 
BE COVERED WITH BITUMIN 
OR GREASE) 


TEE GS 
ERN 


EQUIPMENT/STRIP 


TINNER 
COPPER 
CABLE 


27B Arrangement of Double Earth Connection to Equipment (Strip to Conductor Connection) 


BRAZING FOR 

BRAZI FOR 
COPPER AND та 
WELDING WELDING 
FOR ALUMINIUM FOR ALUMINIUM 


REVETING REVETING 


ALUMINIUM ALUMINIUM 
COPPER COPPER 


OVERLAP MIN, 50MM 


27C Straight Joint (Strips) 27D ‘T’ Joint (Strips) 
Fic. 27 TYPICAL METHODS FoR JOINTING OF CONDUCTORS — (Continued) 


35 


IS 3043 : 2018 


FLAT WASHER AND SPRING WASHER(GI) 
TO BE CONNECTED USING GI BOLTS 


QUIPMENT/ STRIP 


ALUMINIUM 
OR COPPER 


27E Arrangement of Strip to Strip and Strip to Equipment 
Connection 


=] 40mm pe 


2mm TINNED COPPER 
BINDING WIRE AND THE 
JOINT TO BE SOLDERED 


ALMUNIUM/ COPPER 
CONDUCTOR 


27F Conductor to Conductor Joint (Round Conductor) 


Fic. 27 TYPICAL METHODS FOR JOINTING OF CONDUCTORS 


16 VOLTAGE GRADIENT AROUND EARTH 
ELECTRODES 


16.1 Under fault conditions, the earth electrode is raised 
to a potential with respect to the general mass of the 
earth that can be calculated from the prospective fault 
current and the earth resistance of the electrode. This 
results in the existence of voltages in the soil around 
the electrode that may be injurious to telephone and 
pilot cables, whose cores are substantially at earth 
potential, owing to the voltage to which the sheaths of 
such cables are raised; the voltage gradient at the surface 
of the ground may also constitute a danger to life, 
especially where cattle are concerned. The former risk 
arises mainly in connection with large electrode systems 
as at power stations and substations. 


16.2 Danger to animals occurs principally with pole- 
mounted substations on low-voltage systems. In rural 
areas, it is by no means uncommon for the earth-path 
resistance to be such that faults are not cleared within 
a short period and in such cases, animals, which 
frequently congregate nearrm: a pole, are liable to 
receive a dangerous shock. The same trouble sometimes 
occurs at farms where earth electrodes are provided 
for individual appliances. An effective remedy is to 
earth the neutral conductor at some point on the system 
inaccessible to animals rather than earthing the neutral 
at the transformer itself. Alternatively, an effective 
method is for pipe or rod electrodes to be buried with 
their tops below the surface of the soil and connection 
made to them by means of insulated leads. The 
maximum voltage gradient over a span of2 m adjacent 


36 


to a 25 mm diameter pipe electrode is reduced from 
85 percent ofthe total electrode potential when the top 
of the electrode is at ground level to 20 and 5 percent 
when it is buried 0-3 and 1:0 m respectively. 


16.3 Earth electrodes, other than those used for the 
earthing of the fence itself, should not be installed in 
proximity to a metal fence, to avoid the possibility of 
the fence becoming live and thus dangerous at points 
remote from the substation or alternatively giving rise 
to danger within the resistance area of the electrode by 
introducing a good connection with the general mass 
of the earth. 


16.4 Calculation of Ground Surface Potentials 
16.4.1 Vertical Electrodes 


For vertical electrodes, the fraction E of the potential 
arising on the electrode(s) which appears at a point P 
on the ground surface may be estimated approximately 
by the following equation : 


Y^ log, [it Jv? +0] 


E 
(1+ AB) log, (=) 
d 
where 
у = Llr; 
n = the number of the electrodes; 
L = the buried length of an electrode, in metres 


(m); 


the distance of the point P on the ground 
surface to the i™ electrode, in metres (т) (r, 
Is the greater than the radius ofan electrode); 


the grouping factor given in Table 8 


L 


slo aL 
Be d 


B 


where 


d 


the diameter of the electrode(s), in 
metres (m); 


the spacing between the electrodes in 
metres (m) (It is assumed that the 
electrodes are evenly spaced). 


5 = 


NOTE —It is assumed that spacing between electrodes 
is not less than two-thirds of the electrode length and 
that electrode currents are equal. 
For a single electrode, it may be assumed that л = 1, 
à = 0 and Е is the fraction of the electrode potential for 
an equipotential at a radius r around the electrode. 


Table 8 Factors for Vertical Parallel Electrodes 
Arranged in a Line 
(Clause 16.4.1) 


SI Number of Electrodes (лп) Factor à 
No. 
a) (2) (3) 
i) 2 1.00 
ii) 3 1.66 
iii) 4 2.15 
iv) 3 2.54 
v) 6 2.87 
vi) 7 3.15 
vii) 8 3.39 
viii) 9 3.61 
ix) 10 3.81 


16.4.2 Horizontal Electrodes 


For horizontal electrodes, the fraction E ofthe electrode 
potential, at a point P on a line perpendicular to the 
line of the electrodes, may be obtained from the 
following equation : 


Y^ log, [u+ (ve +0) 
E uz 


H 
Flog | — 
a5] 
where 
n = the number of electrodes; 
l 
Vi 


Nre 


37 


IS 3043 : 2018 


h = the depth of electrodes from the ground 
surface, in metres (m); 

r, = the distance along the ground surface from 
point P to a point vertically above the ;'^ 
electrode, in metres (m); 

L = the length of each electrode, in metres (m); 

F = the group factor F has the following value: 
For two lengths, F = 0.5 + [0.078 (s/L)] 9??? 
For three lengths, F = 0.33  [0.071(s/L)] 9^95 
For four lengths, F = 0.25 + [0.067(s/L)] ^^?! 
Provided that 0.02 « (s/L) « 0.3. 

D = the diameter of each electrode, in metres (m). 

For a strip electrode, d may be obtained from: 
f=" 
л 
where 
w = the width ofa strip electrode, in metres (m). 


wherever, there is one electrode, that is n = 1, the group 
factor may be assumed to be unity, that is F = 1. 


NOTE — These equations assume that electrode depth is small 
compared with its length and that electrode currents are equal. 


17 CONNECTIONS TO EARTH ELECTRODES 
— EARTHING AND PROTECTIVE 
CONDUCTORS 


17.0 General 


17.0.1 The materials used for making connections have 
to be compatible with the earth rod and the copper 
earthing conductor so that galvanic corrosion is 
minimized. In all cases, the connections have to be 
mechanically strong. 


17.0.2 For large earthing installations, such as at major 
substations, it is common to make provision for the 
testing of earth electrodes. This 1s achieved by 
connecting a group of rod driven electrodes to the main 
earth grid through a bolted link adjacent to the 
electrodes in a sunken concrete box. Simpler 
disconnecting arrangements (or none at all) may be 
acceptable for small earthing installations. 


17.1 Earthing Conductors 


17.1.1 Earthing conductors are protective conductors 
and should be sized in the same way as other protective 
conductors and shall comply with 17.2.2, but with 
specified minimum cross sectional areas when buried 
in the ground specified in Table 9. 


NOTES 


1 Uncoated buried copper is electro-positive to uncoated buried 
steel and when interconnected by a current-carrying conductor, 


IS 3043 : 2018 


these metals form an electrochemical cell that can cause 
accelerated corrosion. Aluminium or copper clad aluminium 
conductors should not be used for final connection to earth 
electrode. Where a copper conductor is to be joined to 
Aluminium the proper procedure for joining conductors of 
Aluminium to copper should be followed. The connection of 
the earthing conductor to the earth electrode or other means of 
earthing should be soundly made by the use of compound filled, 
encapsulated or substantial clamps of non-ferrous metal. Where 
the earthing conductor is to be connected to the metal sheath 
and armoured of a cable, the sheath and armour should be 
bonded together and the principal connection between the cable 
and the earthing conductor should be to the metal sheath and 
should be plumbed. Alternatively, if a clamp is used for this 
connection it should be so designed and installed as to provide 
reliable connection without damage to the cable. Earthing and 
bonding clamp should conform to relevant IS. 

2 Whilst the connector referred to might be in a link box 
underground and therefore not readily accessible, IS 732 
stipulates that provision is made in an accessible portion for 
disconnecting the main earthing terminal of an installation from 
the means of earthing to facilitate measurement of the resistance 
of the earthing arrangements. 


Table 9 Minimum Cross-sectional Area of 
Earthing Conductors 
(Clause 17.1.1) 


Mechanically Mechanically 
Protected Unprotected 
According to 16 mm? (Cu) 
0 17.2.2 witha 16 mm? (Fe) 
Protected against minimun of 
corrosion 16 mm? (Cu) 
or (Fe) 
Not protected 25 mm? (Cu) 
against corrosion 17 mm? (Fe) 


17.1.2 The connection of an earthing conductor to an 
earth electrode shall be soundly made and electrically 
satisfactory. Where a clamp is used, it shall not damage 
the electrode (for example, a pipe) or the earthing 
conductor. 


17.1.3 Main Earthing Terminals or Bars 


A consumer's electrical installation of voltage 250 V 
but not exceeding 650 V supplied from TN distributor 
network should have a main earthing terminal (MET) 
that is connected to the protective conductor of the 
source and via this to earth electrode installed in the 
electricity distributor supply system. Functional 
earthing conductors should be connected to MET if 
required. 


The function of MET is to provide a reference point 
for the installation, it consists of a terminal or bar 
provided for the connection of protective conductors 
and conductors for functional earthing. 


Although the MET is connected to Earth, it is seldom 
at zero potential because of the potential difference 
caused by leakage and other current flowing to earth. 


38 


Where the installation provides electricity supplies to 
a number of customers, an independent earth electrode 
should also be connected to the MET ifthe main supply 
has a combined neutral and protective conductor. 


In the case of TT and IT system, the MET should be 
earthed by an independent earth electrode only. 


17.2 Circuit Protective Conductors 
17.2.1 Types of Protective Conductors 


17.2.1.1 Protective conductors may comprise: 


a) conductors in multicore cables; 

b) insulated or bare conductors in a common 
enclosure with live conductors; 

c) fixed bare of insulated conductors; 

d) metal coverings, for example, the sheaths, 
screens and armouring of certain cables 
(further requirements under consideration) 
(see Note 1); 

e) metal conduits or other metal enclosures for 
conductors (further requirements under 
consideration) (see Note 2); and 

f) certain extraneous conductive parts. 

NOTES 


1 When the metallic sheath of a cable is used as a current 
protective conductor, every joint in that sheath should 
be made that its current-carrying capacity is not less 
than that of the sheath and where non-metallic joint 
boxes are used, means such as metal strip having the 
same effective current-carrying capacity as the largest 
cable entering the box should be provided to maintain 
continuity. 

When using the metal sheath or armour, attention should 
also be paid to the ability of the cable glands and 
connections to carry prospective earth fault-current and 
it might be necessary to seek advice from the 
manufacturers on this aspect. Special precautions may 
be considered necessary with the metal parts of the 
assembly, particularly gland plates where abrasion 
resistant function for example, power coating, are used. 


Metallic enclosures for cable, such as conduit, ducting 
and trunking, may be used as circuit protective 
conductors but where flexible conduit is used, separate 
protective conductors should be included inside the 
conduit to maintain the integrity of the earth path. Where 
conduit and trunking are used a high standard of 
workmanship in installation is essential. Joints should 
be so made such that their current-carrying capacity is 
not less than that of the conduit itself. Joints should 
also have the same properties, as regards insulation, 
mechanical strength, as those of the wiring system or 
conduit of which they are part. Slackness in joints can 
result in deterioration and even complete loss of 
continuity; plain slip or pin-grip sockets should not be 
used. In case of unscrewed conduit, the use of lug-grip 
fitting is recommended, but for outdoor installation 
where the conduits are subjected to corrosion, screwed 
type conduits shall always be used. Painting is to be 
done on all conduit systems after the assembly. 


Periodical tests to verify the electrical continuity should 
be undertaken. 


2 Electrolytic corrosion is liable to occur under damp 
condition at contacts between dissimilar metals. Copper 
and its alloys having high copper content are particularly 
liable to cause corrosion under these condition when in 
contact with aluminium alloys. When dissimilar metal 
form part of an electrical circuit, the joints should be 
clean and assembled free of moisture, and then 
immediately treated with suitable coating or cover to 
protect from moisture. 


17.2.1.2 The metallic covering including sheaths (bare 
or insulated) of certain wiring, in particular the sheaths 
of mineral-insulated cables, and certain metallic 
conduits and trunking for electrical purposes (types 
under consideration) may be used as a protective 
conductor for the corresponding circuits, if their 
electrical continuity can be achieved in such a manner 
ensuring protection against deterioration and they 
permit connection of other protective conductors at 
predetermined tap off points. Other conduits for 
electrical purposes shall not be used as a protective 
conductor. 


17.2.1.3 Extraneous conductive parts may be used as a 
protective conductor if they satisfy the following four 
requirements: 


a) their electrical continuity shall be assured 
either by construction or by suitable 
connections in such a way as to be protective 
against mechanical, chemical ог 
electrochemical deterioration; 


b) their conductance shall be at least equal to that 
resulting from the application of 17.2.2; 


c) unless compensatory measures are provided 
precautions shall be taken against their 
removal; and 


d) they have been considered for such a use and, 
if necessary, suitably adapted. 


The use of metallic water pipes is permitted, provided 
the consent ofa person or body responsible for the water 
system is obtained. Gas pipes shall not be used as 
protective conductors. 


17.2.1.4 Extraneous conductive parts shall not be used 
as PEN conductors. 


17.2.2 Minimum Cross-Sectional Area 


17.2.2.0 The cross-sectional area of protective 
conductors shall either be: 


a) calculated in accordance with 17.2.2.1, or 
b) selected in accordance with 17.2.2.2. 


In both cases, 17.2.2.3 shall be taken into account. 


Note —The installation should be so prepared that equipment 
terminals are capable of accepting these protective conductors. 


17.2.2.1 The cross-sectional area shall be so calculated 
that the current density value determined by the 


IS 3043 : 2018 


following formula is not exceeded (applicable only for 
disconnection times not exceeding 5 s). 


1 1 
sg 
where 
S = cross-sectional area, in square millimetres; 
I = value (ac, rms) of fault current for a fault of 
negligible-impedance, which can flow 
through the protective device, in amperes; 
t — operating time of the disconnecting device, 
in seconds; and 
NOTE — Account should be taken of the 
current-limiting effect of the circuit 
impedances and the limiting capability (joule 
integral) of the protective device. 
k = factor dependent on the material of the 


protective conductor, the insulation and other 
parts, and the initial and final 
temperatures. Values of k for protective 
conductors in various use or service for ¢ = 
1 s and 3 s respectively are given in 
Table 11A to 11D. 


The k factors for protective conductors of copper, steel 
and aluminium are shown in Fig. 28 to Fig. 30. 


If application of the formula produces non standard 
sizes, conductors of the nearest higher standard cross- 
sectional area shall be used. 


NOTES 


1 It is necessary that the cross-sectional area so calculated be 
compatible with the conditions imposed by fault loop 
impedance. 


2 Maximum permissible temperatures for joints should be taken 
into account. 


3 Values for mineral insulated cables are under consideration. 
Method of deriving the factor k 


The factor kis determined from the following formula: 


k= Q(B +20) 7 14 8 
520 B+0 
where 
О. = volumetric heat capacity of conductor 
material (J/^C mm?), 
B = reciprocal of temperature coefficient of 


resistivity at 0°C for the conductor (°C), 


б = electrical resistivity of conductor material at 


20°C (Q.mm), 
0, = initial temperature of conductor (°C), and 
0, = final temperature of conductor (°С). 


These material constants are given in Table 10. 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Table 10 Material Constants 
(Clause 17.2.2.1) 


Material B (°С) 0. (JC mm?) б» (О.тат) 20) 
20 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Соррег 234-5 3:45 х 10? 17:241 x 10° 226 
Aluminium 228 2:5 x10? 28 264 x 10° 148 
Lead 230 1:45 x 10° 214 x 10° 42 
Steel 202 3:8 x10? 138 x 10° 78 


TEMPERATURE 


x 30*C 
40*C 


70°C 


FINAL TEMPERATURE °C 


Fic. 28 k Factors FoR COPPER PROTECTIVE CONDUCTORS (see 17.2.2.1) 


FINAL TEMPERATURE °C 


Fic. 29 k FACTORS FOR STEEL PROTECTIVE CONDUCTORS 


40 


150 


100 таг 
TEMPERATURE 


30°C 


40°C 
50 


100 


200 


IS 3043 : 2018 


300 400 500 


FINAL TEMPERATURE °С  ——*»— 


Fic. 30 & FACTORS FOR ALUMINIUM PROTECTIVE CONDUCTORS 


17.2.2.2 The cross-sectional area of the protective 
conductor shall be not less than the appropriate value 
shown in Table 12. In this case, checking of compliance 
with 17.2.2.1 is usually not necessary. 


If the application of this table produces non-standard 
sizes, conductors having the nearest higher standard 
cross-sectional area are to be used. 


The values given in Table 12 are valid only if the 
protective conductor is made of the same metal as the 
phase conductors. If this is not so, the cross-sectional 
area of the protective conductor is to be determined in 
a manner which produces a conductance equivalent to 
that which results from the application of Table 12 
(see also 23.3.3). 


17.2.2.3 The cross-sectional area of every protective 
conductor which does not form part of the supply cable 
or cable enclosure shall be, in any case, not less than: 


а) 2:5 mm’, ifmechanical protection is provided; 
and 

b) 4 mm’, if mechanical protection is not 
provided. 


17.2.3 Preservation of Electrical Continuity of 
Protective Conductors 


17.2.3.1 Protective conductors shall be suitably 
protected against mechanical and chemical 
deterioration and electrodynamic forces. 


17.2.3.2 Joints of protective conductors shall be 
accessible for inspection and testing except in 
compound-filled or encapsulated joints. 


17.2.3.3 No switching device shall be inserted in the 


41 


protective conductor, but joints which сап be 
disconnected for test purposes by use of a tool may be 
provided. 


17.2.3.4 Where electrical monitoring of earth- 
continuity is used, the operating coils shall not be 
inserted in protective conductors. 


17.2.3.5 Exposed conductive parts of apparatus shall 
not be used to form part of the protective conductor 
for other equipment except as allowed by the 
preconditions in 17.2.1.2. 


18 EARTHING ARRANGEMENTS FOR 
PROTECTIVE PURPOSES 


NOTE — For protective measures for various systems of 
earthing see 23 and 24. 


18.1 Protective Conductors Used with Overcurrent 
Protective Devices 


18.1.1 When overcurrent protective devices are used 
for protection against electric shock, the incorporation 
of the protective conductor in the same wiring system 
as the live conductors or in their immediate proximity 
is strongly recommended. 


19 EARTHING ARRANGEMENTS FOR 
FUNCTIONAL PURPOSES 


19.1 General 


Earthing arrangements for functional purposes shall be 
provided to ensure correct operation of equipment or 
to permit reliable and proper functioning of 
installations. (Further requirements under 
consideration). 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Table 11 Current Rating of Various Protective Earthing Materials 
(Clauses 17.2.2.1 and 24.2) 


Table 11A Bare Conductor with No Risk of Fire or Danger to any 
Other Touching or Surrounding Material 
Boundary Conditions: Initial Temperature. 40°C Final temperature 395°C for copper; 
325°C for aluminium; 500°C for steel 


118 73 46 


3 s current rating in A/mm? (Аз) 


Table 11B Insulated Protective Conductors not Incorporated in Cables 
or Bare Conductors Touching Other Insulated Cables 
Boundary Conditions: Initial Temperature: 40°C. Final temperature: 160°C for PVC, 220°C 
for butyl rubber, 250°C for XLPE/EPR 


Material Copper Aluminium Steel 
Insulation Butyl XLPE/ Butyl XLPE/ | рус | Butyl | XLPE/ 


PVC 


Eve Rubber EPR Rubber EPR Rubber EPR 


1 s current rating in A/mm? (kı) 
3 s current rating in A/mm? (Аз) 79 92 98 52 61 65 28 33 


36 


Table 11C Protective Conductor as a Core in Multicore Cables 


Boundary Conditions Initial Temperature Final Temperature 


XLPE/EPR 90°C 250°C 


Material Copper Aluminium 


Insulation PVC Butyl Rubber | XLPE/EPR Butyl Rubber XLPE/EPR 
[seanentaingin Amma) | us |__| 1 [7€ | $9 [э 
77 83 


76 
44 51 54 


3 s current rating їп A/mm” (Ёз) 66 


Table 11D Protective Bare Conductors in Hazardous Areas where there is Risk of Fire 
from Petroleum Bound Oil or Other Surrounding Material 
Boundary Conditions: Initial Temperature: 40°C; Final Temperature 150°C/200°C. 


Material Copper Aluminium 
1 s current rating in A/mm? (kı) 131/153 86/101 


3 s current rating in A/mm’ (Ёз) 


Table 12 Cross-section of Protective Conductor 19.2 Low Noise (see 43.2.2) 
(Clause 17.2.2.2) 
20 EARTHING ARRANGEMENTS FOR 


Cross-Sectional Area of Minimum Cross-Sectional COMBINED PROTECTIVE AND FUNCTIONAL 
Phase Conductors of the Area of the Corresponding 
Installations, S Protective Conductor, Sp PURPOSES 
mm? mm? 
M Da 20.1 General 
() 0) . . . . 
S< 16 s Where earthing for combined protective and functional 
16<5<35 16 purposes 15 required, the requirements for protective 
measures shall prevail. 
S>35 See 17.2.2.1 


42 


20.2 PEN Conductors 


20.2.1 In TN systems, for cables in fixed installations 
having a cross-sectional area not less than 10 mm? for 
copper and 16 mm? for aluminium, a single conductor 
may serve both as protective conductor and neutral 
conductor, provided that the part of the installation 
concerned is not protected by a residual current- 
operated device. 


However, the minimum cross-sectional area of a PEN 
conductor may be 4 mm/?, provided that the cable is of 
a concentric type conforming to Indian Standards and 
that duplicate continuity connections exist at all joints 
and terminations in the run ofthe concentric conductors. 


20.2.2 The PEN conductor shall be insulated for the 
highest voltage to which it may be subjected to avoid 
stray currents. 


NOTE — The PEN conductor need not be insulated inside 
switchgear and control gear assemblies. 


20.2.3 If from any point of the installation the neutral 
and protective functions are provided by separate 
conductors, it is inadmissible to connect these 
conductors to each other from that point. At the point 
of separation, separate terminals or bars shall be 
provided for the protective and neutral conductors. The 
PEN conductor shall be connected to the terminal or 
bare intended for the protective conductor. 


20.3 Installation and Location of Increased Shock 
Risk 


For installation and location of increased shock risk, 
additional measures may be considered necessary, these 
include: 


a) supplementary equipotential bonding, 

b) RCD with rated residual current of 30 mA, 
and 

с) Protective extra-low voltage (PELV) and 


separated extra-low voltage (SELV) 
equipment. 


When an installation supplies number of buildings, 
main equipotential bonding is essential in each building, 
so that each has a reference point to which are connected 
the conductor parts referred in 23.2.2.2. In order to 
reduce the voltages occurring in the event of an earth 
fault still further, it is sometimes necessary to install 
supplementary local equipotential bonding. 


20.4 Supplementary Bonding Circuit where 
Disconnection Times Cannot be Met 


Where the disconnection time of IS 732 cannot be met 
(typically 0.4 s and 5 s for 230 V TN supply), 
supplementary bonding shall be provided as specified 
below: 


43 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Where doubt exists regarding the effectiveness of 
supplementary equipotential bonding, it shall be 
confirmed that the resistance R between simultaneously 
accessible exposed conductor parts and extraneous 
conductor parts fulfil the following conditions 


R € 50 ohms in ac system 
R € 120 ohms in dc system 
where 


I; = the operating current in amperes of the 


protective devices. 
21 EQUIPOTENTIAL BONDING CONDUCTORS 
21.1 Minimum Cross-sectional Areas 


21.1.1  Equipotential 
(see 17.2.2.1) 


21.1.2 Bonding of Water Meters 


Bonding | Conductors 


Bonding of water meters is not permitted (see 14.2.4). 


21.2 Non-Earthed Equipotential Bonding (under 
consideration) 


22 TYPICALSCHEMATIC OF EARTHING AND 
PROTECTIVE CONDUCTORS 


22.1 A typical schematic of earthing and protective 
conductors is given in Fig. 31. 


23 EARTH FAULT PROTECTION 
INSTALLATIONS 


23.0 Basic Philosophy of Earth Fault Protection 


IN 


23.0.1 The rules given in this clause are applicable to 
installation below 1 000 V ac. 


23.0.2 Amongst other things, protection against shock 
in case of a fault (protection against indirect contact) 
is provided by automatic disconnection of supply. This 
protective measure necessitates coordination of the 
types of system earthing and the characteristics of the 
protective devices. This clause discusses the basic 
criteria for achieving this protection. 


23.0.3 Protection against electric shock both in normal 
service (protection against direct contact) and in case 
of fault (protection against indirect contact) can be 
achieved by several measures. Details of achieving 
protection through the choice of an appropriate 
protective measure is the subject of IS 732. One of such 
measures is protection by automatic disconnection of 
supply. Automatic disconnection is intended to prevent 
a touch voltage persisting for such time that a danger 
could arise. This method necessitates co-ordination of 
(a) the type of system earthing, and (b) characteristics 
of protective devices. Description of the types of system 
earthing permitted and the requirements for earthing 


IS 3043 : 2018 


7 Z 
/ 
@ 


A 
2 INSTALLATION 
4 EARTHING 


4 
4 
2 


SASASASSSAAASAASSSSSSSSS 


NS 


——1 
[| LLLA 


EE EQUIPMENT EE 
EARTHING 


— exposed conductive parts 

incoming metallic service 

— extraneous conductive parts 

— earth electrode 

— equipotential bonding conductor (in case of small 
domestic installations, 1 takes the form of neutral 
link) 

— protective conductor (in duplicate) 

— earthing conductor 


amori 
| 


Fic. 31 EARTHING ARRANGEMENTS AND 
PROTECTIVE CONDUCTORS 


arrangements and protective conductors, namely 
protection against shock is the subject of this Code. 


23.0.4 Protective measure by automatic disconnection 
of supply following an insulation fault relies on the 
association of two conditions given below: 


a) The existence of a conducting path (fault loop) 
to provide for circulation of fault current (this 
depends on type of system earthing); and 


b) The disconnection of this current by an 
appropriate device in a given time. 


The determination of this time depends on various 
parameters, such as probability of fault, probability of 
a person touching the equipment during the fault and 
the touch voltage to which a person might thereby be 
subjected. 


Limits of touch voltage are based on studies on the 
effects of current on human body (see IS/IEC 60479). 


23.0.5 The study of the electrical impedance of the 
human body as a function of touch voltage and 
magnitude of current flow in the body as a function of 
its duration likely to produce a given effect are two 
components which help in establishing a relationship 
between prospective touch voltage and its duration 
which will not result in harmful physiological effects 
for any person. 


Table 13 shows the values of disconnecting times t for 
given touch voltages for two most common conditions. 


23.0.6 It is necessary, therefore, to apply these results 
emanating out of IS 8437 to the various earthing 
systems. The disconnecting times specified for different 


Table 13 Disconnecting Times for Different Touch Voltages 
(Clause 23.0.5) 


Prospective Touch Condition 2? 
(V) (О) (mA) (s) (Q) (Q) (Q) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
25 — — — 075 23 5 
75 | 060 | 825 91 0:30 
90 0:45 780 115 0:25 
110 0:36 730 151 0-18 
150 0:27 660 227 0-10 
220 575 383 0-035 
280 1370 204 0-12 570 491 0020 
350 1 365 256 0-08 565 620 — 
500 1360 368 560 893 — 
D Dry or moist locations, dry skin and significant floor resistance. 
? Wet locations, wet skin and low floor resistance. 
44 


circuits in this Code follows basically the summary 
given in Table 13 in addition taking into account the 
likelihood of faults and likelihood of contact. 


23.0.7 TN Systems 


All exposed conductive parts shall be connected to the 
earthed point of the lower system by protective 
conductors. The protective conductors shall be earthed 
near each power transformer or generator of the 
installation. If other effective earth connections exist, 
it is recommended that the protective conductors also 
be connected to such points, wherever possible. 
Earthing at additional points as evenly as possible is 
desirable. It is also recommended that protective 
conductors should be earthed where they enter any 
buildings or premises. 


The characteristics of the protective devices and the 
cross-sectional area of conductors shall be so chosen 
that if a fault of negligible impedance occurs anywhere 
between a phase conductor and a protective conductor 
or exposed conductive part, automatic disconnection 
of the supply will occur within the minimum possible 
safe time. The time of operation would depend on the 
magnitude of the contact potential. As a general rule, 
65 V may be cleared within 10 s and voltages of the 
order of 240 V and above shall be cleared 
instantaneously. 


This requirement is met if: 


Z xI <U, 
where 
Z, = fault loop impedance, 
I, = current ensuring the automatic operation of 
disconnecting device, and 
U, = conventional voltage limits. 
NOTES 


1 Z, may be calculated or measured. 


2 The duration of 7, permitted depends on the prospective touch 
voltage. The touch voltage is calculated from the voltage of the 
system and the ratio of the impedance of the source and the 
fault loop. Higher touch voltages should be cleared in shorter 
times. 


If this condition cannot be fulfilled, supplementary 
bonding in accordance with 23.0.10 may be necessary. 


23.0.8 TT Systems 


All exposed conductive parts collectively protected by 
the same protective device shall be interconnected by 
protective conductors with an earth electrode common 
to all those parts. Where several protective devices are 
used in series, this requirement applies separately to 
all the exposed conductive parts protected by each 
device. For compliance with the requirement of 23.0.7 
(para 2), the following shall be fulfilled: 


IS 3043 : 2018 


R, xI, <U, 


R, = resistance ofthe earthed system for exposed 
conductive parts, 


I, = operating currents of the disconnecting series 
device or settings of shunt relays, and 


U, = conventional voltage limit (32 V in case of 
relays with time lag). 


23.0.9 IT Systems 


The impedance of the power system earth shall be such 
that on the occurrence of a single fault to exposed 
conductive parts or to earth, the fault current is of low 
value. Disconnection of the supply is not essential on 
the occurrence of the first fault. Protective measures 
must, however, prevent danger on the occurrence of 
two simultaneous faults involving different live 
conductors. 


The following condition shall be fulfilled: 
R,» <U, 
where 


R, = resistance ofthe earthed system for exposed 
conductive parts, 


I, = operating currents of the disconnecting series 
device, and 
U, = conventional voltage limit. 


23.0.10 Equipotential Bonding 


If the conditions specified in 23.0.7 to 23.0.9 cannot 
be fulfilled for automatic disconnection of supply, it is 
necessary to provide local equipotential bonding 
(see also 23.3.4). This applies to entire installation or 
a part thereof, an item of apparatus or a location. The 
protective conductors for local bonding shall also 
confirm to 17.2. Where doubt exists regarding 
effectiveness of supplementary equipotential bonding, 
it shall be confirmed if: 


gem 
1 
where 
Z = impedance between simultaneously 
accessible exposed conductive parts and 
extraneous conductive parts, and earthing 
system; 
I, = operating current of the disconnecting series 
device; and 
U = conventional voltage limit. 


23.1 Basic Purpose of Earth Fault Protection 


The occurrence of an earth fault in an installation 


IS 3043 : 2018 


creates two possible hazards. Firstly, voltages appear 
between exposed conductive parts and extraneous 
conductive parts, and if these parts are simultaneously 
accessible, these voltages constitute a shock hazard, 
this condition being known as indirect contact. 


Secondly, the fault current that flows in the phase and 
protective conductors of the circuit feeding the faulty 
equipment (the earth fault may, of course, occur in the 
fixed wiring of the circuit itself) may be of such a 
magnitude as to cause an excessive temperature rise in 
those conductors, thereby creating a fire hazard. 


The protective measure known as ‘earthed equipotential 
bonding and automatic disconnection of the supply is 
intended to give a high degree of protection against 
both hazards. The choice of protective device used to 
give disconnection is influenced by the type of system 
of which the installation is part, because either: 


a) the earth fault loop impedance has to be low 
enough to allow adequate earth fault current f 
low to cause an overcurrent protective device 
(for example, a fuse or circuit breaker) in the 
faulty circuit to operate in a sufficiently short 


time; or 


b) where it is not possible to achieve a low 
enough earth fault loop impedance, 
disconnection may be initiated by fitting a 
residual current device (RCD) of 30 mA rating 


as specified in IS 732. 


23.2 Earthing of Installations 


Most installations are part of either a TN system or a 
TT system and in both type of installation the exposed 
conductive parts of all electrical equipment of an 
installation should be connected by means of circuit 
protective devices to the main earthing terminals. The 
earth fault loop impedance should be sufficiently low 
for the protective device (fuse or circuit breaker) 
operate in the required time in the event of an earth 
fault. 


Class II equipment, whether metal enclosed or 
insulation enclosed, embodied in its construction not 
only basic insulation but also supplementary or 
reinforced insulation, exposed metal work of such 
equipment should not be considered to become live 
under fault condition that is not considered to be an 
exposed-conductive part. 


Various earthing systems are considered in 11.1 
and 11.1.1 


23.2.1 Protection Against Indirect Contact (Against 
Electric Shock in Case of a Fault) 


Protection against indirect contact is achieved by the 
adoption of one of the following protective measures: 


46 


a) Safety extra low voltage; 

b) TheuseofClassII equipment or by equivalent 
insulation; 

€) Anon-conducting location; 

d) Earth free local equipotential bonding; 

e) Electrical separation; and 

f) Earthed equipotential bonding and automatic 
disconnection of the supply. 

NOTES 


1 The primary concern of this Code is (d) and (f) while other 
methods of protection against indirect contact are covered in 
other relevant Indian Standard / Codes of Practice. 


2 Item (a) requires that the nominal voltage of the circuit 
concerned does not exceed extra low Voltage that the source 
has a high degree of isolation from higher voltage circuits (for 
example, a Class II safety isolation transformer) and that live 
parts also have a similar degree of isolation or separation from 
those circuits. The most important requirement, however, is 
that live parts and exposed conductive parts of a safety extra 
low Voltage circuit should not be connected to earth, protective 
conductors or exposed conductive parts of another circuit. 
Where these general requirements are not met but the nominal 
voltage still does not exceed extra low voltage, the circuit is 
described as a functional extra low voltage circuit and one part 
of it may be connected to earth. 


3 Item (b) is generally applicable and covers the selection and 
use of equipment complying with either insulation encased 
Class II equipment (‘all-insulated’) or metal cased Class II 
equipment. In some cases, such as factory built assemblies of 
switchgear and control gear, the equivalent term used is ‘total 
insulation’. Item (b) can also be achieved by the application of 
suitable supplementary or reinforced insulation to equipment 
on site. 


Earthing of the equipment is not required; in fact, by definition 
there will be no facility for earthing provided in Class I 
equipment. 

4 Items (c), (d) and (e) are of limited interest as they can be 
applied only in special situations and used under effective 
supervision. They all include a high degree of isolation from 
earth. 


5 In this Clause, detailed consideration is limited to earthed 
equipotential bonding and automatic disconnection of the 


supply. 


23.2.2.1 Earthed Equipotential Bonding and Automatic 
Disconnection of the Supply 


The two aims of this protective measure are to: 


a) ensure that when an earth fault occurs, the 
voltages appearing between exposed 
conductive parts and extraneous conductive 
parts in the location served by the installation 
concerned are minimized; and 

b) 


ensure rapid disconnection of the circuit in 
which that earth fault occurs. 


In order to meet (a), a zone is created by first connecting 
all extraneous conductive parts by means of 
equipotential bonding conductors to the main earthing 
terminal or earth electrode(s) of the installation. 


The zone is completed by the connection of all exposed 


conductive parts of the circuits in the installation and 
of current-using equipment fed from those circuits to 
the main earthing terminal (or installation earth 
electrode) using circuit protective conductors. 


Whilst such a zone is called an equipotential zone, this 
does not mean that voltages cannot exist between 
conductive parts in that zone when an earth fault occurs. 
The voltages referred to earlier (see 23.1) will still exist 
between the exposed conductive parts of perfectly 
sound equipment and between such parts and 
extraneous conductive parts, but the application of 
bonding minimizes these voltages in each case. 


An installation may consist of a number of zones; for 
instance, when an installation supplies a number of 
buildings, equipotential bonding is necessary in each 
building so that each constitutes a zone having a 
reference point to which the exposed conductive parts 
of the circuits and current-using equipment in that 
building are connected. 


The second aim of this protective measure is met by 
limiting the upper value of the earth fault loop 
impedance of each circuit to a value determined by the 
type and current rating of the protective device 
concerned such that, on the occurrence of an earth fault 
(assumed to be of negligible impedance), disconnection 
will occur before the prospective touch voltage reaches 
a harmful value. 


23.2.2.2 Protective equipotential bonding 


The protective measure of automatic disconnection in 
the event of a fault to earth requires : 


a) Automatic disconnection in the event of a fault 
to earth, 

b) Protective earthing facilitate above, and 

c) Protective equequipotentia Inding reduce 


touch voltage. 


Where the automatic disconnection of supply is 
adopted, protective equipotential bonding is 
recommended, whatever be type of supply system. 
Bonding, by means of main equipotential bonding 
conductors, of extraneous-conductive parts the main 
earthing terminal of the installations is recommended; 
these extraneous-conductor parts includes : 


a) Water installation pipes, 

b) Gas installation pipework and ducting, 

c) Other installation pipework and ducting, 

d) Exposed metallic structure and part of the 
building structure, and 

e) Other metallic parts such as cable trays and 


cable ladder racks. 


Connection to a lighting protection system to the 
protective system to the protective equipotential 


47 


IS 3043 : 2018 


bonding should be made as per IS/TEC 62305. 


Where both main gas pipes and main water pipes enter 
a location, a common bonding conductor may be used, 
but in such cases that conductor should be continuous 
or should be permanently joined (by soldering or 
crimping) in order to preserve continuity. Such a 
bonding conductor may be also be used in association 
with other extraneous parts. 


The main equipotential bonding connections to the 
water and gas pipe should be made as near as 
practicable to their point of entry into the premises. If 
there is an insulating section or insert at that point, the 
bonding connection should be made to the metallic 
pipes on the consumer's side of the section or insert 
and before branch pipework. 


23.2.3 Extraneous Conductive Parts 


The extraneous conductive parts that are required to 
be bonded to the main earthing terminal of the 
installation (or to the earth electrode ofthe installation) 
include: 


a) gas pipes, 

b) other service pipes and ducting, 

с) risers and pipes of fire protection equipment, 

d) exposed metallic parts of the building 
structure, and 

e) lightening conductors. 


NOTE — Connections pipes, ducting and exposed metallic parts 
of building structure should be considered most carefully. In 
some types of earthing systems, especially TN-C or TN-C-S 
systems effectively connect extraneous conducting metalwork 
to the supply system neutral and could cause continuously 
circulating currents and standing voltages that might result in 
electrochemical corrosion or random spark hazards in 
potentially flammable atmospheres. 


23.2.4 Exposed Conductive Parts 


Exposed conductive parts that are required to be 
connected by means of protective conductors to the 
main earthing terminal (or earth electrode) of the 
installation are as follows: 


a) Allmetalwork associated with wiring system 
(other than current-carrying parts) including 
cable sheaths and armour, conduit, ducting, 
trunking, boxes and catenary wires. 

b) The exposed metalwork of all Class I fixed 

and portable current-using equipment. Even 

where at the time of the erection of the 

installation this equipment 1s of Class II 

construction or its equivalent, because there 

Is a possibility that in the life ofthe installation 

the equipment may be replaced by Class I 

equipment, all fixed wiring accessories should 

incorporate an earthing terminal that is 


IS 3043 : 2018 


connected to the main earthing terminal by 
means of the protective conductors of the 
circuits concerned. 

The exposed metalwork of transformers used 
in the installation other than those that are an 
integral part of equipment. The secondary 
windings of transformers should also be 
earthed at one point of the winding, unless the 
transformer is a safety isolating transformer 
supplying a part of the installation where the 
protective measure ‘electrical separation’ is 
being used. 


Exposed conductive parts that (because of their small 
dimensions or disposition) cannot be gripped or 
contacted by a major surface of the human body (that 
is, a human body surface not exceeding 50 mm х 
50 mm) need not be earthed if the connection of those 
parts to a protective conductor cannot readily be made 
and reliably maintained. Typical examples of such parts 
are screws and nameplate, cable clips and lamp caps. 
Fixing screws for non-metallic accessories need not be 
earthed provided there is no appreciable risk of the 
screws coming into contact with live parts. 


Other exposed conductive parts not required to be 
earthed are: 


a) Overhead line insulator brackets and metal 
parts connected to them if such parts are not 
within arm’s reach; and 

b) Short lengths of metal conduit or other metal 

enclosures used give mechanical protection 

equipment of Class II or equivalent 
construction 


23.3 Protection against Excessive Temperature Rise 
and Mechanical Damage 


23.3.1 General 


The protective circuit of an installation includes the 
following (see Fig. 32): 


a) Circuit protective conductors; 
b) Equipotential bonding conductors; and 
c) Earthing conductors. 


Under certain circumstances, there may also be local 
equipotential bonding conductors. 


The determination of cross-sectional areas of all these 
conductors is the subject of 14 to 23 (see also 23.4) 
and here consideration is limited to the types of 
conductor that can be used with some indication ofthe 
precautions that should be taken during erection, 
particularly those concerned with mechanical and 
chemical deterioration and electro-dynamic effects. 


48 


23.3.2 Earthing Conductors 


Copper earthing conductors, in general, need not be 
protected against corrosion when they are buried in the 
ground if their cross-sectional area is equal to or greater 
than 25 mnm". In case of buried steel conductors, 
appropriate corrosion factors based upon the summed 
up corrosion indexes corresponding different 
parameters connected with the material for grounding, 
environmental conditions, nature of soil, etc, be applied 
in determining the size of the earthing conductor, 
however, the minimum size should not be less than 
50 mm”. If the earthing conductor is of tape or strip, 
the thickness should be adequate to withstand 
mechanical damage and corrosion. 


It should be remembered that plain uncoated copper is 
positive to plain uncoated buried steel and when 
interconnected by a current carrying conductor, these 
metals will form an electrochemical cell that can cause 
accelerated corrosion of steel. As a rough guide, a dc 
current of 1 A leaving a buried steel structure can 
remove nearly 9 kg of metal in one year. 


Where such conductors are protected against corrosion 
but are not mechanically protected, the minimum cross- 
sectional area is 16 mm? if the conductor is of copper 
or coated steel (Table 9). The determination of the 
cross-sectional area where the earthing conductor is 
both mechanically protected and protected against 
corrosion is considered in a later clause. 


Aluminium or copper clad aluminium conductors 
should not be used for final underground connections 
to earth electrodes. Where a copper conductor is to be 
joined to aluminium, the copper should be tinned, unless 
an approved conductor is used. 


The connection of the earthing conductor to the earth 
electrode or other means of earthing should be readily 
accessible and soundly made by the use of soldered 
joints or substantial clamps of non-ferrous material. 
Where the earthing conductor is to be connected to the 
metal armour and sheath of a cable, the armour should 
be bonded to the metal sheath and the principal 
connection between the cable and the earthing 
conductor should be to the metal sheath, and should 
preferably be soldered. However, if a clamp is used for 
this connection the clamp should be so designed and 
installed as to provide reliable connection without 
damage to the cable. 


23.3.3 Protective Conductors 
23.3.3.1 General 


The generic term ‘protective conductor’ embraces the 
specific types given in 11.1.2. In any particular case, 
the function intended should be correctly identified, 
because this determines which of the numerous 


requirements prescribed in IS 732 is applicable. IS 732 
requires that all protective conductors are suitably 
protected against mechanical and chemical 
deterioration and electromagnetic effect. Two methods 
are given for determining the cross-sectional area 
required for a protective conductor. First, the cross- 
sectional area is related empirically to that of the 
associated line conductor and is given in Table 2. In 
the second method, it is calculated using equation in 
accordance with 17.2.2.1. 


23.3.3.2 Circuit protective conductors 


A circuit protective conductor may form part of the 
same cable as the associated live conductors, either as 
a core of that cable or the metallic sheath or armouring, 
or it may be separately run insulated conductor, the 
insulation being at least equivalent to that provided for 
a single core non-sheathed cable of appropriate size. A 
separately run circuit protective conductor having a 
cross-sectional area greater than 6 mm? or of copper 
strip is not required to be insulated. All protective 
conductors should, however, be protected against 
physical damage and other forms of damage, for 
example, welding current stray return paths. Where the 
sheath of a cable incorporating an uninsulated 
protective conductor having a cross-sectional area of 
6 mm? or less is removed at joints and the termination, 
the conductor should be protected by insulating 
sleeving. 


When the metallic sheath 1s used every joint in that 
sheath should be so made that its current carrying 
capacity is not less than that of the sheath and where 
non-metallic joint boxes are used, means such as a metal 
strip having a resistance not greater than that of the 
corresponding length of sheath of the largest cable 
entering the box should be provided to maintain 
continuity. 


When using the metallic sheath or armour as a 
protective conductor, attention should be paid to the 
ability of cable glands and connections to carry 
prospective earth fault currents. Particular care should 
be taken to avoid problems with non-conducting 
finishes. 


Metallic enclosures for cables, such as conduit, ducting 
and trunking, may be used as circuit protective 
conductors but where flexible or pliable conduit is used, 
separate protective conductors should be used to 
maintain the integrity of the earth path. Where conduit 
Is used, a high standard of workmanship in installation 
Is essential. Joints should be so made that their current 
carrying capacity is not less than the conduit itself. 
Slackness in joints can result in deterioration in and 
even complete loss of continuity. Plain slip or pingrip 
sockets are considered insufficient to ensure satisfactory 
electrical continuity of joints. In the case ofunscrewed 


49 


IS 3043 : 2018 


conduit, the use of lug-grip fitting is recommended, 
but for outdoor installations and where otherwise 
subjected to atmosphere corrosion, screwed conduit 
should always be used, suitably protected against 
corrosion. In screwed conduit installations, the liberal 
use of locknuts is recommended. Joints in all conduit 
systems should be painted overall after assembly. 


These precautions should be adequate, but periodical 
tests should be made to verify that electrical continuity 
Is satisfactorily maintained. 


23.3.4 Local Equipotential Bonding (see also 23.0.10). 


The equipotential zone partially created by the bonding 
of extraneous conductive parts to the main earthing 
terminal depends for its efficacy on metal-to-metal 
contact of negligible impedance. Within a particular 
part ofthe zone where extraneous conductive parts are 
simultaneously accessible with either other extraneous 
conductive parts or exposed conductive parts or both, 
tests may show that it 1s necessary to carry out local 
equipotential bonding between the parts concerned in 
order to obtain satisfactory low impedance. 


23.3.5 Electrolytic Corrosion 


Under damp conditions, electrolytic corrosion is liable 
to occur at contacts between dissimilar metals. Copper 
and alloys having a high copper content are particularly 
liable to cause corrosion under these conditions when 
in contact with aluminium based alloys. 


When dissimilar metals form part of an electrical circuit, 
the joints should be clean and assembled free of 
moisture, and then immediately sealed with a suitable 
medium against the ingress of moisture. 


Where damp conditions prevail, the fittings, fixing 
screws and saddles used to secure aluminium based 
alloy conductors, should be made of aluminium alloy 
or suitably protected steel (zone coated) and all the 
points of contact between them painted. 


Particular attention should be paid to pipework because 
of the risk of replacement of part of the pipe system by 
non-metallic pipes or joints. Metalwork that may 
require bonding includes exposed metal pipes, sinks 
taps, tanks, radiators, and where practicable and 
accessible, structural components. 


23.4 Cross-sectional Areas of the Conductors of an 
Installation Protective Circuit 


The cross-sectional areas of the conductors of the 
protective circuit are influenced by the limitation placed 
on earth loop impedances to ensure disconnection of 
the circuit in which and earth fault occurs in the 
prescribed time, that 1s, instantaneous disconnection 
for higher control potential and disconnection with time 
lag for lower voltages. 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Where a protective device concerned is a fuse, 
miniature circuit breaker or other types of series over- 
current device, those disconnecting times imply that 
the earth fault loop impedances should be such that the 
earth fault current is considerably greater than the rated 
current of the device (or of the same order as occurring 
under shortcircuit conditions). Residual Current 
Devices (RCDs) shall be provided to disconnect the 
circuit within the same time in case of impedance or 
arcing fault conditions. The device setting should be 
interlinked with earth fault loop impedance, safe contact 
potential and permissible time for disconnection. 


All the constituent conductors of the protective circuit 
should therefore be of adequate cross-sectional area to 
ensure that the temperatures attained by the conductors 
do not exceed their prescribed limiting values. 


23.5 Consumers’ Earth Connections (see 11.1.1) 


The method of connection of the main earthing terminal 
of an installation to earth depends on the type of system 
of which that installation is part. The different systems 
are described in Fig. 12 to Fig. 18. 


When the source of energy is privately owned, there 
should be no metallic connection with the general public 
supply unless there has been consultation with the 
electricity authority concerned. 


It should be emphasized that an installation together 
with its source of energy may not consist entirely of 
one particular type of system. In such cases, each part 
of that installation may be required to be treated 
separately without detriment to other parts of the same 
installation. By and large, the types of system 
encountered fall in one or other categories shown in 
Fig. 12 to Fig. 18. 


24 SELECTION OF DEVICES FOR AUTOMATIC 
DISCONNECTION OF SUPPLY 


24.0 Automatic Disconnection 


When an earth fault occurs within an installation, 
dangerous voltage can appear between conductive parts 
and if these parts are simultaneously accessible they 
may constitute a shock hazard. The severity of any 
shock experienced by a person at risk depends on, 
among other factor, the type of current (a.c. or d.c.) the 
magnitude of the voltages and the time which the earth 
fault current is allowed to persist. 


The earth fault current can also be of such magnitude 
and duration as to cause an excessive temperature rise 
in the conductors through which it flows, thereby 
creating a fire hazard. 


IS 732 includes a number of protective measures which 
can be applied for protection against earth fault. 
However, IS 732 only considers the protective 


50 


measures known as automatic disconnection of supply. 
Furthermore, the other protective measures do not 
depend on earthing and have very limited application. 
Automatic disconnection of supply is a protective 
measure in which : 


a) basic protection is provided by basic 
insulation of live parts or by barriers or 
enclosures; and 

b) fault protection is provided by protective 

earthing, protective equipotential bonding and 


disconnection in case of a fault. 


A brief summary of requirement for automatic 
disconnection of supply is given in clauses of IS 732 
where automatic disconnection of supply is applied, 
Class I and Class II equipment may be used. 


In designing the protective system of any installation, 
due consideration be given to ensure that periodic 
inspection, testing and maintenance can be readily and 
safely undertaken. 


24.1 General 


In general, every circuit is provided with a means of 
overcurrent protection. If the earth fault loop impedance 
is low enough to cause these devices to operate within 
the specified times (that is, sufficient current can flow 
to earth under fault conditions), such devices may be 
relied upon to give the requisite automatic 
disconnection of supply. If the earth fault loop 
impedance does not permit the overcurrent protective 
devices to give automatic disconnection of the supply 
under earth fault conditions, the first option is to reduce 
that impedance. It may be permissible for this to be 
achieved by the use of protective multiple earthing or 
by additional earth electrodes. There are practical 
limitations to both approaches. 


In case of impedance/arcing faults, series protective 
devices may be ineffective to clear the faults. An 
alternate approach is to be adopted for the complete 
safety of the operating personnel and equipment from 
the hazards that may result from earth faults. This is to 
use residual current devices with appropriate settings 
to clear the faults within the permissible time, based 
on the probable contact potential. This method is 
equally applicable where earth loop impedances cannot 
be improved. 


In TT systems, there is an additional option of the use 
of fault voltage operated protective devices. Whilst 
these devices will always give protection against shock 
risk, provided they are correctly installed, the presence 
of parallel earths from the bonding will reduce the 
effectiveness of the fire risk protection they offer. These 
are, therefore, more suited for isolated installations that 
do not have interconnections to other installations. It 


should also be remembered that every socket outlet 
circuit that do not have earthing facility in a household 
or similar installation should be protected by a residual 
current device having a rated residual operating current 
not exceeding 30 mA. 


On all other systems where equipment is supplied by 
means ofa socket outlet not having earthing facility or 
by means of a flexible cable or cord used outside the 
protective zone created by the main equipotential 
bonding of the installation such equipment should be 
protected by a residual current operated device having 
an operating current of 30 mA. 


24.2 Use of Overcurrent Protective Devices for 
Earth Fault Protection 


Where overcurrent protective devices are used to give 
automatic disconnection of supply in case of earth fault 
in order to give shock risk protection, the basic 
requirement is that any voltage occurring between 
simultaneously accessible conductive parts during a 
fault should be of such magnitude and duration as not 
to cause danger. The duration will depend on the 
characteristic of the overcurrent device and the earth 
fault current which, in turn, depends on the total earth 
fault loop impedance. The magnitude will depend on 
the impedance of that part of the earth fault loop path 
that lies between the simultaneously accessible parts. 


The basic requirement can be met if: 


a) a contact potential of 65 V is within the 
tolerable limits of human body for 10 s. Hence 
protective relay or device characteristic should 
be such that this 65 V contact potential should 
be eliminated within 10 s and higher voltages 
with shorter times. 

b) a voltage of 250 V can be withstood by a 
human body for about 100 ms, which requires 
instantaneous disconnection of such faults, 
giving rise to potential rise of 250 V or more 


above the ground potential. 


The maximum earth fault loop impedance 
corresponding to specific ratings of fuse or miniature 
circuit breaker that will meet the criteria can be 
calculated on the basis of a nominal voltage to earth 
(U,) and the time current characteristics of the device 
assuming worst case conditions that is, the slowest 
operating time accepted by the relevant standards. Thus, 
if these values are not exceeded, compliance with this 
Code covering automatic disconnection in case of an 
earth fault 1s assured. 


Where it is required to know the maximum earth fault 
loop impedance acceptable in a circuit feeding, a fixed 
appliance or set of appliances and protected by an over 
current device, the minimum current that may be 


51 


IS 3043 : 2018 


necessary to ensure operation of the overcurrent device 
within the permissible time of 10 s for a contact 
potential of 65 V is found from the characteristic curve 
ofthe device concerned. Application ofthe Ohm's Law 
then enables the corresponding earth fault loop 
impedance to be calculated as provided in the formulae 
given in 23.0.3 to 23.0.6. 


For circuits supplying socket outlets, the corresponding 
earth fault loop impedance can be found by a similar 
calculation for earthed equipment. When equipment are 
not earthed and connected to socket outlets without 
earthing facility, disconnection should be ensured for 
30 mA within 10 s and with appropriate decrements in 
time for higher currents. 


This method requires knowledge of the total earth loop 
impedance alone (rather than individual components) 
and is, therefore, quick and direct in application. Its 
simplicity does exclude some circuit arrangements that 
could give the required protection. 


While calculations give the maximum earth fault loop 
or protective conductor impedance to ensure shock risk 
protection under fault conditions it is also necessary to 
ensure that the circuit protective earth conductor is 
protected against the thermal effects of the fault current. 
The earth fault loop impedance should, therefore, be 
low enough to cause the protective device to operate 
quickly enough to give that protection as well. This 
consideration places a second limit on the maximum 
earth loop impedance permissible and can be checked 
by superimposing on the time current characteristic of 
the overload device, the ‘adiabatic’ line having the 
equation: 


k? А? 
РЕ p 
NOTE — Values of k for typical protective conductor conditions 
are given in 17.2.2.1 and Tables 11A to 11D. 


t or A= 


АП 
k 


Details of the maximum permissible earth loop 
impedance for the thermal protection of cables by fuses 
can also be computed. However, the time current 
characteristics of a miniature circuit breaker are such 
that if the loop impedance is low enough to give 
automatic disconnection within safe disconnecting time 
so providing shock risk protection, it will also give the 
necessary thermal protection to the earth conductor 
likely to be used with a breaker of that specific rating. 
Figure 32 shows the relationship between the adiabatic 
line and the characteristic of fuses and miniature circuit 
breaker. 


In order that the devices will give thermal protection 
to the protective conductor, operation has to be 
restricted to the area to the right of point A where these 
curves cross. Thus, the maximum earth fault loop 
impedance for thermal protection of the cable is that 


IS 3043 : 2018 


corresponding to the minimum earth fault current for 
which the device gives protection. The value of this 
current can be read from the curve and the 
corresponding loop impedance can be calculated from: 


ps 
л? 
where 
Z, = earth fault loop impedance, 
U, = nominal voltage to earth, and 
I, = earth fault current. 


For a given application, the maximum permitted earth 
fault loop impedance would be the lower of the two 
values calculated for shock risk protection or thermal 
restraint respectively. 


It will be noted that the adiabatic line crosses the 
characteristic curve for a miniature circuit breaker at a 
second point B. This denotes the maximum fault current 
for which a breaker will give thermal protection but it 
will generally be found in practice that this value is 
higher than the prospective short circuit current that 
occurs in the circuit involved and cannot, therefore, be 
realized. 


FUSE CHARACTERISTICS 


ADIABATIC LINE 


TIME(S) t 


CURRENT | 


A 


32A Fuses 


FUSE CHARACTERISTICS 


ADIABATIC LINE 


TIME(S) t 


CURRENT | A 


32B Miniature Current Breaker 


Fic. 32 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ADIABATIC LINES AND 
CHARACTERISTICS 


52 


24.3 Earth Fault Protective Devices 


Residual Current Operated Devices (RCD) is used for 
individual non-earthed/earthed (with limited 
application) equipment as follows: 


Residual Current Operated Devices (RCD) — An RCD 
incorporates two component items. A core balance 
transformer assembly with a winding for each 
recognizing the out of balance current that the fault 
produces in the main conductors. This induces a current 
that is used to operate the tripping mechanism of a 
contact system. For operating currents of 0:5 A or more, 
the output from such a transformer assembly can 
operate a conventional trip coil directly. For lower 
values of operating current, it is necessary to interpose 
a relay device, either magnetic or solid state. 


Devices for load currents greater than 100 A usually 
comprise a separate transformer assembly with a circuit 
breaker or contact relay, mounted together within a 
common enclosure. Devices for load currents below 
100 A usually include the transformer and contact 
system within the same single unit, which is then 
described as a residual current operated circuit breaker 
(RCB). Such an RCB should be considered a particular 
type of RCB although it is the most usual form. 


A wide choice of operating currents 1s available (typical 
values are between 10 mA and 20 A) RCB's are 
normally non-adjustable whilst RCD's are often 
manufactured so that one of several operating currents 
may be chosen. Single phase and multiphase devices 
with or without integral overcurrent facilities are 
available. 


Where residual current breakers of 30 mA operating 
current or less are being used, there is a choice between 
devices that are entirely electromechanical in operation 
and those that employ a solid state detector. The 
electromechanical types are generally small and 
compact and will operate on the power being fed to the 
fault alone whereas the solid state type which tend to 
be bulkier to require a power supply to ensure operation. 
Where this power supply is derived from the mains, it 
may be necessary to take added precaution against 
failures of part of that mains supply. Devices suitable 
for time grading are more likely to be of the solid state 
form as are those having higher through fault capacity. 


As per IS 732, it is required to use electromagnetic type 
voltage independent RCD of 30 mA for domestic and 
similar application where unskilled persons are 
involved. 


A test device is incorporated to allow the operation of 
the RCD to be checked. Operation ofthis device creates 
an out of balance condition within the device. Tripping 
of the RCD by means of the test device establishes the 
following: 


a) the integrity of the electrical and mechanical 
elements of the tripping device; and 
b) That the device is operating at approximately 


the correct order of operating current. 


It should be noted that the test device does not provide 
a means of checking the continuity of the earthing lead 
or the earth continuity conductor, nor does it impose 
any test on the earth electrode or any other part of the 
earthing circuit. 


Although an RCD will operate on currents equal to or 
exceeding its operating current, it should be noted that 
it will only restrict the time for which a fault current 
flows. It cannot restrict the magnitude of the fault 
current which depends solely on the circuit conditions. 


24.4 Selection of Earth Fault Protective Devices 


In general, residual current operated devices are 
preferred and may be divided into two groups according 
to their final current operating characteristics 
(see Table 14). 


a) RCDS Having Minimum Operating Currents 
Greater Than 30 mA — These devices are 
intended to give indirect shock risk protection 
to persons in contact with earthed metal. 

b) RCDS Having Minimum Operating Current 

of 30 mA and Below — These devices are 

generally referred to as having ‘high 
sensitivity’ and can give direct shock risk 
protection to persons who may come in contact 
with live conductors and earth provided that 
the RCD operating times are better than those 
given in IS 732. It should be noted that such 

RCD’s can only be used to supplement an earth 

conductor and not replace one. 


In addition to giving protection against indirect contact 
or direct contact RCD's may also give fire risk 
protection, the degree of protection being related to 
the sensitivity of the device and magnitude of leakage 
current. National Electric Code 2011 and IS 732 
recommends use of 300/500 mA RCD for protection 
against leakage current to fire in building due to leakage 
current. 


An RCD should be chosen having the lowest suitable 
operating current. The lower the operating current the 
greater the degree of protection given, it can also 
introduce possibilities of nuisance tripping and may 
become unnecessarily expensive. 


The minimum operating current will be above any 
standing leakage that may be unavoidable on the 
system. A further consideration arises if it is intended 
to have several devices in series. It is not always 
possible to introduce time grading to give 
discrimination whereas a limited amount of current 


53 


IS 3043 : 2018 


discrimination can be obtained by grading the 
sensitivities along the distribution chain. 


The maximum permitted operating current depends on 
the earth fault loop impedance. The product of the net 
residual operating current loop impedance should not 
exceed 65 V. 


It is often acceptable on commercial grounds to have 
several final circuits protected by the same residual 
current devices. This, however, does result in several 
circuits being affected if a fault occurs on one of the 
circuits so protected and the financial advantages have 
to be weighed against the effects of losing more than 
one circuit. 


It should also be noted that different types of RCD in 
different circuits may react differently to the presence 
of a neutral to earth fault on the load side. Such an 
earth connection together with the earthing ofthe supply 
at the neutral point will constitute a shunt across the 
neutral winding on the RCD transformer. Consequently, 
a portion of the neutral load current will be shunted 
away from the transformer and it may result in the 
device tripping. On the other hand, such a shunt may 
reduce the sensitivity of the device and prevent its 
tripping even under line to earth fault conditions. In 
general, therefore, care should be taken to avoid a 
neutral to earth fault where RCD’s are in use, although 
there are some designs being developed that will detect 
and operate under such conditions. On installations with 
several RCD's, care should be taken to ensure that 
neutral currents are returned via the same device that 
carries the corresponding phase current and no other. 
Failure to observe this point could result in devices 
tripping even in the absence of a fault on the circuit 
they are protecting. 


Table 14 Maximum Earth Electrode Resistance 
for Different Types of Circuit Breakers 


(Clause 24.4) 
Type of Operating Maximem Earth 
Breaker Current Electrode Resistance 
(mA) (Q) 
RCD 
30 1666 
RCD 
— 500 


25 EARTHING IN POWER STATIONS AND 
SUBSTATIONS 


25.1 General 


In general earthing installations will be required at 
power stations and substations for: 


a) Theneutral points of each separate electricity 


IS 3043 : 2018 


system which has to be earthed at the power 
station or substation; 


b) Apparatus framework or cladding or other 
non-current carrying metalwork associated 
with each system, for example, transformer 
tanks, power cable sheaths; and 

c) Extraneous metalwork not associated with the 


power systems, for example boundary fences, 
sheaths of control or communication cables. 


For safety, the objective of earth bonding is to ensure 
that, in normal or abnormal conditions, any voltage 
appearing on equipment to which there is access should 
be below a dangerous level. It is not practicable to 
ensure that metal parts are earthed and remain near true 
earth potential during the passage of earth fault currents, 
particularly on high voltage systems with directly 
earthed neutrals. The objective should, therefore, be to 
provide effective bonding of low impedance and 
adequate current-carrying capacity between parts with 
which anyone may be in simultaneous contact, and to 
arrange, as far as possible, that large fault currents do 
not flow between such points. 


To minimize risk of damage to certain auxiliary plant, 
the rise of potential of a station earthing installation 
above the potential of true or remote earth should be 
as low as practicable, since this potential will be applied 
across protective insulation of any plant with 
connections to earth external to the substation, for 
example, plant with connections to pilot or telephone 
cables or cable sheaths. For similar reasons, the 
potential difference between earthed points in the 
station should also be kept to a minimum. Where surge 
protection is provided, the connection of the protective 
devices to earth should be as direct as possible. The 
discharge of high currents with high-frequency 
components requires earth connections of low 
resistance and reactance, that is, short connections with 
as few changes of direction as possible. 


Where the neutral points of two electrically separate 
electricity systems are connected to a common earth 
electrode system at a site, there is a coupling of the 
systems in the event of an earth fault occurring on either 
system by virtue of the rise of earth potential due to the 
passage of the fault current through the earth electrode 
system. Similarly, if non-current carrying metalwork 
is bonded to the same earth electrode as the neutral 
point of the supply the metalwork will experience the 
same rise of earth potential. If complete separation of 
electrical systems were required, it would be essential 
that the neutral points of each system and its associated 
metalwork be separately earthed. If such a method were 
adopted, each earthing system would require insulation 
from other earthing systems to withstand the maximum 
rise of earth potential occurring in any system by virtue 


54 


of lightning currents or power system fault currents. 
Insulation to this level is rarely practicable. 


The choice of using a common earth or separate earths 
for the system of different voltages at a transforming 
point affect: 


a) the probability of breakdown occurring in a 
transformer between the higher and lower 
voltage sides due to lighting or other surges; 
and 

b) the safety of consumers or their property 


supplied by any low voltage system distributed 
from the station against arise of potential of 
the earthed neutral by a high voltage system 
earth fault at the station. 


The former risk is reduced by use of a common earth 
system, and the latter danger only arises if the resistance 
of the earth electrode system is not sufficiently low to 
limit the rise of earth potential to a safe value. There is 
advantage in using a common earth where the earth 
electrode resistance, including the parallel resistance 
of any bonded metalwork, etc, to earth is 1 Q or less, 
as is usual at power stations, large outdoor substations 
or substations supplying a network of cables whose 
sheaths have a low impedance to earth. 


The substation earth system rise of potential will not 
be excessive if the resistance of the earth electrode 
system is small compared to the total earth fault circuit 
impedance. Systems of higher voltage (66 kV and 
above) generally have the neutral directly earthed, since 
the increase in costs of insulation that would be required 
for the transformer winding would be considerable. 


In rural situations, where overhead lines are used, it 
may, in certain circumstances, be inadvisable to use a 
common earth (see 25.2). 


The requirements are, therefore, best considered 
separately for substations: 


a) where low voltage is confined to auxiliary 
supplies within the substation; 

b) substations that provide an external low 
voltage supply; and 

c) power stations. 


The use of neutral earthing switchgear in public supply 
systems is avoided, where possible, since a direct earth 
is simple, reliable and cheaper than a switched earth. 
The circumstances in which neutral earthing switchgear 
may be necessary are so broad that it is not practicable 
to form general rules on type and application. 


25.2 General Earthing Arrangement 


A typical earthing arrangement for an outdoor 
switchyard is shown in Fig. 33. A typical earthing 


IS 3043 : 2018 


SPACING AS PER CALCULATION 


L/ 
[| BIBLE] messes PIT] d. 
Q e © e CURRENT » 


FENCE 


BURIED GRID CONDUCTOR WITHIN 1 METRE OF FENCE 


TYPICAL 
EARTH STRIP 


LIGHTING 
ARRESTER 


TRANSFORMER |_| 


CIRCUIT 
BREAKER 


CURRENT — 8 
TRANSFORMER [~] [| [| 


CIRCUIT 
BREAKER 


LIGHTNING 
ARRESTER 


(9 


mS d 
J 


FENCE 


BURIED GRID CONDUCTOR WITHIN 1 METRE OF FENCE 


EARTH ELECTRODE 
(TYP) 


NOTE — The number of electrodes and the size of the grid conductor is to be worked out as per 27.6.2. 


Fic. 33 TYPICAL EARTHING GRID FOR AN OUTDOOR SUBSTATION (66 kV AND ABOVE) 


arrangement for connecting the reinforcement of 
foundations of substation building and switchyard RCC 
masts is shown in Fig. 34. 


The perimeter fence may need to be earthed separately 
from the main station earth electrode system 
(see 25.6.1). 


The tertiary winding of a power transformer should be 
connected to the transformer tank by a connection of 
sufficient cross-sectional area to carry the primary 
short-circuit current. 


55 


In the case of pole mounted transformers on overhead 
line systems, difficulties may arise in areas of high soil 
resistivity. Here, if the pole carries also isolating 
switchgear with low level operating handle, up to three 
separately earthed electrode systems may be required. 
That for the neutral of the low voltage system is usually 
provided not nearer than one pole span away on the 
low voltage line. That for the high voltage metalwork 
(transformer tank, switch framework, support metal 
work), consists of one earth electrode at or near the 
pole. Resistances of 5Q to 50 Q are sometimes the 


IS 3043 : 2018 


SECTION A-A 


FFL 


GL 


NOTES 


"i 


ONLY TOP RING TO BE 
WELDED TO MAIN REIN- 
FORCEMENT RODS 


EARTHING PAD 100 X 100 
(TO BE CONNECTED TO 
MAIN EARTH GRID) 


WELD 


SUBSTATION BUILDING 
COLUMN 


1 Top ring should be half the size of main vertical reinforcement rod. 


2 Two extreme columns should be earthed like this in each substation. 


3 This is applicable to RCC masts and equipment supports in OD switchyard. 


4 Inserts other than earthing pads may or may not be welded to reinforcement. 


Fic. 34 EARTHING OF FOUNDATION REINFORCEMENT (CONCRETE ENCASED EARTHING ELECTRODE) 


minimum economically possible. In addition, an earth 
mat should be provided, near the ground surface, in 
the position taken up by a person operating the switch 
handle; this mat should be connected to the switch 
handle. The mat should be electrically separated from 
the main electrode; this is considered to be achieved 
by spacing the % nearest element of that electrode at 
least 1 m from the periphery of the mat and by placing 
the two earthing-wires on opposite sides of the pole. 
The tops of the main electrodes should be at least 
225 mm and preferably 750 mm below the ground, and 
the earthing wire to the main electrode of outdoor type 
rubber or plastics-insulated cable up to a point 2m 
above ground level. This cable, between the bottom of 
the pole and the electrode should be laid in a 50 mm 
diameter earthenware duct filled solid with bitumen. 


25.3 General Earthing Arrangements at Power 
Stations of Public Electricity Supplies 


25.3.1 Neutral Earthing of Generator Circuits 


At large power stations for public electricity supply 
the generation circuits generally comprise a star- 


56 


connected stator circuit with an operating voltage up 
to about 32 kV, directly connected to a step-up delta/ 
star transformer, the higher voltage winding generally 
operating at 132 kV, 275 kV or 400 kV, with the 
transmission system neutral point directly earthed. 


The following three methods have been used for 
earthing the neutral of the generator windings: 


a) Earthing through the primary winding of a 
matching transformer, with resistor connected 


across the secondary winding, 
b) 
с) 


earthing through a resistor, апа 
earthing through the primary winding of a 
voltage transformer. 


Method (a) — is current practice, the design being such 
that the maximum sub stained earth fault current in the 
generator circuit is restricted to 10 to 15 A, thus limiting 
the damage at the point of fault. The neutral and earthing 
connections, however, are of adequate capacity to 
withstand for 3 s the earth fault current that would flow 
in the event of the matching transformer terminals 
flashing over during an earth fault. The resistor used 


for the arrangement is of the metallic grid-non inductive 
type. 


Method (b) — can be used to achieve the same degree 
of fault-current limitation, by design ofa suitable high- 
current resistor, but is not preferred on the grounds of 
cost and its less robust construction than that of the 
equipment used in method (a). It was earlier practice, 
however, to individually earth each generator at power 
stations by liquid earthing resistors designed to limit 
the earth-fault current to about 300 A. 


Method (c) — is now historic, but had the advantage 
that minimal damage resulted at an earth fault. If 
desired, the generator could remain in circuit while 
operational arrangements were made to permit its 
withdrawal. However, this imposed a higher voltage 
stress on the stator windings and plant on the unfaulted 
phases, and the machine design usually imposed 
limitations on this. The output from the secondary 
winding of the voltage transformer could be arranged 
to activate an alarm or trip the generator circuit as 
desired. In designing the neutral and earthing 
connections to the voltage transformer, the earth-fault 
current used was that resulting by flashover of the 
voltage transformer during an earth-fault. 


Some old power stations have generators connected 
directly to distribution system busbars; in general, the 
neutral terminals of such generators have been earthed 
via liquid neutral earthing resistors of such a value that 
the maximum sustained earth fault current is of the order 
of full load current of the generator. Installations of 
neutral point switchboards with switching of neutral 
points and earthing resistors have been abandoned in 
favour of individual unswitched earthing resistors. 


25.3.2 Earthing of Power Station Auxiliary Systems 


There are, in common use, three methods of earthing 
the neutral point in power station auxiliary systems: 


a) Solid earthing; 

b) Earthing through a voltage transformer (or 
voltage relay) with a surge diverter (but not a 
fuse) shunting the primary winding (or the 
relay); and 

c) Resistance earthing. 


Methods (a) and (c) involve the automatic 
disconnection of the individual fault circuit. 


With method (b), an alarm can be arranged to be 
operated from the secondary ofthe voltage transformer 
and the scheme enables all auxiliaries to be kept in 
service until it is convenient to make the auxiliary 
switchboard dead. 


Method (a) is normally used in power stations with 
smaller generating sets and method (c) used in the larger 


27 


IS 3043 : 2018 


power stations. Method (b) has certain disadvantages, 
such as the complication in arranging for speedy 
identification of the individual faulty circuit and the 
possible difficulties arising from functioning of the 
surge diverter. 


25.4 Equipment Earthing at Power Stations 


Practice in equipment earthing at power stations is 
identical to that for large substations not giving external 
low voltage supplies (see 25.2). Acommon earth is used 
for the neutral earthing of generators and power station 
auxiliaries, and for all equipment framework, cladding, 
power cables sheaths and extraneous metalwork not 
associated with the power systems, other than the 
perimeter fence (see 25.6.1). 


25.5 Power Station and Substation Earth Electrodes 
25.5.1 General 


The required characteristics of earth electrode system 
are: 


a) a suitably low resistance, under all variations 
due to climatic conditions, for the fault 
currents envisaged; 

b) current carrying capability for all currents and 
durations that may arise in normal operating 
conditions or during fault or surge discharge 
conditions, without undue increase in 


resistance; 


suitable location in the vicinity of any lighting 
discharge devices such that earth connection 
conductors from such devices are as short and 
straight as possible to minimize surge 
impedance; and 

d) earth electrode installations should be durable 
and of such material and design to avoid 


corrosions. 


For high voltage system earthing, the value of the 
resistance of the earth electrode system, with any 
adventitious earths due to the bonding of metalwork, 
etc, in contact with earth, should be such that the rise 
in potential ofthe electrode system above the potential 
of remote earth is as low as economically possible. In 
the absence of any specific restriction, attempt should 
be made to restrict the rise of potential within safe value. 
At some sites, the rise in earth potential will inevitably 
exceed these values, and special precautions are 
necessary. 


Where the soil ofasite 1s hostile by virtue of alkalinity 
or acidity it may be necessary to embed earth electrodes 
in rammed neutral soil to avoid corrosion. 


Earth electrode systems can also represent some hazard 
to adjacent underground services or structural steelwork 
through electrolytic action between dissimilar metals 


IS 3043 : 2018 


(see 28). Where this danger cannot be avoided by 
selection of compatible metals, the adoption of cathodic 
protection or other remedial action may be necessary. 


At power stations and substations the steel inforcement 
in foundations and piles can be used to provide an 
effective electrode system, without necessity to provide 
further buried electrodes. Where piles are used they 
should be bonded by welding and connected to earth 
bonding bars at least four points. 


Where no substantial adventitious earths exist or where 
they are in adequate, it is necessary to install electrodes 
(see 14.1, 14.2 and 17.1.1). 


All cladding or steel work at a station should be bonded 
to the earthing system as should all structural steel work, 
but attention is drawn to precautions against undue 
reliance on the latter as an electrode. 


25.5.2 Choice and Design 


Where electrodes of large surface area are necessary 
to provide the requisite current carrying capacity, earth 
plates are recommended. These are generally of cast- 
iron, not less than 12-5 mm thick, and are usually 1-22 m 
by 1:22 m. As an alternative to plates, cast iron pipes 
may be installed. These are, for example, about 100 mm 
in diameter and 3 m long, but are not generally as cost- 
effective as plates for equivalent surface area. 


For lower current rating requirements, driven rods are 
preferred, usually, of the copper-clad steel type. They 
are generally driven in groups, preferably with a spacing 
of not less than their length, although this is not always 
achievable. Closer spacing reduces their effectiveness. 
The use of driven rods is advantageous where the deeper 
strata of a site have a lower resistivity than the upper 
strata but they may not be suitable if the site is stony or 
has rock sub-strata. 


At large substation compounds, it is usual to lay a mesh 
of underground earth strips to which system neutral 
terminals and the earth bonding conductors from above- 
ground structures are connected. In addition to 
providing an approximately equipotential surface over 
the substation, the earth strip mesh frequently suffices 
to provide an electrode of suitable resistance and 
current carrying capacity without augmentation. 


25.6 Earthing Conductors for Power Stations and 
Substations 


25.6.1 Disposition 


It is necessary to provide permanent and substantial 
connections between all equipment and the earth 
electrodes so as to afford a low resistance path for fault 
currents both to earth and between items of equipment. 
In addition, all other metal plant in or about the station 
should be connected to the main station earthing system. 


58 


The most efficient disposition of earthing conductors 
required will depend on the layout of equipment and 
the following may be taken as a guide: 


a) Indoor Equipment — A main earth bar should 
be provided and connected to the framework 
of each item and to the earth-electrodes. 
Except for the smallest installations, there 
should be a connection to the earth electrodes 
at each end of the earth bar or, if this 1s in the 
form of a ring, at several points on the ring. 
These connections may, depending on the 
layout be buried cables of a size adequate for 
the short-circuit current. Where the structure 
ofa switchboard is extensive or occupies more 
than one floor, a further parallel main earth 
bar^ may be required which should be cross 
connected to its companion bar at one point 
at least in each section of the switchboard. 
The main earth bar should be so placed that 
cable sheaths can be readily connected to it. 
When cables are so connected, the bonds 
should be made to the cable gland on which 
the lead sheath should be plumbed and the 
armouring clamped. The main earth bar should 
be accessible for the connection of any 
detachable earthing devices provided with the 
switchgear. 

Branch connections from the main earth bar 
should be provided to all accessory equipment, 
such as control and relay panels, constructional 
steelwork and fire-extinguishing equipment. 
Where busbar protection is effected at 
switchboards by frame leakage, two main 
earth bars are required. The frame bar 
interconnecting the framework of the switch 
units will be connected to the true earth bar 
through a current transformer and bolted links 
for test purposes. The true earth bar should 
be run separately from the frame earth bar in 
convenient position for the connection of cable 
sheaths and earthing devices. Where it is 
mounted on the switch units, it should be 
insulated therefrom by insulation capable of 
withstanding a test voltage of 4 kV rms 
alternating current for 1 min. 

Where insulated cable glands are used, it is 
recommended that ‘island’ insulation should 
be provided to facilitate testing. 

b) Outdoor Equipment (Excluding Pole Mounted 

Transformers) — A main earth bar should be 

provided, so disposed as to allow of the 

shortest subsidiary connections to all major 
equipment, such as transformers or circuit 
breakers. Wherever possible, this should be 
arranged to form a ring round the station. The 


main earth bar (or ring) should be connected 
where required to earth electrodes. For larger 
stations, the ring should be reinforced by one 
or more cross-connections. 

From the main earth bar, branch connections 
should be taken to each item of apparatus and 
where several such items lie together, a 
subsidiary ring with short branches is 
preferable to a number of longer individual 
branches from the main bar. The aim should 
be to provide a mesh system wherever this can 
be contrived with reasonable economy. 

The operating mechanisms for outdoor air 
break switch disconnectors and earth switches 
and circuit breaker control kiosks, etc, not 
integral with the circuit breaker should be 
connected to the main earth grid by a branch 
earth connection entirely separate from that 
employed for earthing the air-break switch- 
disconnector or earth switch base, or the circuit- 
breaker structure. The further contribution to 
safety given by an insulated insert in the 
mechanism drive is small compared with that 
obtained from such a branch earth connection 
and, therefore, insulated inserts are notns: 
recommended in operating mechanisms of 
apparatus installed in substations. While sites 
covered with hard core and stone chippings will 
constitute a surface layer with a relatively high 
specific resistance, in the interests of safety, a 
metal grid can be provided at the operating 
points to give a level standing area and an earth 
connection made from this grid to the operating 
handle. 

Where it can be proved that the current 
carrying capacity of a main aluminium or steel 
member or welded sections forming a 
structure are at least equal to that of the 
required aluminium or copper earth conductor, 
the structure may form part of the connection 
and there is no need to fix an earth conductor 
along this section. A structure made up of 
bolted sections should not be relied upon to 
form an efficient earth bond between 
equipment and the main earth grid, and loops 
bonding across structural joints are required. 
Connections to metal cladding, steel structure 
and metal door frames and windows or any 
other metallic panels should be made inside 
buildings. 

Where the earth wire of an incoming line ends 
at the terminal supports and is not connected 
to a point on the substation structures, a 
subsidiary earth connection should be provided 
between the substation earth system and the 
base of the support. If the latter lies outside the 


59 


IS 3043 : 2018 


substation fence, the earth connection should 
be buried where it passes under the fence and 
should be kept well clear of the latter. 


Earth connections to surge diverters should 
be of sample cross-section and as direct as 
possible; they should not pass through iron 
pipes which would increase the impedance to 
surges of the connection. The earth 
connections of the diverters should be 
interconnected with the main earthing system 
since, for the effective protection of the 
substation equipment, a definite connection 
of low impedance between the equipment and 
the diverters is essential. 


25.6.2 Design 
25.6.2.0 General 


The term earthing grid applies only to that part of the 
grid which is buried in soil. For design calculations of 
the grid resistance to the soil, only the buried part of 
the grid is to be taken into account. That part of the 
grid which lies embedded in concrete and also 
reinforcement connected to the grounding pads do 
lower the combined grid resistance but this contribution 
may not be taken into account while designing the 
earthing grid. 


25.6.2.1 Conductors installed above ground 


Earthing conductors for power stations and substations 
will normally be selected from copper or aluminium or 
steel sections adequately rated in size to carry the 
designed earth fault or three phase fault current for the 
appropriate designed maximum duration without 
exceeding a temperature given in Table 11А. 
Compliance with this requirement will additionally 
ensure satisfactory bonding without excessive voltage 
difference along any conductor. 


The required cross-sectional area of the earthing 
conductor is determined by the choice of conductor 
material and the maximum duration of the fault current. 
The generally accepted duration for design purposes 
are 1 s for voltages above 33 kV and 3 s for lower 
voltages. However, | s may also be accepted for 
voltages upto 33 kV where adequate fast acting earth 
fault protection is provided which isolates the system 
within 1 s. 


25.6.2.2 Conductors buried as strip electrodes 


The earthing grid consists ofthe vertical pipe electrodes 
or plate electrodes interconnected by horizontal 
conductors which serve as a strip electrode (14.2.3) in 
addition to forming an earthing grid. It is recommended 
that the duration of earth fault current should be taken 
as 1 s for 66 kV and above voltage level substations; 
and3 s while designing earth grids for all other voltage 
levels below 66 kV. However, 1 s may also be accepted 


IS 3043 : 2018 


for voltages upto 33 kV where adequate fast acting earth 
fault protection is provided which isolates the system 
within 1 s. 


The other factors which shall be taken as the 
consideration while designing the earth grid are given 
below: 


a) Factor of safety for the ability of the earth 
conductor to carry the fault current during the 
period the fault persists, without any thermal 
and mechanical damage to the conductor; 

b) Therelative importance ofthe installation for 
which the earthing system is being designed; 

с) The likely increase in the near future in the 
fault level in the area where the earth 
conductor has been installed; 

d) Operating time of the protective devices; 

€) Corrosion of the earth conductor; 

f) Factor of safety for workmanship in jointing, 
etc; and 

g) Maximum permissible temperature rise for the 


buried part ofthe grid, which may be taken as 
450°C for copper and steel conductors. 


25.6.2.3 Sizing 


a) The cross-section of the area of the grid 
conductor shall not be less than the value 
stipulated in 17.2.2.1 where the value of k is 
to be taken as 80 for steel. This is based on a 
reasonable assumption that 1 s and 3 s duration 
could not be adequate to bake out the ground 
moisture around the electrode especially as 
only a part of the current would be flowing 
across electrode-soil interface, for corrosion 
allowance see 13.6.1. 

b) XK, is a coefficient which takes into account 

the effect of number n spacing D, diameter d 

and depth of burial Л of the grid conductors. 


K-L n D 
2л 16hd 


6) (9 (9) 


sei upto(n — 2) terms 


1 
+—In 
T 


c) K,is a coefficient which is similar to К, 
dependent on the mesh width and the number 
of parallel conductors given by the empirical 
relationship. 

1, 1 1 1 1 

=—] —+ +—+ 
л 2h D+h 2D 3D 
— up to n terms 


(All lengths in metres) 
d) К, is an irregularity factor to allow for 


nonuniformity of ground, dependent on the 


60 


number of parallel conductors in the ground 
used in the mesh. 
K,=0-65 + 0:172 х п 
where n = number of parallel conductors. 
e) Mesh potential: Mesh potential is the potential 
difference in Volts from grid conductor to 
ground surface at centre of mesh grid. 


Mesh Е = K: Ki Р = 


where 
1 = fault current in amperes, and 
L = length of buried conductor. 


The duration of fault for calculation of step, 
touch and mesh potential shall be the actual 
breaker fault clearing time. 


25.6.3 Construction 
25.6.3.1 General 


It is essential for the safety of personnel and plant that 
an earth system should remain effective throughout the 
life of the plant. It is difficult in many cases to make a 
check of continuity after installation. The system, 
therefore, has to be robust and protected from 
mechanical damage and corrosion, where necessary. 
Any joints should be capable of retaining low resistance 
after many passages of fault current. 


25.6.3.2 Laying conductors 


Buried bare copper or steel conductors forming part of 
the earthing system should be at about 600 mm deep 
which, in addition to giving protection to the conductor 
and connections, should ensure that it will normally be 
below frost line. Aluminium should only be used for 
above ground connections. 

NOTE — Ifthe indigenous soil is hostile to copper, that is, acidic 


with a pH value of less than 6 or alkaline with a pH value of 
more than 10, suitable surrounding soil should be imported. 


Where an adequate earthing installation is provided, 
the subsidiary connections from the main earth grid to 
equipment may be laid at a depth and by routes most 
appropriate to site connections. For convenience in 
connecting to equipment, they may be laid at a depth 
of about 250 mm, and as they are, therefore, in ground 
more subject to seasonal or progressive changes of 
resistivity, it may be assumed that they make negligible 
contribution towards reducing station earth resistance. 
On the other hand, they do serve to reduce surface 
gradient within the station site. Conversely where these 
connections are also required to improve the earth value 
of the station, the 600 mm depth is required. The above 
recommendations deal mainly with stations on normal 
sites. Where ground conditions restrict the installation 
depth or where the soil resistivity is excessive, 
additional measures may be required beyond the station 
boundary to improve the overall earth value. 


The earthing installation within the station will, 
however, bond the station plant and restrict touch 
potentials to acceptable limits. 


Where bare metal conductor is buried under metal 
fencing, and the fencing is independently earthed, the 
conductor should be insulated by threading through non- 
metallic pipe extending for at least 2 m each side of the 
fence or alternatively insulated conductor may be used. 


When laying stranded conductor for earthing purposes, 
care should be taken to avoid bird caging of the strands. 


25.6.3.3 Fixing conductors 


In fixing aluminium or copper conductors to structures, 
etc, insulated clips should be used to avoid drilling and 
prevent electrolytic action. Galvanized clips should not 
be used. Fixing should be spaced not more than | m 
apart. 


Earth conductors in trenches containing power and/or 
multi-core cables should be fixed to the walls near the 
top (for example, 100 mm from the top). 


Copper earth strip supported from or in contact with 
galvanized steel should be tinned to prevent electrolytic 
action. 


Sharp bends required in aluminium strip should be 
formed by the use of a bending machine. 


Aluminium earthing conductors will give satisfactory 
performance in contact with concrete, cement, plaster 
and brickwork, and may be buried in concrete or plaster, 
provided it remains dry after setting. In outdoor 
installations, the conductor will weather to a grey 
appearance and in marine or industrial atmospheres 
slight surface pitting may occur. This will not affect 
performance since the sections are relatively large. The 
interfaces of all ‘mechanical’ joints should be protected 
with a suitable electrical joint compound, particularly 
any bimetallic joints. All bimetallic joints should then 
be encapsulated in a grease impregnated tape, mastic 
compound or bitumastic paint, etc, to exclude moisture. 


In general, aluminium should only be used above 
ground and the connections to earth electrodes made 
above ground with bimetallic joints. Aluminium can 
be used below ground only if efficiently protected or 
sheathed against contact with soil and moisture. 


25.6.3.4 Jointing conductors 


a) General — All crossings of conductors in the 
main earth grid should be jointed. 
Compression type joints may be used for 
stranded conductors. Non-conductor strip 
should be drilled for a bolt having a diameter 
greater than one-third of the width of the strip. 
If this diameter will be exceeded, than a wider 
flag should be jointed to the strip. 


61 


IS 3043 : 2018 


b) Aluminium to aluminium — When possible, 


c) 


joints on strip conductor should be arc welded 
using either the tungsten inert-gas arc (TIC) 
or metal inert gas arc (MIG) techniques. Oxy- 
acetylene gas welding or brazing may also be 
used. 

Ranges of compression fittings and tools are 
available for round conductors. Round 
conductors can also be flattened and punched 
with suitable tools to form a terminal. 


Round and rectangular conductors can be 
joined with bolted clamps. 

Rectangular conductors can be joined or 
terminated by drilling and bolting. When 
making a bolted type joint, the surface of the 
aluminium should be cleaned thoroughly by 
wire brushing and greased or an approved 
jointing compound applied immediately to 
both mating surfaces. Bolts should then be 
tightened and all excess grease or compound 
wiped off and discarded. 

To ensure adequate contact pressure and avoid 
overstressing, torque spanners should be used. 
The conductor manufacturer's literature 
should be consulted for further details for the 
joints and procedures. 

Cold pressure welding and explosive bonding 
can be used for jointing rectangular conductors. 
The appropriate manufacturer should be 
consulted for details of these procedures. 
Aluminium to copper — Joints between 
aluminium and copper should be ofthe bolted 
type and be installed in the vertical plane at a 
minimum distance of 150 mm above ground 
level. 

The rating surface of the aluminium should 
be cleaned thoroughly by wire brushing and 
greased or an approved jointing compound 
applied and the copper tinned. Grease or an 
approved jointing compound should be 
applied to the melting surface of the 
aluminium. After bolt tightening by torque 
spanner, excess grease or compound should 
be wiped off and discarded, and the joint 
protected from the ingress of moisture by the 
application of suitable plastics compound or 
irradiated polyethylene sleeve with mastic 
lining. Alternatively, the joint may be 
protected by a bitumastic paint. 
Aluminium conductor connections to 
equipment should, where possible, be in the 
vertical plane. Surface preparation of the 
aluminium and the making ofthe joint should 
be as previously described. The finished joint 
should be protected by a bitumastic paint. 


IS 3043 : 2018 


d) Copper to copper — The following methods 


may be used: 

1) Brazing using zinc-free brazing material 
with a melting point of at least 600°C; 

2) Bolting; 

3) Riveting and sweating; and 

4) Explosive welding. 


Earthing conductor connections to equipment 
should, as far as practicable, be made onto 
vertical surfaces only. In the case of painted 
metal, the paint should be carefully removed. 
Earthing conductors should be tinned where 
connected to galvanized steelwork. No 
connection point should be less than 150 mm 
above ground level. In any position, subject 
to corrosion, the finished joint should be 
protected by bitumastic paint. 
e) Loops for portable earths — Loops of plain 
aluminium or copper should be provided on 
the earth conductor at each location where 
portable earthing leads may be applied. The 
loops should not be less than 180 mm long 
and 75 mm clear of the earth conductor; they 
should be at a convenient height and should 
be formed separately, not by bending the earth 
strip itself. Loops should be jointed to the earth 
conductor using a method given in 25.6.3.4 (d). 
Steel — For steel, it is recommended to use 
only welded joints. 


25.7 Earthing of High Voltage Cable Sheaths 
25.7.1 Three-Core Cables 


Modern high voltage power cables are generally 
provided with a polymeric insulating over sheaths. The 
sheath of solid type cables are generally directly earthed 
at their terminations and joints, the cable sheaths being 
bonded at joints. The sheath earth connections of 
pressure type cables are generally made via aremovable 
link in a lockable box to permit periodic testing of the 
over sheath insulation, the joints being insulated, but 
the sheaths bonded through. The test requirement also 
means that insulating glands should be provided at the 
cable termination boxes of transformers, switchgear, 
etc and at cable sealing ends or joints. 


25.7.2 Single-Core Cable Tails 


The sheaths of single-core cables have a longitudinal 
induced voltage, the magnitude of which is directly 
proportional to the current flowing in the core. When 
both ends of a single-core cable are bonded to earth, a 
current flows in the sheath and the thermal effects of 
this sheath current derates the capacity of the cable core. 
Where this derating is unacceptable and the value of the 
standing induced voltage is acceptable, it is usual to earth 


62 


the sheaths of the single-core cables at the trifurcating 
box or in the case of single-core mains, the end of the 
trefoil formation, the cable glands at sealing ends or plant 
cable boxes being of the insulated type. The acceptable 
level of the maximum sheath voltage is generally taken 
as 65V with full rated current flowing in the cable, but 
where the ratio of fault current to full rated current is so 
high that the voltage developed across an insulated gland 
is unacceptable, it is necessary to derate the permissible 
voltage to some level lower than 65 V. 


25.7.3 Single-Core Cable Mains 


The choice of termination and earthing arrangements 
for single-core cable mains is a matter of economics. 
The possible methods of earthing are as follows: 


a) Solid Bonding — In this system, the sheath 
bonding and earthing arrangements are such 
that the sheaths are maintained near earth 
potential throughout their length. 


b) Single Point Bonding — This method is as 
described in 25.7.2 for single core tails, and 
is subjected to practical limitations of cable 
lengths permissible. 

c) Cross-Bonding — In this method, the cable 


length is divided into three equal sections (or 
into a multiple of three such sections) and at 
each section junction, an insulating joint is 
provided. At these joints, the sheath of each 
cable section is bonded to the sheath of a 
different phase cable of the next section 
through lockable link boxes. By suitable 
connection, the phasor sum of the longitudinal 
sheath voltage is zero, and at the cable 
terminations, the sheaths of all three cables 
are bonded to earth. It is usual to provide a 
three-phase star-connected set of cable 
protections at each intermediate insulating 
joint; these protectors are non-linear resistors 
presenting low impedance to surge currents. 
The cross-bonding method permits the full 
rating of the cable to be maintained, but incurs 
considerable cost in the provision of insulating 
joints, link boxes, protectors, etc. 


25.8 Miscellaneous Matters in Power Stations and 
Substations 


If two or more stations are adjacent on what may be 
considered to be one site, the earthing systems and the 
stations should be interconnected to form a single 
earthing system. Where the stations actually adjoin, the 
extremities of their earthing systems should be 
connected together so that the whole area is enclosed 
by the earthing system. Where the separation is too large 
to treat as adjoining stations, an interconnecting earth 
conductor of substantial cross-section should be run to 
ensure that, as far as practicable, fault currents are 


diverted from cable sheaths and armour. This is of 
particular importance where fault current flowing in 
one station is provided from the adjoining station, for 
example, where a switching station adjoins power or 
transforming station sites so that an earth fault in the 
switchgear causes current flow between the two sites 
in order to reach the system neutral at the generators or 
transformers. Such interconnections between sites can 
include links suitably disposed to assist in testing. 


Except where special insulation is called for, sheaths 
of all main cables should be connected to the station 
earth system. With multi-core cables the connection is 
generally made at the termination. 


Where high earth-fault currents are to be expected, and 
an appreciable rise of potential of the station system with 
respect to the general body of the earth may ensure, 
special care is necessary with connections other than 
main cables or lines entering the station, such as water 
pipes and telephone or pilot cables, water pipes should 
include an insulated section; polymeric piping is often 
suitable. In several cases, isolating transformers may be 
necessary for telephone connections. British Telecom 
provides isolation equipment at their circuit terminations 
when the potential rise exceeds 430 V (650 V for high 
reliability lines). Pilot cables should be provided with 
insulated glands and so disposed as to minimize the 
possibility of fault currents being carried by the sheaths. 


Where carrier-current equipment is employed, a further 
earth-electrode, normally a driven rod, should be 
provided at or immediately adjacent to each structure 
supporting the coupling capacitors. This earth electrode 
is an additional one for the high frequency equipment 
and should be bonded into the main earthing system. 
The structures supporting the coupling capacitors 
should be earthed in the normal way. 


26 EARTHING ASSOCIATED WITH 
OVERHEAD POWER LINES 


26.1 Type of Support 


Any consideration of whether metalwork associated 
with overhead power lines should be earthed and/or 
bonded has to take account of the type of support. Some 
overhead lines are supported by lattice towers of 
metallic construction, others by poles, which may be 
of steel, wood, concrete or of fabricated construction, 
for example, glass-reinforced plastics; brackets attached 
to buildings are also used to support conductors. 


26.2 Insulation Failure 


Following an insulation failure, a voltage may exist 
between any supporting metalwork and earth. The 
public are generally protected if no metalwork within 
3 m ofthe ground is liable to become live on failure of 
insulation. If the supports are close to buildings, etc, 
the particular circumstances have to be considered. 


63 


IS 3043 : 2018 


26.3 Lattice Steel Structures 


There will often be satisfactory earthing of lattice steel 
structures, poles of metallic construction and reinforced 
concrete poles through their contact with the ground. 
In areas of high earth resistivity, special earthing 
arrangements may be necessary; an overhead protective 
conductor attached at each support and connected to 
the neutral of the supply and of the line may be the 
most economical solution. This conductor 1f positioned 
above the live conductors will also provide a measure 
of lightning protection. 


26.4 Poles of Non-conducting Material 
26.4.1 General 


Where a pole is of non-conducting material, for 
example wood or glass-reinforced plastics, the pole will 
act against the flow of leakage current and can be 
expected to prevent danger near ground level due to 
leakage across or failure of any insulator supporting a 
line conductor, except where there is intervening 
equipment or metalwork that is or may become live. 


For the reasons given in 26.4.2 to 26.4.4, there are 
advantages in not earthing the pole-top metalwork of 
such poles and in not making bonding connections to it. 


26.4.2 Omission of Bonding 


Where insulators are attached to a pole or to non- 
conducting cross-arms, etc, attached to the pole, 
omission of bonding of pole-top metalwork gives a 
greater impulse withstand voltage, so there is less risk 
of faults due to phase-to-phase flashover. To reduce 
risk of fire, where wooden cross-arms are used, care 
should be taken to make close, fire contact between 
the cross-arm and the insulator pipe. 


26.4.3 Omission of Earthing 


If pole top metalwork is not earthed, transient faults 
due to birds, flying branches, etc, bridging the clearance 
between line conductors and the metalwork are greatly 
reduced. 


26.4.4 Transformers, Rod-operated Switchgear and 
Cable Terminations 


In cases where equipment, such as transformers, rod- 
operated switchgear or cable terminations are mounted 
on a wooden or reinforced plastics pole, the impulse 
flashover value of the additional insulation provided 
by the pole is impaired, and all the metal work on the 
pole needs to be bonded and earthed. 


26.5 Stays 


To prevent stay corrosion that would otherwise occur 
due to passage of small leakage currents occurring even 
in normal operation, stay insulators should be fitted in 
stay wires on poles. 


IS 3043 : 2018 


No part of the stay insulator should be less than 3 m 
above ground; it should be fitted as high up the stay as 
possible, but the stay insulator should be so positioned 
that there can be no contact below the stay insulator 
between the stay wire and any phase conductor 
(including a jumper connection), should either of them 
break or become loose. 


26.6 Metal Brackets Attached to Buildings 


A metal bracket attached to or adjacent to any 
metalwork on or joining part of any building or structure 
and supporting a phase conductor needs to be earthed 
unless the conductor is both insulated and supported 
by an insulator, each form of insulation being suitable 
for the conditions under which it will be required to 
operate in the event of failure of the other. 


26.7 Earth Wires and Earth Connection 


Any connection between metalwork and earth has to 
be of low resistivity, both to provide for prompt 
operation of protective equipment and to minimize 
inductive interference with communications circuits in 
the event of a flow of fault current. Electromagnetic 
interference is reduced if the resistance of the earth 
return path is small compared with its reactance. At 50 
Hz, inductive interference may be caused by the use of 
a high-resistivity wire (for example, steel wire) even if 
it is perfectly earthed. A single low-resistivity earth wire 
made of copper, aluminium etc, should be used and it 
should avoid passing close to conductors or cables 
belonging to other circuits. It should be protected 
against mechanical damage for a distance of 3 m above 
ground level. 


26.8 Lightning Protection 


A lightning conductor attached to a structure and 
earthed at its lower end acts to reduce the likelihood of 
a lightning strike. An over-running aerial earth-wire on 
overhead power line, besides forming part, of the earth 
return path, also gives a degree of lightning protection. 
The lower the impedance between aerial earth-wire and 
earth, the better is the protection since this reduces the 
possibility of a back flashover from the earthed 
metalwork to line conductors on the occasion ofa direct 
strike to the earth wire. 


NOTE — The conductors of fundamental earthing may be 
connected to the main earthing terminal (which is equipotential 
bonding conductor) only if the same is recommended by original 
electrical equipment manufacturer. 


27 GUIDELINES ON EARTHING OF 
INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL 
INSTALLATION 


27.1 General 


Many industrial installations take their electrical 


64 


products from public distributor network operated at a 
voltage which might be above 650V ac; fault capacities 
might also be greater than those encountered in 
domestic premises and great care should be exercised 
in the design of all protective conductors and their 
terminations. 


27.1.1 So far as the consumers taking supply at 240 V 
are concerned according to the provisions of the basic 
statutes, it is the responsibility of the supplier to provide 
earthed terminal at the premises of the consumer. In 
the cases of consumers taking supply at higher voltages, 
earthing scheme should be so designed as to satisfy the 
basic statutory requirements and also to provide 
adequate protection against ground faults. 


27.1.1.1 Earth fault loop impedance 


As in the case of voltage supplies of exceeding 650 V, 
low resistance paths for the return of earth fault current 
in industrial and commercial power supply of 250 V 
but not exceeding 650 V is necessary, and the total loop 
impedance should be sufficiently low as to allow the 
operator of a suitably chosen protective device, fuse, 
circuit-breaker or RCD within the disconnection time 
given in IS 732. 


27.1.1.2 Single-core cables 


Where single-core cables are used in low voltage 
installations, it is generally preferable to bond and earth 
all metallic sheaths or armour at both ends of each run 
(solid bonding). Induced voltages in the sheaths or 
armours should be reduced to low values and the sheaths 
or armours may be used as a protective conductor, in 
parallel if necessary with an additional conductor. 
Currents circulating in the armour or sheath reduce the 
current-carrying capacity of the cables; where the 
reduction is not acceptable, sheaths and armours may 
be bonded at one end of the run (single-point bonding) 
and a separate protective conductor is then necessary. 


27.1.2 The earthing system in the premises of 
consumers at voltages above 230 V should be designed 
as a PME system with separate protective conductor. 
The neutral of the transformer should be connected to 
be earth electrodes by duplicate connections and 
adequate number of earth electrodes should be provided 
with interlinking earth bus for getting an optimum value 
of the earth resistance depending upon the setting of 
the earth fault/earth leakage relays and also to limit the 
extent of rise of potential in the case of solidly earthed 
system, the ground fault current can be of the order of 
symmetrical short-circuit current and hence the thermal 
design of the earth bus and the earthing system should 
depend upon the maximum symmetrical short circuit 
current available. The duration of the earth fault current 
according to the existing design practice is 3 s. 
However, in case of installations where adequate 


protective arrangements have been incorporated so as 
to instantaneously isolate the system in the event of a 
ground fault, a lesser duration can be considered for 
design purposes. 


27.1.3 As far as the value of the earth resistance is 
concerned, the objective from the point of safety 
consideration is not to attain minimum value of the earth 
resistance as is sometimes understood. But the 
consideration should be whether there is adequate co- 
ordination between the practically obtainable value of 
the earth resistance and setting of the protective devices. 
This aspect is very much relevant in the case of 
installations where the value of the earth resistivity 
which is to be taken for the calculations is abnormally 
high. The disposition of the earth electrodes, and the 
extent and size of earth grid will always depend upon 
the disposition of plant electrics; the layout should be 
done in such a manner as to keep the earth continuity 
resistance to within the stipulated figure. The thermal 
rating of the earth electrode is specified by this Code 
which gives the formula for the maximum allowable 
current density in an earth electrode. However, in the 
case of a protective multiple earthing system where the 
neutral of the supply transformer and the non-current 
carrying metal parts in the system are interconnected 
by the common earth grid, which is designed for the 
prospective fault current, there is no reason to design 
the earth electrodes assuming that total earth fault 
current is dissipated through the earth electrodes. In 
the case of an interconnected system, earth fault current 
is returned to the neutral mostly through the 
interconnected system, earth fault grid. However, 
depending upon the value of the earth resistivity, a 
percentage of the current may flow through the mass 
of the earth as well. The current, which takes the earth 
return path, enters the earth through different earth 
electrodes. Hence, while designing the earth electrodes, 
the thermal capability of the earth electrodes need be 
verified only with reference to the portion of the current 
which may take the earth return path, which depends 
upon the earth resistivity. In the normal range of earth 
resistivities between 10 and 1 000 m, this division of 
current is found to be in between 80 percent and 
20 percent for design purposes. Hence, depending upon 
the disposition of the plant electrics, an optimum 
number of earth electrodes are provided as anchorages 
for the earth grid. The value of the earth resistance of 
the grid so formed is then calculated assuming the bare 
interconnected grid as a strip electrode. The value of 
the earth resistance so obtained should be within 
reasonable limits, otherwise brought down by adding 
more electrodes. The ground fault protective device or 
the phase fault protective device (in case there is no 
ground fault protective device) is set to operate at the 
minimum current which is obtainable under a ground 
fault condition. The thermal rating of the earth 


65 


IS 3043 : 2018 


electrodes are then cross verified based upon the 
percentage of current which takes the earth return path. 
Based upon the above philosophy, the following 
guidelines for the design of an earthing system in the 
HT consumers premises are issued. 


27.2 Consideration for Earthing 


27.2.1 The main earthing conductor will be run in 
between standard earth electrodes conforming to 
specifications and distributed uniformly around the 
working area. All the non-current carrying metal parts 
of the equipments, switchboards, etc, will be solidly 
connected to this earth grid or equipotential bonding 
conductor by duplicate earth connections of adequate 
size. For interconnecting switchboards protected by 
HRC fuses to this earth grid, the size of interconnection 
need not be more than 75 mm? copper or its equivalent. 
In laying out the earth electrodes and the earth 
conductors, all efforts should be made to maintain a 
uniform potential gradient in and around the work area. 
The transformer neutral should be solidly connected 
to this grid by duplicate earth connections, one going 
directly to earth electrodes and other going to the 
common earth bus. The size of the neutral earthing 
conductor should in no case be less than that of the 
size of the main earthing conductor. 


27.2.2 The earth grid should be run at a minimum depth 
of 50 cm below ground. When bare conductors are used 
as earth grid, this can also be assumed to dissipate the 
fault current to the mass ofthe earth and for calculating 
the effective value of the earth resistance of this grid, 
this grid can be treated as a strip electrode and the 
standard formula can be applied for calculating the earth 
resistance of the grid. 


27.2.3 The continuity resistance of the earth return path 
through the earth grid should be maintained as low as 
possible and in no case greater than one ohm. 


27.2.4 In the case of EHT substations, where there is 
possibility of the ground potential attaining very high 
values (of the order of 5 kV and above) in the event of 
an earth fault, the earth grid design should be based on 
the tolerable limits of the potential gradient in the 
substation area, and the step and touch potential due to 
fault conditions. 


27.2.5 In the case of EHT substations, the earth 
conductors should be bare and they should be buried 
direct in ground. 


27.3 The Earth Electrodes 


27.3.1 The earth electrodes are provided to dissipate 
the fault current in case of earth faults and to maintain 
the earth resistance to a reasonable value so as to avoid 
rise of potential of the earthing grid. Practice, which 
has been followed until now, is to design the earth 


IS 3043 : 2018 


electrodes for the appropriate thermal withstand 
capacity, assuming the total fault current to be passing 
through the earth electrodes. This is true in the case of 
an earthing system which is not interconnected with 
neutral earthing (TT/IT system). But with the adoption 
of PME system in industrial distribution where the 
neutral is solidly connected to the earthing grid, the 
above practice requires revision as has already been 
pointed out in 27.1.3 in order to avoid redundancy and 
thereby to avoid unnecessary expenditure. The amount 
of current that may actually be dissipated through the 
earth electrodes depends to a large extent, on the earth 
resistivity of the soil. Depending upon the value of the 
earth resistivity, the total fault current from the supply 
system will return to neutral partially through the earth 
grid and partially through the earth return path. The 
percentage of current which flows directly through the 
earth grid depends on the resistance of the earth return 
path in relation to the earth resistivity. The standard 
earth resistivity values typically vary in the range 
between 10 and 1 000 ohms. In this range of variation, 
it can be reasonably assumed that the fault current 
division at the point of entry to the earth grid is 20 to 
80 percent. For verification of the fault dissipating 
capacity of earth electrodes, only the portion of the fault 
current which is diverted to the earth electrode need be 
taken and under these conditions the maximum 
allowable current density as stipulated in this code 
should not be exceeded. 


27.3.2 The number of earth electrodes required for a 
particular installation will be basically decided by the 
optimum value of the earth resistance which is required 
to make the protective system operation. Hence, the 
optimum value of the earth resistance depends upon 
the reasonable potential rise and setting of the earth 
fault isolating devices or the series, protective devices 
in case where there is no ground fault detecting devices. 
The main criterion is that the value of the earth return 
resistance should not be so high as not to produce the 
required ground fault current for actuating the 
protective devices within the stipulated time. Or in other 
words, the optimum value of the earth resistance is 
closely related to setting of the earth fault protective 
devices used in the system. For a small installation, as 
a general rule, in the event of a direct earth fault, the 
earth fault current produced should not be less than 
five times the highest rating of the maximum protective 
fuses or the setting of the earth fault relay if such a 
device is provided. 


27.4 Determination of Earth Resistivity 


As has already been pointed out, the value of the earth 
resistivity plays an important role in the design of the 
earth electrodes. In the conventional method, the earth 
resistivity which is to be applied in the design 


66 


calculations is taken as the arithmetic mean of a number 
of measured values in the area under consideration. The 
figure so obtained seldom projects a realistic value. A 
more scientific approach is to measure the earth 
resistivity in different radial directions from a central 
point which may be taken as the proposed load centre. 
With the values so obtained, a polar curve is drawn. 
The polar curve is converted to an equivalent circle 
(see 40.6). The radius of the circle is taken to be the 
average value of the earth resistivity figure which is to 
be applied in design calculations. Necessary allowance 
should, of course, be given for factors such as variations 
in climatic conditions, treatment of soil, etc. 


27.5 Design of Earth Bus 


27.5.1 Design of earth bus is based upon the general 
guidelines given in 14 to 23. The size of the main earth 
grid will be decided on the basis of line to ground fault 
current assumed to be symmetrical short-circuit current 
in the system. This assumption is fairly reasonable in 
the case of a solidly earthed system where the ratio 
between XO/XI is limited to less than 3 and the ohmic 
value of the earth return path to the supply neutral is 
reasonably low. The minimum fault level existing at 
the supply point will be assumed to be 13-1 kA or the 
actual fault current whichever is greater for premises 
at voltages above 1 kV. 


27.5.2 Bare copper, PVC covered aluminium or GI 
subject to relevant restrictions based on the location and 
nature of installation may be used as earthing to 
conductors. The size ofthe earthing conductors will be 
calculated according to guidelines given in the Code. 
The time duration of the fault current as recommended 
is 3 s. According to standards developed in this regard, 
the size of the earthing conductors will be based upon 
current densities as given in 15. A corrosion factor of 
5 percent of unit drop in the value of corrosion index up 
to –10 is recommended for steel/GI earthing conductors 
while designing an earthing scheme, situations of 
corrosion index of below —10 should not be allowed. 


27.5.3 In the case of systems where standard protective 
arrangements have been provided for isolating the 
ground faults instantaneously, due consideration can 
be given to this aspect in deciding upon the size ofthe 
earthing conductor by giving due allowance to lower 
duration of the ground fault currents. 


27.6 Correlation between Grounding and Earth 
Fault Protection 


27.6.1 The phase fault protective device normally used 
in systems operating at 415 V afford reasonable 
protection against arcing ground faults. The ground 
fault current depends upon the impedance to zero 
sequence current flows and depends to a large extent 
on the grounding network and the earth resistivity. The 


pickup value of the ground fault relays or the value of 
the phase fault protective device should be coordinated 
for the required protection for the system. In case the 
impedance of the earth return path for ground fault 
current cannot be regulated so as to produce adequate 
fault current for operating the phase fault protective 
devices like fuses, such circuits should be protected by 
separate ground fault protective devices. Hence, the 
necessity of separate ground fault protection depends 
on the grounding network and its effective impedance 
and earth grid design is closely related to the 
effectiveness of the phase fault protective device in 
clearing a ground fault in place where separate ground 
fault protective devices are not provided. 


27.7 Grounding and Ground Fault Protection 


27.7.1 In recent years, there has been an increasing 
interest in the use of ground fault protection in industrial 
distribution circuits. This interest has been brought 
about by a disturbing number of electric failures. Hence 
it is worthwhile to explore the need for better ground 
fault protection and to examine the grounding practices 
in the light of the required protection. 


27.7.2 Distribution circuits which are solidly grounded 
or grounded through low impedances require fast 
clearing of ground faults. This involves high sensitivity 
in detecting low ground fault currents as well as the 
co-ordination between main and feeder circuit 
protective devices. Fault clearing must be extremely 
fast where arcing is present. 


27.7.3 The appeal of effective ground fault protection 
is based on the following: 


a) The majority of electric faults involve ground. 
Ungrounded systems are also subject to 
ground faults and require careful attention to 
ground fault detection and ground fault 
protections. 

b) The ground fault protective sensitivity can be 
relatively independent of continuous load 
current values and thereby have lower pick 
up settings than phase protective devices. 
Ground fault currents are not transferred 
through system, in the case of power 
transformers which are connected delta-star, 
delta-delta. The ground fault protection for 
each system voltage level should be 
independent of the protection at other voltage 
levels. This permits much faster relaying than 
can be afforded by phase protective device 
which require co-ordinate using pick up values 
and time delays which extend from the load 
to the service generators, often resulting in 
considerable time delay at some parts in the 
system. 


c) 


67 


IS 3043 : 2018 


d) Arcing ground faults which are not 
promptly detected and cleared can be 
extremely destructive. A relatively small 
investment can provide very valuable 
protections. 


27.8 Much of the present emphasis on ground fault 
protection centres around or circuits below 550 V. 
Protective devices have usually fuse switches of circuit 
breakers with integrally mounted phase tripping 
devices. These protective elements are termed as 
overload or fault overcurrent devices because they carry 
the current in each phase and clear the circuit only when 
the current reaches a magnitude greater than full load 
current. To accommodate inrush currents such as motor 
starting or transformer magnetising inrush, phase over 
current devices are designed with inverse 
characteristics, which are rather slow at overcurrent 
values upto about 5 times rating. For example, a 1 600 
A circuit breaker with conventional phase protection 
will clear a 3 200 A fault in about 100 s. Although it 
can be adjusted in the range of 30 to 200 s, at this fault 
value. A 1 600 A fuse may require 10 min or more to 
clear the same 3 200 A fault. These low values of fault 
currents are associated predominantly with fault to 
ground and have generally received little attention in 
the design of earthing systems, until the occurrence of 
many serious electric failures in recent years. In 
contrast, on grounded systems of 3.3 kV and above, it 
has been a standard practice to apply some form of 
ground fault protection. 


27.9 The action initiated by ground fault sensing 
devices will vary depending upon the installation. In 
some cases, such as services to dwelling, it may be 
necessary to immediately disconnect the faulted circuit 
to prevent loss of life and property. However, the 
opening of some circuits in critical applications may 
in itself, endanger life or property. Therefore, each 
particular application should be studied carefully before 
selecting the action to be initiated by the ground fault 
protective devices. 


27.10 Protection against Arcing Ground Faults and 
Earth Leakage 


27.10.1 Necessity of arcing ground fault protection 
especially for 415 V installations is not very well 
understood and protective schemes suggested for 
normal industrial installations never give much 
importance to this aspect. It is also seen that the fact 
that a series protective device like breaker or a fuse 
does not offer protection against an earth fault or arcing 
ground fault in a 415 V system, is very often forgotten. 
In the case of such installations, the avoidance of arcing 
ground faults is important from the point of view of 
personal safely and equipment damage. 


IS 3043 : 2018 


28 UNEARTHED GENERATING SETS 
(RATINGS BELOW 10 kW) 


28.1 General 


Small single-phase generators are run as floating 
systems, that iswithout the winding connected to the 
frame or to earth, see Fig. 35; the generator frame and 
enclosure should be bonded to all exposed conductive 
parts of the load equipment, using a correctly terminated 
protective conductor in the connecting cable. 


KEY 


1 — Unearthed Generator 
2 — Plug and Socket 


3 — Appliance 


NOTES 


1 Low-voltage, single phase generating sets are generally 
mobile or transportable machines ranging in size from 
0.2 kW to 10 kW. 


2 Winding connection are normally brought out to a socket- 
outlet in which the third or protective conductor is 
connected to the generator enclosure. 


Fic. 35 SMALL Low VOLTAGE SINGLE PHASE 
GENERATOR RUN AS A FLOATING SYSTEM 


Cables, plugs, socket-outlets and cable couplers should 
be suitable for their environmental exposure. Cables 
should be a flexible type which includes a metallic braid 
or screen suitable for use as a protective conductor. 


If a cable without a metallic screen is used, it should 
be flexible with an extruded over sheath, capable of 
high abrasion resistance and should contain a separate 
protective conductor. Cables, plugs , socket-outlets 
should be inspected frequently and if defective should 
be replaced, not repaired; equipment and cables that 
are in good condition are vital for the continued safety 
of an unearthed system and form the first line of 
protection against the risk of shock. 


All cables should be as short as practicable and supply 
compactly located loads, since experience has shown 
that a compact installation is less likely to suffer 
insulation damage, causing earth faults, than an 
extensive one. 


It should be noted that RCDs will not operate on a first 
fault and only on particular second faults. 

28.2 Unearthed Generators (Rating Below 10 kW) 
Supplying a Fixed Installation 


Where an unearthed generator is to supply a fixed 
installation (see Fig. 36) it is recommended that 


automatic disconnection of supply is adopted as follows: 


a) One pole of a single phase generator should 
be connected to the installation main earthing 
terminal. 

b) The main earthing terminal should be 
connected to an earth electrode (see Fig. 36) 


c) The installation should conform to standards 
with all exposed-conductive parts and all 
extraneous-conductive-parts connected to the 
main earthing terminal. 


d) The installation should be protected by RCDs. 


The earth electrode should have a resistance to earth 
not exceeding 200 Q. 


The RCD will not provide protection for faults on the 
generator side of the RCD, and consequently 
precautions should be taken. 


KEY 


3 — Isolator 
4 — Main Earth Terminal 


1 — Unearthed Generator 

2 — Electrical Installation 

Fic. 36 SMALL Low VOLTAGE GENERATOR SUPPLYING 
A FIXED INSTALLATION 


28.3 Unearthed Generators Supplying a Mobile or 
Transportable Unit 


Where an unearthed generator is to supply a mobile 
installation it is recommended that the protective 
measure automatic disconnection of supply be adopted 
as follows (see Fig. 37): 


a) One pole of a single phase generator should 
be connected to the installation main earthing 
terminal. 

b) Тһе installation should conform to standards 
with all exposed-conductive parts and all 
extraneous-conductive-parts connected to the 
main earthing terminal. 

c) The installation should be protected by RCDs. 

d) Ifthe unit supplies equipment or socket outlets 
outside the unit these circuits should be 
protected by RCDs with a rated residual 
operating current not exceeding 30 mA and 
an operating time not exceeding 40 ms at a 
residual current of 5 times rated current I. 


If practicable, an earth electrode should be connected 
to the main earthing terminal of the unit with a resistance 


to earth sufficiently low to operate the RCDs. The RCD 
will not provide protection for faults on the generator 
side of the RCD, and consequently precautions should 
be taken. 


2 
1 p—————— 
porem 3 RCD г-——- 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | | 
| | 
| | | | 
Lh - —————————— a | 
PE 
KEY 


1 — Unearthed Generator 3 — Isolator 


2 — Mobile Unit 


Fic. 37 SMALL UNEARTHED GENERATOR SUPPLYING A 
MOBILE OR TRANSPORTABLE UNIT 


29 EARTHING IN STANDBY GENERATING 
PLANTS (INCLUDING PORTABLE AND 
MOBILE GENERATORS) 


29.1 General 


The earthing of standby and other private generating 
plant is necessary to protect against indirect contact 
that may result in electric shock. The objective is to 
create a zone in which voltage between exposed 
conductive parts and extraneous conductive parts are 
minimized in the event of an earth fault. 


In this clause the requirement is met by connecting the 
generating set frame(s), metallic cable sheaths and 
armouring, and all exposed conductive parts to an 
earthing conductor, and by connecting the system to 
earth (normally at one point only). 


Except in some special applications, there is, in every 
case, need for an independent earth electrode for energy 
source earthing at the premises where the generator is 
located. (Any suppliers’ protective earth terminal at the 
premises should also be connected to the independent 
earth electrode). 


There are many variations in system design and for any 
particular application, the precise method of energy 
source earthing is subject to the recommendations of 
the machine manufacturers, the system parameters and, 
where mains supplies are also involved, the agreement 
of the concerned supply authority. 


It may, however, be noted that the guidance included 
in this clause, applies to stock protection as well as 
protection of equipment. 


29.2 Low Voltage (Up to 1 000 V) Generators 
29.2.1 Earth Electrodes 


The overall resistance to earth of the electrodes forming 


69 


IS 3043 : 2018 


the connection to the general mass of earth from the low 
voltage energy source has to be consistent with the earth 
fault protection provided and shall be as low as possible. 


29.2.2 Single Low Voltage Generator Earthing 
(Synchronous Machines) 


29.2.2.1 Generator operating in isolation (from the 
mains or other supplies) 


In this basic arrangement, the generator neutral point 
should be connected to the neutral of the low voltage 
switchgear which is itself connected through a bolted 
link (for test purposes) to an earthing conductor and 
the independent earth electrode. 


29.2.2.2 Standby generator (without paralleling 
facility) 


In addition to the earthing requirements stated for a set 
operating in isolation from other supplies, special 
attention needs to be given to the change-over 
arrangement for standby set, which has to ensure that 
there can be no inadvertent parallel connection 
(see Fig. 38). 


In general four-pole changeover switching between the 
mains and standby, supplies should be used to provide 
isolation of the generator and electricity board neutral 
earths. However, in the case of a protective multiple 
earthing (PME) supply, three-or four-pole switching 
may be used. 


29.2.2.3 Standby generator (capable of parallel 
operation with incoming mains supply) 


Electricity boards will not generally permit continuous 
parallel operation of a synchronous machine with the 
low voltage mains supply, unless there are no other 
consumers on the network. However, short-term parallel 
operation for no-break load transfer or testing may be 
permitted. Also, if a synchronous machine output is 
rectified and connected through mains modulated static 
inverter continuous parallel operation will usually be 
permitted. In the latter case, the generator neutral 
terminal should be connected to the independent earth 
electrode and to any electricity board earth. 


For short-term parallel operation, giving no-break load 
transfer, the alternative energy source earthing 
arrangements, which may be used, are as described 
in 28.2.3.1, except that only one generating set is involved. 


29.2.3 Multiple Low Voltage Generator Earthing 
(Synchronous Machines) 


29.2.3.1 Generator operating in isolation from other 
supplies 


When low voltage generating sets are operated in 
parallel, the energy source earthing method is 
influenced by the magnitude of the circulating currents, 


IS 3043 : 2018 


PRIME 
MOVER 


GENERATOR 


EXTRANEOUS 
CONDUCTIVE 
PARTS 


i 9 | Ф €] EARTHING BAR 


INDEPENDENT EARTH ELECTRODE 


NOTES 
1 Cable sheath earth of provided/ shown 


few: 
2 PNE link of provided/shown - - - m 


1 
9-4] 


3 Changeover switch could be 3-pole with linked neutral. 


CHANGEOVER FACILITY 
(AUTOMATIC OR MANUAL) 


INCOMMING 
ELEC BOARD 
L V SUPPLY 


Fic. 38 SINGLE Low VOLTAGE STANDBY GENERATOR (WITHOUT PARELLELING FACILITY) 


particularly third harmonic, which can arise when 
generators are connected as four-wire machines. If the 
magnitude of the circulating current due to the nature 
of the load or the design of the generators is excessive 
when the neutrals are connected, then a neutral earthing 
transformer or star-point earthing switches are required. 


Hence, three alternative neutral earthing arrangements 
are possible for parallel operation as follows: 


a) All generator neutrals connected — With this 
arrangement, the neutral busbar in the main 
low voltage switchgear is connected through 
a bolted link to an earthing conductor and 
independent earth electrode. 

b) Neutral earthing transformer — By providing 

a neutral earthing transformer solidly 

connected to the busbars, the system neutral 

can remain earthed at all times whilst any 
number of generators can be connected to the 
busbars as three-wire machines. 

c) Generator star point switching — When this 

arrangement is adopted, it is necessary before 

the first generator is started for its star-point/ 
neutral earthing switch to be closed. When 
subsequent sets are started, their star-point 
earthing switches remain open. This avoids 
the circulating current problem, but it is 
essential that electrical and mechanical 
interlocks on the starpoint/earth switches 
ensure the integrity of the energy source 


70 


neutral earth connection at all times and under 
all possible operating conditions. 


29.2.3.2 Standby generators (without mains paralleling 
facility) 


The alternative neutral earthing arrangements for 
standby generators are as set out in 29.2.3.1 for 
generators operated in 1solation from an electricity 
board supply. The earthing arrangements are shown in 
the following drawings: 


a) Allgenerator neutrals connected (see Fig. 39); 
b) Neutral earthing transformer (see Fig. 40); and 
c) Alternator star-point switching (see Fig. 41). 


For standby generators with no mains paralleling 
facility, the changeover arrangement has to prevent 
inadvertent connection of the generator outputs and 
electricity board supply. 


In general, four-pole changeover switching between the 
electricity board supply and the standby supply should 
be used to provide isolation of the neutral earths. 
However, in the case of a protective multiple earthing 
(PME) electricity board supply, three-or four-pole 
switching may be used. 


29.2.3.3 Standby generators (capable of parallel 
operation with the incoming mains supply) 


The conditions for which parallel operation of multiple 
generating set installations with the mains supply may 
be permitted by the electricity board are the same as 


IS 3043 : 2018 


RY BN 


PRIME 


MOVER GENERATOR 


PRIME 


MOVER GENERATOR 


EXTRANEOUS 
CONDUCTIVE 
PARTS 


INDEPENDENT 
EARTH ELECTRODE 


NOTES 

1 Cable sheath earth of provided/shown 
(ae 

2 PNE link of provided/shown - - - 5 Н 

wer 

3 Changeover switch could be 3-pole with linked neutral. 


CHANGEOVER FACILITY 


(AUTOMATIC OR MANUAL) INCOMMING 


ELEC BOARD 
LV SUPPLY 


Fic. 39 Low VOLTAGE STANDBY GENERATORS WITH NEUTRALS CONNECTED 


apply for single generators (see 29.2.2.3). 


The possible alternative energy source earthing 
arrangements are as listed in 29.2.3.2. 


29.2.4 Single and Multiple Generator Earthing 
(Synchronous Machines) 


The parallel operation of synchronous machines is 
generally permitted; such machines are normally 
provided where the prime mover is driven by wind, 
water or biochemical plant, but may be provided with 
any prime mover. Any neutral point of such machine 
windings should be earthed, but the machine framework 
and any other extraneous metalwork should be 
connected to the electricity board earth terminal, if 
provided. 


29.2.5 Small Portable Low Voltage Generators upto 
5 kVA in Rating 


Where portable generators are used to provide a supply 
and earthing is considered as a means of protection 
against electric shock, they are required to be connected 
as follows: 


a) Single-phase machines should have either a 
centre tap on the winding connected to earth 
or, if not compatible with the system, one end 
connected to earth and designated the neutral. 
The Centre tap method reduces the effective 
line-earth voltage and is particularly used 
where the generator is to feed 110 V portable 
tools; and 


71 


b) Three-phase machines should have their 
windings connected in star, with the star 
connection made available and connected to 
earth. 


In all cases, the exposed metalwork of the generator 
should be adequately connected to the earth terminal, 
preferably with a bolted connection. 


The earth electrode should have a minimum cross- 
section area if it is not protected against corrosion of 
25 mm? for copper and 50 mm? for steel. Whilst there 
is no minimum value of earth electrode resistance, it 
should be as low as possible. The upper limit should 
not exceed the value required for the protective devices 
to operate and disconnect the load in a time not 
exceeding the safe value. 


NOTE — The selection of devices for the automatic 
disconnection of supply is covered in 24 and 25. 


For portable generators, residual current devices having 
an operating time of 40 ms or less at a residual current 
of 250 mA are recommended to a means of providing 
additional protection against the effect of electric shock. 
However, it is important to test such devices regularly, 
particularly when the greater 1s used in a hostile 
environment. The method of connecting a rod used on 
the output of a portable generator is shown in Fig. 42. 


29.2.6 Mobile Generators 


Where a supply is taken from a mobile generator, the 
following recommendations, additional to those given 
in 29.2.5 shall apply: 


IS 3043 : 2018 


NEUTRAL-EARTHING 
TRANSFORMER 


PRIME 


MOVER GENERATOR 
ANN O00 
EC 
ais 
PRIME 
MOVER GENERATOR 
PW zs С 
ET ofo 
Ide NELLE 
EXTRANEOUS 
CONDUCTIVE 
PARTS 


INDEPENDENT EARTH ELECTRODE 


NOTES 

1 Cable sheath earth of provided/shown 
гем 

2 PNE link of provided/shown - - - -! RE 


ыи 


NON-AUTOMATIC 
SWITCH INCOMMING 
ELEC BOARD 


LV SUPPLY 


3 If a bus section switch is installed a neutral earthing transformer will be required on each section of busbar. 


Fic. 40 Low VOLTAGE STANDBY GENERATORS WITH NEUTRAL EARTHING TRANSFORMERS 


a) The generator neutral should be connected to 
the vehicle chassis; 


The earth terminal at each outlet on the 
generator vehicle should be connected 
separately to the alternator neutral where the 
latter is bonded to the vehicle chassis; and 


b) 


Where an electricity board protective earth 
terminal or exposed structural metalwork is 
present, it should be connected to the earthing 
conductor on the mobile generator. 


29.3 High Voltage Generators 
29.3.1 Earth Electrodes and Earthing Resistors 


Where an earth electrode resistance is 1 Q or less, a 
common earth may be used for the high voltage 
generator and for the low voltage system derived 
through high voltage/low voltage transformation. 


NOTE — For further information see 25.1 (c). 


Where a resistor is used for earthing the star-point of a 
high voltage generator, it is normally designed to limit 


72 


the earth fault current to the same order of magnitude 
as the machine’s full load current. In general, however 
earthing via resistors is not necessary for single 
generators of 1 MW or less in rating. 


29.3.2 Single High Voltage Generator Earthing 
(Synchronous Machines with Star Connected 
Alternators) 


29.3.2.1 Generator operating in isolation (from mains 
or other suppliers) 


The star-point of the generator should be connected 
(via a resistor, if necessary) and through a bolted link 
for test purposes to an earthing conductor and the 
independent earth electrode. 


29.3.2.2 Standby generator (without paralleling 
facility) 


In addition to the earthing requirements described for 
a set operating in isolation from other supplies, the 
presence of an incoming electricity board supply makes 
necessary the interlocking of the standby supply circuit 


PRIME 


IS 3043 : 2018 


MOVER GENERATOR R Y BN  NON-AUTOMATIC CD 
CN SWITCH 
о о R , LV SUPPLY 
tim J oro HHHH o o - 
iis, OHO i 
Jii. Plo B 
тч 


EXTRANEOUS 
CONDUCTIVE 
PARTS 


INDEPENDENT 
EARTH ELECTRODE 


NOTES 

1 Cable sheath earth of provided/shown 
ге 

2 PNE link of provided/shown - - - - e 
[1.17] 


3 (9 Mechanical interlock to ensure that energy source neutral it always earthed but at one point only. 


Fic. 41 Low VOLTAGE STANDBY GENERATORS WITH STAR POINT SWITCHING 


breakers to prevent inadvertent connection 
(see Fig. 43). 


29.3.2.3 Standby generator (capable of parallel 
operation with an incoming supply) 


The operation of a private generator (or generators) in 
parallel with an electricity board high voltage system 
is subject to the parallel and technical agreement of 
the electricity board. 


In most cases where parallel operation with an incoming 
electricity board is required, an earthing contactor is 
necessary between the generator star-point and the 
bolted test link (see Fig. 44). The contactor should be 
interlocked with the incoming supply circuit breaker 
so that it is open during periods of parallel operation 
but closes at all times. In the event of the electricity 
supply being lost during a period of parallel operation, 
the earthing contactor should be arranged to close 
automatically. The form of generator earthing (direct 
or resistance) is dependent upon the system parameters 
and the machine manufacturer's recommendations. 


73 


29.3.3 Multiple High Voltage Generator Earthing 


29.3.3.1 Generators operating in isolation from other 
supplies 


When it is required to operate two or more generators 
in parallel and the method of energy source earthing is 
direct or resistance earthing, then earthing contactors 
should be installed between each generator star-point 
and the earthing conductor each electrode (as described 
in 29.2.3.1). The contactors need to be interlocked so 
that only one can be closed to maintain a single energy 
source earth. 


Ifa neutral earthing transformer is to be used for energy 
source earthings, it should be connected as shown in 
Fig. 45 except that in the case of an isolated generating 
system, the earthing contactors is not required. 


29.3.3.2 Standby generators (without mains parallel 
facility) 


When the generating sets are not to be operated in 
parallel with the mains supply, and have direct or 


IS 3043 : 2018 


GENERATOR 


LOAD 


L.V. PLANT - PORTABLE 


OR MOBILE UNIT 


INDEPENDENT 
EARTH ELECTRODE 


Fic. 42 METHOD OF CONNECTING A RESIDUAL CURRENT DEVICE (R.C.D.) ON THE 
OUTPUT OF A PORTABLE OR MOBILE GENERATOR 


resistance earthing, the standby generator circuit- 
breakers and mains circuit-breaker need to be 
interlocked. 


If a neutral earthing transformer is used the 
requirements are the same as described for a single 
standby generator in 29.3.2.2; as shown in Fig. 46, but 
without the earthing contactor. 


29.3.3.3 Standby generators (capable of parallel 
operation with an incoming mains supply) 


When the generating sets have direct or resistance 
earthing and are used as standby to the mains, earthing 
contactors are needed if parallel running is a 
requirement. These should be interlocked with the 
incoming mains supply circuit-breaker so that they are 
open during parallel operation ofthe set with the mains, 
but one is closed at all other times (see Fig. 45). 


30 PROTECTIVE MEASURES THROUGH 
EARTHING IN MEDICAL ESTABLISHMENTS 


30.0.1 General 


In the context of this Clause ‘installation’, means any 
combination of interconnected electrical equipment 
within a given space or location intended to supply 
power to electrical equipment used in medical practice. 


30.0.2 As such, some parts of the installation may be 
present in the patient's environment, where potential 
differences that could lead to excessive currents through 
the patient, must be avoided. For this purpose a 
combination or earthing of equipment and potential 
equalization in the installation seems to provide the 
best solution. A disadvantage of such a system is that 
in the case of an insulation fault in circuits directly 
connected to supply mains, the fault current may cause 


74 


a considerable voltage drop over the protective earth 
conductor of the relevant circuit. Since a reduction of 
such a voltage drop by the application of increased 
cross-sectional areas of protective conductors is usually 
impractical, available solutions are the reduction of the 
duration of fault currents to earth by special devices or 
the application of a power supply which is isolated from 
earth. 


30.0.3 Generally a power supply system including a 
separated protective conductor is required. (TN-S 
System) in medical establishment (see 11.1.1). 


In addition the following provisions may be required, 
depending upon the nature of the examinations or 
treatments performed: 


a) Additional requirements concerning 
protective conductors and protective devices 
to restrict continuous voltage differences. 

b) Restriction of voltage differences by 

supplementary equipotential bonding. During 

the application of equipment with direct 
contact to the patient, at least a potential 
equalized zone around the patient shall be 
provided with a patient centre bonding bar to 
which the protective and functional earth 
conductors of the equipment are connected. 

All accessible extraneous conductive parts in 

the zone shall be connected to this potential 

equalization bar. 

c) Restriction of the potential equalization zone 

around one patient, meaning practically 

around one operation table or around one bed 
in an intensive care room. 

d) If more than one patient is present in an area, 

connection of the various potential 


IS 3043 : 2018 


| 
КЛ; 
af 


HV STANDBY 
GENERATOR 


INCOMING LOAD 
MAINS 
SUPPLY 


EARTHING RESISTORS 
(IF REQUIRED) 


Fic. 43 SINGLE HIGH VOLTAGE STANDBY GENERATING SET NOT SUITABLE FOR PARALLEL OPERATION 


HV STANDBY 
GENERATOR 


INCOMING LOAD 
© MAINS 
EARTHING CONTACTOR INTERLOCKED WITH 


INCOMING MAINS SUPPLY CIRCUIT BREAKER 
| SO THAT ONLY ONE CAN BE CLOSED AT ANY TIME 


EARTHING 
CONTACTOR 


EARTHING RESISTORS 
(IF REQUIRED) 


Fic. 44 SINGLE HIGH VOLTAGE STANDBY GENERATING SET SUITABLE FOR 
PARALLEL OPERATION WITH INCOMING MAINS SUPPLY 


75 


IS 3043 : 2018 


NON-AUTOMATIC 
CIRCUIT BREAKER 
OR SWITCH 


NEUTRAL 
EARTHING 
TRANSFORMER 


| 
H.V. STANDBY 
GENERATORS 


INCOMING 
MAINS supply LOAD 
EARTHING CONTACTOR 
INTERLOCKED SO THAT 
J] ТНЕ CONTACTOR CANNOT 
BE CLOSED DURING 
PARALLEL OPERATION 
WITH THE INCOMING 
MAINS SUPPLY 


Fic. 45 MULTIPLE HIGH VOLTAGE STANDBY GENERATING SETS WITH NEUTRAL EARTHING TRANSFORMER SUITABLE 
FOR PARALLEL OPERATION WITH EACH OTHER AND WITH THE INCOMING MAINS SUPPLY 


HV STANDBY 
GENERATORS 


INCOMING 
SUPPLY MAINS LOAD 


EARTHING CONTACTORS INTERLOCKED SO THAT 
ONLY ONE CAN BE CLOSED AT ANY TIME AND NONE 

| САМ BE CLOSED DURING PARALLEL OPERATION 
WITH THE INCOMING MAINS SUPPLY 


EARTHING 
CONTACTORS 


EARTHING 
RESISTORS 
(IF REQUIRED) 


Fic. 46 MurrTIPLE HIGH VOLTAGE STANDBY GENERATING SETS SUITABLE FOR PARALLEL OPERATION 
WITH EACH OTHER AND WITH THE INCOMING MAINS SUPPLY 


equalization centres to a central potential and in the installation. 

equalization bushes, which should preferably e) Restriction of the duration of transient voltage 
be connected to the protective earth system difference by the application of residual 
of the power supply for the given area. In its current operated protective devices (earth 
completed form, the equipotential bonding leakage circuit-breakers). 

network may consist partly of fixed and f) Continuity of power supply to certain 


permanently installed bonding and partly of a 
number of separate bondings which are made 
when the equipment is set up near the patient. 
The necessary terminals for these bonding 
connection should be present on equipment 


equipment in the case ofa first insulation fault 
to earth and restriction of transient voltage 
differences by application of isolating 
transformers. 


76 


g) Monitoring of first insulation fault to earth in 
an IT Systems (see 11.1.1) (the secondary side 
of an isolating transformer) with sufficiently 
high impedance to earth. 

NOTE — Additional safety measures are required 
besides earthing described in this Clause. These cover 


fire safety, safety supply systems and interference 
suppression. Reference may be made to SP 30. 


30.1 Safety Provisions 


30.1.1 Safety measures from the point of view of 
earthing are divided into a number of provisions as 
given in Table 15. 


30.1.2 Provision PO shall be applicable to all buildings 
containing medically used rooms. Provision РІ shall 
be applicable for all medically used rooms. 


Other requirements of this Clause, need not be complied 
with, if: 


a) aroom is not intended for the use of medical 
electrical equipment, or 

b) patients do not come intentionally in contact 
with medical electrical equipment during 
diagnosis or treatment, or 


c) only medical electrical equipment is used 
which is internally powered or of protection 
Class II. 


The rooms mentioned under (a), (b) and (c) may be, 
for example, massage rooms, general wards, doctor's 
examining room (office, consulting room), where 
medical electrical equipment is not used. 


30.1.3 Guidance on the application of the provisions 
are given in Table 16. 


30.1.4 A typical example of an installation in a hospital 
is given in Annex C of SP 30. 


IS 3043 : 2018 


31 SUPPLY CHARACTERISTICS AND 
PARAMETERS 


31.0 Exchange of Information 


31.0.1 Proper coordination shall be ensured between 
the architect, building contractor and the electrical 
engineer or the various aspects of installation design. 
The necessary special features of installations shall be 
ascertained before hand with reference to Table 16. 


31.1 Circuit Installation Measures for Safety 
Provisions (see Table 15, col 3) 


31.1.1 Provision PO General 


31.1.1.1 All buildings in the hospital area which contain 
medically used rooms shall have a TN-S, TT power 
system. The conventional touch voltage limit (LL) is 
fixed at 50 V ac. 


NOTE — The use of TN-C-S system (in which the PEN- 
conductor may carry current in normal condition) can cause 
safety hazards for the patients and interfere with the function 
of medical electrical equipment, data processing equipment, 
and signal transmission lines, etc. 


31.1.2 Provision P1: Medical TN-S System 


31.1.2.1 The conventional touch voltage limit (LL) is 
fixed at 25 V ac. 


31.1.2.2 Protective conductors inside a medically used 
room shall be insulated; their insulation shall be 
coloured green-yellow. 


31.1.2.3 Exposed conductive parts of equipment being 
part of the electrical installation used in the same room 
shall be connected to a common protective conductor. 


31.1.2.4 A main equipotential bonding with a main 
earthing bar shall be provided near the main service 
entrance. Connections shall be made to the following 
parts by bonding conductors: 


Table 15 Safety Provisions 
(Clauses 30.1.1 and 31.1) 


Provisions Principal Requirements Installation Measures 

a) (2) (3) 

PO Duration of touch voltage restricted to a safe limit TN-S, TT or IT system (see 11.1.1) 

РІ As PO but additionally : Touch voltages in patient environment Additional to PO Supply system with 
restricted to a safe limit additional requirements for protective 

earthing, etc 

P2 As РІ but additionally : Resistance between extraneous conductive Additional to РІ Supplementary 
parts and the protective conductor busbar of the room not exceeding — equipotential bonding 
010 

P3 As P1 or P2 but additionally : Potential difference between exposed As РІ ог P2: Measurement necessary, 
conductive parts and the protective conductor busbar not exceeding 10 corrective action possibly necessary 
mV in normal condition (see Note) 

P4 As РІ or P2. Additional protection against electric shock by limitation Additional to РІ or P2 : Residual current 
of disconnecting time operated protective device 

P5 Continuity of the mains supply maintained in case of a first insulation Additional to P1, P2 or P3 : Isolated supply 


fault to earth and currents to earth restricted 


system with isolation monitoring 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Table 16 Examples of Application of Safety Provisions 
(Clauses 30.1.3 and 31.0.1) 


SI Medically Used Rooms Protective Measures 
No. P2 | рз | P4 | PS 
i) Massage room M 0 
ii) Operating wash room M x 
iii) Ward, General M 0 
iv) Delivery room M x x 0 
v) ECG, EEG, EMG room KEEN x 
vi) Endoscopic room M x x 
vii) Examination or treatment room M 0 x 0 
viii) Labour room M x x 0 
ix) Operating sterilization room [м lol] | x 
x) Orology room (not being an operating theatre) M x x 
xi) Radiological diagnostic and therapy room, other than mentioned under 20 and 24 | x 
xii) Hydrotherapy room EIE EIN x 
xiii) Physiotherapy room M x x 0 
xiv) Anesthetic room Xi xX 
xv) Operating theatre M x x Xi x 
xvi) Operating preparation room M x x Xi x 
xvii) Operating plaster room M x Xi x 
xviii) Operating recovery room Xx x 
xix) Out-patient operating room M x Xi x 
xx) Heart catheterization room Xi x 
xxi) Intensive care room M x х х 
xxii) Intensive examination room ae Xi x 
xxiii) Intensive monitoring room [м | x [о | Xi x 
xxiv) Angiographic examination room | M | x | 0 | Xi x 
xxv) Heamodialysis room M x x x 
xxvi) Central monitoring room (see Note) M x —— Xi x 
NOTE — Only if such a room is part of a medical room group and, therefore, installed in the same way as an intensive monitoring room. 
Central monitoring room having no conductive connection to the mexially used room (for example, by use of isolating coupling devices 
for signal transmission) may be installed as non-medically used from (Provision PO only). 
M = mandatory measure; 
x = recommended measure; 
xı = asx, but only for insulation monitoring device; and 
0 = additional measure may be considered desirable. 


a) lightening conductor; 

b) earthing systems of the electric power 
distribution system; 

с) the central heating system; 

d) the conductive water supply line; 

e) the conductive parts of the waste water line; 

f) the conductive parts of the gas supply; and 

g) the structural metal frame work of the 


building, if applicable. 


Main equipotential bonding conductors shall have 
cross-sectional areas of not less than half the cross- 
sectional area of the largest protective conductor of the 
installation, subject to a minimum of 6 mm. The cross- 
sectional area, need not, however, exceed 25 mm? if 
the bonding conductor is of copper or a cross-sectional 


78 


area affording equivalent current-carrying capacity in 
other metals. 


31.1.2.5 Each medically used room or room group shall 
have its own protective conductor bus bar, which should 
have adequate mechanical and electrical properties and 
resistance against corrosion. 


This busbar may be located in the relevant power 
distribution box. The leads connected to terminals of 
such a protective conductor bar shall be identified and 
shall be similarly designated on drawings of the 
installation system. 


31.1.2.6 The impedance (Z) between the protective 
conductor bar and each connected protective conductor 
contact in wall sockets or terminals should not exceed 
0:2 Q, if the rated current of the overcurrent-protective 


device is 16 A or less. In case of a rated current 
exceeding 16 A, the impedance should be calculated 
using the formula: 
ECC 
6 r 


in all cases Z shall not exceed 0-2 Q. 


(J, = rated current of overcurrent protective 
device in amperes). 

NOTE — The measurement of the protective conductor 

impedance should be performed with an ac current not less 


than 10 A and not exceeding 25 A from a source of current with 
a no-load voltage not exceeding 6 V, for a period of at least 5 s. 


31.1.2.7 The cross-sectional area of the protective 
conductor shall be not less than the appropriate value 
shown in Table 12. 


The cross-sectional area of every protective conductor 
which does not form part of the supply cable or cable 
enclosure shall be, in any case, not less than: 


а) 2:5 mm’, ifmechanical protection is provided; 
and 

b) 4 mm’, if mechanical protection is not 
provided. 


31.1.2.8 It may be necessary to run the protective 
conductor separate from the phase conductors, in order 
to avoid measuring problems when recording 
bioelectric potentials. 


31.1.3 Provision P2: Supplementary Equipotential 
Bonding 


31.1.3.1 In order to minimize the touch voltage, all 
extraneous conductive parts shall be connected to the 
system of protective conductors. 


An equipotential conductor bar shall be provided. It 
should be located near the protective conductor bar 
(see also 31.1.2.5). A combined protective conductor 
and equipotential bonding bar may be used, if all 
conductors are clearly marked according to 31.1.2.5 
and 31.1.3.3(e). 


31.1.3.2 Connections shall be provided from the 
equipotential bonding bar to extraneous conductive 
parts such as pipes for fresh water, heating, gases, 
vacuum and other parts with a conductive surface area 
larger than 0-02 m? or a linear dimension exceeding 20 
cm or smaller part that may be grasped by hand. 


Additionally, the following requirements apply: 


a) Such connections need not be made to: 


1) extraneous conductive parts inside of 
walls (for example, structural metal work 
of buildings) having no direct connection 
to any accessible conductive part inside 
the room, and 


IS 3043 : 2018 


2) conductive parts in a non-conductive 
enclosure; 

b) In locations where the position of the patient 
can be predetermined this provision may be 
restricted to extraneous conductive parts 
within the patient environment [see Annex B 
of NEC (Part 3, Section 4)]; and 

c) In operating theatres, intensive care rooms, 
heart catheterization rooms and rooms 
intended for the recording of bioelectrical 
action potentials all parts should be connected 
to the equipotential bonding bar via direct and 
separate conductors. 


31.1.3.3 The following requirements shall be fulfilled: 


a) The impedance between extraneous 
conductive parts and the equipotential 
bonding bar shall not exceed 0.1 Q. 


NOTE — The measurement of this impedance should 
be performed with a current not less than 10 A and not 
exceeding 25 A during not less than 5 s from a current 
source with a no-load potential not exceeding 6 V ac. 


b) All equipotential bonding conductors shall be 
insulated, the insulation being coloured green- 
yellow. 


NOTE — Insulation of the equipotential bonding 
conductors is necessary, to avoid loops by contact and 
to avoid picking up of stray currents. 


c) Equipotential conductors between 
permanently installed extraneous conductive 
parts and the equipotential bonding bar shall 
have a cross-sectional area of not less than 
4 mm’ copper or copper equivalent. 

d) The equipotential bonding bar, if any, should 
have adequate mechanical and electrical 
properties, and resistance against corrosion. 


e) The conductors connected to the equipotential 
bonding bar shall be marked and shall be 
similarly designated on drawings of the 
installation system. 


f) A separate protective conductor bar and an 
equipotential bonding bar in a medically used 
room or in a room group shall be 
interconnected with a conductor having a 
cross-sectional area of not less than 16 mm? 
copper or copper equivalent (see 31.1.3.1). 

g) Anadequate number (under consideration) of 
equipotential bonding terminals other than 
those for protective conductor contact or pins 
of socket outlets should be provided in each 
room for the connection of an additional 
protective conductor of equipment or for 
reasons of functional earthing of equipment. 


31.1.4 Provision P3: Restriction of Touch Voltage in 
Rooms Equipped for Direct Cardiac Application 


31.1.4.1 The continuous current through a resistance 


IS 3043 : 2018 


of 1 000 Q connected between the equipotential 
bonding bar and any exposed conductive part as well 
as any extraneous conductive part in the patient 
environment shall not exceed 10 uA in normal condition 
for frequencies from dc to 1 kHz. 


Fora description of patient environment, see Annex B 
of SP 30 : 2011 (NEC). Where the measuring device 
has impedance and a frequency characteristics, the 
current may also be indicated as a continuous voltage 
with a limit of 10 mV between the parts mentioned 
above. 


a) During the test, it is assumed that fixed and 
permanently installed medical electrical 
equipment is operating. 

b) ‘Normal conditions’ means without any fault 


in the installation and in the medical electrical 
equipment. 

NOTE — To comply with this requirement, it may be 
necessary to apply one or more ofthe following methods: 
Extraneous conductive parts may be: 


a) connected to the equipotential bonding bar by a 
conductor of a large cross-sectional area in order to 
reduce the voltage drop across such a conductor, 


b) insulated so that it is not possible to touch them 
unintentionally, and 


с) provided with isolating joints at those places where 
they enter and leave the room. 


Exposed conductive parts of permanently installed 
equipment may be isolated from the conductive building 
construction. 


31.1.5 Provision P4: Application of Residual-Current 
Protective Devices 


31.1.5.1 The use ofa residual-current protective device 
is not recognized as a sole means of protection and 
does not obviate the need to apply the provisions P1 
and P2. 


31.1.5.2 Each room or each room group shall be 
provided with at least one residual-current protective 
device. 


31.1.5.3 A residual-current protective device shall have 
a standard rated operating residual-current 
Глу<30 mA. 


31.1.5.4 A medical isolating transformer and the circuits 
supplied from it shall not be protected by a residual 
current protective device. 


31.1.5.5 Electrical equipment, for example, general 
lighting luminaries, installed more than 2:5 m above 
floor level, need not be protected by a residual-current 
protective device. 


31.1.5.6 Fixed and permanently installed electro 
medical equipment with a power consumption 
requiring an overcurrent protective device of more 
than 63 A rated value may be connected to the supply 


80 


mains by use of a residual-current protective device 
with Z į x 300 mA. 


31.1.6 Provision P5: Medical IT-System 


31.1.6.0 The use of a medical IT-System for the supply 
of medically used room for example, operating theatres, 
may be desirable for different reasons: 


a) Amedical IT-System increases the reliability 
of power supply in areas where an interruption 
of power supply may cause a hazard to patient 
or user; 

b) A medical IT-System reduces an earth fault 
current to a low value and thus also reduces 
the touch Voltage across a protective 
conductor through which this earth fault 


current may flow; and 


A medical IT-System reduces leakage currents 
of equipment to a low value, where the 
medical IT-System is approximately 
symmetrical to earth. 


It is necessary to keep the impedance to earth of the 
medical IT-System as high as possible. This may be 
achieved by: 


a) restriction of the physical dimensions of the 
medical isolating transformer, 

b) restriction of the system supplied by this 
transformer, 

c) restriction of the number of medical electrical 
equipment connected to such a system, and 

d) high internal impedance to earth of the 


insulation monitoring device connected to 
such a circuit. 


Ifthe primary reason for the use of a medical IT-System 
is the reliability of the power supply, it is not possible 
to define, for such system, a hazard current and an 
insulation resistance monitoring device should be used. 


If, on the other hand, the restriction of leakage current 
of equipment is the main reason for the use of the 
medical IT-System, an insulation impedance monitoring 
device should be used. 


31.1.6.1 For each room or each room group at least 
one fixed and permanently installed medical isolating 
transformer shall be provided. 


31.1.6.2 A medical isolating transformer shall be 
protected against short-circuit and overload. 


In case of a short-circuit or a double earth fault in parts 
of opposite polarity of the medical IT-System, the 
defective system shall be disconnected by the relevant 
overcurrent protective device. 


If more than one item of equipment can be connected 
to the same secondary winding of the transformer, at 


least two separately protected circuits should be 
provided for reasons of continuity of supply. 


31.1.6.3 Overcurrent protective devices shall be easily 
accessible and shall be marked to indicate the protective 
circuit. 


31.1.6.4 An insulation monitoring device shall be 
provided to indicate a fault of the insulation to earth of 
a live part of the medical IT-System. 


31.1.6.5 Fixed and permanently installed equipment 
with arated power input of more than 5 kVA and all X- 
ray equipment (even with a rated power input of less 
than 6 kVA) shall be protected by Provision P4. 
Electrical equipment, for example, general lighting, 
more than 2:5 m above floor level, may be connected 
directly to the supply mains. 


31.1.6.6 General requirements for insulation 
monitoring devices 


A separate insulation resistance or impedance 
monitoring device shall be provided for each secondary 
system. It shall comply with the requirements of (a) to 
(d) below: 


a) Itshall notbe possible to render such a device 
inoperative by a switch. It shall indicate visibly 
and audibly if the resistance or impedance of 
the insulation falls below the value given in 
31.1.6.7 and 31.1.6.8. 

A test button shall be provided to enable 
checking the response of the monitor to a fault 
condition as described in 31.1.6.4. 


b) 


c) Thevisible indication mentioned in (a) of the 
insulation monitoring device shall be visible 
in the monitored room or room group. 

d) The insulation monitoring device should be 
connected symmetrically to the secondary 


circuit of the transformer. 
31.1.6.7 Insulation resistance monitoring device 


The ac-resistance of an insulation resistance monitoring 
device shall be at least 100 КО. The measuring voltage 
of the monitoring device shall not exceed 25 V, and 
the measuring current (in case of a short-circuit of an 
external conductor to earth) shall not exceed 1 mA. The 
alarm shall operate if the resistance between the 
monitored isolated circuit and earth is 50 kQ or less, 
setting to a higher value is recommended. 


31.1.6.8 Insulation impedance monitoring device 


An insulation-impedance monitoring device shall give 
reading calibrated in total hazard current with the value 
of 2 mA near the centre of the metre scale. 


The device shall not fail to alarm for total hazard 
currents in excess of 2 mA. In no case, however, shall 


81 


IS 3043 : 2018 


the alarm be activated until the fault hazard current 
exceeds 0-7 mA. 
NOTE — The value of 2 mA or 0:7 mA are based on practical 
experience with 110 to 120 V power supplies. For a 220-240 V 


power supply, it may be necessary to increase these values to 4 
and 1-4 mA because of the higher leakage current of equipment. 


During the checking of the response of the monitor to 
a fault condition the impedance between the medical 
IT-System and earth shall not decrease. 


32 EARTHINGIN POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS 
AREAS 


32.1 Earthing and Bonding 


32.1.1 Earthing should be in accordance with the 
relevant clauses of this Code. The connection between 
metal part to be grounded and the grounding conductor 
shall be made secure mechanically and electrically by 
using adequate metallic fitting. The grounding 
conductors shall be sufficiently strong and thick, and 
the portions of conductor which are likely to be 
corroded or damaged shall be well protected. 
Grounding conductors which shall not reach a 
hazardous high temperature due to the anticipated 
maximum earth fault current flowing shall be used. 


32.1.2 Specific guidelines for installations in hazardous 
locations are given in IS/IEC 60479. Inter-connection 
system with other buried metal services and/or earth 
terminations for equipment grounding for the purpose 
of equalizing the potential distribution in the ground 
should preferably be made below ground. 


32.1.3 Portable and transportable apparatus shall be 
grounded with one of the cores of flexible cable for 
power supply. The earth continuity conductor and the 
metallic screen, wherever provided for the flexible 
cable, should be bonded to the appropriate metalwork 
of the apparatus and to earthing pin of the plug. 


32.1.4 Efficient bonding should be installed where 
protection against stray currents or electrostatic charges 
is necessary. 


32.1.5 Earthing and Bonding of Pipelines and Pipe 
Racks 


Unless adequately connected to earth elsewhere, all 
utility and process pipelines should be bonded to a 
common conductor by means of earth bars or pipe 
clamps and connected to the earthing system at a point 
where the pipelines enter or leave the hazardous area 
except where conflicting with the requirements of 
cathodic protection. In addition, it is recommended that 
steel pipe racks in the process units and off-site areas 
should be grounded at every 25 m. 


32.2 Permissible Type of Earthing System 


32.2.1 Guidance on permissible power systems is given 
below: 


IS 3043 : 2018 
a) Ifa power system with an earthed neutral is 
used, the type TN-S system with separate 
neutral (M) and protective conductor (PE) 
throughout the system is preferred. 
The neutral and the protective conductor shall 
not be connected together or combined in a 
single conductor in a hazardous area. 
A power system of type Indian TN-C (having 
combined neutral and protective functions in 
a single conductor throughout the system) is 
not allowed in hazardous area. 
b) IfatypeIT power system (separate earths for 
power system and exposed conductive parts) 
is used in Zone 1, it shall be protected with a 
residual current device even if it is a safety 
extra-low voltage circuit (below 50 V). 


The type TT power system is not permittedr: 
in Zone 0. 

For an IT power system (neutral isolated from 
earth or earthed through impedance), an 
insulation monitoring device should be used 
to indicate the first earth fault. However, 
equipment in Zone 0 shall be disconnected 
instantaneously in case of the first earth fault, 
either by the monitoring device or by a residual 
current operated device. 

d) For power systems at all voltage levels 
installed in Zone 0, due attention should be 
paid to the limitation of earth fault currents in 
magnitude and duration. Instantaneous earth 
fault protection shall be installed. 


It may also be necessary to provide instantaneous earth 
fault protection devices for certain applications in 
Zone 1. 


32.2.2 Potential Equalization 


To avoid dangerous sparking between metallic parts 
of structures, potential equalization is always required 
for installations in Zone 0 and Zone 1 areas and may 
be necessary for installations in Zone 2 areas. 
Therefore, all exposed and extraneous conductive parts 
shall be connected to the main or supplementary 
equipotential bonding system. 


The bonding system may include normal protective 
conductors, conduits, metal cable sheaths, steel wire 
armouring and metallic parts of structures but shall not 
include neutral conductors. The conductance between 
metallic parts of structures shall correspond to a cross- 
section of at least 10 mm? of copper. 


Enclosures are not to be separately connected to the 
equipotential bonding system if they are secured to and 
are in metallic contact with structural parts or piping 
which are connected to the equipotential bonding system. 


82 


For additional information, see relevant clauses of this 
Code. 


However, there are certain pieces of equipment, for 
example, some intrinsically safe apparatus, which are 
not intended to be connected to the equipotential 
bonding system. 


33 TELECOMMUNICATION CIRCUITS AND 
APPARATUS 


33.1 General 


In addition to protective earthing which may be required 
in accordance with this Code, telecommunication 
systems may require functional earths for any or all of 
the following purposes: 


a) to complete the circuits of telegraph or 
telephone systems employing on-earth path for 
signalling purposes; 

b) toearth the power supply circuit and stabilize 
the potential of the equipment with respect to 
earth; 

c) for lightning-protective apparatus; and 

d) to earth screening conductors to reduce 


electrical interference to the telecommuni- 
cation circuits. 


If equipment requires both a protective earth and a 
functional earth connection, it is preferred that the two 
earths should be separated within the equipment so that 
power system fault currents cannot flow in the 
functional earthing conductors. The functional earthing 
system and conductors can then be designed solely in 
accordance with the requirements of the 
telecommunication system. Alternatively, the protective 
and functional earth may be connected together within 
the equipment but in this case the functional earth 
system and conductors should be suitable for the current 
they may carry under power system fault conditions. 


The general recommendations for lightning protection 
apply to earth systems for telecommunication lightning 
protection. 


The telecommunication functional earth should be 
obtained from a point which even under power system 
fault conditions is unlikely to have a dangerous potential 
to remote earth. 


The consumer’s earth terminal of a TN-system is 
suitable, otherwise a suitable earth electrode system, 
separate from the protective earth, should be provided. 


33.2 Telecommunication Circuits Association with 
High Voltage Supply Systems 


Telecommunication circuits used in any way in 
connection with or in close proximity to high voltage 
equipment require special attention and due 


consideration should be given to the safeguarding of 
such circuits against rise in potential of the supply 
system earth-electrodes. 


When a telecommunication circuit is provided in a 
building, where a high voltage system terminates and 
the telecommunication circuit is part of or is electrically 
connected to a system outside the ‘earth-electrode area’, 
precautions should be taken to safeguard personnel and 
telecommunication plant against rise of potential of the 
earth-electrode system. 


The term ‘earth-electrode system’ includes all 
metalwork, such as power cable sheaths, pipes, 
frameworks of buildings and metal fences, bonded to 
the power system earth electrodes and situated within 
a distance of 100 m outside the fencing that surrounds 
the high voltage compound or compounds; it also 
includes the first three supports of any overhead line 
leaving the station. The ‘earth-electrode area’ is any 
area within 5 m of any part of the earth-electrode 
system. 


The following practice is recommended: 


a) In all cases as great a separation as is 
practicable should be provided between the 
telecommunication cables and the station 
earth-electrode system. Nevertheless, within 
a station, to prevent the appearance of 
potential differences between normally 
accessible metal parts, all such parts of the 
telecommunication installation should be 
connected to the station earth-electrode 
system. 

b) At stations where the neutral of the high 

voltage system is earthed, it is generally 

practicable from a knowledge of the 
impedance of the earth-electrode system and 
of the maximum earth-fault current to estimate 
the rise of earth potential that will occur upon 
the incidence of a fault. Where the estimate 
does not exceed safe values no precaution 
additional to that described in (a) is necessary. 

This limit may be extended to higher values if 

all the power lines contributing to the earth 

fault current are in the ‘high-reliability’ 
category. 


Ifthe estimate is above safe limits (see 25.5.1), 
the following additional precautions should be 
observed. 


Where the telecommunication circuit lies 
within the ‘earth-electrode area’, it should be 
run in insulated cable capable of withstanding 
the application ofa test voltage of 2 200 V dc 
(or ac 50 Hz peak) or (1 500 + 2U) V dc (or 
ac 50 Hz peak), where U 1s the estimated rise 


c) 


83 


IS 3043 : 2018 


of earth potential, whichever is the greater, 
between conductors and earth for 1 min. It is 
preferred that the cables have no metallic 
sheath, armouring or screen but, if any exists, 
it should be isolated either from the rise of 
earth potential or from the rest of the 
telecommunication network by insulation 
capable of withstanding the above test voltage. 
The station terminal equipment and wiring 
should be isolated from the line by a barrier 
designed to withstand the test voltage as 
above. All wiring and apparatus connected to 
the line side of this barrier should be insulated 
from the station earth to withstand the same 
test voltage. 
d) Any earth connection for the 
telecommunication circuit required on the line 
side of isolating barrier should be obtained 
from a point outside the earth electrode area 
via either a pair in the telecommunication 
cable or a cable insulated in accordance with 


(c). 


In practice, (c) and (d) are normally confined to stations 
where the neutral of a 33 kV or higher voltage system 
is earthed since, at other stations, line faults do not 
usually produce dangerous conditions. 


34 BUILDING SITES 


34.1 In the often damp and rough environment of 
building sites, precautions to prevent electrical hazards 
have to be robust and regularly inspected and this 
particularly applies to the earthing system. 


Because of the great difficulty of ensuring that all 
incoming metallic services and extraneous metalwork 
are bonded to the neutral of the supply system, where 
the supply is at 415 V/240 V, to thus satisfy the 
requirements of the PME approval, it is unlikely that 
the supply authority will offer an earth terminal where 
the supply system has a multiple earthed neutral. If the 
supply is at a voltage higher than 415 V, the developer 
will have to provide the neutral earthing on the low 
voltage system. 


34.2 The main protection against electrical hazards on 
a construction site is the use of a reduced low voltage 
system for power tools (110 V between phases and 55 V 
to mid-point earth or 65 V to star-point earth) and safety 
extra low voltage for supplies to headlamps, etc. 


The earth fault loop impedances on a reduced voltage 
system or on a 240/415 V system serving fixed 
equipment should allow disconnection within the safe 
duration. 


34.3 Early discussions with the electricity board are 
essential so that agreement on the type of supply, 


IS 3043 : 2018 


including earthing facilities, can be obtained. Where the 
supply is provided from the low voltage distribution 
system, the increasing use of protective multiple 
earthing (PME) will usually prevent an earthing 
terminal being provided by the electricity board because 
of the developers inability to comply with the 
requirements of the PME approval during construction 
work. 


35 MINES AND QUARRIES 
35.1 General 


Earthing requirements for mines and quarries are based 
on the broad principle that exposed conductive parts 
of apparatus should be efficiently connected to earth 
or otherwise protected by other equally effective means 
to prevent danger resulting from a rise in potential 
(above earth) on these conductive parts. 


In some mines and certain quarries (quarries include 
open cast coal sites), in addition to shock risk, there 
are also dangers associated with the possible presence 
of flammable gas and explosive materials. In these 
cases, separate local earthing may be necessary to avoid 
incendive sparks caused by static electrical discharge. 


35.2 Power System Earthing 


At most mines and quarries, the incoming supply is 
provided by the supply authority who will install 
switchgear and metering for their own purpose. It is 
important to clearly establish in all cases, the point at 
which the supply authorities’ responsibilities terminate 
and where the consumer’s responsibility commence. 


If the supply is from a transformer (or generator), that 
is, the property of the supply authority, and is on site, a 
request should be made for them to facilitate connection 
of the consumer’s earthing system to the neutral or mid- 
voltage point. In some cases, the supply authority will 
allow the use of their earth electrode for joint use, in 
this event the consumer may not have to provide and 
maintain his own earth electrode. If the supply is from 
a transformer that is not the property of the supply 
authority, or if the consumer generates electricity 
privately, then the consumer should provide and 
maintain the earth electrodes that have the neutral or 
mid-voltage points bonded to them. 


If the supply transformer (or generator) is distant from 
the consumer’s premises, provision of an earth terminal 
at the premises should be requested. Where this is 
possible, the earth terminal should be made available 
by means of an additional earth conductor in the supply 
cable or overhead line. 


NOTE — The supply cable sheath and armouring may serve 
the purpose of this earth conductor provided that they are 
bonded to the supply source earth, neutral or mid-voltage point 
and meet the 50 percent conductivity requirement. 


84 


If the provision of such an earth terminal is 
impracticable, then it is imperative that the earth 
electrodes at the supply source and consumers’ premises 
are maintained such that their resistance to the general 
mass of earth is as low as possible, for example, less 
than 2 Q, and appropriate earth fault protection is 
provided. 


In all cases, the aim should be to maintain earth 
electrode resistance, as low as is practicable, taking 
account of the site conditions, for example, soil/rock 
resistivity. Except, however, for the instance quoted 
above, the achievement of a low resistance is not as 
important as adequate bonding of all exposed metallic 
parts back to the supply source neutral or mid-voltage 
point earth electrode. 


The mains supply system neutral or mid-voltage points 
should be earthed at one point only and in the case of 
mines, this should be on the surface. The connection to 
earth may either be a solid connection or via an 
impedance to limit the prospective earth fault current 
and in the case of impedance earthed systems, suitable 
earth fault provided, that is, capable of detecting the 
restricted flow of fault current. 


No switch or circuit-breaker or fuse should be placed 
in any earthing conductor, although an interlocked 
changeover linking device is allowed in certain cases 
where two or more earth electrodes are provided. Such 
a device would be used to allow periodic testing of an 
electrode resistance to the general mass of earth. 


35.3 Apparatus Earthing at Coal and Other Mines 


Every metallic covering of any cable should be earthed. 
This may be considered as forming part of the earthing 
conductor except in the case of flexible trailing cables 
where specific earthing conductors may also be 
required. 


Earthing conductors installed for that purpose should 
have a conductivity throughout (including joints) of not 
less than half that of the conductor having the greatest 
current carrying capacity, to which that earth conductor 
is related and should have a cross-sectional area of not 
less than 14 mm), in the case of flexible cable working 
at less than 125 V, the cross-section area need not be 
greater than 6 mm?; also a flexible cable on the surface 
of the mine supplying a load less than 3 kW need not 
have an earth conductor larger than the power 
conductors. 


Cables incorporating steel tape armour (unless 
supplementing steel wire), aluminium armour or copper 
sheathed (mineral insulated) cables are unsuitable for 
use below ground. Generally single or double, steel wire 
armoured cables are used. The use of paper-insulated 
lead covered cable is also discouraged from use below 


ground owing to the poor mechanical strength of the 
paper insulating material. 


The following are released from the requirements to 
be earthed, when used solely at the surface of the mine: 


a) any lamp holder, that is, efficiently protected 
by a covering which is insulated or earthed 


and made of fire resisting material; 


b) any hand held tool that is double insulated; 

c) any portable apparatus working at less than 
50 V dc or 30 V ac; and 

d) any other non-portable apparatus working at 


less than 250 V dc or 125 V ac. 


In the case of electrical circuits used for control, 
interlocking and indicating instruments, the regulations 
allow one pole of the auxiliary transformer secondary 
winding serving these circuits to be connected to earth 
as an alternative to mid-point earthing. 


Where mobile apparatus containing its own source of 
electricity, for example, mobile generator sets and 
diesel-electric vehicles/cranes, is used on the surface, 
then an exception is required from the present 
regulations ifthe requirement to earth these to the main 
earth electrode is impracticable. However, the bonding 
together of all exposed metallic parts is required. 


Below ground, where self-contained mobile apparatus 
is used, for example, battery locomotives, these should 
be operated as totally insulated systems (to avoid sparks 
between metal parts ofthe apparatus). Warning systems 
should be provided to give an indication of leakage to 
frame. 


At places below ground, where flammable gas may 
occur in quantity to indicate danger (usually deemed 
to be places where 0-25 percent flammable gas could 
be present in the general body of air), then limitation 
ofthe maximum prospective earth fault current is called 
for on power systems working at voltages between 
250 V and 1 200 V (the range of voltage normally used 
for coal winding machinery served by flexible trailing 
cables). In these cases, the maximum prospective earth 
fault current should be limited (normally by impedance 
earthing) to 16 A at voltages between 250 V and 650 V 
and to 2 A at voltages between 650 V and 1 200 V. In 
either case, the switchgear controlling the circuit should 
be able to detect and cut-off the supply of electricity 
with less than one-third of the maximum prospective 
earth fault current flowing. 


NOTE — The ratio between maximum prospective earth fault 
current and protection settings is known as the ‘tripping ratio’. 
In practice it has been found that in order to take account of 
voltage depressions occurring when a short circuit coincides 
with an earth fault the tripping ratio should be set to at least 5: 
1. Multipoint earthing of a power circuit (sometimes referred 
to as an ‘insulated’ or ‘free neutral system’) is allowed at any 
place in a mine, including places where flammable gas may 


85 


IS 3043 : 2018 


occur, provided that a transformer is used which has a means 
to cut off the supply and prevent danger should a breakdown 
occur between the primary and secondary windings. In these 
systems the maximum prospective earth fault current does not 
usually exceed 2 A and switchgear is set to trip at less than one- 
fifth of this value. 


Signalling and telephone circuits may be connected to 
earth where safety is enhanced and the method of 
connection is approved by the concerned authority for 
that type of apparatus. 


35.4 Apparatus Earthing at Miscellaneous Mines 
and Quarries 


Every earthing conductor should have an equivalent 
cross-sectional area of not less than 14 mm? except this 
requirement does not apply to an earthing conductor, 
that 1s: 


a) the metallic covering ofa cable, which should 
have conductance not less than halfthat ofthe 
largest current carrying capacity conductor in 
that cable; 

one of the conductors in a multi-core flexible 
cable used to supply portable apparatus, in 
which case the earth conductor has to be equal 
in cross-sectional area to that of the largest 


current carrying conductor; and 


b) 


a part of an overhead line on the surface which 
should have a cross-sectional area of not less 
than 12 mm’. 


Every cable at a miscellaneous mine or quarry operating 
at voltages exceeding 250 V dc or 125 V ac, other than 
flexible cables and those not required to be covered by 
insulating material, should be protected throughout by 
a suitable metallic covering that has to be earthed. 
Metallic covering 1s defined in the regulations and it 
should be noted that this does not include any metals 
other than iron or steel, therefore cables with 
armourings or metallic cover made of soft metals such 
as aluminium and copper (MICC cable) cannot be used 
on these premises where the voltages exceed 250 V dc 
or 125 V ac. 


Where a cable is provided with a lead sheath, in addition 
to the required ‘metallic’ covering, the conductance of 
the lead sheath may be taken as contributing to that of 
the metallic covering. For such installations, plumbed 
joints have to be used where the lead sheath is jointed 
or terminated. 


Where flexible cable is used to supply portable 
apparatus at voltages exceeding 250 V dc or 125 Vac, 
such cable should be protected by one of the following: 


a) А metallic covering (flexible wire armouring) 
that encloses all the conductors and having a 
conductance of not less than half that of the 
largest current carrying conductor, or where 


IS 3043 : 2018 


this is impracticable, having a conductance not 
less than that ofa 14 mm? cross-sectional area 
copper conductor. 


b) A screen of wires to enclose all the conductors 
(collectively screened type cable) having a 
conductance not less than that of a 14 mm? 
cross-sectional area copper conductor. 

c) A screen of wires arranged to individually 


enclose each conductor (individually screened 
type cable), other than the earth conductor. 
Cables of this construction for use in quarries 
have to be approved by HSE. For 
miscellaneous mines, the screens should each 
have a conductance of not less than that of 
6 mm? cross-sectional area copper conductor. 


Where flexible cables are used with portable apparatus 
at quarries and the size of the conductor is such as to 
make the use of one multicore cable impracticable, 
single core cables of such construction and bonded in 
such a manner as HSE may approve, may be used. 


36 STREET LIGHTING AND OTHER 
ELECTRICALLY SUPPLIED STREET 
FURNITURE 


NOTE — Street furniture includes fixed lighting columns, 
illuminated traffic signs, bollards and other electrically supplied 
equipment permanently placed in the street. 


36.1 In all cases the local supply authority should be 
consulted before design work on new street furniture 
is commenced to ascertain the type of system that will 
supply the new installation. 


36.2 Supply System for Street Furniture 


Street furniture may normally be fed from TN-S or TN- 
C-S systems. 


36.2.1 TN-S Systems 


Street furniture may be fed from and protected by a 
TN-S system and in such arrangements a supply cable 
with separate line, neutral and protective conductors is 
required, that is, an SNE cable. In Class I street furniture 
the wiring on the load side of the protective device in 
the unit should consist of separate line, neutral and 
circuit protective conductors. Exposed conductive parts 
of the item of street furniture being supplied should be 
earthed by connecting them to the earthing terminal 
within the equipment. The earthing terminal itself 
should be connected to the supply protective conductor. 


If the installation is of Class II, no protective conductor 
is required and the wiring on the load side of the 
protective device should consist of line and neutral 
conductors only. 


It is recommended that a circuit supplying one or more 
items of class II equipment or a mixture of Class I and 


86 


Class II should have a circuit protective conductor run 
to and appropriately terminated at each point in wiring 
and at each accessory. 


36.2.2 TN-C-S Systems 


An alternative method of supplying and protecting the 
street furniture that may be used is by means of a TN- 
C-S system. In such cases a combined neutral and earth 
conductor cable may normally be used at the source of 
supply (for example to an individual lighting column 
or for larger installations a local supply authority PME 
supply into a feeder pillar, with cables using separate 
line, neutral and protective conductors to feed items of 
street furniture in the carriageway). 


In the case of circuits feeding more than one item of 
street furniture, for example, by looping using a cable 
with separate line, neutral and protective conductors, 
an earth electrode should be installed preferably both 
at the point of supply and at the last or penultimate unit 
and this electrode should be such as to make the 
resistance to earth of the neutral at any point less than 
20Q, other earth electrodes equally spaced along the 
circuit should be installed. 


36.2.3 TT Systems 


There is one further possibility that can arise, in which 
case the lighting authority should provide its own 
protective earthing electrode(s): that is where the 
electricity distributor does not provide an earth terminal 
(a TT-System). 


In this case it is essential to ensure that both the initial 
and continuing impedance of the fault path is 
sufficiently low to ensure the operation of the protective 
device on the occurrence of a fault in the fixtures. 


36.3 Wiring on the load side of the protective device in 
the units being supplied should use, unless a special 
approval has been obtained, separate phase, neutral and 
circuit protective conductors. Exposed extraneous 
conductive parts should be bonded to the neutral 
terminal by a conductor with a copper equivalent cross- 
section of 6 mm or the same as that of the supply neutral 
conductor if this is less. This requirement does not apply 
to small isolated metal parts not likely to come into 
contact with exposed metallic or extraneous metal parts 
or with earth, for example, small metallic doors and 
door frames in concrete or plastics units should not be 
so connected. 


36.4 In the case of circuits feeding more than one item 
of street furniture, for example, by looping, an earth 
electrode should be installed at the last or penultimate 
unit and this electrode should be such as to make the 
resistance to earth of the neutral at any point less than 
20 Q before the connection of any circuit protective or 
bonding conductors to the neutral terminal. Should the 


provision of one electrode result in not meeting the 
20 Q requirement other earth electrodes equally spaced 
along the circuit have to be installed. Alternatively, the 
earth electrode may be omitted if it is possible to 
connect the neutral at the ultimate unit to a neutral 
connected to a different supply system. 


There are two further possibilities that may arise: 


a) where the supply system is TN-C but where 
the lighting authority wishes to use SNE cable 
in the installation and does not wish to use the 
supply authority’s CNE conductor as a fault 
path, and 

b) where the supply authority does not provide 
an earth terminal. 


36.5 In both of these cases, the lighting authority should 
provide its own protective earthing electrode and the 
system will be the TT-system. Care is necessary to 
ensure that both the initial and continuing impedance 
of the fault path is sufficiently low to ensure the 
operation of the protective device on the occurrence of 
a fault in the fixtures. The neutral earth electrode at the 
supply transformer is an important part of the fault loop 
but its resistance to earth is not under the control of the 
lighting authority. In such circumstances, consideration 
should be given to the use of residual current devices 
to ensure disconnection of faulty equipment. 


The use of metallic street light columns or the metal 
carcasses of control units, etc, as protective earth 
electrodes is not recommended. 


37 EARTHING OF CONDUCTORS FOR SAFE 
WORKING 


37.1 General 


This clause deals only with the broad principles of the 
earthing of conductors for safety purposes. It is intended 
to cover the safety earthing of both light and heavy 
current equipment and is generally applicable to high 
voltage equipment; however, in some circumstances it 
may, where required, be applied as an additional safety 
feature to low voltage equipment. Where applicable, 
the use of safety earths should be part of overall safe 
system of work, which will include isolation, locking 
off, permits to work or similar documents and liaison 
between parties in control of the supplies and in control 
of the work. To ensure that a safe system of work is 
clearly set out, a set of detailed rules and procedures 
will be necessary in each particular case. 


37.2 Safety Earthing 


When maintenance or repair work, etc, is to be 
undertaken on or near to high voltage apparatus or 
conductors, precautions in connection with safety 
earthing should be taken generally as indicated below. 


87 


IS 3043 : 2018 


All phases or conductors of any apparatus or main to 
be worked on should be made dead, isolated and earthed 
and should remain earthed until work is completed. Due 
regard should be taken of changing conditions during 
the progress of work which may necessitate revision 
of earthing arrangements to ensure the continuity of 
safety measures, for example, if a connection is made 
to another source of supply, whilst work is in progress, 
then additional earths would be necessary as work 
proceeds. 


Safety earthing equipment may be available as 
permanent equipment, such as earthing switches, as part 
of permanent equipment such as provision for integral 
earthing of a circuit breaker, or as portable earthing 
equipment such as portable earthing leads. All such 
equipment needs to receive regular maintenance and 
should be inspected before use. 


Wherever possible, initial earthing should be carried 
out via a circuit-breaker of other suitable fault-rated 
device. 


Earthing leads should, in every case, be of adequate 
cross-sectional area to carry with safety, during the time 
of operation of the protectiveNo: devices, the maximum 
short-circuit current that may flow under fault 
conditions. If possible, they should either be flexible, 
braided or stranded bare copper conductors or 
aluminium conductors suitably protected against 
corrosion and mechanical damage. 


In no case, even for the earthing of light current 
equipment (for example, high voltage testing 
equipment), should the cross-sectional area of the 
earthing lead be less than 6 mm”. 


It has been found in some cases that a 70 mm? copper 
equivalent earthing lead is the largest that can be 
conveniently handled. In such cases, where a larger size 
of lead is necessary to carry with safety, the maximum 
short-circuit current that can occur, it may be necessary 
to use a number of leads of 70 mm? or other suitable 
size in parallel. 


Before earthing leads are applied, it should be verified 
that the circuit is dead and, where applicable, a test by 
means ofa suitable type of voltage indicator should be 
applied (the indicator itself being tested immediately 
before and after verification) before applying earth 
connections. 


Earthing leads should first be efficiently bolted or 
clamped to the permanent earthing system or to a 
substantial electrode of low resistance. Should no 
convenient permanent earth electrode be readily 
available, a substantial copper earth-spike driven well 
into the ground can be utilized to provide a quick and 
convenient temporary earth electrode. 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Whilst such a spike is not generally adequate as a 
primary safety earth, it will give a degree of protection 
against energizing by induction. 


Earthing leads should then be securely bolted or 
clamped to apparatus of conductors to be worked on 
and these connections should be removed in all cases 
before the earthing leads are disconnected from the 
earth electrode or earthing system. 


A suitable insulated earthing pole or device should be 
used to apply earthing leads to apparatus or conductors 
on which work is to be undertaken. 


Earthing leads should be kept as short as possible and 
be placed in such a position that they cannot be 
accidently disconnected or disturbed whilst work is in 
progress. 


37.3 Precautions Relating to Apparatus and Cables 


In the case of switchgear, phases of the section in which 
the work is to be done should be short-circuited and 
earthed to the same earthing system. Self-contained or 
portable apparatus is generally available for this 
purpose. Wherever possible, automatic tripping features 
of circuit breakers should be rendered inoperative by 
being disconnected from the tripping battery before the 
circuit-breaker is closed and the breaker operating 
mechanism should be locked in the closed position. 


With transformers, if there is any possibility of any 
winding becoming inadvertently live, the terminals of 
all windings should be earthed so that no danger from 
shock can occur. When the neutral points of several 
transformers are connected to a common bar, which is 
then earthed through a resistance of an arc suppression 
coil, the neutral point of any transformer that is to be 
worked on should be disconnected and directly earthed 
as well as the phase terminals. 


When liquid earthing resistors are to be worked on, 
particularly when they are drained for work inside, the 
central electrode should be shorted to the tank and not 
earthed remotely. This is especially important where 
two liquid resistors are located side-by-side and one 
remains in commission while the other is opened for 
maintenance. 


When work is to be carried out on equipment that is 
capable of capacitively storing electrical energy, for 
example, cables and capacitors, such equipment has to 
be discharged to earth prior to work commencing. As, 
in some circumstances, charge can reappear on such 
apparatus without reconnecting it to a source of supply, 
it is important work that the equipment should remain 
earthed whilst is in progress. The cutting of a cable 
during the course of work may disconnect conductors 
from safety earths and precautions should be taken to 
prevent this happening. 


88 


37.4 Precautions Relating to Overhead Lines 


After a line has been made dead, isolated, discharged 
and earthed at all points of supply, a working earth 
should be securely attached to each phase of the line at 
the point or points where work is to be carried out. 


The provision of a working earth entails a connection 
to a continuous earth wire or to a temporary earth 
electrode, the resistance of which need not be low. The 
application of earths to all phase conductors will, in 
addition to earthing the conductors, apply a short-circuit 
to all phases. 


The connection of the earthing lead to each conductor 
of the overhead line should be made using a suitable 
mechanical clamp placed round the conductor by means 
of an insulated earthing pole which can also be utilized 
to secure the clamp tight round the line conductor. When 
it is required to remove the working earth from the line, 
the mechanical clamp can be unscrewed and released 
from the conductor by means of this rod. Even when 
an overhead line is earthed at each point of supply, it is 
necessary to place a working earth at each and every 
position where work is being carried out on the line on 
account of the danger of the line becoming energized 
by induction from other power lines and to safeguard 
against the charging of the line by atmospheric 
disturbances. Where the work entails breaking a 
conductor, for example, on the jumper at a sectioning 
point, it is necessary to provide a working earth on both 
sides of the working point. 


37.5 Safety Earthing of Low Voltage Conductors 


In some circumstances, it may be necessary to apply 
safety earthing to low voltage conductors in order to 
prevent danger. Such circumstances may include, for 
example, work on capacitors or work on bare overhead 
crane trolley wires. Where the earthing of low voltage 
conductors is adopted, then the general principles set 
out in 37.2, 37.3 and 37.4 should be applied and due 
consideration should be taken of fault current levels 
(which can be as high or higher than on high voltage 
systems), when the size of earth conductor is chosen. 


38 MAINTENANCE OF EARTH ELECTRODES 


38.1 It is recommended that periodical check tests of 
all earth electrodes should be carried out. Records 
should be maintained of such checks. 


38.2 Where earth-leakage circuit-breakers are 
employed, a check shall be kept on the associated earth- 
electrode by periodically operating the testing device 
which is embodied in the earth leakage circuit-breaker. 


38.3 The neighbouring soil to the earth electrode shall 
be kept moist, where necessary, by periodically pouring 
water through a pipe where fitted alongwith it or by 


pouring water in the immediate vicinity of the earth 
electrode. 


38.4 Substations and Generating Stations 


38.4.1 Records shall be kept of the initial resistance of 
substation and generating station earth electrodes and 
of subsequent tests carried out. 


38.4.2 Normally annual measurement of earth 
resistance of substation shall be carried out but local 
circumstances in the light of experience may justify 
increase or decrease in this interval but it should not be 
less than once in two years. 


38.4.3 Periodical visual inspection of all earth electrode 
connection, wherever available, shall be carried out to 
ensure their rigidity and other signs of deterioration. 


38.4.4 In rural substations, particularly those connected 
to overhead high-voltage and low-voltage lines, greater 
reliance should be placed on the electrode system, and 
therefore facilities for testing the resistance of the 
electrode to general mass of earth, annually or as 
required by experience, should be provided. 


38.4.5 Where installations are earthed to a metal sheath 
of the supply cable, it shall be verified periodically that 
the earth-fault loop is in a satisfactory state. 


38.4.6 Where an installation is earthed to a cable sheath 
which is not continuous to the substation neutral (that 
is, there is an intervening section of overhead line 
without earth wire), a supplementary electrode system 
may be necessary. The adequacy of the electrode system 
shall be checked initially by an earth-fault loop test. 


38.4.7 The neighbouring soil to the earth electrode shall 
be kept moist, where necessary by periodically pouring 
water through a pipe where fitted alongwith it or by 
pouring water in the immediate vicinity of the earth 
electrode. 


39 CALCULATION OF EARTH FAULT 
CURRENTS 


39.0 General 


The magnitude of the current that will flow in the event 
of a line-to-earth fault on an earthed system is 
determined by the impedance from the source to the 
fault plus the impedance of the earth return path, 
including the impedances of earthing transformers, 
resistors and reactors (see IS 13234). For 
interconnected systems, the calculation of the current 
may be complicated. 


39.1 Resistance Earthing 


39.1.1 When a single line-to-earth fault occurs on a 
resistance grounded system, a voltage appears across 
the resistor nearly equal to the normal line-to-neutral 


89 


IS 3043 : 2018 


voltage of the system. 


In low-resistance grounded systems, the resistor current 
is approximately equal to the current in the fault. Thus 
the current is practically equal to the line-to-neutral 
voltage divided by the resistance in ohms. This simple 
method is only suitable when the earth fault current is 
small compared to 3-phase fault current. 


39.2 In a resistance-earthed system with a single line- 
to-earth fault, the earth fault current may be computed 
from: 


_ ЗЕ 
© XXX, +X, +3(X, + Xa) 


where 


I 


ą 7 earth fault current in A, 


= system + ve sequence reactance in Q/phase 
including the subtransient reactance of the 
rotating machines, 


—ve sequence reactance as for Х|, 

zero sequence reactance as for X,, 
reactance of neutral grounding reactor, 
р = reactance of ground return circuits, and 
line-to-earth voltage in V. 


In most industrial and commercial systems without 
inplant generator X, — X, 


39.3 Solid Earthing 


39.3.1 In this case, the fault current can be computed 
from: 


nx 3E 
& XXX, +X, +3Xop 


40 MEASUREMENT OF EARTH RESISTIVITY 
40.1 Resistivity of the Soil 


40.1.1 The resistivity of the earth varies within 
extremely wide limits, between 1 and 10 000 ohm 
metres. The resistivity of the soil at many station sites 
has been found to be non-uniform. Variation of the 
resistivity of the soil with depth is more predominant 
as compared to the variation with horizontal distances. 
Wide variation of resistivity with depth is due to 
stratification of earth layers. In some sites, the resistivity 
variation may be gradual, where stratification is not 
abrupt. Highly refined techniques for the determination 
of resistivity of homogeneous soil are available. To 
design the most economical and technically sound 
grounding system for large stations, it is necessary to 
obtain accurate data on the soil resistivity and on its 
variation at the station site. Resistivity measurements 
at the site will reveal whether the soil is homogeneous 
or non-uniform. In case the soil is found uniform, 


IS 3043 : 2018 


conventional methods are applicable for the 
computation of earth resistivity when the soil is found 
non-uniform, either a gradual variation or a two-layer 
model may be adopted for the computation of earth 
resistivity. 


40.1.2 The resistivity of earth varies over a wide range 
depending on its moisture content. It is, therefore, 
advisable to conduct earth resistivity tests during the 
dry season in order to get conservative results. 


40.2 Test Locations 


40.2.1 In the evaluation of earth resistivity for 
substations and generating stations, at least eight test 
directions shall be chosen from the centre of the station 
to cover the whole site. This number shall be increased 
for very large station sites of the test results obtained 
at various locations show a significant difference, 
indicating variations in soil formation. 


40.2.2 In case of transmission lines, the measurements 
shall be taken along the direction of the line throughout 
the length approximately once in every 4 km. 


40.3 Principle of Tests 


40.3.1 Wenner’s four electrode method is recommended 
for these types of field investigations. In this method, 
four electrodes are driven into the earth along a straight 
line at equal intervals. A current / is passed through the 
two outer electrodes and the earth as shown in Fig. 47 
and the voltage difference V, observed between the two 
inner electrodes. The current J flowing into the earth 
produces an electric field proportional to its density 
and to the resistivity of the soil. The voltage V measured 
between the inner electrodes is, therefore, proportional 
to the field. Consequently, the resistivity will be 
proportional to the ratio of the voltage to current. The 
following equation holds for: 


4szV 
- 1 
P 1+ 25 25 (7) 
Vs2+4e? 4452 +4е? 
where 

p = resistivity of soil in ohm-metre, 

s = distance between two successive electrodes 
in metres, 

V  — voltage difference between the two inner 
electrodes in Volts, 

I = current flowing through the two outer 
electrodes in amperes, and 

e = depth of burial of electrode in metres. 


40.3.1.1 If the depth of burial of the electrodes in the 
ground d is negligible compared to the spacing between 
the electrodes, then 


90 


|. 2zmsV 5 
7 ...(8) 


40.3.1.2 Earth testers normally used for these tests 
comprise the current source and meter in a single 
instrument and directly read the resistance. The most 
frequently used earth tester 1s the four-terminal megger 
shown in Fig. 47. When using such a megger, the 
resistivity may be evaluated from the modified equation 
as given below: 


p-2pxsR .. (9) 
where 
p = resistivity of soil in ohm-metres, 
s  — distance between successive electrodes in 
metres, and 
К = megger reading in ohms. 
40.4 Test Procedure 


40.4.1 Atthe selected test site, in the chosen direction, 
four electrodes are driven into the earth along a straight 
line at equal intervals, s. The depth of the electrodes in 
the ground shall be of the order of 10 to 15 cm. The 
megger is placed on a steady and approximately level 
base, the link between terminals P1 and C1 opened and 
the four electrodes connected to the instrument 
terminals as shown in Fig. 47. An appropriate range on 
the instrument is thus selected to obtain clear readings 
avoiding the two ends of the scale as far as possible. 
The readings are taken while turning the crank at about 
135 rev/min. Resistivity 1s calculated by substituting 
the value of R thus obtained in the Equation (9). In 
case where depth of burial is more than 1/20th of 
spacing, Equation (7) should be used instead of 
Equation (9). 


40.4.2 Correction for Potential Electrode Resistance 


In cases where the resistance of the potential electrodes 
(the two inner electrodes) 1s comparatively high, a 
correction of the test results would be necessary 
depending on its value. For this purpose, the instrument 
is connected to the electrodes as shown in Fig. 48. The 
readings are taken as before. The correction is then 
effected as follows. 


40.4.2.1 Let the readings of the megger be R, with the 
connections as shown in Fig. 48 and the electrode 
spacing in metres. If the uncorrected value of soil 
resistivity is r' and the resistance of the voltage circuit 
of the instrument used to obtain R (as indicated inside 
the scale cover of the meter) is R, the corrected value 
of the earth resistivity would be: 


_ P'x(R, * R,) 
— ш 


v 


40.5 Testing of Soil Uniformity 


40.5.1 During the course of above tests, it would be 
desirable to get information about the horizontal and 
vertical variations in earth resistivity over the site under 
consideration for the correct computation of the 
resistivity to be used in the design calculations. The 
vertical variations may be detected by repeating the 
tests at a given location in a chosen direction with a 
number of different electrode spacings, increasing from 
2 to 250 m or more, preferably in the steps 2, 5, 10, 15, 
25 and 50 m or more. If the resistivity variations are 
within 20 to 30 percent, the soil in the vicinity of the 
test location may be considered uniform. Otherwise a 
curve of resistivity versus electrode spacing shall be 
plotted and this curve further analyzed to deduce 
stratification of soil into two or more layers of 
appropriate thickness or a soil of gradual resistivity 
variation. The horizontal variations are studied by 
taking measurements in various directions from the 
centre of the station. 


40.6 Computation of Earth Resistivity of Uniform 
Soil 


40.6.1 When the earth resistivity readings for different 
electrode spacings in a direction is within 20 to 30 
percent, the soil is considered to be uniform. When the 
spacing is increased gradually from low values, at a 
stage, it may be found that the resistivity reading is 
more or less constant irrespective ofthe increase in the 
electrode spacing. The resistivity for this spacing is 
noted and taken as the resistivity for that direction. In a 
similar manner, resistivities for at least eight equally 
spaced directions from the centre of the site are 
measured. These resistivities are plotted on a graph 
sheet in the appropriate directions choosing a scale. A 
closed curve is plotted on the graph sheets Jointing all 
the resistivity points plotted to get the polar resistivity 
curve. The area inside the polar resistivity curve is 
measured and equivalent circle of the same area is found 
out. The radius of this equivalent circle is the average 
resistivity ofthe site under consideration. The average 
resistivity thus obtained may be used for the design of 
the earthing grid and other computations and the results 
will be reasonably accurate when the soil is 
homogeneous (see Fig. 49). 


CURRENT 
ELECTRODE 4 


POTENTIAL 
ELECTROOE 


CURRENT 
ELECTRODE 


Fic. 47 CONNECTIONS FOR A FOUR-TERMINAL MEGGER 


91 


IS 3043 : 2018 


7] MEGGER 


CURRENT 


CURRENT ELECTRODE 


ELECTRODE 


POTENTIAL 
ELECTRODE 


| 


s ———]À—— s — [HÀ —— s —— 


Fic. 48 TEST CONNECTION TO MEASURE THE SUM OF 
THE POTENTIAL ELECTRODE RESISTANCE 


ШЕЙ ЖЕ ШС es 
it L E ng 


Fic. 49 PoLAR CURVE 


40.7 One Rod Test Method 


This is a simpler test than the full Wennner test and 
may be used for distribution substations. The resistance 
ofa single rod that is driven into the ground for a known 
depth should be measured. The resistance measurement 
and rod dimensions may then be used to calculate the 
average soil resistivity required to produce the 
measured resistance. The resistance measurement may 
be made using the 61.8 percent method. The formula 
for calculating the resistance to earth R of a vertical 
rod given may be used: 


esie 
2лІ а 
where 
R = the resistance to earth of a vertical rod; 
L = the length of the electrode, in metres (m); 
d = the diameter in metres (m); 
p = the resistivity of the soil (assumed uniform), 
in ohm metres (О.т); 
Hence 
2zRL 
p= 


For most distribution substations it is sufficient to drive 
the rod to a depth of 2.4 m and use this reading as the 
average soil resistivity value (see Fig. 50) 


IS 3043 : 2018 


710] 


Fic. 50 ONE Кор боп, RESISTIVITY MEASUREMENT 


41 MEASUREMENT OF EARTH ELECTRODE 
RESISTANCE 


A number of different test methods may be used to 
measure a site’s overall resistance which are based on 
a fall of potential (FOP) technique. There are situations, 
typically in urban areas, where the earth electrode 
resistance may not be directly measures practicably. 
Alternative methods of assessing the earth resistance 
may include computer simulations carried out by 
earthing specialists. 


However, in general the following common test 
methods may be used: 


a) Fall of potential 61.8 percent test — This test 
is suitable for simple earth electrode systems 
such as found in LV installations and in 11 kV 
distribution substations. 

b) Fall of potential 61.8 percent test — Test using 
a clamp on CT — This test is similar to the 
standard 3 terminal FOP test and has the 
advantages that it may be used to measure the 
resistance of a system without disconnecting 
the earthing and can measure the resistance 
of an individual electrode (again without 
disconnecting). 


Fall of potential — Slope test — This test is 
recommended for earth electrode networks 
covering large areas, such as grid and primary 
substations sites, but may be used elsewhere 
if required. 

Fall of potential — 90°/180° test — This test 
is used in conjunction with the 61.8 percent 
or slope method to verify the results obtained. 


c) 


d) 


92 


41.1 Fall of Potential Method 


In this method two auxiliary earth electrodes, besides 
the test electrode, are placed at suitable distances from 
the test electrode (see Fig. 51). A measured current is 
passed between the electrode A to be tested and an 
auxiliary current electrode C and the potential 
difference between the electrode A and the auxiliary 
potential electrode B is measured. 


The resistance of the test electrode A is then given by: 


к=” 
1 
where 
R = resistance of the test electrode in ohms, 
V = reading of the voltmeter in Volts, and 
I = reading of the ammeter in amperes. 


41.1.1 If the test is made at power frequency, that is, 
50 c/s, the resistance of the Voltmeter should be high 
compared to that of the auxiliary potential electrode B 
and in no case should be less than 20 000 ohms. 


NOTE — In most cases, there will be stray currents flowing in 
the soil and unless some steps are taken to eliminate their effect, 
they may produce serious errors in the measured value. If the 
testing current is of the same frequency as the stray current, 
this elimination becomes very difficult and it is better to use an 
earth tester incorporating a hand-driven generator. These earth 
testers usually generate direct current, and have rotary current- 
reverser and synchronous rectifier mounted on the generator 
shaft so that alternating current is supplied to the test circuit 
and the resulting potentials are rectified for measurement by a 
direct reading moving-coil ohm-meter. The presence of stray 
currents in the soil is indicated by a wandering ofthe instrument 
pointer, but an increase or decrease of generator handle speed 
will cause this to disappear. 


CURRENT 
SOURCE 


A 


TEST 
ELECTRODE 


VOLTMETER 


POTENTIAL 
ELECTRODE 


AMMETER 


IS 3043 : 2018 


CURRENT 
ELECTRODE 


Fic. 51 METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF EARTH ELECTRODE RESISTANCE 


41.1.2 The source of current shall be isolated from the 
supply by a double wound transformer. 


41.1.3 At the time of test, where possible, the test 
electrode shall be separated from the earthing system. 


41.1.4 The auxiliary electrodes usually consist of 
12:5 mm diameter mild steel rod driven up to 1 m into 
the ground. 


41.1.5 Allthetest electrodes and the current electrodes 
shall be so placed that they are independent of the 
resistance area of each other. If the test electrode is in 
the form of rod, pipe or plate, the auxiliary current 
electrode C shall be placed at least 30 m away from it 
and the auxiliary potential electrode В midway between 
them. 


41.1.6 Fall of Potential 61.8 Percent Test 


The 61.8 percent test is the recommended test 
procedure for small earth electrode systems where the 
electrical centre of the earth system is known, 
particularly ground mounted distribution substations 
and pole mounted transformers. 


However, if the resistance of a particular electrode is 
required, a CT clamp tester must be used as any cables 
connected to the earth grid contributes to the connection 
with earth. 


To obtain reliable readings the current probe should be 
in a straight line with the earth system under test. 


A 90? / 180? test should be carried out to check the 
results. 


А 50 m separation between the earth grid and the probe 
may be used and is usually adequate for smaller earth 
systems and the resistance measured is equal to the true 
value when the voltage probe is positioned at 61.8 
percent of the distance between the earth electrode and 
the current probe. If the earth electrode system is of 
medium size containing rods, then these distances 
should be increased (see Table 17 for guidance). 


To confirm the accuracy ofthe first reading the voltage 
probe should be moved to the 50 percent and 70 percent 
positions and additional readings taken. 


41.1.7 Testing the Resistance of Specific Electrodes 
Using a CT Clamp Tester 


Certain test instruments that may be used incorporate a 
CT which clamps around the electrode to be tested. 
Figure 52 shows a 3-terminal test with CT clamp. The 
CT may be used to detect the test current returning via 
that specific electrode and allows the resistance of the 
electrode to be measured without disconnecting it from 
the rest of the earth system. 


Table 17 61.8 Percent Test Probe for Various Grid Sizes 
(Clause 41.1.6) 


93 


Maximum Dimension of Distance to Current 50 Percent 61.8 percent Distance 70 Percent 
Earth Grid Under Test Electrode from Distance to Voltage Electrode Distance 
Centre of Earth from Centre of Earth 
System System 

m m m 

(D Q) (4) 
Small or single electrode 50 

5 100 

10 150 

20 200 


IS 3043 : 2018 


This test may be used where an electrode is connected 
to an earthing system with a much lower overall 
resistance than the electrode in question. In effect this 
test may be used to measure the loop impedance of the 
electrode under test and the rest of the system, it is 
connected to. 


This may be used to give an approximate resistance 
value for the electrode when compared to previous 
results, gives an indication of any deterioration of the 
electrode. This test may also be used for measuring the 
resistance of deep high frequency earth rods when 
connected to a larger earth system. 


1 — Earth Tester 
2 — Installation 


3 — Current Measuring Clamp 
4 — Electrode 


Fic. 52 3-TERMINAL TESTER WITH CT CLAMP 


41.1.8 Fall of Potential — Slope Method 


NOTE — A large earthing grid, such as underlies a substation 
or encircles a transmission tower, has a commensurately large 
electric field in the soil. Locating a current test probe beyond 
this influence can typically require several hundred feet, which 
might be quite impractical. Also the electrical centre of the 
earthing system cannot be known if the current probe is not far 
enough away, the plotted graph will show the rising resistance 
curve associated with the grid running directly into the curve 
from the test probe. The slope method permits an estimate of 
where the resistance of the electrode under test maximizes. 


Critical data points should be measured with the 
potential probe placed at 0.2, 0.4 and 0.6 times the 
distance to the current probe, at points R,, R, and R, 
respectively. 


The slope of coefficient i showing the rate of change 
of slope, can be calculated by: 


s R, -R, 


E К, – К 


41.1.9 90°/180° Test 


This technique should be used in conjunction with the 
slope or 61.8 percent method to verify the results 
obtained. The test equipment should be set up as shown 
in Fig. 53. 


The current probe C2 should be positioned as far as 
away from the earthing system under test as practicable 
and the voltage probe P2 should be positioned at an 
angle between 90° / 180° to the current electrode route. 


A number of tests are carried out at say 0.2dc, 0.4dc, 
and 0.6dc. When the graph is drawn, it ought to level 
off, but never quite reach the true resistance value; by 
extrapolating, the true value may be estimated 
(see Fig. 54). 


41.2 Alternative Method 


41.2.1 The method described in 40.1 may not give 
satisfactory results if the test electrode is of very low 
impedance (one ohm or less). This applies particularly, 
while measuring the combined resistance of large 
installations. In these cases, the following method may 
be adopted. 


41.2.2 Two suitable directions, at least 90° apart, are 
first selected. The potential lead is laid in one direction 
and an electrode is placed 250 to 300 m from the fence. 
The current lead is taken in the other direction and the 


NOTE—Rest if earth network overall resistance is 0.5Q. 
KEY 


1 — Instrument (Reading 10.5 Q) 
2 — Substation 


Fic. 53 CLAMP-ON TESTER 


94 


%Dg 


90°-180° 


IS 3043 : 2018 


NOTE — Underground metallic objects or cables can produce a misshaped graph which might lead to false results. 


Fic. 54 90°/180° TEST 


current electrode located at the same distance as the 
potential electrode. A reading is taken under this 
condition. The current electrode is then moved out in 
30-m steps until the same reading is obtained for three 
consecutive locations. The current electrode is then left 
in the last foregoing position and the potential electrode 
is moved out in 30-m steps until three consecutive 
readings are obtained without a change in value. The 
last reading then corresponds to the true value of earth 
resistance. 


42 MEASUREMENT OF EARTH LOOP 
IMPEDANCE 


42.1 The current, which will flow under earth fault 
conditions and will thus be available to operate the 
overload protection, depends upon the impedance of 
the earth return loop. This includes the line conductor, 
fault, earth-continuity conductor and earthing lead, 


95 


earth electrodes at consumer’s premises, and substations 
and any parallel metallic return to the transformer 
neutral as well as the transformer winding. To test the 
overall earthing for any installation, depending for 
protection on the operation of overcurrent devices, for 
example, fuses, it is necessary to measure the impedance 
of this loop under practical fault conditions. After the 
supply has been connected, this shall be done by the 
use of an earth loop impedance tester. The neutral is 
used in place of the phase conductor for the purpose of 
the test. The open-circuit voltage of the loop tester 
should not exceed 32 V. 


43 EARTHING REQUIREMENTS FOR 
INSTALLATIONS OF DATA PROCESSING 
EQUIPMENT 


43.1 General 


43.1.1 This clause covers the special requirements for 


IS 3043 : 2018 


the connection of data processing equipment to the 
electrical power installation of buildings, where the data 
processing equipment has earth leakage current 
exceeding the limit specified in IS 13252 for equipment 
connected via a plug and socket. 


These requirements are intended to ensure the safety 
of personal in the presence of such leakage current. 


These rules apply to the installation up to the point of 
connection of the equipment as shown in Fig. 55. 


These rules do not consider installations for which the 
influence of lightning phenomena may exist. 


These rules do not consider the interconnection of 
equipment on different supply and earthing systems by 
data transmission lines. 


43.1.2 The requirements of this clause may also be 
applied where installations, other than data processing 
such as those for industrial control and 
telecommunications equipment, carry high leakage 
current due to radio-frequency interference suppression 
filtering requirements. 


NOTE — Radio-frequency interference suppression filters fitted 
to data processing equipment may produce high earth leakage 
current. In such cases, failure of continuity in the protective 
earth connection may cause a dangerous touch voltage. The 
main purpose of this Code is to prevent this hazard. 


43.2 Terminology 
43.2.1 Data Processing Equipment 


Electrically operated machine units that separately or 
assembled in systems, accumulate, process and store 
data. Acceptance and divulgence of data may or may 
not be electronic means. 


43.2.2 Low Noise Earth 


An earth connection in which the level of conducted 
interference from external sources does not produce 
an unacceptable incidence of malfunction in the data 
processing or similar equipment to which it is 
connected. 


NOTE — The susceptibility in terms of amplitude/ frequency 
characteristics varies depending on the type of equipment. 


43.2.3 High Leakage Current 


Earth leakage current exceeding the limit specified in 
IS 13252 for equipment connected via a plug and 
socket. 


43.2.4 General Installation Requirements 


The requirements of this clause apply where equipment 
having high leakage current is connected to any type 
of power system. The requirements apply to the 
installation as shown in Fig. 55. 


| EQUIPMENT 
INSTALLATION angen 
| EQUIPMENT EQUIPMENT 
INDUSTRIAL 
PLUG + SOCKET 
| 
INSTALLATION | EQUIPMENT 
| LOOPED 
EQUIPMENT EQUIPMENT 
JUNCTION BOX | 
| 
L---- “| LOOPED 
EQUIPMENT EQUIPMENT 


INSTALLATION 


FIELD 
WIRING 
TERMINALS 


Fic. 55 EQUIPMENT-INSTALLATION BOUNDARIES 


Additional requirements are given for IT and TT systems 
in 43.2.4.4 and 43.3. 


NOTES 


1 On TN-C Systems, where the neutral and protective conductors 
are contained in a single conductor (PEN conductor) up to the 
equipment terminals, leakage current may be treated as load 
current. 

2 Equipment normally having high earth leakage current may 
not be compatible with installations incorporating residual 
current protective devices, as well as the standing residual 
current due to leakage current. The possibility of nuisance 
tripping due to capacitor charging currents at switch-on shall 
be considered. 


Equipment shall be: 


a) 
b) 


stationary, and 


Either permanently connected to the building 
wiring installation or connected via industrial 
plugs and sockets. 


NOTES 


1 Industrial plugs and sockets are examples of suitable 
plugs and sockets. Plugs and sockets for general use are 
not suitable. 


2 It is particularly important for equipment with high 
leakage current that earth continuity should be checked 
at the time it is installed and after any modification to 
the installation. 

It is also recommended that earth continuity be checked 


thereafter at regular intervals. 


Additionally, where leakage current measured in 
accordance with IS 13252 exceeds 10 mA, equipment 
shall be connected in accordance with one of the three 
alternative requirements detailed in 43.2.4.1 to 43.2.4.3. 


NOTE — Leakage current measurements prescribed by 
IS 13252 include likely undetected fault conditions within the 
equipment. 


43.2.4.1 High integrity earth connections 


NOTE — The aim of the requirements detailed below is to 
provide high integrity earth connections by using robust or 
duplicate conductors in association with permanent connections 
or robust connectors. 


Protective conductors shall comply with the following: 


a) Where independent protective conductors are, 
there shall be one conductor with a cross- 
sectional area of not less than 10 mm? or two 
conductors with independent terminations, 
each having a cross-sectional area of not less 
than 4 mm’; 

b) When incorporated in a multicore cable 

together with the supply conductors, the sum 

total cross-sectional area of all the conductors 
shall be not less than 10 mm? and the 

protective conductors shall comply with 14 

to 23; 


Where the protective conductor is installed in, 
and connected in parallel with a metal conduit 


97 


IS 3043 : 2018 


having electrical continuity according to 
relevant Indian Standard specification on 
conduits for electrical purposes, a conductor 
of not less than 2.5 mm! shall be used; and 
d) Rigid and flexible metallic conduits, metallic 
ducting and metallic screens, and armouring 


which meet the requirements of 14 to 23. 


Each conductor specified in (a), (b), (c) and (d) shall 
meet the requirements of 14 to 23. 


43.2.4.2 Earth integrity monitoring 


A protective device shall be provided which will 
disconnect the equipment, in the event ofa discontinuity 
occurring in the earth conductor, within the voltage/ 
time limits prescribed by relevant standards. 


The protective conductors shall comply with 14 to 23. 


NOTE — The aim of the requirements detailed above is to 
monitor the continuity of the protective earth connection and 
provided means of automatic supply disconnection in case of 
failure. 


43.2.4.3 Use of double wound transformer 


Equipment shall be connected to the supply via a double 
wound transformer of other units in which the input 
and output circuits are separated, such as motor- 
alternator sets (see 44). 


The secondary circuit should preferably be connected 
as a TN-System but an IT-System may be used where 
required for the specific application. 

NOTE — The aim of the requirements above is to localize the 


path of the leakage current, and minimize the possibility of a 
break in continuity in this path. 


43.2.4.4 Additional requirements for TT- system 


The requirements below ensure that the leakage in 
normal operation of all equipment protected by one 
and the same protective device is less than half of that 
required to operate earth fault protective devices for 
the installation circuit. 


a) The total leakage current /, (in amperes), the 
resistance of the earth electrode Ё (in ohms) 
and the nominal operating residual current of 
the protective device J,, (in amperes) shall be 
related as follows: 

I^, 2201 

2 QR. 

b) Ifthe requirements of (a) cannot be met, the 

requirements of 42.2.4.3 shall apply. 


1, 


43.3 Additional Requirements for IT-Systems 


43.3.1 It is preferred that equipment with high leakage 
current is not connected directly to IT -systems because 
of the difficulty of satisfying touch voltage requirements 
on a first fault. 


IS 3043 : 2018 


Where possible, the equipment is supplied by a TN- 
system derived from the mains supply by means of a 
double wound transformer. 


Where it is possible, the equipment may be connected 
directly to the equipment may be connected directly to 
the IT-system. This may be facilitated by connecting 
all protective earth connections for equipment using 
the IT-system directly to the power system earth 
electrode. 


43.3.2 Before making direct connection to an IT-system, 
installers shall ensure that equipment is suitable for 
connection to IT - systems according to the declaration 
of the manufacturer. 


43.4 Safety Requirement for Low Noise Earthing 
Connections 


NOTE — It may be found that the electrical noise levels on the 
protective earthing system of building installations cause an 
unacceptable incidence of malfunction on data processing 
equipment connected to it. 


43.4.1 Whatever measures are taken to provide a low- 
noise earthing connection, it is required that exposed 
conductive parts of data processing shall be connected 
to the main earthing terminal. 


NOTE — The use of separate earth electrodes for simultaneously 
accessible exposed conductive parts is not permitted. 


This requirement shall also apply to metallic enclosures 
of Class II and Class HI equipment, and to FELV 
circuits when these are earthed for functional reasons. 


Earth conductors, which serve functional purposes only, 
need not comply with 14 to 23. 


L1 
L2 
OR 
N 
PE EXPOSED 
CONDUCTIVE 
PARTS 


Single phase system depicted for ease. System may be 3-phase. 
Protection and control arrangements are not shown. 


C is the filter capacitance. 


PE 


43.4.2 Other Special Methods 


In extreme cases, if the safety requirements of 43.4.1 
are fulfilled but electrical noise on the main earthing 
terminal of the installation cannot be reduced to an 
acceptable level, the installation has to be treated as a 
special case. 


The earthing arrangement has to provide the same level 
of protection as is generally provided by these 
requirements and particular attention should be given 
to ensure that the arrangement: 


a) 


provides adequate protection against 
overcurrent; 

b) prevents excessive touch voltages on the 
equipment and ensures equipotential between 
the equipment and adjacent metal work or 
other electrical equipment, under normal and 
fault conditions; and 

c) meets the requirements relating to excessive 
earth leakage current, if appropriate, and does 


not invalidate them. 


44 EXAMPLE 
TRANSFORMERS 


OF THE USE OF 


44.1 Transformer Incorporated in or Attached to 
Unit 


The transformer shall be connected in accordance with 
Fig. 56 in order to confine the earth leakage current in 
conductors within the unit. 


NOTE — No further special installation measures are necessary. 


EXPOSED 
CONDUCTVE 
PARTS 


L1 and L2 or М are connections to the incoming supply and PE is the connection from accessible parts of the equipment to the main 
earthing terminal of installation for both protective conductors of Class I equipment and functional earthing conductors for Class II 


equipment. 


Fic. 56 METHODS OF CONNECTING DOUBLE-WOUND TRANSFORMERS SITUATED WITHIN OR 
ATTACHED TO SINGLE UNITS 


98 


IS 3043 : 2018 


44.2 Method of Connecting Transformers Physically connections between the equipment and the transformer 
Separate from Units shall comply with the requirements of 43.2.4.1 or 


The neutral point for the secondary circuit shall be сй 


connected to earth at the transformer and the earth Connections shall be as shown in Fig. 57. 


EXPOSED CONDUCTIVE 
PARTS 


EXPOSED 
CONDUCTIVE 
PARTS 


Single-phase system depicted for ease. System may be 3-phase. 
Primary and secondary circuits must have means of control and protection. These are not shown. 
C is the filter capacitance. 


L1 and L2 or М are connections to the incoming supply and PE is the connection from accessible parts of the equipment to the main 
earthing terminal of the installation for both protective conductors of Class I equipment and functional earthing conductors of Class II 
equipment. 


Fic. 57 METHOD OF CONNECTING PHYSICALLY SEPARATED TRANSFORMERS 


99 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 20 (6667). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern  : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


