**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 5469-1 (1969) : Code of Practice for the Use of 
Semiconductor Junction Devices [LITD 5: Semiconductor and 
Other Electronic Components and Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 

(Reaffirmed 2002) 

Edition 1.1 

(1972-10) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF 
SEMICONDUCTOR JUNCTION DEVICES 

PART I APPLICABLE TO ALL DEVICES 

(Incorporating Amendment No. 1) 

UDC 621.382.2/.3 



© BIS 2007 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



Price Group 8 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF 
SEMICONDUCTOR JUNCTION DEVICES 

PART I APPLICABLE TO ALL DEVICES 

Semiconductor Devices Sectional Committee, ETDC 40 

Chairman Representing 

DR B. H. Wadia Semiconductors Limited, Poona 

Members 
Dr K. S. Balain Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

(CSIR), Pilani 
Dr B. R. Marathe ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. K. Dutta Gupta Directorate General of Inspection (Ministry of Defence) 

Shri R. S. Yadaw {Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Ganguly Directorate General of Civil Aviation (Ministry of 

Tourism & Civil Aviation), New Delhi 
Shri B. P. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri A. K. Gopalakrishnan The Radio, Electronics & Television Manufacturers' 

Association (RETMA), Bombay 
Wg Cdr J. S. Lamba Directorate of Technical Development & Production 

(Air) (Ministry of Defence) 
Shri E. G. Nagarajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. MADAN Continental Device India Ltd, Faridabad 

Shri A. A. Patankar ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. B. Meemamsi Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs 

(Department of Communications), New Delhi 
Shri B. S. MURTHY Directorate General of Defence Research & 

Development (Ministry of Defence) 
Shri K, C. CnwAmAi, Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Raju Electronic Corporation of India Ltd, (Department of 

Atomic Energy), Hyderabad 
Dr Ram Parshad National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New Delhi 

Shri S. P. Suri ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Savoor Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri C. G. Subramanyan Directorate General of Defence Research & 

Development (Ministry of Defence) 
Shri Y. S. Venkateswaran, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director (Elec tech) 

Secretary 

Shri N. Srinivasan 

Deputy Director (Elec tech), ISI 

Ad hoc Panel for Code of Practice for Semiconductor Devices 
Convener 
Dr Ram Parshad National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New Delhi 

Member 
Shri B. S. MURTHY Directorate General of Defence Research & 

Development (Ministry of Defence) 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF 
SEMICONDUCTOR JUNCTION DEVICES 

PART I APPLICABLE TO ALL DEVICES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 9 September 1969, after the draft finaUzed by the 
Semiconductor Devices Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electrotechnical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard (Part I) has been prepared with a view to providing 
guidance to all concerned with the design, construction, use or 
maintenance of equipment using semiconductor devices so that 
optimum device performance and life may be secured. The code is 
intended to be of particular interest to the new entrants to the 
semiconductor device industry and application. 

0.2.1 While this standard (Part I) is applicable to all semiconductor 
junction devices; codes of practice relating to specific types of devices such 
as diodes, thyristors, etc, are being covered in other parts of this series. 

0.3 Assistance has been derived from the following while preparing 
this standard: 

B.S. CP 1016 : Part I : 1968 The use of semiconductor devices, 
Part I : General consideration. British Standards Institution. 

The use of semiconductor devices. Electronic Valve and Semi- 
conductor Manufacturers* Association, UK. 

0.4 This edition 1.1 incorporates Amendment No. 1 (October 1972). 
Side bar indicates modification of the text as the result of 
incorporation of the amendment. 

0,5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2- 1960*. The number ofsignificant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Part I) is intended to give guidance to all concerned | 
with the design, construction, use or maintenance of equipment using 
semiconductor devices so that optimum device performance and life 
may be secured. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

2 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

2. TERMINOLOGY, GRAPHICAL SYMBOLS AND LETTER 
SYMBOLS 

2.1 Terminology — For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in IS : 1885 (Part VII)-1965* shall apply. 

2.2 Letter Symbols — Letter symbols specified in IS : 3715-19661 
shall apply. 

2.3 Graphical Symbols — Graphical symbols specified in IS : 2032 
(Part VIII).1965t shall apply. 

3. BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR PROPERTIES 

3.0 Briefly described below are basic semiconductor properties which 
are fundamental to the proper application of all semiconductor devices 
if satisfactory initial performance and life are to be ensured. Their 
relative importance may vary widely from one case to another. These 
are given as an aid to understanding the reasons for the various 
recommendations that follow for their proper applications. 

3.1 Semiconductor Materials 
3.1.1 General 

3.1.1.1 Semiconductors are materials which have their resistivities lying 
between those of metals and insulators. The approximate limits of their 
resistivities lie between 10~^ ohm centimetre and 10"^ ohm centimetre. 

3.1.1.2 The semiconductor materials may be either in polycrystalline 
or monocrystalline form. However, the monocrystalline form is 
generally used in the fabrication of the semiconductor devices because 
of regularity in production, reliabiUty and efficiency. 

3.1.1.3 In a semiconductor crystal, the electrons in the neighbouring 
atoms are bound to each other mainly by co-valent bonds. The electrons 
are in a state of random thermal agitation. The energy possessed by some 
electrons at room temperature due to thermal agitation may be sufficient 
to enable them to break their co-valent bonds and become free electrons. 
The deficiency produced by the removal of an electron is considered as 
a hole. This process is known as thermal generation of electron-hole pairs. 
The motion of a hole actually involves successive motions of structural 
electrons in the opposite direction, each such motion destroying the 
original hole and creating a new one; but for present purpose it is 
sufficient to regard the hole simply as a mobile positive charge carrier 
and the electron as negative charge carrier. The average time either 
carrier exists as a free carrier is known as life time*. If a hole and a free 
electron combine, the electrons will fill the deficiency represented by hole 
and will cease to exist as a free carrier. This is known as ^recombination*. 



*Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part VII Semiconductor devices. 

t Letter symbols for semiconductor devices. 

tGraphical symbols used in electrotechnology: Part VIII Semiconductor device^. 

3 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 

Note — For convenience of description, both free electrons and holes are referred to 
as 'carriers'. 

5.1.2 Litrifisic and Extrinsic Conduction — There are two kinds of 
semiconductor materials, intrinsic and extrinsic. In the intrinsic 
semiconductors, there is supposed to be no impurities present and 
conductivity is due to nearly equal contributions from free electrons 
and holes which are present in equal numbers, due to thermal effects 
only. The electrons contribute somewhat more than half the 
conductivity because they are about twice as mobile as the holes. In 
the extrinsic semiconductors, impurities will be present which will, 
increase the conductivity very much compared to the intrinsic semi- 
conductors ( see also 3.1.4 ). 

3.1.3 N- and P-tvpe Semiconductors — In 'N-type* semiconductor 
material, the conductivity is predominantly due to the movement of 
*free' electrons, which carry negative charges in the direction opposite to 
the conventional current. In T-type* semiconductor material, 
conductivity is predominantly due to the movement of 'holes' which 
carry positive charges in the same direction as the conventional current. 

3.1.4 Doping — Introduction of even very small proportions of suitable 
impurity atoms (of the order of 10"^ to 10"^) (normally too small to be 
detected spectroscopically) can make an intrinsic semiconductor 
material increase the conductivity of the material by many orders of 
magnitude. This process of adding impurities is called doping. 
Impurity atoms causing N-type conductivity, that is, donate free 
electrons to the crystals, are called 'donors* and those causing P-type 
conductivity, that is, accept electrons from the crystal to produce free 
holes, are called 'acceptors'. Where impurities of both kinds are 
present, the conductivity type of the material is controlled by the 
difference in their effective concentration. 

S.1.& Minority and Majority Carrier — In N-type material the 
electrons are present in greater numbers and are therefore called 
'majority' carriers, while the holes present are called 'minority' carriers. 
In P-type material, on the other hand, the more numerous holes 
present are 'majority' carriers and the electrons are 'minority' carriers. 

3.1.5.1 Inside the bulk of any given semiconductor material in equili- 
brium at any given temperature the product of the free-electron 
density and the hole density is a constant. In N-type or P-type material 
the number of carriers of one kind, greatly exceeds that of the other; 
the total net charge of the carriers is neutralized by the opposite total 
charge of the fixeof ionized impurity atoms. 

S.l.Q Semiconductor Material — The most common semiconductor 
materials being used at present are germanium and siUcon which at 
room temperature have their intrinsic resistivities of 47 ohms-cm and 
63 600 ohms-cm respectively. Apart from these materials, compound 
semiconductor and organic semiconductors are being developed for 
making semiconductor devices. Typical examples are galium arsenide, 
indium antimonide, cadmium sulphide, cadmium selenide, etc. 

4 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

3.2 Modification of Conductivity 

3.2.1 The conductivity of any specimen of semiconductor material may 
be raised by increasing the number of carriers. The increase of 
conductivity is only temporary. When the cause of the increase ceases, 
the number of carriers present (and thus also the conductivity) decays 
towards its original equilibrium value in a manner characteristic of 
the particular specimen and conditions. 

3.2.1.1 Means of increasing the number of carriers fall into two groups: 

a) The first group includes means by which the carriers are produced 
within the semiconductor itself. This may be achieved by: 

1) the effects of electromagnetic radiation (visible or invisible), 

2) the effects of increasing temperature, 

3) the direct effects of high electric field strength (within a poorly 
conducting semiconductor), 

4) the effects of collisions of existing carriers with the crystal 
structure when the carriers have attained enough energy from 
an accelerating electric field, and 

5) some other less commonly used effects. 

In all these cases ^excess' carriers are generated in pairs inside the 
materials, one hole for each electron and the material as a whole 
remains substantially neutral electrically. Except in the immediate 
vicinity of junctions or other boundaries, the net charge densities 
associated with normal semiconductor operating conditions are very 
small compared with the total charge densities of opposite signs 
present in the crystal structure. 

b) The second group consists of introducing carriers of a single type 
at a boundary of the semiconductor region in question-normally 
at its junction with a metallic contact or with another 
semiconductor region of opposite conductivity type. In this case 
substantial neutrality is maintained by a redistribution of the 
carriers of the opposite type already existing in the material, the 
necessary charge being supplied eventually from some other 
point of connection to the region in question. 

3.2.2 When excess carriers are introduced, and the source of excess 
carriers is suddenly removed, the number of carriers present decays 
back to normal approximately exponentially as pairs of carriers of 
opposite sign mutually annihilate one another with release of energy 
(usually to the crystal lattice, though sometimes as radiation). The 
time-constant of the decay (usually referred to the minority or 
less-numerous carriers only) is the *Ufe-time* of the carriers and is very 
sensitive to the presence of imperfections and impurities (deliberate or 
otherwise) in the crystal structure. 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

3.2.3 The conductivity of N-type or P-type semiconductor material may 
also be locally decreased by the application of an electric field that 
drives the majority carriers (electrons for N-type, holes for P-type) out 
of the region near the surface or interface (junction) at which the field 
is applied. This forms a ^depletion layer' of material almost free from 
carriers; this layer has a high resistivity like that of intrinsic material. 
The space-charge associated with the field is provided by the fixed 
ionized impurity atoms, whose charges are normally neutralized by 
those of the carriers now expelled. 

3.3 Semiconductor Junctions 

3.3.1 An interface between N-type and P-type regions within a single 
crystal of semiconductor material is known as a ^junction'. The 
proportion of deliberately-introduced impurities is normally so small 
that it does not seriously disturb the regularity of the crystal 
structure, which is thus continuous across the junction. 

3.3.2 Junctions are usually formed by taking semiconductor material 
of one conductivity type and then introducing an appropriate impurity 
in sufficient amount to give the material the opposite conductivity type 
within a defined region. The impurity may be introduced in several 
ways of which the commonest are 'alloying and 'diffusion'. In alloying, 
the prepared crystal is locally melted in contact with the impurity and 
then allowed to recrystallize. In diffusion, the prepared crystal is not 
melted, but the impurity is allowed to diffuse into it from the surface 
for a controlled time at a high temperature. Other methods of junction 
fabrication like grown junction, grown diffused, alloy diffused, 
melt-back diffused are also employed. 

3.3.2.1 Where a semiconductor device involves several junctions, such 
as in thyristor, they are sometime made by different processes. 

3.3.3 While the fundamental electrical characteristics of all types of 
junction are similar, certain detailed properties depend on the method 
of manufacture. Among these are the variation of junction capacitance 
with voltage (see 3.5.1 ) and the foward-conduction characteristic at 
very-low and very-high current densities. 

3.4 Basic Junction Static Characteristics 

3.4.1 A junction between N-type and P-type semiconductor material 
has an asymmetric voltage versus current characteristic. For moderate 
voltage (V) and current ( /) the relation is approximately: 

the 'constants* A and B depending on temperature and also varying 
sUghtly with V, At moderate forward currents: 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

3.4.2 For most devices (but not all) B^ 35 to 40 at room temperature, so 
that the current increases by a factor of ten for a voltage rise of about 
60 mV. For a given current, dV/dT =« - (2 to 2.5) mV degC in this region. 
At higher forward currents the effect of unavoidable series resistance 
modifies the characteristic; additionally, the value of that part of this 
resistance that lies in the bulk of the semiconductor tends to fall with 
increase of current (*conductivity modulation*), and this further modifies 
the observed characteristic. In the ^reverse' direction the current 
'saturates* at a small fraction of a volt and remains substantially 
constant up to the voltage at which carrier multiplication mechanisms 
become significant usually at or near the breakdown voltage of the 
junction. The saturation current is an approximately exponential 
function of temperature, usually doubling for a temperature rise of 8**C 
to 12^C. At and below room temperature and particularly with the silicon 
devices where the junction saturation current is low, the behaviour is 
often complicated in practice by leakage currents, whose dependence on 
voltage and temperature may be different from that of the saturation 
current. These leakage currents are often associated with the surface of 
the device, and may vary considerably. 

3.4.3 Although the values of the constants in the above relations can 
be predicted, the values deduced from simple theory are not always 
reaUssed in practice, because simple theory ignores many significant 
details, some of which are very dependent on device structure. The 
figures given represent good generalizations of current practical 
values but the device manufacturer's information should be used 
wherever possible in critical work. 

3.4.4 The numerical values of the static characteristics of a junction 
depend markedly on the semiconductor material used. For example, the 
forward voltage of a germanium junction at normally used current 
densities is in the region of 0.25 volts whereas that of a siUcon junction 
is in the region of 0.7 volts. The total reverse current of a silicon junction 
is approximately one-thousandth of that of a germanium junction. 

3.5 Junction Capacitance — Any junction of a semiconductor device 
has inherent capacitance in addition to that of its connections. There 
are two types of capacitances encountered in junction devices: 

a) Transition (depletion layer) capacitance, and 

b) Diffusion capacitance. 

3.6.1 Transition ( Depletion Layer ) Capacitance — The junction region 
in a semiconductor device possesses a strong density of ionized charges 
and in most cases is equivalent to a parallel plate capacitance, with a 
capacitance, which is inversely proportional to the applied voltage, the 
law being approximately: 

D 



c = 



(V^+e/ 



IS : S469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

where D is a constant for a given junction; Vr is the applied reverse 
bias; E is sl constant depending mainly on the material (tjrpically 
about 0.3 V for a germanium, about 0.7 V for silicon); and F is a 
constant varjdng between about 0.33 and about 0.5 or more 
according to the type of junction. 

Junction capacitance is not strongly dependent on temperature 
within the normal working range. 

At any reverse bias in excess of 150 to 200 mV (but well below the 
breakdown voltage), the losses in the capacitance are low; in the 
forward-biased state the junction conductance shunts the capacitance. 

The values of the constants predicted by simple theory are not 
always found in practice and the device manufacturer's information 
should be used whenever possible in critical work. 

3. 5, 2 Diffusion Capacitance — For any given forward bias a certain 
amount of excess carriers are present in the steady state. If the forward 
bias is changed, the amount of excess carriers also changes to a new 

steady level. The quantity _i8 is called the diffusion capacitance ( Qs 

dV^F 

being the stored charge and Vp being the forward bias). Diffusion 
capacitance will appear in transistors also due to the presence of excess 
carriers in the base region when the transistor is in normal operation. 

3.6 Junction Breakdown — Despite its name, it is not normally in 
itself destructive, except through the heating effect due to the electric 
power dissipation involved. 

8.6.1 Reverse Breakdown — The reverse breakdown condition is that 
of a junction sufficiently reverse-biased to make the reverse current 
much greater than its low voltage saturation value ( see Fig. 1 ). The 
two types of a reverse breakdown of a junction are described below: 

a) Zener Breakdown — The electric field in the junction increases 
with the reverse voltage. At a high value of this field (10^ volts/cm) 
valence electrons are torn loose and go into conduction band across 
the junction. The reverse current then increases rapidly and is no 
longer limited by the device itself but is circuit limited. This process 
is called *zener breakdown* or internal field emission. Zener 
breakdown generally occurs in a heavily doped junction. 

b) Avalanche Breakdown — The electric charges that flow through 
the junction receive an amount of energy which is proportional to 
the voltage across the junction. Every increase in the reverse 
voltage corresponds to an increase in the energy which is stored 
up in the moving charges. As soon as this energy exceeds a 
certain threshold, the carrier acquires enough energy between 

8 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

collision with lattice atoms so that it ionizes the atoms on impact 
and causes an electron-hole pair. This process becomes 
cumulative, the Uberated electrons Uberating other charges in 
their turn. This is called *avalanche breakdown*. In this case also 
the reverse current is not limited by the device itself but is circuit 
limited as in the case of zener breakdown. 



REVERSE VOLTAGE 




JUNCTION 
CURRENT 



Fig. 1 Reverse Characteristic of Junction 

3.6.2 Thermal Breakdown — The thermal breakdown is due to the 
heating effect caused by excessive electric power dissipation. This 
dissipation may easily become locaUzed at one or more hot spots. The 
thermal resistance from hot spot to ambient is much higher than that 
normally measured from the junction as a whole because of the thermal 
^spreading resistance* from the very small hot spot. The small size of 
the hot spot results in very short time-constant for the temperature 
rise (microsecond values are often observed). This increases the current 
which further causes heating effect leading to thermal breakdown. 

Thermal breakdown may also be due to the heating effect caused by 
excessive current due to the avalanche or the zener breakdown. 

3.6.8 Secondary Breakdown — In transistors operating in the active 
region, locahzation of heating effects can additionally result from local 
thermal feedback from the collector junction to the emitter junction; 
the time-constants here are usually longer, in the miUisecond region. 
The localization effects are responsible for the phenomenon known as 
^secondary breakdown' in which the temperature of the hot spot may 
be sufficient to damage the device. 

3.6.4 If the energy dissipated on any one occasion is small enough, these 
hot-spot effects are not always immediately fatal to the device. But if 
repeated they can cause initially unnoticeable cumulative degradation 
culminating in the catastrophic failure in service. Special care is 
necessary in switching reactive loads, both capacitive and inductive. 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

3.6.4.1 Special devices (voltage reference diodes, *controlled-avalanche* 
rectifier, etc) exist where design and construction are such as to 
prevent hot-spot formation within a specified working reverse-current 
range (often a function of both temperature and time). 

3.6.4.2 Only devices specifically intended for operation in the break- 
down mode should be so used. Note in particular that breakdown 
operation of the base-emitter junction of a transistor, although it may 
not involve any apparent risk of catastrophic failure, may cause 
gradual changes in the normal characteristics of the transistor. In case 
of doubt the manufacturer should be consulted. 

3.7 Frequency Dependence — The electric charge carriers (holes 
and electrons) take a finite time to move within the solid material of 
the device, and consequently certain of its characteristics change 
noticeably as its operating frequency is increased. The power 
dissipated within the device due to the carrier storage effect (3.8) also 
rises with firequency. For these reasons the manufacturer may relate 
certain of his pubUshed ratings and characteristics to frequency. 

3.8 Charge Storage Effects — The current in, or the voltage across, a 
semiconductor device does not necessarily reach its final value 
immediately upon a change of operating conditions. This, apart from 
other reactive effects, is because it takes a finite time for the minority 
carriers in the semiconductor material to attain equilibrium. There are 
two main effects, a ^forward switching transient' when a junction is biased 
in the forward direction from a condition of reverse bias, and ^minority 
carrier storage* when a junction is reverse biased after conducting in the 
forward direction. Although these effects are usually related they are not 
always of equal practical importance in a given device. 

3.8.1 Forward Switching Transients — If current is passed through a 
junction in the forward direction, the injected carriers change the 
conductivity of the semiconductor material in the vicinity of the junction. 
This takes a finite time and the initial voltage drop may be greater than 
the static value. This effect is sometimes called ^conductivity modulation'. 
The forward switching transient is expressed in terms of the time taken 
for the forward voltage transient at constant current, under specified 
circuit conditions, to decay to a specified fraction of its steady value. 

3.8.2 Minority Carrier Storage — On switching firom forward to reverse 
bias, the minority carriers will be removed firom the semiconductor 
material or will recombine within the material in a time that is 
dependent, in general, on the nature of the circuit and the properties of 
the device. Figure 2 gives the reverse recovery waveform of a diode. 

3.8.2.1 The minority carrier storage is sometime expressed in terms of 
the amount of charge that can be recovered from the device and is an 
inherent characteristic of the device rather than a measure of its 

10 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 




Fig. 2 Diode Reverse Recovery Waveform 

behaviour in a circuit. In some devices the structure is such that the 
final decay is extremely fast, in the region of a nanosecond (Boff diode). 
This effect can be used in fast-pulse generators. 

3.8.2.2 However, minority carrier storage may also be expressed in 
terms of the time taken in a specified circuit for the reverse current to 
fall to a given fraction of the initial forward current. The carrier 
storage time so expressed will depend on the nature of the circuit as 
well as the properties of the device. 

3.8.3 Stored-charge effects are not normally significant in devices 
operating in the reverse -breakdown region (such as voltage regulator 
and voltage reference diodes and avalanche devices), since here the 
strong local electric field tends. to sweep all carrier away from the 
active region as soon as they appear. This sweeping action is very 
much faster than the diffusion processes in the almost fi^ld-free region 
near a forward-biased junction. 

4. KINDS OF DEVICES AND MATERIALS 

4.1 The semiconductor junction devices which have been developed so 
far may be divided into following categories: 

a) Diodes 

Examples: 

1) Small signal diodes 

2) Rectifier diodes 

3) Switching diodes 

4) Voltage reference and regulator diodes 

5) Tunnel diodes 

6) Variable capacitance diodes 

7) Step recovery diodes 

8) Photo diodes 

11 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 

b) Transistors 
Examples: 

1) Low-power small signal transistors 

2) Power transistors 

3) Switching transistors 

4) Field effect transistors 

5) Photo transistors 

c) Thyristors 

Note — The family of semiconductor devices is increasing and newer developments 
are continuously taking place in the fabrication of these semiconductor devices. 
Special mention may be made of integrated circuits in which a number of circuit 
elements are inseparably associated and electrically interconnected. 

4.2 Germanium and siUcon are most commonly used material for the 
fabrication of semiconductor devices ( see 3.1.6 ). The major differences 
in the devices made with these materials are the following: 

a) Silicon can operate at a much higher temperature (at about 200^C) 
and at much lower value of reverse leakage current. Stable 
protected jimction can be easily formed in the case of siUcon devices. 

b) Germanium offers lower voltage drop and hence has a higher 
efficiency in the power rectification on low voltages. Germanium 
also has an advantage of being used for fabrication of high 
frequency devices. 

6. RATINGS AND CHARACTERISTICS OF SEMICONDUCTOR 
DEVICES 

6. 1 General — It is important to distinguish ratings from characteristics. 
A rating is a Umiting condition of usage specified for a semiconductor 
device by the manufacturer, beyond which the serviceabiUty may be 
impaired. Characteristics are the measurable properties of a device. For 
example, maximum collector dissipation, maximum and minimum 
storage temperatures and maximum reverse voltage are all ratings, 
whereas leakage current, current gain and mechanical features such as 
overall length are all characteristics ( see also 7.6 ), 

5.1.1 A rating system is a set of principles upon which ratings are 
established and which determines their interpretation. There are three 
systems which have been accepted and which allocate responsibiUty 
between the device manufacturer and the circuit designer differently. In 
IS : 3700 (Part I)- 1966* absolute maximum ratings have been adopted. 



*E8sential rating and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part I General. 

12 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

5.1.2 Spread of Characteristics — Manufacturers publish the nominal 
or average values of the characteristics of their devices, but the 
characteristics of any particular specimen may differ from the 
nominal. Manufacturer endeavour to keep these spreads as small as 
possible. It is the practice to quote upper and lower limit values for 
important characteristics, and in circuit design, allowance shall be 
made for the spread which will be encountered. 

5.1.3 For the purposes of ratings and characteristics, semiconductor 
devices are divided into three broad groups depending on the cooling 
conditions and system [reference shall be made to 4 of IS : 3700 
(Part I)-1966*]. 

5.1.4 Ratings and characteristics of different semiconductor devices 
are covered by the relevant Indian Standards listed in Appendix A. 

5.1.4.1 The manufacturer's data sheet specifying the ratings and 
characteristics of a particular device should be prepared on the lines of 
the Indian Standards on essential ratings and characteristics, 
wherever available. 

6. PUBLISHED DATA 

6.1 When studjring a device-manufacturer's pubUshed data sheets, the 
following points should be borne in mind, and in all cases of doubt the 
device manufacturer should be consulted: 

a) The values of Umiting ratings and the minimum and maximum 
values of the major characteristics are pre-assigned and fixed but 
much of the other information given in the data sheet represents 
the results of measurements gradually accumulated by the 
manufacturer over a period of time that may extend to several 
years. In the early stages of the introduction of a new device, 
information of this sort shall necessarily be based on a Umited 
number of measurements covering only a short period of 
production, and so the information in the initial 'provisional* data 
sheet may not be fully representative of later production devices. 

b) The actual pubUcation of a revised version of a data sheet often 
lags considerably behind the manufacturer's acquisition of the 
necessary information. 

c) The information in a data sheet is usually Umited to that which is 
normally required for the primary intended uses of the device. 

d) Where devices bearing the same type-number are made by several 
manufacturers, various subsidiary characteristics may differ 
between makes, although the devices all meet the basic 
specification for the type. Also some manufacturers may claim for 
their devices a better performance (closer limits, smaller size, or 



* Essential rating and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part I General. 

13 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

higher limiting ratings) than that required by the basic specification 
for the type. These differences may be important when considering 
alternative sources of supply and possible problems of device 
replacement in the field. However, if the designer avoids reliance 
on unspecified characteristics, the difficulties will be minimized. 

7. ELECTRICAL DESIGN 

7.1 Although a ^single' eqixipment may be built around the actual 
measured parameters of devices or be based on published typical figures, 
all commercial designs for batch or mass production shall ensure that: 

a) A satisfactory initial yield of good circuits is obtained from the 
assembly line, 

b) Tested circuits will remain within the performance specification 
for a period of storage (that is, before sale) and during a 
reasonable working life under any conditions within the general 
environmental specification for the equipment, and 

c) Replacement components can be obtained and fitted to replace 
any that have failed or have been damaged by abnormal 
circumstances, so as to restore the performance to specification. 

7.2 The design approach is based on either the * worst-case* or the 
*worst-probable-case* philosophy ( see 7.3 and 7.4 ). In either case the 
effects of tolerances should be examined thoroughly. In practice it is 
the amount of information and its validity that finally decides the 
effectiveness of the design. It is rarely possible on economic grounds, 
for the device manufacturer to give on his data sheet all the desired 
upper and lower limit values for the user's design analysis but he can 
normally supply further information on request. 

For any design where more than average reliability is required, 
close co-operation between the designer and the semiconductor device 
manufacturer is essential. 

7.3 Worst-Case* Design — In the *worst-case* design every significant 
parameter for every component, device, supply, inputsource, outputload, 
control setting, and environment is assigned two limiting values (some 
of these may be inter-related, for example, resistance values and ambient 
temperature). The 'tolerance* associated with the nominal value of every 
characteristic of every component will normally be an *end of Ufe' 
tolerance, somewhat wider, than the Initial selection' tolerance. The 
equipment is designed so that it will function satisfactorily with any 
attainable combination whatsoever of the various Umiting values, 
without any absolute Umiting ratings being exceeded. For any given part 
of the circuit it is usually obvious what particular combination of limit 
conditions impose the most stringent requirements, but where this is not 
so it may be necessary to evaluate several combinations of limit 
conditions. 

14 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

7.4 Worst-Probable-Case Design 

7.4.1 In Vorst-probable-case' design, allowance is made for the fact that 
it is usually extremely unlikely, statistically, that every significant 
variable will be simultaneously on the adverse limit. If the statistical 
probability distribution of each variable between its limits is known or 
assumed (Gaussian, rectangular, etc), it is possible to calculate the 
probability of the whole circuit (or any given part of it) giving 
satisfactory performance. Component tolerance may then be relaxed or 
circuit design simplified, as compared with a 'worst-case' design, until 
the probability of satisfactory performance is at the economic optimum 
level. Care shall be taken to allow for any known significant correlations 
between variables, for example, there will usually be some degree of 
correlation between any variables having a significant dependence on 
ambient temperature. Care shall also be taken to ensure that the 
distributions assumed are not too optimistic; this is particularly true in 
the case of semiconductor devices where distributions may vary 
significantly from batch to batch while remaining within an 'overall* 
distribution. In all critical cases the manufacturer should be consulted. 

7.4.2 Great care shall be taken that no unwarrantable assumptions 
are made about the nature of the signals with which the equipment 
has to deal. For example, an amplifier intended to handle only speech 
signals may occasionally have to handle a continuous tone (such as the 
*lining-up' tone of a radio transmitter) which could cause the output 
stage to overheat; for another example, a digital circuit should not be 
so designed that certain possible input combinations can overload its 
power supply to an extent that causes malfunctioning, even if the 
occurrence of these combinations is very unlikely. 

7.4.8 The use of 'worst-probable-case' design usually involves a need for 
extra care in testing the finished equipment (or its sub-units), as 
compared with the use of Vorst-case* design. However, it should be noted 
that there is no hard and fast distinction between the two design methods, 
the difference being one of degree rather than kind, since component 
tolerances ensure that only rarely does a device operate just at the point 
at which its characteristics are specified; limiting characteristic values 
at neighbouring points (for example, gain at various collector currents) 
can only be inferred, and variations with time can only be estimated. 

7.5 Ratings and Deratings 

7.6.1 Ratings — The manufacturer cannot guarantee satisfactory per- 
formance if the ratings are exceeded, although individual devices may 
for a time appear to operate satisfactorily under *over-run' conditions. 
It is, therefore, essential for reliable operation to observe the limiting 
ratings of all components and devices. In any case of doubt as to which 
of several related ratings applies in any particular case, the 
manufacturer should be consulted. 

15 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

7.6.1.1 Some device ratings are related principally to ageing effects; 
exceeding these may not cause immediate failure of the device, but cause 
degradation to proceed more rapidly than is normally acceptable. Others 
are related to catastrophic failure effects; if these are exceeded there is 
a risk of immediate failure of the device. The manufacturer may 
occasionally permit ratings of the first kind to be increased to some 
extent when only a short life is required of the device; the second kind 
obviously cannot be raised at all. It is not possible to generalize as to 
what ratings are of which kind; the manufacturer shall be consulted in 
each individual case before any liberties are taken with limiting ratings. 

7.6.1.2 Many Umiting ratings are associated with a time limit, an 
averaging time, a repetition rate, a duty cycle, or some combination of 
these. It is not safe to extrapolate beyond the range covered by the 
manufacturer's information on such ratings; this is particularly 
important where the device ratings are based on a particular circuit 
technique in a particular appUcation. 

7.5.1.3 To ensure that peak ratings are not exceeded, even 
momentarily, the use of wide bandwidth oscilloscopes may be essential 
in the design and development stage, even for circuits intended only 
for low-speed operation. 

7.6.2 Deratings — On the other hand, there are good reasons for 
restricting the operation of any component or device in high-reliabiUty 
equipment to points well within the manufacturer's ratings. This is 
called *deratings*. 

7.6.2. 1 One reason for derating is the unknown nature of the conditions 
of maladjustment or external faults or wrong connections that may be 
applied to the equipment. Although many of these may be foreseen, such 
as a short-circuit or open-circuit, it is impossible to foresee every case that 
could conceivably arise. Consequently it is usual to derate devices 
somewhat, purely as a concession to ignorance. The more closely the 
possible faxllt conditions have been studied, the nearer to unity the 
Ignorance factor' can be. Once again it is a question of an economic 
compromise; but an ignorance factor of 0.8 on voltage, current, and power 
under anticipated fault conditions may be considered reasonable. 

7.6.2.2 Another reason for derating is the fact that some ratings are (as 
mentioned above) a compromise, somewhat arbitrarily chosen by the 
device manufacturer, between, on the one hand, an attractive device 
specification and a short expectation of Ufe, and on the other hand a more 
modest device specification and a very long expectation of life. In such 
cases, derating may be expected to prolong the life of the device; but 
(again, as mentioned above) it is impossible to generaUze as to which 
ratings are of this kind. Obviously there is a limit to the extent to which 
the expectation of life can be increased by derating, even in favourable 
cases, because whatever mode of failure may be substantially eliminated 
by derating, other modes of failure will remain. It is difficult to generalize 

16 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

as to the increased life-expectancy to be obtained by derating, and in any 
critical case the device manufacturer should be consulted. However, it 
can be said that in general there is little further advantage in 
life-expectancy to be gained by derating below about 0.7 of the normal 
rated voltage and current or 0.5 of the normal rated power (the rated 
values being those appropriate to the conditions of operation). 

7.5.2.3 If, for example, the derating of voltage for (a) variations of 
breakdown voltage with life (say 0.8); (b) ignorance of fault conditions 
(say 0.8); and (c) prospective increase in life expectancy (say 0.7) is 
appUed cumulatively, the net reduction factor is in this case 0.46. 
However, if fault conditions are not expected to persist for an 
appreciable fraction of the total life of the device, it would be reasonable 
to regard (b) as covered by (c), and to use an overall factor of 0.56. 

7.6 Variations of Characteristics with Temperature 

7.6.1 The characteristics of semiconductor devices varied with tempe- 
rature, and this shall be allowed for in circuit design. Indications of the 
principal temperature effects on a semiconductor P-junction have 
already been given. Transistor common emitter current gain increases 
with temperatiu'e. The temperature coefficient is usually in the region 
of 0.7 to 1.3 percent per degree C. Charge storage effects tend to become 
more pronounced at nigher temperatures in most semiconductor devices. 

7.6.2 It is important to note that in most cases the significant 
temperature is not the ambient temperature or the temperature of the 
case of the device, but that of the active region inside the device. This 
may be significantly higher than the other two. It is often referred to 
as the 'junction temperature*. 

7.6.3 If the change in device characteristics caused by a rise of 
temperature causes an increase of device dissipation, this in turn will 
cause a further rise of temperature. If this positive thermal feedback is 
sufficiently strong it can lead to a condition of 'thermal runaway*, where 
the device becomes excessively hot and the circuit becomes inoperative. 
The thermal feedback depends on the circuit design and on the cooling 
arrangements for the semi-conductor device. Design should be such that 
the system is thermally stable up to the maximum junction temperature 
(not ambient or case temperature) that will be encountered. The circuit 
conditions producing maximum dissipation are not necessarily those 
giving the greatest risk of instability. It may be necessary to consider the 
effect of an abrupt change of electrical conditions from those of 
maximum dissipation to those of maximum instabiUty. Class B 
audio-fi'equency ampUfiers provide a good example of this. Here the 
most critical condition is usually that which occurs when a sustained 
signal corresponding to maximum device dissipation is suddenly 
removed thus subjecting the transistors to the electrical conditions of 
the quiescent state while their junction temperature has (momentarily) 
the high value associated with the maximum-dissipation state. 

17 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

7.7 Variations of Characteristics with Life 

7.7.1 All components and devices *age* to some extent. The change of 
electrical characteristics is always the result of some form of physical 
change, but often (particularly in the case of semiconductor devices) 
the physical change is practically undetectable except by its effects on 
the electrical characteristics; such changes are frequently merely 
slight atomic rearrangements within or on the surface of the 
crystalline semiconductor material. Ageing in itself, is usually a 
gradual process, and is normally strongly temperature-dependent. A 
doubling of ageing rate for 10**C rise of temperature is t5^ical; the rate 
often increases very sharply above some critical temperature. Ageing 
is often dependent on appUed electrical stress, though frequently this 
is mainly as a result of the temperature rise due to dissipation. But in 
some types of devices, voltage itself has a significant effect. 

7.7.2 Precise general figures for allowance for ageing are obviously 
impossible to give; in all critical cases the device manufacturer should 
be consulted. However, some commonly used allowances in worst-case 
designs are leakage currents (maximum Umit at maximum operational 
junction temperature) multipUed by 2; transistor common-emitter 
current gain (minimum limit at minimxmi operational ambient 
temperature) multipUed by 0.75 (maximum limit at maximum 
operational junction temperature) mutipUed by 1.25, breakdown 
voltage variations may be covered by derating to (maximum rated 
voltage) multipUed by 0.8. 

7.7.8 It should be noted that, unlike thermionic valves (which have a 
well-known *wear-out* mechanism), semiconductor devices age in 
basicaUy the same way as passive components. It is, therefore, 
normaUy possible to choose devices that have reUabiUty similar to that 
of the passive components employed with them. Care should be taken 
when using devices in circuits or environments for which they were not 
intended by the manufacturer because of the lack of relevant 
reliability data. 

7.7.4 On top of the slow ageing process is superimposed the effect of 
catastrophic failures. Where no *wear-out' or fatigue mechanism is 
involved, these tend to occur more or less at random for any given device 
type under any given conditions. They are sometimes preceded by a short 
period of rapid ageing; if this is detected during a maintenance check the 
device showing it should be replaced (first making sure that the effect is 
genuinely in the device in question and is not merely a reflection of some 
other abnormal condition elsewhere in the equipment). In this respect 
the most sensitive parameters of semiconductor devices are usually 
leakage current, current gain (of transistors), and breakdown voltage. 

7.8 Series and Parallel Operation 

7.8.1 When semiconductor devices are connected in series or in 
parallel, special precautions may be necessary to ensure that the 

18 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

circuit voltage or current is properly shared between device so as to 
avoid exceeding their individual ratings. The non-linearities and 
temperature-dependence of device characteristics shall be taken into 
account, in addition to the wide basic tolerances often encountered. 

7.8.2 Voltage-sharing between devices in series may require the use of 
parallel resistance and capacitance across each device. In some cases it 
may be necessary to use unequal values of capacitance so as to 
compensate for different values of stray capacitance between the 
various devices and the ends of the series chain. 

7.8.3 Current sharing between devices in parallel may require the use 
of resistance in series with each device. In ac appUcations balancing 
transformers or series inductors may sometimes be used instead of 
resistors. 

7.8.4 By increasing the number of devices in parallel, it may become 
possible to tolerate the unbalance resulting from the omission of 
equalizing components and this solution may sometimes be more 
economical. 

7.8.6 Some degree of matching of the characteristics of the series or 
parallel devices is often advisable ( $ee 7.9 ). 

7.8.6 Where, say, /i devices are connected in series or parallel, the total 
effective voltage or current rating will normally be less than n times 
the rating of a single device, because the voltage or current will never 
be shared exactly equally between the devices. The equaUty of the 
sharing, and therefore the extent of the required derating, will depend 
partly on the matching of the devices and particularly those of any 
components introduced to control the sharing. 

7.8.7 The device manufacturer normally gives recommendations on 
how to ensure equitable voltage or current sharing between devices of 
those types frequently used in series or parallel combinations. In all 
critical cases his advice should be obtained. 

7.8.8 In the case of parallel connection of high-current devices, care 
shall be taken to allow for the impedances of the connections including 
in particular the resistances of any bolted joints. For special thermal- 
precautions in parallel and series operations, reference may be made 
to 9.6. 

7.8.9 Where thyristors or transistors intended to act as switches are 
connected in series or parallel, care shall be taken to ensure that they 
all turn on and off together. Trouble can occur here if for any reason 
the level of the control signal falls. 

7.8.10 It is not normallv practicable to control reverse breakdown 
characteristics sufficiently to permit direct parallel operation in the 
breakdown mode. This applies both to the normal operating range of 
voltage-reference diodes and to the transient-overload range of 
controlled-avalanche rectifiers. 

19 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

7.8.11 The sharing of current and voltage in power stages at high radio 
frequencies present many speciaUzed problems. Some of these are 
related to the possibiUty of operation under conditions of incorrect 
adjustment, particularly with respect to the level of input drive. 

7.9 Matching 

7.9.1 Some degree of matching between pairs, quads, or larger 
numbers of devices often appears desirable, either for push-pull 
circuits or for series or parallel connections. The need for matching and 
the degree of matching required should be kept to the minimum by the 
use of non-critical circuit designs and bv the use of negative feedback 
where practicable. It should be remembered that even if devices are 
initially perfectly matched they will not necessarily remain so with 
changes of temperature and lapse of time. Device requirements should 
also be taken into account. 

7.9.2 Two methods of matching that are commonly used are: 

a) pairs of devices are selected and packed together as pairs for use; and 

b) the whole of the product is graded into narrow-spread groups and 
these are separately packed, so that any two devices from the 
same package will be adequately closely matched. 

7.9.8 It is usually grossly uneconomic to ask for matching or grading of 
more than one characteristic of a device. It is almost always cheeper to 
re-design the circuit to make it more tolerant. This will also improve 
its stability with time and temperature changes. 

7.10 Interference and Spurious Signal 

7.10.1 Although interference should wherever possible be reduced to 
insignificance at source, it is necessary to provide sufficient screening 
and filtering within any piece of electronic equipment to enble it to 
function satisfactorily in the interference conditions of its intended 
environment. Interference may originate from permanent services (for 
example, lighting equipment), from other fixed equipment (for example, 
office machines, generators, power-control equipment, particularly that 
using flow angle control) or from portable equipment (for example, 
electric tools). Poor maintenance of equipment may allow it to generate 
much worse interference than would normally be expected. 

7.10.2 Internally-generated spurious signals often cause considerable 
trouble. These signals may arise from unwanted impedances and 
couplings in the internal supply and earth lines of the equipment. 
Earthing problems tend to be more important in equipment using 
semiconductor devices than in equipment using electronic valves because 
of the higher currents and lower voltages involved in the former. In some 
equipment it may be desirable to use separate qiUet (signal) and iioisy 
earth Unes. The earth Unes should be connected together at one point only. 

20 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

7.10.3 Care should be taken with the selection and layout of 
decoupling components. The transient and high frequency impedances 
of capacitors cannot always be predicted from low frequency behaviour 
and may vary with life. 

7.10.4 The problems of interference and spurious signals in digital 
systems require extremely careful consideration. The measure of the 
extent to which a digital system can withstand interference and 
spurious signals without false operation is usually referred to as *noise 
margin* or *noise immunity'. These are general terms that have been 
used to describe several related but significantly different measures of 
the basic property of the system. 

7.11 Effects of Overdrive and Underdrive — Both digital and 
analogue circuits can be adversely affected by overdrive and underdrive. 

7.11.1 In digital or static switching circuits the dissipation may be 
quite low under both *OfP (High) and *0n' (Low) conditions. A degree of 
underdrive or the halting of a slowly varying input, may provide a 
destructive *half way' condition. 

7.11.2 The difficulties with analogue circuits usually arise in tuned 
ampUfiers or in those with driver and/or output transformers. Tuned 
amplifiers should be examined under all conditions from zero drive to 
well over normal drive including such degrees of mistuning or load 
disturbance as are likely during operation or setting up. A condition of 
excess dissipation or excess peak voltage on a junction may be discovered. 
Parasitic oscillation may also occur with disastrous results under some 
condition other than the normal design condition. In the circuits using 
untuned iron cored driver and/or output transformers, the overdrive 
condition coupled with load mis-matching can cause catastrophic 
failures. The leakage inductance of the transformer is usually a critical 
parameter and the transformer maker's nominal figure is subject to wide 
variations due to material, lamination stacking errors, etc, and may be 
further increased by saturation caused by the overdrive condition itself 
or an unbalance of dc between the two halves of a push-pull circuit. The 
values of peak current and peak voltage involved may approach those of 
an inductive switching circuit and shall be examined against the 
semiconductor device maker's absolute limiting ratings. 

7.11.3 In multi-stage circuits, care should be taken that the adverse 
effects of overdrive or underdrive are not propagated from stage to 
stage. Where this cannot be avoided by design, particular care is 
necessary during setting-up and adjustment ( see 7.18 ). 

7.12 Conditions Not Envisaged by the Device Manufacturer 

7.12.1 The manufacturer shoxild be consulted before any device is put 
into service under conditions widely different from those under which 
the manufacturer intends it to operate and for which he characterises 

21 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

it on its data sheet. This is particularly important in the case of special 
purpose devices. 

7. 12.2 There are two reasons for caution in this respect. The first 
concerns the limiting ratings of the device; warning has already been 
given of the dangers of extrapolation and interpolation of these. The 
other reason is that the characteristics of the device may have a very 
wide spread under conditions outside the range involved in the 
intended appHcation; the manufacturer may deliberately relax his 
control on these ^unnecessary* regions of the device characteristics in 
order to achieve closer or more economic control in the regions that are 
important in the application for which the device is intended. 

7.13 Design Considerations with Regard to the Setting-Up and 
Adjustment of Equipment 

7.18.1 If damage during setting-up and adjustment is to be avoided, 
the designer shall consider the requirements of these operations all 
through the design procedure, and not merely as an after thought. The 
following are some of the design points that are particularly important 
in equipment using semiconductor devices: 

a) Design should, wherever possible, be such that all semiconductor 
devices remain within their limiting ratings for all combinations 
of settings (correct and incorrect) of all adjustments, preset or 
otherwise. Where this cannot be achieved directly in the basic 
circuit, suitable protective devices ( see 12 ) should be fitted in 
supply leads or elsewhere as appropriate. 

b) Plug-in units intended for maintenance of continuously running 
equipment shall be designed so that damaging surges do not 
occur when a unit is connected. (Note here that the order in which 
the individual contacts of a plug and socket make contact on 
insertion or break contact on withdrawal is not normally 
controlled, and may well vary on different occasions of use.) 

c) Wherever possible, the necessary faciUties should be designed 
into the equipment so that all routine setting up and adjustment 
can be done without the use of temporary test connections. Where 
these cannot be avoided, proper test access points should be 
provided, so as to minimize the risk of accidental electrical or 
mechanical damage when applying test probes or clips. 

7.13.2 In all cases, but particularly where incorrect procedure might 
result in device ratings being exceeded, the provision of clear 
instructions for correct and safe setting-up and adjustment should be 
regarded as an essential part of the design work. The instructions 
should include mention of all the precautions needed to minimize the 
risk of damage. Some of these are: 

a) checking supply voltage and polarity or phase rotation before 
connecting; 

22 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

b) connecting (and disconnecting) them various inputs, outputs, 
controls and supplies in the right sequence; 

c) checking that any cooling fan or pump motors are rotating in the 
correct direction before applying the load; 

d) performing all the steps of the setting-up and adjusting sequence 
in the order given, not altering the order or omitting any steps 
unless this is specifically permitted by the instructions (this 
appUes especially to RF power amplifiers, and to all forms of 
high-power equipment); and 

e) taking great care when applying or removing temporary test 
connections (probes or cUps), and whenever possible switching off 
the equipment and allowing stored energy in capacitors and 
inductors to be dissipated before applying or removing such 
connections. 

8. MECHANICAL CONSIDERATIONS 

8.1 Outline Drawings — The nature of the applications and the 
power ratings of semiconductor devices necessitates a wide variety of 
encapsulations and outUnes. In order to achieve some degree of 
standardization and to facilitate the interchangeability of similar 
t5rpe8 made by diflferent manufacturers, the outUne drawings are given 
in various parts of IS : 5000*. 

Note — A list of outline drawings so far prepared is given in Appendix B. These 
drawings are drawn in accordance with IS: 5001-19691. 

8.2 Mechanical Data — To reduce to a minimum the risk of causing 
mechanical damage to semiconductor devices during installation, due 
account shall be taken of the limiting stresses that may be applied to 
devices. The necessary information should be given by manufacturers 
in their data sheet for each device the information being in the form of 
mechanical data as specified in IS : 3700 (Part I)-1966t. 

8.3 Soldering and Welding — Devices should not be soldered or 
welded at any point except where so intended by the manufacturer. 
For thermal considerations regarding soldering and welding, see 11. 

8.4 Leads and Seals 

8.4.1 The maximum force that may be applied to a lead is related not 
only to the tensile strength of the lead material but also to the 
maximum stress that may safely be applied to the seal through which 
the lead or leads pass. Thus in addition to the possibility of breaking 
the lead, there is a risk that the seal itself may be deformed. Such 
deformation may impair the hermetic sealing properties of the seal 



^Dimensions of semiconductor devices. 

fOuide for preparation of drawings of semiconductor devices. 

(Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part I General. 

23 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

and the electrical characteristics of the device may thereby be 
adversely affected although under normal environmental conditions 
this may not become apparent for some time. 

8.4.2 The manufacturer will normally state the length from the seal, over 
which bending of the leads is not recommended. Some short, thick leads 
are not intended to be bent at all and in case of doubt the manufacturers 
should be consulted. When bending leads, the bending radius should be 
made as large as possible and should not be less than twice the nominal 
lead wire diameter. Sharp-edged bending tools should be avoided. 

8.4.8 To avoid bending the leads too close to the seal, a mounting pad 
may be used to increase the effective thickness of a printed wiring 
board, but care should be taken to avoid creating a trap for moisture or 
for soldering flux. 

8.4.4 Where a device is mounted between two *fixed* pillars or tags, with 
the lead wires substantially straight and collinear, damaging forces can 
be exerted as a result of differential thermal expansion or as a result of 
warping of the base supporting the pillars. In all such cases at least one 
lead should be deliberately bent or looped to allow some freedom. 

8.4.6 Similar considerations will apply where more than two leads are 
involved. 

8.6 Mounting Conditions 

8.6.1 The conditions of mounting will depend upon the type of device. 
It is important to follow precisely any requirement with respect to 
mounting that may be specified by the manvifacturer, since a 
departure from his recommendations can take the device outside its 
ratings, with possible damage to the device. 

8.6.2 Due regard should be given to the contact potentials that can 
develop between different materials, particularly under conditions of 
high humidity and temperature. These potentials can result in actual 
corrosion of the metal with time, and may lead to the ultimate failure of 
the device. The combination of a silver or nickel finished device with an 
aluminium cooling fin is particularly bad from this point of view. The risk 
of corrosion under these conditions can be greatly reduced by the correct 
use of aluminium jointing compound followed by a silicone grease. 

8.6.3 As device temperatures shall not exceed the rated safe values, 
the devices shall not be mounted near parts radiating heat, such as 
mains transformers, electron tubes, valves, high load resistances, etc. 

8.6.4 Information on the design of heat sinks for conduction-cooled 
devices is given in 9.6 to 9.7. 

24 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

8.6 Stud-mounted Devices 

8.6.1 For stud-mounted devices the manufacturer will normally quote 
both minimum and maximum ratings for mounting torque. 

8.6.1.1 The minimum torque is governed by thermal considerations. It 
is imperative that each device is mounted so that sufficient pressure 
exists between the mounting base and the heat sink to permit satisfactory 
heat transfer away from the device. If the heat transfer is insufficient, 
the device may be taken outside its electrical and temperature ratings 
with consequential permanent damage to the device. 

8.6.1.2 The maximum torque is governed by mechanical 
considerations. If the maximum value is exceeded, the device and/or 
the heat sink may be deformed thereby leading to impaired heat 
transfer and possible destruction of the device. In addition excess 
torque may damage the stud, for example, by stripping the threads. 

8.6.1.3 To eliminate the risk of exceeding the maximum specified 
torque, the use of a torque wrench is recommended. The use of phers 
for holding devices or nuts during the tightening operation cannot be 
too strongly deprecated. 

8.6.2 It should be noted that the manufacturer will state the mounting 
torque under specified conditions, and different values may apply if these 
specified conditions are varied. Thus, if the mounting torque is specified 
for dry threads, a different value will apply if the threads are greased. 

8.6.8 Tapped heat sinks should be machined to provide a mounting 
surface perpendicular to the axis of the mounting hole. The thread of 
the stud should already be undercut to allow the heat transfer surfaces 
to make good contact, but if this is not so, a chamfer just adequate to 
achieve this should be provided. 

8.6.4 When the stud is passed through a clearance hole, a packing 
washer may be necessary between the heat sink and the fixing nut. 
Neither clearance holes nor chamfers should be made larger than 
strictly necessary or heat flow will be impaired. 

8.7 Flat Base Devices 

8.7.1 Any restrictions given by the manufacturer with regard to the 
mounting conditions for these devices should be closely followed. These 
may, for example, take the form of Umiting values of torque for the 
screws used for mounting the device to the heat sink. 

8.7.2 Where insulating bushes and/or washers are used, care should be 
taken that they are the correct size and are correctly assembled so as 
to secure the device firmly with good electrical and thermal contact. 

8.7.3 With a flat base device secured by screws, a suitable spring 
washer shovdd be used to retain electrical contact between the screw 
and the device. 

25 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

8.8 Shrinkage of Insulating Materials — If a stud mounting device 
is fixed to a material that is liable to shrink or deform under the 
pressure exerted by the fixing nut, any tag or connection under the nut 
will then become loose and may cause an open circuit. To overcome 
this, the use of two nuts with the tag or connection between the 
tightened nuts is recommended. Any loosening of the device, on its 
mounting material will then not cause an open-circuited connection. 

8.9 Encapsulation of Assemblies — When assembUes containing 
semiconductor devices are potted, precautions should be taken to 
ensure that the devices are not damaged by the stresses caused by 
shrinkage of the potting compound. The advice of the manufacturers of 
the devices and of the compound should be sought. 

9. THERMAL CONSIDERATIONS 

9.1 General 

9.1.1 The power dissipated within a semiconductor device cause a rise 
in the junction temperature. The junction temperature should be 
limited to a safe value so that the device is not damaged and has a long 
operating life. Manufacturers* data sheets give maximum power 
ratings for a range of ambient or coolant or case temperatures, 
depending upon the application, which ensure that the specified 
maximum junction temperature is not exceeded. 

9.1.2 The temperature of the junction ( 7j ) is determined by the 
electrical power ( P) dissipated at the junction, the thermal resistance 
(analogous to electrical resistance) from the junction to its surrounding 
( ifthJA ) ^^d ^^® ambient temperature ( T^mh )• These are related by 
the formula: 

Note — This equation for thermal resistance holds good only for steady state 
conditions and not for pulsed application. 

9.1.3 Thermal resistance of the device depends on its encapsulation, 
method of mounting, and the type of cooUng provided. For safe 
operation, this junction temperature should not be exceeded beyond 
the specified maximum limits; the thermal resistance should therefore 
be kept low by appropriate cooling, mounting, etc. 

9.2 Natural Cooled (Ambient Rated) Devices — The electrical 
ratings and characteristics for these devices [see 4.2 and 4.2.1 of 
IS: 3700 (Part I)- 1966*] are specified in terms of the ambient 
temperature at a specified reference point near the device. 



^Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices. Part I General. 

26 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

9.8 Forced Circulation Cooled Devices — The electrical ratings 
and characteristics for these devices [see 4.2 and 4.2.1 of IS : 3700 
(Part I)- 1966* ] are quoted for specified cooling conditions. These 
conditions are determined by the cooling fluid (for example, air or oil), 
the temperatiire of the cooling fluid, the device terminations, the flow 
of the cooling fluid, the orientation of the device and its support, the 
dimensions of the connections to the device and the surrounding 
surface conditions. For each individual device type, the manufacturer 
will state ambient cooling conditions for which the electrical ratings 
apply. Some devices may be given ratings for more than one set of 
ambient conditions. As an example, for a power rectifier stack 
intended for oil cooUng, the manufacturer will specify the orientation 
of the fins, the t3rpe of oil and the oil temperatiire beneath the stack. 
The same stack could be given electrical ratings relating to forced-air 
cooUng. In this case, the manufacturer will specify the rate of flow of 
cooUng air at a given pressure and inlet temperature. 

9.3.1 Coolant Failure — Particularly where forced cooling is used it may 
be necessary to incorporate some form of protective arrangement to 
protect the semiconductor device firom over-temperature arising from a 
reduction in flow of heat or rise in temperature of the cooUng medium. 

9.4 Conduction Cooled (Case Rated) Devices — The electrical 
ratings for these devices are quoted for a specified temperature of a 
defined reference point, either on the case of the device or on the 
surface on which it is mounted. 

9.4.1 This type of device is normally mounted on some form of cooling 
fin (heat sink), and, since it is most important to provide good thermal 
contact between the device and its heat sink care should be taken to 
ensure that the mating surface of the heat sink is clean, smooth and 
free from burrs. 

9.6 Precautions in Mounting Devices on Heat Sinks — Some 
manufacturers recommend that the device mounting base should be 
smeared with a specified inert compound before mounting, in order to 
minimize the effects of small air gaps caused by any surface 
irregularities. Hieh thermal conductivity silicone grease is one example 
of this type of compound. Alternatively a manufacturer may 
recommend the insertion of a soft metal washer between the device and 
the heat sink, again with the object of improving the transfer of heat 
from the device to the heat sink. Such a washer should never be used 
more than once, since on compression it will work harden and will not 
subsequently adopt, the contours of the device and heat sink accurately. 

9.6 Special Precautions for Devices Connected in Parallel (or 
Series) 

9.6.1 If devices connected in parallel are not adequately bonded 
together thermally, a form of current hogging may occur leading to 



^Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part I General. 

27 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 

thermal instability. This may result in catastrophic failure. If it does 
not, the effect may pass unnoticed but reliability will be impaired by 
the over-heating of individual devices. 

9.6.2 Devices connected in parallel should therefore be thermally 
bonded by being mounted close together on the same heat sink. Where 
this is impracticable the cooling requirements shall take into account 
the maximum possible dissipation of each device under unbalanced 
conditions. 

9.6.3 Under certain conditions a similar effect could occur when 
devices are connected in series. 

9.7 Thermal Effects in Encapsulated Assemblies 

9.7.1 Where devices are potted, the thermal resistance may be 
increased or decreased according to the nature of the potting 
compound. Because of the difficulty of measuring temperature within 
an encapsulated assembly, care should be taken at the design stage to 
avoid hot spots in the vicinity of semiconductor devices. 

9.7.2 Care should also be taken to avoid excessive temperature in the 
interior of the assembly during the potting process since heat is 
released during the setting of many potting compounds. 

9.7.3 Before potting with other components, it shall be ascertained 
from the manufacturer whether the potting temperatures will be 
injurious to the devices. 

10. ENVIRONMENTAL AND INSTALLATION 
CONSIDERATIONS 

10.1 Effects of Atmosphere 

10.1.1 Semiconductor devices are normally designed to be resistant to 
atmospheric conditions in that under normal operating conditions: 

a) their external parts are inherently resistant to fungus growth; and 

b) their external materials do not bUster, crack, soften or flow. 

10.1.2 To achieve this th^ metals used for leads, cases and studs are of 
corrosion resistant type, or plated or treated to resist corrosion. The 
device casing is hermetically sealed against the entry of moisture or 
impurities from its surroundings. 

10.1.3 Where a device has to be used in excessively humid or corrosive 
atmospheres, consult the manufacturer as to its suitability for the 
extreme conditions likely to be encountered. 

10.1.4 Hiunidity effects can be accelerated by moisture-traps, that is 
pockets of air not free to circulate. Moisture-traps can also act as flux trap 
during soldering operations and can thus lead to severe corrosion and 

28 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

leakage Moisture-traps are particularly likely with devices mounted 
close to printed wiring boards or with certain tjrpes of mounting pads. 

10.1.5 Accelerated corrosion can arise in humid atmospheres due to 
contact potentials between dissimilar metals. As far as possible ensure 
that devices are not mounted so as to give rise to this possibility. In 
particular, ensure that any mechanical mounting or cooling clip does 
not give rise to undue contact potential differences ( see 8.6 ). 

10.2 Effects of Visible, Ultra-Violet, and Infra-Red Radiation — 

The encapsulation of some devices may be insufficiently Ught-tight to 
eliminate unwanted photoelectric effects. With metal can devices, the 
only entry point for Ught is normally through the glass-to-metal seals, 
and if the device is likely to be operated in a high Ught level the device 
should be mounted so that the glass is covered. The same procedure 
appUes where significant amounts of ultra-violet or infra-red 
radiations are likely to fall on the device. In case of doubt the 
manufacturer should be consulted. 

10.3 Effects of High-Energy Radiation — Semiconductor devices 
are liable to degradation of characteristics if used in substantial fields 
of X-rays, neutrons, or other high-energy radiation. Where it is 
proposed to use devices in such circumstances, the manufacturer 
should be consulted, since the resistance to high-energy radiation 
depends on the structure of device. 

10.4 Effects of Vibration and Shock — Semiconductor devices, 
although generally mechanically rugged, can still be damaged by 
shock, vibration or acceleration. Serious damage may be caused by 
dropping a device on a hard surface. They should therefore be so 
mounted that they will not be subjected to conditions beyond their 
ratings, and because of the large number of unknown quantities 
involved, a generous Ignorance factor* should be allowed. 

10.4.1 There are three basic methods of mounting; dependent on both 
the environment and the device, any one of these may be the most 
suitable. They are: 

a) the body of the device rigidly clamped to the equipment structure, 

b) the body of the device resiUently supported, and 

c) support by electrical connections only. 

10.4.1.1 In all cases, but particularly in (b) and (c), care should be 
taken that vibration cannot cause fatigue and consequent failure of the 
electrical connections. 

10.4.2 In any case where extreme conditions are expected, the device 
manufacturer should be consiilted. 

10.6 Effect of Barometric Pressure — Reduced barometric pressure 
may necessitate the derating of devices. The internal characteristics of 

29 



IS : 6469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

devices are not significantly affected by reduced pressure, but voltage 
derating may be necessary to avoid flashover or corona discharge and 
dissipation. Derating may become necessary because of impaired cooling. 

10.6 Storage and Transport — In storage or transport, the normal 
precautions used with small electronic components should always be 
exercised and, in particular, devices should not be subjected to 
prolonged heat as for example storing near or on top of radiators. 
Maximum and minimum storage temperatures arc normally given by 
the device manufacturer. 

11. PRECAUTIONS DURING ASSEMBLY OF EQUIPMENT 

11.0 General — If the full intended reUability of equipment using 
semi-conductor devices is to be achieved in service, it is essential to use 
correct assembly techniques. The use of incorrect techniques, either 
carelessly of unwittingly, may result in damage that is not 
immediately apparent but that shortens the life of the device. Some of 
the points that merit specific attention are described in 11.1 to 11.7. 

11.1 Leads — Lead wires should not be overstressed, or bent too near 
the seal ( see also 8.4 ). 

11.1.1 It should also be noted that when leads, particularly those 
above about 0.6 mm diameter, are cut to length using conventional 
type side cutters or pUers it is possible to induce a considerable shock 
wave into the device through the lead wire at the instant of cutting. 
Cases have arisen where this shock wave has been sufficient to crack 
the glass-to-metal seal. It is recommended that the amount of shock 
reaching the seal be minimized by careful choice of the method of 
cutting and tools used. 

11.2 Cooling Fins — Fitting device to cooling fins (heat sinks) 
requires care to ensure adequate thermal contact without excessive 
stress ( see 8.6, 8.7 and 9.4 ). 

11.3 Soldering 

11.3.1 For some tjrpes of device a heat shunt should be used during 
soldering operations. For other t3rpes it may be permissible to dispense 
with the heat shunt, provided that the temperature/time cycle is 
adequately controlled. 

11.5.2 Where a device is soldered into circuit by hand, soldering 
operation should be completed as quickly as possible. A clean, hot, 
well-tinned soldering iron and good quaUty solder of appropriate alloy 
with a non activated resin core should be used. The device leads should 
not be cut any shorter than necessary. Even where a heat shunt is not 
essential, for maximum protection, the lead being soldered should be 
held with a pair of pliers between point where the heat is applied and 
the body of the device. 

30 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

11.3.3 The use of a non-earthed electric soldering iron can cause 
serious damage. The insvilation between heater and bit may allow a 
significant leakage current to flow when the iron is hot. With some 
designs of iron, a specific earth connection to the actual metal of the bit 
itself is advisable since corrosion may affect the reliability of the 
contact between the bit and the normally-earthed supporting stem. In 
working with specially-sensitive device it may be desirable to make the 
earth connection of the soldering iron to the earthed framework of the 
equipment being assembled, to avoid the ask of possible inter 'earth' 
transient voltages appearing between iron and equipment. 

11.3.4 The soldering iron of the gun type with directly heated bits 
should not be used. Not only is the voltage between different parts of 
the bit sufficient to cause damage on accidental contact, but the heavy 
current may cause damage by induction. 

11.3.5 It should be noted that a design that is intended for hand-soldering 
and is satisfactory for this may not be satisfactory for machine soldering 
and vice-versa and an approved method of soldering for any given 
assembly should not be changed without due consideration. The factors 
involved include any direct rating Umitations on the temperature/time 
cycle and any indirect effects of differential thermal expansion (the latter 
can be particularly severe in devices with more than three leads). 

11.3.6 When semiconductor devices are soldered to a printed wiring 
board by a process involving surface contact with a solder wave or the 
edge of a wire, thermal conditions are rather more severe than for 
hand holdering. This is because: 

a) all leads of a small device are heated simultaneously, 

b) adjacent areas of the board are equally hot so that cooUng, and is 
slow, and 

c) radiant heat firom the solder pot further delays cooling. 

11.3.7 Air blast cooUng is generally advantageous. Mounting pads can 
be used to increase the effective lead length on critical devices and so 
reduce the amount of heat transferred ( see 10.1 ). 

11.3.8 No soldering shall be done when the device is live or in circuit 
under operating conditions. 

11.3.9 Most of the requirements specified in 11.3.2 to 11.3.7 may also 
Apply to dip soldering but, in particular, the reciprocating mechanism 
which withdraws the board from the svirface of the bath should have a 
quick retiu'n motion to minimize retardation of cooling by radiant heat. 

11.3.9.1 If dip soldering for printed circuit is employed, the distance 
between the surface of the solder bath and the step press of the devices 
like transistors, shall not be less than 5 mm. Normally a dip of three 

31 



IS : S469 (Part I) - 1969 

seconds is sufficient to ensure satisfactory connection provided the 
solder point has been properly prepared beforehand. The dip shall last 
maximiun of five seconds, assuming a solder bath temperature 
between 230'* to 250**C. Forced air cooling of the entire unit shall bring 
down its temperature to ambient within about 10 seconds. 

1 1.3. 10 Beware of flux residues that may become trapped after soldering 
particularly with machine soldering where active fluxes are used. 

11.3.11 Some semiconductor devices may show increased catastrophic 
failure rates, perhaps intermittently, if ultrasonic agitation of the 
solder bath is used. The effect may vary fi:om batch to batch of devices. 

11.4 Cleaning — When cleaning semiconductor devices or assembUes 
containing them, one should be beware of the possible damaging 
effects of any solvents used. Even where the solvents cause no 
fundamental damage to a device, they may remove the manufactiirer*s 
markings and thus give rise to practical difficulties of type or polarity 
identification; these may make subsequent maintenance operations 
difficult. The manufacturer's recommendations should therefore be 
obtained before solvents are used. This is especially important where 
devices encapsulated in plastics are used. It may be noted that similar 
devices from different manufacturers may differ in their behavious 
towards any given solvent. 

11.4.1 The device manufacturer should be consulted before subjecting 
device to any form of ultrasonic cleaning process. 

11.6 Surface Damage — Where corrosion resistance is secured by a 
surface finish, such as solder, gold plating, or paint, one should be 
beware of accidental damage to the finish. The use of sharp-edged tools 
for lead forming can give rise to trouble in this way ( see also 8.4 ). 

11.6 Magnetic Fields — Semiconductor devices should not be 
mounted too near strong magnets, such as transformers or 
loudspeakers. Magnetic materials may be used in the fabrication of a 
device and excessive magnetic fields can give rise to mechanical 
distortion and possible damage. When ac is involved the resultant 
vibration can give rise to fatigue effects, particularly if mechanical 
resonance occurs as may happen with internal leads. 

11.7 Live Cases — The metal cases of devices which are electrically 
connected internally to one of the device electrodes should be electrically 
insulated. 

11.7.1 This warning appUes to any form of metal ase devices. 

12. PRECAUTIONS DURING SETTING-UP, ADJUSTMENT, 
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 

12.1 If the intended rehability of equipment using semiconductor device 
is to be achieved in service, it is essential to take certain precautions 

32 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 | 

diiring. The setting-up, adjustment, operation, and maintenance of the 
equipment. The designer's instructions (see 7. IS) should be closely 
followed. Normal food engineering practice should be followed in cases 
not specifically covered by the designer's instructions. Some of the points 
that merit specific attention are mentioned in 12.2 to 12.6. 

12.2 Because of the low thermal capacities of semiconductor devices, 
damage may be caused by overloads of relatively short duration. Care 
should be taken to ensure that connections and polarities are correct 
before switching in supplies. The sequence of supply switching may be 
important. 

12.2.1 Neither the devices nor the associated components should be 
inserted or removed with the power supplies switched on. 

12.3 Care is also necessary when making circuit adjustments; for 
example, an accidental short circuit fi'om the base of a transistor to the 
power supply or across an emitter resistor may cause sufficient current 
to flow to damage the transistor. Test probes used in checking circuit 
conditions should always be insulated. Temporary connections should 
be secured. 

12.4 Protective Devices — Adequate protection against damages of 
power devices against accidental overload or short circuit shall be 
provided. In some cases slow response time of a fuse may fail to 
provide the necessary safeguard, in such events quick acting tripping 
devices shall be used. 

12.4.1 When using relays, a diode may be used in the circuit to prevent 
transistor getting damaged by the induced voltages. 

12.6 Great care shall be taken when checking the insulation of an 
equipment or of a complete installation to prevent the high voltage 
from an insulation testing equipment being appUed directly (or 
indirectly by leakage, capacity or inductive coupling) to semiconductor 
devices in such a way that it may cause damage. 

12.6.1 Similar considerations apply to earth continuity testing. 
13. PRECAUTIONS DURING TESTING OF DEVICES 

13.1 It is extremely easy to damage devices by over-dissipation during 
tests and great care shall be taken to ensure that this does not occur. 
In particular, the measixrement of breakdown voltage should not be 
attempted without a full appreciation of the problems involved. 

13.2 It is essential to check that any test equipment employed is 
capable of producing sufficiently accurate results under the measuring 
conditions required. This particularly applies to 'transistor tests'. 

33 



IS : 5469 (Part I) - 1969 

APPENDIX A 

{Clause 5,1A) 

INDIAN STANDARDS ON ESSENTIAL RATINGS 

AND CHARACTERISTICS OF SEMICONDUCTOR 

DEVICES 

18:3700 (Part I)- 1966 Essential ratings and characteristics of 

semiconductor devices: Part I General 
IS : 3700 (Part II)- 1967 Essential ratings and characteristics of semi- 
conductor devices: Part II Low power semiconductor signal diodes 
IS : 3700 (Part III)-I967 Essential ratings and characteristics of 

semiconductor devices: Part III Rectifier diodes 
IS : 3700 (Part IV)- 1968 Essential ratings and characteristics of 

semiconductor devices: Part IV Low power small signal transistors 
18:3700 (Part V)- 1968 Essential ratings and characteristics of 

semiconductor devices: Part V Power transistors 
18:3700 (Part VI)- 1968 Essential ratings and characteristics of 

semiconductor devices: Part VI Switching transistors 
*IS:3790 (Part VII)- 1970 Essential ratings and characteristics of 

semiconductor devices: Part VII Reverse blocking triode thyristors 
*I8:3700 (Part VIII)- 1970 Essential ratings and characteristics of 

semiconductor devices: Part VIII Voltage regulator and voltage 

reference diodes 

APPENDIX B 

(Clause 8.1) 

OUTLINE DRAWINGS ON SEMICONDUCTOR 
DEVICES 

IS : 5000 (GDI to OD9)-1969 Dimensions of semiconductor devices 

device outlines (GDI to GD9) 
IS : 5000 (GBl to GB7)-1969 Dimensions of semiconductor devices 

base outlines (GBl to GB7) 
IS : 5000 (GCl to GC5)-1969 Dimensions of semiconductor devices case 

outlines (GCl to GC5) 
IS : 5001-1969 Guide for the preparation of drawings of semiconductor 

devices 



*Under print. 

34 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quahty certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyrights 

BIS has the copyright of all its pubHcations. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 

reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates 

that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for 

revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest 

amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards : Monthly 

Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed by Technical Committee : ETDC 40 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 

Amd. No. 1 



Date of Issue 



October 1972 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002. 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELffl 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700064 

Northern : SCO 335336. Sector 34.A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road. CHENNAI 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR NALAGARH. PATNA PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISHAKHAPATNAM 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all ofSces) 

Telephone 

323 76 17 
323 38 41 

1337 84 99,337 86 61 
1 337 86 26, 337 91 20 

J 60 38 43 
I 60 20 25 

I 236 02 16, 236 04 42 
1 236 16 19, 236 23 16 

1 832 92 96, 832 78 68 
1 832 78 91, 832 78 92 



