IS 7323 : 1994 ( Reaffirmed 1999 ) w&T mm

WTWi?

%T

%T$ (
PfJFTT

+I

@%WJT

Whi?
)

f&T7

Indian Standard

OPERATIONOFRESERVOIRS

-GUIDELINES

( First Revision )

UDC

627-S l-004

@ BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

November 1994

Price Group 7

Reservoirs

Sectional Committee,

RVD 4

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Reservoirs Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. power generation, Water, a major natural resource, is used for multiple uses as irrigation, navigation, etc, besides industrial and domestic needs. The main source of availability of water is the surface run-off in the form of rivers. The flow in the river changes seasonally and from year to year, due to temporal and spatial variation in precipitation. Thus, the water available abundantly during monsoon season, becomes scarce durin.2 the non-monsoon season, when it is most needed. The traditional method followed commonly for meeting the needs of water during the The excess water during the scarce period is construction of storage reservoir on river course. monsoon season is stored in such reservoirs for eventual use in lean period. Construction of storages will also help in control of flood, as well as generation of electric power. To meet the objective set forth in planning a reservoir or a group of reservoirs and to achieve maximum benefits out of the storage created, it is imperative to evolve guidelines for operation of reservoirs. Without proper regulation schedules, the reservoir may not meet the full objective for which it was planned and may also pose danger to the structure itself. Control of flood is better achieved if the reservoir level is kept low in the early stages of the monsoon season. However, at a later stage, if the anticipated inflows do not result, the reservoir may not get filled up adequately for meeting the various water demands. On the other hand, if the reservoir is filled up to FRL in the early stages of monsoon, to avoid the risk of reservoir remaining unfilled at later stage, there may be problem of accommodating high floods occurring at later stage. In some cases while planning reservoirs, social and other considerations occasionally result in adoption of a plan that may not be economically the best. Considering all these issues, it is proposed to lay down general guidelines for regulation of reservoirs, though it may not be possible to cover all types of cases. This Indian Standard was first published in 1974. Since then considerable developments in the techniques of reservoir operations have taken place. The concept of operation of reservoir considering it as a single entity has given way to the concept of integrated operation of reservoirs. Application of system engineering methods, such as mathematical optimisation and simulation are now being increasingly used for defining, evaluation and selection of reservoir operation policies. Considerable documentations on the subject of system analysis techniques in water resources planning are also available. The present revision has been taken up to incorporate all such latest techniques.

IS 7323: 1994

Indian Standard

OPERATIONOFRESERVOIRS
1 SCOPE
standard provides some important basic guidelines for the operation of reservoirs in order to achieve maximum benefits consistent with their physical characteristics and functions for which they are planned and constructed. 1.2 These guidelines are broad generalisation only and are indicative in nature. For actual operation of reservoir or a system of reservoirs, individual regulation schedules are required to after considering all critical be formulated, factors involved. 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, ing definitions shall apply. 2.1 Carry Over Storage Storage left over in a reservoir at the end of the depletion period of a year, which is available for use in later years. This storage is also called `Over Year Storage'. 2.2 Conservation Storage a reservoir for irrigation, as use, municipal conserpower supply, 2.10 Induced the follow-

-GUIDELINES

( First Revision )
2.6 Dry ( Bad ) Year A year during which the precipitation or stream flow is less than that in the normal year. 2.7 Filling Period

1.1 This

The period during which inflow into the reservoir is likely to be more than the water demand and the surplus flow is impounded to build up the storage. 2.8 Flood Control Storage Storage space provided in the reservoir for storing flood water temporarily in order to reduce peak discharge and to minimize flooding of downstream locations. 2.9 Full Reservoir Level ( FRL ) The highest reservoir level which can be maintained without spillway discharge or without passing water through under sluices. This level is also called highest controlled water level'. Surcharge Envelope Curve

Water impounded in such vational uses generation, industrial etc. 2.3 Dead Storage

Storage below the lowest outlet level of a reservoir, which is not susceptible to release by usual outlet means. 2.4 Depletion Period

This is a curve representing the maximum water level that would be allowed in a reservoir, at different rates of spillway discharges, when operating under the induced surcharge plan. This curve is drawn from a point, corresponding to the maximum permissible flood control release at the FRL, to a point corresponding to the elevation when all spillway gates are fully opened. 2.11 Induced Surcharge Storage

The period during which available storage in the reservoir is released or depleted for meeting various water demands. This period lies outside the filling period of a year. 2.5 Design Flood/Reservoir Design Flood

The magnitude of flood adopted for design purpose is called design flood. It may be the probable maximum flood ( PMF ) or the standard project flood ( SPF ) or a flood corresponding to some desired frequency of occurrence, depending on the type of structure and the extent of calculated ri'sk the designer is prepared to accept.

The storage between the full reservoir level ( FRL ) and the maximum water level ( MWL ) of a reservoir, which may be induced by regulating the outflow rates, after the reservoir is filled up to the FRL. 2.12 Live Storage Storage capacity between the lowest outlet level of reservoir or minimum drawdown level ( MDDL ) to the highest controlled water level or full reservoir level ( FRL ). This storage is also called `Live Capacity'.

IS 7323 : 1994 2.13 Maximum Water Level ( MWL ) The level likely to be attained in a reservoir at the dam face, while negotiating the adopted design flood. The level is also called `Highest flood level', <Spillway design flood level' or cMaximum water surface elevation'. 2.14 Minimum Draw-Down Level ( MDDL ) It is the lowest level up to which the reservoir may be depleted for meeting various needs. Ln power projects, releases are allowable up to MDDL only instead of dead storage level, so as to maintain the minimum head required for power generation. 2.15 Normal ( Average ) Year A year during which the precipitation or stream flow are within + 20 percent of the long period average value. 2.16 Reservoir Routing Flood routing is a process of determining theoretically the outflow pattern from reservoirs, for any given pattern of inflow, storage and tail water condition. 2.17 Rule Curve Rule curve is the target level planned to be different achieved in a reservoir, under conditions of probabilities of intlows and/or demands, during various time period in a year. 2.18 Wet ( Good ) Year A year during which the precipitation or stream flow is more than that in the normal year. 3 CLASSIFICATION OF RESERVOIRS reservoirs are be operated in an integrated manner for optimum utilisation of the water resources of the river system. 4 PRINCIPLES RESERVOIRS OF OPERATION OF princi-

4.1 Following are some of the common ples of reservoir operation.
4.1.1 Siylgle Purpose Reservoirs

Flood control - Operation of flood a> reservoirs is primarily governed

control by the available flood storage capacity, discharge capacity of outlets, their location and nature of damage centres to be protected, flood characteristics, ability and accuracy of flood/storm forecast and size of the uncontrolled drainage area. A regulation plan to cover all the complicated situations may be difficult to evolve, but generally it should be possible according to one of the following principles:

1) EfSective

For the purpose of regulation, classified into following types: a) Single Purpose Reservoirs

Operation under this principle aims at reducing flood damages of the locations to be protected to the maximum extent possible, by effective use of flood control storage capacity available at the time of each flood event. Since the release under this plan would obviously be lower than those required for controlling the reservoir design flood, there is distinct possibility of having a portion of the flood control space occupied during the occurrence of a subsequent heavy flood. In order to reduce this element of risk, maintenance of an adequate network of flood forecasting stations both in the upstream and downstream areaa would be absolutely necessary.

storage -

use of

availabIe flood control

These reservoirs are developed to serve only one purpose, which may be flood control or any of the conservation uses such as irrigation, power generation, navigation, industrial use, municipal water supply, etc. b) Multi-purpose Reservoirs These reservoirs are developed to serve more than one purpose which may be a combination of any of the conservation uses with or without flood control. c) System of Reservoirs These consist of a group multiple purpose reservoirs, of single/ which may 2

2) Control qf reservoir design flood According to this principle, releases from flood control reservoirs operated on this concept are made on the same hypothesis as adopted for controlling the reservoir design flood, that is the full storage capacity would be utilized only when the flood develops into the reservoir design flood. However, as the design flood is usually an extreme event, regulation of minor and major floods, which occur more often is less satisfactory when this method is applied. 3) Combination of principIes (1) and (2)In this method, a combination of the

IS 1323 principles (1) and (2) is followed. The principle ( 1 ) is followed for the lower portion of the flood the maximum to achieve reserve benefits by controlling the earlier part of the flood. Thereafter releases are made as scheduled for the reservoir design flood as in principle ( 2 ). In most cases this plan will result in the best overall regulation, as it combines the good points of both the methods. 4) Flood control in emergencies -- It is advisable to prepare an emergency release schedule that uses information immediately on reservoir data Such available to operator. the schedule should be available with the operator to enable him to comply with necessary precautions under extreme flood conditions. b) Conservation -- Reservoirs meant for augmentation of supplies during lean period should usually be operated to fill as early as possible during filling period, while meeting the requirements. All .water in excess of the requirements of the filling period shall be impounded. No spilling of water over the spillway will normally be permitted until the FRL is reached. Should any flood occur when the reservoir is at or near the FRL, release of flood v;aters should be affected, so as not to exceed the discharge that would have occurred had there been no reservoir. In case the year happens to be dry, the draft for filling period should be curtailed by applying suitable factors. The depletion period should begin thereafter. However, in case the reservoir is planned with carry-over capacity, it is necessary to ensure that the regulation will provide the required carry-over capacity at the end of the depletion period. 4.1.2 Multi-purpose Reservoirs

:1994

h:Wl, is generally referred to as spill zone. This space is occupied mostly during high floods and the releases from this zone are trade-off between structural safety and downstream flood damages.

b) Flood

control zone - This is the storage space earmarked as temporary storage for absorbing high flows for allevating downstream flood damages. This should be space emptied as soon as possible to negotiate next flood event. - This used for conservation meeting various future zone is generally between storage level. storage space is of water for demands. This FRL and dead

c>Conservation zone

-- This 4 Buffer ZOHP

is the storage space above dead storage level which is used to satisfy only very essential water needs in case of extreme situation.

Dend storage e>

zone -- This is also called inactive zone. This is the lowest zone in which the storage is meant to absorb some of the sediments entering into the reservoir. The storage in this zone is not susceptible to release by the in-built outlet means. of operation of storage spaces

4.1.2.2 The general principles reservoirs with these multiple are described below:

4.1.2.1 Operation of a multi-purpose reservoir should be governed by the manner in which various uses of the reservoir have been combined. While operating the reservoirs to meet the demands of end users, the priorities for allocation may be used as a guideline. In general five basic zones of reservoir space may be used in operating a reservoir for various functions. Typical storage allocations for varrous uses are indicated in Fig. I. The various storage zones often identified are: a) Spill zone - Storage flood control zone space between above FRL the and 3

a) Separate allocation of capacities -- When separate allocations of capacity have been made for each of the conservational uses, in addition to that required for flood control, operation for each of the function shall follow the principles of respective functions. The storage available for flood control could, however, be utilised for generation of secondary power to the extent possible. Allocation of specific storage space to several purposes within the conservation zone may sometimes be impossible or very costly to provide water for the various purposes in the quantities needed and at the time they are needed.

b)

Joint use of storage space - In multipurpose reservoir where joint use of some of the storage space or storage water has been envisaged, becomes operation complicated due to competing and conflicting demands. While flood control requires low reservoir level, conservat.ion interests require as high a level as is attainable. Thus, the objectives of these functions are not compatible and a compromise will have to be effected in

IS 9323 : 1994

FIG. 1

RESERVOIR STORAGEALLOCATION ZONES

flood control operations by sacrificing the requirements of these functions. In some cases parts of the conservational storage space is utilized for flood moderation, during the earlier stages of the monsoon. This space has to be filled up for conservation purposes towards the end of monsoon progressively, as it might not be possible to fill up this space during the post-monsoon periods, when the flows are insufficient even to meet the current requirements. This will naturally involve some sacrifice of the flood control interests towards the end of the monsoon. concept of joint use of storage criteria to maximise space, with operational the complementary effects and to minimize the requires careful design. competitive effects Such concepts, if designed properly, are easier to manage and will provide better service for all requirements. With the advancement of system analysis techniques, it is easy. now to carefully design the joint use in a multt-purpose reservoir. 4.1.3 System of Reservoirs In
case of to adopt a strategy

reservoirs to achieve optimum utilisation of the water resources available and to benefit best out of the reservoir system.
4.1.3.1 In the

4.1.2.3 The

preparation of regulation plans for an integrated operation of system of principles applicable to separate reservoirs, units are first applied to the individual reservoirs. Modifications of schedules so developed should then be considered by working out alternative plans. In these studies several optimisation and simulation techniques may be with the application of extensively used computers in water resources development. The principle features usually considered for integrated operation of, reservoirs are given below:
Flood a> flood

system of reservoirs, it is necessary for integrated operation of
4

The basin-wise conditions are considered, rather than the condition of the individual subbasins. The occupancy of flood reserves in each of the reservoirs, distribution of releases among the reservoirs and bankfull stages at critical locations should be considered simultaneously. For instance, if a reduction in Joutflows is required, it should be made from the reservoir having the least capacity occupied or has the smaller flood run-off

control regulation -

IS 7323 : 1994
from its drainage area. If an increase in release is possible, it should be made from the reservoir where the percentage occupancy is the highest or relatively a higher of flood run-off is occurring. Higher releases from reservoirs receiving excessive flood run-off may be thus counter balanced, particularly in cases of isolated storms, by reducing releases from reservoirs receiving relatively less run-off. tions to be protected, operation under principle ( 1 ) of 4.1.1 ( a ) should consist of keeping the discharge at the damage centre within the highest permissible stage or to ensure only a minimum contribution from the controlled area when above this stage. Operation under this principle aims at reducing the damaging flood stages at the location to be protected to the maximum extent possible with the control storage flood capacity available at the time of each flood In order to accomplish this event. result, it is essential to have an accurate forecast of flood flows into the reservoir and the local inflows into the stream below it for a period of time sufficient to fill an empty reservoir. This is obviously an ideal case. It is difficult to forecast reliably and precisely in quantitative terms the rainfall. Thus, there is always the risk of facing difficulty in regulation of run-off from subsequent storms, In order to reduce this element of risk, maintenance of an adequate network of flood forecasting stations both in the upstream and downstream area of the project becomes absolutely necessary. To account for the uncertainly in forecasting the flows, the forecasted flows may be multiplied by a contingency factor for arriving at release decision. The contingency allowance should be greater than one for flood control and less than oue in case of conservation.

b)

regulation - The ctirrent Conservation water demands for various purposes, the storage in conservation available individual reservoirs and the distribution of releases among the reservoirs, should be considered to develop a co-ordinated plan to produce the optimum benefits and minimize water losses due to evaporation and transmission. OF RULE CURVES

5 PREPARATION

5.0 A rule curve is generally based on detailed sequential analysis of various critical combinations of hydrological conditions and water should be prepared in demands. These accordance with the principles described in 4 and should indicate reservoir levels and releases during different times of the year, including Rule curves once prepared operational policies. should be constantly reviewed and, if necessary, modified so as to have the best operation of the reservoirs. 5.0.1 The operational decisions are based on the current state of the system and time of the year, which account for the seasonal variation of the reservoir inflows. A simple rule curve should base the release of the next time pericd solely on the current storage level and the A more current time period of the year. complex rule curve should consider storages in specific downstream control other reservoirs, forecasted inflows into the points and the reservoir. 5.1 Single Purpose Reservoirs a) Flood Control -- When the protected area lies immediately downstream of the reservoir, the flood control schedules would consist of releasing all inflows up to the safe channel capacity. The principles followed in all cases are the same as given in 4.1.1 (a) and are detailed below: 1) Principle (2) 0f4.1.1 (a) -When there is appreciable uncontrolled drainage area between the dam and the loca5

2) Principle

( 2 ) of 4.1.1 ( a ) - The operation schedules based on principle (2 ) of 4.1.1 ( a ) should consist of releases assumed for design flood conditions, SO that design flood could be controlled without exceeding the flood control capacity. The operation consists of discharging a fixed amount, which may be subject to associated flood, storage and outflow conditions, such that all exeessive inflows are stored as long as flooding continues at specified locations. of Principles - When both local and remote locations are to be protected, schedules based on the combination of principles ( 1) and ( 2 ) are usually more salisfactory. In this method, principle may ( 1 ) that is, `ideal operation', be followed to control the earlier

3) Combination

IS 7323 : 1994 part of the flood to achieve the maximum damage reduction during moderate flood. After, the lower portion of the flood reservoir is filled, the regulation may be based on the principle ( 2 ) that is, *based on control of design flood', so as to ensure greater control of major floods. In most cases such a combination of methods ( 1 ) and ( 2) would result in the best overall regulation as it combines the good points of both the methods. In all cases, procedure for releasing the stored water after the flood has passed would also bc laid down in the schedule, in order to vacate the reservoir as quickly as possible for routing subsequent floods. In this way, variation in releases mav be made depending on the prevailing, as wel! as the anticipated conditions of storm/rainfall and run-off. vational demands, operation two ways as discussed below: should be done in

a) Permanent allocation for flood space Permanent allocation of space for flood control at the top of conservation pool may be kept in the regions where flood can occur at any time of the year. A study based on historical or generated flood would indicate the storage space required during different periods. b) Seasonal allocation for JEood space Seasonal allocation of flood control space during flood season depends upon magnitude of flood likely to occur. Thereafter, this space should be utilised for storing uses. The inflows for conservation operation plan to this effect should be prepared based on study of historic and/ or generated f!oods.

c) Joht use of storage space -- For projects

b)

Conservation - The operational schedule of a conservation reservoir would usually consist of two parts, one for filling period and the other fo: the depletion period. For each project it will be necessary to prepare rule curves separately for the filling period and for the depletion period. The rule curves for filling period may be developed from a study of the stream flow records over a long period. These will show the limits up to which reservoir levels are to be maintained during different times of the filling period for meeting the conservational commitments. The most critical release schedule, which provides for only minimum required flow, is specified by the rule curve, in order to provide for acceptable storage or desired allowances contingency during that critical period. When regulation is guided by such curves, it' would be apparent when restrictions are to be imposed on utilization. Reservoirs

use of some of the envisaging joint space for flood control as well as conservational needs, flood control operation should usually be carried out by using part of the conservational storage, which shall be progress:vely reduced as the season advances. The regulation schedule for the conservation phase should then consist of an additional rule curve, indicating levels which may not be exceeded at any particular time of the monsoon season, except for the purpose of storing flood water temporarily. Normal filling and dry weather release curves for the conservation use should be drawn as in the case of single purpose reservoir. of Reservoirs

5.3 System

5.2 Multi-purpose

5.2.1 When separate space allocations for different uses, including flood control are made, preparation of schedules will rarely pose any special problems as the operation for specific uses will usually be independent of each other and will follow the schedules of single purpose opsration for respective functions. In multi-purpose control as main reservoirs, which have flood purpose besides other conser6

5.3.1 Regulation schedules for reservoirs operated as part of system should be prepared separately for each reservoir, based on an integrated plan of operation and considerations discussed in 4.1.3. When determining rule curves among the various reservoirs in the system, it should, howeirer, be noted that critical conditions may not be attained in all projects in the system at the same time. In addition, when considering two reservoirs in series, the upstream reservoir release schedule will bias the development of a rule Furve at the downstream one. For parallel reservoirs, the best rule curve may require apportionment of releases from two or more reservoirs, based on available storage capacity or other relevant criteria. Because of the system operating complex interdependence rules, it is usually necessary of to

IS 7323 : 1994
simulate the system operation to determine a workable regulating schedule. After initial curves are estimated, these independent estimates should then be simulated with a bypothetical operation of the system, to ensure that system targets are satisfied, project objectives are maximised and an equitable distribution of water within the system is maintained. Thus an iterative procedure would be required for establishing operation rules that attain these goals. The following points are generally kept in view, while developing rule curves for a system of reservoirs. a) Balancing of reservoir - As the balancing of reserv%i;s is an important considerations, the concept of `index levels' may be employed, as an aid to making release decisions to keep the reservoir system in a balanced state. The reservoir storage allocation may be subdivided into flood control, conservation, and one or more buffer zones. The top of each of these zones has a corresponding reservoir level, which is assigned an integer or index level. When the index levels in all the reservoirs coincide, the system is in balance. In reservoirs operation, if the current index levels are unbalanced, the releases for the subsequent interval are adjusted as far as possible to restore equilibrium. The index levels are also useful in the regulation of parallel reservoirs with the equivalent reservoir concept. generate possible clump energy future spills. instead of

3) The

hedging rule - It accepts current shortage to avoid large shortages in future and is to be adopted when cost functions for shortages are nonlinear.

5.4 System Engineering Techniques System engineering may be defined as the art and science of selecting from a large number of alternatives, feasible involving substantial engineering content, that particular set of actions which will best accomplish the overall objectives of the decision makers, within the constraints of law, morality, economics, resources, and loss governing the physical life and other natural sciences. Since system engineering techniques have the potential of significantly improving the water resources planning and management process, use of these techniques is increasing rapidly. A variety of these techniques, computational algorithms and increased computer capabilities together with the knowledge of hydrology, hydraulics, and economics environmental engineering could be used for evaluating the performance of a water resource system and problems associated with operation of reservoirs. Various system engineering techniques are available for solving problems associated with reservoir operation. Among these simulation and optithe misation are most commonly used techniques. 54.1 Simulation

b) Apportioning

of storage and releases For an explicit reservoir operation rule that specifies releases of each reservoir as a function of storage volumes, time period and inflows, there are three basic characteristic components for an operation policy. These involve apportioning of storage and release of water among purposes, among time periods and among reservoirs. The governing rules for apportionment are generally as follows: 1) The space rule - The release among parallel reservoirs be planned in such a way that the ratio of space available to that in all in each reservoir reservoirs equals, as far as possible, the ratio of predicted inflow into each reservoir in the remaining period of drawdown refill cycle to that in all the probability of reservoirs. Hence, some reservoirs being spilled while others being empty are minimised. 2) The puck rule -- It is a flexible rule that specifies useful releases in excess of current demand, perhaps to 7

5.4.1.1 Simulation is perhaps the most widely used method for evaluating alternatives due to its mathematical simplicity and versatility. Simulation is a surrogate for asking `what if' and thereby providing a rapid means for evaluating the anticipated performance of the system. The advent of high speed computers has enabled development of detailed simulation programmes to describe the operation of a water resource system, Simulation methods do not identify the optimal design and operating policy but they are excellent means of evaluating the expected performance resulting from any design and operating policy. 5.4.1.2 Simulation may be deterministic or stochastic. If the system is subject to random input events, or generate them internally, the model is said IO be stochastic. If no random components are involved, the model is said to be deterministic. The stochastic simulation is a powerful tool for reservoir operation studies. For example, in reservoir operation studies,

IS 7323: 1994
the reservoir may be empty, half filled or full in the beginning, the stream flow and rainfall are random and so are the demands and, therefore, stochastic simulation is better suited for reservoir operation problems. 5.4.1.3 Simulation is time sequenced or event sequenced. In a simulation model a fixed time interval is selected and it examines the state of the system ( flows, storage volumes, demands, etc, ) at successive time intervals. The increment should be small enough so that no significant information is lost. But the smaller the time increment, larger will be the computation time; on the other hand if the time increment large, the chance of missing an event of interest increases, Thus a judicious choice of time increment is necessary in time sequenced models. 5.4.1.4 A number of general purpose simulation programmes arc available now a days, which may be used to analyse virtually any contiguration and purpose for evaluating various strategies for the operation of a reservoir or system of reservoirs. Most of the reservoir simulation programmes have been developed in other countries where geographical, economic and social condittons considerably differ from those eocountered in India. Hence direct adoption of these models without a critical assessment of the hypotheses or simplifying assumption is to be discouraged. These may, however, be advantageously used with suitable modifications to suit local conditions. 5.4.2 Optimisation ming have been most solving reservoir operation commonly problems. used for

a) Linear programming - Linear nrogramming ( LP ) is concerned with- sGving special type of problems where all the constraints and objective function to be optimised are linear. Since most of the constraints involved in solving reservoir operation problems are non-linear, considerable care should be taken for linearisation of these functions. Linearisation of a non-linear function over a wide range with a single constant may result in a significant error. Therefore, adequate number of adjustments ( iterations ) should be made to ensure that the linearised coefficients are adjusted until they are essentially equal to the derivatives of the non-linear functions they represent at the point of optimality.

b) Dvuamic

programming - Dynamic programming technique has been widely accepted for formulation of reservoir operation policies mainly because of its ability to accommodate non-linear functions. This technique is based on multi-stage decision process. For example, in a reservoir operation problem, the reservoir storage at any time is a typical choice of state variable, the release from the reservoir may be the decision variable and the time is a natural choice of control variable. Therefore, knowing the benefit or cost function the recursive equation may be established. Discrete differential dynamic programming ( DDDP ) has been found more suitable for reservoir operation problem because it is an iterative procedure in which the recursive equation of dynamic programming is solved within a restricted set of quantified values of the state variables. The initial solution of the problem is assumed known. To obtain good convergence, the increment to the state variable should be chosen so that entire feasible region could be inspected, if required. Several iterations with a small increment may be allowed at the end of each computation cycle to improve the value of objective function.

Optimisation is the science of choosing the best solution based on mathematical logic for finding ,the best operation policies ( decision sets ) without having to evaluate all possible alternatives. Optimisation implies use of an optimisation model in conjunction with an appropriate optimisation algorithm. 5.4.2.1 The choice of objective function is a very important decision in an optimisation formulation which is governed by the nature of problem and the computational facilities available. For example, the objective for flood control operation may. be to minimise the flood damage or to minimtse the flows which are greater than the safe carrying capacity of the channel. Similarly for conservation operation the objective function may be to minimise the deviations from the demands or to maximise the reservoir attainable water level for maximisation of firm power. 5.4.2.2 Out of the various optimisation ques, linear programming and dynamic techniprogram-

5.5 Spillway

Gate Regulation

Schedules

In the operation of gated spillways the reservoir is sometimes maintained at itsFRL until all gates are opened, after which outflow would be uncontrolled as long as the inflow flood exceeds the capacity of the spillway at FRL. Under this

8

fS 7323 : 1994 plan of operation when the reservoir is at FRL or near it, the spillway releases may be larger than the inflows, since the dampening effect of within the reservoir reach is valley storage practically non-existent and the flood waves originating from the upstream areas travelling faster may synchronize with those from the local areas around the reservoir to produce higher peak discharges. In order to mitigate damage that may occur under this mode of operation, reservoirs, when full or nearly full, should be so operated that ( a ) peak outflow rates during damaging floods do not exceed inflow rates of the corresponding floods that would have occurred at the reservoir site before construction of the dam and ( b > the rate of increase in outflow does not constitute a major hazard to downstream interests. The above objectives may be accomplished by one or both of the following procedures: a) When the anticipated inflow is likely to raise the reservoir level above FRL, the opening of spillway gates will be initiated before the reservoir attains this level and t,he outflow will be gradual and limited to acceptable rate of increase. This method of operation achieves the objectives but with some risk of not attaining the FRL subsequently. b) In the other method, the induced surcharge storage space above the FRL will be utilized to effect partial control over outflow rates after the reservoir has attained the FRL. This is done by raising all gates initially by small increments thus forcing all inflows in excess of the spillway capacity at the selected gate opening into surcharge storage which will of course be evacuated as rapidly as the conditions warrant. prevailing upon completion of drawdown to the FRL, the regular schedule for release of stored water should be followed.
NOTE -

5.6 Ungated Spillway There is no possibility of any regulation in reservoirs having ungated spillways except some adjustments that can be brought out by the outlets operations. 6 REAL TIME OPERATION OF RESERVOIRS

6.1 The operation of reservoirs based on fixed operation rules, which are developed taking into account the demands and historic/synthetic time series data, often poses difficulties in making appropriate reservoir release decisions due to the uncertainty in the probability of occurrence of the flood event exactly similar to the past event, though the demands could be fairly stable. Operation of reservoirs, therefore, becomes an operation in real time in which water control decisions have to be taken at each instant of time. 6.2 Tn real time reservoir operation control decisions are made quickly, for a finite future condition of the system at that instant of time and the forecast of the likely inputs over this time horizon depending on the purpose of the reservoir operation that is flood control, conservation, irrigation and/or power releases. 6.3 Use of systems engineering techniques using computer technology should be employed and a computer model be developed for real time operation. Some of the important aspects of real time reservoir operation are listed below: a) Collection of catchment hydrological data and water demand data and transmission of the data to the operation manager at the control station through suitable logistics such as hydroiogical sensors, data loggers and telemetry network; b) Availability of a computer control station; A real c> system; time and data base system at the

management

4

projects where water level is not permitted to rise above FRL, the method ( a ) is the
In

only one applicable.

A computer model having capability of flow forecast, control decisions forecast with flexibility for modified data entry and updating, preferably in an interactive mode, in shortest possible execution time. COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS

of spillway gate Development regulation schedules for reservoirs both with and without induced surcharge storage space are given in Annex A. It is of utmost importance that the schedules so developed are used to route the spillway design flood for determining the adequacy of the MWL which may often be based on old operation plans. 9

7 DATA

7.1 An adequate plan for collection and analysis of hydrological data should be developed and adopted in order to ensure efficient operation of reservoirs, particularly during the monsoon period. 7.2 A suitable gauging stations network of rainfall should be established and river according

IS 7323 : 1994 to relevant Indian Standards in the project area at the investigation stage. This would provide sufficient basic data to evolve a reliable programme of flood forecasting for use in the reservoir operation. The instrumentation for the purpose should include hydrological sensors with capability of in-situ recording and compatibility with telemetery network for real time operation of reservoirs. 7.3 The number and distribution of ordinary and self-recording raingauge station should be decided based on the storm characteristics and topography of the region and the requirements of flood forecasting. 7.4 An adequate number of river gauging stations should be set at key locations according to relevant Indian Standards to provide current river information on satisfactory stages/flows upstream and an index to the total inflow to the reservoir. In case of flood control reservoirs, a suflicient number of river gauging stations should be set up below the dam to provide data at the locations to be protected. stations should also be All stream gauging for measuring instruments with equipped rainfall. 7.5 Manual and/or automatic reservoir gauges should be installed for obtaining current reservoir levels. Reservoir levels should be recorded say every 24 hours or as at regular intervals, required. During flood times, reservoir gauges should be observed at closer intervals, say once in 3 hours or even more frequently. 7.6 A close co-operation should be maintained with the nearest office of the Indian Meteoroto obtain the data on logical Department and its expected current weather situation development. In case of major projects it would be necessary to have a separate meteorological unit which will collect the necessary data and engineer-in-charge of interpret them to the operations. 7.7 The mode and frequency of communication of basic data recorded by reporting stations should be decided based on the requirements of such data at the given time. During flood periods, reports at shorter interval ( usually 6 hourly or less ) are required. Manually based and/or semi-automatic data handling systems are generally adequate for the single project system or relatively small multi-project systems. Installation of automatic data handling system in addit.ion to manual or semi-automatic system may be necessary for reducing the transmission 10 and processing time of vast data from various sources. The data transmission media such as telephones, flood priority telegrams, telemetry, VHF wireless. meteor-burst communication system, general purpose communication satellites, etc, should he used for communication of data. All these types of transmission media may be used either singularly or in combination. Planning and design of a particular system should consider each of these alternatives prior to selecting the one or combination of these that best meets the overall requirement of the reliable data system, particularly in the storm period. 7.8 The hydro-meteorological data collected during storm periods should be analyzed by suitably trained personnel. Use of computer at the analyzing centre may be useful in providing accurate information on prevailing and anticipated flood stage/flows at all the locations of interest. Forecast of inflow into the reservoir and the regulation plans during storm period should be developed usually every six hours or as required using the advancements in techniques. Based on the results of this analysis, the operations should be determined by the engineer-in-charge of the reservoir system operation taking into consideration the operation schedule. In case of real-time data collection, computers are essential for data handbng, manipulation and analysing project regulation schemes. non-monsoon period, reservoir 7.9 During operation usually consists of release of water from conservation storage for various uses, considering actual requirements and storage conditions. As such, it requires less attention. This period, therefore, should be devoted to investigating possible technical improvements in the hydro-meteorological data collection and transmission network, application of modern technical know-how such as system engineering techniques, development of computer models and training of personnel to facilitate reliable and optimum system regulation in addition to the normal works pertaining to reservoir regulation. surveys should be done to 7.10 Capacity compute the actual storage capacities at various levels at regular intervals depending on the rate of sedimentation. The higher the rate of sedimentation, the greater will be the frequency of survey. Capacity survey of reservoirs may be carried out once in 3 to 5 years or when the loss of capacity is5 percent, whichever isearlier. 7.11 In order to facilitate and to keep up-todate information for the operation of reservoirs,

IS 7323 : 1994 a proper record of all the data pertaining to reservoir operation should be maintained. FOI large reservoir systems a suitable computerized data base management system is essential for storage and retrieval of data/information. Data received from the data collection network should be stored in the data base. The data base should also include flow forecast and project operation data and should be designed for providing both graphical and tabular displays. Various proformae for data compilation as per the requirements of system operation may be designed. Three sample proformae for compiling information are given in this standard. Proforma 1 deals with collection of rainfall and stream flow data. Proforma 3 deals with the computations of forecasting inflows based on rainfall-runoff correlation and unit hydrograph. Proforma 3 contains data relating to daily reservoir operations.

ANNEX A (Clause 5.5 )
DEVELOPMENT A-l GENERAL A-l.1 In many earlier projects where the FRL and MWL are the same and even in projects with provision for induced surcharge operation, it may .be imperative to utilize a portion of the storage space below the FRL in order to meet the requirements of 5.5 under operating conditions. The volume of inflow, however, must be predicted before releases can be determined. Although forecasting of runoff from reports of rainfall and river stages/discharges provides a sound basis for operation, schedules for use in spi!lway design and by operational staff under emergency conditions require a more conservative approach. During very severe floods communications may fail and the only information available at the dam may be reservoir water levels and the rate of rise. The minimum volume of inflow to be expected during flood at any instant may be predicted by assuming that the inflow has crested for computing the volume under the recession curve of the hydrograph. The assumed recession curve should, however, be steeper than the normal observed recession for conservative results and may usually be patterned after the recession. spillway design flood Once the minimum volume expected with a given inflow is known, the outflow required to limit storage to the capacity available may be readily determined. A-2 PROCEDURE A-2.1 A complete schedule of releases in the form of a chart may be developed that will allow the outflow to be regulated on the basis storage inflow and space of the current available by making a series of computations OF SPILLWAY GATE REGULATION SCHEDULES and with various assumed values of inflows amounts of storage available as below:
`L

-) Calculate

a constant Ts ( in days ), that is the time required for the discharge to recede to 112.1 of its initial value, by reading from the assumed recession curve. Sk/Q, values by multiplying TS with derived by assuming Ts values correspnnding to of Q,/QZ ratios are given for the project, the S.L/Q, values = 1. The S,/Q, TS = 1 for a set be!ow:

b) Compute

Q,/Qz
1.2 1.6 2.0 2.5 3.5 10'0

S-k/Q, ( for Ts = 1 ) 1 363 10 023 23 657 45 006 96 163 548 856 amount of storage metres to impound a ( in cumecs ) with Q, constant release from

Where Sa is the required in cubic flood inflow of Q, ( in cumecs ) as the the reservoir. For an assumed c> example 3 000

range of inflows Q, ( for m3/s to spillway design flood peak ) compute a set of Qa for the entire set of Q,/Q, ratios by dividing

Q,byQ,/Q,.
d) Lastly
co mpute a set of Sa values for each selected value of Q1 by multiplying the project S.%/QZ values by Q,.

A convenient computational form is given in Table I. A family of curves S4 versus Q2' such as in Fig. 2 may be then plotted for each assumed values of inflow Qr 11

IS 7323 : 1994 Table 1 Computation for Spillway Gate Regulation Schedule [ Clause A-2.1 ( d ) ] Project WQr (2) Q1 3 Y ms's Qt = = 1_ co1 ( 1 ) (3)
sA=CO1(2)XCO1(3)

Ql = 6 000 ma/s Qt = c7F;T (5)
SA = CO1

(2) X

CO1 (

3)

(4)

(6)

NOTE _ Columns will extend with various values of Q, considered.

LULL A'NO MA!h"M
/RESERVOIR LEVEL I I I I

FREE

OVERFLOW

VX" i
INFLOW IQ,) RELEASE (Ql) -

FIG. 2

SPILLWAYGATE REGULATION SCHEDULE WITHOUT INDUCED SURCHARGE

For reservoirs having no induced surcharge storage provision, SA values can be transformed

into reservoir elevations by subtracting SA values from the storage capacity at FRL and reading corresponding elevation values from the elevation-capacity curves. In case of reservoir provision, the points raised vertically by storage permissible at with induced surcharge located as above may be the amount of surcharge the particular outflow as

shown in Fig. 3. Thus the point b corresponding to the schedule with induced storage will be obtained by raising point a of the dotted curves ( without induced storage ) by an amount cd, the amount of surcharge storage at the given outflow. useful in deciding the These curves are required releases for reservoir regulation based on the inflow and available storage space at any instant.

12

IS 7323 : 1994
I
INDUCED

I
SURCHARGE

I
I

FREE

OVERFLOW

bd
CONTROL SPILLWAY RELEASE CREST

RELEASE

Qz

FIG.

3

SPILLWAY GATE REGULATION SCHEDULE WITH INDUCED SURCHARGE

Proforma 1 -

Rainfall and Streamflow Data ( Clause 7.11 )
Name and Location of Raingauge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . River gauge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . R. L. of Zero of gauge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Date

Time in Hours

Observed Rainfall in mm ~~y-G.~-G;7

Catchment Rainfall

Gauge in Metres

Discharge Estimated/Observed m3/s

Remarks

13

IS 7323 : 1994 Proforma 2 ( Using `Rainfall, Ruroff
Stream and Station Runoff Computations r----__-_ Date 6 7 ~_-____---__-___*--_Y_-*_8

Forecast Computation Sheet (Clause 7. I 1 )
co-axial relations and unit hydrographs Discharge in ma/s 9 ---------3 I1 10 ------7 12
8Ph4

)

SAM 8PM 8AM 8PM 8AM 8PM SAM 8PM 8AM 8PM 8AM 8PM 8AM

Station A on river X

Antecedent precipitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .cm Total duration . . .. . . . . . . . . .h Total rain.. . . . . . . . . . . .. . cm Total runoff ..,.. . . . . . . cm Prev. runoff. . . . .. . . .. . .cm Runoff increment . . . . . .cm

Hydrograph ( Prev. Period 12-h unit hydrograph Direct Runoff Total llow

)

Local area between station A and B

Antecedent precipitation Hydrograph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . cm ( Prev. Period ) Total duration. . . . . . . . . . h 12-h unit hydrograph Total rain . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .cm Direct .. . . . . . .cm Rutloff Total runoK....
Prcv. runoi~ . . . . . . . . . . . . cm Runoff increment......cm Total flow

--Station Routing B on river X Routed flow from Station Local flow Total flow Adjusted . . .. . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . ( Basin ) food A

___~ _.__ ~~

~

..____-

____ Computed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .For ( Month ) ( Date ) (Year ) storm beginning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Computed by . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . Checked by . . .. . . . . . Time . . .. . . . . . ( Hour ) ( Month ) ( Date )

14

tS 7323 : 1994 Proforma 3 - Daily Reservoir Operation Data ( czause 7. I 1 )
Date Time in h Pool Elevation in Metres above MSL 3. Withdrawals ma/s Spillway Dischargel) Estimated Inflow ---___-_ Precipitation, mm Dam Site Weather _--h-----.-7 Temperature Wind c--h--T r--A-7 Max Min Speed Direction km/h 8 9 10 11 Remarks

-- 1

2

4

5

6

7

12

l)Sluices,

crest bays and power house separately.

15

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmoious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced BIS has the copyright of all its publications. in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the up for revision. latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and Standards Monthly Addition'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. RVD 4 ( 124 ), Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones
: 331 01 31,

331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 33101 31 Maniktola { 331 13 75 f37 84 99, 37 85 61 137 86 26, 37 86 62 r-60 38 43, 160 20 25, f235 02 16, 1235 15 19, 235 04 42 235 23 15

Regional

Offices :

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VIII M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southein : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

160022

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Andheri ( East )

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, BOMBAY 400093

[632 92 95, 632 78 58 1632 78 91, 632 78 92 Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHPURAM. Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh. India

