**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  7307-1  (1974) :  Approval  tests  for  welding  procedures. 
Part  1:  fusion  welding  of  steel  [MTD  11:  Welding  General] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  :  7307  (  Part  I)- 1974 

(  Reaffirmed  1997) 


Indian  Standard 

APPROVAL  TESTS  FOR 
WELDING  PROCEDURES 

PART  I    FUSION  WELDING  OF  STEEL 


Fourth  Reprint  SEPTFMBER  2001 

(  Incorporating  Amendment  No,  I  ) 


UDC  621.791.65 


(0  Copyright  1 993 
BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK   BHAVAN,  '>   BAHADliK   SIlAll  /Al  AR  MARCi 
NtW    DELHI    I  10002 

Gr5  October  1974 


ISi 7307  (Part  I)*1974 

Indian  Standard 

APPROVAL  TESTS  FOR 
WELDING  PROCEDURES 

PART  I     FUSION  WELDING  OF  STEEL 

Welding  General  Sectional  Committee,  SMDC  14 

Chairman  Rtprtsenting 

Skri  R.  Ghosh  Indian  Oxygen  Limited,  Calcutta 

Mtmbers 

Shri  J.  K.  Ahluwalia  Stcwartt  &  Lloyds  of  India  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shri  M.  M.  Ghosh  ( Alternate  ) 
Shri  N.  C.  Baochi  National  Test  House,  Calcutta 

Shri  B.  C.  Biswas  (  Altemite  ) 
Shri  S.  Balasubrahmanyam  Binny  Ltd,  Madras 

Shri  K.  Balmanohar  Hindustan  Shipyard  Ltd,  Visakhapatnam 

Shri  R.  N.  Chakrabortv  Braithwaitc  &  Co  ( India  )  Ltd,  Calcutta 

ShriB.  N.  Das  National       Metallurgical      Laboratory      (CSIR), 

Jamshedpur 
Shri  S.  P.  Dasoupta  Central   Mechanical  Engineering  Research  Inititute 

( CSIR ),  Durgapur 
Shri  B.  Sen  (  Alternate  ) 
Director,   Research  and  Design    Public  Works  Department,  Government  of  Hiryi—, 

B  &  R  Branch,  C^iandigarh  Chandigarh 

Executive      Engineer       (  Elec-   Central  Public  Works  Department,  New  Delhi 
trical),    Electrical   Division 
No.  1,  New  Delia 
Executive  Engineer  (Elegtri- 
cal).  Central  Electrical 
Division   No.    1,   Calcutta 
(AltimaU) 
Shri  H.  D.  Govindaraj  Philips  India  Ltd,  Bombay 

DrJ.  Vaid  (AliemaU) 
Shri  S.  K.  Hari  Malik  Elcctricals  Pvt  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  M.  K.  Sinha  (  Alternate  ) 
DrJ.  Jain  Tata    Engineering     and      Locomotive      Co     Lt<!» 

Jamshedpur 
Prop  A.  P.  Jambulinoam  Indian  Society  for  Technical  Education,  New  Delhi 

(  ConHmud  on  pagt  2 ) 


<9  Copyright  1993 

BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS^ 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (XIV  of  1957)  tad 

rtproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permiftsion  of  tht 

publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Ail. 


IS :  7307  (  Part  I )  •  1974 

(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Joint  Director  (  M  &  C  ),  RDSO,    Ministry  of  Railways 

LUCKNOW 

Chemist  and  Metallurgist, 
Integral  Coach  Factory, 
Perambur  (  Alternate  I ) 
Production  Engineer  (  Shell  ), 
Integral  Coach  Factory, 
Perambur  (  Alternate  II  ) 
Shri  M.  V.  D.  Kamath  Indian  Engineering  Association,  Calcutta 

Shri  M.  T.  Kanse  Directorate     General     of    Supplies     and     Disposals 

( Inspection  Wing  ),  New  Delhi 
Shri  S.  N.  Basu  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.  S.  Kodikal  Bharat  Heavy  Plate  &  Vessels  Ltd,  Visakhapatnam 

Shri  A.  P.  Sanyal  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  V.  Nadkarni  Advani-Oerlikon  Private  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  P.  S.  Viswanath  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  A.  C.  Mukherjee  Power  Cables  Private  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  K.  M.  Pole  Walchandnagar  Industries,  Walchandnagar 

Shri  G.  D.  Apt'e  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  H.  L.  Prabhakar  Larscn  &  Toubro  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  J.  R.  Prasher  Bharat  Heavy  Elcctricals  Ltd,  Hardwar 

Suki  S.  S.  Raohavan  Enginccr-in-Chief  *s  Branch,  Army  Headquarters 

Shri  K.  S.  Hans  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  B.  Rao  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI ) 

Shri  S.  C.  Roy  Central  Boilers  Board,  New  Delhi 

Shri  V.  V.  Sathyanarayana  Mining  &  Allied  Machinery  Corpn,  Durgapur 

Shri  S.  K.  Banerjia  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  K.  Senoupta  Hindustan  Steel  Ltd,  Ranchi 

Shri  V.  V.  Kaviswar  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  H.  K.  Sharma  Directorate  General  of  Technical  Development,  New 

Delhi 

Shri  K.  C.  Sharma  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  A.  Srinivasalo  Bharat  Heavy  Elcctricals  Ltd,  Tiruchirapalli 

Shri  B.  Pattabhiraman  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  K.  Srivastava  Mukand  Iron  and  Steel  Works  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  V.  R.  Subramanian  Indian  Oxygen  Limited,  Calcutta 

Shri  J.  C.  Acharya  ( Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  Sundaresan  Directorate  General  of  Employment  and  Training, 

New  Delhi 

Superintending      Engineer,  Public    Works    Department,   Government   of  Tamil 

Central  Mechanical  Circle^         Nadu,  Madras 

Madras 

Shri  C.  R.  Rama  Rao,  Director  General/ ISI  <  Ex-ojfficio  Member ) 


Director  (  Struc  &  Met ) 


Secretary 

Shri  M.  S.  Naoaraj 

Deputy  Director  (  Struc  &  Met ),  ISI 

(  Continutel  on  petgi  20  ) 


IS  I  7307  (  Part  I  >    1974 

Indian  Standard 

APPROVAL  TESTS  FOR 
WELDING  PROCEDURES 

PART  I     FUSION  WELDING  OF  STEEL 
0.  FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  (  Part  I )  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards 
Institution  on  29  March  1974,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Welding 
General  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Structural  and 
Metals  Division  Council. 

0.2  This  standard  is  one  of  a  series  of  Indian  Standards  on  the  approval 
testing  of  welders  and  welding  procedures,  the  latter  having  a  bearing  on 
the  former  for  certain  applications.  This  link  has  been  used  as  a  means  of 
arranging  the  series  of  standards  into: 

a)  welder  approval  when  the  welding  procedure  is  not  required  to  be 
approved  (  for  either  technical  or  contract  reasons ), 

b)  approval  testing  of  welding  procedures,  and 

c)  welder  approval  when  welding  procedure  approval  is  required. 

0.3  For  the  purposes  of  this  standard,  tlie  welder  who  makes  the  welding 
procedure  test  is  considered  to  be  sufficiently  experienced  in  the  appropriate 
welding  process  and  hence  already  capable  of  passing  training  tests  such  as 
those  contained  in  IS  :  817-1966*. 

0.4  To  indicate  the  philosophy  behind  this  series  of  standards,  it  is 
considered  useful  to  give  details  of  the  practices  relating  to  welding  proce- 
dure approval.  Depending  upon  the  emphasis  placed  on  quality  control 
in  the  production  of  welded  components,  so  may  the  approval  of  welding 
procedures  be  administered  in  one  of  several  ways.  The  alternatives 
currently  employed  are  the  following: 

a)  Each  individual  contractor  (  or  sub-contractor  )  should  prove  by 
actual  test  pieces  every  weld  form  he  wishes  to  use,  in  every 
thickness  and  material;  or 

b)  Each  individual  contractor  (  or  sub-contractor  )  should  prove  by 
actual  test  pieces,  a  set  of  welds  representative  on  a  group  basis, 
of  all  the  various  thicknesses  and  materials  to  be  used  in 
production;  or 


•Code  of  practice  for  training  and  testing  of  metal  arc  welders  (  rtvised). 


ISt 7307  (Part  I).  1974 

c)  Each  individual  contractor  (  or  sub-contractor )  need  not  make 
procedure  test  pieces  providing  he  can  prove  by  authentic  docu- 
mentation of  an  independent  nature  that  he  has  previously  welded 
the  type  of  joint  and  material  in  question  to  give  satisfactory 
service  behaviour. 

In  respect  of  (  a )  and  (  b )  it  should  be  appreciated  that  once  the 
welding  procedure  tests  have  been  approved,  they  need  never  be  repeated 
unless  there  is  a  change  in  certain  variables.  As  an  extension  beyond  (  c  ), 
it  may  be  possible  in  the  future  for  fully  documented  welding  procedures, 
developed  independently  of  the  particular  contractor,  to  be  employed 
without  the  need  for  further  approval  tests. 

Although  a  v/elding  procedure  may  already  have  been  approved, 
each  manufacturer  should  accept  responsibility  for  the  procedure  used  on 
a  contract  and  for  the  ability  oi  the  welders  to  apply  the  procedure. 

0.5  In  the  formulation  of  this  standard  assistance  has  been  derived  from 
the  draft  British  Standard  '  Specification  for  approval  testing  of  welding 

Erocedures,  Part  1  Fusion  welding  of  steel'  (  Doc:  72/42576  DC),  issued 
y  the  British  Standards  Institution. 

0.6  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this 
standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  expressing 
the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with 
IS:  2-1960*.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded  off 
value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


1.  SCOPE 

U  This  standard  specifies  requirements  for  the  approval  tests  for  welding 
procedures  for  the  fusion  welding  (  see  3.3  )  of  carbon  and  carbon-manganese 
steel,  except  castings.  The  approval  testing  of  welding  procedure  for  the 
fusion  wdiding  of  steel  casting  are  covered  in  IS :  5530-1 969t  and 
IS :  6916.1973t 

2.  DEFINITIONS 

2.0  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following  definitions  shall  apply. 

2.1  Welding  Procedare§  —  A  specified  course  of  action  followed  in 
welding  including  a  list  of  materials  and,  where  necessary,  tools  to  be  used. 

•Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  rtvised). 

•f  Code  of  procedure  for  repair  and  rectification  of  steel  castings  by  metal  arc  welding 
proceM. 

{Code  of  practice  for  fabrication  welding  of  steel  castings. 

jThis  definition  has  been  extracted  from  IS:  812-1957  *  Glossary  of  terms  relating  to 
wcldiog  and  cutting  of  metals  *. 


ISi7307(PartI).1974 

2.2  Welding  Procedure  Test— The  making  and  testing  of  a  welded 
joint  representative  of  that  to  be  used  in  production  in  order  to  prove  the 
feasibility  of  welding  p/occdurc  for  a  specified  application. 

Note  —  This  term  is  not  usually  applied  to  any  tests   that  may  have  been  made 
during  the  development  of  a  welding  procedure. 

2.3  Approved  Welding  Procedure  —  A  documented  welding  procedure 
that  has  been  signified  as  approved  for  a  specified  application  cither  by 
means  of  a  welding  procedure  test  or  as  a  result  of  experience  gained  with 
the  welding  of  joints  similar  to  that  to  which  the  welding  procedure  applies. 

2.4  Test  Piece*  —  Components  welded  together  in  accordance  with  a 
specified  welding  procedure,  or  a  portion  of  a  welded  joint  detached  from 
a  structure,  for  test. 

2.5  Test  Specimen*  ~  A  portion  detached  from  a  test  piece  and  prepared 
as  required  for  testing. 

3.  ITEMS  IN  A  WELDING  PROCEDURE  TEST 

3.1  General  -  The  items  listed  in  3,2  and  the  items  in  3.3  relevant  to  the 
particular  welding  process  shall  be  recorded  for  each  welding  procedure 
test. 

J>^OTE  —  Not  all  of  these  items  need  he  itiduded  in  the  approved  welding  procedure. 

3.2  Items  for  All  Welding  Processes  —  Details  relating  to  the  following 

items  shall  be  recorded  for  all  welding  processes: 

a)  Wielding  process  or  processes  when   more   than   one   is   used   in 
making  a  complete  joint. 

b)  Parent  inc-tal  specification,  thickness  and  for    pipcf    the    outside 
diamet'.!r  or  dimension. 

c)  Shop  or  site  conditions. 

d)  Sketch  showing  the  edge  preparation. 

e)  Cleaning,  degreasing,  etc. 

f)  Sketch  showing  fit-up. 

g)  Jigging  or  tacking,  backing,  etc. 

h)  Welding  position  ( including  direction  for  vertical  position ). 
j)   Make  and  type  of  welding  consumables. 
k)   Filler  material  composition  and  size. 


•This  definition  has  been  extracted  from  IS  :  812-1957  *  Glossary  of  terms  relating  to 
welding  and  cutting  of  metals  '. 

tin  this  standard  the  word  'pipe*,  alone  or  in  combination,  is  used  to  mean  'pipe*  or 
'tube'  or  'circular  structural  hollow  section'  (  circular  or  rectangular  ),  although  clies€ 
terms  are  often  used  for  different  categories  of  product  by  dilfcrent  industries. 


ISt73l>7(PartI).1974 

m)  Preheating  and  intcrpass  temperature  range,  including  method  and 
control. 

n)  Travel  speed  (  mechanized  welding ) . 

p)  Sketch  showing  approximate  number  and  arrangement  of  rum 
and  weld  dimensions. 

q)  Welding  sequence, 

r)  Back  gouging/back  chipping. 

s)  Heat  treatment  before  post-weld  heat  treatment. 

t)  Post-weld  heat  treatment,  including  method  and  control. 

u)  Any  special  features  to  meet  particular  service  requirements. 

3.3  Items  for  Particular  Welding  Processes  —  Details  relating  to  the 
items  given  in  3.3.1  to  3.3.6  shall  be  recorded  for  the  particular  welding 
processes.  For  pipe  welding,  where  back  purging  is  used,  the  purge  gas, 
flow  rate  of  purge  gas  and  period  shall  be  recorded. 

3.3.1  Manual  MetaUArc  Welding 

a)  Electrode  designation. 

b)  Type  of  core  wire. 

c)  Flux  covering. 

d)  Nature  of  current  (  ac  or  dc )  and  polarity. 

e)  Current. 

3.3.2  MJG  Welding* 

a)  Electrode  composition. 

b)  Shielding  gas  and  flow  rate. 

c)  Nozzle  diameter. 

d)  Current. 

c)  Arc  voltage. 

f )  Wire  feed  speed. 

g)  Electrode  extension        1   Additional  for  dip  transfer 
h)  Circuit  inductance  or      v      technique. 

setting  J 

j)  Nature  of  metal  transfer —  whether  spray  or  dip  transfer. 

3.3.3  TIG  Welding* 

a)  Tungsten  electrode  diameter /type. 

b)  Shielding  gas  and  flow  rate. 


•For  fHtUed  welding,  the  pulfc  time,  pulse  current  sod  buckgrouiid  current  and  voJUf e 
iImUI  ftlsQ  be  rccprdcd.  • 


ISt7307(PartI).1974 

c)  Nozzle  diameter, 

d)  Nature  of  cun-cnt  (  ac  or  dc  )  and  polarity. 
c)  Current. 

f )  Arc  length  or  voltage  for  mechanized  welding. 

g)  Purging  gas. 

3.3.4  Submerged  Arc    Welding  and  Continuous  Covered  Electrode  Arc  Welding 
with  or  Without  CO|  or  Flux  Shielding 

a)  Number  and    configuration    of    electrode  wires   and    electrical 
connections. 

b)  Electrode  composition/flux  combination  if  cored  or  covered  wire. 

c)  Flux  type. 

d)  Shielding  gas  and  flow  rate. 

e)  Electrode  extension. 

f )  Nature  of  current  (  ac  or  dc  )  and  polarity. 

g)  Current. 

h)  Arc  voltage. 

j)  Power  source  characteristic. 

k)  Welding  speed. 

3.3.5  Electroslag  and  Consumable  Guide  Welding 

a)  Number  of  electrodes. 

b)  Flux  type. 

c)  Guide  configuration. 

d)  Oscillation  width  and  dwell  periods. 

e)  Current  ( wire  feed  speed  ) . 

f)  Polarity. 

g)  Voltage  and  vertical  lift  rate, 
h)  Slag  depth. 

33.6  Gas  Welding 

a)  Flux  type. 

b)  Oxygen  pressure. 

c)  Fuel  gas  and  pressure. 

d)  Nozzle  size. 

c)  Flame  characteristic  (  oxidizing,  reducing  or  neutral ), 

7 


Bt  7307  (Part  I).  1974 

4.  CaiANGES  AFFECTING  APPROVAL 

4.1  A  welding  procedure  test  shall  be  required  when  any  of  the  following 
changes  are  made  to  an  approved  welding  procedure: 

a)  Any  change  in  welding  process; 

b)  Any  change  in  parent  metal,  thickness  or  pipe  outside  diameter 
or  dimension,  subject  to  the  extent  of  approval  given  in  5; 

c)  Any  change  in  root  detail  (  gap,  root  face  or  backing ) ; 

d)  Any  change  in  fundamental  welding  position,  flat,  horizontal* 
vertical,  vertical,  overhead  (  see  IS  :  812-1957*  for  definitions ),  that 
is,  each  fundamental  welding  position  shall  be  separately 
approved; 

Note  —  Care  is  required  to  distinguish  between  pipe  positions  and  welding  positions, 
as  a  pipe  position  may  involve  more  than  one  welding  position. 

e)  Any  change  in  welding  technique  ( for  example,  a  change  from 
the  vertical-upward  method  to  the  vertical-downward  method  ) ; 

f )  Any  change  in  type  of  electrode,  filler  material,  flux  or  shielding  gas; 

g)  Any  change  in  the  size  of  a  manual  metal-arc  welding  electrode 
used  for  the  root  run  of  an  unbacked  weld; 

h)  Any  change  of  more  than  one- third  in  thfe  size  of  a  manual 
metal-arc  welding  electrode  used  for  the  root  run  of  a  backed 
weld; 

j)  A  change  in  welding  current  from  dc  to  ac  or  change  in  polarity; 

k)  A  change  in  preheating  temperature,  except  for  an  increase  of 

less  than  100°G;  and 
m)  Any  change  in  post-weld  heat  treatment. 

Any  change  in  the  make  or  size  other  than  under  (g)  or  (h)  above, 
of  filler  material  or  in  the  shielding  or  back  purging  gas  shall  be  reported 
to  the  purchaser,  but  this  will  not  necessarily  require  re-approval. 

In  the  absence  of  any  of  the  changes  set  out  above,  an  approved 
welding  procedure  shall  remain  in  force  indefinitely. 

5.  EXTENT  OF  APPROVAL 

5.1  Parent  Metal — In  respect  of  the  following  types  of  steel,  approval 
of  a  welding  procedure  shall  be  given  on  a  group  basis: 

Group  FE\ — Mild  and  carbon  manganese  structural  steels  not 
requiring  hydrogen  controlled  electrodes  and /or  heat  imput  controlled 
welding  processes  and  preheating.  Such  steels  would  have  a  tensile 
strength  in  the  range  410-510  N/mm^  and  a  combined  thickness  of  up  to 
and  including  80  nun. 

^Glossary  of  terms  relating  to  welding  and  cutting  of  metali, 

8 


IS  I  7307  (Parti)-  1974 

Group  FE2  —  Carbon  and  carbon  manganese  steels  requiring  hydro- 
gen controlled  electrodes  and/or  heat  imput  controlled  welding  processes 
and  preheating.  Such  steels  would  have  tensile  strength  in  the  range  5 1 0 
to  610  N/mm'  or  would  be  Group  FEl  steels  having  a  combined  thickness 
exceeding  80  mm. 

5.1.1  Tlie  approval  of  a  welding  procedure  for  a  particular  type  of  steel 
in  Group  FEl  or  FE2  shall  include  approval  for  all  the  other  steels  in  the 
same  group,  unless  it  has  heen  stated  in  the  enquiry  or  order  that  a 
separate  welding  procedure  test  for  the  particular  steel  is  required. 
Approval  between  groups  is  not  permitted. 

5.1.2  Separate  welding  procedure  approval  shall  be  required  for  each 
steel  not  covered  by  Groups  FEl  and  FE2.  If  dissimilar  steels  are  to  be 
welded  a  separate  welding  procedure  test  for  the  particular  combination 
of  materials  shall  be  made. 

5.2  Thickness  —  For  gas  welding,  the  approval  of  a  welding  procedure 
for  material  of  thickness  /  shall  include  approval  for  all  thicknesses  up  to  and 
including  /. 

For  processes  other  than  gas  welding,  the  approval  of  a  welding 
procedure  for  material  of  thickness  /  shall  include  approval  for  thicknesses 
in  the  range  0*75Mf)/. 

5.3  Pipe  Outside  Diameter  or  Dimension  —  The  approval  of  a 
weldmg  procedure  for  pipe  of  outside  diameter  or  dimension  D  shall 
include  approval  for  diameters  or  dimensions  in  the  range  0*5/)- 15/). 
For  rectangular  hollow  sections,  D  shall  be  the  dimension  of  the  smaller 
side. 

6.  TEST  PIECES 

6.1  Each  type  of  joint  to  which  the  welding  procedure  will  relate  in 
production  shall  be  represented  by  making  an  appropriate  test  piece  or 
pieces,  preferably  selected  from  the  following: 

a)  A  butt  joint  (  plate  or  pipe  )  (  Fig.  I  and  2); 

b)  A  fillet  weld  (  plate  )  (  Fig.  3  ) ;  and 

c)  A  branch  connection  (  pipe  ;  forming  the  most   severe   angle   6, 
likely  to  be  involved  in  production  (  Fig.  4). 

Note  —  Somrtimcs  .i  butt  joint  is  prrparrd  in  addition  to  a  test  piece  oi  the  types 
given  in  (  b )  and  (  c  )  above  in.order  to  obtain  relevant  test  data. 

6.2  If  the  production  joint  design  or  apphcation  is  such  that  none  of  the 
above  types  of  test  pieces  could  be  regarded  as  representative,  such  as 
attachment  welds  to  thin  pipes  or  surfacing,  then  the  enquiry  and  order 
shall  state  that  a  special  test  piece  is  required  which  shall  simulate  the 
production  joint  in  all  essential  features,  such  as  dimensions,  restraint, 
access,  heat  sink  effects  and  any  special  surface  protection.  Edge  prepa* 
ration  and  fit-up  shall  be  as  given  in  welding  procedure  (see  3  A). 


IS :  7307  (  Part  I  )  - 1974 


U- 


100  MIN- — ♦■ 


DISCARD 
TENSILE 
ROOT  BEND 
FACE  BEND 


SIDE   BEND 


SIDE   BEND 


1 


ALL  WELD 
TENSILE 


DISCARD 


-100  MIN * 


350 
MIN 


All  dimrnsions  in  millimetres. 

Fig.  1     Test  Piece  for  Butt  Weld  in  Plate 


k-lOOMIN- 


-- 100  MIN 


PIPES  UP  TO  AND 
INCLUDING  88-9  mm 
OUTSIDE 
DIAMETER 


Fig.  2 


PIPES  OVER  88-9  mm 

OUTSIDE 

DIAMETER 


R  «  Root  bend  T  «  Tensile 

F  «=  Face  bend  M  =  Macro 

S  ■=  Side  bend 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

Test  Piece  and  Location  of  Test  Specimens 
FOR  Butt  Weld  in  Pipe 


10 


IS:7307(  Parti) -1974 


225 


100 


L 


FULL  LENGTH  OF  WELD 
THIS   SIDE 


ROOT  RUN  TO  BE 
STOPPED  AND 
RESTARTED  ABOUT 
75mm  FROM  END 
(ONE  MICRO -EXAMI- 
NATION POSITION) 


CUTTING  LINES 
FOR  SPECIMENS 
WHEN  ONLY  ONE 
SIDE  WELDED 


too 


J 


DIRECTION  OF  FRACTURE 
FORCE 


-WELD  THIS  SIDE 


-i 100 


-50 


*   LENGTH  OF  WELD  WHEN 
SECOND  SIDE  WELDED 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fio.  3    Test  Piece  for  Fillet  Weld  in  Plate 


11 


IS:  7307 (Part  I).  1974 


200  MIN 


-350MIN 


All  dimensions  in  millitnt-Lrcs. 

Fig.  4    Test  Piece  for  Branch  Connection  in  Pipe 

6.3  The  dimensions  and  number  of  test  pieces  shall  be  such  as  to  provide 
lor  the  appropriate  test  specimens  given  in  Table  1 . 

6.4  Subsurface  defects  that  break  the  surface  or  which  arc  revealed  as  the 
icsult  of  any  grinding  specified  in  the  welding  procedure  shall  not  be 
repaired  and  there  shall  be  no  other  repair  welding  of  a  completed  test 
piece. 

7.  EXAMINATION  AND  TESTING 

7.1  General  —  For  a  welding  procedure  to  be  approved,  tin;  same  test 
pierc(s;  representing  the  welding  procedure  test  shall  satisfy  the  require- 
ments for  both  non-destructive  and  destructive  testing  (  7.2  and  7.3  ). 

7.1.1  If  the  test  piece  fails  to  satisfy  any  of  the  requirements  for  non- 
destructive testing  given  in  7.2.2,  one  further  test  piece  shall  be  welded 
and  subjected  to  the  same  examination.  If  this  additional  test  piece  does 
not  meet  the  required  standard,  the  procedure  shall  not  be  regarded  as 
(  apable  of  meeting  the  requirements  of  this  standard  without  modification. 

7.1.2  If  any  test  specimen  fails  to  satisfy  the  relevant  requirements  given 
in  7.3.3,  two  further  test  specimens  for  each  one  that  failed  shall  be 
obtamed,  cither  from  the  same  test  piece  0"  there  is  sufficient   material 


12 


ISi7307(PartI)-1974 


TABLE  1    TEST  SPECIMENS* 

(Clauses  6.3  and  7.3A) 

Sl 
No. 

Tut  SpEGiittN 

Butt 
Joint 

IN 

Plate 

ButtToint 
OF  Outmd 

OR  DiMEh 

Up  to 
and  In- 
cluding 

88-9 

mm 

nPipe 

eDia 

moN 

Fillet 
Weld 

IN 

Plate 

Branch  Con- 
nection in  Pipe 
OF  Outside  Dia 
OR  Dimension 

Over 
88-9 
mm 

Up  to  Over 
and  In-  88*9 
eluding  mm 
88-9  mm 

0) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7)           (8) 

1. 

KCacro-examination 

2 

2 

2 

4t           8t 

2. 

HErdnesB  lurveyt 

1 

1 

I 

1             1 

S. 

Tnuifverse  teniiie 

1 

2 

— 

—           — 

4. 
5. 

AU-wdd  tenulef 
Root  bend 

2 

3 

— 

—           — 

6. 

Face  bend 

— 

1 

— 

—           — 

7. 
8. 

Side  bend  ( for  material 
at  least  10  mm  thick  ) 
Fillet  weld  fracture 

2 

I 

* 

3 

— —           ... 

*When  more  than  one  specimen  of  a  particular  type  is  required,  the  specimens  shall  he 
taken  as  far  apart  as  possible  with  one  specimen  for  macro-examination  taken  from  that 
part  of  the  jomt  considered  to  have  been  welded  in  the  most  difficult  welding  position  or 
finom  a  stop/start  position. 

|For  purely  structural  application  the  number  of  specimens  may  be  reduced  to  2  and  4 
respectively. 

}The  hardness  survey  shall  be  made  on  a  macro-examination  test  specimen. 

|To  include  high-temperature  testing  when  appropriate. 


available  or  from  a  new  test  piece,  and  subjected  to  the  same  test.  If  either 
of  these  additional  test  specimens  does  not  meet  the  required  standard,  the 
procedure  shall  not  be  r^arded  as  capable  of  meeting  the  requirements 
of  this  standard  without  modification. 

7.1  J  When  any  further  test  piece  or  test  specimen  fails  to  meet  the  requir- 
ed standard  for  non-destructive  or  destructive  testing,  the  cause  of  fiilure 
shall  be  established.  Dependent  upon  the  results  of  the  examination,  the 
procedure  shall  either  be  modified  or  a  new  procedure  approved.  By 
agreement  between  the  contracting  parties,  a  modified  procedure  may  be 
approved  without  the  need  for  further  test  pieces  to  be  welded. 

7.2  NmfdMtrmcdvm  Testliig 

7.2.1  Examination  —  All  test  pieces  shall  be  examined  i^on-destTuc* 
tivdy  after  any  post-weld  heat  treatment  and  prior  to  the  cutting  of  tat 
tpecimenSr 

13 


I8:7307(PmrtI).»74 

All  test  pieces  shall  be  examined  visually  followed  by: 

a)  magnetic  particle  or  penetrant  testing  (  j^^  18:5334-1969*  and 
IS:  3658-1966!  );  and/or 

b)  ultrasonic  and/or  radiographic  examination  (  J*e  IS:  4260-1969J; 
IS:  1182-1967§  and  IS  :  4853-1 968|| ); 

depending  upon  joint  geometry  and  material.  The  types  of  tests  shall  not  be 
lets  than  that  required  for  production  work,  according  to  the  requirements 
of  the  application  standard  where  it  exists. 

7.2.2  Acceptance  Levels  —  Defects  that  arc  detected  by  visual  exami- 
nation and  the  other  relevant  methods  of  non-destructive  testing  shall  be 
assessed  in  accordance  with  the  details  specified  in  Table  2.  The  existence 
of  any  defect  greater  than  the  maximum  permitted  by  Table  2  shall  be 
sufficient  cause  for  rejection.  Minor  local  defects,  except  cracks,  which  can 
be  established  as  being  due  solely  to  the  welder's  workmanship  need  not 
be  the  cause  for  rejection. 

Note  1  —  Multiple  type  faults  contained  within  the  same  weld,  cither  fuprrimposed  or 
interposed,  which  arc  individually  acceptable  as  isolated  imperfections  may  be  considered 
acceptable  provided  that  investigation  shows  that  there  is  nothing  fundamentally  wrong 
with  the  welding  procedure. 

Note  2  —  It  should  be  appreciated  that  thl  details  given  in  Table  2  may  be  different 
from  those  specified  for  a  particular  application. 

7  J  Dettroctivc  Tests 

7.3.1  Test  Specimens  —  According  to  the  type  and  size  of  test  piece, 
the  specimens  to  be  obtained  shall  be  as  given  in  Table  1 . 

When  the  size  and  thickness  of  a  pipe  butt  joint  arc  such  that  the 
test  specimens  required  cannot  be  obtained,  then  some  other  method  of 
test  as  agreed  between  itic  contracting  parties  shall  be  used,  for  example  a 
fill!  size  tensile  test  or  a  pressure  test. 

NoTB  —  It  may  be  useful  and  advantageous  to  carry  out  more  comprehensive  testing 
than  is  required  by  this  clause  ( for  example,  Charpy  V-notch  impact  tests,  chemical 
anmlysif  and  micro-examination  )  in  order  to  gain  more  information  and  to  avoid 
having  to  repeat  the  weldinff  procedure  test  at  a  later  date  just  to  obtain  additional  test 
data.  The  dimensions  of  the  test  piece  would  probably  have  to  be  increased  if 
additioiud  tem  were  made. 


^Code  of  practice  for  magnetic  particle  flaw  detection  of  welds. 

tCode  of  practice  for  liquid  penetrant  flaw  detection. 

^Recommended  practice  for  ultrasonic  testing  of  welds  in  ferritic  stoel. 

{Recommended  practice  for  radiographic  examination  of  fusion  welded  butt  jointa  in 
ited  plates  (  first  revision ). 

||Recommended  practice  for  radiographic  examination  of  fusion  welded  circumferentifd 
jdnti  in  ited[pipef . 

14 


ISs7307(PartI).1974 


TABLE  2    ACCEPTANCE  LEVELS  —  NON-DESTRUCTIVE  TESTING 

[Clause  7.2.2) 


Defect  Type 

1)  Planar  Defects 

a)  Cracks  and  lamellar  tcan 

b)  Root  concavity 

c)  Lack  of  root  fusion 

d)  Lack  of  side  fusion 

c)  Lack  of  inter-run  fusion 
f )  Lack  of  root  penetration 

2)  Cavities 

a)  Isolated  p)ores  (or  individual 
pores  in  a  group) 


b)  Uniformly    distributed     or 
localized  porosity 

c)  Linear  porosity 


d)  Wormholes,  isolated 

c)  Wormholes,  aligned 
f )  Crater  pipes 

3)  Solid  Inclusions  ( Slag  Inclusions ) 

a)  Individual  and  parallel  to  weld 
axis  (  as  seen  in  the  radiograph  ) 

b)  Linear  group* 


c)  Individual  and  randomly  orien- 
tated (  not  parallel  to  weld  axis  ) 


Permitted,  Maximum 


Not  permitted 

01  ^  or  1*2  mm  whichever  is  less 

Not  permitted 

Not  permitted 

Not  permitted 

Not  permitted 


0  >  ^4 

015  mm  for  e  up  to  and  including  25  mm 

0  3*0  mm  for  e  over  25  mm  up  to  and  includ- 
ing 50  mm 

0  4' 5  mm  for  e  over  50  mm  up  to  and  includ- 
ing 75  mm 

0  6*0  mm  for  e  over  75  mm 

1  percent  by  area  (  as  seen  in  a  radiograph  ) 
for  *  >  25  mm  and  pro  rata  for  greater  thick- 
nesses 

Linear  porosity  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  weld 
may  indicate  lack  of  fusion  or  lack  of  penetra- 
tion and  is  therefore  not  permitted 

/  >  6  mm,  w  >  1*5  mm  (  as  seen  in  radio- 
graph ) 

As  linear  porosity 

As  wormlkolcs  isolated 


e  >  18  mm  ^  >  18  >  75  mm  e  >75mm 

/  >  */2  >()  mm  /  >  W3  /  >  25  mm 

IV  >  1*5  mm        w  y  1*5  mm        w  >  1*5  nmi 

Aggregate  length  should  not  exceed  8  percent 
of  length  of  group,  which  in  turp  should 
not  exceed  1 2e  in  length 

Maximum  dimension  in  any  direction  6  mm 


^Individual  inclusions  within  the  group  should  not  exceed  the  sizes  in  3  (a)  abow.  A 
linear  group  is  defined  as  a  number  of  inclusions  in  line  and  parallel  to  the  weld  axis  where 
the  spacing  between  their  adjacent  ends  docs  not  exceed  6  times  the  length  of  the  longest 
inclusion  within  the  group.  With  parallel  groups,  all  inclusions  count  towards  the  aggrrgatc, 

(  Omtbiued ) 


15 


I$t7307(PartI).1974 


TABLE  2   AGGEPTANGE  LEVELS  - 

Defect  Type 

4)  Tungsten  Inclusions 

a)  Isolated 

b)  Grouped 

5)  Copper  Inclusions     (  Detected  by    Visual 
Examination  or  by  Radiography  ) 

6)  Profile  Defects 

a)  Undercut 

b)  Shrinkage     grooves    and    root 
concavity 

c)  Excess  penetration 

d)  Reinforcement  shape 


e)  Overlap 

f)  Linear  misaligmnent 


NON.DESTRUG11VE  TESTING  —  Qmid 
Periiittbd,  Maximum 

As  isolated  pores 

i\s  uniformly  distributed  or  localized  porority 

Not  permitted 


Slight  intermittent  undercut  permitted  pro- 
vided  it  docs  not  form  a  sharp  notch:  depth 
should  not  exceed  0-4  mm 

As  for  undercut,  depth  should  not  exceed 
1*2  mm 

h  >  3  mm.  Occasional  local  slight  excess  is 
allowable 

The  reinforcement  shall  blend  smoothly  with 
the  parent  metal  and  dressing  is  not  normally 
requu-cd  provided  the  shape  does  not  inter- 
fere with  the  specified  NDT  techniques 

Not  permitted 

h  >  */10,\3mm 


Abbreviations  used: 

e  »  parent  metal  thickness. 

thinner  component. 
w  B  width. 

/  «  length. 
h  —  height. 
0  e=?  diameter. 


In  the  case  of  dissimilar  thicknesses  e  applies  to  the 


7,3.2  Preparation  and  Testing  — The  preparation,  shape  and  dimen- 
sions of  test  specimens  and  the  methods  of  testing  them,  except  the  hardness 
survey,  shall  be  as  specified  in  IS :  3600-1973'. 

The  method  of  hardness  testing  shall  be  in  accordance  with  IS  :  1501- 
1968t  and  the  survey  shall  include  at  least  two  traverses  of  the  weld  section 
covering  the  parent  metal  and  heat-affected  zones  on  each  side  of  the  weld 
as  well  as  the  weld  metal. 

For  high  temperature  applications  the  all-wcld  tensile  test  shall  be 
carried  out  at  the  maximum  service  temperature. 

Each  bend  test  specimen  shall  be  bent  through  at  least  90*  round  a 
former  of  a  diameter  as  specified  below: 

For  Group  FEl  steels        3/ 

•Method  of  testing  fusion  welded  joints  and  weld  metal  in  steel  {first  revisit  ). 
tMetbod  for  Vickcrs  hardnets  test  for  tied  {first  revision ). 


16 


I»:7307(PiirtI).197« 

For  Group  FE2  steels         4f 

For  other  steels  A  diameter  equal  to  \t  greater  than  that 

required  to  test  the  parent  metal  of  the 

same  thickness 
where  /  is  the  thickness  of  the  specimen. 
7.3.3  Test  Results 

a)  Macro-examination  and  fillet  weld  fracture  test — The  etched  face  for 
macro-examination  and  the  fracture  surface  from  the  fillet  weld 
test  shall  be  assessed  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  7.2.2. 

b)  Hardness  survey  —  The  results  from  the  hardness  survey  shall  be 
recorded.  — 

c)  Transverse  tensile  test  —  The  tensile  strength  shall  be  not  less  than 
the  corresponding  minimum  value  for  the  parent  metal  and  the 
location  of  the  fracture  shall  be  recorded. 

d)  All-weld  tensile  test  —  The  tensile  strength  and  yield  stress  shall  be 
recorded.  Depending  on  which  parameter  the  design  criteria  are 
based,  either  the  tensile  strength  or  the  yield  stress  shall  be  not 
less  than  the  corresponding  minimum  values  for  the  parent  metal. 
The  tensile  strength  shall  not  exceed  by  more  than  20  percent  of 
the  maximum  value  specified. 

Note  —  The  design  criteria  arc  based  on  either  yield  stress  or  tensile  strength. 

The  elongation  shall  be  not  less  than  16  percent  or  0*8  times  the  minimum  value 
for  the  parent  metal  whichever  is  the  greater. 

When  relevant,  the  high  temperature  values  of  these  properties  shall  be  not  less 
than  the  corresponding  values  for  the  parent  metal  at  the  appropriate  temperature. 

c)  Bend  tests  —  On  completion  of  bending,  any  defects  exceeding  3  mm 
at  the  outer  surface  of  the  test  specimen  shall  be  investigated  and 
their  cause  established  before  the  specimens  are  accepted.  Slight 
tearing  at  the  comers  of  the  test  specimen  shall  not  be  the  cause  foi 
rejection. 

8.  STATEMENT  OF  RESULTS 

8.1  A  statement  of  the  results  of  assessing  each  test  piece,  including  repeat 
tests,  shall  be  made  for  each  welding  procedure.  The  items  required  under 
3  shall  be  included  toi^cthcr  with  details  of  any  features  that  would  be 
rejectahle  by  the  requirements  of  7.2.2  and  of  the  lest  results  in  accordance 
with  7.3.3.  If  no  rejectahle  features  or  test  results  are  found,  a  stateihent 
that  the  test  piece  made  according  to  the  particular  welding  procedure  satis- 
fied the  requirements  of  this  standard  in  respect  of  that  type  of  test  piece 
shall  be  signed  by  the  person  conducting  the  test  (  see  also  Appendix  A  ). 

It  is  recommended  that  welding  procedure  tests  carried  out  in 
accordance  with  this  standard  and  witnessed  by  an  independent  inspect- 
ing authority  should  be  accepted  by  other  inspecting  authorities  provided 
that  all  the  provisions  have  been  fulfilled. 

17 


IS  1 7307  (Part  I).  1974 

APPENDIX    A 

i  Clause  S.l  ) 
TYPICAL  WELDING  PROCXJ>URE  TEST  RECORD 
TEST  RECORD  OF  SHOP* /SITE*  WELD  PROCEDURE 
Manofactorer's  Name  Procedare  No. 


Weld  preparation 

Run  sequence  and  completed 
weld  dimensions 

(Sketch) 
( State  method  and  fit-up ) 

( Sketch ) 

Dimensions  of  test  piece 

Parent  material  ( s ) 

Welding  position 

Position  of  test  piece 

Pre-heating  and  interpass 
temp)erature,  method  and  control 

Post-weld  heat  treatment 

temperature,  method  and  control 

Welding  Cfl 

Filler  material 
Make 
Type 

Composition 
Size 

»n8iunables 

Shielding  gas  1  flux 
Type  of  flux 
Composition  of  gas 
Flow  rate 

Travel  speed  (  mechanized  welding ) 

Back  gouging 

Welding  proces8(  es ) 

Additional  information 

Drafted  by  date 

Approved  by 

Revision 

^Delete  as  neccisary. 

18 


IS :  7307  (  Part  I )  •  1974 

TMt  Remits  foiU^medjiif^Ma. 


Type  of  test  State  :  —  Satisfactory,  unsatisfactory  or  not 

(  Delete  any  not  required  )  approved  except  where  numerical 

results  are  obtained 


Non-destructive  tests 

Visual 

Magnetic  particle 

Penetrant 

Radiography/Ultrasonics 

- 

Destructive  tests 

Transverse  tensile 

Tensile 
strength 

Tensile 
strength 

Yield 
stress 

Location  of  fracture 

All-weld  tensile 

Yield 
stress 

0-2% 
proof 
stress 

Elongation 
% 

Guided  bend  tests 
Root        Side        Face 

Root        Side        Face 

-— 

-  — 

Root        Side        Face 

Root        Side        Face 

Fillet  weld  fracture 



- 



Macro-ex  amination 

Hardness  survey 

Additional  tests 


Remarks 


Inspecting  authority 
Witnessed  by 
Date 


Manufacturer's  signature 

Position 

Date 


19 


IS  :  7307  (  Part  1 )  -  1974 

(  ConHnuidfrom  pagt  2  ) 

Training  and  Testing  of  Welders,  Handbooks  and  Other' 
Publications  Subcommittee,  SMDC  14:  4 

Convener  Representing 

SiiRi  S.  V.  Sambamurti  Indian  Oxygen  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Members 

Shri  J.  K.  Ahluwalia  Stewarts  and  Lloyds  of  India  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shri  Gajender  Singh  Indian  Institute  of  Technology,  Madras 

Prop  A.  P.  Jambuunoam  Indian  Society  for  Technical  Education,  New  Delhi 

Shri  S.  V.  Nadkarni  Advani-Ocrlikon  Private  Ltd,  Bombay 


20 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg.  NEW  DELHI  11 0002 

Telephones:  323  0131 .  323  3375,  323  9402     Fax  :+  91  01 1  3234062.  3239399,  3239382 

E  -  Mail :  bis@vsnl.com    Website  :  http://www.bis.org.in 


Central  Laboratory: 

Plot  No.  20/9.  Site  IV,  Sahibabad  Industrial  Area,  Sahibabad  201010 

Regional  Offices: 

Central :  Manal<  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  NEW  DELHI  1 10002 

^Eastern  :  1/14  CIT  Scheme  VII,  VI.P.  Road,  Kankurgachi,  CALCUTTA  700054 

Northern  :  SCO  335-336.  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022 

Southern  :  C.I.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600113 

t  Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9.  MIDC,  Behind  Marol  Telephone  Exchange, 
Andheri  (East),  MUMBAI  400093 

Branch  Offices: 

'Pushpak',  Nurmohamed  Shaikh  Marg,  Khanpur,  AHMEDABAD  380001 

Peenya  Industrial  Area,  1st  Stage,  Bangalore-Tumkur  Road, 
BANGALORE  560058 

Commercial-cum-Office  Complex,  Opp,  Dushera  Maidan,  E-5  Arera  Colony, 
BIttan  Market.  BHOPAL  462016 

62-63,  Ganga  Nagar,  Unit  VI,  BHUBANESHWAR  751001 

5th  Floor,  Kovai  Towers,  44  Bala  Sundaram  Road.  COIMBATORE  641018 

Plot  No.  58,  Neelam  Bata  Road,  NIT,  FARIDABAD  121001 

Savitri  Complex,  116  G.T  Road.  GHAZIABAD  201001 

53/5  Ward  No.  29,  R.G.  Barua  Road.  5th  By-lane.  Apurba  Sinha  Path, 
GUWAHATI  781003 

5-8-56C,  L.N.  Gupta  Marg,  Nampally  Station  Road,  HYDERABAD  500001 

E-52,  Chitaranjan  Marg,  C-Scheme,  JAIPUR  302001 

1 17/418  B,  Sarvodaya  Nagar,  KANPUR  208005 

Seth  Bhawan,  2nd  Floor,  Behind  Leela  Cinema,  Naval  Kishore  Road, 
LUCKNOW  226001 

NIT  Building,  Second  Floor,  Gokulpat  Market,  NAGPUR  440010 

Mahabir  Bhawan,  1st  Floor,  Ropar  Road.  NALAGARH  174101 

Patliputra  Industrial  Estate,  PATNA  800013 

First  Floor.  Plot  Nos.  657-660,  Market  Yard,  Gultekdi,  PUNE  411037 

'Sahajanand  House'  3rd  Floor,  Bhaktinagar  Circle,  80  Feet  Road, 
RAJKOT  360002 

T.C.  No.  14/1421.  University  PO.  Palayam,  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM  695034 


•Sales  Office  is  at  5  Chowringhee  Approach,  P.O.  Princep  Street, 

CALCUTTA  700072 
t Sales  Office  Is  at  Novelty  Chambers,  Grant  Road,  MUMBAI  4000d7 


Telephone 
477  0032 

3*7617 
337  86  62 
60  38  43 
254  13  16 
832  92  95 


550  13  48 
839  49  55 

72  34  52 

40  36  27 
21  88  35 
542  82  61 
471  19  98 
54  1 1  37 

320  10  84 
37  38  79 
21  68  76 
21  89  23 

52  51  71 
2  14  51 
26  28  08 
426  86  59 
37  82  51 

32  21  04 

23710  85 

309  65  28 


Printed  at  Simco  Printing  Press,  Delhi 


