UDC

001'4

: 687-053-6

IS:9152-1979

Indian

Standard

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

1 659

I

GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND IDENTIFICATION SYMBOLS RELATING TO CLASSIFICATION OF INDUSTRIAL SEWING MACHINES
glossary machines, o$ terms * and identification symbols relating to three classes of

1. Scope-Covers
industrial 2. Classes 2.1 Principal stitch form.

sewing

Class -

The sewing

machines machines

shall

be classified

into

principal

class according

to the

2.2 Secondary Class - The sewing class according to their use,

in principal

class

shall

be classified

into secondary into tertiary

2.3 Tertiary C/assThe sewing machines class according to the shape of the bed. 3. Terminology 3.1 Principal Term and identification Class

in secondary

class shall

be further

classified

Symbols

Definition Refers to the stitch form whereby the needle thread is made to circle around the bobbin containing the bobbin thread to interlace the needle and bobbin threads. Refers to the stitch form wherein the thread is passed through only from one side of material to form a chain like intralooped stitched. Refers to the stitch form wherein interlaced and interlooped with looper thread handled by the looper.

Identification Symbol L

Figures 1,2, 3, 4,5, 6, and 7

Lock stitch

Chain stitch Multi-thread chain stitch or double locked stitch Flat stitch seam

C

8,9 and 10 11, 12. 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17 18, 19, 20, 21, and 22 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, and 29 30 -

D

Refers to the stitch form wherein three or more threads are used, one or more of which are used for crossstitching between other two or more, while the lower threads interloop with two respective upper threads. Refers to the stitch form wherein the thread or threads are intralooped and/or interlooped at the top and/or underside of the edge of material by the action of the looper*. Refers to the stitch form wherein two or more different stitch forms are used in combination. Refers to all stitch forms using thread and not belonging to the principal class given above. -_ Refers to the stitch form whereby the material is welded while being fed by roller type electrode. ~~~ .----

F

O;te;t;Qe

E

Combination stitch Special Neat ~~~ stitch

Mt S W ~_____~~

sealing

*The looper is a part of a mechanism which forms a IoOP on the looper thread necessary for makes up a stitch by acting on the loop of needle thread either with or without the looper thread. j-In the case of identification symbol `M' for combination stitches, symbol representing stitch therein as listed under principal class may be indicated after `M' in parentheses when required.

stitching, and it
forms combined

Example :
Adopted

M(ED) @ January I INDIAN
MANAK 1980, ISI I W&c MARG 0

5 June 1979

STANDARDS

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS:9152

-1979

4

3.2 -Secondary Class
Term Definition I itraight Ioubleor straight stitch multiple stitch Refers to the method of sewing wherein the material is fed mechanically to stitch a straight line continuously. Reverse sewing shall be included in this straight line sewing. Refers to the lines. method of sewing two more straight paratlel Identification Symbol S

T

!igzag stitch imbroidery ing stitch-

Refers to the method of sewing wherein the material is sewncontinuously mechanically in staggered fashion. It is also called zigzag sewing. I Refers to the method of sewing wherein can be sewn manually or mechanically. any pattern or design

Z

E

3utton sewing

Refers to the mechanical process or sewing on buttons or snaps on clothing, etc, by holding them in position and perform the operation in a single cycle, and stop automatically after completing each cycle. Refers to the method of mechanically cutting and stitching the button hole in one operating cycle and stop automatically after completing each cycle. Refers to the method of mechanical operation wherein the bar tacking of clothing, etc, and also sewing on the accessories, etc, are performed in one operating cycle and stop automatically after completing each cycle.

B

3utton hole sewing

H

Bar tacking

K

Ornamental ing

stitch-

Refers to the method of sewing wherein the stitch formation is mainly ornamental such as the shell stitched hem. Also includes ornamental stitching, as incidental object as in the
case of sewing with two needles.

D

Blind

stitch

Refers to the method of sewing wherein a thick material is sewn by passing the thread through the top ply and horizontally out penetrating it the full depth. Since seams are not visible on the surface, it is called ` blind stitching ' or ` felling.' It is applicable for sewing coat lapels or where ordinary blind stitching and edge finishing are required. Refers to the method of sewn with the primary ing ornamental effect. _ -_Refers to the method -of sewn simultaneously strengthening. sewing wherein the edge of material is object of preventing fraying, or providsewing wherein an independent seam is as the hemming for the purpose of

M

Hem stitch

F

Reinforcing

stitch

A

Sewing in direction

every

Refers to the method of sewing wherein the universal feed mechanism permits stitching in every direction from the centre of needle*. Refers to the method of sewing whereby the mouth~of a bag is sewn in a manner capable of being opened readily in reverse direction to the stitching without using any implement.
classification

J

Bag closing

P

Note -The sewing methods which do not fall under the secondary identification symbol X.
*Universal

above, shall be designated b in every direction.

feed mechanism is a device built IntO the arm whereby it permits stitching

2

IS: 91529 1979
3.3 Tertiary Class identification Symbol bed less than with the table

Term

Definition

Short flat machine

bed

Refers to the type of machine with flat rectangular 420 mm in length and which is set almost flush surface when mounted on the table. -~ Refers to the type of machine with flat rectangular 420 mm in length and which is set almost flush surface when mounted on the table.

1

flat Long machine

_bed

bed more than with the table

2

Cylinder machine

1 Refers to the type of machine with arm-like bed projecting almost Normally, the material is fed at right parallel to the arm. bed angle or parallel to this arm, and is used for sewing cuffs on sleeves. The type having a separate feed mechanism and automatic stop is used for tacking or button sewing. bed Refers to the type of machine having a box shaped bed which completely covers the internal mechanism, and which is placed on top of the table for operation. Refers to the type of machine having an upright for hemming edge of bags and gloves, etc.
bed convenient

3

Box type machine

4

Post bed machine

5

Cylinder bed, feedoff arm machine

Refers to the type of machine having an arm-like bed projecting horizontally at right angle to the arm wherein the work is automatically-fed parallel to the feed-off arm, and is used for sewing sleeves, trouser legs, etc, in a cylindrical form,
to sewing

6

NoteIdentification symbol 9 shall be applied fall under tertiary classification given above.

machines

with

unusual

shaped

bed

which

does

not

4. Stitch FormsThe stitch forms principal class and secondry class.

are

closely

related

to identification

symbols

and terms

for

4.1 The stitch forms shall be divided into and the number of needles and threads in 4. When identifying ` multiple stitch,' these shall be entered next to the form of

30 classes ( see Fig. 1 to 30 ) according to the stitched form used in sewing, and shall be identified in the order given ' one sided ornamental stitch ' and ` blind hemming', etc, stitch (see Fig. 5 and 16 ). below and be identified in the order

4.2 Symbols - The symbols for stitch forms shall be as given of stitch form, number of needles and number of threads: rL IC 4D 1F IE CS (1 12 1 3 L4
in the number

Stitch

forms

( Lock stitch ) (Single chain stitch ) ( Multi-thread chain stitch ) ( Flat seam stitch ) (Overedge stitch ) (Special stitch ) (1 (2 (3 (4 needle), needles ) needles ) needles )

Number

of needles*

*Only

the threaded

needle shall

be included

of needles.

3

IS : 9152- 1979

Number

of threads 5 ( 5 threads ) I 6 9 (6 9 threads )

4.2.1 The symbol Z as for ' zigzag stitch ' and M as for ` blind stitch ' shall be entered stitch' form. To identify ` multiple stitch,' ` one sided ornamental stitch ' and ` blind symbol A or B shall be entered in the last place (see Fig. 25 and 28).

next to the hemming',

machine shall be made by combining the identification 5. Marking - The marking of sewing symbols of each class in the order of principal, secondary and tertiary class. In case of combined or ambiguous classifications in the secondary or tertiary classes, marking shall be based on the If it becomes necessary to indicate both in particular, the symbols identifying major classification. the combination shall be indicated in parentheses after the major identification symbol. Examples:

Principal
Lock stitch

Secondary

Tertiary

Identification
LS 1

Symbol

I
Straight stitch Short flat bed

Multi-thread

chain

stitch

I I

Hem stitch

I I

Box type bed
Box type bed

DF 4

Overedge

stitch

Hem stitch

EF 4

Lock stitch

Bar tacking

Cylinder

bed

LK 3

Multi-thread

chain

stitch

Double

or multiple

Cylinder

bed, feed-off
bed

arm

DT 6

Single

chain

stitch

Blind

stitch

I
Combination edge stitch, chain stitch) stitch ( overmulti-thread Reinforcing stitch

I

Cylinder

I
Box type bed M(ED)

CM 3

A 4

4

rs:m2-1979
Figuw Wuder ~StitchFormation _Designation Symbol

I _-

Lock stitch 1. 1 needle . 2 threads

L 12

2

Lock stitch 2 needles . 3 threads

L 23

-_

3

Lock stitch 3 needles 4 threads

L 34

.4

_

Lock stitch, zigzag 1 needle . 2 threads

LZ 12

_5

_6

Lock stitch Multiple stitch, Zigzag 1 needle . 2 threads
_

LZ 12A

Lock stitch, Zigzag 2 needles . 3 threads

LZ 23

7

_-

Lock stitch, Blind 1 needle . 2 threads

LM 12

-_
8

--

Single chain stitch I needle . 1 thread

c 11

5

-

-gure Number Stitch Formation 1 Designation Symbol

Single chain stitch 2 needles . 2 threads

c 22

10

Single

c$i;

stitch CM 11

1 needle

, 1 thread

Multi-thread chain stitch 1 needle . 2 threads

D 12

Multi-thread 2needles

chain stitch . 3 threads

D 23

Multi-thread 3 needles L

chain stitch . 4 threads

D34

14

Multi-thread chain stitch Zigzag 1 needle 2 threads .

DZ 12

Multi-thread~chain stitch Zigzag 2 needles . 3 threads

DZ 23

6

IS:9152-1979
gure Number Stitch Formation Designation Symbol

16

Multi-thread chain stitch One sided ornamental stitch 2 needles . 3 threads

D 23A

Multi-thread chain stitch Ine sided ornamental stitch 3 needles . 4 threads

D 34A

18

Flat seam stitch One cover thread ouble sided ornamental stitcl 2 needles . 4 threads

_F 24

19

Flat seam stitch ' Two cover threads ouble sided ornamental stitc 2 needles . 5 threads

F 25

20

Flat seam stitch One cover thread Double sided ornamental stitc 3 needles , 5 threads

F 35

21

Flat seam stitch Two cover threads Double sided ornamental stitc 3 needles . 6 threads

F 36

22

Flat seam stitch 4 needles . 9 threads

F 49

7

1 needle

Overedge

stitch . 1 thread

Overedge stitch 1 needle . 2 thread

Overedge stitch Blind hemming. 1 needle . 2threads

Overedge stitch 1 needle . 3 threads

Overedge stitch Blind hemming 1 needle . 3 threads

Overedge stitch Multi-thread chain stitch 1 needle . 3 threads

Overedge stitch 2 needles . 4 threads

1 needle

. 1 thread

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

While preparing this standard assistance has been derived from JIS B 9070-1962 `Identification symbols and terms on classification of sewing machine heads for industrial use' issued by Japanese Industrial..Staf?dards Committee. . . .I, 6,.,1 " 8
Printed at New lndla Printing Press, Khurja, India

