IS14177:1994 ( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard

GUIDELINES FOR PAINTING SYSTEM FOR HYDRAULIC GATES AND HOISTS

UDC

626.422'2 :621'75)5'3

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN.

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 11ooU2

Octohr

1994

Price Group

3

Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee, RVD 12

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. Gates, its embedded parts, hoists and-its supporting structures should be protect4 against corrosion due to climatic condition, biochemical reaction and abrasion due to different forces acting on it, otherwise these equipments may deteriorate to an extent that the replacement of parts may bccomc necessary and such replacementswill become very difficult. It is, therefore, recommended that a suitable painting system should be adopted. In the formulation of this standard assistance from the following publications have been &rived: 1) ISO-8501-l : 1988 Preparation of steel substrates bcforc application of paints and related products - Visual assessment of surface clcanlincss. 2) BS 4232 : 1967 Specification for surface finish of blast-clcancd slccl for painting. 3) Swedish Standard SlSU55900 Rust grades for steel surfaces and preparation protective coating. grades prior to

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requircmcnt of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for roundin!: off numerical values (rer*ised)`. The numhcr of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14177 : 1994

Indian Standard

GUIDELINES FOR PAINTING SYSTEM FOR HYDRAULIC GATES AND HOISTS
1 SCOPE

This standard lays down the methods of preparation of steel surfaces, painting operation and paint system applicable to hydraulic gates, hoists and their supporting structures.
2 REFRRENCES The Indian Standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to this standard.
IS No.

3.4 The chemical composition of the paint should be considered while selecting the type of paint. 4 SURFACE PREPARATION PRIOR TO APPLICATION OF PAINT 4.0 For adherence and durability of the paint system it is extremely important that a suitable surface preparation is carried out. 4.1 The factors which influence the performance of painting system are: a) Presence of mill scale and rust. b) Presence of foreign material such as oil, grease, etc. c) Profile of the surface. d) Presence of welded surface, spatter and

Title

1477 (Part 1) : Code of -practice for painting of 1971 ferrous metals in buildings: Part I Pretreatment (first rrvision) 1477 (Part 2) : Code of practice for painting of 1971 ferrous metals in buildings: Part 2 Painting (first revision) 2339 : 1963 2932 : 1974

sharp projects. 4.2 Types of Surface Preparation
4.2.1 Blast Cleaning

Aluminium paint for general purposes in dual container. Enamel, synthetic, exterior (a) undercoating (b) finishing (ftrst revbion)

3 SELECTION OF PAINTING SYSTEM 3.0 The following factors should determine the type of painting system to be adopted: a) Location; b) Climatic condition; c) Water quality, for example, Salinity, and d) Composition of paint. ' 3.1 Lomtion The painting system to be adopted depends on location of the structure, component or equipment relating to water exposure that is whether it is submerged under water, partially submerged under water, above water, occasionally submerged under water or is to be in contact, with concrete surface. 3.2 C@natic Conditions .i climatic condition of the area where the equipment is to be installed also plays a part in the selection of painting system.
The

Surfaces requiring blast cleaning should be sand/ grit/shot blasted after fabrication prior to painting. Heavy deposits of grease or oil may be removed by the solvent like clean mineral, spirits, xylol or white, gasoline, etc. prior to sand blasting. Small quantities of grease or~oil may be removed by the blasting process in which case, however, the abrasive should not be reused if it contains sufftcient oil or grease to render it unsuitabie for blast cleaning purposes. The average surface roughness after sand-blasting should not exceed 40 microns. Blast cleaning should be performed with sand/ grit/shot as per requirements given.in IS 1477 (Part 1) : 1971.After-blast cleaning, thesurfaceshouldbe cieatied from loose dust.and debris preferably by air blast with the help of blower. For the purpose of surface preparation, blast cleaning is classified into four classes as given in 4.2.1.1 to 4.2.1.4. 4.2.1.1 Class `A' This is the best quality of Blast cleaning. Whole surface of steel should be cleaned to bare metal without any res'idual~in any form. , : ,. _, 4.2.1.2 Class `B' Under this class at least 95 percent of surface of steel should be cleaned to bare metal except some tightly bonded residue in the form of millscale/rust 1

3.3 The pH value and salinity -of water is to be considered while selecting the type of finish coat.

IS 14177 : 1994 only. The extent of residue should not be more than be allowed to dry or to harden before the succeed10 percent of any single square having an area of ing coat is applied. Newly cleaned or painted surface should remain in a covered shop protected 6.25 cm'. from moisture, condensation, contamination and 4.2.1.3 Class `C' freezing temperatures until the paint is thoroughly Under this. class at least 80 percent of surface of cured. Each coat should be thoroughly dried and steel should be cleaned to bare metal except some cured before application of succeeding coats. Care tightly bonded residue in the form of millscale/rust shauld be taken to prevent contamination of suronly. The extent of residue should not be more than faces between coats of paint. 40 percent of any single square having an area of All coats should be applied in such a manner that 6.25 cm2. produce an even film of uniform thickness com4.2.6.4 Class `II' pletely covering all corners and crevices. Coating Under this class at least 65 percent of surface of should be done by qualified workers experienced in steel should be cleaned to bare metal except some applying the specific coating materials. tightly bonded residue in the form of millscale/rust only. The extentof residue should not be more than Thinner should not be added to any paint. How60 percent of any single square having an area of ever, if used, solvents should be compatible with the paint materials being applied. 6.25 cm2. Spray application should be performed with airless 4.2.2 Hand and Power Toal Cleaning spray equipment. Spray guns should be suited to the Surfaces should be prepared. by hand and power type of paint being used and,`should be operated tool cleaning such as scraping, wire. brushing, with orifices, nozzles and air pressure suited to the machine brushing and grinding. Prior to hand and type of paint and its consistency. Paint .pofs should power tool cleaning, any heavy layer of rust should be equipped with means of controlling air or liquid be removed by chipping, visible oil, grease, dirt and pressure~on the pot independently of the-pressure other foreign material should be cleaned,by using of the gun. Airlines should be equipped with water solvents by the use of clean mineral spirits, xylol or traps for positive removal of condensed moisture. white gasoline. After hand and power tool cleaning, the surface should be cleaned of loose dust and Brush application of priming coats should be debris. Before application of primer coat an absor- avoided. If brush is to be applied, paint material bant is preferably applied to remove very fine dust. shouldbe applied with succeeding coats, each coat This type of surface preparation may be used only of uniform coverage, well brushed out, leaving no in the case of small components of the hoist equip- defects. ment where blast cleaning is not feasible. All cleaning, surface preparation and coating application work should be done after the parts are 5 PAINTING completely fabricated and machine finished and 5.1 Application of Paints checked in the shop. The parts should be dis-. Surface preparation leaves the material in vul- assembled to the extent necessary to enable cleannerable condition. It is therefore essential that im: ing and coating, those surfaces, which are inaccesmediately after surface preparation but not later sible while assembled. After finish coating and than a time gap of 6 hours, the pFepared surface of c'urirtg,part should be reassembled as required for the steel metal should be covered with a primer shipment and coating on bolts or connections that will not be removed in erection should be touched coat. up. if some surfaces are in accessible for painting A primer coat cannot be expected to last for an the coating should be applied by sheep skin extensive period. It must receive finish coats before daubers. it deteriorates. Primer coated articles in storage should be examined every few weeks to determine Roller application of coating system should be whether additional painting is needed. avoided.,If it is essential to use the coating material The air temperature at the time of application must so applied it should be uniform and in even coats, not be below 1OOCand relative humidity should not without defects. The second coat should be applied be above 90 percent. Paint material should be at-right angle to the first coat. thoroughly mixed at the time of application. Each 5.2 Painting System coat of primer and paint should becompatible with _the previous and subsequent coats. Each coat The painting system should preferably be carried should be free from runs, drops, pinholes, wave, out in the shop in order to ensure good quality laps, sags and unnecessary brush marks and should control. Considering the facility available in the 2

IS 14177 : 11994 shop,that is, the sand/shot blasting, the application of primer coat should invariably be carried out in the shop. The first finishing coat should also preferably be carried out in the shop. If due to practical reasons the finishing coat is applied in the field the finished coat should be applied within the `time gap permitted by the paint manufacturer between the primer coat and finished coat. In some cases final coat of finished paint may be carried out in the field if inter coat bond permits. During .painting operations, all stainless steel, bronze nickel and other machined surface adjacent tometal work to be painted should be protected by covering with masking tape or other suitable means. Metal work which has been shop painted should be handled with care so as to preserve the shop coat in the best practicable conditions. Before proceeding with any painting operation, the base metal should. becleaned and all the areas of the shop paint which are defective' or damaged should be repainted. Metal work adjacent to field weld, rivetting or bolting where the shop paint coating has been damaged due to handling or due to heat.should be cleaned thoroughly to expose the base metal and should be repainted. Paint applied to such areas should be of the same types as used for the original shop coat. During assembly/fabrication the surface on which another member overlaps for welding should be cleaned and painted and then the secondary member should be placed on the primary member to avoid surface left unpainted. Heat resistant paint should be used. 5.2.1 Gates and Appurtenances
5.2.1.1 Surface preparation

(containing not less than 85% zinc on dry film) should be applied to give a total dry film thickness of 70 f 5 microns. 2) Lifting beamlhfting tackles - Over the prepared surfaces two coats of zinc phosphate primer should be applied giving a dry filin thickness of 40 microns per coat. 3) Exposed embedded parts - Over the prepared surfaces one coat of inorganic zinc silicate primer (preferably air-less spray) giving a dry film thickness of 70 + 5 microns should be applied. Alternatively two coats of zinc rich primer (containing not less than 85% zinc on dry film) should be applied to give a total dry film thickness of 75 +- 5 microns. 5.2.1.3 Finishing coats Over the primer coats the following finished coats should be applied: 1) Gates and stoplogs - Finishing coat should consist of two coats of solventless coaltar epoxy paint. These should be applied at an interval of 24 hours. Each coat should give a minimum dry film thickness of 150 + 5 microns. The total dry film thickness of all the coats including primer coating should not be less than350 microns. 2) Lifting beam - Finishing coat should consist of two coats of alkyd based micaceous iron oxide paint. Each coat of paint should give a minimum dry film thickness of 65 + 5 microns. The interval between coats should be 24 hours. The total dry film thickness of all coats including primer coating should not be less than 200 microns. 3) Exposed embedded parts - Finishing coat consist of two coats of solventless coaltar epoxy paint. These should be applied at an interval ofabout 24 hours. Each coat should give a dry film thickness of 150 rf: 5 microns. The total dry film thickness of~all the coats including primer coating should not be less than 350 microns. 5.2,2 Hoists and Supporting Structure
5.2.2.1 Srrflace preparation -

The following classes of blast cleaning for surface

preparation should be adopted. Details of classes are given in 4.2.1. 1) Gates and stop logs - As per Class B or Class A Liftingbeams - As peKlass C or Class B. 2) 3) Exposed embedded parts - As per Class B or Class A. 5.2.1.2 JXmer coat After surface preparation the following primer coats should be applied: 1) Gates and stoplogs - Over the prepared surfaces one,coat of Inorganic zinc silicate (Preferably airless spray) should be applied giving a dry film thickness of 70 + 5 microns. Alternatively two coats of zinc rich primer 3

per the requirements

Should be done as of Class B given in 4.2.1.2.

In case thesurface preparation is done manually by wire brush, mechanical tools, etc, instead of sand blasting all ferrous surfaces exposed to atmosphere or water shall be given a coat of rust inhibitive phosphate wash by brush immediately following cleaning operation and surface shall be thoroughly wetted with rust inhibitive wash at a rate ap-

IS 14177 : 1994 proximately 30 ml/m2 and allowed to dry for 24 hours. Rinsing after applications is generally not required but unreached residue if any shall be removed by wiping the inhibited surface with damp cloth, within one hour after rust inhibiting wash has dried thoroughly and after removing unreacted residue, the application of primer and painting as indicated in the following paragraph shall be carried out. 5.2.2.2 Primer coat ing to IS 2339 : 1963 Dr Synthetic enamel conforming to IS 2932 : 1974 to give a dry film thickness of 25 + 5 micrpns/cbat. 3) Hydraulichoist - AlLunmachined ferrous surfaces (hoist cylinder, cylinder heads, hydraulic piping, pCpe fittings, bonnet cover) exposed to water should be given two coats of solventless coal tar epoxy paint. Each coat should give a dry film thickness of 150 f 5 microns. Total dry film thickness of all the coats including primer coat should not be less than 350 microns. Surfaces unexposed to water should be given one coat of alkyd based micaceous iron,oxide paint to give dry film thickness of 65 k 5 microns followed by two coats of synthetic enamel paint conforming to IS 2932 : 1974 to give dry film thickness of 25 + 5 microns/coat. The interval between coats should be 24 hours. The total dry film thickness should not be less than 175.microns. Oil tank, control cabinet, hoist beams, pipe supports and clamps, ladders, etc, should be given three coats of aluminium paint conforming to IS 2339 : I%3 or synthetic enamel conforming to IS 2932 : 1974 to give a dry film thickness of 25 2 5 microns per coat. The total dry film thickness of all the coats including primer coat should not be less than 125 microns. 41 Unmachinedsurfnces-The unfinished surfaces of the piston and the unfinished surfaces of cylinder heads should be cleaned and given three coats of vinyl resin/ chlorinated rubber to give a dtyfilm thickness of 30 + 5 microns/coat, to obtain a minimum dry film thickness of 125 microns including primer coat. 5.2.3 Machined Surfaces

1) Structural component - Two coats of zinc
phosphate primer should be applied. Dry film thickness of 40 + 5 micron per coat should be given. Machinery - Except machined surfaces, all surfaces of the~machinery including gearing housing, shafting bearing pedestals, etc, should be given one coat of zinc phosphate priming paint to give a minimum dry film thickness of 50 microns. Motors and other bought out items should also be painted if necessary. Hydraulic hoist - All unmachined ferrous surfaces (hoist cylinder, cylinder heads, hydraulic piping, pipe fittings, bonnet covers) exposed to water should .be given one coat of inorganic zinc silicate (preferably airless spray) to give a dry film thickness of 70 & 5 microns and surfaces unexposed to water should be given two coats of zinc phosphate primer paint giving a dry film thickness of 40 f 5 microns/coat. Oil tank control cabinets, hoist beams and pipe support should be given one coat of zinc phosphate priming paint giving a minimum dry film thickness of 50 + 5 microns. Unmachined surfaces - All unmachined surfaces should be given one primer coat of chlorinated rubber based zinc phosphate primer togive a dry film thickness of 50 + 5 microns.

2)

3)

4)

All machined surfaces of ferrous metal including screw threads which will be exposed during ship ment or while awaiting installation should be 5.2.2.3 Finishing coats cleaned by suitable solvent and given a heavy 1) Structural component - The finish paint uniform coating of gasoline soluble removable rust should consist of one coat of alkyed based preventivecompound orequivalent. Machinedsurmicaceous iron oxide paint at dry l"tlm faces should be protected with the adhesive tapes thickness of 65 f 5 followed by two or other suitable means during the cleaning and coats of synthetic enamel paint conformpainting operation of other components. ing to IS 2932 : 1974 to give dry film thickS.2.4 Painting of Embedded Parts in Contact with ness of 25 + 5 microns per coat or synthetic Concrete enamel paint. The interval between.coats should be 24 hours. The total dry film thickAll surfaces of embedded parts which are to come ness of all the coats including primer coat in contact with concrete should be cleaned as given should not be less than 175~microns. in 4.2.1.4 to meet the requirements of class D and -21 Machinery-The finish Paint should consist should be given a coating of cement latex to prevent rusting. Exposed machined surfaces of ferrous of three coats of aluminium paint conform4

IS 14177 : 1994 metal which are to be in rolling and sliding contact should not be painted but should bc coated with heavy gasoline soluble rust preventive compound. In all exposures where metal will be partially cmbedded in concrete, it is good practice to extend the protective coating on the nonembedded portion a short distance into the area later to be emhcdded, thus eliminating problem at the junction point. 52.5 Su$ices not to be Pointed The following surfaces are not to be painted unless or otherwise specified: 6 INSPECTION ANI) `I'EWING 6.0 Inspection and testing of paint should be carried out- in accordance with the provisions laid down in IS 1477 (Part 2) : 1071. 7 MAINTENANCE OI'I~HA'I'ION 7.0 As a part of maintenance operation, all gates, embedded pyrts and hoists should be inspected at least at an interval of 2 years. If repainting is considered necessary, surface preparation should be carried out by appropriare hand and power tool cleaning. Visible oil, grcasc, dirt and other foreign material should bc cleaned by using solvents by the use of clean mineral spirits, xylol or white gasoline. While attending lo the maintenance painting. It is not ordinarily intended that total sound adherent old paint hc removed unless it is excessively thick or flexible. Howcvcr,specific instructionsshould be given on the exlcnt Of surface to be blast cleaned while repainting. In preparing a previously painted surface, it is necessary to remove all corrosion and all ~paint which shows evidence of corrosion, peeling, excessivc thickness. brittleness, blistering, scaling or general disinlcgration. It is essential that the removal of rhe old paint be carried back around the edges of rhc sporr of area until an area of completely intacr and adhering paint film, with no rust, or biislcrs underneath is atlained. Edges of tightly adhcrcnt paint remaining around the area to be rccoalcd musl hc fcathcrcd, so that the repainted surface can have a smooth appcarancc. The remainingold paint should havcsufficicnt adhesionso that it cannol bc Wed as a layer by inserting a blade of a dull putty knife under it.

a) Machine finished or similar surfaces: However, such surfaces should be protected with a corrosion preventing compound.

b) Surfaces which will be in contact with concrete. cl Stainless steel overlay surfaces.
4

e)

Surfaces in sliding or rolling contact. Galvanized surfaces, brass and bronze surfaces.

9 Aluminium alloy surfaces. 8) Bare electrical conductors and insulating
materials.

h) Equipment name plates and instructions.
5.2.6 Handling Painted Metnl .Work Metal work to be transported by rail or truck should be loaded so as to prevent shifting and scuffing or gauging of the coating. In loading and unloading and during installation reasonable cart and suitable handling equipment should be employed to keep abrasion damage at a minimum.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyrigbt BIS has a copyright of allits publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols~and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such a review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue'of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Addition'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. RVD 12 ( 32 ). Pablication Text Affected

Amendments Issued Since Amend No. Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : ?310131,331 13 `75 Regional Offices:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Officer ) TeIephones 331 01 31 t 331 13 75 { 378499, 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 53 23 84 I 378561 37 86 62 53 16 40

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Maniktola 160036 600113

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C CHANDIGARH

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Maml, BOMBAY 430093 Branches
: AHMADABAD.

235~02 16, 235 04 42 235 15 19, 235 23 15 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 632 78 58 632 78 92

Andheri ( East )

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

