IS 12504 ( Part 1) : 1988 IS0 5361 - 1 : 1988 Indian Standard
( Reaffirmed 1998 )

SPECIFICATION FOR TRACHEAL TUBES
PART 1 GE'NERAL RE&REMENTS

UDC 616-231-089'5 : 621.643'2

DESCRIPTORS :

MEDICAL EQUIPMENT. ANAESTHESIA. ENDOTRACHEAL TUBES. SPECIFICATIONS. DESIGNATION. MARKING

@ BIS 1989

B U R E A U

O F

I N D I A N

S T A N D A R D S

MANAK BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

September 1989

Price Group 3

IS 12504 ( Part 1) : 1988 ISO 5361- 1 : 1968

Indian Standard

SPECIFICATION FOR TRACHEAL TUBES
PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS NATIONAL FOREWORD with IS0 5361-1:1988 Tracheal tubes - Part 1: This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ), which .is identical . General requirements', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 25 April 1988 on the recommendation of the Anaesthetic, Resuscitation and Allied Equipment Sectional Committee ( CPDC 13 ) and approval of the Consumer Products and Medical instruments Division Council. The text of IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `international Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. . This Indian Standard is in five parts. The other four parts are: Part Part Part Part 2 3 4 5 Oro-tracheal and naso-tracheal tubes of the Magiii type (plain and cuffed ), Murphy type, Cole type, and Requirements and methods of test for cuffs and tubes.

CROSS REFERENCE in this Indian Standard, the following international Standard is referred to, Read in its place the following: International Standard Indian Standard Degree of Correspondence IS 12504 ( Part 4 ): 1988 l$s)bi;61/4: 1984 Tracheal Identical - Part 4: Cole type Specification for tracheal tubes: Part 4 Cole type The technical committee responsible for the Preparation Of this Indian Standard has reviewed the provisions of the following IS0 standard and has decided that it is acceptable for use in coniunction with this standard: IS0 4135:1979 Anaesthesioiogy - Vocabulary

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS 12504'( Part 1) : 1 9 8 8 IS0 5361- 1 : 1 9 8 8

0 Introduction
This International Sfandard is one of a series dealing with anaesthetic equipment and medical breathing machines, and specifies the basic requirements for the more commonly used types of tracheal tubes, whether made of rubber or of other elastomeric material. Tubes with walls reinforced with metal or nylon, tubes with shoulders ( except for those in IS0 5361-4 ), tapering tubes, or the many types of special tubes devised for use in thoratic surgery, are not specifically covered although most may have the size designated by the inside diameter as required by this specification. The inside diameter has been specified for the purpose of size designation.

3.5 machine end: That end of the tracheal tube which is intended to project from the patient. 3.6 bevel: Slanted portion at the patient end of the tracheal tube. 3.7 angle of bevel*: Acute angle between the plane of the bevel and the longitudinal axis of the tracheal tube at the patient end. 3.6 cuff*: Inflatable sleeve fitted near the patient end of the tracheal tube to provide an effective fit between the tube and the trachea. 3.9 bonded cuff: Cuff permanently attached to the tracheal tube. 3.10 inflating tube: Tube through which the cuff is inflated. 3.11 pilot balloon*: Balloon fitted to the inflating tube to indicate inflation of the cuff.

1

Scope and field of application

This part of IS0 5361 specifies general requirements for tracheal ( endotracheal ) tubes.

2 References
IS0 4135, Anaesthesiology - Vocabulary. IS0 5361-4, Tracheal tubes - Part 4: Cole type.

4 Size designation The size of tracheal tubes shall be designated by a number giving the nominal inside diameter expressed in millimetres.

3 Definitions
Definitions are taken from IS0 4135, except where marked with an asterisk. 3.1 tracheal tube ( endotracheal tube ): Tube designed for insertion through the larynx into the trachea to convey gases and vapours to and from the trachea. 3.2 ore-tracheal tube: T r a c h e a l t u b e f o r insertion through the mouth into the trachea. 3.3 naso-tracheal tube: Tracheal tube for insertion through the nose into the trachea. 3.4 patient end: That end of the tracheal tube which is intended to be inserted into the trachea. 3

5 Size range
The size range 2'5, to ,ll ( except for Cole tubes specified in IS0 5361-4 ) of tracheal tubes shall be based on sizes having the nominal inside diameter of a whole number of millimetres or of the intermediate 0.5 mm steps.

6 Materials 6.1 Tracheal tubes, including cuffs, in their ready-for-use state shall be compatible with the human tissues with which they are intended to be used as determined by the implantation test given in the annex.

fS 12504 ( Part 1) :' 1988 IS0 536l- a : 1988
6.2 Unless designated for single use, tracheal tubes should be reasonably resistant to deterioration by methods of cleaning disinfection and sterilization as recommended by the manufacturer or the supplier. Such tubes should withstand accepted methods of steam sterilization. The recommended method or methods of sterilization should not produce changes in the tube material which will render the tracheal tube incompatible with human tissues with which it is .lntended to be used ( see also 6.1 ). 6.3 Tracheal tubes under normal conditions of use should be reasonably resistant to deterioration by anaesthetic vapours and gases. 6.4 The material used for the manufacture of the tubes shall have sufficient rigidity to allow theconstruction of a tube with the thinnest possible wall which, at the same time, maintains resistanceto kinking. When in place it shall be flexible and soft enough to conform to the patient's anatomy without exerting undue pressure on the body tissues. 6.5 Tracheal tubes should be readily detectable by X-ray either by the nature of the material of which they are made or by the provision of a marker at the patient end.

8 Marking 9.1
Marking materials used on tracheal tubes shall be of a contrasting colour, shall be compatible with the human tissues with which the tubes are intended to be used, shall resist anaesthetic agents and, unless designated for single use, shall resist agents and methods commonly used for cleaning and sterilizing ( see also clause 6 ). 9.2 The marking of tracheal tubes shall be durable and legible and shall include the following: the name or trade-mark of the manufacturer or supplier;

b) c) 4

the size designation in accordance with clause 4; name of country of origin, if required; tracheal tubes intended for single use shall be clearly marked to indicate single use or marked in accordance with t h e r e q u i r e m e n t s o f t h e relevant national regulatory authorities;

d depth ( length ) mark(s) in centimetres

measured from the patient end. This requirement is optional for Cole tubes.

7 Lumen
The lumen of the tracheal tube shall be essentially circular In a plane at right angles to the long axis. 8 Finish Tracheal tubes shall be smooth on the outside and inside. Ttre, cuffs shall have a smooth surface.

10 Information to be supplied by manufacturer
The manufacturer shall provide a warning with the tracheal tube that cuff volume or pressure can either increase or decrease owing to diffusion of nitrous oxide/oxygen mixtures or air, and shall include recommendations for minimizing this effect.

IS 12504 ( Part 1 ) : 1 9 8 8 IS0 5361- 1 : 1 9 8 8 A N N E X Implantation testl)
( This annex forms an integral part of-the Standard )

A.1 General
The implantation test is designed for the evaluation of a plastics material in direct contact with living tissue. Care shall be taken in the preparation of the implant strips and their proper implantatlon under aseptic conditions.

a commonly used anaesfhetic agent to a degree deep enough to prevent muscular movements, such as twitching.

A.4 Procedure
Perform the test in a clean area. On the day of the test or up to 20 h before testing, clip the fur of the animals on both sides of the spinal column. Remove loose hair by means of vacuum. Implant four strips of the sample into the paravertebral muscle on one side of the spine of each of two rabbits, 2'5 to 5 cm from the mid-line and parallel to the spinal column, and about 2'5 cm apart from each other. In a similar fashion implant two strips of USP Negative Control Plastic RS in the opposite muscle of each animal. Insert a stylet into the needle to hold, the plastics strip in the tissue while withdrawing the needle. If excessive bleeding is observed after implantation of a strip, place a duplicate strip at another site. Close the incision after implantation is complete. Keep the animals for a period of not less than 72 h and sacrifice them at the end of the observation period by administering an overdose of an anaesthetic agent. Allow sufficient time to elapse for the tissue to be cut without bleeding. Examine macroscopically the area of the tissue surrounding the centre portion of each implant strip. Use a magnifying lens if necessary. The tissue immediately surrounding the USP Negative Control Plastic RS strips appears normal and entirely free from hemorrhage, film, or encapsulation. The requirements of the test are met if, in each rabbit, the reaction to not more than one of the four sample strips is significantly greater than that to the strips of USP Negative Control Plastic RS.

A.2 Preparation of test samples
Prepare for implantation eight strips of the sample and four strips of USP Negative Control Plastic RW. Each strip shall measure not lessthan 10mm xl mm. Theedgesofthestrips should be as smooth as possible to avoid additional mechanical trauma upon implantation. Strips of the specified minimum size shall be implanted by means of a hypodermic needle such as a 15 gauge needle with intravenous point and of 19 mm ( 0.75 inch ) cannula length, and a sterile trocar. Use either presterilized needles into which the sterile plastics strips are aseptically inserted, or insert each clean strip into a needle, the cannula and hub of which are protected with an appropriate cover, and then subjected to the appropriate sterilization procedure.
NOTE -Allowance should be made for proper degassing if agents such as ethylene oxide are used.

A.3 Test animal
Select healthy, adult rabbits weighing not less than 2'5 kg, and whose paravertebral muscles are sufficiently large in size to allow for implantation of the test strips. Do not use any muscular tissue other than the paravertebral site. The animals may be anaesthetized with

1) Taken from US Pharmacopea. 2) USP Nagative Control Plastic RS is a trade name for a commercial product available from the US Pharmacopeal Convention Inc., 12601 Twinbrook Parkway, Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA. At present, no other products intended for this purpose are known to be available commercially. This information is given for the convenience of the users of this International Standard and does not constitute an endorsement of this product by ISO.

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of /ndian Standards Act, 7986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Sfandards
BIS is a statutorv institution established under the Bureau of lndian Standards Act, 7986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright
No part of these publications may be reproduced does not preclude the free use, any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. . . This . . the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications BIS.

BIS has the copyright of all its publications.

in in or ),

Revision of Indian Standards
Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should `ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. CPDC 13 ( 1987 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

I

331 331 01 13 31 75 36 24 99

I

3 2 18 16 41 43

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Madras 600113 Western : Eg;Lg;ya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM.

41 24 42 41 25 19 41 29 16

6 32 92 95

P%bd at New India Prlntina Press. Ktkrja, India

