IS 4410 (Part

22) : 1994 ( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian

Standard

GLOSS4RY OF TERMS RELATING TO RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART 22 BARRAGES AND WEIRS

UDC

001'4 : 627'432~627'82

Q

BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price ZAFAR MARG

NEW

December

1994

Group 3

Terminology

Relating

to River Valley Projects

Sectional

Committee,

RVD 2

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Terminology Relating to River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. A large number of Indian Standards have already been printed covering various aspects of river These standards valley projects and some more similar standards are in the process of formulation. include technical terms, and precise definitions for these are required for avoiding ambiguity in To achieve this aim, the Terminology Relating to River Valley Projects their interpretation. Sectional Committee is bringing out Indian Standard Glossary of terms relating to river valley This Part 22 contains definitions of terms relating to Projects ( IS 4410 1, being published in parts. barrages and weirs.

IS 4410 ( Part 22 ) : 1994

Indian Standard

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART 22 BARRAGES AND WEIRS

1 SCOPE This standard (Part 22) covers the definitions relating to Barrages and Weirs. 2 GENERAL TERMS of terms

2.8 Barrage A permanent barrier provided with a series of gates across the river to regulate water surface level and pattern of flow upstream and for other purposes, distinguished from a weir in that it is gated over its entire length and may or may not have a raised sill. 2.9 Bay One of the main divisions of the diversion structure such as spillway, undersluice, riversluice, regulator intake, etc, in between two consecutive piers or a pier and abutment or a pier and the nearest divide wall. 2.10 Bed Material Material, the practicle sizes of which are found in appreciable quantities in that part of the bed affected by transport. 2.11 Block Outs Temporary recesses provided in the civil structure to facilitate proper embedment of steel fixtures for gates, trestles, etc, and which are concreted after their fixing. 2.12 Boulder Stage of River

Terminology adopted in Barrages and Weirs have the following definitions. 2.1 Abutment A wall constructed at both ends of the structure mainly for effective keying the main barrage/weir structure into the ground at either end and also to perform additional functions, such as, retaining the backfill, protectingthe bankfromerosion,supportingload from superstructure and confining the flow to the desired waterway at the structure. 2.2 Afflux The difference in water level between upstream and downstream of a barrage/weir under free flow condition, as a result of construction of the structure on the river. 2.3 Atllux Bund An earthen embankment or dyke designed to ensure that the structure is not outflanked during flood flows and in some cases acting as embankment to prevent flooding of the country side due to rise in water level. 2.4 Aggradation of Level

The reach of river characterized by steep bed slope and a bed comprising a mixture of boulder, shingle, gravel and sand. 2.13 Chute Blocks Cement concrete block provided at suitable spacing at the toe of the downstream glacis of the structure for improved energy dissipation. 2.14 Coffer Dam

An increase or rise in specific levels of the bed (the bed level at specific discharge) of a channel at any site. 2.5 Alluvial River formed from its

River which flows through alluvium own deposits. 2.6 Apron

A temporary structure constructed to exclude from the work site during construction. 2.15 Concentration Factor

water

A protective layer of stone or other material provided in the bed of the river where it is desired to prevent erosion. 2.7 Backwater Curve

The factor by which the discharge per unit length of a barrage/weirassuminguniformdistributiollisrequired to be increased for purposes of design to allow for higher concentration of discharge in some parts of the structure. 2.16 Construction Joint

The upstream longitudinal profile of the surface of water in a stream/river or free flow conduit from a point where such water surface is raised above its normal level by a diversion structure.

composed of A joint occurring in a structure homogeneous material, such as earth or concrete,

1

IS 4410 ( Part 22 ) : 1994 along a plane or surface, formed by cessation of the placing of material for a time, such as overnight or for several days. 2.17 Contraction Joint 2.28 End Sill Raised sill provided at the end of the stilling basin for energy dissipation. 2.29 Erosion

A joint provided to localise and minimise development of cracks due to drying, shrinkage and thermal variations. 2.18 Crest the top of the barrage/weir.

The lowering of land or river bed due to wearing away caused by weathering and transportation under the influence of wind or water. 2.30 Exit Gradient The upward seepage force per unit volume of seepage water through foundation soil at the tail end of a barrage/weir, tending to lift up the soil particles if it is more than the submerged weight of a unit volume of the latter. It is also defined as the hydraulic gradient of emerging stream lines at the end of an impervious apron. 2.31 Expansion Joint

The line or area defining 2.19 Cut Offs

Lugs either of R.C.C. masonry or of steel sheet pile, provided at the bottom of the structure to protect the structure against scours and possible piping due to excessive exit gradients of the seepage flow below the foundations. 2.20 Design Flood

The maximum blood discharge in the river for which the barrage/weir waterway, scour, freeboard, etc, are to be designed. 2.21 Dewatering

A type of joint provided in the structure to localise and permit longitudinal expansion and contraction when changes in temperature occur and to permit vertical movement where differential settlement is anticipated. 2.32 Filter A layer or combination of layers of graded pervious materials designed and placed in such a manner as to provide drainage and yet prevent the movement of soil particles with seepage water. 2.33 Fish Ladder/Lock Device provided in the diversion structure for the smooth passage of fish from upstream to downstream and vice versn . 2.34 Flank Walls of abutments both

Lowering of the water table to facilitate construction of the barrage/weir substructure and item to be done in a fairly dry condition and to create reasonably dry condition for foundation work. 2.22 Differential Head

The difference in water levels between upstream and downstream water surfaces of the structure or the difference in water levels on either side of a pier or divide walls. 2.23 Divide Wall

Wall constructed usually at right angles to the axis of the barrage extending well beyond the main structure to separate the undersluice, riversluices and spillways into independent units for facilitating regulation. 2.24 Diversion Ratio

Retaining wall in continuation upstream and downstream. 2.35 Flared Wall

The ratio of the flow diverted to the stream flow. 2.25 Diversion Head Works Works or Diversion Structure or

Retaining wall with its profile gradually changing from one slope to another as required. Flared walls may be straight or curved. 2.36 Flexible Apron, Talus or Placed Riprap A protection at the downstream or upstream end of a barrage/weir, fall, etc, consisting of blocks of concrete or masonry or stones or stones in wire crates (gabions). This is also referred to as loose apron. 2.37 Free Board The vertical distance betweena and top of the component consideration. 2.38 Frictioh Block Staggered R.C.C. blocks provided in the stilling basin for energy dissipation. 2 specified water surface of a structure under

A collective term for all works required on the river or channel to divert control or regulate the water level or water supplies in the river/channels or offtaking ca na 1s. 2.26 Dominant Discharge

The discharge which is large enough in magnitude and is of sufficient frequency bf occurrence to have a dominating effect in determining the size and characteristics of the river course, canals and bed. 2.27 Embayment

The area within the swing of the bend of a river. Also a local recession of a river bank due to erosion, that is, a bite taken out of a river bank.

IS 4410 ( Part 22 ) : 1994
2.39 Froude Number 2.47 Looseness Factor

The dimensionless parameter expressing the ratio between inertia and gravitational forces in liquid. The number is obtained by dividing the mean velocity by the square root of the product of mean depth and the acceleration due to gravity:
V

The ratio of the overall length of the barrage/weir provided to theoretically computed minimum stable width of the riverat the design flood obtained by using Lacey's equation.
2.48 Meander

F,=

___ 43-

A meander in a river consists of two consecutive one flowing clockwise and the other counter wise. 2.49 Operating
Platform

loops, clock-

where V = mean velocity, g d 2.40
Curve

= acceleration

due to gravity, and

A platform constructed on the top of piers to support the gate stand and operating mechanism. 2.50 Pier

= mean total depth. Gauge-Discharge Curve/Stage Discharge

Concrete or masonry structure constructed over the waterway for supporting bridge decking, gates and hoist operating mechanism. 2.51 Pitching A protective covering of properly packed or built-inmaterials on the earthen surface/sides (side pitching) and bed (bed pitching) to protect them from the erosive action of water. 2.52 Pond/Pool Level

The curve indicating the relationship between various levels/stages of the river and corresponding river discharges at a particular river location. 2.41
Glacis

The sloping portion of the floor upstream and downstream of the crest. 2.42
Guide Bund

A protective and training the side of a barrage/weir through the waterway. 2.43
Hydraulic Jump

embankment to smoothly

constructed at guide the flow

The level of relatively still water immediately upstream the barrage/weir required to facilitate withdrawal into the canals or for any other purpose.

2.53 Regime The condition stability. of a stream or channel in respect of its

The sudden and usually turbulent passage of water from a lower level (below critical depth) to higher level (above critical'depth), during which headloss occurs and the flow passes from supercritical to subcritical state. 2.44 Hydrograph Agraph showing the stage, discharge, velocity or some other features of llowing water with respect to time, at a given site. 2.45 Intake or Head Regulator A structure built at the diversion structure to divert, control and regulate water supplies from the pond into the canal. 2.46 Lock A structure (open rectangular chamber) built in an open conduit in a reach having a considerable vertical drop in water levels to pass two-way traffic by means of an open water chamber having movable and water tight gates at both ends. The water traffic is rasied or lowered by admitting or releasing water from the chamber to negotiate with the desired water level upstream or downstream. 3

2.54 Retrogression

of Level

A general decrease in the bed level of the river or channel over a sufficiently long length downstream of a structure.
2.55 Revetment

A protective surface of pitching, concrete blocks or matresses placed on the bottom or banks of a river to prevent or minimize erosion. 2.56 Riprap Broken stone dumped or placed on the surface and the slops of embankments for protection against the action of flowing water, wave wash and heavy rain. 2.57 River Sluices This is a set of sluices similar to the sluiceways and located in between the sluiceways and the spillway bays and separated from them by means of the divide walls. These are nomrally provided in large barrages, for maintaining a still pond just in front of the canal intake and at the same time maintaining the main dry weather river channel active towards the intake.

IS 4410 ( Part 22 ) : 1994 2.58 River Training 2.68 Specific Energy It is the section channel velocity energy of stream flow per unit weight at any of a channel measured with respect to the bottom as datum, namely, vertical depth plus head corresponding to the mean velocity. Basin

Works constructed on a river to guide and confine the flow to the river channel and to control and regulate the river bed configuration for effective and safe movement of floods and river sediment. 2.59 Scour

2.69 Stilling

The removal of material from the bed of a channel by flowing water. 2.60 Sediment

Fragmental material transported in suspension or transported and deposited at another location by stream flow, regardless of its size. 2.61 Seepage

A short length of paved channel in the exit course of an outlet structure or below a spillway undersluice/ riversluice, in which part of the energy of the flowing water is dissipated and water is discharged into the downstream Channel in such a manner as to prevent damage to the structure from dangerous scour of bed or banks of the channel.

2.70

Stone Reserve

A slow movement of water due to capillary action through pores and interstices of unsaturated close soil material into or out of a surface or subsurface body of water such as river, canal, etc. 2.62 Sheet Pile

A quantity of stone kept as reserve on guide bunds, spurs or groynes for emergency use, to prevent deep scour occurring and endangering the safety of the structure. 2.71 Stone Mesh A type of construction in which shingle, small boulders, or other form of stone, is held together by a wrapping of wire mesh, to give a heavy but more or less flexible structure used invarious forms as groynes, aprons, low weirs, etc. Rounded stone is usually preferred to increase flexibility. 2.72 Stoplogs

A long straight stiff structural element, usually made of steel driven in the ground under the barrage/weir floor, mainly to control underseepage and exit gradient and also to provide protection against scour. 2.63 Silt

A fine grained soil with little or no plasticity. 2.64 Silt Factor equation in regime channels : Fabricated structural steel or wooden units utilised for temporary closure of any bay, in order to facilitate repairs of the gate and other components of the bay. 2.73 Sub-Critical Flow

A factor `,f in the Lacey's regime formula and is given
by the following

f = 1.`76where M = average particle diameter 2.65 Sediment Excluder in mm.

The flow in which the Froude number is less than unity and surface disturbances can travel upstream. 2.74 Super Critical Flow

A device by which silt is precluded from entering the canal, consisting usually of a series of R.C.C. tunnels located infrontofthe intake/head regulatorand at right angles to the axis of the barrage. 2.66 Sluiceways

The flow in which the Froude number is greater than unity and surface disturbances will not travel upstream. 2.75 Toe Protection Loose stones wire crates or concrete blocks laid or dumped at the toe of an embankment, groyne, etc, or masonry or concrete wall built at the junction of the slope of pitching and the bed in channels or at extremities of hydraulic structures to counteract erosion. 2.76 Toe Wall A shallow wall constructed below the bed or floor level to provide a foothold for the sloped pitching or the facing of an embankment. 2.77 Trash Rack Metallic racks in front of a intake/head regulator screen out floating materials, debris, etc. 4 to

Sluiceways are a set of bays of the barrage at the canal end to maintain a well defined river channel towards the intake and scour out the silt/sediment deposited in front of it. 2.67 Spillway

This is the set of central bays in a barrage, whose crests are a little higher than those of the sluiceways and the river sluices. The spillway bays are normally operated, when the river flow exceeds the normal discharges through the sluiceways and the canal intake.

IS 4410 ( Part 22 ) : 1994 2.78 Unit Hydrograph

provided for flow of water through head regulators, etc. 2.82 Weep Holes

barrages/weirs,

Hydrograph of storm run-off at a given point on a given stream, which will result from an isolated rainfall excess ofunit duration, occurringoverthe contributing drainage area and resulting in a unit depth of run-off. 2.79
Uplift

Opening left in walls, aprons linings, foundations, to permit drainage and reduce pressure. 2.83 Weir

etc,

The vertical upward pressure caused by the water seeping through the pores, cracks and fissures of the foundation material.
2.80 Velocity of Approach

A solid barrier across a river/stream water course to raise the water level for diversion purposes. 2.84 Wing Walls

A mean velocity in the stream immediately of a barrage/weir. 2.81 Waterway area or the amount

upstream

The sectional

of opening

(vent)

Walls joining the abutment of a structure to earth dyke or the banks to retain and protect the earth fill behind and provide a longer path ofpercolation around the end of a structure or for improving the flow conditions upstream and downstream of the controlling section.

Bureau

of Indian

Standards cf Indian Standards
Acf,

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the oountry.
Copyright

1986 to promote

marking

and qualtty

certification

of goods

No part of these publications may be reproduced ~,n BIS has the copyright of all its pubhcatrons. This does not preclude the free USC, in the any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. such as symbols and sizes, type or grade course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be aadressed to the Director ( Publications 1. BIS. Revision of Indian Standards periodically of Indian and revised, when necessary Standards should ascertain and amendments, if any, are that they are in possession of

Indian Standards are reviewed issued from time to time. Users the latest amendments or edition. This Indian Standard

has been developed

from Dot

: No.

RVD 2 ( 168 )
Ptihllcation

Amendments

issued

Since

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi I I0002 Telephones : 331 01 31. 331 13 75
Ofices:

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Cotnmon to all Offices 1 Telephone

Regional Central

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002

Shah Zafar

Marg

331 01 31 1 331 13 75 37 84 99, I 37 86 26, 37 85 61 37 86 62 60 38 43 160 20 25 235 02 16, t 235 14 19, 632 92 95, t 632 78 91, 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northarn Southern Western : SC0 335-336. Sector 34-A. CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol. MADRAS Andheri 160022 600113

: C. I. T. Campus,

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

( East )

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COIMBATORE. JAIPUR. KANPUR.

Printed at Printrade.

New Delhi. India

