**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12524 (1988) : General Requirements for Main Deck Baggage 
Container Loader [TED 14: Aircraft and Space Vehicles] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



I 18 : 12524 - 1988 



Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2003) 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
MAIN DECK BAGGAGE c6nTAINER LOADER 



UDG 62r869-3 ! 656'7*013 



® Copyright 1989 

BUR'EAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 1 April 1989 



IS : 12524 - 1988 



Indian Standard 



GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
MAIN DECK BAGGAGE CONTAINER LOADER 



0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the 
Bureau of Indian Standards on 26 December 
1988, after the draft finalized by the Air Cargo 
Handling Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and 
Packing Division Council. 

0.2 In this standard the term Veight' is used 



instead of correct technical term *mass' in order 
to conform to the current commercial usage. 

0.3 In the preparation of this standard, assis- 
tance has been derived from lATA/AHM 930 
'Functional specification for main deck 
baggage container loader', issued by the Inter- 
national Air Transport Association ( lATA ). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the general require- 
ments for a self-propelled loader capable of 
raising containers from a standard height of 
508 mm to a height of 5 540 mm with basic 
dimensions and maximum weight as follows: 



Length 
mm 


Width 
mm 


Height 
mm 


Maximum Gross 

Weight 

H 


3 175 


965 


1524 


795 


1562 


965 


1524 


397 



2. DIMENSIONS 

2*1 On an adequate chassis, the loader shall 
provide the following two platforms: 

a) Front Platform — This is positioned at the 
applicable aircraft door and remains at 
this position during the loading/unloading 
operation, and 

b) Main Platform — For up and down move- 
ment between 483 and 5 540 mm. 

2*2 The overall height of the entire unit shall 
not exceed 3 600 mm when being driven, 

2.3 The overall dimensions of the unit shall be 
kept to a minimum. 

2.4 The loader shall support simultaneously, at 
their maximum gross weight, two half-size 
containers on the main platform and one half- 
size on the front platform. 



2.5 The unit shall have adequate under clear- 
ance from any portion of the equipment to the 
ground when negotiating two ramps that 
intersect at 5°. 

3. PLATFORM DESIGN, GUIDE RAILS 
AND STOPS 

3.1 The length of the front platform shall be 
adequate to accept one half-size container 
lengthwise, 

3.2 The length of the main platform shall be 
adequate to accept two half-size containers or 
one full size container lengthwise. 

3.3 The surface of both the platforms shall allow 
lengthwise container movement. 

3.4 The loader shall be designed for powered 
end loading of the containers. 

3.5 The power system shall be able to drive 
containers at a speed of approximately 
18'3 m/min. 

3*6 The front platform shall have provisions to 
accept a bridging panel extending from the 
aircraft door sill. 

3.7 The front platform shall be designed not to 
interfere with the excursion of the opened air- 
craft doors, regardless of whether loading/ 
unloading is performed at the right or the left 
side of the aircraft. 

3.8 Container guide rails shall be provided 
along the whole length of both sides of two 
platforms to guide containers exactly into 
the aircraft. The rails shall be removable. On 
the front platform, the rails shall be adjustable 
laterally to allow or a misalignment of 5° 
between the centre lines of the bridging panel 
and the loader. 



I 



IS : 12524 « 1988 



3.8.1 On main platform, each guide rail shall 
be adjustable with a range of 150 mm laterally 
at each end. 

3.9 Automatic container stops shall be provided 
as follows: 

a) Front Platform — At the end adjacent to 
the main platform, these stops shall raise 
at the moment the main platform starts 
moving down and shall be retracted when 
the upcoming main platform is level with 
the front platform. 

b) Main Platform — At both ends, the ramp 
side stops shall automatically retract as 
the platform reaches the full down position 
and extend, when the platform rises. The 
stops at the end adjacent to the front plat- 
form shall be extended in the down 
position and retract when the platform 
lines up with the front platform [ see 
also 1.1 (b)]. 

4. PLATFORM OPERATION AND 
LOADING 

4.1 It shall be possible to manually adjust the 
container in a lateral direction on the front 
platform. 

4.2 Platform elevating system shall be able to 
hold both platforms at maximum height with 
full specified continuous lift capicity with no 
considerable height decrease for 30 minutes with 
and without engine running* 

4.3 Both the front and main platform elevating 
mechanisms shall incorporate safety features to 
prevent sudden collapse in the event of a system 
failure. 

4.4 Load movement in and out of the aircraft 
shall be carried out by one person (operator). 
The unit shall be capable of being positioned 
and operated by one person. The operator 
shall be able to open the aircraft door from the 
front platform. 

4.5 The time taken for the main platform to 
reach maximum height from the lowerd position 
and vice-versa, that is, one complete cycle, shall 
not exceed 60 s. 

4.6 The front platform shall be accessible from 
the ground at all times. 

4.7 It shall not be possible to alter the height of 
either platform when containers are bridging 
the platforms. 

5. MOBILITY AND STABILITY 

5.1 The unit shall be capable of being driven at 
speeds up to 16 km/h for at least 3 km. The 



unit does not require the capability of being 
driven when loaded. 

5.2 Power steering shall be provided. 

5.3 The unit shall be capable of turning with a 
swept radius of less than 7*6 m. 

5.4 For final safe positioning at the aircraft 
door, a slow positive non-jerking speed is 
required. 

5.5 Power operated stabilizers shall be installed 
in order to provide for the stability required 
for loading/unloading operations and to unload 
the wheel axles. 

5.6 The unit in the raised position with stabi- 
lizers extended shall be safe in wind velocities 
up to 129 km/h. In the lowered position, the 
loader shall remain stable in wind velocities up 
to 192 km/h. 

5.7 It shall be possible: 

a) to activate the transfer system and to raise 
the main platform from the full down 
position if the stabilizers are not extended, 

b) to drive the loader when the stabilizers are 
extended, and 

c) for the stabilizers to collapse in case of a 
system failure. 

6. CONTROLS 

6.1 All controls necessary to move and position 
the loader shall be located in the driver position. 

6.2 Ample lighting is required for night 
operations to illuminate the platforms and close 
surroundings. 

6.3 Normal system warning and indicator lights 
shall be provided. 

7. OPTIONS 

7.1 The following options shall be provided: 

a) Normal automotive lighting and warning 
lights; 

b) Manually controlled end stops of the main 
plat-form. However, it shall only be possi- 
ble to retract the rear stop when the main 
platform is stopped at any height between 
500 and 1 500 mm above the ground; 

c) Removable personnel guard rails to be 
fitted to the front end/or the main plat- 
forms; and 

d) An electrical remote control box of mini- 
mum weight and size to allow control of 
both the platforms and the complete 
loading/unfa»4ing processes from the front 
platform in an elevated position or from 
the aircraft cabin door area. 



Printed at Arcee Pr«fts, New Delhi, India 



