**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 1991-2 (1987) : Safety Requirements for the Use, Care and 
Protection of Abrasive Grinding Wheels, Part 2: Handling 
and Storage [PGD 9: Abrasives] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621 '922*025: 614-8 



IS: 1991 ( Part 2 )-1987 



Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR THE USE, 
CARE AND PROTECTION OF ABRASIVE GRINDING WHEELS 

PART 2 HANDLING AND STORAGE 

( Second Revision ) 



CO 



CD 



1. Scope — This standard ( Part 2 ) deals with handling and storage of abrasive grinding wheels. 

2. Handling 

2.1 All abrasive wheels are breakable and some are very fragile. Therefore, care shall be excer- 
cised in handling and storage to prevent damage, which might cause a wheel to fly apart when 
speeded up. 

AM abrasive wheels must be handled carefully. Abrasive wheels are necessarily manufactured in varying 
strengths to grind properly. 

Some abrasive wheels are stronger than others, but all abrasive wheels can be broken by mishandling. 

2.2 While handling abrasive wheels, following rules which are based on experience, shall be 
observed. 

2.2.1 Handle the wheels carefully to prevent dropping or bumping. 

2.2.2 Do not roll wheels ( hoop fashion ). 

2.2.3 Use trucks or other suitable conveyance for transportation of all such wheels which cannot 
be carried by hand. These conveyances shall provide support and protection to the wheels. 

2.2.4 Place wheels carefully on a shelf or rack or In bins, boxes or drawers. 

2.2.5 Stack the wheels carefully in trucks, trolleys or other conveying machinery. Heavy materials 
or tools shall not be placed over the wheels. Stacking shall besuchasnot to allow toppling over 
the wheels. 

2.2.6 Pack the wheels suitably to minimize any damage during transit. 

2.2.7 Arrest the wheels suitably to avoid rolling off during transit. 

3. Storage 

3.1 Suitable racks, bins or drawers, having ample strength shall be provided to store the various 
types of wheels ( .see Fig. 1 ). 

3.1.1 Wheels shall not be stored subject to: 

a) Exposure to water or other solvents, and 

b) Any temperature low enough to cause condensation on the wheels when moving them from 
storage to an area of higher temperature. 

3.1.2 Wheels should not be stored subject io: 

a) High humidity, and 

b) Freezing temperatures. 

3.2 Wheel storage room shall not be subject to extreme temperatures and shall always be kept dry. 

Grinding wheels must be protected while awaiting use. Wheel storage should be arranged to allow for removal 
of wheels without disturbing or damaging other wheels. Storage and records should also be set up to allow for 
wheel use on rotational basis so that the wheels will be in storage tor a minimum length of time. This minimizes 
the possibility of damage from lengthy storage. Such suitable storage should be available for partly used wheels. 
Special care should be taken to prevent problems with wheel support and environmental conditions for wheels 
stored in mobile storage areas such as: 

a) Rescue squad trucks, 



Adopted 23 November 1987 



© October 1988, BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 1991 ( Part 2)- 1987 

b) Field contractors, and 

c) Barges and boats. 

Abrasive wheel storage racks should be designed, constructed and located to fit the needs of the users. The 
■following factors should be kept in mind: 

i) Location — AHabrasive wheels should be stored in a dry area in rooms not subject to extreme tempera- 
ture changes since some-bonds may be affected by dampness, excessive humidity and extreme temperature 
differentials. Racks should be located as near as practical to the grinding location, but never where there 
is danger of damage from passing trucks, crane handling or excessive vibration. 

ii) Storage methods — The racks, bins or d rawers should be construcred so that each of the various types of 
wheels can be stored in an orderly and safe manner. Wheel selection should be possible with a minimum 
of handling. The selection of racks, bins, boxes or drawers for storage depends on the size and type of 
wheels. Generally, the following points should be observed: 

1 ) The organic bonded wheels, such as those used for cutting off, should be laid flat on a flat surface of 
steel or similar rigid material away from excessive heat, moisture and other liquids to prevent 
warpage. Loose blotters should not be placed.between stacked thin wheels. If thin wheels are supplied 
with blotters attached, suitable separators should be used to preserve flatness. 

2) Large diameter wheels ( Type 1 , 5, 7, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 and 26 ) of appreciable thickness are best 
supported in racks. Such racks should provide cushioned two point cradle support to prevent the 
wheels from rolling. Partitions are helpful in facilitating wheel selection with a minimum of handling. 

3) Taper cap ( flaring cup ) wheels ( Type 11 ) are best stored as shown in Fig. 1 , to prevent chipping of 
edges. 

4) Cylinder wheels or large straight cup wheels maybe stacked on flat sides with corrugated paper or 
other cushioning material between them, or they may be stored on edge in racks similar to those used 
for large straight wheels. 

5) Small wheels ( approx 100 mm or less in diameter ) except taper cup ( flaring cup ) wheels, are often 
stored in boxes, bins or drawers. 



-PLAIN WHEELS 





INCLINED SHELF 

FOR 
SHALL WHEELS 



FLAT SHELF FOR 
CUTTING-OFF 
WHEELS AND 
SHAPED WHEELS 



FRONT EDGE OF WHEELS 
SHOULD NOT PROTRUDE 
OUTSIDE THE FRAME 



TWO POINT CRADLE 
SUPPORTS 



1ARGE PLAIN WHEELS 



LARGE TAPER SiDED WHEELS 



FIG. 1 TYPICAL STORAGE OF WHEELS 



3.3 Ageing Effect on Grinding Wheeis — Resinoid bonded abrasive products have a definite storage 
life as such these must be used before the expiry period mentioned by the manufacturers on the 
products whereas the vitrified bonded abrasive products can be stored for any long period and 
these can be used at any time. The shelf life of vitrified bonded products has no limit. 

4. Acceptance of Shipment — The first inspection shall be made on the original container. If 
there is a visible evidence of damage to the container, the shipment should not be accepted. 

Note — For inspection procedures prior to mounting, see Part 6 of this standard. 

2 



IS : 1991 ( Part 2 ) « 1987 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The safe operation of abrasive wheels requires the understanding and cooperation of many 
-diverse groups and of all individuals concerned with their use or operation. This has been the 
basic viewpoint in establishing these safety requirements forthe guidance of manufacturers, users 
and others involved in handling these products. 

A thorough knowledge oi nature and characteristics of arbrasive wheels, the grinding 
machines on which they are used and the safety and protection devices which can and shall be 
used to limit, if not eliminate, injury or damage in case of accidental wheel breakage, is necessary 
for proper understanding of these safety requirements. These safety requirements may be used as 
a guide and not as an alternative to constant educational programmes at all levels which are the 
best insurance against those unforeseen conditions or circumstances which result in an industrial 
accident. 

The mandatory requirements are printed in normal ( 10 points ) type and the explanatory 
information in smaller (8 point) type. This is intended to facilitate a condensed document of 
mandatory requirements together with supporting tables and a figure. The explanatory information 
gives the basic reasons forthe rules to encourage their implementation in practice. However, it 
may not be termed as part of the standard. The explanatory material has been included to encou- 
rage compliance and it is given only where it amplifies or clarifies a requirement. 

Operating rules are not included in these safety requirements unless they areof such a nature 
as to be important safety requirements equal in importance to other requirements included in 
this standard. 

This standard was first issued in 1962 and its first revision was taken up in 1973, based on 
ANSI B 7.1-1970. 

In order to review the individual section at anytime and also for technical and drafting 
reasons alike, this standard has been split up in the following ten parts; 

Scope and definitions 
Handling and storage 
General machine requirements 
Safety guards 
Flanges 

Mounting and inspection 
Standard speeds 
Special speeds 
General operating rules 
Part 10 Mounted wheels 

While splitting, this part ( Part 2 ) of the standard has also been revised and the details have 
been made more explicit. More data has also been included. 

While revising this standard, assistance has also been taken from the following publications: 

'European safety requirement for the use, care and protection of abrasive wheels', issued by 
the Federation of European Producers of Abrasive Products ( FEPA ). 

ANSI B 7.1-1978 'Safety requirement for the use, care and protection of abrasive wheels', 
issued by the American National Standards Institute, USA. 



Part 


1 


Part 


2 


Part 


3 


Part 


4 


Part 


5 


Part 


6 


Part 


7 


Part 


8 


Part 


9 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



