Waa GE IS 5561 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


faa nmaa dtaep — faferite 


( geet JIAO ) 


Electric Power Connectors — 
Specification 
( First Revision ) 


ICS: 29.130.10 


© BIS 2018 


aR AA ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 geigasg AHL HM, Ae fercit-110002 
Vesey” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2018 Price Group 4 


High Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional Committee, ETD 08 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the High Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1970. The revision of this standard has been taken up to align it with the latest 
practices. The major changes in the revised standard are as given below: 


a) the connectors composed of aluminium alloy and other copper alloys have been included in the scope. 
b) the following new type tests have been included: 

1) Visual corona and RIV test (for 132 kV and above voltage level) (see 15). 

2) Cantilever strength test on bus support clamps and connectors (see 17). 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following international/other standards: 


ANSI/ NEMA CC1: 2009 Electric power connectors for substation 


BS 159 : 1992 Busbar and busbar connections 

BS 3288-1:2014 Insulator and conductor fittings for overhead power lines: Part 1 Performance and 
general requirements 

IEC 61284 : 1997 Overhead lines — Requirement and tests for fittings 


IS/TEC 62271 (Part 1) : 2007 High-voltage switchgear and control gear — Part 1: Common specifications 


The connectors covered in this standard are primarily intended to establish electrical connection between conductors, 
aluminium to aluminium or aluminium to copper or copper to copper conductors, between equipment and 
conductors, etc, in places like substations and generating stations. This standard does not cover fittings for insulators. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5561 : 2018 


Indian Standard 
ELECTRIC POWER CONNECTORS — SPECIFICATION 
(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers uninsulated electric power 
connectors having current rating of 200 amperes and 
above and bus supports, which are Components of high 
tension, extra high and ultra-high tension a.c power 
systems and which are composed of such metals as 
aluminium, aluminium alloys, bronze and other copper 
alloys. 


1.1.1 This standard is mainly intended for power 
connectors used in substations and generating stations. 


1.2 In addition to plugs and sockets which do not come 
under the scope of this standard, the following types of 
connectors are also not covered. 


a) Connectors for use in equipment for 
telecommunications and in electronic devices 
employing similar techniques. 

b) Connectors for use in frequencies other than 
the power frequency of 50 Hz. 

c) Connectors for use in transmission lines such 
as mid span compression joints. 


2 REFERENCES 


2.1 The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards. 


IS No. Title 
28 : 1985 Phosphor bronze ingots and 
castings 
292 : 1983 Leaded brass ingots and castings 


617 : 1994 Aluminium and aluminium alloy 
ingots and castings for general 
engineering purposes 

Hexagon head bolts, screws and 
nuts of product Grade C 
Technical supply conditions for 


threaded steel fasteners 


1363 (All parts) 


1367 (All parts) 


1573 : 1986 Electroplated coatings of zinc on 
iron and steel 

2629 : 1985 Recommended practice for hot- 
dip galvanizing of iron and steel 

2633 : 1986 Methods for testing uniformity of 


coating of zinc coated articles 


IS No. Title 
10052 (Part 1): Specification for radio disturbance 
1999 and immunity measuring 
apparatus and methods: Part 1 
Radio disturbance and immunity 
measuring apparatus 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1.1 Bimetallic Connector — A connector designed 
for the purpose of connecting together two or more 
conductors of different materials (normally copper and 
aluminium conductors) for preventing electrolytic 
corrosion. 


3.1.2 Acceptance Tests — Tests carried out on samples 
selected from a lot for the purpose of verifying the 
acceptability of the lot. 


3.1.3 Bus Support Clamps — A connector designed 
for the purpose of connecting the conductor(s) to the 
support insulator. 


3.1.4 Conductor — A piece of material of any shape, 
rigid or flexible, meant for the purpose of carrying 
current. 


3.1.5 Connector — A component for the purpose of 
providing connection(s) through a suitable mating part 
between. 


3.1.6 Corona Extinction — Voltage (or) conductor 
voltage gradient at which corona discharge cease during 
a decreasing test volt sequences. 


3.1.7 Corona Inception — Voltage (or) conductor 
voltage gradient at which corona discharge initiate 
during an increasing test volt sequences. 


3.1.8 Equipment Connector — A connector designed 
for the purpose of connecting the terminal of the 
equipment to the conductor(s). Terminal pad (or) Round 
terminal stud. 


3.1.9 Expansion Connector — A connector designed 
for the purpose of connecting together two or more 
conductors and incorporating means to allow for any 
relative movement with ample allowance for the relative 
movement between the conductors. 


3.1.10 Junction Connector — A connector designed 
for the purpose of connecting together two or more 


IS 5561 : 2018 


conductors whose axes are either in line with or at an 
angle to each other. 


3.1.11 Lot— All connectors of the same type, category 
and rating manufactured by the same factory during 
the same period using the same process and materials. 


3.1.12 Parallel Groove Connector — A connector 
designed for the purpose of connecting two or more 
conductors whose axes are parallel to each other. 
3.1.13 Rated Short Time Withstand Current — The 
r.m.s value of the current during specified short time 
under specified conditions of use and behaviour. 


3.1.14 Rigid Connector — A connector designed for 
the purpose of connecting together two or more 
conductors with no allowance for the relative movement 
between conductors. 


3.1.15 Routine Tests — Tests carried out on each 
connector to check requirements likely to vary during 
production. 


3.1.16 Tee Connector — A connector designed for the 
purpose of connecting two conductors whose axes are 
perpendicular to each other. 


3.1.17 Type Tests — Tests carried out to prove 
conformity with the requirements of this specification. 
These are intended to prove the general quality and 
design of a given type of connector. 


4 RATING 


4.1 Rated Normal Current 


The rated normal current of power connectors is the 
r.m.s value of the current which shall be able to carry 
continuously under specified conditions of use and 
behaviour and shall be selected from one of the 
following values: 


— 200 A, 400 A, 630 A, 800 A, 1 000 A, 1 250 A, 
1 600 A, 2 000 A, 2 500A, 3 000 A or 3 150 A or as 
recommended by the conductor manufacturer. 


4.2 Connector Classes 


The connector class is based upon the system operating 
voltage as follows: 


4.2.1 HV (High Voltage) 


System operating voltage equal to or greater than 
100 kV and equal to or less than 230 kV. 


4.2.2 EHV (Extra High Voltage) 


System operating voltage greater than 230 kV but less 
than 1 000 kV. 


4.2.3 UHV (Ultra High Voltage) 


System operating voltage equal to or greater than 
1 000 kV 


4.3 The rated frequency of the power connector shall 
be 50 Hz. 


4.4 Rated Short Time withstand Current 


The rated short-time withstand current shall be one of 
the standard values laid down in Indian Standards for 
the associated circuit-breakers, switches, etc. 
NOTE — When power connectors are directly associated with a 
circuit-breaker or a switch, the rated short-time withstand current 


of the power connectors shall be not less than the corresponding 
rating for the circuit-breaker or switch. 


4.5 Rated Peak withstand Current 


The rated peak withstand current equal to 2.5 times 
the rated short time withstand current. For electric 
power connectors with rated voltages higher than 
800 kV equal to 2.7 times the rated short time with 
stand current. 


5 MATERIALS 


5.1 All materials used shall conform to the relevant 
Indian Standards. 


5.2 The chemical composition of aluminium and 
aluminium alloys used in the manufacture of the electric 
power connector and bus supports shall conform to 
designation 4600 of IS 617. Chemical composition of 
Bronze or other copper alloys shall conform to 
IS 28 or IS 292. 


5.3 Steel bolts and nuts shall conform to IS 1367. Non- 
ferrous alloy bolts and nuts shall conform to IS 1363. 


5.4 Spring washers shall be electro-galvanized mild 
steel suitable for at least service condition-3 as per 
IS 1573. 


6 REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Freedom from Defects 


The power connectors shall be reasonably — smooth 
and free from cavities, blow-holes and such other defects 
which would be likely to cause them to be unsatisfactory 
in service. 


6.2 Power connectors shall be so designed and 
proportioned that they are capable of safely 
withstanding stresses to which they may be subjected 
(including those due to short-circuit and climatic 
conditions) and that the effects of vibration both on the 
conductor and the connector itself are minimized. They 
shall be designed, manufactured and finished so as to 
avoid sharp radii of curvature, ridges and excrescences 
which might lead to localized pressure on or damage 
to the conductor in service. 


6.3 In bolted connectors that conduct rated normal 
current, the tightening of electrical conducting contact 


surface area must be done at least with four bolts. The 
minimum number of bolts per current carrying joint shall 
be four except parallel groove connectors, which 
connects single conductor to single conductor. 


6.4 Expansion connectors shall permit a total 
movement of one conductor in relation to the other as 
follows: 


a) For copper conductors — 31.8 mm, Min 


b) For aluminium conductors or combination of 
aluminium and copper — 50.8 mm, Min 


6.5 Bimetallic connectors shall be used to connect 
conductors of two dissimilar metals. 


Sufficient contact pressure should be maintained at the 
joint by the provision of the required number of bolts 
or other fixing arrangements. But the contact pressure 
should not be so great as to cause relaxation of the 
joint by cold flow. The joint should be such that the 
pressure is maintained within this range under all 
conditions of service. To avoid excessive local pressure, 
the contact pressure should be evenly distributed by 
the use of pressure plates, washers or suitable saddles 
of adequate area and thickness. 


7 LIMITS OF TEMPERATURE-RISE 


7.1 Electrical Power Connectors 


The temperature-rise of an electric power connector at 
rated current shall not exceed the temperature-rise of 
the conductor with which it is intended to be used. 


The temperature-rise of an electric power connector 
that connects conductors of varying sizes shall not 
exceed the temperature-rise of the conductor having 
the highest temperature rise. For equipment terminal 
connector, 7.2. 


NOTE — The clamps are specified for service at an altitude up 
to 1 000 m. If the clamps are used at an altitude above 1 000 m, 
a correction factor, if any as mutually agreed between the 
manufacturer and the purchaser may be applicable. 


7.2 Equipment Terminal Connectors 


The temperature-rise of equipment terminal connectors 
that connects conductors of varying sizes and equipment 
terminal shall not exceed the temperature-rise of the 
conductor or terminal, having the highest temperature 
rise. The maximum temperature rise of equipment 
terminal connectors above a reference of ambient 
temperature of 40° C, when carrying rated current shall 
not exceed 45° C. 


7.3 Expansion (or) Flexible Electric Power 
Connectors 


The average temperature-rise of an expansion electric 
power connector shall be in accordance with 7.1. The 


IS 5561 : 2018 


hot spot temperature-rise shall not exceed the average 
temperature rise by more than 10°C. 


On expansion connectors measurement shall be made 
in accordance with the following: 


a) Thermocouples shall be attached to the top 
surface of the flexible element(s) at the center 
of the free length. 

b) The temperature of each flexible element(s) 
forming the entire connector shall be 
measured. 


c) Allofthe temperature measurements shall be 
averaged to obtain the average temperature- 
rise of the expansion connector. 


8 PROTECTION AGAINST CORROSION 


8.1 All parts of power connectors shall either be 
inherently resistant to atmosphere corrosion or be 
suitably protected against corrosion, both during 
storage and in service. 


8.2 All ferrous metal parts intended for outdoor use, 
except those made of stainless steel, shall be protected 
by hot-dip galvanizing in accordance with IS 2633 and 
IS 2629. Bolts, nuts and plain washers for the sizes 
below M12 and spring washers shall be electro- 
galvanized. 


8.3 The threads of nuts and tapped holes shall be cut 
after galvanizing and shall be well oiled or greased. All 
other threads shall be cut before galvanizing. 


9 MARKING 


9.1 The connectors shall be indelibly marked with rated 
current or any identifying mark to enable full particulars 
of the connector to be obtained. 


9.2 The product may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


9.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made 
thereunder. The details of conditions under which the 
licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted 
to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


10 TESTS 


10.1 Following shall be the tests to be carried out on 
the connector. 


10.1.1 Type Tests 


NOTE — Because of the variety of types, ratings and possible 
combinations, it is impracticable to type test all arrangements of 
busbars and busbar connections. The performance of any 
particular arrangement can be substantiated by test data and 
experience in service on comparable arrangements and such data 


IS 5561 : 2018 


is considered as evidence of compliance with the requirement 
of this specification. 
The following type tests shall be carried out on three 
samples. 


a) Pull out strength test (see 11), 

b) Resistance test (see 12), 

c) Temperature-rise test (see 13), 

d) Short time current test. (see 14), 

e) Visual corona and RIV test (for 132 kV and 
above voltage level) (see 15), 

f) Cantilever strength test on bus support clamps 
and connectors (see 17), 

g) Dimensional check (see 19), and 

h) Galvanizing test, where applicable (see 20). 


Acceptance Tests 


a) Pull out strength test (see 11), 

b) Resistance test (see 12), 

c) Torque strength test of bolted connectors 
(see 16), 

d) Visual examination (see 18), 

e) Dimensional check (see 19), and 

f) Galvanizing test, where applicable (see 20). 


10.1.3 Routine Tests 


a) Visual examination (see 16), and 
b) Dimensional check (see 17). 


10.2 For acceptance tests the number of samples to be 
tested shall be the nearest whole number to 0.5 percent 
of the batch offered for acceptance. If these samples 
meet the test requirements, the batch is deemed to 
comply with the standard. In the event of the sample 
not meeting the requirements, twice the original number 
of new samples shall be tested. If all these new samples 
meet the test requirements, the batch is deemed to 
comply with the standard, but if any fails to do so, the 
batch is deemed not to comply with the standard. 


11 PULL OUT STRENGTH TEST 


11.1 The joint shall be assembled using the connector 
under test in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
recommendations, on conductors of the sizes and types 
with which it is to be used. 


11.2 The assembly shall be mounted in a tensile testing 
machine (or) rig and anchored in such a way that the 
test load is applied in the direction of the conductor. 


11.3 The minimum pull out strength of connectors shall 
be 1 100 N. The connector shall be fastened to the 
conductor and the clamping bolts tightened in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendation. 
The conductor shall be marked in such a way that 
movement relative to the conductor can easily be 


detected. The load shall be steadily raised to 1 100 N 
in | min. There shall be no movement of the conductor 
relative to the connector due to slip during this 1 min 
period and no failure of the connector. 


12 RESISTANCE TEST 


12.1 The largest conductor which the electric power 
connector will accommodate shall be used during the 
resistance test. 


12.2 The resistance measurements shall be made by 
millivolt drop with the help of an accurate resistance 
bridge or other suitable means. 


12.3 The resistance of 1.25 m of a conductor, including 
one connector, such as splices or elbow, shall not exceed 
the resistance of 1.25 m of the identical conductor 
without connectors, by more than 10 percent. For 
terminal connectors, the resistance measured shall be 
the sum of the resistance measurements taken from A 
to B and C to Das shown in Fig. 1. In cases where the 
conductor is a stranded cable, the strands shall be 
suitably bonded at the point of measurement. 


13 TEMPERATURE-RISE TEST 


13.1 The values of the currents to be used in making 
temperature-rise tests for the various general types of 
connectors shall be determined in accordance with the 
following: 


a) Equipment Connectors — The values of 
current shall be selected on the basis of the 
rating of the equipment to which the connector 
is connected or on the basis of the rating of 
the conductor for which the opening is 
designed, whichever is lower. 

b) Function Connectors — The values of current 
shall be selected on the basis of the conductor 
which has the lower current carrying value 
where the openings are of two sizes and on 
the basis of the conductor which is common 
to both openings where the openings are of 
the same size. 

c) ‘T’Connectors — The values of current shall 
be selected on the basis of the rating of the 
main and tap conductor which has the lower 
current carrying value. 


13.2 The test of temperature-rise for power connectors 
shall be made with alternating current at an average 
frequency not below 95 percent of the rated frequency. 


13.3 The connector shall be assembled indoors in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations 
on conductors of size and type with which it is to be 
used. Air shall be freely circulated around the assembly. 
No draughts shall be allowed. 


IS 5561 : 2018 


SPLICES 


TERMINAL CONNECTORS 


Fic.1 TERMINAL CONNECTORS AND SPLICES 


13.4 The thermocouples mounted in the connectors are 
to be placed as close as possible to the zone of current 
flow between the connector and conductor. 


13.5 Each test shall be made over a period of time 
sufficient for the temperature to reach an equilibrium 
condition (for practical purposes, this condition is 
attained when the variation does not exceed + 1° C 
per h). Measurement shall be made at the end of the 
first 30 min and at one hour internals thereafter until 
completion of the test. Temperature measurements shall 
be made using either thermometer or thermocouple. 


13.6 The time for the whole test may be shortened by 
preheating the circuit with a higher value of current. 


14 SHORT-TIME CURRENT TEST 


14.1 The test shall be arranged, as far as practicable, 
to produce conditions equivalent to those which would 
obtain in service when the connector under test carries 
fault current. The test may be made at any suitable 
voltage, and with the connector at any convenient 
temperature. The short-time current shall be applied 
for the specified time, and its r.m.s. value shall be 
determined from the oscillogram as indicated in 
Annex A. 


14.2 The r.m.s. value of the short-time current shall 
be not less than the rated short-time current, and the 
highest peak value of the major current loop during the 
first cycle of the test shall be not less than the rated 


making capacity of any directly associated circuit- 
breaker or switch. 


14.3 Where, however, the characteristics of test plant 
are such that the above requirements cannot be met, 
the following deviations are permitted provided that in 
(a) and (b) below the product of the square of the short- 
time current and the duration is not less than the product 
of the square of the rated short-time current and the 
rated time. 


a) If the decrement associated with the test is 
such that the rated short-time current, 
measured in accordance with Annex A, cannot 
be obtained for the rated short-time duration 
without applying initially an excessively high 
current, the current may be permitted to fall 
during the test below the specified value and 
the duration of the test increased appropriately, 
provided that the initial value of both peak 
and r.m.s. current are not less than those set 
out above. 

b) Ifin order to obtain the required initial peak 
value, the rm.s. value of the short-time current 
is increased above the value of the rated short- 
time current, the duration of the may be 
reduced below the rated short-time duration. 

14.4 The short-time current shall not produce any 
mechanical damage, such as permanent distortion or 
burning of parts, and shall not cause a temperature- 


IS 5561 : 2018 


rise that, added to the maximum temperature attained 
at rated current, would damage the current-carrying 
parts. 


15 CORONA AND RADIO INTERFERENCE 
VOLTAGE (RIV) TEST 


15.1 This test shall be applicable for connectors of 
system operating voltage of 132 kV and above. 


15.2 The connectors shall be tested for external corona 
both by observing the voltage level for the extinction 
of visible corona under falling power frequency voltage. 
Observation for visual corona shall be made in a 
darkened area after the eye has adapted to the dark. 
Binoculars or image amplification equipment can be 
used to locate and observe the presence of corona. 


15.3 RIV tests shall be made according to measuring 
circuit as per IS 10052 (Part 1). The measuring circuit 
shall preferably be tuned at a frequency of 0.5 MHz or 
1 MHz or alternatively other frequencies between 
0.5 MHz to 2 MHz may be used, the measuring frequency 
being recorded. The RIV results shall be in microvolt. 


15.4 Test Set-up 


Connectors shall be tested while assembled with the 
conductor on which they are to be used or dimensionally 
equivalent tubing shall be permitted to be substituted 
for stranded conductors. The connector and conductor 
to be tested shall be in a clean, dry condition and test 
shall be conducted on new connectors or conductors. 
It is permitted to wipe the mounting insulators, 
connectors and busbars with a clean cloth before taking 
measurements. 


15.4.1 Test Voltage Levels 


The test voltage levels for measurement of external RIV 
and for corona extinction voltage are listed below 


Test voltage (kV): for 765 kV system operating 
voltage — 508 kV ms 
for 400 kV system operating 
voltage — 320 kV rms. 
for 220 kV system operating 
voltage — 156 kV ms 
for 132 kV system operating 
voltage — 105 kV rm.s 


For system operating voltage other than listed above , 
the test voltage levels for measurement of external RIV 
and for corona extinction voltage shall be at least 110 
percent of the height system operating voltage (equal to 
the highest system voltage divides by square root of three) 
or as agreed between the purchaser and the supplier. 


15.4.2 Test Methods for Visible Corona 


The power frequency voltage shall be raised to 110 


percent of test voltage and maintained the voltage for 
5 min. In case of corona inception does not take place 
at 110 percent, test shall be stopped, otherwise test shall 
be continued and the voltage will then be decreased 
slowly until all visible corona disappears, then the 
voltage increased slowly until visible corona appears. 
The procedure shall be repeated at least four times with 
corona inception and extinction voltage recorded each 
time. The corona extinction voltage for purposes of 
determining compliance with the specification shall be 
the lowest of the four values at which visible corona 
disappears. Inception and extinction of visual corona 
for each of the four test shall be recorded. 


15.4.3 Test Methods for RIV 


110 percent of the specified test voltage shall be applied 
to the connectors or conductors under test and 
maintained for at least 5 min. The voltage shall then be 
decreased in steps to 30 percent of the specified test 
voltage, raised in steps to the initial value, maintained 
there for 1 min and finally decreased in steps to the 30 
percent value. Each voltage step shall be approximately 
10 percent of the specified test voltage 


At each step a radio interference measurement shall be 
made and the results obtained during the last decreasing 
run shall be plotted against the applied voltage. The 
curve so obtained is the RI characteristic of the 
connector or conductor. 


Ambient noise shall be measured before and after each 
series of tests to ensure that there is no variation in 
ambient noise level. If variation is present, the lowest 
ambient noise level will form basis for the measurement 


The RIV level of a test sample shall be considered 
acceptable as long as the measured RIV level, which 
includes both the test area ambient and test sample RIV 
is below the limit. 


15.4.4 Acceptance Criteria for Corona and RIV 

Corona extinction voltage (kV): 
for 765 kV system operating voltage — 
508 kV ms 
for 400 kV system operating voltage — 
320 kV ms, 
for 220 kV system operating voltage — 
156 kV rms. 
for 132 kV system operating voltage — 
105 kV rms. 

Maximum permissible Radio Interference level (mV): 
for 765 kV system operating voltage — 
Less than 2 500 mV at 508 kV ms 
for 400 kV system operating voltage — 
Less than 1 000 mV at 320 kV ms 
for 220 kV system operating voltage — 
Less than 1 000 mV at 156 kV rms. 


for 132 kV system operating voltage — 
Less than 500 mV 
at 105kV rms. 


NOTE — In cases where a corona glow effect occurs below the 
required corona extinction, it is permissible to clean the fittings 
surface with a clean dry cloth. 


16 TORQUE STRENGTH TEST OF BOLTED 
CONNECTORS 


The purpose of this is to ensure mechanical integrity 
of connector casting which shall also be considered as 
an alternative test to tensile test for castings as per 10.2 
of IS 617. The conductor(s) shall be assembled in the 
connector and the bolts torqued uniformly and 
alternatively in increments until 50 percent over the 
manufactures recommended torque value is achieved. 
The connector shall withstand without damage a torque 
value 50 percent over the manufacturers recommended 
torque value. Damage is defined as any crack or opening 
detected by the naked eye. This torque test is intended 
to verify the mechanical integrity of connector castings 
and not the bolts. 


17 CANTILEVER STRENGTH TEST ON BUS 
SUPPORT CLAMPS AND CONNECTORS 


The cantilever strength shall be determined by applying 
a load transverse to the conductor longitudinal axis. 


IS 5561 : 2018 


The bus support shall be bolted to a flat surface, using 
the hardware recommended by the manufacturer. The 
minimum cantilever strength of bus support clamps and 
connectors shall be 8 896 N for aluminum and 2 224 N 
for copper alloy. 


18 VISUAL EXAMINATION 


The clamps and connectors shall be checked visually 
for the following: 


a) electrical contact surface area of the 
connectors which carry rated normal current 
shall satisfy the requirements given in 6.1. 

b) shall be free from manufacturing defects such 
as cavities, blow holes and such others defect 
which would be likely if cause them to be 
unsatisfactory in service. 


19 DIMENSIONAL CHECK 


The dimensions of the connectors shall be checked 
against drawings and gauges. 


20 GALVANIZING TEST 


The quality of hot-dip galvanized ferrous components 
shall be determined by the tests given in IS 2633 and 
shall satisfy the requirements of that standard. 


IS 5561 : 2018 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 14.1) 
DETERMINATION OF SHORT-TERM CURRENT 


A-1 The method illustrated in Fig. 2 should be used to 
determine the short-time current. 


A-2 The total time BT of the test is divided into ten 
equal parts by verticals 0 to 10 and the r.m.s value of 
the ac component of the current is measured at these 
verticals. 


These values are designated Ip, Je Lig: 
where 
I= Imax 
2 
A 


J) 


d V l UI AATTEET] 
Grp 


being the peak value of ac component of current. 


A-3 For the purpose of this standard the dc component 
of current represented by is neglected since in practice 
its inclusion in the determination is of negligible effect. 


A-4 The equivalent r.m.s current during the time BT 
is given by: 


$ 
h 


ena 


E A A AAN, 


-+0 


H 1 
nett, + ACTF hy D+ fe 1+ 1, +1,°) + 
SC? Envelope of current wave. 
CC Displacement of current wave zero line from normal zero line at any instant. 
hho R.M.S. value of ac component of current at any instant measured from normal zero. DC component is 
neglected. 
l?Max Peak value of ac component of current at instant of imitating short-circuit. 


Peak value of ac component of current at time division |. 
BT Duration of short-circuit. 


Fic. 2 DETERMINATION OF SHORT-TIME CURRENT 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 08 (10871). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : CUT Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


