( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS:W94-UK8

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN OF PORTAL AND SEMI-PORTAL WHARF CRANES ( ELECTRICAL )
Cranes and Allied Appliances Sectional Committee,
Representing Jessop & Co Ltd, Calcutta

SMDC

26

Chairman SHRI D. K. NANDI Members SHRI F. V. BADAMI

Directorate General New Delhi

of

Technical

Development,

SHRI S. MAJUMDAR( Alternate ) -l-L, r..,... ui .e. c+*,, lA a...., . . .._ P__-. NT p_ Tl...",.T"" I,,.- r..rl:r.. I,`IlIIL,, 1IY.l "LCjcI0, "V r Y&l+ uu,,,pu, OkiK, LV. ". unnunJuf. Jessop & Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI R. N. BHOWAL The Commissioner for the Port of Calcutta SHRI B. R. CHATTERJEE Ministry of Railways DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( ELEC) I DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( Loco) ( Alternate ) A~~~~TANT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( ELEC ) I ( Alternate ) Central Water 82 Power Commission ( Water Wing), DIRECTOR (P &M) New Delhi Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam SHR;~:~ J GODM~ALA d. C. S. SASTRY (Alternate) Hindustan Steel Limited, Rourkela SHRI B. GOPAL RAO SHRI B. R. HALDAR ( Alternate ) Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi SHRI C. Gosw.4~1 SHRI D. CHATTERJEE( Alternate) M&and Iron & Steei `Works Lid, Bombav %.IRI'v'.P. ___~~~ %Yiri. ' Hindustan Motors Ltd, Uttarpara SHRI H. S. GUPTA SHRI P. K. HIJI ( Alternate) Western Mechanical Industries Pvt Lpi, Bombay SHRI M. S. GURNANI SHRI M. S. PURWANI ( Alternate) Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd. Jamshedpur SWRX H. HODGKINSON Indian Engineering Association, Calcutta SHRI K. K. JoJ0~1.4 SHRI A. K. DE ( Altcrnats ) Tata-Robins-Fraser Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI D. G. KEAY SHRI J. C. BISWAL ( Alternatc ) M. N. Dastur & Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI B. V. MALLYA SHRI J. J. DOSHI ( Alternafs ) Siemens Engg & Mfg Co of India Ltd, Bombay SHRI G. RATNAM SHRI A. ROY ( Alternate ) ( Continued on bags 2 )

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARC3

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI

IS : as94 - 196s
( Continued from page 1 ) Members SHRI S. R. RAY Representing Inspection Wing, Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi

Su11 -. D T. ( _____.. Altmua. L,_____ _. Grrar~u~wr - ____..___-._ \ ____ j, Braithwaite & Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. N. SARKAR Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore SHRXE.R. SHANKARRAO Hindustan Steel Limited, Bhilai SHRI T.C. SHARMA SHRI T. P. V. NA~R ( Alternate) Steel Construction Co ( Pvt ) Ltd, Bangalore SHRI S. SITARAM SHRI N. B. MANAY ( Alternate) SHRI D. SUBBARAO Southern Structurals Ltd, Madras SHRI S. R. KRISHNASWAMY ( Alfernntc) Heavy Electricals ( India ) Ltd, Bhopal SHRI V. R. M. SUNDARAM Burn & Co Ltd, Howrah SHRI B. C. SYAM Mantoas ( Bangalore ) Pvt Ltd, Bangalore SHRI N. VENKOBARAO MANAY Director General, IS1 (Ex-oficzo Member) DR A. K. CHATTERJEE, Director ( Strut & Met ) Secretary SHRI M. S. NAGARAJ Assistant Director ( Siruc 13 Met j, ISI

Panel for Code of Practice for Design of Portal and Semi-Portal Wharf Cranes ( Electrical ), SMDC 26 : Pi
Convener SHRI A. N. SARKAR Members SHRI R. N. SHRI B. R. SHRI M. J. SHRI H., S. SHRI B. c. BHOWAL CHATTERJEE GODIWALA GUPTA SYAV Jessop & Co Ltd, Calcutta The Commissioner for the Port of Calcutta Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. Vishakhapatnam Hindustan Motors Ltd, Uttarpara Burn & Co Ltd, Howrah Braithwaite & Co ( India) Ltd, Calcutta

Panel for Revision of Draft Code of Practice for (i) Design of Mobile Cranes ( All Types ), and (ii) Design of Portal and Semi-Portal Wharf Cranes ( Electrical ), SMDC 26 : P8
Convener SHRI N. HOUGH Members SHRI B. R. CHATTERJEE SHRI H. S. GUPTA SHR~K. G. K. RAO SHRI A. ROY SHRI A. N. SARKAR SHRI R. C. Syanf The Commissioner for the Port of Calcutta Hindustan Motors Ltd, Uttarpara Tata Engineering 82 Locomotive Co .Ltd, Jamshedpur Siemens Engineering & hfanufacturing Co of India Ltd, Calcutta Braithwaite & Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta Burn & Co Ltd, Howrah Coles Cranes of India Ltd, Calcutta

2

ls:45!M-1968

Indian Stbndard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN OF PORTAL AND SEMI-PORTAL WHARF CRANES ( ELECTRICAL )
0.

FORE

WORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 April 1968, after the draft finalized by the Cranes and Allied Appliances Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 As a part of the steel economy programme of ISI, IS : 807 - 1963" was published. After its publication, it was felt that a separate code of practice should be formulated for the mechanical and electrical engineering aspects _P uc>qy, J,-._L-- "I -r LIallLa _`_,,_ ,." . ...=ll -0 :mrn.ert;An ,,.-l ccmr:mn ,T,..,z." IAT:rL AL_ "1 a3 WLII QJ I113y&CI"II a`lu LLJL`L1~ LL*u>c->. ""'1LU tile increased tempo of industrialization, the demand for different types ofcranes has also increased during the third five-year plan. In order to meet this demand, a number of units with technical collaboration from various overseas countries came up for manufacturing cranes. In this background, the importance of formulating standard codes of practice for design ofvarious Accordingly, in 1964 the panel for code types of cranes was appreciated. ofpractice for design, manufacture, erection and testing of cranes and hoists, was reconstituted. It was elevated to the status of a Sectional Committee and redesignated as Cranes and Allied Appliances Sectional Committee. It proposes to formulate a number of ` Indian Standard codes of practice covering design of various types of cranes and hoists ' that are manufactured and used in the' country, this constitutes one of them. ~~3 This code covers mechanical, electrical, inspection and testing rquirements relating to the design, manufacture and erection of portal and semi_ portal wharf cranes, level luffing derricking and fixed radius type. Structural design aspects of all types of cranes and hoists including heavy duty overhead travelling' cranes for use in steel works are covered in IS : 807-1963*. Mechanical, electrical, inspection and testing aspects as related to daign, manufacture, erection and testing of overhead travelling cranes and gantry other than steel work cranes, are covered separately in cranes, Cranes are broadly classified into four classes in IS : 807_ IS : 3177 - 1965f. 1963* depending on duty and number of hours in service per year. In IS : 3177 - 19657 the different motions of a crane and the design of
*Code of practice fpr design. manufacture, erection and testing ( structural portion ) of' cranes and hoists tCode of practice ?or d&@ OT overlead travelling cranes and gantry cranes other &m ntecl work cranes.

Isr45!M-1968
component parts are required to be treated on the basis of mechanism classification defined in terms of the severity of duties to be performed or average life ofmechanism or the component part. The same mechanism classification has been adopted in this code also. 0.4 All the necessary information regarding the conditions under which the crane is to be used together with the particulars laid down in Appendix A shall be supplied with the enquiry or order. The manufacturer shall supply with the tender the information in accordance with proforma laid down in Appendix B. 0.5 In the preparation of this standard, the Sectional Committee kept in view the manufacturing and trade practices followed in the country in this field. Furthermore, due consideration was also given to the need for international co-ordination with standards being followed in various countries of the world. Accordingly, considerable amount of assistance has been obtained from B.S. 2452 : 1954 `High pedestal or portal jib cranes ' issued by the British Standards Institution. 0,6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in The number of significant places retained accordance with IS : 2-1960*. m the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value . in this standard.

1. SCOPE
1.1 This standard covers mechanical, electrical, inspection and testing requirements relating to the design, manufacture `and erection of portal and semi-portal wharf cranes, level luffing derricking and fixed radius type,
SECTION I GENERAL

2. IDENTIFICATION

AND RADIUS - LOAD INDICATION

.t J "l'he crane shall bear one or more nameplates easily visible in a prominent place having the following permanent inscriptions: a) b) c) d) Manufacturer's name, Safe working load or loads and the radii appropriate thereto, Manufacturer's serial number, and Year of manufacture.

2.1.1 A small plaque shall be located in full view of the operator preferably inside the operator's cab, bearing the safe working load or loads and the speed appropriate thereto, when change-speed gear is used for the hoisting motion.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( reuised).

4

ISt4594-1968 2.1.1.1 If specified by the purchaser, an alarm shall be fitted to the crane to give the crane driver audible and visual warning, when the load exceeds the safe working load, and a device preferably electrical shall be fitted which will automatically stop the hoisting motion when the load exceeds 15 percent of safe working load, which will not preclude the load from being lowered. 2.2 Indication of Load at Different Radii - There shall be provided, in full view of the driver, an indicator, preferably in the driver's cabin, clearly showing to the driver the safe working load at different radii. When change-speed gear is used for hoist motion, corresponding safe working load will be indicated therein. SECTION 3. DESIGN OF CRANE 2 MECHANICAL

,

MECHANISM

design of the component parts of the mechanism 3.1 j General -The relating to each motion shall include due allowance for the effects of the duty which the mechanism will perform in service. 3.1.1 In all cases the mechanism shall be classified in accordance with the provisions of 4.3 of IS : 807 - 1963* on the basis of its duty, and the design of the component parts shall be in accordance with the provisions given in this section.
NOTE - The classification of the individua1 motions of the crane may not necessarily be the same as those of crane structure, and the cla&ication of one motion of a crane may differ from that of another motion of the same crane.

on the 3.2 Design on Strength Basis - In the design of a component basis of ultimate strength, the value of stress factor used shall be the product of the basic stress factor and duty factor for the appropriate mechanism class where basic stress factor shall be not less than 5 and duty factor shall be as given in Table 1 for the appropriate mechanism class.
TABLE MECHANISM
&Ass

1 DUTY FACTOR AND LIFE FOR MECHANISM
FACTOR Wear 0.5 0.6 0.7 time per day and c---_--_~~----_--~ Running Time perDay 1.5 3.0 66 life given

Dun r-----_~ Strength 1.2 1.4 1.6

AVERAGE LIFE
Total Life (h) Over 9 000 Over 20 000 over 40 000 in the table relate to

2 3 4

Over total

NOTE --The running mechanism class only.

*Code of practice for design, manufacture, cranes and hoists. 5

erection

and testing

( structural

portion

) of

ISr4394=1968 3.3 Design OP Lift Basis - Components designed on the basis of life shall have a rated life of not less than 20 years of 300 days per year for Class 2 The average and 333 days per year for Class 3 and Class 4 mechanism. running hours per day or the life in hours used fir` the p\nrposeof the design of such components shall be the value specified m Table 1 for the aDDro.a-priate mechanism class. 4. STABILiTY 4.1 Condition of TippingA crane shall be deemed to be in i condition of tipping when it is supporting a load, at the stated radius, and it is impossible to increase this load without imposing stresses on: a) the centre pin, or centre column (where provided ); and b) any one of the track wheels leaving the track.
A 3 Mm.u;n tfic~r2p-eis ----------a hanrllinlr 2 f& wnrlrino a._ _._I_ m)`- cfgt&ili$g--Whep_ -' "-"`6 load at the appropriate radium or is subject to a wind pressure not less than 150 kgf/m2, the margin of stability is the additional load expressed as a percentage, which is required tb bring the crane to the condition of tipping (see 4.1) with the jib adjus& if necessary, to maintain the same operating radius.

4.3 Stability - The following stability requirements shall be met: a) Stability under Storm Conditions - Under storm conditions, the crane is subject to a wind force of not less than 150 kgf/m2 and P mar&n 7.5 nf chall I" h met .+ "`"`a"' nf -_ eahilitv I-Iu-&.. J nf ._,& __ nerremt VA thip 1-a-1winrl . . -1.u fnrre ."I ..,uYAAUY YI._C. r"*--"' b) Stability under Service Conditions - The load on the crane in the condition of tipping ( see 4.1) at the operating radius for appropriate safe working load, and with the crane in the position of least stability shall not be less than the safe working load $50 percent under condition 4.1(a) and + 75 percent under condition 4.1(b), and subject to a wind force of 25 kgf/m* acting at the same time. 4.4 Where possible the vertical projection of the centre of gravity of the revolving superstructure shall be kept inside the roller path for all service conditions. 5. JIB 5.1 Jib and its attachments shall be designed to withstand the sum of the stresses arising under working conditions including: a) all stresses due to load, b) all stresses due to jib and its attachments, c) accelerating and retarding forces acting horizontally at the jib head pin due to slewing the load, d) accelerating and retarding forces acting horizontally due to slewing the jib,

6

IS : 4594 - 196% e) stresses due to wind pressure of25 kg/m2, f) transverse shear stress due to 2) percent of maximum axial and g) stresses due to sudden application of slew and luff brakes.

load,

5-2 Tf J--iihc -. >w mrt~s. Ienpthg of rone shall =______-_, nrefernhlv & =_ ___--___-_ _ ____ hv .-, -=--, two -.. - ----o---i ._ -- rltw-irlwd used and buffer stops shall be provided wherever practicable to restrict the travel ofjih beyond minimum radius.

6. WIRE ROPES 6.1 Ropes, unless otherwise specified or agreed by the purchaser, shall comply with the relevant Indian Standards mentioned in Appendix C. 6.1.1 The breaking strength of all splicings, sockets, thimbles and rope anchorages shall be not less than 90 percent of the breaking strength of the rope or ropes to which they are attached. 6.2 Factor of Safety - The factor of safety based on nominal breaking strength and the rated lifted load, will not be less than the figures given in Table 2.
TABLE 2 FACTOR OF SAFETY OF WIRE ROPES 2 6 8 specified in Table 1 shall not
AND

TYPE OF ROPE

CLASSES

3

CLASS 4

Hoist rope n,,,;,.L 1,x ."r-rnnPP YC...U`. nr ". ."..
NOTE -The

7.5 8 be applicable to these

duty

factors

factors

of safety.

6.3 Ball bearing swivels ropes are not used. 6.3.1 7. ROPE Reverse

shall

be provided

in cases

where

non-rotating

bends shall be avoided

as far as possible.

DRUMS cast steel

7.1 Material for Drums - Drums shall be made of cast iron, or mild steel conforming to the following Indian Standards: a) Grey cast iron b) Cast steel c) Mild steel
*Specification tspecification $Specification 5Specification for for for for

Grade 25 of IS : 210-1962* Grade 2 of IS: 1030-1963t IS: 226-1962$ IS: 2062-1962s f r:~~i~ed;

grey iron castings ( revised) steel castings for, general enginemng purposes structural steel ( standard quality ) ( fhirrl IE: structural steel ( fusion welding quality )

7

IS:45!M7.2 .I-me the

1968

Strength of Drums -Every drum shall be designed to withstand _L.___ _-.___f l___Lt_ ---...-Y ~._ ~~ stress causea by sne wouna-on rope and the iocai bending stress when rope is winding on.

7.2.1 The bending stress due to beam action of the drum shall also be taken into consideration. 7.2.2 The factor of safety based on ultimate strength of the material used shall be not less than the appropriate value obtained from 6.2 and Table 2. 7.3 Drums shall generally be of such length that there will be not more than one layer of rope on the drum when the rope is in its fully wound position and there &ill be in addition not fewer than two dead turns at each anchored end and one spare groove at the other end. The drum shall be flanged at both ends and the flanges shall project to a distance not less than two rope diameters above the rope. A spur or other wheel or a ring secured to the drum may be regarded as forming the flange. The lead angle of the rope shall not exceed 5" ( 1 in 12 ). 7.4 Drum Diameter -The diameter of drum, measured at the bottom of groove shall be not less than the appropriate value specified in Table 3 according to the construction of the rope and the classification of crane .-__L_V.:-Inecna`Usrn. 7.5 Grooving of Drums -Rope drums shall be machine grooved and the contour at the bottom of the grooves shall be circular over an angle of approximate ,120". The radius of the groove shall be larger than the radius of the rope by not ,less than the appropriate amount given in Table 4. 7.5.1 The depth of the groove shall be not less than 0.35 times the diameter of the rope. 7.5.2 The grooves of the drum shall be so pitched that there is between adjacent turns of the rope a ciearance of not iess than: a) 1.5 mm for ropes up to and including 12 mm dia, b) 2.5 mm for ropes over 14 mm and including 29 mm dia, and c) 3.0 mm for ropes over 29 mm dia. 7.5.3 Grooving shall be finished smooth and shall be free from surface crl~~;~ecfikely to injure the rope. The edges between the grooves shall be 7.6 Rope Anchor - The end of the rope shall be anchored in such a way that the anchorage is readily accessible. 8. SHEAVES 8.1 Material-Sheaves specified for drums. shall be made of any suitable material as to the drum

8

IS:4S94TABLE 3 DRUM DIAMETERS

1968

( Clause 7.4 ) ROPE CONSTRUCTION TENSILEBREAKING STRENGTH OF WIRE, kgf/mmz MINIMUM DIAMETER OF DRUM FOR MECHANISM ~----_--h-. Classes 2 Class 4` and 3

6 x i9 6 x 24 6 x 37 17 x 7 or 18 x 7 34 x 7

lb0

.-_

to ,, ,, ,) ,, ), )) ,)

.__

115 190 175 190 175 190 190 190

24 d
28.5 d 21 d 24 d 19 d 21 d 27 d 21 d

27 d
30 d 24 d 28 d 22 d 24 d 30 d 27 d

175 160 175 160 175 175 175

d = Diameter of rope.

TABLE

4

RADIUS

OF GROOVE

IN DRUMS

AND SHEAVES

( Clazlse 7.5 ) DIAMETEROF ROPE mm Up to and including 16 Over 16 and including 24 Over 24 and including 29 Over 29 INCREASE OVERROPE RADIUS mm 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0

8.2 Diameter

of Sheave of the groove shall not be

8.2.1 The diameter of sheaves at the bottom less than that of the drums as specified in 7.4.

8.2.2 The diameter of each non-rotating equalizer sheave at the bottom of groove shall be a minimum of 12 times diameter of Mire rope for mechanism class 2 and 3 and i5 times for mechanism ciass 4. 8.3 Grooving - Sheaves shall be machine grooved to a depth of not less than 1.5 times diameter of rope. The grooves shall be finished smooth and shall be free from surface defects likely to injure the rope. The contour at the bottom of the groove shall be circular over an angle of The radius of the part of the groove shall be 130" & 5" approximately. 9

IS:4594

- 1968

larger than the radius given in Table 4.

of rope

by not less than

the appropriate

amount

8.4 Lead Angle - The angle between the rope and a plane perpendicular to the axis of the sheave shall not exceed 5" ( 1 in 12 ). 8.5 Sheave Guards rope in the grooves. Sheaves shall be adequately guarded to retain the

9. BEARINGS 9.1 Type-Bearings

type. Bush bearings below.

shall be generally of ball, roller may be used for shafts running

or ring-lubricated at 450 rev/min or

Life of ball 9.2 Due allowance shall be made for impact and thrust load. and roller bearings shall be calculated in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and based on the equivalent running time given in Table 1. 9,2,1 If 1.--main-- bush bearinrzs 9- are --~ used exceed 70 kgf/cm2 on the projected area.
10. SHAFTS 10.1 General - Shaft and axles shall have ample strength and rigidity They shall, where and adequate bearing surfaces for their purposes. necessary, be finished smoothly and if shouldered, shall be provided with fillets as large as possible and/or be tapered to surt.

the bearing (3 rnressure ----- - shall not

10.2 Material
10.3 Shaft

-

All sh,afts shall be made of steel. Indian practicable, Standards. keys, keyways and splines shall

Keys-Where

conform

to the relevant

11. COUPLINGS 11.1 All couplings suit the maximum

shall be of steel or cast iron torque that may he developed

and shall be designed in adverse condition.

to

11.1.1 Alignment shall be such that solid couplings meet accurately. Flexible couplings shall be initially aligned with the same accuracy as solid couplings. 11.1.1.1 Flexible couplings shall be-fitted between motor shafts and extension shafts. 10

IS:4594=l!HS 12. GEARING
gears shall have machine cut teeth except for slew racks where provided and their engaging pinions which may have cast or machine moulded teeth. Sewing racks inay consist of steel section with pins for teeth. 12.2 Material -L All gears shall be of steel ( cast and/or wrought ) except as provided below: a) Wheels may have steel rims secured to cast iron centres. b) Worm wheels or worm wheel rims shall be of bronze and worm of steel for power operated cranes. 12.3 Design-Gears shall be designed in accordance with relevant Indian Standards using as a minimum the duty factor given in Table 1 for the appropriate class of mechanism. 12.4 Fidng - Keys in gear trains shall be so fitted and secured that they do not work loose in service. 12.5 Gear Boxes - Gear boxes shall be so designed that the gears which they enclose will be automatically lubricated, the gears shall be readily removable and the boxes shall be oil-tight as far as is reasonably practiThey shall be of rigid construction and fitted with inspection cable. covers and lifting lugs where necessary. Facilities for oil filling, adequate breathing, drainage and means of indicating clearly the correct oil levels shall be provided. 12.5.1 Where worm gearing is used as a first motion drive it shall have under test, the same load and time rating as the driving motor, and the temperature-rise of the oil bath when measured by thermometer shall not , exceed 56�C ( lOOoF ) above the temperature of the atmosphere. 12.5.2 Gear box feet shall be machined and shall be seated and p& tively located on an appropriate level surface, preferably machined. 12.5.3 Material for the gear box shall preferably,be cast iron, cast steel or mild steel fabricated. The material shall conform to the relevant Indian Standard specifications given in 7.1. 12.6 If worm gearing is provided in slew motion, a slipping clutch or its equivalent should be provided in the mechanism. 13. TRACi(

12.1 General -All

WHEELS

13.1 Track wheels shall have cylindrical tread and be ok double or centre flanged. The wheels shall be mounted in such a manner as to facilitate removal and replacement. Provision for inserting lifting jacks shall be kept to permit withdrawal of wheels.
11

xS:4594-1968 13.2 Material -Track

have steel tyres shrunk

wheels shall be of cast or wrought on and registered. not contain more than either

steel or shall of

13.2.1 The steel shall sulphur or phosphorus. 13.2.1.1 The hardness

0*060 percent

of steel shall not be less than 250 HB. of the wheels

13.3 Diameter

of Wheels

may be calculated

- The maximum tread diameter from the formula given below: D =--

1.5 w a

where
D = tread

diameter

W = wheel load in kilograms, a = full width

of wheel in millimetres, and of railhead including radii in millimetres.

13.4 Flanges - The dimensions of flanges of track wheels shall be not less than the values given in Table 5.
TABLE
DIAMETER OF WHEELS

5

FLANGE

DIMENSIONS
THICKNESS OF WHEEL FLANGE AT BASE

DEPTH OF FLANGE

mm UP to and including Over
NOTE ,-

mm 800 so0 flanged wheels, 25 30 thickness of the flange should

mm 25 35 be increased.

For centre

14. BOLTS

AND

SCREWS

14.1 All bolts and set screws in rotating parts tension shall be avoided wherever possible.

shall

be locked.

Bolts in

14.1.1 Washers and taper pads, provided on the under sections with tapered flanges, shall be ta:k welded in place.

side of steel

14.1.1.1 All bolts and nuts shall preferably be in accordance with IS : 1364-1960* and IS : 1367-19Glt. The diameter shall be not less than 10 mm in load carrying member.
*PrrciAn allil tpwA&exa~l (G to39 mm). bolts c-6 w 39 mm

) with nuts and hexagonal

screws

12

1S:4594-196S M. BRAKES

15.1 Hoisting Motion -- Each hoisti:lg motion shall be fitted with a failsafe ( electro-magnetic or my other type ) brake and another emergency brake if required.

15.1.1 Where gravity lowering is used, it is recommended tic speed limiting brake is provided.

that automa-

15.1.2 An emergency holding brake shall be fitted in the load side when a cha ,Ige speed gear is fitted. 15.2 Luffing or Derricking Motion -- A failsafe ( electro-magnetic or any other type ) brake which is capable of arresting the jib with any load up to and including the test load at any radius between maximum and minimum shall be fitted. %.3 Slewing Brakes -- A slewing brake or other means of arresting the The brake shall be capable of being slewing motion shall be provided. secured in the holding position or other means of locking the structure shall be provided. X5.4 Tr:welling Brake -- Eiectro-mechanical brake shall be provided.

when it is left unattended or under storm condition.
a) a ~a;] clip or screw jack at each corner, or b~ a chais? anchm on each track, or -'. ".. , z storm k~ake which shall be independent. X5,5 Cenerai

15.4.1 Anchoring -- Provisions shall be made for anchoring the crane This may be done by mtaw of

15,5.1 Capacity of Brakes -- Hoisting brake when applied shall arrest the mo~im and sustain any load up to and including the test load at any p{,sitii.m of the lift. 155.1.1 Provision shall be made to control with safety the l~wering of any ?oad up to and including the test load. 15.5.1.2 Brakes in other motions shall be capable of bringing the relevant motions of the fully loaded crane safety to rest, in the shortest possible time, with the least possible shock and shall arrest the motion under all other service conditions, 15.5,2 S'ring.r -- Springs for electro-mechanical brakes shall be of the compression type and shall not be stressed in excess of 80 percent of the torsional elastic limit of the material. 1!5.5.3 Weights -- Brake weights, if provided, shall be securely bolted t~ their levers, and locked. 13

IS:--1968 X5.5.4 Brake-Drums and Shoes - The wearing surface of all brake-drums shall be machined, and shall be cylindrical, smooth and free from defects. Brake-drums shall, preferably, be balanced.
15.5.5 Adjustment - Brakes shall be provided with a simple ble means of adjustment to compensate for wear and removal and accessifor relining.

15.5.6 Brake E$ort - Under service conditions brakes applied by hand shall not require a force greater than 10 kgf at the handle. Brakes applied by foot shall not require a force of more than 15 kgf at the pedal. 15.5.6.1 It is recommended that the stroke exceed 300 mm and of pedals 150 mm. of hand ltvers shall not levers

15.5.7 Locking - Locking devices shall be provided on where necessary. Brake pedals shall have a non-slip surface. 15.5.8 Temperature exceed 100�C for fabric 16. LIFTING

brake

of the rubbin, q surfaces of all brakes shall not lining and 200�C for asbestos or metal lining.

HOOKS
hooks shall comply with the relevant Indian

16.1 General -Lifting
Standard specification.

16.2 Types - For loads up to 40 tonnes ordinary shank type or `C' type hook shall be .used. For loads of 40 tonnes and over ramshorn of triangular hooks are preferred. 16.3 Mountings - Swivelling hocks shall be mounted on thrust bearings and a protective skirt shall be provided to enclose the bearings. If reqllired a locking device shall be fitted to prevent rotation of hook and efficient catch provided to prevent displacement of sling or load from hook, or hooks shall be of such shape as to reduce as far as possible the risk of' such displacement. 16.4 Shackles

I

16.4.X Shackles shall comply with relevant Indian Standard sy,:cification ,.=A ,h-11 nrrwirld WTCWPTI shall he !g&=d. -- wlitahlv `u-`""., L1.*`u ,,llU`l hr VI PA" . . . ..-I with ,I-.-- I_._ I, -u nine r---w which I_-u_.

X6.4.2 Each shackle shall be legibly stamped on a non-vital part with an identification number and the pin of the shackle shall bear the same number.
16,4.3 When -the load on the shackle is not perpendicular to the axis, th,, allowable load shall be reduced depending on the angle at which it is applied. 14

IS : 4594 - 1968 17. OVERHAULING WEIGHT

17.1 If the hook, for single fall hoisting, is connected to the rope by means of a short length of chain, the overhauling weight shall be attached with When the overhauling weight is attached directly to tile rope, the chain. at the top and the weight shall be machine bored and bellmouthed bottom. For split overhauling weights, all bolts and nuts shall be sunk and locked. 18. CABIN AND MACHINERY HOUSE

18,I Cabin - The cabin shall be built with a clear head-room of not less than 2 m. It shall afford the driver an unrestricted view of the load and as clear a view as possible of surroundings including those'forward, and to each side of his position. 18.1.1 A seat shall be provided for the driver and that the controller handles are within his easy reach. shall be so placed and/or main Pro-

18.1.2 Cabins shall be closed, weather-proof type with sliding windows and have proper means of ventilation.

opening

18.2 Machinery House -. A house shall be fitted over the machinery arranged for ready access for inspection and maintenance. vision for adequate ventilaton and sky lights shall be kept. 18.3 The cabin or be separate. and machinery house may be combined

in one structure

18.4 Effective provision shall be made to check entry of rain water through the openings in the roof required to pass wire ropes. 18.5 Guard - If the operator's seat is in the centre line of the crane in between two legs of the jib, the window in front of him shall be adequately guarded to protect from the inadvertent swinging of the load. 19. MEANS OF ACCESS 19.1 General - Safe means of access shall be provided to the driver's cabin and to every place where any person engaged on the inspection, repair and lubrication of the crane will be called upon to work; adequate handholds being provided where necessary. -Every platform shall be securely fenced with double 19.2 Platform rT,r.Jrrl rr.;ln c.nrl +AP an mnnh.tr.,ctr.T1 ~s,~,-~AI~,I *. &1L1_ nrart;rahle ~`U'C'~UY.~, -1. . ..a."UYCA L&IL\-u `cjU"~..U, fjuaru .UI.,J ,X.&U CYI hna.4. U~u.ur) Where not less than 600 mm wide shall be provided between any moving part and guard rail, fencing or fixture. 19.3 Ladders - Sides of ladders shall extend to a reasonable or other reliable handholds shall be above the platforms, distance provided,

15

IS:4594=19fM Ladders shall, if possible, slope forward. If the slope of ladder exceeds 3 place shall be provided in 1 and its length exceed5 9 m, a resting Vertical ladders exceeding 3 m in length shall approximately in midway. be provided with back safety guard. 20. GUARDING 20.1 All gear tiheels, pinions and chain drives shall be totally encased unless such parts are so situated in relation to the structure of the crane as to be as safe as if complete encasement were provided. 20.2 Effective guards shall be provided for revolving shafts and couplings unless every set screw, bolt or key on any revolving shaft is sunk, shrouded, or otherwise effectively guarded. 20.3 The sheaves of hook blocks shall be guarded as far as possible to prevent the trapping of a hand between a sheave and the inrunning rope. 20.4 Rail required. Sweeper-Rail sweeper may be provided when specifically

21. CARRIAGE

BUFFERS

21.1 When, from the position or duty of the crane, buffers are necessary on the carriage, they shall be of timber or of the spring type and shall for preference, be fixed on the main sills and not on the bogies. The buffers shall be fitted on extensions of the sills where the tails of adjacent cranes would otherwise foul each other. 22. WEATHER PROTECTION
wecathm. .I.+~~IIc-I.

Z?Z?~_A~~efzc;ical and mechanical equipment nrnt-rt& frnm ," "%bUbLU ll"l`l `,"UO.., D&La., We adequately covers shall be easily removable. 23. PAINTING

outside cabin

A 11 ..,PIII th mw. p n..sv-sf `111 1"&ULIILI ""I

and machinery

23.1 Before despatch of the crane the complete crane covering structural, mechanical and electrical parts shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt grease, scale and rust and then given a single coat of primer. The exposed mechanical parts of the crane shall be given one coat of rust preventor. 24. LUBRICATION 24.1 Provision shall be made for lubricating easily accessible from the working platforms all bearings and of the crane. this shall be

16

24.2 In case centralized lubrication is provided it shall be given in Appendix A. In this case provision shall be made at the bearings to vent excess lubricant pressure. 24.3 Lubricating nipples, pipes, and adopters shall generally comply with the relevant Indian Standards. 24.4 A lubricating chart in the maintenance manual shall be provided indicating all the lubricating points, the type of lubricant and recommended frequency of lubrication. 24.5 Grease lubricated ball and roller bearings shall in addition be packed with grease during initial assembly. 25. SAFETY REQUIREMENTS

25.1 The cranes should comply with the relevant safety regulations under the Factories Act and Indian Electricity Rules prevalent in various States, Indian Dock Labourer's Regulation and other Statutory Regulations. SECTION 26. MOTORS 26.1 Ratings and Enclosures -The ratings shall be such that, under the specified service conditions, the temperature rise will not exceed the limits specified in IS : 325-1961* or other relevant Indian Standards. This shall not preclude use of intermittent rated motors if required. 26.1.1 The enclosures shall suit the specified shall be stipulated with the enquiry or order. service conditions and 3 ELECTRICAL

26.2 Torque - The pull-out torque of any motor supplied at rated voltage should preferably be not less than 2f times the rated torque. 26.3 Design and Construction frequent acceleration and braking. 26.3.1 braking, Motors shall be suitable for reversing,

If it is intended to retard or stop the motion of a crane by electric the motor shall be of suitable design to withstand this duty.

26.4 Mounting - Motors shall be so located that the brushgear and terminals are accessible for inspection and maintenance and normal ventilation is not restricted. 26.5 Limiting Speed - Unless specially designed for specified higher speeds, motors shall be capable of withstanding maximum speed of two and half times the rated speed or 2 000 revolutions per minute whichever is lesser. *Specificationfor three phaseinductionmotors ( sccmd rtvinin ). 17

m45944968
26.6 Terminals - Motor leads shall be brqught out from the m&r frame to terminals in the terminal box fixed to the frame. When mill type motors are used, it may not be applied.

27. CONTROLLERS
27.1 Gkneral - Controllers shall comply with relevant Indian Standards and shall be adequately protected to prevent accidental'contact with live parts.

27.2 Rating Standards.

Controllers shall be rated to comply with relevant

Indian

27.3 Accessibility - All controllers shall be so disposed that the contacts and terminal arrangements are readily accessible for inspection and maintenance. 27.4 Marking and Direction of Operation of Controllers -Where practicable, controller handles should move in the direction of the resultant load movement. Each controller shall be marked in a permanent manner to show the motion controlled, and wherever practicable of the direction of movement. 27.5.Notching -The notching for the controller handle in the ` OFF ' position shall be more positive than the notching in other position. The handle may be provided with a lock, latch, `dead man ' or ` spring return ' feature if specially requested by the customer. 27.5.1 The control lever shall be provided with stops and/or catches, to ensure safety and facility of operation. A controller drum fitted with a star wheel shall be regarded as complying with the requirement, 28. RESISTORS shall be adequately protected to prevent 28.1 General -Resistors accidental contact with live parts. The resistors shall preferably be of such material which is resistant to the corrosive action of saline atmosphere. 28.2, Rating - Resistors shall be rated such that the temperature does not exceed the limits specified in the relevant Indian Standards &ring the operation of the crane under service conditions. 28.2.1 Resistors shall be rated according to the service conditionr and the mechanism class of the crane and shall preferably be intermittent rated. She@ time rated resistors may, however, be used. 18

15:4594=196S

The rating of resistors shall be not less than that as shown below:
Mechanism Class Short Time Rated Resistors, Minutes Intermittent Rated Resistors, Seconds -h-_-y 5K OFF

2 3 4

5 5 10

15 15 15

45 30 15 housings

shall be enclosed in well-ventilated 28.3 Fittings -Resistors and, wherever necessary, be fitted with suitable covers.
29. CRANE CONTROL

29.1 General -

All control handles and pedals shall be placed in convenient positions to allow the driver ample room for operation and permit an unrestricted view of the load.
29.1.1 The hoist motion circuits shall enable any load to be lowered with safety and the hoist motor shall remain under effective control with controller in all positions.

29.2 Control OFF Position - Controllers when in the OFF position shall open all supply lines of the respective motors unless otherwise agreed, in which case a warning notice shall be tied to the controllers. 29.3 Control Circuits - If the mains supply is alternating current and the control circuits are supplied at reduced voltage, the supply to these circuits shall be from the secondary winding of an isolating transformer or an isolating transformer and rectifier. One pole of this supply shall be earthed and the contactor and relay coils shall be connected to this pole, or other equally effective means shall be adopted to prevent mal-operation owing to sneak circuits or earth faults. 29.4 Schemes of Control - If electrically operated contactor equipment is used for the control of all crane motions, the protective equipment shall be in accordance either with Scheme A, in which each motion has separate protection, or with Scheme B, in which an overload on any motion trips out the crane supply. The two schemes are given below:
Scheme A

a) Switchgear Common to ALL Motions - The main contactors or main circuit-breaker shall open all lines. If a main circuit-breaker is used, it shall be hand operated, unless otherwise specified, fitted with a shunt trip and rated to carry at least the combined full load current of the two motions having the largest horse-powers. 19

b)

Switchgcar fw Individual Motions - Each motion shall be separately protected and provided with an under-voltage relcasc. The minimum provision of over-load protection shall be that all supply lines except one to each motion shall be provided with adjustable inverse time-lag, suitable type over-load releases. These shall be connected as close as possible to the contactors they control, and shall be set to trip the circuit of the motion controlled when carrying 200 percent of the full load current of the motor, after a time-lag of approximately 10 seconds.

It shall be prominently labelled MAIN CIRCUIT-BREAKER. electro-magnetic type over current Instantaneous adjustable reieases on each pole shall be provided to trip the main circuitbreaking devici and shall be connected as close to it as possible. The setting of these over-current releases shall be such that the circuit will be tripped instantaneously when the current rises to 250 percent of the value specified above.

c) It shall not be possible to reinstate the current supply to the contactor closing coils of a motion until the master coQtroller for the motion is returned to the OFF position. Schehenc B

.

a! Switchgear

Common to All Motions - All motions shall be controlled by a common main contactor or contactors or trip free circuitbreaker or circuit-breakers fitted with no-volt release and rated to carry the combined full-load current of the two motions having the largest horse-powers.

b)

Any motor having a horsepower less than one-third that of the largest motor served by the common over-load release shall be protected by separate over-load release. The number of over-load devices and their positions shall normally be in accordance with one of the _____n_.m_..+n . ..__I_____ aryarl~lzLWz;ll LJ ,h,,...o Jll"Wl* ;, 1`1 TP,hl, I _",I; G " h..+ l.JUL;f-n-zan:Carl II JIJ~L""U l... uy by_ Lllr; . ~u`W,&cc-, other arrangements giving protection of not less than any of these shall be considered as complyin`g,with the specification.

Protective Devices for Individual Motor -

Adjustable electro-magnetic type over-load release shall be provided to trip the main contactor or contactors or circuitbreaker or circuit-breakers and shall be connected as close to it The minimum provision for over-current ( them ) as possible. protection shall be: release in a common line feeding all i> One instahtaneous motions set to trip the main contactor or contactors or circuitbreaker or circuit-breakers instantaneously when the current rises to 250 percent of the value specified above, and ii) One inverse time-lag release in each other line feeding each motion, set to trip the main contactor or contactors or 20

IS : 4594 - 1968
TABLE 6 NORMAL REQUIREMENTS FOR NUMBER PROTECTIVE DEVICES FOR MOTOR CIRCUIT OF

[ Scheme B (b) ] < -P---P
dc
SUPPLY

--------~
One Line Earthed

3-Pxusri

ac SupPLY

Neither Line Earthed

1 per motor + 1 in common return line

1 per motor each connccted in the non-earthed line 1

2 per motor in separate phase wire + 1 in the common return line 3 lF;Es motor in separate

2 per motor
lines

in

separate

per motor + 1 equivalent to that connected in common return line but each connected in the nonearthed line

circuit-breaker or circuit-breakers when carrying 200 percent of the full-load current of the line, after a time-lag of approximately 10 seconds. . It shall not be possible to reinstate the current supply to the common main contactor closing coils, or complete the of the circuit-breakers under-voltage circuit until the controllers for all motions are returned to the OFF position. 29.4.1 If drum controllers of mechanically operated contactor are used for the control of all crane motions, the protective shall comply with Scheme B. controllers equipment _ _

29.4.1.1 Where a motion is Ward-Leonard controlled, provision shall be made for: a) protection in case of motor field failure, b) protection against the motor creeping when the controller is in the OFF position, and c) tripping of the generator field circuit with suppression of generator voltages instantaneously, when there is an over-cwrent of 250 percent in the generator-motor loop, or after a time-lag when there is a sustained over-current of lower value. 29.4.1.2 automatically Operation of any of the apply the electro-mechanical above protective devices shall brakes on the relevant motion,

29.4.1.3 If other systems of control or mixed systems are specified, the protective equipment shall be in accordance with the recommendations of the control gear manufacturer. 29.4.1.4 A circuit diagram of the protective equipment preferably be provided in the electrical equipment compartment manufacturer of the protective panel. 21 shall by the

IS I 4594 - 1988 29.5 Control Switch Fuse - A double pole switch fuse connected coil circdit of the main contactor shall be provided. in the

29.6 Control for dc Supply - When a dc control circuit is\ so designed in the lowering direction the control that the motor acts as a generator shall be such that: a) with the minimum load on the hook, the motor predetermined maximum rev/min, b) progressive degree the controller, of braking is provided may not exceed a steps of

on the various

c) adequate light hook lowering speeds are provided, shall be made to prevent the brake from being d) arrangements released by the back emf of the motor when the power supply has been interrupted, and brake is automatically applied when the e) the electro-mechanical circuit-breaker or contactor is opened, that is, in the case of a crane with a common protective panel this applies to the main circuit-breaker or contactor and in the case of a crane with individual protection for each control panel, this applies to the circuit-breaker or contactor attached to the hoist control panel. 29.7 Pilot Lamp - A pilot lamp with red lens should be located at a visible point. Pilot lamp should either be connected so that it indirates whether the control switch is ON or OFF, or the contactor is CLOSE or OPEN. 29.8 Emergency Push Button - A push button emergency stop shall be so located so as to be readily available for prompt use by the operator in case of emergency. If specified by the purchaser the number of emergency stops may be more than one. `u'niess otherwise, agreed, the provision of a RESET.button is not required. 29.9 OFF Position Interlocking - Electrical Interlocking shall be provided to prevent the main contactor or circuit-breaker from being closed unless all controllers are in the OFF position. 29.9.1 A suitable control circuit may be provided for the main circuitbreaker to prevent it from being closed when the contactor of a particular motor has failed to open although the corresponding controller has been brought to'its OFF position. 38. BRAKE 38.1 Service Brakes-Each motion shall have minimum one faiisafe ( electromechanical or any other type ) brake which shall apply automatically, when the power supply fails or when the circuit-breaker is opened. 22

IS : 4594 - 1968

When the controller brake shall apply.

handle

is brought

to the OFF position,

the particular

30.2 Emergency and Parking Brakes - When an electro-mechanical brake is used as an emergency or parking brake, the brake shall remain in circuit when the main circuit-breaker is closed and the brake shall apply automatically when the power supply fails or when the circuit-breaker is opened, but not when the controller handle is brought to the OFF position, 30.3 Electrical Braking - In addition to the specific requirements of this code in regard to the provision of brakes, and irrespective of the supply current, electrical braking is permissible on all motions of electrically operated cranes. 30.4 BFake $Iagnets - The terminals of brake magnets shall be protected from accidental contact and the connections and windings shall be effectively Where necessary, magnets shall be protected from mechanical damage. provided with an efficient cushioning device. Twoduties are recognized for both ac and dc, namely: b) normal duty. a) continuously or heavy duty, and 30.4.1 Since, with an alternating current brake magnet, the current in the coil is greater for the open position than that when closed, the rating for ac are slightly different from dc as shown in table 7.
TABLE KIND OFOPERATION 7 BRAKE MAGNET RATJNGS

dc MAGNETS Suitable for being
more every in circuit not than 71 minutes out of 15 minutes

ac MAGNETS
Suitable for being in circuit tinually where the brake operates infrequently concoil

Heavy duty

OR
240 operations per hour

OR
For 240
operations per hour where the time that the brake coil is in circuit is not more than 5 minutes out of every 16 minutes Suitable for 120 operations per hour where the time that the brake coil is in circuit not more than 5 minutes out of every i 5 minutes

Normal duty

Suitable for 240 operations per hour where the time that the brake coil is in circuit is not more than 5 minutes out of every is minutes

30.4.2 The brake magnets shall operate, and voltages given in Table 8.

for both

duties

at the current or any of brake

30.5 Brake Release - Appropriate mechanical, electro-hydraulic other alternative failsafe brake releasing gear may be used instead Magnet if desired. 23

IS:45M-1968
TABLE'8 BRAKE MAGNET OPEBATING (Clause 30.4.2 ) WfNDINO For series resistors control Series i PoientioI meter Shunt dc &onars Lift at 60 percent rated current. Hold at 15 percent rated current Lift _ .- at 40 percent rated current. Hold at 15 percent rated current *Lift at 90 percent rated voltage Hold at 50 percent rated voltage *Lift at 80 percent rated voltage *Hold at 50 percent rated voltage ac -MAanxrs CURRENTS AND VOLTAOES

NOTE-Arrangements shall be made, where necessary to prevent the brake ma from being energized by the back emf of the motor when the supply has 7.z interrupted. *This is intended to apply with hot coils corresponding to the duty cycles at rated voltage. The temperature rise of the brake magnet shall not exceed that allowed for the control equipment fitted.

31. ISOLATING SWITCH
metal clad isolating switch with OFF position lock 31.1 General -A shall be placed in an accessible position on the crane carriage just after the cable reeling drum or equivalent collqtor gear. An indicator shall be fitted to show clearly whether the switch is ON or OFF.

31.1.1 Another isolating switch shall be fitted inside the machinery house adjacent to it to cut off the supply of all power driven and associated equipment, but not the auxiliary leads such as lightings. 31.1.2 Means shall be provided in the control cabin, and readily accessible to the driver, for switching off promptly all power to the motors in case of emergency. This may be a main switch or the push-button associated with the crane protective panel, where contactor-type circuit breakers are used, or the main switch, where switch and fuse protection is adopted. 31.2 Isolators for Auxiliary Circuits - Crane lighting, driver's cabin heating, fans, etc, when required shall be supplied from the live side of the main isolating switch and shall be controlled by separate isolating switches. If the supply voltage exceeds 250 volts and lamps are operated in sericr double pole isolating switches shall be provided. 31.3 Interlo&ng crane protective - If the main isolating switch is combined panel, it shall be mechanically interlocked with 24 with the the door/

rs:4594-1968 giving access to the panel, and the incoming terminals shall be screened to nr,~.ren+UU~I~~..CU. ~,.r;rl~nt~l ,-nn+~r+ rlnnr LU ;E "yd" fin-n Whcsn nn+ Y" EA V"".U~.`~`Y, rnmh;ns.A . . `lb.. .."b y`x,.b*.l. U""CULb when *v&lb.- th.= Lll" .a"". a suitably worded red warning plate shall be attached to the cover of the protective gear and all other panels and controllers, not fitted with interlocked isolators. 32. LIMIT SWITCHES

32.1 General -A limit switch, after being tripped, shall automatically reset itself within a reasonable distance travelled in the opposite direction. This does not prevent the use of change over type limit switches, where the resetting is achieved by a striker when moving in the opposite direction. 32.2 Hoist Limit Switch - A positively acting mechanism which cuts off the current and stops the motion and applies the brake when the hook has risen to a predetermined level with jib in any position shall be provided to prevent overwinding. Limit switches may be fitted if required to prevent overlowering. 32.3 Limit Switches for LuiBng - A iimit switch shaii be provided to limit the level luffing or derricking in either direction. 32.4 Limit Switches for Travel fitted to prevent overtravelling. 33. COLLECTOR RINGS Limit switches if specified shall be

33.1 For conveying current between the non-revolving and the revolving part of the crane a collector column shall be provided within easy access for maintenance. The Lolumn shall consist of collector rings with contact Rings and fingers shall be readily accessible fingers of ample capacity. for examination. 34. CABLE AND WIRING 34.1 Cables - Rubber insulated cables, polyvinyl chloride insulated cables or varnished cambric insulated cables used for crane wiring should comply with the relevant Indian Standard specifications. 34.2 Minimum Size - Cable having conductors smaller than 2.5 mm" nominal equivalent copper area of cross-section shall not be used for the power wiring to any of the motors. For control circuits and auxiliary wiring, cables having a sectional area smaller than 1.5 mm2 nominal equivalent copper area shall not be used. 34.3 Protection-All cables shall be adequately protected against mechanical damage and metal trunking may be used if desired. Electric' -..l~_._-L lnulan 1--l:_- ozanoaru. Q~__l_._> *P--L,_ conduits shall comply with the rcievan~ 11 causes are ^__ 25

Is : 4594 - 1968
drawn into a steel tube, the steel tube ii s s0iid drawn, screw Jointed. shall be heavy gauge welded or

34.4 Multicore Cables -- Multicore power and control cables suitably clamped to the crane structure may be used. Suitable clamping glads - should be provided at both ends of each multicore cable, cables shall be either armoured or unarmoured suitably protected throughout their length. A flexible metallic tube or duct may not form an effective earth connection and shall not be used for that purpose. Taped and braided varnished cambric insulated cables shall not be used for outdoor cranes. 34.5 Current Rating - Ratings of the cables shall comply with the relevant Indian Standard specifications. Where cranes are equipped with one hour rated motors, the stator or armature cables may be rated by a factor of 1.4 above the ratings for continuous duty. Similarly for cranes equipped with half hour rated motors an up-rating factor of 1.7 may be used. Where the cranes are equipped with intermittend duty rated motors -100 the factor for uprating the cable will be equal to IDF
'

current -during accelerating periods only and may, therefore, be still further oprated. For 10 minutes and 5 minutes rated resistors, the up-rating factors of I.5 and 2 respectively may be used. For intermittent resistors suitable up-rating factor may be used.
carry

where IDF is the intermittent duty factor. .Y" e 1 TL, __L,,r__ __+,._ ^_ _____~.___ _.^-:...._ _:__..:rafd.~ III'- C~UILS GUI IULUI VI ~IIII~LL~C I~S~~LUI C~CUILJ

__. .

.._. _I

34.5.2 Consideration should be given to such factors as the ambient temperature, grouping and disposition of the cables, and to the limitation of voltage drop, Lvhich will influence selection of suitable cables. 35. MAIN
SUPPLY

35.1 For travelling cranes the main supply may be obtained from bare conductors or from convenient plug through a flexible cable. In the case of bare conductors, necessary collector gear shall be provided in the crane.

35.1.1 In the case of flexible cable, a cable drum with necessary sliprings shall be incorporated in the crane. The cable drum may be either automatically or manually operated. When automatically operated a limit switch shall be provided to prevent overdrawing. 36. WIRING
DIAGRAM

The diagram shall 36.1 A wiring diagram of the crane shall be supplied. give the rating of each of the motors, the cable sizes and such other 26

Is:4594-1968
information crane. 36.1.1 cranes. 37. FIXED as will tend \ to facilitate shall inspection be supplied and maintenance for contactor of the

A schematic

diagram

controlled

LIGHTING

37.1 General - Sufficient and suitable lighting shall driver's cabin, machinery house and at access ladders. 37.2 37.3 38. All connections for lighting shall be from auxiliary

be provided in the
isolator ( see 31.2 ).

All lights shall be fitted with shock absorbers. HAND LAMP

lamp is provided it shall not be connected to a circuit exceeding 250 volts dc or 25 volts ac. In the case of an ac circuit the hand lamp shall be fed through a doub!e wound isolating transformer with some part of the secondary winding earthed., 38.2 The primary winding of &e, transformershall be controlled by a double pole switch. Fuses shall b: provided m each pole of the primary circuit and one pole of each of the secondary circuits. 39. EARTHING motor frames, and metal cases of all electrical including metal conduit or cable guards, shall be effectively to earth complying with Indian Electricity Rules.

38.1 If a hand

39.1 The crane structure:
equipment connected

39.1.1 Where the crane is connected to the supply-by flexible cord or flexible cable, the crane shall be connected to earth by means of an earthing conductor enclosed with the current carrying conductors within the flexible cord or flexible cable.

39.1.2 Travelling cranes connected be effectively earthed. SECTION
40. INSPECTION

to the supply through

collectors

shall

4

INSPECTION
TESTING

AND

TESTING

AND

and specified in the contract, 40.1 If required by the purchaser purchaser or his authorized representative shall have access to 27

the the

1s : 4594 - 1968
manufacturer's works at all reasonable times for the purpose of witnessing the manufacture, inspection and testing of all products concerned and/or the complete crane. 40.2 Any work found defective or which is not in accordance with the drawings or of the terms of this code and/or the contract may be rejected by the inspector. 41.

TESTS

AND MANUFACTURER'S

WORKS

41.1 All electrical

and mechanical equipment shall be tested in accordance with the appropriate Indian Standard at either, the crane maker's or equipment manufacturer's work and manufacturer's test certificates provided, if required by the customer. by the purchaser and specified in the contract, the crane shall be tested at manufacturer's works under full load and 25 percent over-load on hoisting, slowing and luffing. Testing of long travelling motion is not necessary.

41.2 If required

41.3 Any test required by the purchaser beyond those called for in the appropriate Indian Standard shall be subjected to mutual agreement and shall be carried out at the purchaser's expense. 42.

TESTS

AT PURCHASER'S

PREMISES

42.1 Insulation

Tests -After erection but before the crane is connected to the supply, the insulation of the electrical equipment shall be tested by a suitable instrument and any defects revealed shall be rectified.
42.1.1 The voltage required for the insulation resistance dc voltage not less than twice the rated the voltage. test shall be a

42.1.2 Any reading less than 0.5 megohm obtained with an insulation resistance tester of the unregulated type shall be disregarded and the wiring under test shall be subdivided until a reading higher than 0.5 Failure to obtain a higher reading shows an megohm is obtained. unsatisfactory state of the insulation.
NOTE -

that unduly

A reading below 0.5 megohm low proportion of the prescribed

obtained with such a tester may indicate test voltage is in fact being applied.

If an installation has been subdivided sion shall meet the requirements.

for test purposes,

each subdivi-

42.1.3 The insulation resistance of each wiring circuit exclusive of connected apparatus shall be not ICSS than 2 megohms. If necessary, it shall be permissible to disconnect individual items of equipment while making this test.

28

IS : 4594 - 1968 the supply has been connected and 42.2 Tests for Operation -After before the complete crane installation is put in to commercial service, tests on firm level ground shall be carried out to prove the following: a) The satisfactory operation of each controller, switch, contactor, relay and other control devices and in particular the correct operation of aii iimit switches under the most unfavourabie conditions; b) The correctness of all circuits and interlocks and sequence operation; c) The satisfactory operation of all protective devices; d) The satisfactory operation of each motion of the crane; of

e) The satisfactory operation of load and radius indicator; f) The crane shall be tested for each motion in each direction under the following conditions: 1) With no road; 2) With each safe working load at its specified maximum radius; 3) With over-load 25 percent in excess of safe working load at its specified maximum radius. The specified speeds at full load shall be within -f 10 percent. During the over-load test the specified speed may not be attained but the crane will handle over-load without difficulty. g) All brakes shall be tested with 25 percent over-load on the crane. In addition, it is recommended that each brake on hoisting and derricking motion be tested under full load, from the maximum rated speed to rest, not less than three times in quick succession.
NOTE In the case of erection of the crane by a party other than the supplier, the purchaser shall satisfy the supplier before the above tests are carried out that the erection of crane `has been done according to the supplier's requirements.

43.1 When a stability test is required by the purchaser, the load on the hook or grab shall be of static character only, and built up gradually above the amount of the active test load. The load on the crane in the condition of tipping ( see 4.1 ) at the operating radius for appropriate safe working load, and with the crane in the position of least stability shall not be less than the safe working load plus 50 percent under conditions 4.1 (a) and plus 75 percent under condition 4.1 (b), and the crane subjected to a wind force of 25 kgf/m2 acting at the same time. During this test care shall be taken that the load remains close to the ground. The jib should be in a position which places the crane in a condition oi`last stability. 43.1.1 The stability requirement given in 43.1 deemed to be satisfied by theoretical checks only. 29 shall normal@ be

IS:4!i94-1968

APPENDIX

A

( Chuses 0.4 and 24.2 )
INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED WITH THE ENQUIRY OR ORDER A-O. The following information in regard to the details of the crane shall be furnished by the purchaser at the time of enquiry or order. Capital letters in parentheses refer to those in clearance diagram (see Fig. 1 ).

HOOK TO FOLLOW HORIZONTAL PATH FOR LEVEL LUFFING

1I
I

CH

I

FIG, 1

CLEARANCE DIAGRAM OF H~GEX PEDESTAL JIB CRANE

30

ISt4594-1!%8 A-l, General a) Number of cranes ........................... b) Duty of class of crane.. ................... 1) Crane structure.. .................. 2) Main hoist.. ......................... hoist ..................... 3) Auxilii 4) Slew .................................... 5) Derricking ........................... 6) Long travel ........................... ( See 4.3 of IS : 807-1963* .7 1 (See 4) 1 1 J I )

c) Crane capacity in tonnes 1) Main hoist ............. ..a t maximum radius (R,) .............. at minimum radius (Rs) .............. 2) Auxiliary hoist ......... .at maximum radius (R,) .............. at minimum radius (R,). ............. d) Range of lift 1) Main hoist (HI). ............. (Hs). .............. .metres above rail level at maximum radius (R,) metres below rail level at minimum radius (Rs) .metres below rail maximum radius metres above rail minimum radius level at (Zr) level at (R,)

.m .m
.m

.m

2) Auxiliary hoist (HI). ............. (Hs). ..............

e) Is level luffing required ?. ................................................. f) Is crane to be used with hook or grab ? ......... >U . .rz ...............

g) Additional information required for grab crane : 1) Nature of material to be handled ....................................... XAT-:-Lc -PI CUVlC ,..r.: _ l""L P,.,c..LIllU . . e;Ialll . ,: - J`YC .:,.a ................................. vvr;,g;nr I&I

2)

7) If the purchaser is to supply the grab, give the gross and ..*..........L. empty grab bucket weights .. i ........................... *Code of practice for design,manufticture,erection and testingt structuralportion) of eraneaand hoists .

3) Output in tonnes/hour and operating cycles/hour ............... 4) Type of grab ............................................................... ..,/............................ 5) No. of ropes .............................. ..`..I........................... ........................ grab Capacity of 6)

31

IS:4!5!34-1968 h) Abnormal j) Is change k) Travelling atmoshperic gear required conditions, for grain ifany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . hoist ?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . .

track details: . . . . . . . . .m 1) Track gauge (S) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,.. .,.......,. 2) Width of rail head (B) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..a....... mm 3) Size and weight/unit length of rail section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

difference of level if the track rails are not on level ..*...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5) Sketch showing crane tracks, clearances and obstruction or any other site restrictions ..,..................................:....**..., .f.......... t 6) Minimum wheel load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*............. m) Any special requirements, -2. Crane performance: speeds: such as lighting, limit switches, etc.

4) State same

a) Operating

1) Main hoist: Slow gear. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..m/min fast gear . . . . . . . __ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . .m/min 2) Auxiliary hoist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . m{min 3) Derricking or luffing at full load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . m/mm m/min 4) Slewing at full load .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.................. 5) Travelling
b) Tail

full

load... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..m/min

radius:

1) Maximum permissible projection from centre line of crane to tail end of crane ( `TR ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . m 2) Distance from centre line of crane to nearest obstructing point (D) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..m 3) Minimum clear height ( CH) metres to underside of jib or at distance (L) . . . . . . . . . .. . .,, . . . . . . ,.,......... m revolving structure 4) Minimum end clearances: i) ( EC, ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . , . ii) ( EC,) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . c) Portal 4 clearance ( if required ):

(f0. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..m m

b) (C) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..L........... 32

IS : 4594 - 1968 A-3. Electrical
details: ac or dc:

a) Power supply

1) ac supply: Volts . . . . . . . . . .No. of phases.. . . . . . . . . . .Frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .c/s No. of wires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Neutral ( earthed or not ) . . . . . . . . . . . . 2) dc supply: Volts.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .No. of wires. . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Is one pole earthed ?... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . ~. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . b) Type and position of conductors or boxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . state whether automatic or . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . *,..........,.....

c) If cable reeling hand operated.. d) Ambient

drum is required, . ,......................I....

temperature and rating

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . ."C
of motors . . . . . . . . . ..*................*.....*.............

e) Types

APPENDIX ( Uaause 0.4 )
INFORMATION

B

TO BE SUPPLIED BY MANUFACTURERS
should be supplied to

B-0. The following details in regard to the crane the purchaser at the time of enquiry and order.

B-l. Type and class of crane:
a) Crane structure . . . ..I..................... b) Main hoist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*... c) Auxiliary hoist... ., , ,..... .,......... - . . . . d) Slew . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e) Derricking or luffing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . f) Long`travel................................ B-2. Crane capacity: a) Main hoist... . . . . . . . . I . . . . . .t at maximum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . t at minimum b) Main hoist change hoist ,........ radius radius ( Rr ),.. . . . . . . . . . m ( R, ) . . . . . . . . . . . . m radius radius radius` radius ( R, ) . , . m (R,)... m ( R, )... m (R,)...m

gear load.. .t at maximum . ..t at minimum . . . . . . . . . . ..t at maximum . ..t at minimum 33

c) Auxiliary

18 : 4394- 1968

B-3. Range ,\
illal`l

of lift:
L`".PL

;s;
cl 4
B-4. B-5. Tail

h/T,;"

L.-Ad

\

I

A',

u \
,".

hmw m a,,.,

rail
lull

l~xw.1 mt ma~im,,m ..u
A.d.uI YC . -1.1 *,.A..

rarl;r~r
11-1 ..Y

f _&)

Main hoist ( HZ ) . . .m below rail level at hoist ( Hr ) . . . . . . m above hoist ( Hz ) . . . . . .m below

minimum

radius

( R, ) radius radius

Auxiliary (& ) Auxiliary ( & ) radius

rail level at maximum rail level at minimum

( TR ). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..m track: distance (S) of track rails . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..m

Travelling a) Centre

b) Size of track rail recommended..

. .,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

mc _^..^ L,, D-u, r\ "pclarwg
a) Main b) Main

C..~P.-l". UpcuJ.
hoist: hoist: slow gear' ,,.,....*...,..... fast gear.. t at... . . . . . ,.. . . . . . . . . . . . m/min

. . . . . . . . . . . . . ..t at. . . . . . . ._. . . . . . . . . . . ,m/min

c) Auxiliary d) Derricking f ) Travelling. B-7. Type

hoist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . t at . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..m/min or luffing, full load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . m/min . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . m/min type of grab supplied: ... ... ... ... ............

e) Slewing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . m/min of hook or where applicable

a) Main hoist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . b) Auxiliary B-8. Gearing a) Type.. c) Type hoist . . . . . . ..*.............................

. . ,. . .

.. . . .. . . . . .. .. . . . .. .. .. . . .. . .. . . . .. . . . .. .. .. . . . ..
gear.. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

b) Material. B-9. Travelling
a) Material b) Maximum

..,............,.,......,..................................

of slewing wheels:

.. . . .. ... . .. ... .. .. . .. .. . .. . . . . ... .. . . . . .. . .. . . . . ... .. . . . wheel load excluding provided impact..

,. _. _..

_. t

B-10. Type of support

for revolving

part of crane:

a) Live ring roller .................................................

b) Rollers Cl Centre

on fixed axles ......................................... pillar ...... . . ............................................. 34

. B-11, Wire ropes
-_---___ Main hoist Diameter (mm) Construction Quality of Steel

No. of Falls Minimum Breaking Strength _-__

T
I

Factor of Safety --

Auxiliary Hoist -___ Derrick

--~

___

--

-

B-12. Type of driver's cabin and machinery B-13. Description of brakes: a) Hoist... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . b) Derrick. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _. c) Slew.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . d) Travel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

house

B-14. Electrical details B-14.1 Power supply, ac or dc ......................................................... Frequency.....................c/ ..Phase ............... a) Volts ............. b) No. of wires ..................................................................... B-14.2 Motors: a) Temperature rise *.............
Quantity

s

S...........,,.
Metric Horse Powrr

. "C
T

b) /

Nolion

1 Tvp& '

Synchronous Speed rev/min

Enclosure

Rating

Main

hoist

Auxiliary hoist ___Slew ~~ lx%.r;,-L. "CIIILR

-I-

_`_ ._ ...

Long travel

-

35

IS : 4594 - ,1968 B-14.3 Details of controllers control panel and equipment .... ?...............
B-14.4 Particulars of safety devices ................................. ..I........ t

B-15. Net weight of complete unladen crane ...........
B-16. B-17. B-18. Tools and accessories Other information General arrangement not scheduled above

sup1 .ied ............................. drawing No. ........................

APPENDIX ( Clause 6.1 )
LIST

C

OF RELEVANT INDIAN STANDARDS FOR MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT, AND CODES OF PRACTICE MATERIALS Steel and Castings IS : 210-1962 Specification for grey iron castings ( revised )

C-l. C-I.1

IS : 226-1962 Specification for structural. steel ( standard quality ) ( third 1 \ _?___ - rauision __ , IS : 961-1962 Specification for structural steel ( high tensile ) ( revised ) EC-: lO30-1962 Specification for steel castings for general engineering purposes ( revised ) IS : 1387-1959 General requirements for the supply of materials and metal products IS : 1570-1961 Schedule for wrought steels for general engineering purposes :.. IS : 1875-1961 Specification for carbon steel, bars, billets, blooms a'nd slabs for forgings IS : 20621962 Specification for structural steel ( fusion welding quality ) C-1.2 Bolts and Nuts IS : 1363-1960 Black hexagonal bolts ( 6 to 39 mm ) with nuts and hexagonal screws ( 6 to 29 mm ) IS : 1364-1960 Precision and turned hexagonal bolts ( 6 to 39 nlrn ) with nut and hexagonal screws ( 3 to 39 mm ) IS : 1367-1961 Technical supply conditions for threaded fasteners . 36

G1.3 Wire Ropes IS : 2266-1963
1".

TC .

Specification ing purposes
C.er:kw-&;nn "yw4sLuu"**

for steel wire ropes for general engineer4-m. .a"`

Q2Cr; ~1 OfZQ Ld".I-IJ".J

atrrl ur;rr .ndnf=nsinn rnnPF !if& u&I"* ...A- ""'r--_l_'-.`-r-- fcj'nr

and hoists IS : 3973-1967 Code of practice for selection, installation tenance of wire ropes ( u&r prcpafation ) C-2. and main-

MECHANICAL

AND FABRICATION

DETAILS

C-2.1 Keys pnd Eeyways IS : 2048-1962 Specification for parallel keys and keyways
IS : 2291-1963 IS : 2292-1963 IS : 2293-1963 _ ---c IS: 2294-l'Jti5 C-2.2 Weldixg IS: 816-1956 Code of practice for use of metal general construction in mild steel arc welding for Specification Specification Specification -i specification for tangential for gib-head for woo&G keys and keyways keys and keyways keys and keysiots for taper keys and keyways

IS : 818-1957 Code of practice for safety and health requirement in electric and gas welding and cutting operations Code of practice for welding of structures subject to IS: 1024a dynamic loading ( unah print ) IS i 1323-1959 Code of practice for oxy-acetylene welding for structural work in mild steel for welding of structures IS : 2467-l 963 Notation IS: 2535-1963 purposes C-2.4 RiveIS : 1929-1962 Rivets for general purposes ,( 12 to 48 Min dia ) Basic for toothed gearing modulus, etc, for general engineering

rack,

C-3. ELEGI-RXAL ;C-3.1 Motors

DETAILS

IS : 325-1961 Specification for three phase induction motors (second r&r&6 ) IS : 900-1956 Code of practice for installation and maintenance of induction motors 37

G3.2 Cables and Conductors
IS : 434 ( Part I )-I964 Specification for rubber insulated Part I With copper conductors ( reoised)
T9 - 4'24 I Psrt TT 1-`19fi4 Sne&firatinn fag- n&b Sk. -.a-\--..", _"_. *"r__--I_-Part II With alumimum conductors ( retied) hsuhttd

cables : cables :

IS : 693- 1965 Specification for varnished cambric insulated cables for electricity supply ( mired ) IS : 694 ( Part I )-1964 PVC insulated cables ( for voltage up to 1 100 V ) : Part I With copper conducton ( reakf) IS : 694 ( Part II )-1964 PVC insulated cables (for voltage up to 1 100 V ) : Part II With aluminium conductors ( rsoiscd ) for polythene insulated IS : 1596-l 962 Specification sheathed cables IS : 1753-1961 Specification for alutninium conductors cables G3.3 and PVC-

in insulated

Conduits IS : 1653-I 960 Specification for steel conduits for general engineering purposes IS : 2509-1963 Specification for rigid non-metallic conduits for electrical installations Switchgear IS : 1822-1961 Motor starters of voltage up to 650 volts

C-3.4

IS : 2147- 1962 Degrees of protection provided by enclosures for lowvoltage switchgear and control gear G-4. GENERAL

CODES
erection and

IS : 807-1963 Code of practice for design, manufacture, testing ( structural portion ) of cranes and hoists

IS : 3177-1965 Code of practice for design of overhead travelling cranes and gantry cranes other than steel work cranes IS : 4137-1967 Code of practice for heavy -duty electric overhead travelling cranes including special service machines for use in steel works

