( Reaffirmed 2003 )

fS : 10106( Part 4/&x 6 ) - 1986

lndian Standard
PACKAGING
PART Section
Packaging

CODE

4 6

PACKAGES Fabrics/Textiles
Committee, MCPD 24

Code Sectional

Representing Indian Institute of Packaging, Combay

Srrrt~ P. V. N.\,t \YANBN ( Allernate to Shri M. Ii. Suhramanian ) SILILI A. S. A~~IIALYI; Containers Plastic MCPD I I, ISI

Sectional

Committee,

SHI~I U. D. L,\i\l,
SlIltt I(. v.

(

Alternafe)

E;ILISIINA~\~U~~TI~Y

LTC I,imitrd,
The

Calcutta of India ( Ministry Lttl, 01

DIL I'. I' YIF~J* ( Afternale )
CAP1. s. Il. 1;1INI)IZll(II

Smtr

M. M. S. Mrs~n

Shipping Corporation Ilomljay Standardization Dircctoratv of I)pf~nrv ), Nvw D< Ihi

@I Copyright1987
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTI'I'U'I'ION This publication is protrctrd under thP Indian CopyriRht Act ( XIV of I!)57 ) and reproduction in wholr or in I)art by any means exrrpt with writtrn ptrmic~ion oftllc DubIisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under thr said Art,

IS : 10106 ( Part Q/Set 6 ) - 1986

Members

Refresef~li:t~ Ministry
RAJ ( Alternate )

SIII~I R. C.
Slmr
SKRI U.U.

SIIAHMA

of New Delhi Limited,

Railways

( Railway

Board ),

LOVE DEV
SRENOY

ILAC ( Alternate )

lsombay Sectional Committee, MCPD 13,

SIX111 C. K. SoIXANY
Dn K. K.

Salty

V. H. DE~AI

Glass Containers ISI

SHRI I(. H. PAICIEJI ( Al!ernate ) The Paper Products Limited, New Delhi TALWAR &In1 I-I. L. &OPRA ( z'lltW?JQte) Larsen & Toubro Limited, Bombay SJIIEIH. K. UPADJIAYAYA Paper and Flexible Packaging Sectional CommiSHRI R. VISWANATJJAN ttee, MCPD 14, 151 Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojFcio Member ) SHRI B. L. RAINA,
Director ( MCPD ) Secretary SHRI S. P. ABBEY

Joint Director

( MCPD ), ISI

2

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 6 ) - 1986

Indian Standard
PACKAGING
PART Section 6 4

CODE

PACKAGES Fabrics/Textiles

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 4/Section 6 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 Julv 1986, after the draft finalized by the Packaging Code Sectional Committee had been approved by thr Marine, Cargo Movcmcnt and Packaging Division Council. 0.2 The packaging co& one or more sections: Part 1 Product Part 2 Packaging Part 3 Ancillary Part 4 Packages Part 5 Packaging Part 6 Storage Part 7 Packaging operations machinery matcand transportation is b&g issued in the following parts, each having

packaging materials mntcrials

0.2.1 This section deals with fabric/textile packages. Fabric/textile rials for making packages are covered in Part 2/Set 4 of the code.

0.3 Packages, namely, bags, sacks and wrappings are made from a variety of materials, the basic ones being jute, cotton and high density polyethyThe uses, fabrication, marking, closing, etc, of these packages lene fabric. are described in this section. 0.4 In the preparation of this section of the code, assistance publications: code, textile bags, sacks and Standards Institution ( BSI ). issued by the Ministry of has been derived from the following

a) BS : 1133, Section 9-1967 `Packaging wrappings', puljlished lry the British b ) `11cfencc~ Services packagirq code'. Dcfcncr, Cove~~nrricnt of India. 3

IS : lOlOG ( Part 4/Set 6 ) - 1986 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 4&c 6 ) deals with packages, namely, and wrappings made of fabric/textile materials. 2. JUTE 2.1 General - -Jute in the form of bags, sacks and wrappings is extensively used as a packaging material for a wide variety of commodities, particularly at stages prior to retail sale. <Jute bags, sacks and wrappings have numerous advantages. 2.2 Terminology - The definitions products are given in IS : 5476-1969*. 2.3 Material variety of clothes 2.4 Fabrication of terms relating to jute and jute bags, sacks

Jute bags, sacks and wrappings are made as described in Part P/SK 4 of the code. of Bags and Sacks -- The

from a wide

2.4.1 Seaming and Hemming code are shown in Table 1.
TABLE TYPE 1 TYPES

seams and hems recommended

in this

OF SEAMING

AND HEMMING DIAQKAM OF SEAM on HEM ( S~~nmro IJNNS-CLOTH; PLAIN LINES-STIT~HIKG)

OIISHAM ou HEM

'l`yreOF STITCIIING (See 'YAl%LIi. 2 )

A

Plait1 senms -Sewn through two thicknesses of cloth, Ilag turnctd after srwing.

Union

B

P&l seam double sewn Sewn through two thicknesses of cloth. Bag turned after sewing.

Union

P///`/,`./

//

//&

1s : lOiO6 ( Part
TABLE I TYPES OF SEAMING AND HEMMING -

4/Set 6 ) - 1986
Corr/,l

seam Sewn C Countcrlaid through two thicknesses of Bag turned after cloth. sewing.

Union

D Count6rlaidsaaln double sewn Sewn through four thicknesses of cloth. Bag turn4 after sewing.

Union

B

`M'

Sewn through ~ea,r, four thicknesses of cloth. Bag not turned after sewing. ( `l'his seam is used for paperlined bags and for certain unlined bags. )

Lockstitch Union

or

F `.M' seavz -- Sewn throlqh three thicknesses of cloth. Top cloth selvcdgc, bottom cloth raw etlgc. Bag nclt turned after sewing.

lf//////,`U/,`i.?

I

5

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 6 ) - 1986
1

TABLE

TYPES

OF SEAMING

AND

HEMMING

-

C:o,ild

G Hem smm - Sewn through six thicknesses of cloth. Bag not turned after sewing.

Union

seam - Sewn Ii Fold-over through four thicknesses of cloth. Bag not turned after sewing. ( This scam is used for paper-lined bags and for certain unlined bags. )

Lockstitch Union

or

,7

oo~rhead

smm

or

.reli~ed,qes -

Sewn through two thickn,3ses of cloth. Bag not tllrn(`tl aftrr sewing.

K Overhead seam on, muI edges Sewn through four thicknesses of cloth. Bag not turned after sewing.

Overhead

L Htrakles seam on sclved,~es Sewn through two thicknesses of cloth. Bag not turned after sewing.

Hcraklcs

6

f$ : 10106 ( Part Q/Set 6 ) - 1986

TABLE

1

TYPES

OF SEAMING

AND HEMMING DIAGRAM

-

Contd

TYPE or: STITGIIINO ( See TAE~I>E2 )

( SHAL>IGU LINES-CLOTH; PLAIN
LINES~TITCHINQ )

OF SEAM OIL HEM

M Herakles Sewn nesses turned

seam on rau edges through four thickof cloth. Bag not after sewing.

Herakles

Jv Splay seam- Cloth selvedges laid together, one selvedge overlapping about half an inch; then sewn through the two thicknesses of cloth on a lockstitch machine, leaving the 12 mm protruding cloth, which is then foldc,d over and stitched by a horn again through machinck, two thicknesses of cloth. The bag is then turned. VW/- If vented at mouth to facilitate lilling of the sack, sewing is sometimes finished off by forming bar across the sewing ( that is sewing runs 50 mm towards centre of bag and then back and 50 mm to other side ). See Fig. 1.

Lock-stitch

P

Hemming: edges at raw a) On mouth; cloth turned in twice. b) On sclvedges at mouth; cloth turned in once.

Union

7

TABLE

2

STITCHING

AND

TWINE

i)

Union - 2 thrc~ad chain stitch; 3 fold ( ply ) cotton twine of 74 tcx ( except where other cotton or twinr: of other material is speciiird for extra strength ), bags turned after sewing except when otherwise stated. 3 to 4 stitches per 25 mm. f-lerokles - Overrdgc stitch. The twine used should he as follows: For hessian bags: not lighter than 3-ply 3 kg jute twist, 3 stitchc's per 25 mm. For twills and tarpaulins: not lighter than 4-ply 3 kg ,jutc twist, `1 stitches pr'r 25 mm. Overhetlci follows: Overcdgc stitch. `l`hc (win<than uhcd sl~ould 3 kg jute than I-ply br as

2

ii)

.. lllj

a) For hessian bags: not lighter 24 stitches per 25 mm.

3-ply

twist, 3 kg

b) For twills and tarpaulins: not lighter jute twist, 24 stitches per 25 mm.

i \`)

Lodrtitch

-

The

machines a)

twine used with should bc as follows:

heavy

industrial

lockstitch twist,

For hessian bags: not lighter than 3-ply not less than 2 stitches per 25 mm. tarpaulins 3 kg jute

3 kg jute

I)) For twills, than g-ply 25 mm.

and paper-lined Lags: not lighter twist, not less than 2 stitches per cotton twine

VI

Hmzming -

Chain stitch r .tce (i) above 1. The used should be not lighter than the following:

a) For hessian: 3 fold ( ply ) cotton twine of 30 tex, 29 stitches per 25 mm. b) For twills and tarpaulins: 3 fold (ply ) cotton twine of 74 tex, 2:. stitches per 25 mm.

2.5 Marking
hand, ments. 2.6 Closing ( see Fig. 6A, in one

or

,Jute sacks and n1cn.c' colours,

hags may be marked, hy machine in typrs and designs to suit user's

or by rrqttirc-

Closing may be done by hand or by machine stitching 6C and 6D ) with wire ties or twine ( see Fig. GE ). The machine stitching methods sho\vn in I;&. 6f: is the most suitablc whrre labels have to be attached.
6B,

-

"One `ear' is securely knotted at its base and the rolled mouth of the bag is then sewn by overstitching, finishing with a loop kllottcd round the base of the other `ear'. Normal type straight packing needles are used with jute or hemp twine." 2.6.2 Bags Closed by Machine Stitching ( Fig. GB ) - Bags are fed into the machine so tllat the line of stitchinGq is not less than 25 rnnl from the etlgcs of tllr l';~l)~,ic, at the open end or the bag. Hi\, (7 stilrlling machine-s have b feet1 ' plates sitIliI;Lr to tllosc fitted on normal sewing machines, but hand or mccl~mical ( for cxarnple, conveyor ) feed through thr bay closing nlachine is necessary. 2.63 Tliire Tyirl~e ( and Wire-cum-Twine Tie ) ( Fig. 6C ) - Baas closed by wire tying sl~ould bc bunched at the mouth and tied \vith a \vlrr tie by means of a cbirc: tying tool. There should br adequate fret. cloth above the contents of the bag. The bunch is made and a wire tic, made from 1.3 mm ( 16 SWG ) wire and Ioopctl at cac11 end, is pl:tccd round illis l)unch ap1)roxilnatc.ly 11 CI~ from the top ofthe bag. `1'1~ loops arc brollght toqcthcr alltl 111~ I~oolc of the Ivirc bag tyer is placX*tl in thcsc loops. I:? p"llinx on the Ilantllc of the tool the loops arc lucked together in a spiral and a secure fastening is matlc. The end of the tic should be laid flat along the bag. 2.6.4 Bunch Tying with `Twine ( Fig. (iD ) - Bags are bunched at the mouth and tied by twine. There should be adequate free cloth above the contents of the bag. The bunch is made and the twine, knotted at the end is passed through both thickness of cloth, by means of a standard type packing needle, wound twice around the bunch approximately 11 cm from the top of the bag, passed again through both thicknesses of cloth and securely knotted. 2.7 Liners - Where protection is required against sifting of finally PCJWdcred materials, or against contamination of the contents or of other matcrials by the contents, loose liners or lined bags should be used; paper liners should be in accordance with Part Z/Section 2 of this rode. Typt,:' of liners generally available arc sllown in Table 3. 9

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set

6 ) - 1986

2.7.1 In the C:ISC of' loose liner bags, the top of the linrrs sl~orrltl be I;~lcl~d ovrr and closrd brfore 111~jntr, lq or sac<1 is closc~d. l,oc)sc~ lirlc,r l):lgS than tiic. ouler IJags to ;11low 111c &o11lt1 1~ not less than 75 1nrr1 lon,qer alid not less tllan 25 mm widt:r to prcvt'"t tllc> inner 1)ag l`oltlirl;q over, bllr:;titig. 111 cas~`s whcrc air should not be c:xcludcd hrn the contents, as with ccctaill :;lucs, a doul~le jute bag may be preferable. 2.8 Economical Dimensions of Bags and Sacks 2.8.1 `I'hc ht dilllcnsions of a bag/sack suitable for carrying given weight of commodity are generally decided by trial and error, by reference to previous experience or by simple calculations. The holding capacity of' bag of given dimensions depends on the bulk density of the material packed and the degree of tightness of packing adopted. Although various combinations of Icn$h and width dimensions arc possible factors, such as, maximum nvaiIal)lc width of fabric, convrniencc of filling, handling and storqc ol' lillctl b;qs and the pcrfornlance of the filled bags in drop tests arc to I)c consitlcrctl bcforc dtsciding tllc nltimatc dimensions of bags for particular end-use. TPSL - `The filled bags shall be subjected to scqucntial 2.8.2 1>,+ 4 drops - one c;u,h or1 cithrr side and the other two 011 the Ilutt-end sitlr. It is optional to subject the bag to two The tlrop hci$t shall I)(: 1.2 m. atltlitiomll drops - OII tllc top ant1 bottom side from tllc same: hei;;ht. 2.8.3 I~tc,<:rlklo Ii/id/h Ra/io -- Generally, length-widtll ratio of bags is adjusted hwcc11 1.3 to 1.7. \Vllen a filled bag is dropped from a Ileigllt, As a ITsuIt tltc Illntcthe IMtorn layer of the La> (I strikes the lloor brlow. rial insitlc rc:cci\,c:s an ripward tllrust whicll c.~uscs ni:,nicnt;try cornprc:;sion Also the weiglit or the nlatcri.tl above in the niatcrial at the lower layer. `Tlicrc is tlius opposes this ~lpwartl movement of 111~ material from bclo\vv. a tcntlcncy of accWtliulation of rnatrrinl at solne intermcdiatc position. `I'llis generates a lateral pressure on the sides of the bag M~hiclI ultimately attains a contour shape. Since the side seams of the bag generally constitute the weakest part, a damage would result when the lateral pressure cxcccds tllc side seam strength of the bag. A tearing of tllc l)ag wo111d t!lus occur along with cd$e of the side seam. The higher length to width ratio between 1 .3 and 1 .7 will no doubt yield economy in fabric but will also make the bag narrower. Investigations have shown that a narrower bag ( length-width ratio of 1.7 ) would be more susceptible to damage in buttend drops compared to wider bag ( length-width ratio 1.3 ) on account of the reduced area of contact with the striking surface which leads to increased stress It is, therefore, concentration on the side seams. rccommendrd to determine length-width ratio basr-d on the analysis of butt-end drops in order to fix the flat dimensions of bag. An extra length of al)out 5 cm to 15 cm may l)e allowed for attaining tllc necpssarv l~)osc packing conditions and for proper closing of the bag. 10

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 6 ) - 1986

FIG. 1

SPLAY SEAM,BAR AND VENT 11

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 6 ) - 1986

IS : 101C6 ( Part

4/Set

6 ) - 1986

Hoth sides of' the stitching FIG 3 HERAKLES,

are shown. STITCN

OVEREDGE

13

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 6 )- 1986

FIG. 4

OVERHEAD,

OVEREDGE

STITCH

14

IS : 10106 ( Pa-t

$/Set 6 ) - 1986

Both sides of the line of sewing

are iliustrated.

FIG. 5

LOCKSTITCH

15

:: ..

6A

Hand-Ciosed FIG. 6
CLWSC

66

Machine-Closed

.Ju-n: BAGS -

Chad

IS : 10106( Part 4$ec 6 ) - 1986

6C

Wire

Tying

6D FIG.

Twine

Tying BAGS
Co71onld

6

CLOSING

JUTE 17

1s : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 6 ) - 1986

6E FE. 6

Ties JUTE

C~osmo

BAGS

18

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set

6 ) - 1986

TABLE

3

JUTE

BAG LINERS

( Clause 2.7 ) SJ, No. (I) i) LINER (2) Jute fabric combined with crepe or plain paper ( united by bitumen or other water-resisting adhesive ), generally known as ` paper -lined ' USAGE (3) For protection against moisture and sifting. This is used for packing such commodities as nitrates and other crystalline chemicals, pigments, fcrtilizcrs, etc, provided the contents are not susceptible to contamination by the adhesive For general protection against sifting where moisture is not detrimental For use under severe climatic or other conditions where jute fabric and paper united by bitumen or other adhesive is unsuitable a) Liners with external ply ( or ply in contact with the outer package), of union kraft when it is desired to prevent contamination of products by weather or contact with other materials in transit h) Liners with internal ply ( or ply in contact with thr contents ) of union kraft when it is desired to prevent contents from contaminating other products during transit c) Liners with one or more plies of union kraft as the central plies with the external and internal plies of plain kraft when the liner is used to permeability of the reduce package

ii) iii)

Loose crepe kraft ( waxed if required Loose kraft liners ( or crepcd

paper ) kraft I plain

liners paper

1 waxed,

)

iv)

Loose kraft paper liners. Each liner made from one or more plain kraft plies and one or more union kraft plies, the nllmber and position of the ` Union ' plies in the liner deprnding on the protection required

VI

Liners, either loose or bonded to the sack made from plastics film, such as polyethylene or polypropylene.

For specific purposes, such as ance of crrtain chemicals, ccuticals, fertilizers, ctc[ see (Part l)-1972* and IS : 7406 1980' 1

conveypharmaIS : 7406 (Part 2)-

*Laminated jute bags for packing fertilizers: Part 1 Laminatrd bags manufactured from 407 g/ma; 85 x 30 tarpaulin Part 2 Laminatctl bags rnanufacturcd from 380 g/m2; (88 x ?I!I tary'aulin

fabric. fabric.

19

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/See 6 ) - 1986 2.9 Packing 1969*. ) -- .Jute bags arc packed in bales. ( For details see IS : 2873-

2.10 Handling and Storage - Handling mechanical methods. The method of storage ( see 2.8 of Part P/Set 4 of this code ). 3. COTTON

may be done I)y manual or is similar as for jute materials

3.1 General-Cotton bags arc usually regarded as complementary in their use to jute bags or sacks. The bags are durable and can frequently be used more than once, either for the purpose for which they were intended or for other purposes. 3.2 Materials - Cotton bags are usually made from cotton faljric of plain weave, but sometimes twill weave is also used. Details are given in Part 2/ Set 4 of this code. 3.3 Types 3.3.1 and Uses Cotton bags are of the following two types: closures.

Types -

a) Bags made with raw or selvedge tops, and b) Bags made with hem tops fitted with drawstring

3.3.2 Uses - Bags with raw or selvedge tops are used for packaging grains, seeds, pellets, fertilizers, animal and poultry foods and all fine powdered and cgranular products. Bags with drawstring closures are used for packaging small parts such as engineering spares, metal or plastics, etc. This type of bag is extremely useful where small accessories have to be packed with the main component. 3.4 Fabrication of Bags - A single or double chain stitch is used and bags are generally sewn through two thicknesses of cloth. Bags made from bleached cloth can be sewn having raw edge or selvedge at mouth. Bags made from grcy ( unbleached ) cloth are occasionally sewn with folded seams, that is, the two edges are folded over and stitched once through four thicknesses of cloth, or in very rare cases, twice. Lockstitch may also be supplied if specially desired. Grey bags may be supplied with raw edges at the mouth, but this is not recommended in view of the danger of unravelling. 3.5 Marking - Cotton bags may be marked, by machine or by hand, one or more colours, in types or designs to suit users' requirements. in

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 6 ) - 1986 3.6 Closing - Closing is done l)y arrtomntic stitching machines, or by hand using twine, or by wire ties. Scab may IX attached if required. In the recommended that case ofbags containing 25 kg or more, it is strongly ` ears ' or lugs should he left for case of handling. 4. MAN-MADE FABRIC SACKS ( HDPE OR PP WOVEN SACKS )

4.1 General - High Density Polyethylene ( HDPE ) or polypropylene ( PP ) woven sacks and Ijags are gcncrally used for packaging product such as fertilizers, powdered chemicals, foodgrains, plastic raw materials, sugar, etc. These have the advantage ofstrength as well as inertness. Reference may be made to IS : 0069 ( Part 1 )-1976* and IS : 8069 ( Part 2 )-1981* and IS : 63~l-197It. 4.2 Terminology - The definitions fabrics are given in IS : 132+1966$. and terms relating to man-made

4.3 Materials - HDI'lS/PP sacks and bags arc woven tapes. Details are given in Part 2/See 4 of the code.

from HDPE/PP

4.4 Fabrication - The sack/bag may bc fabricated from material woven as a tube and cut to reyrrired length or convcrtcd from woven material. When made from @in fabric the side and bottom are sewn and in case of tubular fabric the stitching is at the bottom only. Stitching is done in two rows of either lockstitch or chain stitch with a distance of at least 5 mm between the two rows n11d the outer layer at least 8 mm from the outer edge. Stitching should 1~. done with fold over seam so that the stitches pass through a minimum of four layers of the fabric. HDPE/PP tape or any other suitable thread, compatible with the product being packed shall be used for stitching. The stitchin p shall be uniform without any loose threads or knots. Thr HDPT:/PP tape used for stitching shall have at least 20 percent high denier than used for making the sacks. The mouth of the sack/ In case of hemming, it should be stitbag shall be selvrdged or hemmed. ched with foId over seam to a depth of 25 mm with a single row of chain or lockstitch. A loose liner of LDPE or HMHDPE film may be provided inside the bag. Instrad of a loose liner the HDPE:/PP fabric may be laminated or extrusion coated with LDPI:. 4.5 Marking - When a small number of sacks/bags are involved, silk screens or stencils are used for printing the matter. With a large number The inks used for printing are of sacks the method used is flexo-printing. those based on polyamide resins. ____.-___._____ ___
*IIigh density polyc~tllyl(mv ( IIIIPI:, ) vovc~n sacks Tar packing Part I Wov:~n Imgs ( /Ir.,l rcoistof~ ). prsticides:

Part 2 wove II sacks(jr.\/ rrririorr ).
tlligll density [wly(,th\ lfm(, wovam sacks. $(~lossarv of I~~stilc~ tl-rtns rc,lating to nlan-matIt> f~l)rc: and fabric indrlstr).

21

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 6 ) - 1986 5. BALES, TRUSSES AND BUNDLES of supplies, often highly compressed, or

5.1 General which may be:
a

A MC is a package or cord

)

tied with rope hoop iron;

or secured

with wire, and stitched stitched

metal strapping up in the

b)

protected by one or more coverings cover; and by one or more coverings, and tied or strapped.

outer

Cl protected

up in the outer cover

Baling is usually confined to compressible articles such as are not likely to be damaged or spoilt by compression. Press packing of bales reduces their volume, thus effecting a saving in shipping and warehousing space, and to some extrnt in handling and packing costs. The world truss is largely synonymous with l)ale, but as a rule ` truss ' is used to denote smaller and less highly compressed packages. A bundle is an assembly of Bundles articles secured together and only subjected to manual pressure. may be cr~closcd in some form of covering or several bundles assembled together and baled, with or without compression. 5.2 Size ~-- The factors to be borne in mind when deciding upon the size of a bale arc the nature of the materials to be packed, the pressure to be applied, and the handlin,g facilities at the destination. In some cases, owing to transport or other dificulties, bales can only be acceptrd if they weigh say 50 kg or less; in other cases, bales of say 750 kg and over are also acceptable. 5.3 Press Packing 5.3.0 The sequence of operations and collection in press packing of materials of bales is as follows:

a ) Preparation

or goods;

b) Placing the lower portion of the coverings in position on the press; c.1 Placing the materials or goods to be packed on these coverings on the bale press; d) Positioning the upper half of the covering3 e) Applying pressure; f) Scawing outer required; covering and forming on the goods; for handling, if

( ears '

fi) Positioning 11) Rrlrasing

and securing pressure; Illarkings. and

wire, ropes, straps or hoops;

.i)

Applying

22

fS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 6 ) - 1986 5.3.1 Preparation and Colleclion of Makria1.s 07 Goods - The size and comprcssion of the individual bales having been dccidetl upon, the qtlantity of niatcrial or number of articles, I~undlcs or parcels to IN: packed iii each Articles suclr as shirts, drawers, bale is detcrmincd on previous cxpcricnce. pillow cases, towels, sweaters,combination overalls denim trousers, coats or gloves, should be carefully folded and firmly tied into bundles suitable for packing. Usually 10 single articles or 10 pairs of the same size are bundled together, but if the resultant bundle is deeper than the width, 5 single articles or 5 pairs of the same size make a more satisfactory bundle. Many articles will previously be parcelled in transparent film or other They may be labelled and closed with gummed paper wrapping papers. tape, cloth tape or twine. If the individual parcels are labelled or sealed with gummed paper tape, care must be taken to ensure that the paste or gum is perfectly dry before baling, otherwise mildew is likely to clevelop in tropical climates. If the individual parcels are tied with tape or string, the knots must be at the ends of the parcels to prevent their cutting into other parcels when pressure is applied. Great that: a) extra bulky parts are not placed on top of one another; and care must be taken in folding and bundling articles to ensure

b) buckles and buttons are staggered so that they do not damage the garments or thcn~selvrs become broken or bent when the bale IS compressed. The rccluisitc arc then assembled numlrcr of articles at the bale press. or l~undles to Le packed in each bale

5.3.2 Coverings - In some cases, such as hay, raw jute, secondhand bags, and banding only and have no etc, bales are sub,jected to compression rule, however, bales are covered with protective covering. As a general various kinds of paper and jute cloth with a view to protecting the consunlight, careless handling, pilfering, tents from moisture, dirt, insects, being governed by the probable abrasion, etc, the degree of protection of tlie bale to the above mentioned hazards, and by the exposure destination. 5.3.3 Forming the Bale - The positioning of the goods on the bale press js one of the most important operations. Firm, compact, neat and uniform bales can only be made if: a) when 1,undles or parcels are used, the goods have been assembled as indicated in 5.3.1 (a) and (I,) above; 23 carefully

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 6 ) - 1986

bj the contents
romlxcssion, `I'llc `brick'

of the Me arc cnrcfully formctl and piled bcforc and bulky parts, lniltolls, I~ucltles, ctc, slag~crcd. ( .xc I'ig. 7 ). method of piliI1 g is rccommtrl&d I~olstcrs, ctc, art' built up within in order to hold the package in

cl

certain articles, such as pillows, a form or rnould 6box-bal~s', shape;

d)

`joints between individual articles or packages ;trc st;1~gcr1~1 in and cutting tile bale covex~ng order to prevent straps from injuring the contents. If long storage is expected, it is essential to include in the bale a preparation to prevent insect or moth damage.

5.3.4 Colr2br-c.tsion - `Tile goods llaving been satisfactorily stncl;ed on the lower portion of the covering in the bale press, the top la).c>rs of covering arc positioned, and pressure applied; as s:tving of space is 011c of the objects of baliIi~:, 1 m1 es should be of the n~asimum dcnsiry consistent \vith the protection of the contents. Ordinal ily, only comnlodities \vllich admit of a certain amount of comprrssion should be bal~d, and the density or compression should be studied carefully. J'rcssur(. IILL!. 1 ar). l>r)rn `10 lcgf/crn2 to 3 10 ligf/cmZ. The heaviest pressure is used only on curtain classes of goods in order to save shipl)ing space; some materials \\~~ultl split under heavy prcssux. The anlount of cx,lllIxession deairal)k dc Ix~nds cntircly upuri the nature of the goods, for instancr, piece goods will stand high compression, mosqllito curtains a IcTsser degr~`r, ;rr~cl sleeping bags stullid wit11 kapok or wool vc-ry littlc. Slcc+ng lqs and similar stufrc`ed articles should, thrrcfore, not be baled cscc pt in circumstancc.s wllcrc the saving of space is imperative.

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 6 ) - 1986 5.3.5 Closiq lha Bale by Sewitrg -- As a general rule, it is recommended that bale covering be sewn with strorlg twine at the sides and ends, with stitches approximately 5 cm in length. Where ` ears ' are required to facilitate handling and reduce the risk of damage resulting from the use of hooks by dock labourers, etc, not less than 12 cm of hessian should be gathered together at each of four corners and securely sewn to form ` ears ' as shown in Fig. 8. All ends of twine should be tied or otherwise securely fastened.

c

/
FIG. 8

` EARS ' ON BALES
steel strapping

5.3.6 Posilion Strapping, Banding or Hoops - Rope, wire, and hoop Iron are commonly used for securing bales. 5.3.6.1 Rope - An objection weather and loosens as it becomes

to rope is that it contracts in damp drier; it can also be gnawed by rats.

5.1.6.2 Mre - Wire is satisfactory for low-grade merchandise, waste materials, raw materials, woodpulp, rags, hay and other articles which will not deteriorate in value if the wire cuts into the bale. 5.3.6.3 S/raf$ing - Strapping used should be in accordance with Part 3/Set 3 of this code. Hot or cold-rolled flat steel strapping is satisfactory for most bales. It should normally be cold-rolled high tensile steel 16 mm wide, not less than 0.50 mm thick and should be treated to prevent rust. When applying steel strapping, the two outside straps should be approximately 100 mm from each end, and the intermediate straps placed equidistant from one another and from the end straps. Straps should be applied by a mechanical stretching tool, and must be stretched so tightly that the compression of the bale will be held and the straps remain in place without slipping over the ends of the bale when the pressure is released. The ends of straps may be sealed with a metal sleeve or seal designed to be either punched or crimped. Loose ends of the straps should be foldrd under, and cut or broken off, so that no edges project which are liable to cause damage to goods or injury to person. A piece of bitumenized hessian or similar material should be placed round the fastening of straps before the pressure is released, in order to preirent dama<(: to the contents of the bale or any other materials with which they may cornc in contact. 25

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 6 )- 1986 5.3.6.4 HO+IS - In the case of bales of exceptional size or weight, hot rolled hoop iron should be used, not less than 25 mm wide ( 1.0 mm thick ) and painted to prevent rust. The hoops should be fastened by metal studs or buckles which must be fixed while the bale is under pressure. The positioning of the hoops and protection at the fastening is similar to that recommended for straps. 5.3.7 Releasing Pressure nrd AJarking - The pressure is now released, the bale moved from the press and the necessary marking applied with a brush, stencil or stamp. Waterproof ink or paint should be used. A penetrating fluid which will soak through tlrc coverings and injure the contents should not bc used. Suppliers of marking inks or paints arc usually in a position to recommend what is suitable for any given purpose. Tags are not recommended for marking bales, but if used should have reinforced metal eyelets and be attached M.ilh blunt-ended fasteners or suitable wire. 5.3.7.1 All markings should be clear and marks such as ` USE NO HOOKS `, L KEEP DRY minently placed. 5.3.7.2 modification The opcrxtion of lrrcss-packing in certain clctnils when: material9 are
uwcl;

distinct and `, etc, should

caution bc proto

of b&s

are subjected

a) no covcririg b) pressure

and

is low and no strap? are required.

5.4 Trusses and Bundles - The operations of press-packing of bales apply equally to trusses and bundles, sub,ject to modifications when: a) no covering b) pressure C) no pressure materials other are used; and pressure is applied. is low and no straps are required; than manual

26

