IS 16093 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


UNG Wh 
Ta eme FRANE Her det d 
aed — Te ufedr 


Indian Standard 


INSTALLATION OF GAS BASED INSTANTANEOUS 
WATER HEATER — CODE OF PRACTICE 


ICS 91.140.65; 97.100.20 


€ BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 2013 Price Group 3 


Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) Sectional Committee, MED 23 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Domestic 
and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


Proper installation is very important for safe uses of water heater. Improper installation may result in asphyxia, 
fire or explosion causing personal injury or damage to property. Therefore, it was decided to formulate this 
standard for the benefit of all stakeholders. 


Those responsible for installation should understand the characteristics of gas employed and should be trained in 
good practices of handling, installing and maintaining instantaneous gas based water heaters. 


Statutory requirements regarding installations of gas based water heaters as enforced from time to time shall be 
complied with. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16093 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


INSTALLATION OF GAS BASED INSTANTANEOUS 
WATER HEATER — CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard lays down the requirements for 
installation of gas based instantaneous water heaters. 


1.2 This standard also applies to the associated 
components like piping and equipment used for 
installation of the water heater. 


1.3 In case instructions given in the standard are not 
followed exactly, it may result in asphyxia, fire or 
explosion causing personal injury or damage to the 


property. 
2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject 
to revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these 
standards: 


IS No. Title 
1239 (Part 1): Steel tubes, tubulars and other 
2004 wrought steel fittings — 
Specification: Part 1 Steel 
tubes (sixth revision) 
2379 : 1990 Pipelines-identification — Colour 
code ( first revision) 
2501 : 1995 Solid drawn copper tubes for general 
engineering purposes — 
Specification (third revision) 
3601 : 2006 Steel tubes for mechanical and 
general engineering purposes — 
Specification (second revision) 
9573 : 1998 Rubber hose for liquefied petroleum 
gas (LPG) — Specification (second 
revision) 
9798 : 1995 Low pressure regulators for use with 


liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) 
mixtures — Specification (first 
revision) 


3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


3.1 Cylinders, valves and regulators used with the water 
heaters shall be as approved by the statutory authority. 
All other installation materials like pipe, flexible pipes, 
hoses, etc, shall comply with the relevant Indian 


Standard specifications, wherever applicable. If no 
relevant Indian Standard is available; such equipment 
shall comply with requirements of gas distributing 
company. 


3.2 Gas piping colour shall be in accordance with 
IS 2379 or as stipulated by the statutory authority to 
distinguish it from other pipes. 


3.3 Before installation water heater shall be inspected 
visually for any physical damage. Check the marking 
on the marking plate of the water heater to ascertain, 1f 
the type of the gas supply corresponds to the water 
heater design. 


3.4 Installation/safety instructions provided by the 
water heater manufacturer shall be followed. 


3.5 Long hot water lines should be insulated to 
conserve energy. 


3.6 PVC hose pipe should not be used for hot water. 


4 WATER HEATER LOCATION AND 
INSTALLATION 


4.1 The water heater shall be installed in a well cross- 
ventilated room of minimum volume 20 m?. The room 
should have an air inlet area of minimum 0.09 m?. In 
case of insufficient ventilation or area, gas water heater 
shall be installed in other open space and hot water 
pipeline shall be provided in the intended area. 


4.2 Installation of water heater inside the bathroom 
is not recommended, unless condition specified in 4.1 
are complied with (see 1.3). 


4.3 Water heater shall not be installed in bed rooms 
and any occupied space normally kept closed. 


4.4 Water heater shall not be installed in a small poorly 
ventilated room or air tight room with air conditioner. 


4.5 The water heater shall not be installed near an air 
supply containing halogenated hydrocarbons. 


NOTES 

1 The air in beauty shop, dry-cleaning establishments. photo 
processing labs and storage area for liquid and powder bleach 
or swimming pool chemicals often contain such halogenated 
carbons. 

2 An air supply containing halogenated carbon may be safe to 
breathe, but when it passes through a gas flame, corrosive 
elements are released that will shorten the life of any gas 
burning appliance. 


IS 16093 : 2013 


4.6 Water heater shall not be installed in places where 
liquids, which give off flammable vapours are used/ 
stored. Such liquids include gasoline, liquefied 
petroleum gas, paint or adhesive and their thinners, 
solvents or removers. The open flame of the water 
heater’s main burner may ignite these vapours causing 
an explosion of fire which may cause severe burns/ 
death or damage to property. 


4.7 The water heater shall not be installed below the 
ground level, such as, in basement or in cellar. 


4.8 Water heater shall not be installed near vents for 
heating. In such a case minimum distance of 1.2 m 
shall be maintained. 


4.9 The water heater shall be so located that the gas 
outlet from cylinder is below the level of gas inlet of 
the water heater. 


4.10 Vent manufacturer instruction should be followed 
while installing vent. The vent pipe must accommodate 
the size of the water heater’s chimney and should be 
of flame retardant anti-corrosive material. The vent pipe 
should be fitted with an H type hood or similar to 
prevent blow back of burnt gases and the entry of rain 
into the vent. 


4.11 There shall not be any electrical wiring, electrical 
points or electrical equipments above the water heater. 
The minimum distance of water heater from electrical 
wires, points or equipments shall be 0.60 m. 


4.12 The water heater shall be firmly mounted on a 
wall with screws or nut and bolts strong enough to 
withstand its load. Water heaters shall not be mounted 
on walls/wall lining made up of wood/plastic or any 
other combustible/thermoplastic materials. 


4.13 The bottom of the water heater shall be at least 
1.5 m above the floor level and top of the exhaust point 
shall be at least 2.1 m above the floor level. 


4.14 The water heater shall be installed in such a way 
that its control knobs are out of reach of children under 
normal conditions of use. 


4.15 No inflammable or corrosive materials shall be 
kept near the water heater. 


4.16 The water and gas connections given into the water 
heater shall be leak proof. 


5 CYLINDER LOCATION 


5.1 The cylinder shall be kept outside the bathroom or 
any other area where, 


a) it does not come into contact with water so as 
to avoid risk of corrosion; and 


b) incase of accidental leakage, gas is released 
to the open atmosphere. 


5.2 In case the cylinder is kept in closed area, proper 
bottom clearance and air ventilation shall be provided. 


5.3 No electrical wiring or point or apparatus should 
be within 0.6 m from the cylinder. 


5.4 The cylinder shall have easy access for switching/ 
changing of the regulator, etc. 


6 PRESSURE REGULATORS 


6.1 The pressure regulator used with the device shall 
conform to IS 9798 (for LPG) or as approved by the 
statutory authority. No click-on adopters shall be used 
with the cylinders. 


6.2 If the regulator is fitted with a relief valve, care 
should be taken in positioning the regulator so that there 
is no obstruction in release of gas. 


6.3 The regulator shall be properly mounted on the 
cylinder. 


7 PIPING (EXCLUDING MANIFOLDS) 


7.1 All gas piping, tubing and fitting shall comply to 
relevant Indian Standards or with the requirement of 
the statutory authority. 


7.2 Copper Tubes 


Drawn copper tubes conforming to IS 2501 of outside 
diameter 10, 12 or 20 mm, as suitable, shall be used. 


7.3 Stainless Steel Tubes 


Cold drawn seamless, cold drawn electric resistance 
welded (ERW) or oxy-acetylene welded SS tubes of 
suitable size conforming to IS 3601 shall be used. 


7.4 Mild Steel Tubes 


Electric resistance welded (ERW) mild steel tubes of 
suitable size conforming to medium and heavy class 
of IS 1239 (Part 1) or hot finished seamless tubes shall 
be used. 


7.5 Any material other than the ones mentioned 
in 7.2, 7.3 and 7.4 shall be used with prior approval 
of statutory authority. 


7.6 The piping shall withstand a pressure of 3.5 kg/cm? 
and shall not leak or burst. 


7.7 The joints in the piping shall be either welded or 
brazed or flanged and shall be leak-proof. In case 
threaded connections are employed same shall be 
galvanized fittings. 


7.8 The material used for welding or brazing of joints 
shall be fire resistant, of adequate mechanical strength 
and shall have a minimum melting point of 540°C. 


7.9 The flanges used for flanged joints shall be 


machined, preferably with raised faces. Metallic gaskets 
or spiral wound metallic gasket of minimum thickness 
1.5 mm shall be used. 


7.10 The pipe shall not pass through or be concealed 
in cupboard or similar structure. Similarly, piping shall 
not run through an air or ventilation duct, chimney flue 
or lift shaft. 


7.11 The piping passing through the walls shall be 
protected by a covering sleeve. The material used to 
pack the space between piping and sleeve shall be 
moisture proof so as not to corrode the piping. 


7.12 Care should be taken that the piping is not 
damaged by expansion, contraction or vibration. 


7.13 The plumbing work shall be carried out by 
qualified and trained personnel only. 


$ FLEXIBLE CONNECTIONS 


8.1 Hoses conforming to IS 9573 Type 4 only shall be 
used for LPG. To use any other hose prior approval of 
statutory authority shall be taken. 


8.2 The length of a flexible hose should not be more 
than 1.5 m. 


8.3 Multiple connections using flexible hoses shall 
not be used. 


8.4 It is the responsibility of the installer to ensure 
that the hose used is not past replacement date. 


9 LEAK TESTING 


9.1 Before putting the water heater into service, the 
entire pipeline along with all the connections and joints 


IS 16093 : 2013 


shall be tested to ensure that it is gas tight. Where any 
part of the system is enclosed, the test shall precede 
the work of closing it. 


9.2 Naked flames shall never be used for checking the 
gas tightness of installation. It is recommended that 
soap solution or similar materials may be employed to 
detect leakage. 


9.3 Defective pipes and fittings shall be replaced and 
shall not be repaired in-situ. 


10 INSTRUCTION TO THE CUSTOMERS 


10.1 In case gas odour/leak is detected close the gas 
supply immediately ventilate the room by opening, 
door, windows, etc. Do not activate any electrical 
switches or operate the water heater, call emergency 
number (as applicable) or installer immediately to 
attend before using the water heater. 


10.2 When water heater is not being used for a longer 
period of time it is desirable to close the gas supply. 


10.3 The customer shall be instructed by the supplier 
and installer on following points: 


a) Operation of the water heater. 

b) How to recognize gas leakage. 

C) Action to be taken in case of gas leakage. 
d) Action to be taken in case of fire. 


e) Action to be taken in case of damage to, or 
failure of, any part of installation. 


f) Do'sand don'ts of the water heater. 


g) Safety instructions provided by the water 
heater manufacturer. 


IS 16093 : 2013 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) 
Sectional Committee, MED 23 


Organization 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


All India LP Gas Stove Association, Delhi 


Ashok Home Appliances Pvt Ltd, Rajkot 


Bharat Petroleum Corp Ltd, Mumbai 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Centre of Technology for Sustainable Development (CTSD), 


Faridabad 


Chemo Electronic Laboratory, Distt Valsad 


Delton Industries, Delhi 


DGQA, Delhi 


Gandhimathi Appliances Limited, Chennai 


Gorani Indusrtries Limited, Indore 


Goyal Engineers (P) Ltd, Delhi 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Ideal Engineers Hyderabad Ltd, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Oil Corporation (R&D), Faridabad 


Indian Oil Corporation, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


Loss Prevention Association of India Ltd, Mumbai 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Petroleum Conservation Research Association, New Delhi 


Racold Thermo Limited, Pune 


Rama Domestic Appliances, Delhi 


Shri Shakti Alternative Energy Ltd, Hyderabad 


Sunflame Industries, Faridabad 


Representative(s) 


Suri R. B. Kocanti (Chairman) 
Suri R. RAJAKUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri M. L. ANAND 
SHRI SUNIL TALWAR (Alternate) 


Suri V. H. BARCHHA 
Suri R. H. BARCHHA (Alternate) 


SHRI J. VEDAGIRI 
SHRI SANJAY PHULLI (Alternate ) 


SHRI SANDEEP GARG 


DR S. P. SRIVASTAVA 
Suri R. K. PAULASTYA (Alternate) 


Dn R. C. Naik 
Suri RAJAN A. JosHi (Alternate) 


Suri R. C. NANGIA 
Suri VIVEK NANGIA (Alternate) 


Suri S. J. KOLARKAR 
Lr Cor N. MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI V. M. KUMARESAN 
Suri K. SIVASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL GORANI 
SHRI SANJAY GORANI (Alternate) 


Suri D. P. GovaL 
SHRI AJAY GoYaL (Alternate) 


SHRI M. SELVAKUMAR 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri SATISH KABRA 
SHRI DEEPAK KABRA (Alternate) 


Suri U. K. JAISWAL 
Suri V. K. VERMA (Alternate) 


Suri S. P. DUBEY 
Suri R. MAHAPATRA (Alternate) 


SHRI RABINDRA N. GHOSH 
SHRI SUNIL RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI BHUDEV SINGH 
Suri K. C. DEWANGAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHUIT Das 
Suri D. K. Sarkar (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH SHRIPAD 
Suri SUSHIL PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. GOEL 
Suri Ant Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI JAGDISH MULIMANI 


SHRI AMARJEET S. KOHLI 
SHRI MANMOHAN KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI D. V. SATYAKUMAR 
SHRI SIDDHARTHA SENGUPT (Alternate) 


Suri K. L. VERMA 
Suri A. K. DHINGRA (Alternate) 


Organization 
Superflame Appliances Private Limited, Faridabad 
United Works Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Vanaz Engineers Ltd, Pune 
In Personal Capacity (S-139, Greater Kailash-I, 


New Delhi-110048) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16093 : 2013 


Representative(s) 
SHRI VIKRAM VERMA 


SHRI VICTOR MACMULL 
SHRI S. BHORGHARKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. R. SARVATE 
Suri S. J. VisPuTE (Alternate) 


Suri M. K. Gupta 


Suri J. A. SIDDIQUI, Scientist “F” and Head (MED ) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI VISHAL TOMER 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards : Monthly Additions”. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 23(1146). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


