YAT UT IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


far A Mi m ui ae Pata 
sed ch ia facter — fafirfte 
WT 1 Waid sed facisx 
(iten yrüsror) 


Refillable Seamless Steel Gas 
Cylinders — Specification 
Part 1 Normalized Steel Cylinders 


( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 23.020.30 


© BIS 2017 


ada AM oR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM YAA, 9 Fags SL Art, TE feeeit-110002 
was MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2018 Price Group 7 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional 
Council. 


This standard was first published in 1974 as IS 7285 “Specification for seamless steel cylinders for permanent and 
high pressure liquefiable gases’, when the manufacture of seamless steel gas cylinders had not started in our 
country and subsequently revised in 1982, 1988 due to technological development made by the gas cylinder 
industry. Subsequently, this Part of standard was published together with Part 2 “Ouenched and tempered steel 
cylinder with tensile strength less than 1 100 MPa (112 kgf/mm?)” superseding IS 7285 : 1988. Further this 
standard (Part 1) was revised in 2004. In this revision efforts have been made to align with ISO 9809-3:2010 ‘Gas 
cylinder — Refillable seamless steel gas cylinders — Design, construction and testing — Part 3 Normalized steel 
cylinders’. However, considering the prevailing practices of cylinder manufacturing in the country, necessary 
additions are made wherever necessary. 


Assistance has also been taken from ISO 13769 : 2007 ‘Gas cylinders — Stamp-marking’ 


The purpose of this standard is to provide a specification for the design, manufacture, inspection and testing of a 
cylinder for worldwide usage. The objective is to balance design and economic efficiency against International 
acceptance and universal utility. 


Cylinders for on-board storage of compressed natural gas (CNG) as fuel for automobile vehicles application covered 
in IS 15490 : 2004 ‘Cylinders for on-board storage of compressed natural gas as a fuel for automotive vehicles — 
Specification’. Periodic inspection and testing of high pressure gas cylinders is covered in IS 8541 : 2009 ‘Periodic 
inspection and testing of high pressure gas cylinders — Code of practice’. 


While implementing this standard, the manufacturer and the inspection agency shall ensure compliance with 
statutory regulations. It is the responsibility of the owners and the users to ensure that the cylinders are periodically 
tested as per norms laid down in Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 as amended from time to time and as enforced by 
statutory authorities under the rules. 


The relevant SI units and corresponding conversion factors are given below for guidance: 
Pressure 1Pa (Pascal) = 1 N/m? 
1 kgf/mm? = 9.806 65 MPa 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


REFILLABLE SEAMLESS STEEL GAS 
CYLINDERS — SPECIFICATION 


PART 1 NORMALIZED STEEL CYLINDERS 


( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies minimum requirements for the 
material, design, construction and workmanship, 
manufacturing processes and tests at manufacture of 
refillable normalized or normalized and tempered 
seamless steel gas cylinders of water capacities from 0.5 
litre upto and including 400 litres for compressed, 
liquefied and dissolved gases. 


NOTES 


1 If so desired, cylinders of water capacity less than 0.5 litre 
may be manufactured and certified according to this standard. 


2 If so desired, cylinders of water capacity greater than 400 
litres may be manufactured and certified according to this 
standard. The number of cylinders to be subjected to pressure 
cycling test and sampling method for mechanical tests shall be 
decided in consultation with the statutory authority. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
were valid. All standards are subject to revision and 
parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of the standards indicated 
below. 


IS No. Title 
1500 : 2005 Method for brinell hardness test for 
metallic materials (third revision) 
Method for Rockwell hardness test 
for metallic materials (scales A-B-C- 
D-E-F-G-H-K 15N, 30N, 45N, 15T, 
30T and 45T) (third revision) 
Mechanical testing of metals tensile 
testing (second revision) 
Metallic materials — Charpy pendul- 
um impact test: Part 1 Test method 
(third revision) 


1586 : 2000 


1608 : 2005 


1757 
(Part 1) : 2014 


2878 : 2004 Fire extinguisher, carbon dioxide 
type (portable and trolley mounted) 
— Specification (third revision) 

3224 : 2002 Valve fittings for compressed gas 


cylinders excluding liquefied 
petroleum gas LPG) cylinders — 


IS No. Title 

Specification (fourth revision) 
Yoke type valve connections for 
small medical gas cylinders — 
Specification (second revision) 
Colour identification of gas cylinders 
and related equipment intended for 
medical use 

ISO Metric screw threads: 

Basic and design profiles (second 
revision) 

General plan (second revision) 
Basic dimensions (second revision) 
Selected sizes for screws, bolts and 
nuts (second revision) 

ISO general purpose metric screw 
threads — Tolerances: 

Limits of sizes for general purpose 
external and internal screw threads — 


3745 : 2006 
3933 : 1966 
4218 
(Part 1) : 2001 
(Part 2) : 2001 
(Part 3) : 1999 
(Part 4) : 2001 
14962 


(Part 2) : 2001 


Medium quality 
(Part 3): 2001 Deviations for constructional screw 

threads 

4258 : 2011 Metallic materials — Conversion of 
hardness values (second revision) 

4379 : 1981 Identification of the contents of 
industrial gas cylinder (first revision) 

5844 : 2014 Hydrostatic stretch testing of 
compressed gas cylinders — 
Recommendations (first revision) 

7241 : 1981 Glossary of terms used in gas 
cylinder technology (first revision) 

15683 : 2006 Portable fire extinguishers — 


Performance and construction — 
Specification 
IS/ISO 11114-1 : Gas cylinders — Compatibility of 
2012 cylinder and valve materials with gas 
contents : Part 1 Metallic materials 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


In addition to the definitions given in IS 7241, the 
following definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Yield Stress (R,) — Value corresponding to the 
lower yield stress R, or for steels that do not exhibit a 
defined yield, the 0.2 percent proof stress (non- 
proportional elongation) R02. 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


3.2 Normalizing — Heat treatment in which a cylinder 
is heated to a uniform temperature above the upper 
critical point (Ac,) of the steel and then cooled in still 
air. 


3.3 Tempering — Softening heat treatment which 
follows normalizing, in which the cylinder is heated to 
a uniform temperature below the lower critical point 
(Ac,) of the steel. 


3.4 Batch — A guantity of up to 200 cylinders plus 
cylinder for destructive testing of the same nominal 
diameter, thickness and design made, successively from 
the same steel and subjected to the same heat treatment 
for the same duration of time. 


3.5 Working Pressure (P,,)/Service Pressure — 
Working pressure for permanent gas means the settled 
internal pressure of the gas in the cylinder at a 
temperature of 15°C. 


3.6 Test Pressure (P,) — Test pressure means the 
internal pressure reguired for the hydrostatic test or 
the hydrostatic stretch test of the cylinders. 


NOTE — It is used for cylinder wall thickness calculation. 


3.7 Burst Pressure (P,,) — Highest pressure reached 
in a cylinder during a burst test. 


4 SYMBOLS 


a = calculated minimum thickness, in 
millimetres, of the cylindrical shell; 


a” = guaranteed minimum thickness, in millimetres, 
of the cylindrical shell (see Fig. 1); 

ay = guaranteed minimum thickness, in 
millimetres, of a concave base at the knuckle 
(see Fig. 2); 

a, = guaranteed minimum thickness, in 
millimetres, at the centre of a concave base 
(see Fig. 2); 

A = percentage elongation on gauge length 
5.65VS,; 

b = guaranteed minimum thickness, in 
millimetres, at the centre of a convex base 
(see Fig. 1); 

d, = maximum permissible deviation of burst 
profile, in millimetres (see Fig. 5); 

D, = nominal design outside diameter of the 
cylinder, in millimetres, (see Fig. 1); 

D; = nominal inside diameter of the cylinder, in 
millimetres; 


D, = diameter, in millimetres, of former (see 
Fig. 9); 

h = outside depth (concave base end), in 
millimetres (see Fig. 2); 


H = outside height, in millimetres, of domed part 
(convex head or base end) (see Fig. 1); 


l = length of cylindrical part of the cylinder, in 
millimetres (see Fig. 3); 

L, = original gauge length, in millimetres; 

n = ratio of diameter of bend test former to actual 


thickness of test piece (t); 


P, = measured burst pressure, in bar or kgf/cm?; 

P, = hydraulic test pressure, in bar or kgf/em?, 
above atmospheric pressure; 

P,, = working pressure/Service pressure, in bar or 
kgf/cm’, above atmospheric pressure; 

P, = observed pressure when cylinder starts 
yielding during hydraulic bursting test, in 
bar or kgf/cm’; 

r — inside knuckle radius, in millimetres (see 
Fig.1 and Fig. 2); 

R, = minimum guaranteed value of yield strength 
(see 3.1) in MPa or kgf/mm’; 

R., = value of the actual yield strength, in MPa or 


kgf/mm?, as determined by the tensile test; 


R, = minimum guaranteed value of tensile 
strength, in MPa or kgf/mm’; 


R,, = actual value of tensile strength, in MPa or 
kgf/mm?, as determined by the tensile test; 


Rama = Maximum guaranteed value of tensile 
strength, in MPa or kgf/mm?; 

S, = original cross-sectional area of tensile test 
piece, in square millimetres according to IS 
1608; 

t = actual thickness of the test specimen, in 
millimetres; 

u = ratio of distance between knife edges or 
platens in the flattening test to average 
cylinder wall thickness at the position of test; 

V = water capacity of cylinder, in litres; and 

w = width, in millimetres, of the tensile test piece. 

5 MATERIALS 


5.1 General Requirements 


5.1.1 The steel used shall be such that its properties 
met the requirements of the finished product. The steel 
shall be aluminium or silicon killed with non-aging 
properties, other than rimming qualities. The chemical 
composition of all steels shall be declared and defined 
at least by: 


a) carbon, manganese and silicon content in all 
cases; 


b) chromium, nickel, molybdenum, vanadium 
and that of any other alloying elements 
intentionally added; and 


c) maximum sulphur and phosphorus contents in 
all cases. 


NOTES 


1 When aluminium or a combination of aluminium and silicon 
is used for killing the steel, the requirement regarding minimum 
silicon content does not apply. 


2 When steel is aluminium killed, nitrogen content shall be 
limited to 0.01 percent. 


3 When steel is aluminium killed by aluminium alone, nitrogen 
content is limited to 0.007 percent. 


5.1.2 The cylinder manufacturer shall establish means 
to identify the cylinders with the cast of steel from which 
they are made. 


5.1.3 Grades of steel used for cylinder manufacture 
shall be compatible with the intended gas service, for 
example corrosive gases, embrittling gases (see IS/ 
ISO11114-1). 


5.2 Controls on Chemical Composition 


5.2.1 The steel used in the manufacture of gas cylinder 
shall be as per chemical composition specified in 
Table 1, unless otherwise permitted by the statutory 
authority. 


The actual content of any element deliberately added 
shall be reported and their maximum content shall be 
representative of good steel making practice. 


Table 1 Chemical Composition of Steel (cast 
analyses) in Percentage 
(Clauses 5.2.1 and 5.4) 


SI No. Element Contents 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Carbon 0.45, Max 
ii) Manganese 1.20 — 1.70 
iii) Silicon 0.10 — 0.35 
iv) Chromium 0.20, Max 
v) Nickel 0.20, Max 
vi) Copper 0.20, Max 
vii) Combined value of micro 0.15, Max 
alloyingelements: that is, 
V, Nb, Ti, B, Zr, Sn 
viii) Sulphur 0.015, Max 
ix) Phosphorus 0.02, Max 
x) Sulphur + Phosphorus 0.03, Max 


NOTE — Actual cast analysis shall comply with 5.2.2. 


5.2.2 The carbon, manganese silicon and molybdenum 
contents shall be given, with tolerances, such that the 
differences between the maximum and minimum values 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


of the cast do not exceed the values given in col 5 of 
Table 2. 


Table 2 Chemical Composition Tolerances 
(Clauses 5.2.2 and 5.2.3) 


SI Element Mazimum Mazimum Mazimum 
No. Contentin Permissible Permissible 
Percentage Deviation in Range in 

Percentage Percentage 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Carbon < 0.30 0.06 0.06 
2 0.30 0.07 0.07 
ii) Manganese All values 0.30 0.30 
iii) Silicon All values 0.30 0.30 
iv) Molybdenum All values 0.15 0.15 


5.2.3 The cylinder manufacturer shall obtain and 
provide certificates of cast (heat) analysis of the steels 
supplied for the construction of gas cylinders. If check 
analysis is required, they shall be carried out either on 
specimen taken during manufacture from the material 
in the form as supplied by the steel maker to the cylinder 
manufacturer, or from finished cylinders. In any check 
analysis, the maximum permissible deviation from the 
values obtained for the cast analysis of that particular 
heat/cast, shall conform to the values specified in col 4 
of Table 2. 


5.3 Heat Treatment 


The heat treatment process applied to the finished 
cylinder shall be either normalizing or normalizing and 
tempering. The cylinder manufacturer shall certify the 
heat treatment process applied and shall be in 
conformity with material standard and or as 
recommended by steel maker. The heat treatment 
process shall achieve the required mechanical 
properties. The actual temperature to which a type of 
steel if subjected for a given tensile strength shall not 
deviate by more than 30°C from the temperature 
specified by the cylinder manufacturer. When the 
hardness check is specified, the hardness value shall 
be within the band related to the range of declared 
values of tensile strength. 


5.4 Mechanical Properties 


The steel conforming to the composition specified in 
Table 1 after manufacture of the cylinders the 
normalized or normalized and tempered, should meet 
the mechanical properties given in Table 3. 


5.4.1 Suitable steel other than above may be used with 
the prior approval of the statutory authority. In such a 
case, minimum specified value of the yield strength of 
the steel shall be taken for the purpose of calculating 
the wall thickness of the cylinder. 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


Table 3 Mechanical Properties 


(Clause 5.4) 
SI Properties Heat Treatment 
No. Condition Normalized 
or Normalized and 
Tempered 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Tensile strength (Rg) kgf/mm? 68 (670) 
(MPa), Min 
ii) Yield strength (R.) kgf/mm”? 44 (430) 
(MPa), Min 
ii) Elongation percent Min on 18 


gauge length = 5.65 NS, 
NOTE — Alternatively, yield strength shall be 0.2 percent of 
proof stress. 


6 DESIGN 


6.1 General Reguirements 


For design purpose, the value of R, shall not exceed 
0.75 R,- 


6.2 Limitation on Tensile Strength 


6.2.1 Where there is norisk of hydrogen embrittlement 
the maximum value of the tensile strength is limited by 
the ability of the steel to qualify the requirements of 9 
and 10, but in no case shall the actual maximum tensile 
strength R,, exceed 1 100 MPa for chrome-molybdenum 
steel or 1 030 MPa for carbon manganese steels. 


6.2.2 Where there is a risk of hydrogen embrittlement 
the maximum value of the tensile strength as determined 
as per 10.2 shall either be 880 MPa or, where the ratio 
R,,/R,, does not exceed 0.9, shall be 950 MPa. The 
hardness obtained on each cylinder shall be within the 
band related to the range of declared values of tensile 
strength. 


6.2.3 In case of cylinders for compressed natural gas 
or any embrittling gas or embrittling gas mixtures as 
specified in IS/ISO 11114-1 or by statutory authority, 
the maximum value of the tensile strength (Rn max) aS 
determined as per 10.2 shall either be 880 MPa or where 
the ratio R,,/R,, does not exceed 0.9 shall be 950 MPa. 
The minimum guaranteed value of tensile strength in 
MPa (R,) shall be less than or equal to Rn max Minus 
120 MPa. The hardness obtained on each cylinder shall 
be within the band related to the range of declared 
values of tensile strength. 


6.3 Calculation of Cylindrical Shell Thickness 
6.3.1 The wall thickness of the cylindrical shell of the 
cylinder may be calculated by the following formulae: 
P, (1.0D +0.4D;) 
f= 100(D?) 


with absolute minimum of a = 1.5 mm 


where 

f = maximum allowable wall stress at 
hydrostatic test pressure in kgf/mm?; 

= 5/6 Ro R, being the minimum value of the 

yield strength in kgf/mm?; 

D, = nominal outer diameter of cylinder in mm; 

D, = nominal inner diameter of cylinder in mm; 

a = calculated minimum wall thickness of 
cylindrical shell in mm, excluding additional 
allowances to resist influences other than 
those of internal pressure and of external 
forces due to normal handling; and 

P, = 5/3 x service pressure for permanent gases, 
in kgf/cm’. 

NOTES 


1 Incase of liguefiable gases, P, > 1.5 x developed pressure 
at 65°C (for the filling ratio under consideration); 


2 For dissolved acetylene P, > 60 kgf/cm’; 
3 The value of R itself is limited to 75 percent of the minimum 
value of the tensile strength of the material. 
6.3.2 The value of the wall thickness as calculated from 
above formula shall however, be not less 
than 0.136 V D.. 


6.4 Calculation of Convex Ends (Heads and Bases) 


6.4.1 The thickness, b, at the centre of a convex end 
shall not be less than that required by the following 
criteria: 


b215a'for H/D, 20.25 
b 2 2 a' for 0.25> H/D, 20.2 


where the inside knuckle radius, r, is not less than 
0.075 D,- 


NOTE — H / D, < 0.20 is not recommended. 


6.4.1.1 For cylinders manufactured from plate, the 
thickness, b, at the centre of a convex end shall be not 
less than that required by the following criteria: 


b > 1.5a' for 0.4 > H/D, 2 0.20 
b 2 a' for H/D, 20.40 


where the inside knuckle radius, r is not less than 
0.075 D,- 


6.4.1.2 In order to obtain a satisfactory stress 
distribution in the region where the end joins the shell, 
any thickening of the end that is required shall be 
gradual from the point of juncture, particularly at the 
base. For the application of this rule the point of 
juncture between the shell and the end is defined by 


the horizontal line indicating dimension H in Fig. 1. 


6.4.2 The cylinder manufacturer shall prove by the 
pressure cycling test as detailed in 9.2.4 that the design 
is satisfactory. The shapes shown in Fig.1 are typical 
convex heads and base ends. Shapes A, B, D and E are 
base ends and shapes C and F are heads. 


6.4.3 The cylinder may be designed with one or two 
openings along the central axis. 


6.5 Calculation of Concave Base Ends 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


When concave base ends (see Fig. 2) are used the 
following design values are recommended: 

a,22a' 

a,22a' 

h 2 0.10 D, 

r 2 0.075 D, 


The design drawing shall at least show values for a4, 
a, h andr. 


6.5.1 In order to obtain a satisfactory stress distribution, 


7 


Key 
1 Cylinderical Part 
NOTE — Shape B shall not be excluded from this reguirement. 


Fic. 1 TypicAL CONVEX ENDS 


5 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


the thickness of the cylinder shall increase 
progressively in the transition region between the 
cylindrical part and the base. 


6.5.2 The cylinder manufacturer shall in any case prove 
by the pressure cycling test as detailed in 9.2.4 that the 
design is satisfactory. 


Fic. 2 Concave BASE ENDS 


6.6 Neck Design 


6.6.1 The external diameter and thickness of the formed 
neck end of the cylinder shall be adequate for the torque 
applied in fitting the valve to the cylinder. The torque 
may vary according to the diameter of thread, the form 
of thread and the sealant used in the fitting of the valve 
(for guidance on torque, see IS 3224 and IS 3745). 


6.6.2 In establishing the minimum thickness, 
consideration shall be given to obtain a thickness of 
wall in the cylinder neck which will prevent permanent 
expansion of the neck during the initial and subsequent 
fittings of the valve into the cylinder without support 
of an attachment such as aneck ring. Where the cylinder 
is specifically designed to be fitted with neck 
reinforcement, such as neck ring or shrunk-on collar, 
the same shall be taken into account. 


6.6.3 Valve Fittings 


The cylinder neck shall be threaded to suit the type of 
valves specified in IS 3224 or IS 3745 or to any other 
specification approved by the statutory authority. The 
threads shall be full form, clean cut, even, and without 
chatter, tapped into gauges, and concentric with axis 
of the cylinder. 

NOTE — For special application parallel threads suitable for 

pressure retaining as per IS 4218 (Part 1 to Part 4), IS 14962 


(Part 2) and IS 14962 (Part 3) may be acceptable with the 
approval of the statutory authority. 


6.7 Foot Rings 


When a foot ring is provided, it shall be sufficiently 
strong and made of material compatible with that of 
the cylinder. The shape should preferably be cylindrical 
and shall give the cylinder sufficient stability. The foot 


ring shall be secured to the cylinder by a method other 
than welding, brazing or soldering. Any gaps which 
may form water traps shall be sealed by a method other 
than welding, brazing or soldering. 


6.8 Neck Rings 


6.8.1 The valve shall be protected against damage by 
the provision of a stout cap of thickness not less than 
2.5 mm. Cylinder for non-toxic gases of nominal water 
capacity upto 5 litres shall be exempted from this 
provision. Cylinder for non-toxic gases of nominal 
water capacity above 5 litres and up to 10.5 litres may 
not be provided with valve protection cap, if approved 
by the statutory authority. The cap shall be of such a 
shape that it is nowhere in actual contact with any part 
of the valve or the valve body. The cap shall be provided 
with vent of adequate size so as to avoid any gas 
pressure accumulation inside cap in case of leak. 
However, in case of highly toxic gases, the cap shall 
be gas tight, capable of withstanding maximum 
developed pressure of contained gas at 65°C. 


6.8.2 When a neck ring is provided, it shall be 
sufficiently strong and made of material compatible 
with that of the cylinder and shall be securely attached 
by a method other than welding, brazing or soldering. 
The manufacturer shall ensure that the torque to turn 
the neck ring is greater than100 Nm. 


6.9 Design Drawing 


A fully dimensioned drawing shall be prepared which 
includes the specification of the material (cast analyses), 
neck threads, working pressure, test pressure, 
mechanical properties selected for calculating the wall 
thickness, heat treatment parameters and hardness 
range. 


7 MANUFACTURE 
7.1 General 
The cylinder shall be produced by: 


a) forging or drop forging from a solid ingot or 
billet; or 


b) manufacturing from seamless tube (hot/cold 
finish, flow formed); or Pressing from a flat 
plate; 


c) closing of the open ends may be done by any 
hot working processes such as spinning, 
forging, etc; and 


e) cylinders may be designed with one or two 
openings along the central cylinder axis. Metal 
shall not be added in the process of closure of 
the end. Plugging to correct manufacturing 
defects in cylinder bases is not permitted. 


7.2 Wall Thickness 


During production each cylinder or semi-finished shell 
shall be examined for thickness. The wall thickness at 
any point shall be not less than the minimum thickness 
specified. If reguired by the purchaser, suitable 
allowances to cover corrosion, manufacturing 
tolerances, stresses due to horizontal acceleration and 
retardation during transportation may also be provided. 
The amount of these allowances shall be as agreed to 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 


7.3 Surface Defects 


The internal and external surfaces of the finished cylinder 
shall be free from defects which would adversely affect 
the safe working of the cylinder (see Annex A for 
examples of defects and guidance on their evaluation). 


7.4 Out-of-Roundness 


The out-of-roundness of the cylindrical shell that is the 
difference between the maximum and minimum outside 


Key 
1 Maximum 0.01 x / (see 7.7) 
2 Maximum 0.003 x / (see 7.6) 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


diameters at the same cross-section shall not exceed 2 
percent of the mean of these diameters. 


7.5 Mean Diameter 


The mean external diameter of the cylindrical part 
outside the transition zones on a cross-section shall not 
deviate more than +1 percent from the nominal design 
diameter. 


7.6 Straightness 


The maximum deviation of the cylindrical part of the 
shell from a straight line shall not exceed 3 mm/m length 
(see Fig. 3). 


7.7 Verticality 


Deviation from vertical shall not exceed 10 mm/m 
length (see Fig. 3). 


7.8 Stability 


The outer diameter of the surface in contact with the 


Ve. 


Fic. 3 ILLUSTRATION OF DEVIATION OF CYLINDRICAL PART OF SHELL FROM A STRAIGHT LINE AND FROM VERTICAL 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


ground shall be greater than 65 percent of the nominal 
outside diameter of the concave base cylinder. 


7.9 Testing Reguirements The material of the finished 
cylinders shall satisfy the reguirements given in 9 (type 
approval test), 10 (batch test) and 11 (test on every 
cylinder). 


7.9.1 In the event of failure to meet test reguirements, 
retesting or reheat treatment and retesting shall be 
carried out as follows: 


7.9.1.1 If the sample fails in any of the test specified in 
10.2, 10.3 and 10.4 and if the inspecting authority 
considers that failure was due to an error in carrying 
out the test, a fresh test shall be made on a test piece 
taken from the same cylinder. The defective test shall 
be ignored but otherwise, at the cylinder makers’ 
discretion, one of the following procedures shall be 
adopted: 


a) The test in which the failure occurred shall be 
repeated on the cylinder or test ring originally 
tested and, in addition, the test specified in 
10.2, 10.3 and 10.4 shall be carried out on 
another cylinder or test rings from the same 
batch of the cylinders. If both test samples 
comply with the test requirements of 10.2, 
10.3 and 10.4 the batch shall be accepted. 


b) The batch may be reheat-treated as given in 
5.3 and the tests specified in 10.2, 10.3 and 
10.4 shall be carried out on two cylinders or 
test rings at the discretion of inspecting 
authority, which have not been previously 
tested. If both the cylinders or both test rings 
satisfy the test requirements, the batch shall 
be accepted. 


7.9.2 If any of the tests specified in 10.2, 10.3 and 10.4 
fail, the batch may be reheat-treated as given in 7.10 
and retested as given in 7.10.1.1 (b). If both cylinders 
or both test rings satisfy the test requirements, the batch 
shall be accepted. 


7.9.3 No cylinder shall, however, be heat-treated more 
than three times. Also, if more than five cylinders in a 
batch are reheat-treated, they shall constitute a new 
batch for the purposes of 10.2, 10.3 and 10.4. 


7.9.4 Not more than five cylinders or test rings from 
batch shall be submitted to the test and the limitations 
on reheat-treatment given in 7.9.3 shall be complied 
with. 


7.9.5 If after the permitted number of retests and reheat- 
treatments the tests requirements have not been 
complied with, the cylinders in the batch shall be 
rendered unserviceable for holding the gas under 
pressure. 


NOTE — If any cylinders fail to meet the requirements of 
hydrostatic stretch test in terms of stretch, or burst test, no 
further cylinders conforming to that drawing shall be accepted 
from the manufacturer until it has been demonstrated to the 
satisfaction of the inspector that the cause of the failure has 
been identified and corrected. Also, for the batch under 
consideration, each of the remaining cylinders should be 
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the inspector, to be free from 
the defect which caused the failure. 


7.10 Water Capacity 


The manufacturer shall check and record the water 
capacity of each cylinder in order to ensure compliance 
as per following tolerance: 


a) For cylinders of water capacity up to and 
including 20 litres = +10/—-0 percent subject 
to a maximum of 1 litre; and 


b) For cylinders of water capacity exceeding 20 
litres = +5/-0 percent. 


7.11 Neck Thread 


Neck threads shall meet the requirements of 6.8. 


8 INSPECTION AND TESTING 


In order to ensure that the cylinders are in compliance 
with this standard they shall be subject to inspection and 
testing in accordance with 9 (type approval test), 10 
(batch test) and 11 (test on every cylinder) by an 
authorized inspection body (hereafter referred to as ‘the 
inspector’) recognized by the statutory authority. 


9 TYPE APPROVAL PROCEDURE 


9.1 General Requirements — A technical specification 
of each new design of cylinders (or cylinder family as 
given in 9.1 (f) including design drawing, design 
calculations, steel details and heat treatment, shall be 
submitted by the manufacturer to the inspecting 
authority, for scrutiny and further recommendations to 
statutory authority. The type approval tests detailed 
given in 9.2 shall be carried out on each new design 
under the supervision of the inspector. A cylinder shall 
be considered to be of a new design, compared with an 
existing approved design when: 


a) itis manufactured in a different factory; or 
b) itis manufactured by a different process; or 


c) it is manufactured from a steel of different 
specified chemical composition range as 
defined in 5.2.1; or 


d) itis given a different heat treatment beyond 
the limits stipulated in 5.3; or 


e) base/neck profile has changed, for example 
concave, convex, hemispherical or also if 
there is a change in base thickness/cylinder 
diameter ratio; or 


f) overall length of the cylinder has increased 
by more than 50 percent (cylinders with a 
length to diameter ratio less than 3 shall not 
be used as reference cylinders for any new 
design with this ratio greater than 3); or 


g) nominal outside diameter has changed; or 
h) design wall thickness has changed; or 


j) hydraulic test pressure has been increased 
(where a cylinder is to be used for lower 
pressure duty than that for which design 
approval has been given, it shall not be 
deemed to be a new design); or 


k) guaranteed minimum yield stress (R,) and/or 
the guaranteed minimum tensile strength (R,) 
have changed. 


9.2 Prototype Tests 


9.2.1 A minimum of 50 cylinders, which shall be 
guaranteed by the manufacturer to be representative of 
the new design, shall be made available for prototype 
testing. However, if for special applications the total 
production if less than 50 cylinders, enough cylinders 
shall be made to complete the prototype tests required, 
in addition to the production quantity. 


9.2.2 In the course of the type approval process, the 
inspector shall select the cylinders for test and 


a) Verify that: 


1. Design conforms to the requirements of 6 
(design); 

2. Requirements of 5 (materials) are 
complied with; 

3. Thickness of the wall of the ends on one 
cylinder (that taken for mechanical 
testing) meet the requirements of 6.3. The 
measurements being taken at least at three 
transverse sections of the cylindrical part 
and on a longitudinal section of the base 
and head; 


4. Requirements of 6.5 to 6.8 and 7.5 to 7.8, 
are complied with for all cylinders 
selected by the inspector; and 


5. Internal and external surfaces of the 
cylinders are free of any defect which 
might make them unsafe for use (see 
Annex A). 


b) Supervise the following tests on the cylinders 
selected: 


1. tests specified in 9.2.3 (hydraulic burst 
test) on one cylinder, the cylinder bearing 
representative tamp markings; 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


2. tests specified in 10.1.3 (mechanical 
testing) on one cylinder, the test piece 
being identifiable with the batch; 


3. tests specified in 9.2.4 (pressure cycling 
test) on two cylinders, the cylinders 
bearing representative stamp marking; 


4. for cylinders made from seamless tube, 
the test specified in 9.2.5 (base check) 
shall be performed on one cylinder 
selected for mechanical testing. 

NOTES 


1 In case of cylinders having diameter exceeding 300 mm for 
test 9.2.2 (b) (2), a sample cut from a tube of same heat 
number in the form of a ring of sufficient length to provide 
requisite test piece may be taken and subjected to the same 
heat treatment, so that its mechanical properties are 
representative of the cylinders in the batch. 


2 Cylinders selected for pressure cycling test may be used for 
hydraulic burst test. 


9.2.3 Hydraulic Bursting Test 
9.2.3.1 Test installation 


The test equipment shall be capable of operation in 
accordance with the test conditions specified in 9.2.3.2 
and producing accurately the information required 
by 9.2.3.3. A typical hydraulic burst test installation 
is illustrated in Fig. 4. 


9.2.3.2 Test conditions 


As the cylinder and test equipment are being filled with 
water, care shall be taken to ensure that no air is trapped 
in the circuit by operating the hydraulic pump until 
water is discharged from the vent or air release valve. 
During the test, pressurization shall be carried out in 
two successive stages: 


a) In the first stage, the pressure shall be 
increased at a rate of not more than 0.5 MPa/s 
(5 bar/s) up to a pressure value corresponding 
to the initiation of plastic deformation; and 


b) In the second stage, the pump discharge rate 
shall be maintained at as constant a level as is 
possible until the cylinder bursts. 


9.2.3.3 Interpretation of test 


a) The interpretation of the burst test shall 
involve: 


1 Examination of the pressure/time curve 
or pressure/volume of water used curve, 
to permit determination of the pressure 
(P) at which plastic deformation of the 
cylinder commences, together with the 
bursting pressure (P,); and 


2. Examination of the burst tear and of the 
shape of its edges. 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


b) 


c) 


d) 


Key 
1 Test fluid reservoir 


2 Tank for measurement of test fluid (the feed tank 
may also be used as a measuring tank) 


Pump 

Pressure gauge 
Pressure/time curve recorder 
Vent or air release valve 

Test well 

Cylinder 


ANON PE 


Fic. 4 TypıcaL HYDRAULIC Burst TEST INSTALLATION 


For the result of a bursting test to be 
considered satisfactory, the following 
requirements shall be met: 


1. Observed yield pressure (P,) shall be 
greater than or equal to 1.2 times of test 
pressure (P,). 

2. Actual burst pressure (P,) shall be greater 
than or equal to 2.25 times of working 
pressure (P). 

The cylinder shall remain in one piece and 

shall not fragment; 


The main fracture shall be in the cylindrical 
portion and shall not be brittle, that is the 
fracture edges shall be inclined with respect 
to the wall. The tear shall not reveal a 
significant defect in the metal; 


For cylinder with wall thickness less than 


10 


e) 


7.3 mm, the fracture shall be acceptable only if 
itconforms to one of the following descriptions: 


1. Longitudinal, without branching (see 
Fig. 5a); 

2. Longitudinal, with a side branching at 
each end which in no case extends d, 
beyond the longitudinal plane normal to 
the fracture plane (see Fig. 3b) or with 
fishtail branching at one end (see Fig. 5c) 
or at both ends (see Fig. 5d). 


Cylinder having diameter exceeding 300 mm 
and water capacity exceeding 150 litres shall 
be subjected to hydraulic pressure not less than 
calculated burst pressure as per formula given 
below. During pressurization, if no visible 
permanent deformation is observed, the 
cylinder shall be considered to have passed 
the burst test. 


P, (D, -2a') 


R, x 0.95 = 
200a' 


9.2.3.4 Acceptance criteria 


Figure 5 illustrate satisfactory burst test profiles and 
batches represented by such results shall be accepted. 
If the configuration of the fracture does not conform to 
Fig. 5 but other material and mechanical tests are 
satisfactory, investigation of the cause of the non- 
conformity shall be undertaken prior to acceptance or 
rejection of the batch. 


9.2.4 Pressure Cycling Test 


This test shall be carried out on cylinders bearing 
representative markings with a non-corrosive liquid 
subjecting the cylinders to successive reversals at an 
Upper Cyclic Pressure (UCP) which is equal to the 
hydraulic test pressure (P,,). The cylinders shall withstand 
12 000 cycles without failure. For cylinders with hydraulic 
test pressure (P,) > 450 bar, the upper cyclic pressure 
may be reduced to two-third of this test pressure. In this 
case the cylinders shall withstand 80 000 cycles without 
failure. The value of the lower cyclic pressure shall not 
exceed 10 percent of the upper cyclic pressure, but shall 
have an absolute maximum of 30 bar. The cylinder shall 
actually experience the maximum and minimum cyclic 
pressures during the test. The frequency of reversals of 
pressure shall not exceed 0.25 Hz (15 cycles/min). The 
temperature measured on the outside surface of the 
cylinder shall not exceed 50°C during the test. After the 


a) b) 


c) 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


test the cylinder bases shall be sectioned in order to 
measure the thickness and to ensure that this thickness is 
greater than the minimum designed thickness. The test 
shall be considered satisfactory if the cylinders attain the 
required number of cycles without developing a leak. 


9.2.5 Base Check (for cylinder made from tube only) 


A meridian section with offset equal to saw blade 
thickness shall be made in the base of the cylinder and 
one of the surfaces thus obtained polished for 
examination under a magnification of between 5 X and 
10 X. The cylinder shall be regarded as defective if the 
presence of cracks is detected. It shall also be regarded 
as defective, if the dimensions of any pores or inclusions 
present reach values considered to pose a threat to 
safety. In no case shall the sound thickness (that is the 
thickness with no defects) in the base center be less 
than the specified shell thickness as per 6.3 and 6.4. 


9.3 Type Approval Certificate 


If the results of the checks according to 9.2 are 
satisfactory, the inspector shall issue a type approval 
certificate. A typical proforma for type approval 
certificate is given in Annex B. 


10 BATCH TESTS 
10.1 General Requirements 


10.1.1 All tests given at 10.1.3 for checking the quality 
of the gas cylinder material shall be carried out on 
material from finished cylinders. For the purpose of 


d) 


Fic. 5 ACCEPTABLE BURST PROFILES 


11 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


batch testing the manufacturer shall provide the 
inspector with: 


a) type approval certificate; 

b) certificates from material manufacturer 
stating the cast analysis of the steel supplied 
for the manufacture of the cylinders, and heat- 
wise verification by test laboratory; 

c) evidence that appropriate heat treatment has 
been performed; 

d) a list of the cylinders, stating serial numbers 
and stamp markings as required; and 

e) confirmation that threads are checked 


properly in accordance with gauging 
requirements. The gauges to be used shall be 
specified. 


10.1.2 During batch testing, the inspector shall: 
a) 


ascertain that the type approval certificate has 
been obtained and the cylinders confirm to 
it; 

check whether the requirements set out 
in 5, 6 and 7 have met and in particular check 
by an external and, if physically possible, 
internal visual examination of the cylinders 
whether their construction and checks carried 
out by the manufacturer in accordance 
with 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 7.6, 7.7 and 7.8 are 
satisfactory. The visual examination shall 
cover at least 10 percent of the cylinders 
manufactured; 

check whether the information supplied by 
the manufacturer referred to in 10.1.1 is 
correct; 

select the necessary cylinders per batch for 
destructive testing and carry out the tests 
specified in 10.2, 10.3 and 10.4. Where 
alternative tests are permitted, the purchaser 
and manufacturer shall agree which tests are 
to be carried out; and 

assess the results of hardness testing specified 
in 11.3. 


10.1.3 Mechanical Test 


The following tests shall be carried out on one cylinder 
of each batch: 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


a) one tensile test in the longitudinal direction 
(see 10.2); 


b) either two bend tests (see 10.4.1) in a 
circumferential direction or a flattening test 
(see 10.4.2) or one ring flattening test (see 
10.4.3); and 

c) three impact tests in transverse or longitudinal 


direction as required in 10.3 when the 
thickness of the cylinder permits the 
machining of a test piece at least 3 mm thick. 


NOTE — For location of test pieces, see Fig 6. 


12 


10.2 Tensile Test 


10.2.1 A tensile test shall be carried out on material 
taken from the cylindrical part of the cylinder by 
adopting either of the following procedures: 


a) Rectangular specimens shall be prepared in 
accordance with Fig. 6 and with a gauge length 
L, equal to 5.65 NS, The two faces of the test 
piece representing the inside and the outside 
surfaces of the cylinder shall not be machined. 
The elongation (A) shall not be less than 18 
Percent. 


b) Machined round specimens having the 
maximum diameter practicable, the 
elongation (A) measured on a gauge length 
of 5 times the specimen’s diameter being not 
less than the value calculated by the formula 
in 10.2.1 (a) increased by elongation as 20 
percent. It is recommended that machined 
round test pieces are not used for wall 
thickness less than 3 mm. 


10.2.2 The tensile test shall be carried out in accordance 
with IS 1608. 


10.3 Impact Test 


10.3.1 Except for the requirement set out below, the 
test shall be carried out in accordance with IS 1757 
(Part 1). The impact test pieces three numbers shall 
be taken in the direction either transverse or 
longitudinal as required in Table 4 from the wall of 
the cylinder. The notch shall be perpendicular to the 
face of the cylinder wall (see Fig. 7). For longitudinal 
tests the test piece shall be machined all over (on six 
faces), if the wall thickness does not permit a final 
test piece width of 10 mm, the width shall be near as 
practicable to the nominal thickness of the cylinder 
wall. The test pieces taken in the transverse direction 
shall be machined on four faces only, the inner and 
outer faces of the cylinder wall shall be un-machined 
(see Fig. 8). Minimum acceptance values are given 
in Table 4. 


Table 4 Impact Test Acceptance Values 
(Clauses 6.8 and 10.3.1) 


SI Cylinder Diameter D,, > 140 < 140 
No. inmm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Direction of testing Transverse Longitudinal 
ii) Test temperature, in °C —20 —20 
iii) Impact strength in J/cm’, 20 40 
Minimum for mean of 3 
specimens 
iv) Impact strength in J/cm’, 16 32 


Minimum for individual 
specimen 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


DETAIL AT X 


Key 
1 Bend test pieces 
2 Transverse impact test pieces 


3 Longitudinal impact test pieces (alternative positions shown dotted) 
4 Tensile test piece 


Fic. 6 TYPICAL LOCATION OF TEST PIECES 


3 
> < 
Key 
1 Transverse specimen a 
2 Cylinder longitudinal — axis Width of 


3 Charpy-V — notch perpendicular to wall specimen 
4 Longitudinal specimen ; 


Fic 7 DESCRIPTION OF TRANSVERSE AND LONGITUDINAL İMPACT TEST PIECES 


13 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


8A TEST PIECE TAKEN FROM CYLINDER WALL 


Key 

Machining optional 
Striker 

Direction of strike 
Test piece 

Centre of strike 
Anvils 


SAG BEN = 


8C TOP VIEW OF TEST PIECE IN IMPACT TESTER 


Fic. 8 DESCRIPTION OF TRANSVERSE IMPACT TESTING 


10.4 Bend Test and Flattening Test 
10.4.1 Bend Test 


10.4.1.1 The bend test shall be carried out on two test 
pieces obtained by cutting either one or two rings of 
width 25 mm or 4 times the minimum agreed finished 
thickness, whichever is the greater, into equal parts. 
Each test piece shall be of sufficient length to permit 
the bend test to be carried out correctly. Only the edges 
of each strip may be machined. 


10.4.1.2 The test piece shall not crack when bent 
inwards around the former until the inside surfaces are 
not further apart than the diameter of the former (see 
Fig. 9). 


10.4.1.3 The maximum diameter of the former (Dp) 
shall be established form Table 5. For the actual tensile 
strength (Rm) given in Table 5; Dp =n x t where t is the 
test piece thickness. 


10.4.2 Flattening Test 


10.4.2.1 The flattening test shall be performed on one 
cylinder selected from each batch after heat treatment. 


14 


10.4.2.2 The test cylinder shall be flattened between 
wedge-shaped knife edges with a 60° included angle, 
the edges being rounded to a nominal radius of 13 mm. 
The length of the wedges shall not be less than the width 
of the flattened cylinder. The longitudinal axis of the 
cylinder shall be at an angle of approximately 90° to 
the knife edges. 


Table 5 Bend Test and Flattening Test 
Requirements 
(Clauses 10.4.1.3, 10.4.2.3 and 10.4.3) 


SI Actual Tensile Bend Test Flattening Test 
No. Strength Rn, MPa Valueofn (Cylinder or Ring) 
Value of u” 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Ru 500 2 4 

ii) 500 < Rm < 670 3 5 

iii) 670 < Rm < 800 4 6 

iv) 800< Rm <950 6 8 


D Maximum distance between knife edges or platens = u x tw 
where ¢,, is the average cylinder wall thickness at the position 
of testing. 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


Dp + 2t 


Fic. 9 ILLUSTRATION OF BEND TEST 


10.4.2.3 The test cylinder shall be flattened until the 
distance between the knife edges is in accordance with 
Table 5. The flattened cylinder shall remain visually intact. 


10.4.3 Ring-Flattening Test 


The ring-flattening test shall be carried out on one ring 
of width 25 mm or 4 times the minimum agreed 
finished thickness, whichever is greater, taken from 
the cylinder body. Only the edges of the ring may be 
machined. The ring shall be flattened between platens 
until the distance between platens is in accordance with 
Table 5. The flattened ring shall remain visually un- 
cracked. 


11 TESTS ON EVERY CYLINDER 
11.1 General 


Following heat treatment, all cylinders except those 
selected for testing under 10, shall be subjected to the 
following tests: 


a) Hydrostatic stretch test in accordance with 
11.2; 

b) Cylinders manufactured from chromium, 
molybdenum and nickel chromium 
molybdenum steel shall be tested for hardness 
in accordance with 11.3; 

c) Leakage test in accordance with 11.4; 

d) Water capacity check in accordance with 11.5; 
and 

e) Neck thread, shall meet the requirements of 


6.6. 


If there is an evidence of failure of test apparatus, the 
test shall be repeated. 


11.2 Hydrostatic Stretch Test 


The water pressure in the cylinder shall be increased 


15 


at a controlled rate until the test pressure, P,, is 
reached. The cylinder shall remain under pressure P, 
for at least 30 s and the total volumetric expansion 
measured. The pressure shall be released, and the 
volumetric expansion re-measured (see IS 5844). The 
cylinder shall be rejected, if it shows a permanent 
expansion (that is volumetric expansion after the 
pressure has been released) in excess of 10 percent 
of the total volumetric expansion measured at the test 
pressure P,. The total and permanent expansion 
readings shall be recorded together with the 
corresponding serial number of each cylinder tested, 
so that the elastic expansion (that is total expansion 
less permanent expansion) under the test pressure can 
be established for each cylinder. 


11.3 Hardness Test 


If required, a hardness test [see 11.1 (b)] in accordance 
with IS 1500 (Brinell), or IS 1586 (Rockwell) or other 
equivalent methods shall be carried out by the 
manufacturer after the final heat treatment of the 
cylinder. The hardness values thus determined 
according to IS 4258, shall be within the limits specified 
by the cylinder manufacturer for the material, 
dependent upon the heat treatment used for the 
production of the cylinder. 


NOTES 


1 Methods for measuring the surface indentation, other than 
given in IS 1500 or IS 1586 may be used subject to agreement 
between the parties concerned. 


2 Cylinders made from carbon manganese steel shall not be 
subjected to this test, except those having a hydraulic test 
pressure > 260 bar. 


11.4 Leakage Test 


The manufacturer shall employ such manufacturing 
techniques and apply such tests as will demonstrate to 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


the satisfaction of the inspector that the cylinders do 
not leak. This test shall be conducted at a pressure not 
lower than 0.6 x test pressure (P,). 


11.5 Capacity Check 


The manufacturer shall verify that water capacity of 
each cylinder conforms to 7.10. 


12 CERTIFICATION 


Each batch of cylinders shall be covered by a certificate 
signed by the inspecting authority’s representative to 
the effect that the cylinders meet the requirements of 
this standard in all respects. An example of a suitable 
worded certificate is given in Annex C. Copies of the 
certificate shall be issued to the manufacturer. The 
original certificate shall be retained by the inspector 
and the copies by the manufacturer in accordance with 
the regulations of the relevant statutory authority. 


13 COLOUR IDENTIFICATION 


The cylinder shall be painted externally in accordance 
with the colour scheme specified in IS 3933 or IS 4379. 
The cylinders used for fire extinguisher or used in fire 
fighting service, in accordance to IS 15683 or IS 2878 
shall be painted externally to the requirements of 
respective standard. 


14 CYLINDER MARKING 


14.1 Each cylinder shall be permanently stamped with 
the following: 


a) Serial number and identification of 
manufacturer and year of manufacture; 

b) Number of this standard IS 7285 (Part 1); 

c) Test pressure and date of the hydraulic test 
(such as 4/15 for April 2015); 

d) Tare weight, in kg (except in case of dissolved 
gas); 

e) Design minimum water capacity of the 
cylinder, in litres; 

f) Inspector’s official mark; 

g) Awhole number, indicating the value of yield 
stress, R., in MPa, on which the calculation 
of wall thickness was based; 

h) Symbol for heat treatment, N; 

j) Filling pressure in bar or kgf/cm? at 15° Cin 
the case of permanent gases and filling ratio 
in the case of liquefiable gases; 

k) Name or chemical symbol of the gas for which 
cylinder is to be used; and 

m) Identification of cylinder thread, for example: 


1) TISI for Type 1 Size 1 threads mark, 
2) TIS2 for Type 1 Size 2 threads mark, 
3) T1S3 for Type 1 Size 3 threads mark, 


16 


4) T3 for Type 2 threads mark, 

5) T4S1 for Type 4 Size 1 threads mark, 
6) T4S2 for Type 4 Size 2 threads mark, 
7) T4S3 for Type 4 Size 3 threads mark, 


14.2 The marking shall not be made on the body of the 
cylinder but shall be at areas in the formed neck where 
the thickness of metal is greater than the design 
minimum and where it is adequate for marking to be 
carried out. 


14.3 The characters in marking shall be 6 mm in height. 
On cylinders below 140 mm diameter, the height may 
be reduced, but in no case shall the characters be less 
than 3 mm in height. The indentation shall not be 
excessive depth. 


14.4 The stamps used for marking shall have small radii 
at changes of section to avoid the formation of sharp 
edges in the stamped marking. 


14.5 Export Market/Defence Services 


Cylinders manufactured for export/defense services 
use, shall be marked as agreed to between the purchaser 
and the manufacturer. 


15 BIS CERTIFICATION MARKING 


15.1 Each cylinder may also be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 


15.2 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the license for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to the 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


16 RECORDS 


Records shall be kept of all the tests made at the cylinder 
manufacturer’s works and copies shall be forwarded to 
the purchase of the cylinder and the inspecting authority. 


17 PREPARATION FOR DESPATCH 


Before being despatched from the manufacturer’s 
works, all cylinder shall be thoroughly cleaned and all 
particles of grit, filings or other matter which may have 
collected inside the cylinder during the course of 
manufacture, heat treatment and testing shall be 
removed completely and the cylinder dried internally. 
If cylinder is heated for drying the temperature shall 
not exceed 200°C. Cylinders not immediately closed 
by fitting of a valve and safety devices if applicable, 
shall have plugs suitably designed to prevent ingress 
of moisture and to protect threads, fitted to all the 
openings. The outside of the cylinder shall be given a 
suitable protective coating before despatch. 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEXA 
[Clauses 7.3 and 9.2.2 (a)] 


DESCRIPTION, EVALUATION OF MANUFACTURING DEFECTS AND CONDITIONS FOR 
REJECTION OF SEAMLESS STEEL GAS CYLINDERS AT TIME OF FINAL 
VISUAL INSPECTION BY THE MANUFACTURER 


A-1 INTRODUCTION 


Several types of defects can occur during the 
manufacturing of seamless steel gas cylinders. Such 
defects can be mechanical or material. They can be 
due to the basic material used, the manufacturing 
process, heat treatments, manipulation, neck-ring, 
machining or marking operations and other occurrences 
during manufacture. The aim of this Annex is to identify 
the manufacturing defects most commonly met and to 
provide rejection criteria to the inspectors that perform 
the visual inspection. Nevertheless extensive field 
experience and good judgement and independence from 
production are necessary by the inspector to detect and 
to be able to evaluate and judge a defect at the time of 
the visual inspection. 


A-2 GENERAL 


A-2.1 It is essential to perform the visual internal and 
external inspection in good conditions. The surface of 
the metal and particularly the inner wall should be 
completely clean, dry and reasonably free from 
oxidation products, corrosion, scale, etc, since these 
could obscure other more serious defects. Where 
necessary, the surface should be cleaned under closely 
controlled conditions by suitable methods before further 
inspection. Appropriate sources of illumination with 
sufficient intensity should be used. After the cylinders 


have been closed and the threads have been cut, the 
internal neck area should be examined by means of an 
introscope, dental-mirror or other suitable appliance. 


A-2.2 Small defects may be removed by local dressing, 
grinding, machining, or other appropriate methods. 
Great care should be taken to avoid introducing new 
injurious defects. After such a repair the cylinders 
should be re-examined. 


A-3 MANUFACTURING DEFECTS 


The most commonly found manufacturing defects and 
their definitions are listed in Table 6. Rejection limits 
for repair or reject are also included in Table 6. These 
rejections limits are established following considerable 
field experience. They apply to all sizes and types of 
cylinders and service conditions. Nevertheless, some 
customer specifications, some types of cylinder or some 
special service conditions can require stringent 
conditions. 


A-4 REJECTED CYLINDERS 


a) All rejected cylinders should be rendered 
unserviceable for their original application, and 


b) It may be possible to produce cylinders for 
different service conditions from rejected 


cylinders. 


Table 6 Manufacturing Defects 
(Clause A-3) 


Conditions for Rejection and/or Actions 


SI No Defect Description Repair/ 
Reject 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 6) 
i) Bulge Visible swelling of the wall All cylinders with such a defect Reject 
ii) Dent (flats) A depression in the wall that has a) When the depth of the dent exceeds 2 percent Reject 


neither penetrated nor removed 
metal (see Fig. 10) (see also 
‘excessive grinding or machining’ 
below). 


ii) Cut, gouge, metallic or 


scale impression 


An impression in the wall where 
metal has been removed or 
redistributed (due basically to the 
introduction of foreign bodies on 
the mandrel or matrix during 
extrusion or drawing operations) 


of the external diameter of the cylinder 

b) When the depth of the dent is greater than 1 
mm and when the diameter of the dent is less 
than 30 times its depth. 
NOTE — On small diameter cylinders these 
general limits may have to be adjusted. 
Consideration of appearance also plays a part in 
the evaluation of dents, especially in the case of 
small cylinders. 


Permit repair 


a) Inside defect : If not superficial with sharp Reject 
notches more than 5 percent of wall thickness Repair 
NOTE — Consideration of appearance and (see A - 2.2) 


localization (in thicker part with lower stresses) 
can be taken into account. 
b) Outside defect : When the depth exceeds 5 


percent of the wall thickness 


17 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


SI No 


(1) 


iv) 


v) 


vi) 


vii) 


viii) 


ix) 


x) 


xi) 


xii) 


xiii) 


xiv) 


xv) 


xvi) 


xvii) 


Defect 


(2) 
Dent containing 


cut or gouge 


Excessive grinding or 
machining 


Rib 


Groove 


Crack 


Neck cracks 


Shoulder folds 
and/or shoulder cracks 


Internal cracks in base 


Orange peel surface 


Internal neck threads 
damaged or out of 
tolerance 


Pitting 
Non-conformity with 


design drawing 


Neck ring not secure 


Arc or torch burns 


Table 6 — (Concluded) 


Description Conditions for Rejection and/or Actions 


(3) 


A depression in the wall which 
contains a cut or gouge (see 
Fig.11) 

Local reduction of wall thickness 
by grinding or machining. 


(4) 
All cylinders with such defects 


a) When the wall thickness is reduced to below 
the minimum drawing thickness; and 

b) When it results in the formation of a dent. 

Inside defect : If height or depth exceeds 5 percent 

of wall thickness or if the length exceeds 10 

percent of the length of the cylinders 


A longitudinal raised surface with 
sharp corners (see Fig. 12) 


A longitudinal notch (see Fig. 13) Outside defect : when the height or depth exceeds 

5 percent of the wall thickness or when the length 

exceeds 5 x the thickness of the cylinders 

a) When not removable within thickness 
tolerance; and 


b) When removable within thickness tolerance 


Split, material separation 


Appear as lines, which run All cylinders with such defects 
vertically down the thread and 
across the thread faces. (They 
should not be confused with tap 
marks or thread machining 
marks.) (see Fig. 14) 

Folding with peaks and troughs 
situated in the internal shoulder 
area, which can propagate into the 
threaded area of the shoulder (see 
Fig. 15) 

Cracks can start from folds in the 
internal shoulder area and 
propagate into the cylindrical 
machined or threaded area of the 
shoulder (see Fig. 16 shows 
exactly where shoulder cracks 
start and how they propagate). 


a) Folds or cracks that are visible as a line of 
oxide running into the threaded portion should 
be removed by a machining operation until the 
lines of oxide are no longer visible. 

After machining, the whole area should be re- 
inspected carefully and the wall thickness 
verified 

b) If folding or lines of oxide have not been 
removed by machining, if cracks are still 
visible or if wall thickness is unsatisfactory; 
and 

c) Folds which extend beyond the machined area 
and are clearly visible as open depressions 
where no oxides have been trapped in the 
metal, should be accepted provided that the 
peaks are smooth and the root of the depression 
is rounded 

a) When not removable within thickness 
tolerance; and 

b) When removable within thickness tolerance. 

If sharp cracks are visible in the orange peel 

surface 


Splits in the metal of the bottom of 
the cylinder in star form 


Orange peel appearance due to 
discontinuous metal flow 


Neck threads damaged, with dents, a) When the design permits it, threads may be 

cuts, burrs or out of tolerance retapped and re-checked by the appropriate 
thread gauge and carefully visually re- 
examined. The appropriate number of effective 
threads shall be guaranteed; and 

b) If not repairable. 

All cylinders with such defects visible after shot 

blasting 

All cylinders presenting such a defect 


Severe surface corrosion 


Neck ring turns under application 
of low torque, or pulls off under 
low axial load (see 6.7.2) 


All cylinders presenting such a defect 


Partial burning of the cylinder 
metal, the addition of weld metal 
or the removal of metal by 
scarfing or cratering 


All cylinders presenting such a defect 


18 


Repair/ 
Reject 
(5) 


Reject 


Reject 
See ‘dent’ above 


Repair if 
possible or 
reject 


Repair if 
possible (see A- 
2.2) 

Reject 

Repair 


Reject 


Repair, if 
possible 
Reject 
Acceptable 


Reject 
Repair 


Acceptable for 
non-aggressive 
gases 

Repair 

Reject 


Reject 


Repair if 
possible or 
reject 


Repair possible 
according to 
approved 
method only 
Reject 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


fe h Ss 


Fic. 10 DENT 


— - s 
zman — 


Fic. 11 DENT CONTAINING CUT OR GOUGE 


WA, 


Fic. 12 Ris 


Fic. 13 GROOVE 


19 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


Key 
1 Neck cracks 
2 Propagated crack in the neck 


Fig. 14 NECK CRACKS 


Key 
1 Folds or cracks 
2 After machining 


Fic. 15 CYLINDER SHOULDER FOLDS OR CRACKS BEFORE AND AFTER MACHININS 


Key 

1 Shoulder cracks 

2 Propagated crack in the shoulder 
3 Folds 


Fic. 16 SHOULDER CRACKS 


20 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 9.3) 
TYPE APPROVAL CERTIFICATE 


This Annex provides an example of a suitable form of a type approval certificate. Other formats also acceptable. 


TYPE APPROVAL CERTIFICATE 


ISSUER: DY WAWA AU a tad liman Koş chants Midst yas op damada ire asal onam dıl alı öğ 
(Authorized Inspection Authority) 


appiying IS Standard 5s elisa adak la ys doe ves od cae midir ila bala şam lella hab yk 


concerning 
SEAMLESS STEEL GAS CYLINDERS 


Approval Nó. Samanı alamı lala Date kada sasi dl 
Type or Cylinder? iel dante epey ea lynn ese chun vende des ae iaar ea RA Aaa alin Gaal ek 
(Description of the family of cylinders (Drawing No.) which has received type approval) 


I es bar, Dm si sth a lida mm, Dye... MM, Gi Kemane şa MM, 


manken mm, E lk ir Vatan ULE, Vi iia 
Matéria and heat treatment? mu AI AA lm pl Da hla en ik elmalar asi WA 
Material and characteristics: Material: .....................R...........................MPa, KR aiilanse MPa 


e 


Manufacturer or agent.» ii iarrt E evi aut di be dele eee se şen iyii 
(Name and address of manufacturer or its agent) 


(Name and address of approving body) 


Dale: a nits 


Placöi siyer ies allam 


(Signature of Inspector) 


21 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 12) 
ACCEPTANCE CERTIFICATE 


This Annex provides an example of a suitable form of an acceptance certificate. Other formats are also acceptable. 


ACCEPTANCE CERTIFICATE 
Acceptance certificateforseamlesssteeleylindersNo............................... 


A consignment of ....................cylinders consisting of ......... test batches have been inspected and tested for 
.............. according to IS 7285 (Part 1). 


(Designation or type ot SA AA even Ya ANN Cees ev abe va bends EE KI ka 
Manufacturers: NOS) 21.4 5140074 zl ela ga na Gİ Oi ağ ale alsam eh oe ee 
Ömer? 5 NOS. Hür klar lela IA makale la İmla Bai VU Sa e le dol az SANS, SMa 
Manufacturer:..................................................ManufacturerorderNo................................. 
Address? reyi nyal kn Baas iallllığlar al seid ease cheered E E AEE  ll pll 
COUNTY: ii na PUA 

Owner/Customer :......................................PurchaseOrderNo................... wa 
AMATO SS ha anar dez alan Same öpme dn özak alak dale dee oe att aaa ğa asma tes sea YANA AA AAA MIE RA eek keki an lede ZINA 


AL e e DAA e e e 


Water capacity V: Nominal”............... Litre Nominallength:......................... mm 
Minimum /”?................. Litre (without cap and without valve) 
Test Pressure Pp? ve ekeni bar Outside diameter D: .................... MM 
Working Pressure ? at 15°C Py: ................ bar Min. wall thickness a: ................. MM 
Maximum FillingCharge”....................... kg Drawing No.: ................ Approved vide 
CCE letter Novi edi 


Material: Manufacturer’s name, Specification, designation and grade: 


C% Si% Mn% P% S% (P +9)% 


Specified analysis”: 


% maximum : 


% minimum : 


Heat treatment: 


Stamp markings: > 


Date Manufacturer 


22 


ACCEPTANCE TESTS 


1. Measurements taken on one representative cylinder of the batch * 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


Test No. 
or Batch No. 


Covering Serial 


Minimum measured 


Thickness (mm) 


or Cylinder No. 


2. Mechanical tests ” 


Wallbase 


Tensile Test Hardness Impact test Bend or 
flattening test 
Test Cast /Yield Tensile Elong- Charpy (V) 180° 
No. No. Stress Strength fation | [eee eee ee eee °C without 
(Rea) (Rm) (A) | |... direction [cracking 
MPa MPa % HB Average |Minimum 
J/cm? (J/cm? 


Minimum Values : 


This is to certify that the cylinders covered by this Acceptance Certificate have passed the hydraulic pressure test 
and all the other tests as required in 10 of IS 7285 (Part 1) and they are in accordance with this Indian Standard. 


Special remarks? AAA ach sonst gezisi E İÇ dvags Bai Lr RAD 


On behalf of : 


Date (Signature of Inspector) 


D If required by customer. 
> Delete as applicable. 
>> To be quoted or drawing to be attached. 


* Need not be filled in if test reports are attached. 


23 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Ashok Leyland Limited, Chennai 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd, Allahabad 


Bhiwadi Cylinders Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


GSPC Gas Co Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 


Inox India Limited, Vadodara 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Ltd, Mumbai/Surat 


LINDE India Ltd, Kolkata 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Ltd, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Research & Development Estt (Engineers), Pune 


SICGIL India Ltd, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 


24 


Representative(s) 


Dr SUDARSHAN KAMAL (Chairman) 
SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


Suri M. Ravi 
Suri S. Arun (Alternate) 


Suri. S. SRIRAM 
SHRI A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Suri P. G. CHOUDHURY (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
SHRI RAJNEESH CHOPRA (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. K. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 
Suri H. D. KHATRI (Alternate) 


Suri K. S. R. PRASAD 


SHRI ALOK K. GUPTA 
Suri P. N. Kanta (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH TIWARI 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 
SHRI ALOK SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA K. GARG 
Suri NIKHILESH K. GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK V. PATWARDHAN 
SHRI DEEPAK V. ACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Suri. S. GOPALALAH (Alternate) 


Suri SUNIL K. Dey 
Suri S. B. BoLmaL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU 
SHRI PRADEEP (Alternate) 


Suri P. KRISHNAN KUTTY 
Dr. A. Krishna (Alternate) 


Suri S. MURALI 
SHRI ARUN NAYAK (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
SHRI K. SUDHAKARAN (Alfernate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MARAGATHAVEL 
SHRI NAUZER DADABHOY (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 
SHRI PANKAJ K. Karn (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
DR ANJANA Deva (Alternate) 


Organization 
Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 
Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Vanaz Engineers Ltd, Pune 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


Representative(s) 
Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
Suri AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


DR S. S. THIPSE 
Suri S. D. RARIKAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. JAN 
Suri P. K. MATHUR (Alternate) 


Suri S. J. VISPUTE 
Suri A. V. KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Suri T. V. Singa, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI CHANDAN GUPTA 
Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


Dissolved Acetylene Cylinders, Generators, Acetylene Pipe Lines and High Pressure 
Gas Cylinders Subcommittee, MED 16:3 


Organization 
LINDE India Limited, Kolkata 
Adani Gas Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Al-Can Exports Private Limited, Distt Thane 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited, Allahabad 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Limited, Mumbai 


Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Limited, Howrah 


Jai Maruti Gas Cylinders Gases Limited, Gwalior 


KVK Corporation, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


Rama Cylinders Private Limited, Mumbai 


Sahuwala High Pressure Cylinder (P) Limited, Visakhapatnam 


25 


Representative(s) 
SHRI VUTUKURU RAMANA (Convener) 


SHRI PEEYUSH TRIPATHI 
SHRI Amit MALIK (Alternate) 


Suri VUAy K. PARIKH 
Suri D. C. Dave (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
Smt. VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Suri P. G. CHOUDHURY (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. G. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
Suri. V Ramaswamy (Alternate I) 
SHRI SUDHIR JAIN (Alternate II) 


SHRI ALOK K. GUPTA 
Suri P. N. Kantu (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH TIWARI 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 


Suri D. K. GARG 
Suri N. K. Gara (Alternate) 


Suri AsHOK K. NIGAM 
Sarı Manu Kumar NIGAM (Alternate) 


SHRI R. CHANDGOTHIA 


SHRI NITIN J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
SHRI K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH 


SHRI SANJAY MANDE 
SHRI Pramod W. Sancwal (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. Gupta 
Suri SRINIVAS Rao (Alternate) 


IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 


Organization Representative(s) 
SICGIL India Limited, Chennai Suri S. MARAGATHAVEL 
Suri NAUZER DADABHOY (Alternate) 
Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (ARAT), New Delhi Suri K. K. GANDHI 


SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR Karn (Alternate) 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune Dr S. S. THIPSE 
Suri M. K. CHOUDHARI (Alternate) 


26 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enguiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (1369). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


AMENDMENT NO. 1 SEPTEMBER 2018 
TO 
IS 7285 (PART 1) : 2018 REFILLABLE SEAMLESS STEEL 
GAS CYLINDERS — SPECIFICATION 


PART 1 NORMALIZED STEEL CYLINDERS 
(Fourth Revision) 


(Page 4, clause 6.3.1, Equation 1 and Equation 2) — Substitute the 
following for the existing: 


P, (1.3 Do + 0.4 DÔ 


f = 100 (Ds — Di) AD 
a > (D,/250) +1 ...(2) 
(MED 16) 


Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


