RAT TAP IS 3251 (Part 1) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


wanes War fain 


UT 1 gt SATU 
( Teel JAGO ) 


Asphalt Paver Finisher 


Part 1 General Requirements 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.220 


© BIS 2021 


anda get SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay ect 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2021 Price Group 3 


Construction Plant and Machinery, Sectional Committee, MED 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 


This standard supersedes IS 3251 : 1965 (Reaffirmed 2017) ‘Specification for Asphalt Paver Finisher: Part 1 
General Requirements’. In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the 
available International Standards. 


This standard was first published in 1965. The latest revision has been taken up to keep pace with the latest 
technological developments and international practices. 


In this revision following major changes have been made: 
a) Operating speeds; and 
b) Marking. 
The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 3251 (Part 1) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


ASPHALT PAVER FINISHER 
PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) lays down the requirements 
regarding materials, construction, capacity and 
performance of asphalt paver finishers. 


2 MATERIALS 


Materials used in the construction of asphalt paver 
finisher and the power unit shall comply with the 
requirements of relevant Indian Standards. 


3 CAPACITY 


3.1 Paver finishers shall be of the following three basic 
sizes: 


a) Narrow gauge, 
b) Light duty, and 
c) Heavy duty. 


3.2 The narrow-gauge paver finisher shall be designed 
and built to lay a mat of material up to 2:4 m wide and 
from 12:5 mm to 100 mm thick and shall be provided 
with a complete set of blanking or other attachments 
so that the width of the mat may be varied between 
the maximum width and a minimum working width of 
1-4 m in increments of not more than 75 mm. 


3.3 The light duty paver finisher shall be designed and 
built to lay a mat of material up to 3-3 m wide and 
from 12:5 mm to 100 mm thick and shall be provided 
with a complete set of blanking or other attachments 
so that the width of the mat may be varied between 
the maximum width and a minimum working width of 
2:2 m in increments of not more than 75 mm. 


3.4 The heavy-duty paver finisher shall be designed 
and built to lay a mat of material up to 4 m wide and 
from 12:5 mm to 200 mm thick and shall be provided 
with a complete set of blanking or other attachments 
so that the width of the mat may be varied between 
the maximum width and a minimum working width of 
2:5 m in increments of not more than 75 mm. 


4 POWER UNIT 


4.1 The paver finisher shall be powered by a petrol or 
diesel engine equipped with appropriate appurtenances, 


such as an efficient air cleaner, a renewable oil filter, 
suitable means for lighting, an auto starter, etc. 


4.2 The rating of the engine for continuous duty, by its 
manufacturer, shall be not less than 25 kilowatts for the 
narrow gauge and light duty paver finishers and not less 
than 37 kilowatts for the heavy-duty paver finishers. 


4.3 The engine shall drive the paver finisher through 
a suitable clutch and an enclosed variable speed 
transmission running in oil. 


5 MOUNTING 


5.1 The paver finisher may be either crawler or wheel 
mounted. Wheels may be equipped with pneumatic or 
solid tyres. 


5.2 If the paver finisher is mounted on crawlers, 
they shall be independently operated to furnish full 
steering control. Crawlers shall be provided with a 
track tensioner/tightener, and all rollers, sprockets, 
and idlers shall be designed with an adequate means 
for lubrication. The shoe width of each crawler 
assembly shall not be less than 75 mm for the 
narrow-gauge paver finisher, 200 mm for the light duty 
paver finisher and 250 mm for the heavy-duty paver 
finisher. The bearing pressure of the crawler assembly 
when the paver finisher is empty shall not be greater 
than 1000 g/cm’. The bearing pressure of the crawler 
assembly under loaded condition shall not be greater 
than 1200 g/cm? for narrow gauge paver finisher, 
1250 g/cm’ for light duty paver finisher and 1 700 g/cm? 
for heavy duty paver finisher. 


5.3 If the paver finisher is mounted on pneumatic 
tyres, the front wheels shall be fitted with automotive 
type steering and the main drive wheels shall be 
controlled through a differential drive. Power operated, 
independent brakes shall be provided for each side. The 
recommended tyre pressures shall be clearly indicated 
on the machine. 


6 PUSHING ROLLERS 


The front end of the main frame of the light and 
heavy duty paver finishers shall be equipped with 
two rollers properly spaced to contact the rear wheels 


IS 3251 (Part 1) : 2021 


of the material feeding truck when feeding premixed 
material into the paver finisher and sufficient traction 
shall be provided by the crawlers or pneumatic tyres 
when working on a firm unyielding base to push up 
a 10 percent grade, a fully loaded truck weighing 
6 800 kg in the case of the light duty paver finisher and 
11 300 kg in the case of the heavy duty paver finisher. 


7 RECEIVING HOPPER AND FEEDING 
CONVEYOR 


7.1 The paver finisher shall be provided with a sheet 
steel hopper to receive material directy from trucks. 
The hopper for the narrow gauge and light duty paver 
finisher shall have a bar type conveyor. Machines 
with one feeder shall provide means for diverting the 
material to either side of the receiving area of the screw 
conveyor. The hopper for the heavy-duty paver finisher 
shall have two bar type conveyors capable of operating 
independently of each other. 


7.1.1 The floor of the hopper shall be constructed of a 
steel plate having a minimum thickness of 6 mm. 


7.1.2 The minimum capacity of the hopper shall be as 
below: 


a) Narrow gauge paver finisher - 2 000 kg 
b) Light duty paver finisher - 3 000 kg 
c) Heavy duty paver finisher - 8 000 kg 


7.1.3 The sides of the hopper of the heavy-duty paver 
finisher shall consist of wings so arranged that each 
hopper wing can be individually raised or lowered by 
a hydraulic ram to a position within the paver’s overall 
width for travel or to avoid accumulation of material in 
the corners of the hopper. 


7.2 The conveyor shall move the premixed material to 
the spreading screws, the volume of material moved 
being controlled by means of conveyor speed or 
adjustable gates. 


8 SPREADING SCREWS 


8.1 The paver finisher shall be provided with two 
spreading screws capable of evenly distributing the 
material delivered by the bar type conveyor over the 
whole or either half of the width of the area to be 
surfaced. One screw shall have a right-hand thread and 
the other a left-hand thread, each moving material from 
the centre to the sides. The screws shall be visible to 
the operator. 


8.2 The auger/screw conveyor shall have removable 
anti-abrasion segments. 


9 COMPACTION 


9.1 The paver finisher shall be equipped with a device 
for obtaining preliminary compaction of the mat laid. 
Compaction may be affected either by means of a 
tamping device ahead of the screed or by vibration 
applied to the screed. 


9.2 Tamper 


If compaction is obtained by means of a tamper, the 
tamper shall operate at the rate of not less than 1 000 
strokes per minute. The wearing parts of the tamper 
shall be of manganese steel or equally wear-resisting 
alloy steel and shall be renewable and adjustable to 
the optimum projection below the screed. The tamping 
action shall not be preceded by any strike off action and 
the tamper shall leave the material in proper condition 
for smoothing and finishing by the screed. 


9.2.1 The tamper may be operated mechanically, 
electrically or hydraulically. 


9.3 Vibrating Screed 


If compaction is obtained by means of a vibrating 
screed, the intensity of vibration shall be capable of 
being controlled through a range having a maximum 
value of at least 3 000 vibrations per minute so that 
the optimum intensity in relation to mat thickness, 
density, working speed and material specification may 
be employed. 


10 SCREED 


10.1 The paver finisher shall be equipped with a fully 
floating, heated screed. The screed shall slide over the 
compacted mat and smooth it out in preparation for 
rolling and shall be adjustable to give a crown to the 
compacted mat. 


10.2 The screed shall be equipped with a satisfactory 
heating system which will enable the screed to be 
uniformly heated before and during the operation of 
the paver finisher. 


10.3 The screed shall be constructed from abrasion 
resisting steel and the wearing parts shall be renewable. 


10.4 The screed and the tamper, if employed, shall 
be so carried and drawn over the material that it will 
maintain a predetermined average thickness which will 
not be affected by sudden or minor changes in the level 
of the base on which the material is being applied. 


10.5 Means shall be provided for raising the screed and 
the tamper if employed, by a power operated hydraulic 
hoist or similar device to a travelling position clear 


of the road surface. Locks or safety chains shall be 
provided for holding the screed in the raised position 
while the paver finisher is being moved from one 
working point to another. 


11 OPERATING SPEEDS 


a) Narrow gauge and light duty paver finishers shall 
have, not less than four operating speeds from 
approximately 2 to 13-5 m/min with a reverse 
speed of not less than 50 m/min. 


b 


wm 


Heavy duty paver finisher shall have, not less 
than seven operating speeds from approximately 
0 to 30 m/min, with a reverse speed or speeds of 
not less than 75 m/min. 


12 CONSTRUCTION 


a) The drives from the engine to the crawlers 
or driving wheels, hopper conveyor, screw 
spreaders, etc., shall be of first quality design in 
accordance with best engineering practice. Gears 
and sprockets shall be machine cut and properly 
hardened. Clutches and brakes shall be of simple 
design, of ample capacity and shall be accessible 
for quick adjustment. 


b 


wm 


The heavy-duty paver finisher shall be provided 
with a complete set of controls on each side of the 
machine so that alternative driving positions are 
available. 


c 


st 


Workmanship — All parts, components, and 
assemblies ofthe paver finisher including castings, 
forgings, moulded parts, stampings, bearings, 
seals, machined surfaces, and welded parts shall 
be clean and free from sand, dirt, fins, pits, sprues, 
scale, flux, and other harmful extraneous material. 
All exposed edges shall be rounded or bevelled. 


13 METHOD OF TRANSPORTING 


Narrow gauge and light duty crawler mounted paver 
finisher shall be equipped with two retracting pneumatic 
tyred wheels to permit converting the paver finisher 
to a two-wheel trailer for quick movement from one 
location to another. A front mounted tow bar shall be 
provided for convenient attachment to a towing truck. 


In the case of paver finishers mounted on pneumatic 
tyres which have travelling speeds of less than 16 km/h, 
means shall be provided for disengaging the drive from 
the engine to the road wheels so that the paver finisher 
may be towed at a moderate speed. A front mounted 
tow bar shall be provided for convenient attachment to 
a towing truck. 


14 PERFORMANCE 


The paver finisher shall lay, compact, and finish a mat 
of asphaltic material of thickness and width as specified 
in 3.2 to 3.4. As a specific performance test, the paver 


IS 3251 (Part 1) : 2021 


shall be tested to lay at its maximum extended width, 
a mat of asphaltic concrete approximately 200 m long 
and 25 mm thick on a base having no depression 
greater than 10 mm when tested under a straight edge 
3 m long placed parallel to the center line of the carriage 
way. The material for the test mat shall be asphaltic 
concrete containing well graded aggregate with 
100 percent passing a 10 mm IS Sieve (square) and a 
bitumen content such that the compacted sample shall 
contain approximately 3 percent of air voids. The mat 
shall be free from tearing and dragging and the surface 
shall be smooth both laterally and longitudinally. The 
resultant surface tested with a straight edge 3 m long 
placed parallel to the centre line of the carriage way 
shall have no depression greater than 5 mm on the 
surface. 


15 MAINTENANCE ACCESSIBILITY 


Ease of Maintenance 


All major assemblies and installed attachments shall 
be accessible for maintenance, repair, and replacement 
without the removal of other major assemblies and 
installed attachments. Covers and plates which must be 
removed for component adjustment, replacement, and 
maintenance shall be equipped with quick-disconnect 
fasteners. 


16 LUBRICATION 


16.1 Means for lubrication shall be provided for all 
bearings, power transmitting gears, sprockets, chains 
and all other moving parts requiring lubrication. Plain 
bearings or their shafts shall have oil or grease grooves. 
All lubricating nipples shall be of similar type and shall 
be readily accessible. Where access for lubrication 
is difficult, bearings shall be such that lubrication is 
required as infrequently as possible or facilities for 
lubrication from a remote position shall be provided. A 
lubrication chart indicating the points to be lubricated 
shall be permanently affixed in a conspicuous place 
on the machine describing the type of lubricant, the 
internal of greasing and the amount to be used. Chains 
shall be enclosed and provided with oil bath or drip 
feed lubrication. 


16.2 Automatic pressure release devices shall be 
provided where pressure lubricating equipment will 
damage grease seals or other parts. 


17 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


17.1 All exposed parts which are subject to high 
operating temperatures or which are energized 
electrically shall be insulated, fully enclosed, or 
guarded. All moving parts which are of such nature or 
so located as to be a hazard to operating or maintenance 
personnel shall be fully enclosed or guarded. 


IS 3251 (Part 1) : 2021 


Protective devices shall not impair the operating 
functions. 


17.2 Effective precautions shall be taken to minimize 
fire hazard. 


18 FINISHING 


All exposed parts of the paver finisher shall be cleaned, 
treated and painted with suitable anti-corrosive 
protective paint conforming to the relevant Indian 
Standards. Electrical equipment, power units and parts 
subjected to high temperature shall be painted with 
special paint suited for the purpose. 


19 MAINTENANCE 
ACCESSORIES 


TOOLS AND 


A strong tool box with lock and key and containing 
necessary tools and accessories for normal maintenance, 
adjustment and lubrication of the paver finisher together 
with instructions and inventory of tools and accessories 
shall be provided. Provisions shall be made for suitably 
affixing the tool box on the paver finisher. 


20 MARKING 


20.1 Instruction Plates 


The paver finisher shall be equipped with instruction 
plates including warnings and cautions, suitably 
located, describing any special or important procedure 
to be followed in operating and servicing the machine. 


20.2 Marking Plate 


The paver finisher shall have an identification plate 
permanently affixed to it with the following particulars 
conspicuously marked on it: 


a) Manufacturer’s name or trade-mark; 
b) Manufacturer’s reference number; 
c) Capacity (see 3); 

d) Type and rating of power unit; and 
e) Year of manufacture. 


20.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS 3251 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 18 


Organization 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 
AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Ammann Apollo India Private Limited, Gujrat 


Atlas Copco India Limited, Pune 

B G Shirke Construction Technology Limited, Pune 

CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

Caterpillar India Private Limited, Chennai 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Chief Quality Assurance Establishment, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 


Directorate General Border Roads, New Delhi 


Escorts Construction Equipment Limited, Faridabad 


IRCON International Limited, New Delhi 

Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 

Jaypee India Limited, Kolkata 

John Deere India Private Limited, Mumbai 

KYB Conmat Private Limited, Sahibabad 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Bengaluru 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


BRIG P. K. SHRIVASTAVA (Chairman) 


SHRI ROHITASH BARUA 
Suri K. K. V. Yasas (Alternate) 


SHRI G. K. CHOUDHARY 
SHRI R. L. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH DIKIT 
SHRI ASHISH PATEL (Alternate D 
SHRI MANAN RAJPURA (Alternate II) 
SHRI PRASAD DAYAL (Alternate III) 


SHRI VIJAY SHARMA 
SHRI YOGESH TULJAPURKAR (Alternate) 
Suri A. D. BHOSALE 
SHRI SUNIL KEDAR (Alternate) 
Dr Suvir SINGH 
SHRI RAJIV GOEL (Alternate) 
SHRI K. REJI JOSE 
SHRI RAMESH VISHWANATHAN (Alternate) 
SHRI ATUL JAIN 
SHRI A. S. GOEL (Alternate) 
COL SURESH K. 
Lr CoL A. K. Maurya (Alternate) 
Sarı P. R. Ray 
CoL MANJUNATH BT (Alternate) 


SHRI FAIZ AHMAD 
SHRI ASHOK CHAUHAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI LAXMI CHAND TYAGI (Alternate II) 


SHRI RANDHIR GUPTA 
SHRI S. K. Ray (Alternate) 


SHRI K. V. KRISHNAMURTHY 


SHRI KUMAR M. MEHTA 
SHRI KUMAR M. MEHTA (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTHIK KALIAPPAN 
SHRI RAJ ANAND (Alternate) 


SHRI NAGESH KUDVA 
SHRI KALPESH SONI (Alternate) 


SHRI K. KESHAVA 
SHRI M. SURESH Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI K. C. SHARMA 
SHRI ROHIT SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 3251 (Part 1) : 2021 


Organization 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Faridabad 


Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private Limited, 
Mumbai 


Universal Construction Machinery and Equipments 
Limited, Pune 


Volvo Construction Equipments India Private 
Limited, Bengaluru 


Wirtgen India Private Limited, Pune 


In Personal Capacity (G-99, Pushkar Enclave, 
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (Flat no. 3052, Prestige 
Shantiniketan, Whitefield main road, Bengaluru) 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 64, Pocket D-10, 
Sector 7, Rohini, New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (D-24, Amar Colony , 
New Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI KAPIL KUKREJA 
SHRI SAURABH BHATNAGAR (Alternate) 


SHRI NEERAJ KAPOOR 


SHRI RANJEET MORE 
SHRI Ravi CHAVAN (Alternate) 


SHRI V. R. SAI PRASAD POLIPALLI 
SHRI K. RAGHURAMAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK BHOIR 
SHRI PARUL ARORA (Alternate) 
SHRI Hans RAJ 
SHRI S. N. MAHAJAN 
SHRI RAJENDRA JEE 


SHRI SATANDER KUMAR 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (MED) 
[ Representing Director General ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI LOKRAJ MEENA 
Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 18 (14884). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


