**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 6609-5 (1972) : Methods of test for commercial blasting 
explosives and accessories, Part V: Safety fuses [CHD 26: 
Explosives and Pyrotechnics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 6609 (Part V). 1972 

f# „ IJ ( Reaffirmed 1998) 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF TEST FOR COMMERCIAL 
BLASTING EXPLOSIVES AND ACCESSORIES 

PART V SAFETY FUSES 



UDC 662452 




© Copyright 1972 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFA& MARC 

NEW DELHr 1 

, R S i*W ^ October V*n 



IS: 6609 ( Part V)- 1972 

} Indian Standard 

METHODS OF TEST FOR COMMERCIAL 
BLASTING EXPLOSIVES AND ACCESSORIES 

PART V SAFETY FUSES 

Explosives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee, GDC 51 

Chairman Representing 

Dr W. D. PatwArdhan Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Members 
Dr A. K. Chatterjeb Indian Detonators Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri V. Y. Tambb ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. S. Cheema The Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, Naya 

Nangal 
Shri Ghinomy Sen ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. P. Ghoudhary National Goal Development Corporation Ltd, 

Ranchi 
Shri R. G. Deolauker Directorate General, Ordnance Factories, 

Calcutta 
Shri K. P. R. Pillai ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. M. Deosthale Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 

Shri P. G. Gupta National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. D. Jindal Indian Mining Federation, Calcutta 

Shri Joginder Singh Directorate General of Technical Development, New 

Delhi 
Shri Jastinder Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. C. Kale Directorate General of Factory Advice Services & 

Labour Institutes, New Delhi 
Shri B. M. Khanna Directorate General, Border Roads, New Delhi 

Shri R. R. Khanna Indian Mining Association, Calcutta 

Shri V. Krishnamurthy Central Mining Research Station ( GSIR ), Dhanbad 

Shri S. G. Kulkarni ( Alternate ) 
Shri Raunao, Ram Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri S. Mitra ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. C. Roy Chief Inspectorate of Explosives, Nagpur 

Shri M. P. Mukherji ( Alternate ) 
Dr J. N. Sen Indian Explosives Ltd, Calcutta 

*Dr S. K. Biswas ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. B. Sengupta The Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. M. Prabhu ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. Das Gupta, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director (Chem) 

Secretary 

Shri S. K. Mathur 

Deputy Director ( Chem ), ISI 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 



IS 1 66(KT( Part V). 1972 

( Continued from page 1 ) V 

Methods of Test Subcommittee, CDC 51 : 2 

Convener Representing 

Dr A. K« Chatterjee Indian Detonators Ltd, Hyderabad 

Members 

Dr C. P. Ramaswamy ( Alternate to 
Dr A. K, Chatterjee } 
Shri G. M. Chopra Indian Explosives Ltd, Gomia 

Shri S. Seshan ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. M. Deosthale Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 

Shri V, Krishnamurthy Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ) , Dhanbad 

Shri S. G. Kulkarni ( Alternate ) 
Shri Raunaq^ Ram Chief Inspectorate of Military Explosives, Poona 

Shri V. Subramanian ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. C. Roy Chief Inspectorate of Explosives, Nagpur 

Shri M. P. Mukherji ( Alternate ) 



IS : 6609 (Part V)- 1972 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF TEST FOR COMMERCIAL 
BLASTING EXPLOSIVES AND ACCESSORIES 

PART V SAFETY FUSES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part V ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 2 August 1972, after the draft finalized by the Explosives and 
Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 

0.2 The explosives industry in India was for a considerable time confined 
only to the ordnance factories. However, during the last decade other 
manufacturing units have come into existence. It was, therefore, consi- 
dered necessary to formulate specifications for various commercial explo- 
sives and explosive accessories produced by the industry. Before laying 
down specifications, it was felt necessary to prepare standard methods of 
test. 

03 Testing of commercial explosives is of utmost importance for ensuring 
their safety during transport and handling, stability in. storage and ade- 
quate life and performance under all conditions of use. Test methods 
included in this standard cover these aspects for all the groups of explosives 
under consideration. 

0.4 Depending upon the country of origin and type of the explosive stores, 
a large number of test methods are in vogue, which though similar in 
nature, differ in minor details of experimental procedure and expression/ 
interpretation of results. 

0.5 It is a difficult task to select a particular method as the best. There- 
fore, choice has been effected in favour of those methods for which sufficient 
experience and experimental data is available and which are mutually 
acceptable to all concerned, namely, the producers, the inspectors and the 
consumers in the field. 

0.6 The test methods cover both general and permitted explosives and 
accessories like detonators, detonating fuses and safety fuses. They do not 
cover all items but include those which are currently used and manufac- 
tured in the country. The methods are covered under different parts of 
this standard: 

Part I Gun powder ( black powder ) 

Part HA Explosives, general 



IS: 6609 (Part V)- 1972 

Part IIB Explosives, permitted 

Part III Detonators, general, and permitted 

Part IV Detonating fuses 

Part V Safety fuses 

0.7 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1*1 This standard ( Part V ) prescribes the methods of test for safety fuses. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2«0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definition shall apply. 

2.1 Safety Fuse — It is an accessory used for blasting which burns at a 
specified rate and does not explode and which does not contain its own 
means of ignition and which is of such construction and strength and con- 
tains a core of gun powder in such quantity that the burning of such fuse 
will not communicate laterally with like fuses when kept in contact. 

3. TEST METHODS 

3.1 Measurement, of Diameter — The diameter shall be measured with 
the help of a micrometer or calipers. The instrument shall be preferably 
a ratchet type or spring loaded. Take one metre length of sample and 
measure the diameter at three different places and at each place in two 
positions right angle to each other. Record the results giving the diameter 
in millimetres. 

3.2 Test for Burning Time — Cut one metre length of the safety fuse 
under test, taking care to discard about 5 cm from the exposed end. 
Ignite at one end and at the same time start the stop-watch. Stop the 
watch simultaneously with the emergence of a spit of flame from the other 
end. Note the time to the nearest second, 

3.3 Water Immersion Test (for Waterproof Fuses) — Take two 
metre length of the fuse from the sample to be tested discarding about 5 cm 
of the exposed ends of the sample. Seal the ends of the fuse using molten 
bitumen so as to prevent ingress of moisture through the ends. Immerse 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ) . 



IS: 6609 (Part V)-1972 

the fuse longitudinally in a tank at a depth of 15 cm of water at 
27 ± 2°C with the ends of the fuse protruding above the water surface, 
for a period of six hours. Remove the fuse after immersion and wipe off 
water from the surface. Take one metre length from the middle discard- 
ing 50 cm from both ends and determine the burning time as prescribed 
in 3.2. Record the results giving the burning time in s/m. In case of 
burning failure record the results accordingly. 

3.4 Accelerated Ageing Test 

3.4.1 For High Temperature — Bend about 1*2 m length of safety fuse 
into a coil of 75 mm diameter on a mandrel. Keep it in a hot cabinet at 
about 60°C for a period of 48 h. At the end of this period, examine it 
visually and determine the burning time as prescribed in 3.2. 

3.4.2 For Low Temperature — Take about 1'2 m length of safety fuse and 
bend it into a coil of 75 mm diameter on a mandrel. Keep it in a deep 
freeze cabinet at — 10°C for 24 h. At the end of this period, unroll the 
fuse and examine for cracks. Determine the burning time of 1 metre 
length as specified in 3.2. 

3.5 Gap Test — - Cut two pieces of the fuse taking care to discard about 
5 cm from the exposed end, one piece 100 mm long and the other 200 mm 
long. Insert both the pieces into a glass tube in which they are push fit 
and which has a hole in the region of gap between the fuse ends. Keep 
the fuse ends at a distance of 2*5 cm. Ignite the longer piece of the fuse 
and observe whether the spit from its enclosed end is able to ignite the 
shorter piece. 

3.6 Lateral Transmission Test — Take a 5 m length of safety fuse, 
wind it on a suitable mandrel of 30 cm diameter in such a way that the 
individual turns of the coil are in close contact side by side, with the fuse 
ends clamped suitably on the mandrel. Light one end of the fuse on the 
mandrel and see whether any lateral transmission is taking place. Note 
the burning time of the coil and record the results giving the burning time 
and whether there was any lateral transmission. 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

RAW MATERIALS FOR EXPLOSIVES 

IS: 

301-1963 Potassium nitrate for explosives and pyrotechnic compositions ( revised ) 

438-1961 Aluminium powder for explosives and pyrotechnic compositions 

708-1970 Potassium chlorate, technical {first revision } 

2012-1961 Red phosphorus 

2307-1962 Magnesium powder for explosives and pyrotechnic compositions 

4396-1967 Barium nitrate for explosives and pyrotechnic compositions 

4668-1967 Ammonium nitrate for explosives 

5670-1970 Lead thiocyanate for explosive and pyrotechnic compositions 

5671-1970 Strontium nitrate for pyrotechnic compositions 

5713-1970 Manganese dioxide for explosive and pyrotechnic compositions 

5731-1970 Antimony sulphide for explosive and pyrotechnic compositions 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

INDIAN STANDARDS 

Dvar 6 600 Indian Standards covering various subjects have been 
issued so far. Of these, the standards belonging to the Chemical Group 
fall under the following categories; 



A ads 

Adhoslvts 

Alcohols &nii allied piyducts 

Alkali* 

Bru&hwar* 

C&rtfmlcwarQ, e nam &l ware and labora- 
tory ncrr:&ia=n 
Chemical hazards and safety 
Chemicals. In org in Ec J mkcetlanPouR ) 

Chemicals, oraai^c (miscellaneous) 

Coal and Coke 

Coal carbonization producii 

Coated fabrics 

CosmflOci and tollat goods 

Drying oil a 

Dye antEfmpdial^ft 

Electroplating ch*mltals 

ExpltJilve and pyrotechnic m tile rials 

Fertilisers 

Fillers, stoppers and puttie* 

Footwear 

C I us a arid glassware 

Industrial gases 

Inks and allied products 

Laboratory glaa9«are thermometeri 

and rolalud apparatus 
Lac and lac products 
Leather* kattiar goo-do- and J eat ha* 

G/flsalnja 



Linters and allied products 
Lubricants and rfliatnd pro duel 5 
Oil pastas 
Oils &. bts, oleaginous swda and 

frulta 
Painters' mats rial a ( miecaFlanBOua ) 
Pap^rAnd its product! 
Paper and pulp board packaging 

material 
Ferlumery mal«rtaj^ ri natural and 

Synthetic 
PatroJaum and petroleum products 

Photographic chemicals 
Pigments and extend &j& 
PJaslics 
Polished 

Prtntlng InM 

Ftajidy mljrec pamtB and enamels 

Rubber anil rubber products 

Soaps and ctti&r mri&c? aetiva 

agents 
Tanning material* and allied 

products 

Thermal Insulation material a 
Thinners and solvents 

Vamish-at and lacquer* 
Water and water t real men l 

Water ba'-ad paints 

Unclassified 



OTHER PUBLICATIONS 



151 Bulletin ( Published Evary Month ) 

Single Copy 

Annual Subscription 
Standards: Monthly Addition* 

SlnfjlR Copy 

Annual Subscription 
Annual Reports I from 194B-49 Onward* ] 
i3l HmnJbouh a 1flT£ 



Rft 






Rs 



ftp 030 

Ra 3-u-n 

a^tos-w 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Nlunah Bhavflii, i Bahadur gnati Zatar Marg P New Daltri 1 

Telephone: 270131 (20 tin**) Tal*ararns : lUlanakaarjttna 

Branch opcei; 

'Sadhna', Nurmohamert Shaikh- Marc Khampur 
F Blocl^ Unity Bldg, Naraslmharaja Sqoar* 
534 Sardar VallabtibhiH Ratal Road 
9 Chowrlnghw Approach 

6-9-201 '2- A (Flflf floor >. Chirac All L*n* 

111/416 B Sarvodaya Nagar 
54 Gwirai Patten Road 

Punl-Hl *e Lielbi frintwi, Ddlii 6, lodift 





TfliaphofiQ 


Anmedahad 1 


2 03S1 


Bangalore 3 


5 7*« 


Bombay f 


85 69 44 


Calcutta 13 


W-06Q2 


Hyderabad 1 


5 34SG 


Kanpur A 


BE 71 


Madras E 


B72 7B 



