Indian hndard

IS : 5121.1969 ( (Reaffirmed ) ) Reaffirmed1990 2005

SAFETY COriE FOR PILING AND OTHER DEEP FOUNDATIONS
( Fourth Reprint OCTOBER 1991)

UDC

624.154:614.8

0

Copyright

1969

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
9

INDIAN
BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI 1 loo02

Gr3

August

1969

IS : 5121- 1969

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR PILING AND OTHER DEEP FOUNDATIONS
Safety in Constructian Sectional Committee, BDC 45
Chairman
SHRI D. N. CHOPRA

Representing
Railway Board, Ministry of Railways

Members
DIRECTOR, CIVIL ENOINEERINC, RAILWAY BOARD ( Altmtc to Shri D. N. Chopra ) Irrigation & Power Department, Government of SHRI ARDAWAN SINGH Himachal Pradesh Gammon India Limited, Bombay SHRI A. PIRET DF, BEHAIN Eastern Regional Electrical Contractors' Association, SHRI P. BOSE Calcutta SHRI A. K. SEN ( Alternate) Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkee DR S. M. K. CHATTY SHRI B. C. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) Hindustan Steel Limited, Ranchi SHRI N. N. CHOPRA SHRI T. K. KOSHI (Alternate) Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI J. DATT SHRI Y. K. MEHTA ( Alternate ) Braithwaite Burn & Jessop Construction CO Ltd, SHRI A. K. DATTA Calcutta Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad SHRI C. M. DEOSTHALE SHRI K. BHATTACHARYA ( Alternate ) Irrigation and Power Department, Maharashtra SHRI V. R. DEUSKAR SHRI G. B. AGASKAR ( Alternate 1 DIRECTOR GENERAL, FACTQRY `Ministry of Labour & Employment ADVICE SERVICE AND LABOUR INSTITUTES Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( P & R ) Directorate General of Health Services SHRI T. DURAI RAJ SHRI C. R. NAUABHUSHANA RAO ( Alternate ) Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHRI H. C. GUPTA Builders' Association of India, Bombay SERI G. R. JOLLY SHRI K. J. SAPRA ( Alternate) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. S. KAMAT Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI V. S. KRISRNASWAMY SHRI V. PRASAD ( Alternate) The Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi SHRI R. L. KUMAR

( Continuedon page 2 )

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STA~NDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI 110002

( Continued from page 1 ) Members Representing Natige;LIBuildingo Construction Corporation, New

SHRI B. B.

LAL

MANAQING DIRECTOR
SRRI K. G. SAL-71 ( Akflatc ) SURI G. C. MATHUR SNRI B. S. BHATTI (Alternate ) SHRI G. X. MIROHANDANI SHRI C. B. PATEL &RI b. C. JRAVERI [ Alternate) SHRI P. SAMPATH

Hindustan Housing Factory, New Delhi National Buildings Organization Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters M. N. Dastur & Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta National Projects Construction Delhi Corporation Ltd, New

SRRI J. NAQARAJ ( Alternate) SUPERINTE~JUINGSURVEYOR OF WORKS I SURVEYOR OF WORKS II, SSW PROP C. G. SWAMINATHAN SERI TILAE RAJ TAKULIA SHRI G. VENICATASUBRAMANIAN DR H. C. VISVF,SVARAYA SHRI R. NAQARAJAN, Director ( Civ Engg )

Central Public Works Department I ( Alternate) Central Road Research Iustitute ( CSIR ), New Delhi Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay Ministry of Law The Institute of Engineers ( India), dalcutta Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member) Secretary

SHRI J. R. MEHTA
Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI

Pand for Safety in Piling and Other Deep Foundations, BDC 45 : P2
Convener SHRI T. K. GROSH Members Simplex Concrete Piles ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI R. X. Dns GWPTA McKenzies Limited, Bombay SHRI c. M. SHAE &RI V. B. MATRUR ( Alternate ) The Cementation Co Ltd, Bombay

2

IS : 5121- 1969

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR PILING AND OTHER DEEP FOUNrjATIONS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 3b May 1969, after the draft finalized by the,Safety in Construction Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Pile driving and well sinking are specialized jobs involving a lot of hazards which sometimes lead to accidents. It is necessary that certain safety rules are laid down for every phase of work involved and that these are meticulously followed by each member of the crew working on the jobs, not only for his own safety but also for the safety of his fellow workers and onlookers. This standard has, therefore, been formulated to lay down safety requirements for pile driving and for preparing deep foundations including well sinking. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 0.4 This standard construction. is one of a series of Indian Standards eon safety in

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shail be rounded off in accordance' with IS: 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. I. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down the safety requirements for piling and other deep foundations as stated below: a) Safety measures while working with a piling rig, and b) Safety measures while preparing other deep foundations.
*Rules' for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

3

IS : 5121- 1969 2. GENERAL 2.1 Safety ProgrammeAll operations shall be carried out under the immediate charge of a properly qualified and competent foreman. The foreman shall also be responsible for the safety arrangements of the work. 22 Fencing shall be provided, wherever necessary, around the working area or watchmen provided to prevent onlookers from tresspassing into the construction sites. For work during the night lighting of at least 100 lux intensity shall be provided at the work site. 2.3 The working area shall be investigated to ascertain the presence of any buried~obstruction and actual position of all service lines passing through the work site shall be known before the work commences. Particular attention shall be given in case live electrical cables pass underground, which may interfere within the depth of foundation. 2.4 The safety provisions shall be brought to the notice of all concerned and matters needing special attention shall be displayed at a prominent place at the work spot. 2.5 All necessary safety equipment like safety belts and safety helmets and safety shoes, as considered suitable, shall be kept available for the use of ~persons employed on the site and maintained in condition suitable for immediate use. 2.6 A first-aid kit shall be maintained at the site near the place of work, to comply with the requirements and provisions for the work. 2.7 Those engaged in mixing and stacking of cement bags or any Dther material injurious to human body shall be provided with protective wear suitable for the purpose. Welders engaged in the work of welding shall use eye sight shields. 2.8 Every crane driver or hoisting appliance operator shall be competent to the satisfaction of the engineer-in-charge and no person under the age of 21 years should be in-charge of any hoisting machine including any scaffolding winch, or give signals to operator. 3. PILING RIG 3.1 There are numerous types of piling rigs in piling work, depending on the need for the site conditions. While utilizing specialized rigs the instructions issued by the suppliers shall be kept in view. 3.1.1 Pile drivers shall not be erected in dangerous proximity to electric con'ductors. 3.1.2 If two pile drivers are erected at one place these shall be separated by a-distance at least equal to the longest leg in either rig. 4

IS : 5121-1969 3.2 The frame of any rig shall be structurally safe for all anticipated dead, live or wind loads. Whenever there is any doubt about the strucmrd strength, suitable test shall be Carrie out by the foreman and the results No pile-drivin 8 equipment shall be taken into use of the test recorded. until it has been inspected and found to be safe. 3.3 Pile drivers shall be firmly supported on heavy timber sills, concrete beds or other secure foundation. If necessary to prevent danger, pile drivers shall be adequately guyed. 3.3.1 When the rig is not in use, extra precautionary measures for stability, such as securing them with minimum four guys, shall be adopted to prevent any accidents due to wind, storm, gales, and earthquake., fiidtrcess . to working platforms and the top pulley shall be provided by Working platforms shall be protected against the weather.

3.4.1 In tall driven piling rigs or rigs of similar nature where a ladder is necessary for regular use, the ladder shall be securely fastened and extended for the full height of the rig. The ladder shall also be maintained in good condition at all times. 3.5 Exposed gears, fly wheels, etc, shall be fully enclosed. boilers, hoisting drums and brakes shall be kept in good condition and sheltered from weather, wherever possible. 3.6 Pile driving equipment in use shall be inspected by a competent engineer at regular intervals not exceeding three months. Also a register shall be maintained at the site of work for recording the results of such inspections. Pile lines and pulley blocks shall be inspected by the foreman before the beginning of each shift. for any ~excess wear or any other defect. 3.6.1 Defective parts of pile drivers, such as sheaves, mechanism slings and hose shall be repaired by only competent person and duly inspected by foreman-in-charge of the rig and the results recorded in the register. 3.6.2 No steam or air equipment shall be repaired while it is in operation or under pressure. 3.6.3 Hoisting ropes on pile drivers shall be made of galvanized steel.
l

3.7 All bolts and nuts which are likely to be loosened due to vibration during pile driving shall be checked regularly and tightened. 3.8 Steam and air lines shall be controlled by easily accessible shut-off valves, These lines shall.consist of armoured hose or its equivalent. The hose of steam and air hammers shall be securely lashed to the hammer so , as' to prevent it from whipping if a connection breaks. Couplings of sections of hose shall be. additionally secured by ropes or chains. 5

Is; 5121- 1969 3.9 When not in use the hammer shall be in dropped position and shall be held in place by a cleat, timber or any other suitable means. 3.10 For every hoisting. machine and for .every chain ring hook, shackie, swivel and pulley block used in hoisting or as means of suspension, the safe In case of doubt actual testing shall working loads shall be ascertained. be carried out and the working load shall be taken as half of the tested load. Every hoisting machine, and all gears referred to above shall be plainly marked with the safe working load. In case of a hoisting machine having a variable safe working load, each safe working load together with the conditions under which it is applicable shall be clearly indicated. No part of any machine or any gear shall be loaded beyond the safe working load exc5ept for the purpose of testing. 3.11 Motor gearing, transmission, electrical wiring and other dangerous parts of hoisting appliances should be provided with efficient safe guards. Hoisting appliances shall be provided with such. means as will reduce, to the minimum, the risk of accidental descent of the load and adequate precautions shall be taken to reduce to the minimum, the risk of any part of suspended load becoming accidentally displaced. When workers are em, loyed on -electrical installations which are already energised, insulating mats and wearing p$parel, such as gloves, etc, as may be necessary, shall be provided. Sheaves on pile drivers shall be guarded so that workers may not be drawn into them. 3.11;1 When loads have to be inclined: counter-balanced; and a) they shall be adequat-ly

b) the tilting device shall be secured against slipping. 3.12 Adequate precautions shall be taken to prevent a pile driver from overturning if a wheel breaks. 3.13 Adequate precautions shall be taken by providing stirrups or by other effective means, to prevent the rope from coming out of the top pulley or wheel. 3.14 Adequate precautions missing the pile. shall be taken to prevent (he hammer t?om

~3.15 If necessary to prevent danger, long piles and heavy sheet piling should be secured against falling. 3.16 Wherever steam boilers are used, the safety regulations of boiler .shall be strictly followed and safety valves shall be adjusted to 0.7 kg/cm' in excess of working pressure accurately. 3.17 Where electricity is usedlas power for piling rig, only armoured cable conforming to the relevant Indian Standard shall be used and the cable shall be thoroughly waterproofed.

ls:5121-1969 4. OPERATION OF EQUIPMENT

4.1 Workers employed in the vicinity of pile drivers shall wear .helmets conforming to IS: 29251964*. 4.2 Piles&all be prepared at a distance at least equal to twice the length of the longest pile from the pile driver. 4.3 Piles being hoisted in the rig should be so slung that they do not have to be swung round, and may not inadvertently, swing or whip round. A hand rope shall be fastened to a pile that is being hoisted to control its While a pile is being guided into position in the leads, movement. workers shall not put their hands or arms`xbetween the pile and the inside guide or on top of the pile, but shall use a rope for guiding. 4.4 While a pile is being hoisted all workers not actually operation shall keep at a distance which ensures safety. engaged in the

4.5 Before a wood pile is hoisted in+ 9position it shall be provided with an iron ring or cap over the driving end to prevent brooming. 4.6 When creosoted wood piles are being driven, adequate precautions shall be taken, such as the provision of personal protective equipment and barrier creams to prevent workers receiving eye or skin injuries from splashes of creosote. 4.7 When piles are driven at an inclination to the vertical, prevent danger, these should rest in a guide. if necessary to

4.8 No steam or air line shall be blown down until all workers are at a safe ~distance. 5. FLGATING PILE DRIVERS

5.1 When pile-drivers are working over water a suitable boat shall be kept readily available at all times. All members of floating pile-driver crews shall be trained to handle boats and shall also know swimming. 5.2 Floating pile drivers shall be provided with a whistle, siren, horn or other effective signalling equipment. 5.3 Floating equipment. pile drivers shall be provided with adequate fire fighting

5.4 The weight of machinery on a floating pile driver shall be so distributed that the deck of the installation is horizontal Further, it shall be ensured that the floating craft is stable and safe under all working conditions. *Specification for industrialsafetyhelmets. 7

ISt5121-1969 5.3 Steel pile-driver hulls shall be divided into watertight compartments, and the watertight compartments should be provided with siphons for the removal of water seepage. 5.6 Deck hatches shall have firmly fastened covers that fit flush with the deck. Open hatches shall be adequately fenced or guarded. 5.7 Fuel tanks below deck shall be vented to the outside and vents shall be Fcr each fuel tank below deck there shall provided with flame arrestors. be an emergency shut-off valve on deck. 5.8 Lighting fixtures below deck shall be explosion proof and flame proof. 5.9 Sufficient sheaves shall be provided on deck to enable the pile driver to be safely manoeuvred in any direction and safely secured in position. 5.10 The operator's operations. 6. SHEET PILING 6.1 If necessary to prevent danger from wind or other sources, a hand rope shall be used to control the movement of steel sheet sections that are being transported. 6.2 Workers who have to sit on a steel sheet section to interlock sheets shall be provided with stirrups or other devices to afford them a safe seat. Workers shall not stand or sit on sheet piling while it is being released from the slings, lowered or moved into position. 6.3 Workers handling sheets should wear gloves. 6.4 If necessary to prevent danger from displacement by the current, steel sheet sections shall be braced until they are firmly in position. If necessary to prevent danger from undercutting of the cofferdam by the current a substantial berm shall be installed upstream. 6.5 While it is being weighted with stones, sheet piling should be securely moored. 6.6 Adequate pumping facilities shall be available at cofferdams to keep them clear of water. Also adequate means of escape, such as. ladders and boats shall be provided at cofferdams for the protection of workers in case of flooding. 6.7 Adequate supplies of life-saving workers employed on cofferdams. equipment shall be provided for cabin shall afford an unrestricted view of the

6.8 When sheet sections are being removed, controlled by cables or other effective means. 8

their movements

shall be

IS : 5121.1969 7. OTHER MEASURES WHILE GASSION PILING RIG WORKING WITH BORED OR

7.1 All holes which are left unattended shall be adequately and securely covered or shall have an effective barrier placed as close to the edge as is practicable. 7.2 Before any person enters a hole, the ground surface next to the hole shall be cleaned and all loose soil, materials, loose tools, ropes, etc, removed. 7.3 A person shall not remain in a hole for more than one hour at a time and this time shall be suitably reduced depending on circumstances. 7.4 Persons entering holes shall be lowered or raised in suitable skips or cages using properly constructed cranes and winches, shear legs or other devices suitable for the purpose. 7.5 In water bearing and unstable overburdens or where the sides of the hole are likely to collapse, lining tubes shall be used and those shall be penetrated wherever possible sufficiently into any impermeable stratum or rock to secure seal against ingress of ground water into the unlined hole below. 7.6 When working at night, flood lighting shall be provided for the working area. Hand lamps used for illuminating the bottom of the hole shall be of flameproof construction of not more than 24 volt rating, when men are working in the hole. 7.7 Detector lamp capable of indicating the presence of dangerous quantities of flammable gases and vapours or a serious oxygen deficiency or an excess of carbon-di-oxide shall be a part of the working gear, where poisonous gases may be present in the subsoil. 7.8 Before first lowering men into a borehole suitable steps shall be taken to investigate the likely presence of poisonous gas in the subsoil of the site. 8. ADDITIONAL MEASURES FOR WELL FOUNDATION

8.1 Well sinking' work shall be under the charge of engineers or supervisors who have adequate experience in the execution of such jobs and at least one such engineer/supervisor shall be present at site whenever work is in progress. 8.2 Detailed information about the subsoil up to adequate depth below the proposed bottom of well foundations shall be collected so that the wells, including their steinings and cutting edges are designed suiting the conditions at site. This information will also assist in following safe well sinking 9

IS : 5121.1969
procedures and in taking rance of sudden dangers, peripherial area. precautionary measures in time heavy sand blow and consequent against appeasubsidence of

8.3 Prior geological study of terrain is recommended, particularly for rocky area and bed with boulder studed soil to enable determination of slope of Based on the information collected rock, presence of fissures, etc, if any. precautionary measures against sudden tilt and shift in well shall be taken for the safety of workmen. 8.3.1 If the study reveals presence of methane gas, approved methanometer shall be used to detect the presence of such gas. type of

8.3.2 In case methane or any other hazardous gas is detected it shall be immediately reported to the employer and further work in regard to sinking of well shall be stopped. 8.3.3 For further progressing of work at such sites all precautions necessary for working in gaseous mines shall be satisfied all the time in consultation with an expert competent to work in such mines. 8.4 Whenever well sinking is to be carried out in compressed requirements laid down in IS : 4138-1967* shall be followed. air, safety

8.5 Whenever blasting is resorted to, it,shall be done under water through electric detonators by remote control arrangements and all the detonators shall be connected in series to prevent the possibility of any misfire. 8.6 Plant and equipment placed around a well for sinking shall be placed sufficiently far from the well to avoid chances of accident due to subsidence of ground on account of heavy sand blow or other causes. 8.7 If a blow is expected when the diver is working, suitable provisions shall be kept ready for him to come up uickly in the event of a blow. It is suggested that an open grab is lowere 3 to the bottom of excavations and the winches/crane engine kept running and ready for hoisting at any time. 8.8 An an -receiver with safety valve shall be attached to the compressor used for diving work. The air receiver shall be able to supply air for at least half an hour working. 8.9 The signalman working with a diver shall be his own team mate as far as possible, and in any case there shall be complete understanding between the two about the signals code to be used. 8.10 In deep water say over 30 m divers shall not work for more than ha!f an hour at a time. 8.11 The divers shall give frequent
code for working in compressed

signals about their safety.
air.

*Safety

LO

8.12 All diving equipment

shall be 6equently

checked.

8.13 When a well is loaded with heavy kentledge and a diver has to go down for inspection it shall be only for a short duration say 10 to 15 minutes. 8.14 Divers carrying out excavation work using jack hammers, etc, shall not go under the cutting edge of the well curb. When reached that sudden downward movement -of the well may be the divers shall not stay- under the steining thickness but will be with long enough tools for doing any work at this stage. 9. PROTECTION UNDERGROUND TO NRIGHROURING 9FRVICR3 !$TRUGTUR.B pickaxes, a stage is expected, provided AND

9.1 In driven piles vibration is set up which may cause damage to adjoining structures or service lines depending on the nature of soil condition and the construction standard of such structures and service lines. Possible extent of all such damages shall be ascertained in advance and operation and mode of driving shall be planned with appropriate measures to ensure safety. 9.2 Wherever in the vicinity of a site where bored or driven piling works are to be carried out there are old structures which are likely to be damaged, felkalea shall be fixed on such structures to watch their behaviour and thmely precautions taken against any undesirable effect. 9.3 In case of bored or cassion piles, measures shall be taken to ensure ,that there is no appreciable movement of soil mass into the bxehole which may cause subsidence to any existing foundation in the close proximity. In wet holes where such possibilities are likely to be there the same shall be minimized by approved technique and the operation should be planned.

11

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Menak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telef.?t%nes: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Regipnal Offices: Telephone Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. 331 01 31 NEW DELHI 110002 331 1375 I *Eastern : l/l 4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, 36 24 99 Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector'35-C, 21843 CHANDIGARH l-60036 I 3 16 41 41 24 42 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MA_DRAS 600113 t: ;: :t TWestern : Manakalaya. E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093 Branch Offices: `Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 2 63 48 AHMADABAD 380001 I 2 63 49 SPeenya Industrial Area 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road 38 49 55 BANGALORE 560058 38 49 56 I Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, -Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 667 16 BHOPAL 462003 5 36 27 Plot No. 82183. Lewis Road. BHUBANESHWAR 751002 531'5. Ward' No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 3 31 77 GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), 23 1083 HYDERABAD 500001 63471 R14 Yudhister Marg. C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 ( 6 98 32 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 { fl Patliputra Industrial Estate. PATNA 800013 T.C. No. 14/l 421. Urii Jersity P.O.. Palayam TRIVANDRUM 695035 inspection Offices ( With Sale Point ):Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square. NAGPUR 440010 fnstitution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1'332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 "SP3; 6 23 05 IS 21 04 16 21 17 2~51 71 5 24 35

*Saks Office in Calcutta is at SChowringhea Approach, P. 0. Princap 27 68 00 Strrot. Calcutta 700072 tSalar Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambars, Grant Road, 89 6528 Bombay 400007 $Saler Office in Bangalore is at Unity Building. Narasimharaja Square, 22 36 71 Bangalore 560002 Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

