hdiun

Standard

IS 12643 : 1989 (Reaffirmed 2000)

CORROSION PROTECTION OF STEEL BY FIBREGLASS REINFORCED POLYESTER LINING-CODE OF PRACTICE meits W?g;

UDC

669.14 : 620.197'6 : 678~674~067*5*027~24

@ BIS 1989

BUREAU
MANAK October 1989

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MA&G

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group

3

Corrosion

Protection

Sectional

Committee,

SMDC

29

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau the draft finalized by the Corrosion Protection Structural and Metals Division Council. of Indian Sectional Standards on 23 February 1989, after Committee had been approved by the

The use of linings of polymeric materials as a protection against corrosion has been the normal industrial practice for nearly half a century but the use of monolithic reinforced plastic lining has The primary advantage is that the monolithic several distinct advantages over any other coating. liner is structurally sound for providing reasonable insurance against leakage through holidays developing due to external corrosion. A standard specification for fibreglass used for reinforcement assistance is under preparation.

In the preparation

of this standard,

has been derived

from the following:

a) BS : CP 3003 : Part 5 : 1966 Code of practice for epoxy phenolic linings. British Standards Institution, United Kingdom; and Specification for contact moulded glass fibre reinforced thermoset resin b) ASTM D-4097-82 American Society for Testing and Materials, USA. chemical resistant tanks.

IS 12643: -1989

Indian Standard

CORROSION PROTECTION OF STEEL BY FIBREGLASS REINFORCED POLYESTER LINING-CODE OF PRACTICE
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the code of practice for corrosion protection of steel by the use of fibreglass reinforced unsaturated polyester lining.

3.2 Glassfibre Reinforced Polyester Linings

Unsaturated

1.2 The selection application, testing of the lining are also standard. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following Indian adjuncts to this standard:
IS No. IS

inspection covered by

and this

Linings based on unsaturated polyester resins which are generally a mixture of condensation products of an unsaturated dibasic acid and a glycol dissolved in a cross-linking monomer, suitably reinforced with glassfibre in the form of non-woven mat or lvoven fabric. 4 MATERIALS

Standards
Title

are necessary

1323 : 1982:

Code ol` practice weldin lene mild work in reuisiolz ) Code for unfired Glossary corrosion
reaision )

for oxy-acetyfor structural steel ( deco& pressure vessels

4.0 The selection of suitable materials, for the lining and thickness of 1inir.g required including its method of application, has to be based on the ( information supplied by the user, Therefore, it is necessary that full details and applications are submitted to the contractor ~to enable him to choose the suitable lining. Annex A gives the information to be supplied by the user to the manufacturer. 4.1 Purpose
4.1.1 FRP linings are used for protecting equipment and steel structure against chemical attack. They are also used for the prevention of contamination of various products that may arise due to reaction of chemical with metallic equipment/vessel.

IS IS

2825 : 1969 3531 : 1983

of

terms relating to of metals (first

IS

5746 ( Part

1 ):1987 Specification for woven glass fibre fabrics for plastic iaminates for aerospace purposes: Part 1 Loom-state fabrics ( srcond wisiot~ ) Specification for unsaturated polyester resin systems for low fibre reinforced pressure plastics Recommendations for metal of carbon and arc welding carbon manganese steels Specification for woven roving fabrics of `E' Class fibre Specification for glass fibre chopped strand mat for the polyester reinforcement of resin systems

IS

6746 : 1972

IS

95'15 ' 1980 I *

4.1.2 Unless the 1inin.g is known from previous experience to be suitable, test panels should -be exposed to conditions similar to those of service for not less than three u~onths or preferably longer. `These panels should be examined carefully for any signs of failure before instructions for application of the lining are given. 4.2 Grades
and Properties

IS L 11',73 . . 1985 ~ IS 11551 : 1986

Any FRP material a) Glassfibre 1)) Resin 4.2.1
The Glassjbre

is essentially reinforcement,

conlposed and

of:

system.
Reinforcement

3. TERMINOLOGY 3.1 For the purpose of this standard, apart from definitions given in IS 3531 : 1983 the following definition shall apply. 1

most common glassfibre reinforcement used in FRP linings is in the form of a chopped strand mat ( CSM ) (see IS 11551 : 1986 ) commonly available with a mass of 300,450 and 600 g/m2. CSM forms the main body of the lining and progresdve layers are used to build up to the required thickness.

IS 12643 : 3989

Alternatively, this part of the lining could also be built up using woven glassfibre fabric [ see IS 574ti ( Part 1 ):I987 ] available in various masses, namely, 200, 360 and 610 g/m2 or by combining both CSM and woven rovmgs ( see IS 11273 : 1985 ), The composition of glaasfibre used for the reinforcement will be a low alkali `IX' type glass. 4.2.2.2 The surface of the lining is reinforced with a chemical resistant glass in the form of a `surf'aciug veil' ( also called surfacing mat ) and is capable of absorbing between 7 and 10 times-its own weight of resin. 4.2.2
Unsaturated Polyester Resin

4.2.1.1

relatively inert applications. isophthalic polyesters are adequate. However, the chemical resistant properties of these resins decline rapidly at elevated temperatures. chemical environments 4.2.7.2 For aggressive such as, strong acids and alkalies, at elevated temperatures, a rigid bisphenol polyester tiers the broadest corrosion resistance and temperature limits. 4.2.8 The resin system used must be tested for viscosity, gel time and hardness prior to actual use. 4.2.9 The user or specifier shall obtain full information nn chemical resistance of the resin prior to specifying its use for a particular condition. When requesting resin recommendation for corrosion resistant FRP -equipment, users or specifiers shall supply the data given in Annex A. The resin manufacturer shall also furnish the ~data listed in Annex B for the benefit of the user. 4.3 Effect of Temperature on these linings varies with each resin. It also depends on the chemical in use and on its concentration. It must be noted that due to the differential in the coefficient of thermal expansion between FRP and the base material, higher temperature becomes a limiting factor. Therefore, FRP linings may be used at temperatures up to 80X, quite often this may be lowered due to the chemicals in use or other conditions prevalent. 4.3.2 thick In all cases, it is assumed that a sufficiently and pin hole free lining has been applied.
4.3.1 The effect of temperature

The resin used shall be of Type 2 of IS 6746 : 1972. The resin shall meet the chemical resistance requirements as agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser when tested in ~the provisions of 4.3 of accordance with IS 6746 : 1972. 4.2.3 The resin, containing no fillers except a thixotropic agent that cloes not interfere with visual inspection of laminate quality, or with required corrosion resistance of the laminate, may be added for viscosity control.
NOTE - The addition of thixotropic agent will reduce the resistance of many resin systems to certain corrosive chemical environments.

4.2.4 Resin shall contain no pigments, dyes, or colorants except as agreed upon between the manufacturer and the purchaser.
NOTE - The addition of pigment:, dyes or colorants may interfere with visual inspectIon of the laminate quality.

4.2.5

Ultraviolet absorbers may be added for improved weather resistance if agreed upon between the manufacturer and ~the purchaser. 4.2.6 Resin environments a) Rigid, b) Flexible. 4.2.6.1 Flexible resins give improved reverse impact resistance on equipment where jarring or These resins vibration is likely to take place. also offer good resistance to thermal shock which is extremely important when extremes of temperatures are encountered. 4.2.7 The following basic grades of unsaturated polyester resin family are recommended: a) Based on isophthalic, b) Based on bisphenol-A.
4.2.7.1 Between the two, isopolyesters have a lower resistance to chemical attack and tempeHowever, they are entirely suitable rature. for a wide range of acids, mild alkalies, salts and For mild, other commercially used chemicals.

5 DESIGN
5.1 General 5.1.1 Il~terior Surface and Fittings

capable or withstanding corrosive can be divided into two types: and

The surfaces which -are to be covered with -FRP lining shall be easily accessible and free from pitting or other physical imperfections. Interior fittings shall be designed to allow safe and easy movement of the operator. In case of FRP linings of vessels, manhole shall be provided in each section of the vessel being lined. 5.1.2
Access to Vessel and Ventilation

and

The design of all vessels shall allow ~for adequate access and venting of fumes during the preparation of the surface and the application of the lining. 5.1.3
Flanges and Outlets

The lining shall be taken over all flanged faces/ outlets to prevent the ingress of liquids/fluids behind the linings. 2

IS 12643 : 1989 5.1.4 Surface Contents

Sharp changes of contour in the surfaces to be Corners in the surface covered shall be avoided. to be covered should be finished to a suitable radius which should be as large as possible but not less than 8 mm. 5.2 Fabricated
5.2.1 Fubrication Mild ad Steel Vessels

abrasive and blast products. is particularly suitable.

Vacuum

cleaning'

7.1.3 A primer coat of resin shall be applied within eight hours of sand blasting or sooner if humid conditions prevail. The primer coat shall of approximately be applied to a thickness A typical primer formulation is 0.125 mm. 25 parts styrene in 100 parts of resin. 7.1.4 Putty Application After the primer coat is applied, all rivets, welded lap seams and the angles where the tank bottom and the walls meet shall be filled with putty to provide smooth rounded contour. Any obvious holes and pits shall be also filled with putty. Typical putty is a mix of 100 parts of gelcoat resin and 50 to 100 parts of the silica flour. 7.2 Preparation
7.2.1 The concrete of Concrete Surface

T'tvting

Mild steel vessels shall be fabricated and tested in accordance with recognized standards of good design and practice. Only welded or seamless Rivetted construcconstruction shall be used. tions sha!l not be usetl. 5.2.2 Welding shall be in accordance with the requirements of either IS 9595 : 1980, IS 1323 : 1982 or IS 2025 : 1969. Lap joints shall be avoided. The weld shall be ground smooth and flush on the side to be covered. 6 DESIGN
6.1 Selection OF LININGS of Material

The selection of the resin and the FRP lining shall be based on the information supplied by Full details of the applications of the the user. vessel involved must be provided, as given in Annex A. 6.2 Quality
of Lining

When the lining is to be applied by a contractor, the lining materials to be used shall be agreed The contractor between him and the purchaser. shall guarantee that the lining will satisfy the chemical and physical conditions met with the The contractor shall supply required services. materials or panels to samples with the lining which this has been applied for future reference in case of disputes. He shall not change the composition in any way except by agreement with the purchaser. 6.3 Thickness
of Lining

substrate must be clean and dry, rough and at least 30 days old. ?`he concrete surface shall be sandblasted until it is cleaned of oily spots and `flaky' concrete, and is uniformly roughened. Residue and by-product from sandblasting shall be removed, preferably by vacuum cleaning. In small tanks or other places where sandblasting is not practicable, the surface shall be etched with dilute hydrochloric acid. Application of the acid shall be done with a stiff broom, scrubbing the surface to remove flaky material. When the acid is applied, bubbling should take place indicating a reaction; if shall be sandblasted again. not, the surface After etching with acid, the concrete shall be washed with a dilute ammonia solution and flushed with clean water. The concrete surface shall be thoroughly dried before application of the primer coat of resin. It is very necessary that the concrete surface is completely dry to obiain proper adhesion of lining. 7.2.2 Priming After etching or sandblasting, the concrete becomes porous and shall be sealed with a primer coat approxmiately 0,125 mm thick. The primer coat, shall be applied the same day preferably within eight hours after sandblasting is completed. 7.2.3
Putty Applicatioll

For all conditions, the minimum thickness of shall be 3. mm. Higher thickness FRP lining shall be used where necessitated by the conditions of temperature, chemical attack or vessel size require this. 7 METHOD
OF LINING

The procedure outlined shall be followed. 8 APPLICATlON
8.1 The

in 7.1.4 for steel surfaces

7.1 Steel Vessels/Structures 7.1.1 Remove

foreign suitable

deposits of oil, grease and other matter by washing \vith solvent or other cleaner.

OF LAMINATE

7.1.2 Sandblast the cleaned surface until it is and slighly uniformly gray-white in colour roughened ( white metal blast ). The surface shall be free of visible mill scale, rust, corrosion oxides, paint QT other contamination. After blasting, clean the tank thoroughly to remove all traces of 3

time required for the primer coat to harden depends on the ambient temperature of the working area and the quantity of accelerator, catalyst and the promoter used, and is normally 40 minutes or less at 30�C. 8.2 After laminated technique the resin is cured, the area can lvith FRP by the hand lay outlined in 8.3. be up

IS 126431: 1989 8.3 Procedure

The glass mat is cut to convenient sizes for handling, making allowance for overlaps of 50 mm at seams. Resin mixture is applied to the area of the substrate to be covered first. The cut mat is positioned on the resin and worked with a roller with simultaneous strippling with a paint brush until the mat is completely wetted out and no resin starved areas or air bubbles are present. Additional resin is applied to the layup where needed and between the layers as they When the entire tank surface has are built up. been covered with one complete layer of glass, further layers are applied using the same technique until the lamination is complete.
NOTES
1 All butted.

overlays, may 3 to 10 units. 9.1.3

lower

the

hardness

reading

by

Acetone Sensitivity

Barcol hardness tests cannot be expected to detect air--inhibited surfaces in all cases. Therefore, it is recommended that the acetone sensitivity test may also be employed where appropriate. This test involves application of a small amount of acetone on the resin surface. `The wetted surface is lightly rubbed with a finger `until the acetone has evaporated. If the surface softens or becomes tacky, the resin has not properly cured. 9.2 Visual
Inspection

reinforcing

media

should

be

lapped

and

not and the

Linings shall be inspected visually to ensure freedom from poorly set out glass entrapped air and exposed fibres. 9.2.1 `Tests for Continuity of Lining

2 Mat should be lapped minimum of 25 mm woven roving on cloth a minimum of 50 mm. 3 The overlaps should be YRP lining not superimposed. staggered throughout

8.3.1 For maximum corrosion resistance, the glass concentration in the laminate shall be in the range of 25 to 30 percent.

The inspection for visual defects shall be carried out over the entire surface in sufficient light. The entire surface shall be free of cracks, traces of bubbles, lack of adhesion, hollow spaces, etc. 9.3 Holiday
Test or Spark Test

8.3.2

To@ Coating

The lining shall be finished with a fibreglass surfacing mat for a resin rich surface, minimum of 0.3 mm thick for maximum corrosion resistance. The resin used for this top coat shall contain 0.6 percent paraffin wax to provide for a tack free surface. 8.3.3 Post Curing

After the lining job is completed, it shall be allowed to post cure at room temperature ( 3O"C, A4in ) for a minimum period of three weeks. This would ensure that the lining attains the maximum chemical resistance and is relieved of all internal stresses that might have developed during the lamination. Accelerated curing may be possible at higher temperature as recommended by the manufacturer. 9 ACCEPTANCE
TESTS. of Cure

A high voltage, high frequency spark tester shall be used for testing voids and pinholes. Where a defect occurs in the lining, the discharge is earthed producing a strong white continuous spark. The surface of the lining shall be clean and dry when the test is carried out. Excessive voltage or long residence time or both may puncture the lining, and care should, therefore, be taken to select the correct voltage and to ensure that the probe does not remain in one position for too long. The voltage depends on the thickness of the lining to be tested and shall be determined by trial on sample test pieces. 9.4 Repairs Defects are repaired by sanding a generous area around the defect and applying a layer of glass mat saturated with activated resin and then top coating with surfacing mat and parafin filled resin. 9.5 Vacuum
Test

9.1 Test for Completeness 9.1.1

Whether a resin has properly cured or not can be easily determined using-a Barcol hardness For most polyester cured resin system, tester. the Barcol hardness value lies between 35 to 50. However, Barcol hardness reading may vary with different resin system, for example, more resilient resins normally produce lower Barcol readings. In practice readings of 90 percent of a manufacturer's recommendation for the particular cast resin may be obtained.
9.1.2

Lined vessels subjected to vacuum during operation shall undergo a vacuum test at specified vacuum. The vacuum shall be maintained for a period of minimum one hour and the lining shall show no defects on reinspection.
10 PRECAUTIONS 10.0 During lamination, the following shall be strictly observed.

precautions

Laminates containing thixotropic agents may have higher hardness readings by about 3 to 5 units. The use of parraffin, synthetic fibre 4

10.1 Cobalt napthenate and methyl ethyl ketone peroxide ( MEKP ) shall not be mixed together as they form a highly reactive mixture and a

IS 12643: 1989 fire or explosion may result. These components shall be added and mixed in the batch, `separately. 10.2 Enforce `NO SlMOKlNG' rules and avoid ignition sources in the working area since MEKP and styrene are flammable. 10.3 Concentration of vapours may cause complaints of disagreeable odour or eye irritation. Working areas shall be well ventilated so that concentration in the atmosphere does not rise to intolerable limits.

ANNEX
( Clauses 4.0, 4.2.9

A

and 6.1 )
TO concentrations

LNFORMATtON TO BE FURNISHED BY PURCHASER THE MANUFACTURER/SUPPLIER A-l The purchaser information: shall furnish the following maximum possible. and

minimum

a) Site conditions

which may affect the work, availability of services for site lining, access and lifting facilities. Safety measures to be taken; the details of medical and technological precautions to be taken during storing and handling should be given by the resin supplier.

4 Presence of abrasives in contents. temperature f 1 Range of normal operating
and pressures with the maximum minimum temperature and pressures their duration. of heating of the vessels. and cooling

and and the

b)

9) Methods
contents

4

Construction of equipment to be lined, location of welds, branches, joints and supports and finish of the surface to be lined. and concentration of the contents vessel or equipment with their

d) Nature of the

Fire retardancy and thermal insulation requirement. j) Service life required. k) Cycle of operation whether batch or continuous. m) Possibilities of any vibration and any mechanical damage during operation,

h)

ANNEX
( CZause 4.2.9
DATA B-l The following TO BE FURNISHED the

B
) MANUFACTURER

BY RESIN

resin manufacturer shall furnish data to the supplier/purchaser: and type application

a) Resin grade the specific user, b) Viscosity, c) Gel time,

for recommended indicated by the

d) Hardness, e) Curing cycle, f) Shelf life, g) Storage recommendations, that may be h) Handling precautions, and j) Any other information necessary.

I-----

._

-__I____

_______

-

Standard Mark Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the proStandard marked products are also continuously checked by BlS for conformity to that ducer. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. The use of the

Standards Act, 1986 and

Bureau of Indian Stand&s 51s is a statutory harmonious goods and attending Copyright BIS has the copyright any form withou\ grade desigeations. of ,.a11its publications. permission the standard, relating 1 and revised, of Indian Comments when necessary should and amendments, ascertain Standard that they may if any, are in be sent No part of these publications of BIS. This of necessary details, such may be reproduced and sizes, type in or BIS. institution established matters under the Bureau

of

Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification
of

development

of the activities

of standardization, in the country.

to connected

the prior Enquiries

in writing to copyright

does not preclude as symbols to the Director

the free use, in

the cour!r@ of implementing

be addressed

(Publications),

Revision of Indian Standards lndian are Standards from are reviewed time

periodically Users :

issued

to `~tirne,

Standards

possession

of the latest amendments the following SMDC reference

or edition.

on this Indian

to BIS giving Dot : No.

29 ( 3220 )

Amendments Amend No.

IsFued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, NEW DELHI 9 Bahadur 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

331~01 31 331 13 75 36 24 99

Eastern

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. ,P. R~oad, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Northern

I

2 3 16 1843 41

r41 24 42 Southern Western : C. I. T. Campus, : Manakalaya, BOMBAY IV Cross Road, Marol, MADRAS Andheri 600113 I:: E9 MIDC, 400093 ( East ) 632 92 95 BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. JAlPUR. KANPUR. PATNA.
Printed at Priqtograph, Delhi, India

`2; t;

Branches

: AHMADABAD. GUWAHATI. TRIVANDRUM.

BANGALORE. HYDERABAD.

