**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 3118 (1978) : Electric Bacteriological Incubators [MHD 
12: Hospital Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



fStJtlt*lfH 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
ELECTRIC BACTERIOLOGICAL INCUBATORS 

(First Revision) 



UOC 616*083-92: 578*8093*5 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAKADtm SHAH 2AFAR MAItO 
jrm « NEW DEUU UQOOS 






iti 3118 mtm 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
EL3CTRIC BACTERIOLOGICAL INCUBATORS 

( First Revision ) 

Hospital Equipment Sectional Committee, CPDC 14 
GseirtM.t foprtsmting 

Da L. R. r ATM it Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 

MfSSMTJ 

Paof O. lALumnaMAH Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education ft 

Research, Chandigarh 
Sni Dabayus Bhatheka Nat Steel Equipment Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shm K. D. Hathuuui ( Atttrmk ) 
Sbbi K.. M. Daroab Development Conmihsioner, Small Scale Industrie! 

( Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi 
Da S. Gnanadm!EAM Directorate of Medical Education, Government of 

Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Jonrr Dibbotob or Insdbtbisb Directorate of Industries, Government of Maharashtra 
(CSPO) 
Assistant Dmioroa or 
Industries ( CSPO j ( Alttmaf ) 
Sbbi V. S. Kalbao Tempo Industrial Corporation, Bombay 

Saai K. Mamvannam Directorate of Industries, Government of Haryana, 

Chandigarh 
Mbdical Omasa, Gintial Railway Board (Ministry of Railways) 
Railway, Bombay 
Divisional Medical Omosa, • 
CairraAL Railway, Bombay ( Alttrnatt ) 
SaatS. Mutbum Directorate of Industries & Commerce, Government 

of Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Samt K. N. Ramaswamy Directorate General of Technical Development, New 

Delhi 
Rbjnumbmtative Department of Urban Development, Public Health ft 

Housing, Government of Maharashtra, Bombay 
Saw V. R. Sabrabwal Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Sbbi J. R. Saohdbva Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Lt-Col R. K. Dey ( Alton** ) 
Smt Bhiishan Sawhnby Equlpwell Corporation, Chandigarh 

Saat R. B. Sara International Industries, Bombay 

(C$ntinmdmp€gi2) 



® Ctpright 1979 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Mm Oftptyif Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS :3118.197a 

(Cmtomtijhnpt! 1 ) 

Attmbm Ripr$$nti*t 

Shm 8. 9. Shams a Metal ft Alloys Industries, Tutsukia ( Assam ) 

Shm A. S. Duooal ( iftsmets ) 
Saw D. M. TAtWAB Government Institute of Surgical Instruments 

Technology, Sonepat ( Haryana ) 
Shm Babulal Tom Todi Industries Private Ltd, Bombay 

Mai Uoai Sihoh Ministry of Defence ( DOAFMS ) 

Lt-Col M. K. Baoqhi ( Atttnmk ) 
Shm R. N. Vio Ultradent Pvt Ltd, Bombay; tmi All India Instrument 

Manufacturers ft Dealers Association, Bombay 
SmiD.N.Vio(J/ftnM») 
Shm Son Pkakabha, Director General, ISI ( ExifkU Atmnk* ) 

Director (Cosnr Prods ft Med 
Instrs) 

Smttmy 

Shm Dhajum Dsv 

Assistant Director ( Consr Prods ft Med Instrs ), ISI 

Incubators, Water Baths and Sterilizing Ovens Subcommittee, CPDG 14 : 4 



Sjuu V. S. Kauao Tempo Industrial Corporadon, Bombay 

Mmbtrt 

Snmt S. Bakdhoi»adhya Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries 

(Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi 
Swu Dabayus Bhathbna Nat Steel Equipment Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shm K. D. Hathwam ( Albrnati 1 ) 

Shki Saah D. Msmta < Atttrnmtt II) 
Sani H. L. Daeakh Toshniwal Instruments ( Ajmer ), Ajmcr 

Shm D.J. Rao ( AlttnuH I ) 

SmU A. SAmtAftANAJUYANAN ( Alttrnott II ) 

Sxai K. K. Ghai Minutry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shm Namnde* Simoh ( AU*mti$ ) 
g m i 5. LABimi Adair, Dutt ft Go ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shm M. L. Goha ( AlUmato) 

( Bombay ) 
Shm K. BANaajta ( Alutmu ) 
( Calcutta ) 
ShbjV.K.Sabhaawai. Ministry of Defence ( R ft D) 



tSt 311* -1978 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
ELECTRIC BACTERIOLOGICAL INCUBATORS 



(First Revision) 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Fint Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 21 November 1978, after the draft finalized by the 
Hospital Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division Council. 

0*2 Formulation of standards on hospital equipment has been taken up on 
the recommendations of the Advisory Committee for the Development of 
Surgical Instruments, Equipment and Appliances of the then Ministry of 
Industry and Supply, Government of India. 

03 This standard was first published in 1965 and now it has been revised 
keeping in view the latest developments in the manufacture of electric 
bacteriological incubators. In this revision, performance test for thermo- 
stats used has been included and the insulation resistance test has been 
modified. 

0.4 Tliis standard covers the general, performance and safety requirements 
for electrically heated incubators mainly used in laboratories for bacterio- 
logical and allied work, with a view to ensuring reliable operation, 
personal safety against electric shock, heat and fire. Dimensions of 
components parts have not been specified. It is recognized that some 
parts of incubators may have to be replaced during use. For this reason, 
it is essential that the manufacturers should so design their incubators that 
the spare parts of any particular size are interchangeable within one's 
manufacture. 

0.5 Adequate provisions have been made throughout, the standard for 
safety and satisfactory design of the apparatus, bearing in mind the fact 
that a good deal of latitude is to be allowed to the individual manufacturer 
of incubators to introduce innovations and refinements. 

0.6 ' General and safety requirements for household and similar electrical 
appliances (fourth raisin ) ( IS : 302-1973 ) to which references have been 



IS 1 3110 -197* 

made in this standard with regard to genera! and safety requirements at 
well as methods of tests is a necessary adjunct to this standard. Should, 
however, any deviations exist between the requirements of IS : 302-1973 
and those of this standard, provisions of the latter shall apply. 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS: 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard lays down the requirements and performance tests of 
electrically heated incubators used in the laboratories for bacteriological 
and allied work (see 2.1), designed for thermostatic control at one or 
more temperatures above ambient and up to 80°C, and for connections 
to supplies at 240 V ac single-phase 50 c/s, or dc 230 or 240 V systems, 
with rated loading not exceeding 3 kW. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2*0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Incubators — A closed chamber designed and constructed for 
cultivation of bacteria or for facilitating biological tests with or without 
arrangements for humidifying the air or supply of oxygen. 

2.1*1 Gravity Convection Incubator — An incubator in which heat transfer 
within the working space takes place predominantly through convection 
currents of air caused by difference of density of air at different 
temperatures. 

2.1.2 Forced Convection Incubator — An incubator in which heat transfer 
within the working space takes place predominantly through air currents 
forced by a circulating fan. 

2*1*3 Water-Jacketed Incubator — An incubator which is enclosed in and 
heated through a water jacket. 

2.1.4 Fixed Temperature Incubator — An incubator which is designed to 
operate at a fixed temperature, though its temperature may be capable of 
being adjusted within narrow limits, not exceeding plus or minus 5 degrees 
Celsius. 



♦Rule, for rounding off numerical values (rmted), 

4 



IS 1 3113- 1973 

2*1*5 WU% Rang* Incubator — An incubator designed to operate at any 
set temperature above ambient in a wide range exceeding 10 degrees 
Celsius. The temperature being set by adjustment of the thermostat. 

2.2 Working Space — The space within the incubator which is above 
the lowest shelf and not less than 5 cm from any heating surface or 3 cm 
from any non-heating surface of any wall or roof. 

2*3 Incubator Temperature — The mean of the maximum and 
minimum temperatures of the air recorded at the centre of the working 
space over one complete cycle of the thermostat. 

2.4 Temperature Variation — The difference in the temperature of air at 
the centre of the working space and at any other point in the working 
space at any instant. 

2.5 Temperature Differential — The cyclic change of temperature at 
any point regulated by the operation of the thermostat. 

2.6 Temperature Drift — The change in incubator temperature which 
may take place in continuous operation over a long period. 

2.7 Temperature Overshoot — The amount by which the maximum 
temperature attained by air at the centre of the wot king space during the 
initial heating-up exceeds the incubator temperature when steady operating 
condition of the thermostat is reached. 

3. RATING 

3.1 Voltage Rating — The highest rated voltage shall be as follows: 

a) For ac, 240 V 

b) For dc, 230 V or 240 V 

4. MATERIAL 

4.1 The provisions of 5.1 of IS 1 302-1973* shall apply. 

5. CONSTRUCTION 

5.1 The relevant provisions of 7 of IS : 302-1973* and those given in 5.2 
to 5.6 shall apply. 



'General and safety requirements for household and similar electrical appliances t/tmiH 
fflpW»a)» 



IS 1 3118- 1978 

5.2 Cabfeec 

5.24 The inner surface of the cabinet and its fittings shall be smooth and 
impervious, and resistant to corrosion. 

5.2.2 The cabinet with the doors closed shall be lightproof. In 
addition to the outer lightproof door, an inner door with a clear glass 
panel shall be provided for viewing the interior. All doors shall be fitted 
with suitable gaskets or packing for tight closure. 

5.23 Ventilation of the cabinet shall be provided by means of one or 
more ports at the bottom and the top of the cabinet. In large cabinets 
circulating fans may be provided to assist convection and ventilation, so 
that temperature variation is minimized. The ports at the top of the 
cabinet shall be adjustable to regulate ventilation rate. 

5.2.4 The glass panels used shall be capable of withstanding continuously 
the maximum temperature at which the incubator is designed to operate. 

5.2.5 Shelves shall be made of stout wire mesh, expanded metal or 
perforated sheet metal, treated to resist corrosion. The design of lugs, 
brackets or runners for shelves shall be such that heavily laden shelves do 
not tilt during withdrawal. 

5 .3 Water Jacket 

5.3.1 When a water jacket is provided, it shall be made of copper 
or other material not inferior to copper in resistance to corrosion under 
normal working conditions. 

5.3.2 The water jacket shall have a drain cock or plug, a water level 
gauge and an opening for filling. 

5.3.3 All seams and joints shall be secured by welding, brazing or 
soldering. If soft solder is used, the solder shall not be depended upon 
for mechanical strength, which shall be assured by welding, riveting or 
lock-jointing. 

5.4 Heating Element-- The heating element shall be so designed and 
located that overheating in its vicinity is minimized. The heating element 
or that part of it which is fixed on the inside bottom of the incubator 
shall be covered by suitable baffles or perforated covers so that fresh air 
entering through the bottom ports is preheated and uniformly distributed in 
the working space, and undue heating of the bottom shelves is avoided. 

5.4.1 If trays are provided for maintaining a high humidity by evapora- 
tion of water in them, the heating element shall be protected from 
accidental spillage of water, 



IS 1 3118 -197$ 

&«5 Thermostat 

5.5.1 The thermostat contacts and the contacts of any auxiliary device 
such as relays or contactors shall be readily accessible for inspection, 
cleaning or replacement, by the removal of a simple cover retained by one 
or more screws. 

5.5.2 The thermostat contacts shall be of silver, platinum, or other 
material which will not be easily fouled or welded by arcing. 

5*5.3 If a mercury switch is used in a thermostat or in an auxiliary 
device* it shall be securely mounted and protected so that it cannot 
be damaged easily in normal handling or transport of the incubator. 

5.5.4 If the thermostat contacts are slow acting, a condenser of sufficient 
capacity shall be connected across them to prevent excessive arcing and 
to minimize radio interference. 

5.5.5 If the steam, bulb, or other sensing part of the thermostat is fixed 
in or protrudes into the working space, it shall be adequately protected 
from accidental damage during loaning or unloading of the incubator. 

5.5.6 If the thermostat adjusting screw, knob or other adjusting 
mechanism is exposed to unintentional or accidental disturbance of 
setting, a scale shall be provided for checking the setting. 

5.6 Thermometer — The thermometer, when provided, shall be capable 
of reading temperatures with an accuracy of at least 0*5°C. Arrangement 
shall be provided for fixing such a thermometer on the cabinet so that its 
sensing element is at least 5 cm below the top of the inner chamber. 

Norm — Thermometer! are generally marked in red lines at 37°G and 56°G marking. 
6. GENERAL AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 

6.1 Protection Against Electric Shock — The provisions of 8 of 
IS: 302-1973* shall apply. 

6.2 Electric Inanlation — The provisions of 11 and 44 of IS : 302-1973* 
shall apply. 

63 Stability — The provisions of 14 of IS: 302-1973* shall apply. 

6.4 Mechanical Strength — The provisions of 15 of IS : 302-1973* shall 
apply. 

63 Supply Connections — The provisions of 20 of IS : 302-1973* shall 
apply. 



'General and safety requirements for household and similar electrical appliances (fimtk 
mririsn). 



IS 13118-1978 

6.6 Terminals — The provisions of 21 of IS : 302-1973* shall apply. 

6.7 Earthing — The provisions of 22 of IS : 302-1973* shall apply. 

6 J Screw* and Connections — The provisions of 23 of IS: 302-1973* 
shall apply. 

6.9 Resistance to Raattng — The provisions of 37 of IS : 302- 1973* shall 
apply. 

7. PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

7.1 Heatiag-Up Time — The incubator when switched on without 
loading at ambient temperature shall take not more than 45 minutes to 
attain the maximum temperature attainable by it. 

7.2 Temperature Variation — The incubator shall satisfactorily pass 
the tests specified in 9.2.4 to 9.2.8. 

8. MARKING AND. INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 

8.1 Each incubator shall be marked indelibly and clearly in accordance 
with 25 of IS : 302-1973* on its outer surface or on a name plate firmly 
attached to it. 

8.1.1 The marking shall also show the minimum ambient temperature 
at which the incubator is suitable for operation. 

8.1*2 The incubators may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Now— The uk of the ISI Certification Mark U governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marb ) Act and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveyi 
the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirement! of that 
standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is 
devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI marked products are 
also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. 
Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark 
may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian 
Standards Institution. 

8.2 Marking of Earth Terminal — The symbol * 4 ' shall be marked 
permanently on or adjacent to the earth terminal, if provided. 

8.3 Instructions for Use — Each incubator shall be provided with 
necessary instructions including precautions to be taken for its proper use, 
maintenance and resetting. The instruction leaflet or manual shall 
include a recommended list of spare parts. 

•General and safety requirements for household and similar electrical appliances (fourth 
twin**). 

8 



9. TESTS 

9.1 Geatral Conditions for Tests 

9.1.1 Test Voltage — The tests shall be carried out either at the rated 
voltage or at the maximum voltage of the range unless otherwise specified 
in the relevant clauses. The test voltage shall not vary by more than db 10 
percent during the test. 

9.1.2 Ambient Temperature — The ambient temperature during the 
performance test shall be 27 ± 2°C. 

9.1.3 Test Temperatures — The temperature variation test and tempera- 
ture differential test shall be carried out at the fixed operating temperature 
in the case of fixed temperature incubators, or at 5°CI above the ambient 
and again at 5°C below the maximum of the range in the case of wide 
range incubators. The temperature drift test, the temperature overshoot 
test, and the reproducibility of temperature test shall be done at the fixed 
operating temperature of a fixed temperature incubator or at the midpoint 
of the temperature range of a wide range incubator. 

9.1.4 Measurement of Temperatures — The measurements of temperatures 
for the purpose of the temperature variation and temperature differential 
tests shall commence two hours after the incubator is switched on or one 
hour after the final adjustment of thermostat, whichever is later. 

9.1.4.1 The incubator temperature, temperature drift and tempera- 
ture overshoot shall be measured with a long stem thermometer of the 
mercury-inglass type, with the bulb as near as possible to the centre of the 
working space. The thermometer shall have a bulb capacity not greater 
than 0'5 ml, a maximum error not over 1°C and the error over any 
interval of I0°C shall not vary by more than 1°C. It shall also be 
permissible to use a thermocouple, thermistor or other compact sensing 
element with a suitable indicator provided its response to temperature 
changes and its accuracy are not inferior to the thermometer described. 

9.1.4.2 The temperature variation and temperature differential shall 
be measured with thermocouples, thermistors, or other compact tempera- 
ture sensing elements capable of measuring temperature differences of 
0'2°C in the temperature range of the incubator. For the purpose of 
measurements, one sensing element shall be placed as near as possible to 
the centre of the working space and the others successively at the following 
points: 

a) Each of the four upper corners of the working space, 

b) Each of the four centres of the four sides of the working space, and 

c) Each of the four points vertically above the four lower corners of 
the working space and 2 cm above the lowest-shelf. 



18:3118-1978 

In the case of cylindrical incubators the above twelve points shall be 
substituted by ten points equally distributed on the cylindrical periphery 
of the working space and two points on the axis of the cylinder, one at 
each end. 

9.1.5 Arrangement of the Incubator — The incubator shall be tested on a 
table or stand one metre above floor level and located so as to be protected 
from direct sun rays or draughts, when carrying out the performance 
tests. It shall have all the shelves in position but not loaded, and the top 
ventilation ports shall be adjusted according to the manufacturers' instruc- 
tions. In the case of a water jacketed incubator, water must be initially 
filled up to and later maintained at the level recommended by the manu- 
facturer. 

9.2 Schedule of Teste — Schedule of tests to be carried out on the 
incubators for proving conformity with the requirements of this standard 
is given in Table I with suitable reference to relevant clauses of IS : 302- 
1973* and this standard. 

9.2.1 Visual Examination and Inspection — Each incubator shall be 
examined and inspected for general construction and marking requirements 
specified in this standard. 

TABLE 1 SCHEDULE OF TEST! 

(Owm9.2) 
Twrr Method 

Routint Tut 

Visual examination and inspection 9.2.1 

Protection against electric shock 40 of IS : 302-1973* 

High voltage 42 .3 of IS : 302- 1 973* 

Insulation resistance 11 and 44 of IS : 302-1973* and 9.2.2 

Leakage current 44 of IS : 302-1973* 

Earthing connection 38 of IS : 302-1973* 

Type Test 

Mechanical strength 36 of IS : 302- 1973* 

Performance test for thermostats 49 of IS : 302. 1973* and 9.2.3 

Temperature variation test 9.2.4 

Temperature differential test 9.2.5 

Temperature drift test 9.2.6 

Test for reproducibility of temperature 9.2.7 

setting 

Temperature overshoot test 9.2 J 

*General and safety requirements for household and similar electrical appliances 
{fourth revision ). 



*General and safety requirements for household and similar electrical applianees (fourth 
revision), 

10 



18 1 3118-1979 

9.Z2 Insulation Resistance Test — White conducting this test in accordance 
with 11 and 44 of IS : 302-1973*, the appliance shall not be subjected to 
humidity. 

9.2.3 From lot of thermostats for use in the incubators, three samples 
shall be subjected to the performance test as described in 49 of IS : 302- 
1973*. 

9*2.4 Temperature Variation Test — - With the temperature sensing elements 
located as described in 9.1.4.2, the temperature differences shall be read 
with reference to the sensing element located at the centre of the working 
space. For this purpose, the other sensing elements may be connected 
differentially with the sensing element at the centre. The temperature 
variation at each point shall be determined by taking the mean of at 
least three readings of temperature difference at that point. The 
maximum temperature variation between any two points tested shall not 
exceed 1*5*G. 

9.2.5 Temperature Differential Test — With a temperature sensing element 
located successively at all the different points described in 9.1.4.2, or a 
number of sensing elements located simultaneously at all the points 
described, the temperature at each point shall be recorded continuously or 
at intervals not exceeding 5 minutes during a three-hour test period. The 
temperature differential measured at any point shall not exceed 1*C. 

9.2.6 Temperature Drift Test — With the incubator adjusted as required 
in 9.1.3, the incubator temperature shall be recorded once every 8 hours 
with the thermometer described in 9.1.4.1, for a continuous period of 
72 hours. The temperature drift so measured shall not exceed 1*5*C. 

9.2.7 Test /or Reproducibility of Temperature Setting— M the end of the 
test as described in 9*2.6, when the last temperature reading has been 
taken, the incubator shall be switched off but left otherwise undisturbed for 
24 hours. At the % end of this period the incubator shall be switched on 
again for at least 3 hours without altering the thermostat setting. At the 
end of this period the original temperature before switching off shall be 
regained to within , 5°G. 

9.2.8 Temperature Overshoot Test — In the above test during the initial 
heating up, the temperature shall be recorded at least every 5 minutes 
when the temperature approaches the original temperature in the test 
according to 9.2.7 with 3°C, until a steady temperature is reached again. 
The maximum temperature recorded shall not exceed the steady incubator 
temperature finally obtained by more than I'd, 



•General and tatty requirement! for household and similar electrical appliances {fewm 

r 

11 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (SI UNITS) 
Bag* Unite 



QpAMlRt 


Um 


STUM* 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mm 


kilogram 


kf 




TbM 


second 


• 




Electric cur rait 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous Intensity 


candda 


ed 




Amount of substance 


mole 


art 




Supplementary Unite 


i 






QUAKTITY 


Urn? 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


nd 




Solid angle 


steradiaa 


a 




Derived Unite 








Qpjamn 


Unit 


Symbol 


Corvbumom 


Force 


newt xi 


N 


1 N- 0*101 S72kgf 


Energy 


Joule 


J 


I J - 1 Nun 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W-lJ/a 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb - 1 V* 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


1 T - 1 Wb/m" 


Frequency 


heru 


Hi 


1 Hi-lc/s(i-») 


Electric conduct mcs 


Siemens 


S 


1 S -1A/V 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


H 


1 P«-1V 



PUBUCATIQNS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTItliTIOM 

INDIAN STANDARDS 

Over 600 Indian Standards covering various subjects hava bear* 
Issued so far* Of these, tt*s standards belonging to the Consumer 
Products and Medical Instruments &fou$> fall under the followhia 
categories: 



Anaefltftusia, re»ufaiaiM»fi <*rttf slll#<l 

aqiitpment 
Artilcut limbs and mhnWHI^tton 

+qtt-pm*ftt 
Cotr 
D*nta! «<iu<pf»<**.t and In Mm** 

m*nta 
Oomfentic taiFdwar* 
faate ntira tor confuitiar goodt 
fountain p<w* and bait point 

pan* 
Ga* iKifnJn© »pplinr>c«« 
HospUa! squipmsftt 
Hotpftaluttm**]* 



Mtcttcat gta$« In&troment* entf 
ttftyltanc** 

Qbttalitc and ^gynaecological initnt* 

nrtetits and appttanc*-* 
OH bututnf) a* pilances 
Orthopawdie infcirumanls* accDfttaria* 

and litiplanta 
Safaty rn itches 
Sports a^odw 

Sural cat afitt medical trtstrumartf f 
SurtfhCal <ff#t*tnQ* 

UtenaOa and cuttery 
Writing aids 



OTHJEft PUBLICATIONS 



mi SuttSttn < RiMlalitf Evary Month > 

Stnfllo Copy 

Animal 5afc»£f«pitof* 
Standard* 2 Monthly AddJttOflt 

Stogla Copy 

Annual Su&t€flptton 
Annual Kaports (from 1W8-49 Onwarde) 
isi Handbook* 1»7i 





4*9 


R 8 **><> to T*w 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
Ma»«H 0h«vait, 9 Bahadur Shaa Zafar M«f«, NfcW D£«.M* t1«0OT 



Tattplion* : IT ttt 31 ( 20 tinea 1 

fttytutmt Qfltew, 

W«ftt*rn ; Novelty Chamber*, <Sr«nl ftaa* 

* a«t*m t a CtiowrJngf*s» Approach 
Southern i CUT, Campus, Afityar 

<?** reft Off! can 

* Puthpa* *« Nurmofi«m«<t Shtlfch Marg, Khanptt* 
4 f * ftlock, Unity Bldg, Naraiirnharala Squa/a 
Gft'iyoft Compt*x, Bhadfchadartcail, f.T- Naffar 
<",.£ K.itp*o* Are* 

Ah«m*« BUfg* SCO 82&J, Saator 17C 

**-6*7*1 L N. €«pf a Mara 

O 271 Toaarmai Mara, Ballpark 

1U/4t8 B Sarvodaya Najjar 

8X.I. &<<tf < fcd Fioa#). G.nahi Mattantaat 

Hint** eida ( «fttf ftaor fc Rty Station Roao 



T«l«flr«*t# * Ma»4.K«an*tt»a 



BOMBAY 4OQO0T 


sr«m 


CALCUTTA Tfmn 


23-08 0* 


MADRAS «0Q0S» 


41 2**t 


AHMADABAD 380001 


1 03 111 


BANGALORE WOODS 


* ?a*i 


shopal mmz 


_ 


BHUBANESBWAtt 161014 


5 j«a? 


CHANOl(SAKHl6aai! 


stum 


HYDERABAD S4J0QQ1 


c*iq*i 


JAIPUR 3«tt>0» 


dim at 


KANPUR 2OSO08 


a t2 la 


PA1NA KKXKM 


s»w 


rRkVANORUM *95Q01 


» a? 






