NAT HA IS 17799 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


ama wed Fale Tet (TU at) — 
FA rA A R pa 


Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) — 
Drones for Agricultural Purposes 


ICS 49.020 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HMM, ay fref 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2022 Price Group 3 


Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Sectional Committee, TED 14 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


The global drone industry is bound to prosper in the near future and in a big way. One of the latest developments 
is the increase in the use of small, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in the sector of agriculture. There is a 
huge potential for drones in agriculture to support evidence-based planning and spatial data collection. These 
technologies can provide valuable data that can then be used to influence policies and decisions. 


In India, drone regulation is governed by Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA). Worldwide, the usage 
of drones in agriculture is increasing by leaps and bounds. With time, the technologies for drone based input 
application will be perfected and will become affordable through custom hiring centres even to small and marginal 
farmers. However, non-availability of proper regulations and guidelines may offer hindrances in popularization 
of drones in agriculture. Thus, proper drone laws and regulations are the need of the hour for advancement and 
spread of drone technology in agriculture. Hence, these recommendations are brought in place to help India in 
implementing the laws and regulations for agriculture drones. 


It is recommended to refer Indian standard on “UAV-General Requirements” also for the general requirements 
related to drones. 


In addition to requirements specific to drones, general guidelines for drone operators are provided in Annex A. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standards is given in Annex B. 


IS 17799 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLES (UAV) — DRONES 
FOR AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard is applicable to all the categories of 
drones which may be used for agricultural purposes, 
such as nano up to 250 g, micro 250 g to 2 kg, small 
2 kg to 25 kg, medium 25 kg to 150 kg and large more 
than 150 kg of pay loads. 


2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


Drones shall comply with prevailing rules and 
regulations in the country as notified by the government. 


3 DRONE SPECIFICATIONS 


3.1 The drone shall be fitted with accurate altitude 
sensor to ensure that the desired height above the crop 
is maintained throughout the spraying mission. 


3.2 The Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) 
accuracy of the drone and accuracy of the map shall 
be characterized and the same shall be utilized to 
define the safety/buffer margin while creating the 
geo-fencing around the field or obstacles. The GNSS 
may preferably have support for NavIC (Navigation 
with Indian Constellation). 


3.3 Additional electronic devices, such as multispectral 
imaging, photography, data logging from sensors 
located in agricultural fields etc. may be considered for 
usage in drones for agricultural purpose. The additional 
equipment/components, if any, fitted to the drone shall 
not create navigational or aerodynamic interference to 
the safe operation of the drone. 


3.4 The drone shall have necessary fail-safes including 
Return to Home (RTH) on empty tank/loss of signal, 
and auto mission restart from the point RTH was 
engaged. 


3.5 The drone shall have capability to handle variable 
payload (depleting tank). 


3.6 The nozzle system shall be attached in such a 
manner that the spray swath is continuous when 
sprayed from the minimum permitted height above the 
uniformly distributed crop, for example, paddy. 


3.7 The drone spray system shall support variable flow 
control to ensure uniform dispensing of the payload. 


3.8 The drone spray system shall be leak proof and 
dripping of agrochemical shall be avoided during the 
application. 


3.9 The drone spray system shall be properly calibrated 
to ensure accuracy of + 10 percent on the quantity of 
input sprayed. 


3.10 The spray tank or tank supporting structure shall 
have enough shock absorption capacity to ensure no 
spillage of spray mixture occurs when the spray tank 
filled upto maximum payload is dropped from a height 
of 1 m. 


3.11 The spray tank shall be made of transparent or 
semi-transparent material to allow the pilot to estimate 
the amount of spray material contained in the tank. 


4 AGROCHEMICAL 
REQUIREMETNS 


COMPATIBILITY 


4.1 The agrochemical (liquid/solid) compatibility with 
the drone spray system shall be established prior to 
the mission for the desired dilution. This is to ensure 
agrochemical solubility formulation stability and ability 
to spray with the type of nozzles provided in the drone. 
Regulatory guidelines by Central Insecticides Board 
and Registration Committee (CIBRC) shall be used 
for the purpose to ensure agrochemical compatibility. 
Agrochemical handling protocols in terms of usage and 
disposal shall be strictly followed as per the specified 
guidelines from the label approved by CIBRC. 


4.2 Following guidelines may be utilized for the 
agrochemical spray to have the better trade-off between 
the drift and retention ability: 


a) fine : 106-235 um; or 

b) medium to coarse: 236 — 403 um. 
4.3 Following spray coverage guidelines may be 
utilized to have satisfactory bio-efficacy: 


a) 20 droplets/cm? — For insecticides and systemic 


fungicides; 

b) 5-10 droplets/cm? — For translocated herbicides; 
and 

c) 50-70 droplets/cm? — For non-systemic 
fungicides. 


4.4 It is recommended to carry out a onetime pilot 
assessment of crop phytotoxicity for the desired 
dilution for the specific spray system, unless data is 
already available. It is to be noted that phytotoxicity 
behaviour depends on various factor change with the 
spray parameters. 


IS 17799 : 2022 


4.5 When applying for modification of the registration 
of an already registered agricultural chemical spray by 
using a drone, the following is recommended: 


a) if the amount of the active ingredient deposited 
per unit surface area is within the range initially 
applied for, there is no need to submit crop residue 
tests in addition to those at the time of initial 
application for registration; and 


b 


wm 


when a study on phytotoxicity can confirm the 
existence or otherwise of phytotoxicity, there is no 
restriction as to field studies. 


4.6 The minimum dilution shall be decided based on 
the fulfilment of the requirements given in 4.1 to 4.5 
and ensuring satisfactory coverage of sprayed input 
both horizontally and vertically. 


5 OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Before Application 


5.1.1 The components of drone assisted spraying 
system such as real time kinematic global positioning, 
flight controller, remote control system, battery module, 
motor with propellers and spraying system shall be 
checked for their soundness, safety and integrity before 
operating the drones in the field. 


5.1.2 The home point of drone shall be selected keeping 
in view the crop and field conditions. Flying path shall 
be prepared according to field shape and required head 
space for turning. Safe distance (not less than 10 m) of 
nearby people from the drone take off place shall be 
ensured. 


5.1.3 The service provider shall carry additional spare 
parts like propellers, batteries (minimum four sets), 
motors and nozzles to the operational site. 


5.2 During Application 


5.2.1 Behaviour of drone shall be monitored 
continuously during operation to avoid accidents. The 
nozzles shall also be monitored for not being choked 
during operation. 


5.2.2 It is recommended to fly the drones at a height 
of 1.5 to 3 m above the targeted crop canopy and at a 
speed not exceeding 6 m/s during spraying. 


5.2.3 Discharged drone batteries shall be replaced 
immediately. 


5.3 Post Application 


5.3.1 After every 20 h of flight, the drone shall be 
examined for the wear, loosen screws, dislocated 


components, scratches, distortion and abnormality, if 
any, in propeller and frames. 


5.4 Weather Considerations 


5.4.1 It is recommended not to use drone for spray 
under fog, during cloudy and immediately after the 
rains to ensure input retention by the crop. 


5.4.2 The weather forecasting shall also be considered 
before flying the drone. The conditions like cloudiness, 
light intensity, temperature, wind direction and 
velocity shall be recorded, and decisions shall be taken 
accordingly. 


5.4.3 The use of drones for spraying shall be avoided in 
high temperature conditions (> 35 °C), high humidity 
conditions (> 70 percent) and high wind speed 
(> 3 m/s). It shall be avoided immediately before and 
after the rains and also opposite to wind direction. 


6 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 


The drone maintenance guidelines (periodic, daily 
and between the flights) shall be followed as per the 
Original Equipment Manufacturer instructions. 


7 PILOT TRAINING REQUIREMENTS 


7.1 A training module encompassing agrochemical 
handling, agri-mission specific protocols and relevant 
crop protection guidelines shall be essential for pilots 
operating agro input spray drones. 


7.2 The use of personal protective equipment (PPE) 
including full sleeve top, gumboots, hand gloves (while 
handling the chemicals), goggles, mask, helmet and 
radium jacket (for night operations) shall be mandatory 
for the pilots. 


7.3 Technical team size is subject to scale and strength 
of the operation. The team members shall be properly 
trained for their respective jobs and have training 
certificate from training centres approved by the 
concerned authority. 


8 MARKING 


The drone shall have following labelled information: 
a) Year of manufacture; 
b) Designation of series or type; 
c) Serial number, if any; 
d) Empty mass (kg): Mass ofUASS when the tank is 
empty; 
e) Maximum payload capacity (kg); and 
f) Maximum flow rate, litre per min (lpm). 


IS 17799 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR PILOTS/DRONE OPERATORS 


A-1 It is recommended to use clean water for preparing 
the solution of pesticides. Containers and buckets used 
for mixing pesticides should not be used for domestic 
purpose even after thorough washing. Pesticides shall 
be kept separated during transportation. Bulk pesticides 
shall be carried carefully to the site of application. 


A-2 No movement of human or animal should be 
allowed in the operational field during spraying. 


A-3 Entry to the treated field immediately after 
operation shall be avoided without wearing protective 
clothing. 


A-4 Hands and face shall be washed with clean water 
and preferably with soap, immediately after the 
spraying operation. Also, the clothes shall be changed. 
In case any sign of body contamination with hazardous 
or poisonous chemicals is perceived, consultation of 
doctor shall be sought. 


A-5 A buffer zone between drone based treatment and 
the non-target crop (= 5m to cater to agrochemical 
drift) shall be maintained between the adjacent farms 
or different crops to avoid spray on non-targets. The 
buffer zone may be increased based on the severity of 
the agrochemical on the non-targets. 


A-6 During the spray operation operator should always 
maintain minimum 10 m distance from the drone and 
avoid windward direction as much as possible. 


A-7 A display of warning sign during and immediately 
after the spray operations should be placed. 


A-8 Drone based spray operations shall be conducted 
at a safe distance from water bodies, residential areas, 
fodder crops, public utilities, dairy, poultry etc. during 
pesticide application. 


A-9 It shall be ensured that the application of chemical 
spray shall not exceed the defined threshold limit so 
that there is no over-dose of chemical application to the 
crop. 


A-10 The drone and spraying unit shall be properly 
calibrated before flying. The spraying unit shall be 
checked for pump pressure, nozzle wear out for uniform 
spraying, and leakage in tank and lines. 


A-11 The pesticide name and label shall be checked 
before filling in the tank atrecommended concentrations. 


A-12 The reach of pesticide spray shall be avoided 
during active bee foraging period of the day in flowering 
nectar crop. When spraying pesticides that are toxic to 
non-target organisms, such as fish, birds and silkworm, 
it shall be abided by the product label requirements and 
take effective measures to avoid risks. 


A-13 A first aid box and maintenance tool box are 
essential during the drone operations. The drone shall 
have safety guards around propellers to avoid the 
accidents with human, animal and birds etc. 


A-14 Chemical spray which is left out shall be 
disposed-off at safer place, the area shall be away from 
the residential areas, children play areas, hospitals, 
restaurants, etc. The disposal of waste shall conform 
to the local laws. Hazardous wastes shall not be burnt 
or buried. 


A-15 Empty containers shall not be left in the field. 
Empty containers of pesticides should not be re-used 
for storing other solutions. 


A-16 While transporting or storing the plant protection 
products, the area shall be beyond the reach of children, 
animals and unauthorized persons. 


IS 17799 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Sectional Committee, TED 32 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 


Adani Aerospace and Defence Limited, Bengaluru 


Aerospace and Aviation Sector Skill Council, 
Bengaluru 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 
Anna University, Chennai 


Centre For Military Air Worthiness and Certification, 
Bengaluru 


Cyphysignals India Private Limited, Bengaluru 
Detect Technologies, Chennai 


Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality 
Assurance, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 
Drone Federation of India, New Delhi 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Bengaluru 


Honeywell Technology Solutions, Bengaluru 
Ideaforge Technology Private Limited, Mumbai 
Indhra Dhanush Autonomous Platforms, Mangaluru 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology , Kanpur 

Indian Space Research Organization, Bengaluru 


Institute of Electrical And Electronics Engineers 
Standards Association 


International Air Transport Association 
International Centre For Automotive Technology 
International Institute of Aviation, Bengaluru 
LDRA Technology Private Limited, Bengaluru 
Nextleap Aeronautics, Bengaluru 

Quality Council Of India, New Delhi 

Reverence Tech, Mumbai 


Robert Bosch Engineering And Business Solutions, 
Bengaluru 


Representative(s) 


Dr. S. N. OMKAR (Chairman) 


SHRI SAMPATHKUMARAN S. T. 
SHRI SWAPNIL JALUNDHWALA (Alternate) 


WG CDR RACHIT BHATNAGAR 


SHRI D. DILIP KUMAR 
DR K. SENTHIL KUMAR 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR CHATURVEDI 


SHRI D. SRINIVASAN 
WG CDR A. S. SATISH (RETD) (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTHIK RAJASEKARAN 
Suri G. D. SUNIL (Alternate) 


SHRI GANESH PRASAD SAHU 


SHRI MANISH GUPTA 
SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SMIT SHAH 
SHRI VIPUL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI NISHA GANESH 
SHRI PRATAP PANDA (Alternate) 


DR JEPPU YOGANANDA 
SHRI RAGHAV MALIK 
SHRI NEVILLE RODRIGUES 
DR HEMENDRA ARYA 

DR ABHISHEK 

SHRI MANISH SAXENA 


SHRI SRIKANTH CHANDRASEKARAN 


SHRI PRASHANT SANGLIKAR 
SHRI DEVESH PAREEK 

DR SUMEET SUSHEELAN 
SHRI SHINTO JOSEPH 

SHRI GAJENDRA KASHYAP 
DR MANISH PANDE 

SHRI NITISH SAWANT 


SHRIMATI PRIYAMVADHA VEMBAR 
Lr Cor P. V. J. HARSHA (RETD) (Alternate) 


IS 17799 : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 
Sanganak Labs, Bengaluru SHRI RAJ ASHISH 
System Level Solutions (India) Private Limited, SHRI ANAND PUROHIT 
Vidhya Sangha Technology, Bengaluru Frr Lr A. T. KISHORE (RETD) 
Wavekids India, Bengaluru SHRIMATI ANIMA AGARWAL 
BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJIV RANJAN SINGH, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (TED) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI RAVINDRA BENIWAL 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (TED), BIS 


Panel on Drones for Agriculture Purpose TED 32/P 1 


Organization Representative(s) 
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru Dr S. N. OMKAR (Convener) 
Anna University, Chennai Dr K. SENTHIL KUMAR 
General Aeronautics Private Limited, Bengaluru SHRI ABHISHEK BURMAN 
Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi Dr INDRAMANI 
Dr ROAF AHMAD PARRAY (Alternate) 
Indian Space Research Organization, Bengaluru SHRI MANISH SAXENA 
Sarvaa Research and Innovation Private Limited, SHRIMATI SHWETHAR. 
Bengaluru 
Vidhya Sangha Technology, Bengaluru Frr Lr A. T. KISHORE (RETD) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 14 (17604). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


