( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS : 4919- 1981

Indian
GLOSSARY LANDSCAPE

Standard

OF TERMS APPLICABLE TO AND HORTICULTURE WORK

( First Retiision )
Terminology, Notations, Drawings and Documentation Sectional Committee, BDC 1
Representing Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, New Delhi

Chairman SHRI H. K. RAKHRA

Army

Headquarters,

Members THE ARCHITECT TO GOVT

Buildings & Communications Department, Government of Maharashtra, Bombay THE ASSISTANT ARCHITECT( Alternate ) The Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay SHRI J. R. BHALLA SHRI B. M. AHUJA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Railways SHRI V. C. CHADHA SHRI S. M. MITAL ( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Government of Uttar SHRI S. C. DAS Pradesh, Lucknow Municipal Corporation of Delhi SHRI J. D. GOYAL Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI T. N. GUPTA Roorkee DR S. K. MICRA ( Alternate ) The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta PROF J. N. HATE Central Water Commission SHRI K. MADHAVAN DEPUTYDIRECTOR( PH-III ) ( Alrernate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI M. M. MISTRY SHRI B. D. DHAWAN ( Alternate ) Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI S. P. MODI SHRI M. V. DONGRE ( Alternate ) Indian Posts & Telegraphs Department,`New Delhi SHRI J. L. NARULA Coun;iIh;f Scientific & Industrial Research, New SHRI R. S. PANESAR Town & Country Planning Organization, New Delhi SHRI P. B. RAI Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI M. M. RANA SENIOR ARCHITECT ( Alternate )

( Continued on page 2 )
0 Copyright 1981

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 4919- 1981 ( Continued from puge 1 )
Members
SHRI M. V. S. RAO

Representinn
Engineer-in-Chief's New Delhi Branch, Army Headquarters, ( India

SHRI V. K. RAZDAN ( AIternate ) Metallurgical & Engineering SHR~ S. SANKARAN Ltd, Ranchi SHRI T. B. KRISHNAMURTHY SHRI R. P. SIKKA SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg

Consultants

)

( Alternate )

)

Indian Roads Congress, Director General, IS1 (

New Delhi

Ex-ojicio Member )

Secretaries
SHRI S. P. MAGGU Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI SHRI V. KALYANASUNDARAM Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI

Terminology
Convener
SHRI T. R. M~HANDRU

Subcommittee,

BDC

1: 1

Institution

of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta

Members
Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay SHR~ J. R. BHALLA DEPUTY CHIEF E N G I N e E R Ministry of Railways ( CENTRAL ) Central Water Commission SHRI K. MADHAVAN DEPUTY DIRECTOR( PH-III ) , A,. ( Alfernare ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI M. M. MISTRY SHRI B. D. DHAWAN ( Alternate ) Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, New SHRI R. S. PANESAR Delhi Ministry of Works, Housing and Supply SHRI B. N. RAHALKAR Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, SHRI H. K. RAKHRA New Delhi SHRI D. K. GANGAHAR ( Alternnte ) Suri & Suri Consulting Acoustical Engineers, New SHRI R. L. SURI Delhi SHRI GAUTAM SURI ( Alternate ) THE SUPERINTENDINGENGINEER Ministry of Works, Housing and Supply ( VIGILANCE) THE EXECUTIVE ENGINEER ( VIGILANCE) ( Alternate )

2

IS : 4919 - 1981

Indian
GLOSSARY LANDSCAPE (

Standard

OF TERMS APPLICABLE TO AND HORTICULTURE WORK

First Retiision )
FOREWORD

0.
0.1 This Indian Standard

was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 January 1981, after the draft finalized by the Terminology, Notations, Drawings and Documentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first issued in 1968. A revision of this standard has been taken up to incorporate certain changes found necessary in the light of comments received. Additional terms applicable to landscape and horticultural operations have been incorporated in this revision. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practice in the field in this country.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers horticultural operations. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply.

various

terms

applicable

to landscape

and

2.2 Abscission - The shedding of some part of structure, as a leaf or flower, as the result of the formation of a layer of loosely adhering cells at its base that break apart readily. 2.3 Absorption -The process of taking up water and holding it in pores or open spaces as a sponge.
2.4 Aeration -

Any method which facilitates interstices of the soil.
3

the entry of air into the

IS : 4919 - 1981 2.5 Autogamy When a flower is fertilized by its own pollen.

2.6 Auxin - A substance synthesized by a plant and able to influence growth at some point other than the point of synthesis; comparable to a hormone in animals. 2.7 Bark Ringing- The removal of a narrow strip of bark from a part or whole of the circumference. 2.8 Bastard Trenching -A method of manually cultivating soil to a depth of two spits, reversing the order of top soil and subsoil. 2.9 Bedding - The planting of flowering or foliage plants in beds to give massive decorative displays. 2.10 Blending a) Blending of grasses for a lawn. b) Blending the plants in herbaceous borders. c) Mixing of colours in annual border to avoid clash of colours. use of an implement on which brushes are 2.11 Brush Harrowing -The mounted for improvement of the surface condition of grass areas and removal of dry leaves. 2.12 Brushing - Manual or mechanical use of a brush for the improvement of the condition of the surface. 2.13 Burn off-The level by burning. destruction of vegetable growth above or at ground decay by the effect of fire used to

from 2.14 Charring -Protection carbonize the surface of wood.

2.15 Chlorosis - A diseased condition is chlorophyll. 2.16 Cladophyil 2.17 Cleistogamy A stem like leaf.

shown by loss of green colour that

Self pollination without the flower opening.

2.18 Comb Out.- To carry out a form of raking either manual or mechanical, by which coarse, dead or dying vegetation is removed from old established or neglected grass areas, shrubberies and fruit groves. 2.19 Compatibility a) of sex cells, the ability to unite and form a fertilized egg that can grow to maturity. b) Congeniality as determined by the degree success of the union between stock and cion.
4

of

IS : 4919 - 1981 2.20 Composting a) The process of converting into humus. waste vegetable matter

b) The application of compost to the soil. 2.21 Consolidation -The application of water or pressure to soil to pack the particles more closely without undesirable compaction. 2.22 Coulure - The failure of blossoms to set, resulting in a premature drop. 2.23 Crazy Top - A disorder of citrus tree associated with an alkaline soil reaction and resulting in a peculiar type of growth. 2.24 Cross Raking-Cultivation directions. 2.25 Cultivate ( Verb ) a) To till the soil by ploughing or other mechanical means. b) Growing or tending to plant in order to promote subsequent cropping. 2.26 Cutting 2.26.1 Cutting Back -The the plant. 2.26.2 Cutting Down - In pruning, removal of top growth usually of multi-stemmed shrubs and other plants to encourage fresh growth from old wood. 2.26.3 Cutting Out - In pruning, the removal of dead or diseased wood or any unwanted growth. 2.26.4 Cuttings - The portion of a plant used for multiplication. 2.27 Damping Down a) The moistening of paths and paving to settle dust. b) The moistening of paths and stagings usually in a greenhouse to maintain or increase humidity. 2.27.1 Die back - A disorder of tree, bush and vine fruits characterized by killing back of the younger growth. 2.27.2 Soaking - The application of water to plants in open ground pots or containers to the extent of saturating the soil about the roots. 2.28 Deblossoming - The cultural flowers from a growing plant. practice of removing completely the removal of unwanted growth to a specific
point, either to protect the plant from diseases or to have desired shape of

by raking in two or more transverse

growth and

5

IS : 4919 - 1981 2.29 Deflowering - see 2.28. 2.30 Defoliation -The a growing plant. cultural practice of causing the leaves to fall from

2.31 Deheading - The removal of faded flower or seed heads. 2.32 Digging - Breaking or loosening the soil by lifting with a spade or fork. 2.32.1 Digging In - The incorporation of additional material, such as organic material, fertilizers and soil conditioners into the soil by digging. 2.32.2 Digging Over-Cultivation of the soil by a fork to a shallow depth. to the full depth 2.32.3 Digging Single ( One Spit Digging) --Digging of a spade or fork. 2.33 Disbudding - The removal of unwanted buds.

2.34 Dividing - A method of multiplying plants or improving established herbaceous plants either by cutting away or by separating rooted plant plumps. 2.35 Double Digging - A method of manually cultivating soil to a depth of two spits. 2.36 Draw Upsimilar tool. To move soil towards the plants by use of a drawhoe or

2.37 Dressing a) The treatment of seed by applying a chemical coating ( for example, fungicide, insecticide, repellent ). b) The application of fresh soil, peat, compost or other fertilizing material to a plant or turf. c) The grooming of bloom or plant for exhibition. 2.38 Drying Off-The removal of plants, such as cannas, begonias, dahlias and gladioli, from the soil usually at the start of their dgrmant season to create an artificial resting period. 2.39 Dusting - The application of a fungicide or insecticide in powder form by hand or mechanical means. 2.40 Dust Tilth - A method of repeated shallow cultivation of soil surface to create a fine particle layer of top soil for conserving moisture arid preventing the germination and development of woods. 2.41 Dyloporisus - A disorder, associated with lack of compatibility between stock and cion, characterized by pores or pits in the wood and corresponding pegs in the bank. cover up the lower part of the stem of a plant with 2.42 Earth Up -To soil usually for support or blanching. 6

IS : 4919 - 1981 2.43 Edge 2.43.1 Edge Cutting - The cutting of the edge of a lawn to a desired line by hand or by mechanical means. 2.43.2 Edge Up -The

cutting of a new edge to a lawn by edging tool caused by a marked downward

or similar means. 2.44 Epiaasty - Drooping of leaves bending at the base of the petiole. 2.45 Exocortis -

A shelling off of the bark of trees. but will

normally used for crop production 2.46 Fallow ( Adjective ) -Land left unsown for one or more growing seasons. 2.47 Fecundity germinate. 2.48 Feeding 2.49 Fertile 2.50 Fertility 2.51 Fertilization

The

ability

of

flowers

to

produce

seeds

that

To provide plants or soil with plant nutrient by any means. Soils capable of producing vegetation abundantly. The capacity of a soil to produce vegetation.
-

The fusion of two gametes to form a new cell. or the resettle-

2.52 Firm
2.52.1 Firm In - The settlement of a plant at planting, ment after lifting, by pressing down the soil around it.

2.52.2 Firming soil.

Any method of lightly consolidating

the surface of the

2.53 Flame Gunning - The destruction of vegetative growth above ground by burning off with a flame gun. 2.54 Flying - The automatic dispersal of grass cuttings while machine cutting as practised by the use of a rotary or cylinder machine without grass collecting attachments. ,255 Foiiar Feeding - To feed plants with soluble nutrients through their leaves. 2.56 Forking 2.56.1 Forking Cultivation of the soil by a fork to a shallow depth.
Over -

Repeated cultivation of soil by a fork. by loss of colour in leaves example

2.57 Frencting - The disease characterized between the veins.

condition of soil or other material ( for 2.58 Friable -The manures, compost ) in which it is readily broken to a finer state. 7

IS : 4919 - 1981 2.59 Frost lifting of a plant in the soil 2.59.1 Frost Heave ( Frost Lifting ) -The or the lifting of the soil itself due to the expansion caused when water freezes in the soil. 2.59.2 Frost Screening -The frost for tender plants. provision of temporary protection from

2.60 Fruit Setting-The development following the blossoming period.

of an ovary and adjacent tissues

method of controlling pests and diseases by use of 2.61 Fumigation -A volatile materials in the form of smoke or fumes in the air or to the soil. 2.62 Gapping -The replace losses. filling of gaps in existing rows of plants or hedges to gaps in planted areas by replacing plants

2.62.1 Gapping Up -Filling that have failed to thrive.

method of propagation where a piece of tissue trans2.63 Grafting -A planted from one individual to another or to a different place on the same individual. 2.64 Grease Banding - The attachment trees to trap ascending, wingless pests. of sticky bands to the stem of

2.65 Green Manuring - The manuring of soil by burying the grown crop in-situ, which is rich in nitrogen. 2.66 Growth Regulator - Any substance or physical factor, either external or internal, that influences a growth process; in a more restricted sense, a substance that influences growth. 2.67 Gummosis - A disorder, particularly of stone and citrus fruits, in which there are small local deposits of gum in tissues of fruit, shoot or some other organ. 2.68 Gum Spot - A disorder of stone, citrus and certain other fruits in which there are small local deposits of gum in tissues of fruit, shoot or some other organ. a plant with its roots in a trench and covering 2.69 Heeling In -Laying with soil as a temporary measure until planting can be undertaken. condition of restricted 2.70 Hide Bound -A hardening of the bark, so preventing expansion. growth supposedly by

2.71 Hoeing - A method of shallow cultivation of the soil to break up the surface, dislodge and ultimately remove weed growth.

IS : 4919 - 1981 2.72 Hormone -

A substance synthesized on animal organism that is able to influence growth at some point other than the point of synthesis; comparable to an auxin in plants.

2.73 Hosing Down - The application of water usually under mechanically assisted pressure and a suitable temperature to greenhouse plants mainly practised during summer months as a daily routine to control pests, dirt and humidity. to produce functional gametes of one sex 2.74 Hydrophyte -Inability or the other; sometimes used in a more general sense to denote sterility. 2.75 Incompatibility - Of sex cells, the inability fertilized egg that can grow to maturity. 2.76 Infertile to unite and form a

Soils having a very limited capacity to produce vegetation. in a surface by filling

2.77 Infilling - The correcting of irregularities depressions with a suitable material.

2.78 Interfertility - The ability of one variety to set fruit and produce seeds that will germinate when pollenized by another variety. 2.79 Knife Ringing-A branch of a tree. single circumferential knife cut in the stem or

2.80 Latent Bud - A bud, usually concealed, more than one year old, which may remain dormant indefinitely or may develop under certain conditions. 2.81 Layering-The method by which stem of a plant is pegged down and covered with a layer of soil so that it takes root and can be detached. 2.82 Leaf Mould - Vegetable moulds which have decayed well. obtained from leaves and weeds

2.83 Lifting - The loosening and raising of the root ball of a tree or plant by manual or mechanical means. 2.84 Liming - The application of lime to the soil. 2.85 Make Good - To rectify defective work; to replace dead, drying or inferior plants, turf, etc. 2.86 Manuring - The enrichment organic or inorganic fertilizers. of soil with farmyard. manures or any

plant that grows naturally under conditions of 2.87 Mesophyte -A moderate humidity, and neither requires nor will survive culture in water or extreme drought.
9

IS : 4919 - 1981 2.88 Minimal Cultivation - The reduction of physical cultivation methods by the application of chemicals.

2.89 Mound-up - To cover up the lower part of the stem of a plant with soil usually to protect tubers or for support or blanching. 2.90 Mowing - The cutting of grass by manual or mechanical means.
2.91 Mulching-The

application of a layer of a suitable material to the surface of the soil to protect the roots of the plants, to conserve moisture, reduce weed growth and reduce fluctuations in soil temperature.

2.92 Naturalize - The practice of growing certain plants in simulated wild conditions and allowing them to adopt natural habits and associations.

2.93 Netting ( Verb ) - The application of protective nets as netting to plants to prevent damage by mammals, birds, vermin or weather. 2.94 Nicking
a) To give a horizontal

incision below a bud or lateral shoot to

control the flow of sap. b) The removal of a small piece of the coat of hard seed to assist germination. 2.95 Notching -- The removal of a small crescent or triangle of bark to control the flow of sap to a bud or lateral shoot. 2.96 Over Sowing - The repair of thin areas of sward by lightly cultivating the surface and sowing additional seed. 2.97 Parthenocarpy The producrion of fruit without true fertilization. of unfertilized proliferation or

2.98 Parthenogenesis - The development expansion of parenchyma tissues.

2.99 Pedicel - The support of a single flower of an inflorescence. 2.100 Pegging Down - A form of training by which shoots are brought down to a horizontal or arched position and held by pegs driven into the soil. 2.101 Pentosan - A polysaccharide hydrolysis.
2.103 Plashing

that

yields five carbon

sugars on

2.102 Perennial - A plant which lives for more than two years.
( Pleaching ) - A form of training in which branches and twigs of adjoining plants are roughly intertwined in the form of a screen.

2.104 Photoperiodism - The influence of light on direction of growth. 10

IS : 4919 - 1981
2.105 Peduncle 2.106 Phyllody -

The support of an inflorescence or a flower stalk.

A disorder of plant in which a shoot or branch develops a much larger number of leaves than is normal.

2.107 Polyembryony - The production avule. 2.108.1 Pricking Ofseed pan or nursery bed.

of more than one embryo in an

2.108 Pricking - The light disturbance of soil surface with a fork. Removal of seedlings from an overcrowded

2.109 Proliferation - A rapid and repeated production of new parts, as the formation of leafy parts from floral parts. 2.110 Pruning -The and appearance. cutting of trees and shrubs to improve their growth

2.111 Pulverisiog - Breaking the soil from lumps or clods down to finer state, either mechanically or by manual methods. 2.112 Raking ( Raking Over ) a) Final cultivation by a rake to produce a fine tilth and bring to a true even surface prior to sowing, planting, or turfing. b) Drawing a rake across a surface to remove unwanted material, for example, raking stones from soil. c) Drawing of a spring tine rake or similar tool across turf to remove moss, leaves and litter. 2.112.1 Raking In - The incorporation seed, fertilizers, and chemical compounds by raking. of additional material, such as into the surface layer of the soil

2.113 Rank ( Adjective ) - The unwanted vegetative growth. 2.114 Re-setting Replanting
oxygen

2.115 Respiration -Gaseous exchange by which the plant absorbs and gives off carbon dioxide. 2.116 Ridging - A method of cultivation into ridges.

in which the soil is thrown up

2.117 Rolling - Passing a roller over a surface to crush or consolidate the material or to form a better surface. 2.118 Rosette -A condition in which the internodes are much shortened, giving the leaves a bunched or clustered appearance. 11

IS : 4919 - 1981 2.119 Rotary Mowing - The mowing of grass by a rotary type machine. 2.120 Rotation - A succession of different crops on a piece of ground. 2.121 Rotavating - Tilling the soil with a rotary mechanical rotavator. 2.122 Rough Cutting - Maintenance scythe or similar tools. action by means of a

of grass areas by hand-scythe, motor-

2.123 Scarifying - The operation of breaking-up, loosening, incising or scratching a surface with an appropriate implement, usually preparatory to re-surfacing. 2.124 Score -To cut or slit to a preset depth, that is, the vertical cutting of turf prior to lifting. 2.124.1 Screening ( Sifting or Sieving) - The separation of materials, such as soil, compost, wood ash, leafsoil and peat into various grades of particle size by using either hand or mechanical sieves or screens. The finer materials are sifted from coarse, the degree of fineness depending on the number and size of mesh of the sieves or screens used ( the choice of synonym depending upon the implement used ). 2.125 Scything a) The cutting of grass with a scythe. b) Usually the cutting of long grass, either with a scythe or by a reciprocating knife or machine. 2.126 Seasonal Bedding - The planting of flowering or foliage plant in beds to give massive decorative displays. 2.127 Slitting -The use of a flat bladed implement to make a series of cuts through a fibrous mat of turf. 2.128 Smother - A cultural practice of controlling close growing weed growth by skimming the surface and turning with a spade to cover the green top growth with root, mat and soil. 2.129 Soaking -The application of water to plants in open ground, pots or containers, to the extent of saturating the soil. 2.130 Sod Culture - A method of orchard soil management in which a permanent perennial crops is grown between the trees, season and then allowed to remain on the ground. A limited area around the trees is hoed, spaded or otherwise tilled. 2.131 Sod Mulch - A method of orchard soil management in which a permanent perennial crop is grown between the trees, mowed once or twice during the growing season and then allowed to remain on the ground. 12

IS : 4919- 1981
2.132 Sod-Sowing -

The restoration of an existing grass sward by resowing after scarification or chemical destruction.

2.133 Sour Sap - A sour or fermented condition of the sap often associated with a high water table or other root disturbance and usually followed by the death of the tree. 2.134 Spiking Perforation of turf with a solid tined implement.

2.135 Spit - A layer of soil in depth, equal to the blade of a spade. 2.136 Sponging -The treatment of plants by washing or wiping leaf surfaces and stems with soft water or insecticide, for display, routine maintenance or pest control. 2.137 Spraying - The application of water, other liquids or liquid mixtures containing insecticides or fungicides in the form of fine droplets produced under pressure. 2.138 Spring Bedding - The planting of flowering or foliage plants in beds to give massive decorative displays during springs. 2.139 Springing-The easing of soil compaction, lightly levering with a fork. usually under turf, by movement

supporting of trees or shrubs against 2.140 Staking -The by attachment to one or more posts of wood or metal.

2.141 Sterility - The inability to produce seeds that will germinate. 2.142 Summer Fallow - Allowing land to lie idle for a season to conserve water for use the following season. killing of bark 2.143 Sunburn -The reflected heat rays, a form of sunsclad. near the ground surface due to
.

2.144 Sweeping - The removal of leaves or debris by a brush, broom, or machine. 2.145 Syringing - The application by means of a hand syringe. under pressure of water or sprays

2.146 Systemic Feeding - TO feed plants through their stem. 2.147 Tillage - The state or condition of being tilled or cultivated. 2.148 Top-Dress - To apply fresh soil, peat, compost or other material fertilizers or conditioners to the surface of soil or turf. 2.149 Topiary Work - The clipping of shrubs or small trees to train them into ornamental or fanciful shapes. 13

IS : 4919 - 1981 2.150 Topping 2.150.1 Topping of Grass 2.150.2 shoots. 2.150.3 encourage Lightly mowing. shortening of leading tying-in of leading to

Topping of Hedges and Plants-The Topping of Trees - The shortening branching and to obtain better shape. shaping of a plant a desired form.

shoots

2.151 Training-The means to produce 2.152 Treading

by pruning,

or other

2.152.1 Treading In/Treading Up after replanting by using the feet.

The firming

of soil around

a plant

2.153 Trenching - A type of terracing where small trenches are constructed across the land slope in order to intercept and either to drain it safely or to conserve it on land, particularly for improving soil condition of the where afforestation of pasture development degraded land slopes programmes are taken. When the trenches are made on contour, it is called contour trenching and when the trenches are provided with a gradient across land slope, it is called graded trenching. 2.154 Trimming or shape. 2.155 Turfing lawn. Slightly clipping upon any plant lifted material from to align edge an established

Laying

a lawn

with

the turfs

2.156 Turf-Perforation - The operation of making a series of holes through a grass sward into the soil beneath with a spiked peat or hollow tined implement to improve the free passage of air, moisture and nutrients. 2.157 Twig Staking - Supporting inserted into the ground. 2.158 Underfill desired level. Packing soil of beneath plants sunken by twigs turf to of raise brushwood it to or the

in which certain 2.159 Virescence - A disorder structures become and remain abnormally vegetative 2.160 Weed 2.161 Weeding 2.162 Weeding Undesirable or unwanted mechanical plants. or chemical

vegetative and green.

floral

The manual,

removal

of weeds. plants.

Out -

The removal

of undesirable 14

or unwanted

IS : 4919 - 1981 2.163 Wind Burn- A disorder of the leaves in which first their edges and later perhaps the entire leaf dries out and presents a scorched appearance. 2.164 Witches Broom - A disorder of the stem or it's branches in which there is an extreme amount of branching, resulting in a very brushy condition, sometimes caused by fungus attack. 2.165 Working In - Any method of incorporating into the upper levels of the soil or into turf any substance for its improvement. 2.166 Xeropyte - A plant that can endure extreme drought.

15

INTERNATIONAL Base Units

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS )

QuUnCtY Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary
Quantity

Unit

Symbol

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

m kg
S

A K cd mol

Units
Unit Symbol

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units

radian steradian

rad
ST

Quantity

Unit

Symbol N

Definition

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

W Wb T Hz S V Pa

1 N= lkg. m/s2 1 J=l N.m 1 W=l J/s 1 Wb=l V.s 1 T=l Wb/m* 1 Hz=1 c/s (s-l) 1 S=lA/V 1 V=l W/A 1 Pa=1 N/m*

