**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13041 (1991) : Recommendation for inspection, testing and 
maintenance of hydraulic hoist (After Erection) [WRD 12: 
Hydraulic Gates and Valves] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13041 :1991 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR INSPECTION, 

TESTING AND MAINTENANCE OF 
HYDRAULIC HOIST ( AFTER ERECTION ) 



UDC 621-876-82 



© BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 10002 
April 1991 •'"cc Group 1 



Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee, RVD 12 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the 
Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division 
Council. 

The hoists of gates should be properly maintained through proper inspection to ensure smooth 
operation of gate leaves at all times, and to keep good maintenance. This standard is being prepared 
with a view to providing guidance for proper inspection, testing and maintenance of hydraulic hoists. 



IS 13041 : 1991 



Indian Standard 



RECOMMENDATIONS FOR INSPECTION, 

TESTING AND MAINTENANCE OF 
HYDRAULIC HOIST ( AFTER ERECTION ) 



1 SCOPF 

1.1 TTiis standard lays down the recommendations 
for inspections, testing and maintenance of hydra- 
ulic hoist, 

2 GENERAL 

2.1 Oil level in the tank should be checked at 
regular intervals and replenished if found 
necessary. 

2.2 Operating temperature in the oil tank and 
bearing of the pump should be checked. 



b) Breather screws should be checked. It 
should be loosened and after clear oil free 
from foaming and air comes out, itfshould 
be tightened. 

c) In case shut off valve is provided tjetween 
tank and pump suction line, it must be 
ensured that it is kept fully open to prevent 
damage to the pump. 



2,3 All the pipe joints should 
tightened if found loose. 



be checked and 



d) Inspect the hoist stem 
corrosion once in a year. 

4 TESTING 



for pitting or 



2.4 Electrical wiring and voltage of control cir- 
cuit should be checked. 

2.5 The alignment of pump-motor set should be 
checked regularly. 

2.6 Oil level in the hydraulic limit switches used 
to control stroke length should be checked 
regularly. 

2.7 Oil level in oil-bath solenoid valves should 
be checked and condensation water be drained 
regularly. 



2.8 Keep suspension devices of 
greased. 

3 INSPECTION 



4.1 The motor should be inched to check the 
direction of rotation of motor. The direction 
should be corrected, if necessary. 

4.2 When the motor is put on, the relief valves, 
solenoid valves and directional valves should be 
adjusted for the working pressure. 

4.3 Functioning of limit switches, pressure 
switches and indication lamp should be checked 
for proper working. 

4.4 The hydraulic hoist system should be run for 
at least 50 to 100 cycles on load. Joints and fit- 
tings should be tightened where leakages appear 

nt th/^ tlm/^ f-if* rrvmniiocirtninor 



cylinder suitably ^* *^^ time of commissioning. 



3.1 Periodical inspection of hydraulic hoist and 
power pack shall be carried out to detect leakage 
of oil, if any. It shall be done as and when 
necessary, but at least once a year prior to the 
onset of monsoon. The hoists should be operated 
up and down several times to make sure that 
everything is in order. 

3.2 The visual inspection of components shall 
consist of checking the following: 

a) Before putting on the drive motors oil level 
in tank should be checked. Actuate the 
directional valves to operate the hoist until 
one operation is completed. Pumps, valves, 
hydraulic cylinders, pipe and pipe fittings 
should be properly cleaned. 



4.5 If there arc unusual sounds in the stuffing 
box, cylinder stem should be lubricated. If the 
sound persists further investigation shall be made. 

4.6 Check the quality of oil twice a year. Check- 
ing of oil can be done by placing a drop of oil 
taken from the system on white filter paper. If 
the oil is good a clear spot occurs whereas aged 
oil leaves dark spot which becomes larger and 
darker. Check up the strainer and filter for 
contamination, 

5 MAINTENANCE 

5A The maintenance of hydraulic hoist mecha- 
nism should be done regularly. Reference should 
be made to manufacturer s instructions for detailed 
maintenance and servicing of hoists. Proper 
record of inspection, testing and maintenance 
should be made by the project authority. 



1 



IS 13041 : 1991 



5.2 The following maintenance works should be 
attended to: 

a) Seals : Only 'O* seals, copper sealing, teflon 
tapes and the like are suitable as sealings. 
In no case hemp and puttey be used as 
sealings m.aterial. 

b) Filter : The filter or filters provided arc to 
be cleaned regularly. The first cleaning 
should take place after first test run 
followed by cleaning replacement as found 
necessary and after oil replenishment. 
Filter should be replaced if found necessary. 

c) Oil : First oil change should take place 
after aboxrt 1 000 operating hours, followed 
by oil change at an interval of about 5 000 
operating hours depending on the size 
of plant. Check the viscosity and contami- 



nation oil once in a year and replenish the 
oil if necessary. 

d) Pipe and pipe connections: Pipes are to be 
thoroughly cleaned prior to installation by 
weak acid or by dry cleaning. It may be 
ensured that the pipe connections shall be 
made with high pressure fittings or flanged 
joints with 'O' rings or welded blocks. 

e) Repairs and replacement of electrical relays, 
controls and solenoid valves should be 
attended to. 

f) Maintenance of alternative source of power, 
such as diesel generating set and alternative 
drives wherever provided shall be carried 
out. 

g) The condition of spares should be checked 
before use. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products 
covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with 
the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked 
products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safe- 
guard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), 
BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference: 



DocrNo.RVD 12(4635) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 



Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 1 3 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( Fast ) 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL 

HYDERABAD, JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUYANANTHAPURAM. 



331 0! 31 
331 13 75 

37 86 62 



53 38 43 
41 29 16 

6 32 92 95 



FVintcd at Progressive Printers. Shahdra. Delhi, India 



