( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 2469- 1976

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING ( TO GYPSUM

First Reaision )
BDC 21

Gypsum Building Material Sectional Committee,
Chairman
DR S. K. CHOPRA

Representing
Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi

Members
ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR ( ARCH ), Ministry of Railways RESEARCH, DESIGNS AND STANDARDS ORGANIZATION, LUCKNOW JOINT DIRECTOR ( ARCH ) ( Alternate ) Directorate of Mines and Geology, Government of SHRI K. D. BHARGAVA Rajasthan, Jaipur MINING ENGINEER( Alternate ) All India Pottery Manufacturers' Association, SHRI K. K BHATIA Calcutta SHRI R. K. BHATNAGAR Shri Ram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi SHR~C. P. SHARDA ( Alternate ) SHR~ G. J. CHANDAK Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI P. N. MEHTA ( Alternate ) Jamnagar Mineral SHRI J. S. FRANCISCO Development Syndicate, Jamnagar Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi SHRI G. C. GUPTA SHRI B. B. DUTT CHOUDHARY ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI R. K. MALIK New Delhi SHRI HAZARI LAL MARWAH Central Builders' Association ( Regd ), Delhi SHRI AMARJIT SINGH ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence SHRI R. D. MATHUR SHRI V. K. RAZDAN ( Alternate ) Rai Plasters Ltd. Bikaner SHRI D. MOHTA Gypsum Industries Pvt Ltd, Tiruchirapalli SHRI L. RAMIA~~ National Buildings Organization, New Delhi DR A. V. R. RAO SHRI G. T. BHIDE ( Alternate ) Rajasthan State Mines and Minerals Limited, SHRI M. N. ROY Jaipur

(Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1976

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 2469- 1976
(Continued from page 1) Members SHRIK. K. SARIN Representing
Rajasthan Housing Board, Jaipur Research Institute

SHRI B. G. SHARMA ( Alternate DR S. SEN DR S. K. GUHA ( Alternate SHRI SOHAN LAL SINGHANIA

)

Central Glass and Ceramic I CSIR ), Calcutta J. K. Cotton Kanpur Central

)

'

"

Spinning

and Weaving

Mills CO Ltd, New Delhi

SHRI K. L. PAI ( Alternate ) SUPERINTENDING SURVEYOR OF WORKS ( NDZ ) SURVEYOR OF W o R K s I ( NDZ ) ( AIternate ) DR C. A. TANEJA

Public

Works Department,

Central Building Roorkee

Research

Institute

( CSIR

).

DR IRSHAD MASOOD ( Alternate ) Associated Instrument SHRI H. C. VERMA Ltd. New Delhi SHRI M. N. BALIGA ( Alternate ) Director General, ISI SHRI D. AJITHA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg )

Manufacturers

( India ) Pvt

( Ex-oficio Member )

Secretary
SHRI VINOD KUMAR Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI

2

IS:2469-1976

Indian
GLOSSARY

Standard
TO GYPSUM

OF TERMS RELATING (

First

Revision

)

0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 20 February 1976, after the draft finalized by the Gypsum Building Materials Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Gypsum is a well known building material and is extensively used as a building material in many countries, such as Australia, Canada, United It has the specific advantages of Kingdom, United States of America, etc. lightness and high fire resistance. 0.3 The various resources for gypsum in this country, when fully developed, will yield, in addition to high grade gypsum, large quantities of gypsum of purity 70 percent or less. The latter, according to present knowledge, have also prospects of economic use mainly as building materials, namely, in the The form of gypsum plaster, gypsum plaster boards and gypsum blocks. Gypsum Building Material Sectional Committee has prepared a series of Indian Standards on building gypsum covering specifications, methods of test and codes of practice, with a view to assisting the industry, which is in This glossary of terms relating to buildthe initial stages of development. ing gypsum has now been revised to include additional terms which are being used in connection with the subject. 0.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to internationai coordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the pratices in the field in this country. This has been met by deriving assistance from the following publications: A-82.29-1950 Specification to gypsum. Canadian for standard definitions Standards Association. of terms relating

BS : 1191: Part I : 1973 Specification for gypsum building plaster: Part I Excluding premixed lightweight plasters. British Standards Institution. ASTM Designation C-11-70 Standard definitions of terms to gypsum. American Society for Testing and Materials. 3 relating

IS : 2469 - 1976 1. SCOPE

1.1This
products.

standard

defines

the

terms

relating

to

gypsum

and

gypsum

2. TERMINOLOGY A Accelerator - In the case of stucco, stance which hastens the set. plaster, mortar, concrete, etc, a submortar, sul-

Aggregate-Any inert material used as a filler in stucco, plaster, concrete, etc, without regard to its function as a binding material. Anhydrite - The mineral phate ( CaSO, ). consisting primarily of anhydrous

calcium

Anhydrous Gypsum Plaster -A material consisting essentially of anhydrous calcium sulphate ( CaSO, ) produced by the dehydration of gypsum, the set of which has been suitably accelerated. B Base CoatThe first layer of layers of plaster applied over a lath or other The first application is normally called a scratch coat and the substrate. second application is referred to as a brown coat. Binder - In ,the case of plaster, stucco, etc, a fibrous material, increase their cohesiveness, while they are in a plastic state. Bond Plaster - A calcined tion over rough monolithic gypsum plaster layer. Brown Coat The second gypsum plaster specially concrete as a bonding coat in three-coat gypsum which will

formulated for applicacoat for a subsequent plaster application.

Browning Plaster - It is a form of retarded hemihydrate as undercoat plaster after mixing with sand. C Calcined Gypsum - Gypsum partially dehydrated the approximate chemical formula CaSO 4. +H,O Cement - A material or a mixture when in a plastic state, possesses which will harden in place.
NOTEmaterial. The word `cement'

plaster and is used

by means of heat, having ( see also `Hemihydrate' ).

of materials ( without aggregate ) which, adhesive and cohesive properties, and
regard to the composition of the

is used without

4

IS : 2469 - 1976 Combined Water - The water chemically held, as water of crystallization, by the calcium sulphate dehydrate or hemihydrate crystal. Consistency-A

force relation. gypsum board.

property of a material determined - _ The portion

by the complete flowcovering of

Core ( of Gypsum Board ) Crushed Gypsum -

within the paper

Gypsum subjected to a primary crushing operation.
F

Finish Coat -

The final layer of plaster applied over a base coat or other

substrate.
Free Water - All water contained by gypsum board or plaster in excess of that chemically held as water of crystallization.

G
Gauging Plaster -

A calcined gypsum plaster used with lime for a finish

coat.
Gypsum-Calcium

sulphate combined with two molecules of water, in crystalline form, having the approximate chemical formula CaSO,. 2H,O.

Gypsum Backing Board - A sheet or a slab having an incombustible core, essential of gypsum, surfaced with paper on both sides and designed to be used as a base layer or a backing material in multilayer construction. Gypsum Board -The generic name for a family of noncombustible sheet products consisting of a core. primarily of gypsum and a paper surfacing. Gypsum Concrete - A combination of aggregate or aggregates with calcined gypsum as a binding medium, which after mixing with water, sets into a conglomerate mass. Gypsum Fibre Concrete Gypsum Formboard -

Gypsum concrete in which the aggregate consists of shaving fibre, or chips of wood. A sheet or a slab having an incombustible core, essentially of gypsum, surfaced on the exposed side with a fungus-resistant paper and on the reverse side with paper suitable to receive poured-in-place gypsum concrete.
Gypsum Lath-A gypsum board used as the base for application

of

gypsum plaster. a) Insulating Gypsum Lath - The same as plain gypsum lath except that in addition, the back surface is covered with a continuous sheet of pure bright finished aluminium foil. 5

IS : 2469 - 1976 b) Perforated Gypsum Lath -A gypsum lath having to provide mechanical keying of the base coat plaster. c) Plain Gypsum Lath A gypsum lath without d) Type-X Lath - A gypsum lath specially specific fire retardant characteristics. perforations

perforations. to provide

manufactured

Gypsum Moulding Plaster -A material consisting essentially of calcined gypsum for use in making interior embellishments and cornices as gauging plaster. Gypsum Neat Plaster - A calcined common usage is for gypsum plaster gypsum plaster without used for base coats. aggregate,

Gypsum Partition Block ( or Tile ) -A gypsum building unit in the form of block ( or tile ) for use in non-load bearing construction in the interior of buildings and for the protection of columns, elevator shafts, etc, against fire. Gypsum Sheathing Board - A sheet or a slab having an incombustible essentially of gypsum, surfaced with water-repellent paper. Gypsum ( Wall Board ) Plaster Board-A incombustible core, essentially of gypsum, receive decoration. H Hemihydrate - An intermediate phase in the dehydration of gypsum by heat, wherein the amount of combined water corresponds approximately to The formula is the formula 2CaSO,, H,O, calcium sulphate hemihydrate. `hemihydrate'. often written as CaSO 4, @I,O, hence the designation J Joint Reinforcing Tape - A type of paper, metal, fabric, glass mesh or other material, commonly used with a cementitious compound to reinforce the joints between adjacent gypsum boards. Joint Reinforcing Metal wire mesh used to reinforce Strips of expanded metal, woven, or welded corners and other areas of plaster and lath. K Keene's or Parian Cement - Anhydrous calcined gypsum plasters which are characterized by being more easily brought to a smooth and true finish in a continuous plastered surface, this property being associated as well with a slow and gradual set.
NOTE - Keene's cement contains alum or aluminium cement contains borax. sulphate, whereas Parian

core an to

sheet or a slab surfaced with paper

having suitable

6

IS : 2469- 1976 M plaster and Metal Lathing Plaster - It is a form of retarded hemihydrate It is different from is used as undercoat plaster after mixing with sand. browning plaster in that it contains free lime also. Mortar - A material used in a plastic state, which may be trowelled, becomes hard in place, to bond units of masonry structures. and

No~~-_he word `mortar' is used without regard to the composition of the material, and is defined only with reference to its use as a bonding material as contrasted with the words `stucco' and `plaster'.

N of millilitres of water per 100 g of Normal Consistency - The number gypsum plaster or gypsum concrete required to produce a mortar or slurry of specified fluidity. P Plaster Plaster set. See Gauging Plaster and Gypsum Neat Plaster. without any added retarder of

of Paris -

A form

of hemihydrate

NOTE -

It is manufactured

in several grades for various industrial

uses.

Plasticity - A complex property of a material, the properties of mobility and of yield value.

involving

a combination

of

NOTE - A plastic material is distinct from a solid material in that it possesses mobility. It is distinct from fluid material in that it requires a measurable force ( yield value ) to start flow.

R Ready-Mixed Plaster during manufacture. A calcined gypsum plaster, plaster with aggregate added

Retarder - In the case of stucco, which retards the set. Retarded Hemihydrate tion of a retarder of set.

mortar,

concrete, which

etc, a substance an addi-

A form of hemihydrate S

contains

Set Setting

The hardening

and hydration

of a gypsum

plaster

( see Setting Time ). plaster to attain a

Time - The elapsed time required for a gypsum specified hardness and strength after mixing with water.

IS : 2469- 1976 Sized Gypsum -

Crushed gypsum of prescribed size of individual particles.

Stucco - A material used in a plastic state, which may be trowelled to form, when set, a hard covering for the exterior walls or other exterior surfaces of any building or structure.
NOTE - The word `stucco' is used without regard to the composition of the material, and is defined only with reference to its use and location as contrasted with the words `plaster' and `mortar'.

T Tapered Edge-An

edge formation of gypsum board which provides a shallow depression at the paper-bound edge to receive joint reinforcement.
V

Veneer Plaster

Base - A gypsum board used as the base for application of a gypsum veneer plaster.

Veneer Plaster -

A calcined gypsum plaster specially manufactured to provide high strength, hardness and abrasion resistance when applied in thin coats over a veneer plaster base.
W Wood Fibre -

A material produced by grinding or shredding wood.

Wood Fibred Plaster -

A calcined gypsum plaster containing shredded or ground wood fibre added during manufacture.

