WAT Wad IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 
Indian Standard earn ACEN 


Frater utara wae — feonfdcer 


a 8 wea wae 


Construction Project Management — 
Guidelines 


Part 8 Risk Management 


ICS 03.100.30 


© BIS 2015 


ada AH SRT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM FH, 9 see AHL Art, ae ferci-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2015 Price Group 8 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 8) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 


A construction project is an endeavour undertaken by a project team on behalf of owner/client to create a built 
facility suited to the defined functional objectives. From inception to commissioning, the project goes through 
various distinct stages leading to progressive achievement of project objectives. Each stage involves specific 
inputs, processes (both technical and managerial) and deliverables. Typically, the life cycle of a project from 
commencement to completion involves the following stages: 


a) Project appraisal — Inception, feasibility and strategic planning; 
b) Project development — Project brief development, planning and design, finalization of proposals, 


procurement strategy, construction documentation including tender drawings, construction drawings, 
specifications, cost estimates, bills of quantities, procurement documents; 


c) Planning for construction — Sequencing of project components, planning tools, resource planning and 
time cost trade off; 


d) Tender action — Open competitive bidding/pre-qualification of agencies, issue of tender documents, 
evaluation of bids, negotiation if required and award of work; 


e) Construction — Execution, monitoring, control, work acceptance; and 


f) Commissioning and handing over — Contractual closeout, financial closeout, defect liability 
commencement, facility handing over. 


The distinct features of a construction project include the temporary nature of the project team involved, the 
evolutionary process of project deliverables during project development stages and the unique output as the built 
facility. As a result of these features, unless there is efficient and effective project management, a construction 
project is faced with challenges of uncertainties leading to time over-runs, cost over-runs, changes in project 
parameters, loss of quality and inability to meet the functional objectives. While technical soundness of a proposal 
is an important aspect of a construction project, the management aspects, which involve techno-legal, financial 
and other issues, have also a significant role in the success of a project. Therefore, management functions and 
technical processes in a construction project need to be integrated towards achieving project objectives. Top 
management commitment plays an important role in harmoniously achieving these project objectives. In some of 
the public domain projects, it may be necessary to share relevant information with public at large through 
appropriate means. 


To provide necessary guidance on effective construction project management, a series of standards are being 
developed as part of IS 15883 ‘Guidelines for Construction project management’. Part 1 General, of the standard 
since published as IS 15883 (Part 1) : 2009, covers general aspects of overall construction project management. 
This has been followed by publication of other parts as follows: 


Part 2: 2013 Time management 

Part 3: 2015 Cost management 

Part 4: 2015 Quality management 

Part 5: 2013 Health and safety management 
Part 6: 2015 Scope management 


The other parts of the standard are under formulation which will cover functions such as procurement management, 
communication management, human resource management, sustainability management and integration 
management. 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


Indian Standard 


CONSTRUCTION PROJECT MANAGEMENT — 
GUIDELINES 
PART 8 RISK MANAGEMENT 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 8) covers guidelines for risk 
management aspects of construction project 
management. 


1.2 The risk management aspects during the project 
formulation and appraisal stage of the project are not 
covered in this standard. The scope of this standard, 
therefore, covers the stages subsequent to the stage of 
approval (when a decision to implement the project 
including its financing is taken) till commissioning and 
handing over of the project. 


1.3 The provisions of this standard are to be read in 
conjunction with IS 15883 (Part 1). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
7337 : 2010 Glossary of terms in project 
management (second revision) 
10400 : 2013 Glossary of terms in inventory 
management (second revision) 
15198 : 2014 Glossary of terms in human resource 
development (first revision) 
15883 Construction project management — 
Guidelines 
(Part 1) : 2009 General 
(Part 2): 2013 Time management 
(Part 3) : 2015 Cost management 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 7337, IS 10400 and IS 15198 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 General Aspects Relating to Risk and Risk 
Management 


Generally risk is considered as exposure to a danger 
or hazard and is viewed as ‘negative’. However, risk 


could be both, a mix of danger and opportunity. 


Project risk management is the art and science of 
identifying, assessing and responding to project risks 
throughout the life of a project and in the best interests 
of its objectives namely, project completion within 
estimated time and cost and to the required 
specifications and quality standards. The constant goal 
of project risk management should be to minimise 
uncertainties and move towards opportunities. The 
goals of risk management, therefore, are to identify 
project risks and to develop strategies, which either 
reduce them or attempt to avoid them so as to achieve 
the project objectives. 


All projects have associated risks which need to be 
identified during all stages of the construction project. 
Some risks are independent risks and some risks may 
be inter-related or dependent risks. There is a need to 
quantify the risks in terms of likelihood of their 
occurrence and their impacts on the project objectives. 
For inter-related or dependent risks, it should be 
anticipated how one risk occurrence may affect 
probability of occurrence of another. The response to 
one risk may also alter the consequences of or the 
probabilities of occurrence of the other risks or the 
response to one risk may impact the project’s ability 
to respond to another risk as both may require same 
resources. Project risk management is not only for 
corporations or public organisations, but for each 
activity of the project whether of short or long duration. 
The benefits and opportunities should be viewed not 
just in the context of the activity itself but in relation 
to the many and varied stakeholders who can be 
affected. 


The risk analysis and management process needs to 
address the following: 


a) Identification of risks; 

b) Probability of occurrence of identified risks; 

c) Likely impact of risks on the project in terms 
of time, cost and quality; 

d) Risk responses and their cost to the project; 

e) Understanding that how responses to certain 
risks would lead to other risks; 


f) Methodologies to reduce or eliminate the 
losses; and 
g) Management setup to deal with risks. 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


To achieve the objective of above explained risk 
analysis and management process, following steps need 
to be taken: 


1) Risk management planning; 

2) Risk identification; 

3) Risk assessment; 

4) Risk response planning; 

5) Risk monitoring and control; and 


6) Risk management feedback and lessons 
learnt. 


All these steps are discussed in detail in the subsequent 
sections. 


In construction project management, a risk is some 
future happening that results in a change, either positive 
or negative, to the project. However, for the most part, 
it is associated with loss. The loss can be estimated 
and is a combination of the following two factors: 


i) The probability that the event will occur; and 
H) The severity of the loss, if the event occurs. 


This estimate forces a choice on the project manager’s 
part regarding what to do, how to mitigate the risk and 
ascertain the loss that may occur. At project level a 
standard approach is needed to ensure that there is an 
agreed: objective for risk management, definitions and 
terminologies related to risk management, process by 
which risk management can be carried out, and 
organisation structure for risk management. 


There are many ways of achieving the objectives of 
risk management. These would vary with the scale, 
nature and complexity of projects. This standard is 
prescriptive in nature and the generic approach 
described herein provides the principles and guidelines 
for managing any form of risk in a systematic, 
transparent and credible manner within any scope and 
context. By meeting the various provisions of this 
standard, though in different ways, project teams will 
be in a position to report that they are in compliance 
and they can benchmark their risk management 
practices. 


4.2 Anticipated Risks at different Stages of 
Construction Projects 


a) Pre-construction Stage — Anticipated risks during 
pre-construction stage, may be, 


1) inadequate soil and other required 
investigations and surveys; 


2) inadequate detailed project reports (DPRs) 
including inadequate cost estimates; 


3) delay in project specific clearances including 
environmental clearances; 


4) inadequate handling of social issues; 


5) incomplete/inadequate project drawings and 
documents; 


6) inappropriate technology adoption decision; 


7) unrealistic project schedules and inadequate 
programme scheduling; 


8) lack of proper study of project documents; 
and 

9) inadequate project tenders and bidder 
response. 


b) Construction stage — Anticipated risks during 
construction stage, may be, 


1) land acquisition and non-availability of site 
free of encumbrances; 

2) organisational inter-disciplinary interfaces; 

3) variations in geotechnical conditions; 

4) delay in issue of ‘good for construction 
drawings’; 

5) design variations and other changes by 
consultants, client and other stakeholders; 

6) variations in construction programme; 


7) non-availability/shortage of adequate 
resources including manpower, material and 
machines; 


8) lack of commitment/co-ordination by various 
stakeholders/project participants; 


9) lack of team work and inter-disciplinary 
interfaces; 


10) lack of commitment and leadership skills in 
senior management; 


11) inadequate disputes’ settlement mechanism; 


12) lack of awareness of safety norms and lack 
of implementation of safety requirements; 


13) accidents; 


14) multiplicity of laws to be followed and delay 
in project specific clearances required at the 
construction stage; 


15) inefficient payment system/paucity of funds; 

16) ineffective contract management; 

17) interpretation of contract clauses; 

18) law and order issues; 

19) currency fluctuation; 

20) political uncertainty; 

21) unpredictable weather conditions; 

22) lack of transportation and infrastructure 
availability; 

23) force majeure; and 

24) change in statutory stipulations. 


c) Commissioning and handing over stage — 
Anticipated risks during commissioning and handing 
over stage, may be related to, 


1) final payments and related settlements; 


2) contract closure; 

3) final project documentation; 

4) final disputes resolution; 

5) political interference/public pressure; and 
6) concessionaire’s apathy (if applicable). 


Risks listed above are indicative only and could be 
identified in detail for each specific project. 


4.3 Organizational Structure for Risk Management 


Organizational structure for risk management is 
defined by the size, characteristics and criticality of a 
project. 


Depending upon the size, nature and complexity of 
the project, risk management team shall comprise either 
the project execution team and/or a group of project 
stakeholders. Their role, accountability and reporting 
structure shall be well defined and documented. 


For small to medium size projects, risk management 
could be conducted by the project team. But, for large 
and critical projects, risk management would be 
conducted by specialized in-house team or through 
consultant(s). 


5 RISK MANAGEMENT 


5.1 Risk Management Planning 


Risk management planning is the process of defining 
how to conduct risk management activities for a project. 
Careful and explicit planning enhances the probability 
of success of project risk management. Planning risk 
management processes is important to ensure that the 
degree, type and visibility of risk management is 
commensurate with both the perceived risks and 
criticality and complexity of the project. Planning is 
also important to provide sufficient resources and time 
for risk management activities, and to establish an 
agreed approach amongst the project stakeholders for 
risk identification, assessment, monitoring and control. 
Risk management planning is the process to enable 
formulation of risk management team structure, 
identification of tools and techniques to be used for 
risk management, documentation for monitoring and 
control of risk management processes. 


5.1.1 Risk Management Planning: Required 
Information 


The required information for risk management 
planning includes the following: 


a) Project scope, including all activities 
associated with the project for its delivery as 
per the defined objectives. 

b) Time management plan [see IS15883 (Part 2)]. 

c) Costmanagement plan [see IS15883 (Part 3)]. 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


d) Information and communications management 
plan, including interactions that shall occur on 
the project and modes thereof. 

e) Procurement management plan, including 
processes for purchase of materials, equipment, 
products, soliciting services of consultants and 
engaging agencies for execution of works 
under a contract with special provisions with 
respect to risk management. 

f) Quality management plan, including 
planning, direction and control for issues with 
respect to risk management. 


g) Human resource management plan, including 
skills, roles and responsibilities required for 
risk management. 

h) Health, safety and environment plan, including 
all the issues with respect to risk management. 

j) Project environment, that can influence the 
risk management planning process with 
respect to the risk attitudes and the tolerances 
that describe the degree of risk which project 
stakeholders have to withstand. 


Following aspects of constituent stakeholders’ 
organizational elements shall also be considered in risk 
management planning: 


1) Risk categories, 

2) Definitions and terminologies related to risk 
management, 

3) Risk statement formats, 

4) Standard templates, 

5) Roles and responsibilities, 

6) Authority levels for decision-making, and 

7) Lessons learnt. 


5.1.2 Planning Meetings and Analysis 


Project teams hold planning meetings to develop the 
risk management plan. Attendees at these meetings 
need to include the project manager, selected project 
team members, authorized representatives of 
stakeholders and others as needed. The outputs of these 
meetings shall be summarized in the form of a risk 
management plan. 


5.1.3 Risk Management Plan 


The risk management plan describes how risk 
management shall be structured and performed on the 
project shall include at least the following elements: 


a) Methodology — It defines the approaches, 
tools, and data sources that may be used to 
perform risk management on the project. 

b) Roles and responsibilities — It defines the lead, 
support, and risk management team members 
for each type of activity in the risk management 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


d) 


e) 


g) 


h) 


j) 


k) 


m) 


plan, and assigns their authorities and 
responsibilities. 

Risk categories — It provides a structure that 
ensures a comprehensive process of 
systematically identifying risks to a consistent 
level of detail and contributes to the 
effectiveness and quality of the process of 
identification of risks which shall lead to the 
preparation of the risk breakdown structure 
(RBS). The RBS is an hierarchically organized 
depiction of the identified project risk arranged 
by risk category and subcategory that identifies 
the various areas and causes of potential risks. 
Risk budget — It assigns resources, estimates 
funds needed for risk management for 
inclusion in the cost performance baseline, 
and establishes protocols for application of 
contingency and management reserves. 
Schedule for risk management processes — 
It defines when and how often the risk 
management processes will be performed 
throughout the project life cycle, establishes 
risk management activities to be included in 
the project schedule and establishes protocols 
for application of schedule contingency 
reserves. 

Project tolerances — It establishes project 
baseline tolerances acceptable to project 
stakeholders. 

Definitions of risk probability and impact — 
The quality and credibility of the risk 
assessment process requires that probabilities 
of occurrence of different levels of risks and 
their impacts be defined. General definitions 
of probability levels and impact levels are 
tailored to the project. 


Probability and impact matrix — Risks are 
prioritized according to their potential 
implications for having an impact on the 
objectives of the project. A typical approach 
to prioritizing risks is to use a probability and 
impact matrix. The specific combinations of 
probability and impact that lead to a risk being 
rated as high, moderate, or low importance 
are established at this stage. 

Reporting formats and communication — It 
defines how the outcomes of the risk 
management processes shall be documented, 
analyzed, and communicated. It describes the 
content and format of the risk register as well 
as any other risk reports required. 

Risk monitoring — It establishes risk tracking 
and monitoring processes. 

Risk auditing — It documents how risk 
activities shall be recorded for the benefit of 


the current project as well as for future needs 
and lessons learned, and whether and how risk 
management processes shall be audited. 


5.2 Risk Identification 


To manage risks in a project, once the risk management 
plan has been completed, all anticipated risks shall be 
identified. The objectives of risk identification are to 
identify and categorize risks that can affect the project, 
and to then document these risks. The outcome of this 
step is acomprehensive list of risks based upon historical 
review (past), present project assessment (present) and 
assessment of future project risks by applying creative 
tools and techniques (future). This process should 
include identification of, 


a) sources of risks irrespective of whether these 
are under control of the project team; 


b) areas of impact due to these risks; and 
c) their causes and potential consequences. 


Comprehensive risk identification is critical, though 
identification of all possible risks at the outset of a 
project may not be possible. The objective is to identify 
all risks to the maximum possible extent. Identified 
project risks may change as project progresses through 
its life cycle. This may be due to actions or decisions 
taken during project execution to handle project 
internal changes or externally imposed changes. 


5.2.1 Risk Identification Process 


Following describe the best practices for identifying 
risks, which enhance the likelihood of identification 
of as many risks as possible: 


a) Identification to start at an early stage in the 
project life cycle — Early identification of the 
risks helps to take key project decisions that 
may define the project strategy. It also 
maximizes the time available to plan and 
implement the risk response. 


b) Identification be comprehensive — All 
possible sources of risk or risk categories for 
a construction project shall be considered to 
identify the risks. 

c) Encourage creative thinking — The risk 
identification process should promote creative 
thinking and leverage team experience and 
knowledge. 

d) Involvement of broad range of stakeholders — 
For identifying risks, taking input from broad 
range of stakeholders ensures that all 
perspectives of the project are represented and 
considered. Risk identification should not limit 
to immediate project team members only. 

e) Identification of possible risk sources — 
Identification should include risks whether or 


g) 


h) 


j) 


k) 


n) 


p) 


not their source is under the control of the 
project team. Some of the possible risk 
sources for construction projects are listed in 
4.2. List is not exhaustive and should be 
arrived at depending upon the project 
peculiarities. 

Risks to be linked to project objectives — All 
identified risks should be linked to one or 
more project objectives: project cost, time, 
scope, quality, etc. 

Risk categorisation and risk breakdown 
structure — The identified risks may be 
further categorized based upon sources of 
risks, area of impact of risks, project phases 
or as per any other parameter considered 
relevant for the project. This shall lead to 
preparation of risk breakdown structure. It is 
an hierarchically organized depiction of the 
identified project risks arranged by risk 
category and subcategory that identifies the 
various areas and causes of potential risks. 


Project documents review — Risks can be 
identified and derived from an examination 
of the project documents and details including 
description, work breakdown structure, cost 
estimate, design and construction schedule, 
procurement plan or quality plan. 


A clear and complete risk statement — All 
identified risks shall be clearly described so 
that these can be well understood for further 
risk assessment and response planning. Single 
word like, ‘contract’, ‘infrastructure’ or an 
ambiguous statement should be avoided for 
any miscommunication. 


Risk trigger — For each identified risk, a 
suitable risk trigger or symptom shall be 
defined which indicates its occurrence in the 
project. 

Risk ownership — Each identified risk shall 
be assigned to a single identified owner with 
clear responsibility and accountability to 
manage it further. 


Documentation — All identified risks shall 
be formally recorded in a form of table that is 
risk register or any other suitable format in 
order to document all relevant information 
currently available for the identified risks. A 
template of possible risk register is given in 
Annex A. 


Identification to be an iterative process — As 
it is impossible to identify all risks at one time 
in a project, risk identification process should 
be done repeatedly throughout the project 
lifecycle, that is, from project appraisal stage 
till commissioning stage. Frequency of risk 


q) 


r) 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


identification shall be determined during the 
risk management plan. 


Identification of secondary risks and residual 


risk — See 5.4.2 and 5.4.3. 


Risk response planning to identify responses 
to mitigate identified risks — It is not 
practically possible to mitigate all risks and 
project shall always be executed with certain 
‘residual risks’ that may affect the project. 
Also, implementation of certain risk response 
strategies may generate new risks which are 
termed as ‘secondary risks’. Thus, during risk 
monitoring and control process, new risks, 
residual risks and secondary risks shall be 
identified, included in the risk register and 
assigned risk owners for necessary action. 


Identification not to limit to any formal event 
or regular review — In addition to the 
frequency or event that is defined during risk 
management plan for risk identification 
process, identification of the risk can be done 
at any time whenever it is required. 


5.2.2 Risk Identification Tools and Techniques 


The project team should apply risk identification tools 
and techniques that are appropriate to its objectives 
and capabilities, and also to the nature and type of 
project risks faced. Following are some simple risk 
identification tools: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


Documentation review — A structured review 
of project documentation including that of 
previous similar projects. This information 
may include risk audit information, variance 
and trend analysis information and other 
information of previous similar projects which 
may help to identify risks in the project being 
planned. 

Brain storming — This is an information 
gathering technique by group discussion. 
Goal is to obtain a comprehensive list of 
project risks. Ideas about project risks are 
generated under the leadership of a facilitator. 


Delphi technique — This is similar to 
brainstorming but participants are 
anonymous. A facilitator uses a questionnaire 
and circulates to experts. Responses are 
submitted and assessed. Consensus is reached 
after few rounds of this process. 


Interviewing — This is performed by talking 
individually or in group with experienced 
project team members, stakeholders or subject 
matter experts. These interviews can be done 
informally or formally based on the prepared 
questionnaire. 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


e) Assumption analysis — It explores the validity 
of assumptions as they apply to the project. 
Inaccuracy, instability, inconsistency or 
incompleteness of assumptions identifies 
risks. This may include ‘what-if analysis’ to 
be conducted regarding project scenarios. 


f) Strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and 
threat (SWOT) analysis — Assessment of 
strengths and/or weaknesses of an 
organization or project team, focusing on 
either the project organization or the wider 
business opportunities and threats are 
identified using brain storming. 


5.3 Risk Assessment 


Risk assessment evaluates characteristics of 
individually identified project risks and prioritizes risks 
based on agreed-upon parameters. It shall includes, 


a) evaluating the probability or likelihood of 
each risk occurring, and 


b) impact of each individual risk either 
enhancing or threatening the achievement of 
project objectives. 


Risk assessment may be performed qualitatively and/ 
or quantitatively. Qualitative risk assessment process 
evaluates likelihood and impact of each individual risk. 
Quantitative risk assessment analyses overall risk to 
the project objectives that results from the combined 
effect of all risks and their potential interactions with 
each other. 


5.3.1 Qualitative Risk Assessment 


A project faces multiple risks. Thus, risks 
categorization and understanding of relationships 
between risks leads to improved analysis of the 
probability and magnitude of impacts, which helps in 
effective response planning. This shall include the 
following: 


a) Risks categorization based on their sources 
or corresponding risk hazards or causes — 
This lead to the identification of ‘root causes’ 
or causes from which several risks or a group 
of risks arise. This may reveal the magnitude 
of the risk event for the group as a whole. 


b) Identifying common effects or impacts of 
risks — This may lead to the identification of 
the areas of greatest exposure like project 
time, cost or quality. 

c) Identifying causal chain between the linked 
risks — Understanding the chain of risks may 
lead to a better understanding of the likelihood 
and impact of the project risk. 


d) Identifying risks that can occur at the same 
time or using the same resources for 


recovery — This may provide a realistic 
picture of problems of risk mitigation using 
scarce resources. 


Qualitative risk analysis should lead to the following 
output information: 


1) Prioritization of risks — This information is 
an input for plan risk response process. The 
criteria for risk prioritization shall be as 
agreed upon during the plan risk management 
process. 

2) Identification of activities that exhibit more 
risks — This is identified by combining 
qualitative risk analysis information with 
work breakdown structure. 


3) Identification of activities that may lead to the 
risk impact on a specific project objective. 
4) Risk sources from which a cluster or group 
of risks originate. 
This information shall be used for further finalizing 
the risk register (see Annex A). 


There are various techniques that may be used for 
qualitative risk analysis. Some of these are as follows: 


i) Root cause analysis — It is a tool for 
identifying the factors that resulted in the 
nature, the magnitude, the location, and the 
timing of the harmful outcomes 
(consequences) of one or more past events in 
order to identify what behaviours, actions, 
inactions, or conditions should be changed to 
prevent recurrence of similar harmful 
outcomes and to identify the lessons to be 
learned to promote the achievement of better 
consequences. It is a team effort and for risk 
assessment, it will be effective if the 
definitions for probability and impact of risks 
are agreed upon between all the project 
stakeholders. 


ii) Documentation review — It is structured 
review of project documentation including 
previous project files, and other information 
which helps to identify the risk in the project 


iii) Probability and impact matrix — It is a tool 
utilised to categorize risks based on their 
severity (see Annex B). 


iv) Analytic hierarchy process (AHP) — It is a 
structured technique for organizing and 
analyzing complex decisions through group 
decision making process. Rather than 
prescribing a ‘correct’ decision, the AHP helps 
decision makers find one decision that best 
suits their goal and their understanding of the 
problem. It provides a comprehensive and 


rational framework for structuring a decision 
problem, for representing and quantifying its 
elements, for relating those elements to overall 
goals, and for evaluating alternative solutions. 


5.3.2 Risk Likelihood, Impact and Consequence 


5.3.2.1 Risk likelihood is the probability that a hazard 
or risk factor may actually materialize. It may be 
expressed as follows: 


a) A qualitative rating such as high, medium or 
low; or 

b) A numerical value between 1.0 (certain to 
happen) and 0 (impossible). 


These ratings are subjective and depend upon the 
opinion of managers. Qualitative ratings may also be 
associated with certain numerical values as shown 
below: 


Qualitative Numerical Values 
Low 0 — 0.20 
Medium 0.21 — 0.50 
High 0.51 — 1.00 


The association between qualitative ratings and 
numerical values is subjective and depends on the type 
of proJect, experience of the project team and the risk 
tolerance of stakeholders. 


5.3.2.2 Risk Impact is the effect of the materialization 
of a risk hazard. It is specified in terms of time, cost 
and performance measures. It can be expressed as, 


a) qualitative rating such as high, medium and 
low, or 

b) numerical value between 1.0 (catastrophic) 
and 0 (not serious). 


These ratings are subjective. Qualitative ratings may 
also be associated with numerical values and the 
association is subjective. Risk impacts may also be 
classified as under: 


1) Impact of arisk on specific project objectives, 
2) Impact of a risk on the overall project, and 


3) Impact of a risk beyond the project on the 
enterprise or organization executing the 
project. 


5.3.2.3 Risk or risk consequence is defined as a 
function of risk likelihood and risk impact. It can be 
expressed in two ways: 


a) Asasimple numerical rating ranging between 
O and 1.0 (see Annex O). 

b) As an expected value with respect to project 
objectives, that is, project time or cost 
(see Annex D). 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


5.3.3 Qualitative Risk Assessment for Multiple, 
Independent Risks 


When a project is facing multiple, independent risk 
sources, a common likelihood factor (CLF) for the 
project shall be assessed. Similarly, for assessing the 
cumulative impact of all the risks a common impact 
factor (CIF) shall be calculated for the project. This 
leads to quantification of risk for the project in terms 
of risk consequence (RCR). 


RCR = CLF + CIF — CLF(CIF) 


Annex C explains the method of calculating CLF, CIF 
and RCR. 


5.3.4 Quantitative Risk Assessment 


Quantitative risk assessment seeks to determine the 
overall risk to project objectives when all risks 
potentially operate simultaneously on the project. It 
provides a numerical estimate of the overall effect of 
risk on the objectives of the project, based on current 
plans and information, when considering risks 
simultaneously. It helps in establishing contingency 
reserves, usually for time and cost that are appropriate 
to both, the risks and risk tolerance of project 
stakeholders. 


Quantitative risk assessment by utilization of 
probabilistic techniques like Monte Carlo simulation, 
provides realism in the estimate of the overall project 
cost or schedule. A non-probabilistic approach assumes 
that the activity durations or cost estimates are 
deterministic. The basis for quantitative risk assessment 
is an appropriate model of the project, which may 
include project time schedule, cost estimates, decision 
tree (for decisions in the scenario of uncertainty) and 
other information to depict total project. 


However, quantitative assessment is not always 
required or appropriate for all projects especially for 
smaller projects. Therefore, during the risk 
management planning process (see 5.1), the benefits 
of quantitative risk analysis should be weighed against 
the effort required to ensure that the additional insights 
and value justify the additional effort. 


Quantitative risk analysis leads to the following output 
information: 


a) Likelihood of the project to complete on the 
schedule date or earlier, and the project actual 
cost to be the budgeted cost or less. 

b) Extent of contingency in time and cost needed 
to provide the organization with its desired 
degree of confidence in the results; and if the 
contingency reserve required exceeds the time 
or resources available, the required changes 
needed to be done in project scope and plan. 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


c) 


d) 


e) 


Extent of reliability of the product that the 
project produces and how should the design 
of the product or system be changed most 
economically to increase its reliability. 

The best decision to make in the face of 
uncertain results. 

The individual risks that seem to be the most 
important in determining the overall project 
risk. 


Project activities associated with most 
important risks; this can be identified by 
sensitivity analysis in a cost risk analysis or a 
criticality analysis in a schedule risk analysis. 


There are various techniques that may be used for 
quantitative risk analysis. Some of these are: 


1) 


2) 


3) 


4) 


5) 


6) 


Decision tree analysis — It is a tool used for 
decision making. It allows the user to specify 
the structure of the decision with decision 
nodes, chance nodes, costs, benefits and 
probabilities. Different decisions can be 
evaluated using linear utility functions based 
on expected monetary value (described 
below) or on non-linear utility functions of 
various shapes. 

Expected monetary value (EMV) — This is a 
simple calculation of a value such as weighted 
average or expected cost or benefit when the 
outcomes are uncertain. All reasonable 
alternative outcomes are identified. Their 
probabilities of occurring (summing to 100 
percent) and their values are estimated. The 
EMV calculation is made for the entire event 
by weighting the individual possible 
outcomes by their probabilities of occurring. 
Fault tree analysis — It is a top down, 
deductive failure analysis technique in which 
an undesired state of a system is analyzed 
using boolean logic to combine a series of 
lower-level events. This analysis method is 
mainly used to determine the probability of a 
particular system level (functional) failure. 


Monte Carlo simulation — It is a detailed, 
computer-intensive simulation approach to 
determine the value and probability of 
possible outcomes of a project objective such 
as a project schedule or cost estimate. 
Documentation review — A structured review 
of project documentation including previous 
project files, and other information which 
helps to identify the risk in the project. 
System dynamics — It is an approach to 
understand the behaviour of complex systems 
over time. It deals with internal feedback 
loops and time delays that affect the behaviour 


7) 


of the entire system. What makes using system 
dynamics different from other approaches to 
studying complex systems is the use of 
feedback loops and stocks and flows. These 
elements help describe how even seemingly 
simple systems display nonlinearity. 
Sensitivity analysis — This is an approach to 
study different project scenarios in terms of 
probability of their occurrence. 


5.3.5 The following are some other points that should 
be considered during risk assessment: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


During risk management planning, the risk 
management team should define the levels of 
probability and of impact on objectives, which 
would be required for risk assessment. 

Data collected for risk assessment should be 
reliable and of high quality. It should also be 
unbiased. 

Risk assessment for individual risks should 
be performed periodically throughout the 
project. The frequency of this process shall 
be planned in the risk management planning 
process, but may also depend on events within 
the project itself. 


The risk assessment process is depicted in Fig. 1. 


5.4 Risk Response Planning 


Risk assessment and risks categorization of all 
identified risks leads to risk response plans formulation. 
These will comprise a report on identified risks and 
recommended actions for reducing the probability of 
occurrence of these risks and minimizing the impact 
of risks if they occur. 


For negative risks, recommended actions shall fall 
under any, some or all of the following categories: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Hold or retain or accept — Low category 
risks may be retained or accepted by the 
project execution team and dealt with during 
project execution. For such risks, there shall 
be a fall back plan to be implemented, if the 
risk affects the project. For example, 
unanticipated increase in cost of material. 
Reduce — This action shall apply to those 
risks for which we can reduce the probability 
of their occurrence and impact, if they occur. 
Some of these actions may be modifying the 
design specifications, working methodologies 
and procurement strategies. 

Share — Risks can be shared by the project 
team with other entities where mutual 
incentives are recognized. Some of these risk 
sharing mechanisms may be sub-contracting 
and joint ventures. 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


Risks Identification 
Initiate Qualitative Risk Assessment 


Study Risks’ Characteristics including Likelihood and Impact 
Collect and Analyze Data 


Risk 


Identification Identification Identification of Risks 


Categorization of Causal of Activities that may Lead to the 
based on Risk Chain between that Exhibit impact on Specific 
Causes Risks most Risks Project Objectives 


Prioritization of Risks 
Document Results 


Periodically Repeat 
Qualitative Risk Assessment 


Assess the 
Requirement of 
Quantitative Risk 

Assessment 


Risk Identification for Secondary Risks and Residual Risks 


Collect Detailed Risk Data 
Developed Project Model Perform Quantitative Risk Assessment 


Document Risks 
* Probability of Project Success 

e Contingency Reserves 

¢ Design modification if Required 

e Decision Taking Structure if Risks Materialize 
e Modified Risks Register 


Risk Response Planning 


Fic. 1 Risk ASSESSMENT PROCESS 


Periodically Repeat 
Risk Assessment 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


d) Transfer — This action shall apply to those 
risks for which probability of occurrence 
cannot be reduced but impact can be 
minimized by transferring the liability to 
another entity through insurance or relevant 
contract clauses. 

e) Avoid — This applies to high or extreme risks 

for which probability of occurrence and 

impact cannot be reduced. Such risks may be 
totally avoided, for example, changing the 


location of the project, changing 
specifications, technology and working 
methodologies. 


Contingency reserves allocated for the project shall be 
utilized for above stated five risk response actions. 


For positive risks, recommended actions shall fall under 
any, some or all of the following categories: 


1) Exploit — Actions are taken so that 
opportunities may occur and project shall be 
able to take advantage of those opportunities. 
This includes strategically planning the 
project location near the location of sourcing 
resources. 

2) Share — Benefits of positive risks are 
opportunities shared with agencies that are 
better placed to take the benefit of those 
opportunities. This includes executing a 
project through a joint venture where the 
profits are shared by all the agencies that 
constitute the joint venture. 
3) Enhance — Actions are taken to increase the 
probability of opportunities occurring for the 
project or to increase their positive impact on 
the project. This may be achieved by changing 
the specifications, design elements or the 
structure of the project team. 

4) Accept — Some opportunities may occur for 

the project and be accepted by the project 

execution team. For example, unanticipated 
change in cost of material. If the cost of 
material does not increase, it shall be 
beneficial for the project, but if it happens, 
that shall have negative impact on the project. 


For each identified risk, possible risk response 
strategies shall be finalized, taking into account the 
cost of implementing those responses, resources and 
tools and techniques required to implement those 
responses, their impact on the project and the possible 
secondary and residual risks. Risk responses may be 
planned at the senior management level and 
implemented by the planning or execution team. 
Recommended risk response actions for each 
identified risk shall be included in the risk register 
(see Annex A). 


10 


Risk response strategy needs to be integrated with the 
overall project management plan to assess probability 
of its effective implementation, its efficacy in 
mitigating risks, expected post-response scenario and 
expected requirement of additional response strategies 
or fall back plan. 


5.4.1 Insurance Policies for Construction Projects 


Specific insurance policies are utilized for specific 
industries. Following insurance policies are applicable 
to construction projects: 


a) Contractor all risks (CAR) insurance — It is 
applicable for construction and maintenance 
period of construction projects like roads, 
buildings, bridges, etc. It covers insurance 
cover for damage or loss of the object that is 
being insured. It also includes third party 
liability during construction period covering 
labour insurance. 

b) Erection all risks (EAR) insurance — It is 
applicable for erection and maintenance 
period of projects like factory equipment 
installation, antenna installation, etc. It covers 
insurance for object’s damage or loss that is 
being insured. It also includes third party 
liability during erection period. 

Electronic equipment (EEI) insurance — It 
covers electronic equipment damage or loss 
caused to them by external hazard such as 
short circuit, fire, etc. For example, television 
studio equipment insurance, CCTV, 
telecommunication equipments, etc. 

d) Machinery breakdown (MB) insurance — It 
covers machinery breakdown damage or loss 
caused by it and not from external hazard. For 
example, factory machinery insurance, 
refrigerator, etc. 

Loss of profit following machinery breakdown 
(MLOP) insurance — It covers the loss of 
gross profit that occurs from machinery 
breakdown, refrigerator and other 
machineries insured under MB Insurance. 


Boiler and pressure vessel (BPV) 
insurance — It covers the loss from boiler 
explosion or pressure vessel. The insurance 
includes the damage from the object of the 
insured, the damage from the property of the 
insured, and third party liability either on 
physical or property damage. 

Deterioration of stock (DOS) insurance — It 
covers the loss from goods deterioration 
inside cold storage caused by cold engine. In 
order to have a claim settlement for this 
insurance, the cold engine shall have to be 
insured with MB insurance. 


g) 


h) Civil engineering completed risk (CECR) 
insurance — It covers for finished civil 
engineering facility or structure being 
developed such as bridge, barrage, port, and 
other civil property. The insurance will cover 
for damage caused by fire, earthquake, flood, 
landslide, storm, etc. 

J) Contractor’s plant and machinery (CPM) 
insurance — CPM insurance covers for any 
damage or loss in heavy equipment used that 
is caused by collision, tumbling, burglary, 
natural disaster, etc. For example, insurance 
for tractors, excavator and bulldozer. 


5.4.2 Secondary Risks 


Implementation of certain risk responses may generate 
additional risks that are known as secondary risks. 
These identified secondary risks shall be assessed, 
included in the risk register; risk owners shall be 
assigned for these risks; and response strategies for 
these risks shall be planned for the project. Some of 
these secondary risks can be identified at the risk 
planning stage, but some of these risks may get 
identified at the risk monitoring and control stage. 


For example, for transferring the risk of executing a 
project on time, within estimated cost and as per the 
quality specifications, the lead contractor of a project 
sub-contracts the project work to different agencies, 
who may further sub-contract their contracted work 
to other sub-contractor. This process increases the 
number of agencies executing the project and 
generates the secondary risk of effective coordination 
between all the agencies. Thus, response strategy is 
to plan for effective coordination between all the 
agencies. 


5.4.3 Residual Risks 


It is not possible to eliminate the probability of 
occurrence of all the risks or their impact on the project. 
Thus, even after formulating and implementing a risk 
response strategy, some risks remain for the project 
and are termed as residual risks, which are retained 
during the project execution stage. These identified 
residual risks shall be assessed, included in the risk 
register and risk owners shall be assigned for these 
risks. Priorities for these residual risks shall be 
identified and recorded. Some of these residual risks 
shall be identified at the risk planning stage, but some 
of these risks may get identified at the risk monitoring 
and control stage. 


For example, unanticipated increase in cost of material 
can be residual risk for a project. At the start of the 
project, this risk cannot be eliminated, but there should 
be a fall back plan to be implemented if this risk affects 
the project. 


11 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


5.5 Risk Monitoring and Control 


Risk monitoring and control shall be performed 
throughout the project life cycle by the risk 
management team. It shall comprise the following 
steps: 


a) Identification of new risks including 
secondary and residual risks; 

b) Monitoring of previously identified risks; 

c) Monitoring of risk response plans and their 
effectiveness; 

d) Risk management plan updation; 

e) Maintaining communication between the 
project team and risk management team; and 

f) Comprehensive project documentation. 


Depending upon the size, nature and complexity of 
project the periodicity of above steps shall be decided. 


5.5.1 Risk Monitoring Meetings 


While there may be a regular review for project 
implementation which can discuss risk monitoring, 
such meeting of stakeholders shall be convened early 
in case of emergency/high value risk. This will help in 
identifying suitable risk mitigation measures early 
resulting in less additional cost. 


Risk monitoring team shall analyze the risks and their 
occurrence, trigger mechanisms and their usefulness 
and risk mitigation actions and their effectiveness. 


5.5.2 Risk Reports 


Risk monitoring reports may be prepared for the 
following parameters: 


a) Identified and unidentified risks and their 
occurrence; 

b) Risk mitigation action taken whether as 
originally envisaged or modified; 

c) Expenditure, if incurred or likely to be 
incurred, over and above the contingency 
reserves earmarked; 

d) Status update of closed risks; and 

e) Feedback reports for above parameters. 


5.5.3 Sensitizing Project Team regarding Risk 
Awareness 


Periodically the project team and stakeholders shall 
be sensitized regarding the risks to the project and the 
benefits of risk management exercise being conducted. 


5.5.4 Alternative actions for Risk Monitoring 


Risk mitigation measures whether pre-decided or 
innovative when adopted, need to be reported to the 
risk management team through feedback and the 
concerned team members may be suitably rewarded. 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


5.5.5 Replenishing Contingency Reserves 5.6 Post Construction Review and Documentation 


Risk management team shall periodically monitor the All project risk management documents related to risks 
expenditure from contingency reserves and trigger the encountered and managed shall be analyzed and 
mechanism for replenishment of contingency reserves, preserved for later reference. 

if required. 


ANNEX A 
[Clauses 5.3.1(4) and 5.4] 
A TYPICAL RISK REGISTER TEMPLATE 


Organization Name : 


Project Name: Project Manager’s Name: 


Risk Identification Risk Assessment Risk Response Risk Monitoring 
& Control 


Impact (D 


Description of response action 


Any alternative action 


~ 
N 
— 
> 
p. 
= 
` 
2 
q 
2 
° 
= 
= 


P 
Š 
2 
i 
Q 
7 
š 
"= 
= 
a 
isi 
| 
ew 
= 
ou 
| 
=s 
7a 
mE 
| 
| 
Pas 
S 


ale 
= x 
x x Ë 
i i 
wam 
-m 
Ca _ 
i | 
| I 
T | 
T | 
le =i | 
T | 
T | 
= l 
ae] a 
nl isssai 
a | 
T | 
rots 


° 
Q 
= 
s 
= 
= 
= 
= 
Q 
` 


= 
© 
= 
= 
Li 
= 
5) 
N 
D 
Qa 
=< 
š 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


ANNEX B 
[Clause 5.3.1 (i1i)] 
PROBABILITY-IMPACT MATRIX 


B-1 Probability-impact matrix is generated to 
categorise the identified risks as per their severity. The 
probability of occurrence of risks may be measured 
on the following five point scale: 


a) Very high, 
b) High, 

c) Moderate, 
d) Low, and 

e) Very low. 


The impacts of identified risks may be measured on 
the following five point scale: 


3) Moderate, 

4) Minor, and 

5) Insignificant. 
All the identified risks are accordingly placed in the 
probability-impact matrix and based on their severity 
categorized as, 

i) Extreme risk, 

ii) High risk, 

iii) Moderate risk, and 

iv) Low risk. 


B-2 The following probability-impact matrix may be 


1) Severe, generated for the identified risk: 

2) Major, 

Probability Impact 

aaaea 
Insignificant Minor Moderate Major Severe 
Very high Moderate High High Extreme Extreme 
High Moderate Moderate High High Extreme 
Moderate Low Moderate Moderate High Extreme 
Low Low Moderate Moderate Moderate High 
Very low Low Low Moderate Moderate High 
ANNEX C 


[Clauses 5.3.2.3(a) and 5.3.3] 


METHOD OF CALCULATING COMMON LIKELIHOOD FACTOR (CLF), COMMON IMPACT 
FACTOR (CIF) AND RISK CONSEQUENCE (RCR) 


C-1 The method is explained below through a simple 
hypothetical example: 


a) Step 1 — Identify risk sources for the project and 
establish weightage for each risk source. Weightages 
of all risk sources should add up to 1. 


Example: For a road project executed under build- 
operate-transfer (BOT) contractual arrangement, project 
risk sources and their respective weightages may be: 


(W, =0.6) 
(W, = 0.4) 


S,: Land acquisition 
S, : Funds 


b) Step 2 — Identify risk situations or scenarios arising 
from each risk source. 


Example: 


S,: Land acquisition 


a) Land acquisition happens as planned 
b) Land acquisition delayed due to administrative 
reasons 
c) Land acquisition delayed due to political 
reasons 
d) Land acquisition cancelled 
S,: Funds 


a) Funds available 
b) Funds stopped intermittently 
c) Funds delayed 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


d) Funds stopped during project duration 


c) Step 3 — Identify failure likelihood due to each 
risk situation or scenario and select the most probable 
situation as is foreseen for the project. 


Example: 
Likelihood 
Si: Land acquisition 
a) Land acquisition happens 0 (low) 


as planned 

b) Land acquisition delayed 
due to administrative 
reasons 

c) Land acquisition delayed 
due to political reasons 

d) Land acquisition cancelled 1 (high) 


S,: Funds 


0.4 (moderate) 


0.7 (significant) y 


a) Funds available 0 (low) 

b) Funds stopped intermittently 0.4 (moderate)¥ 

c) Funds delayed 0.7 (significant) 

d) Funds stopped during project 1 (high) 
duration 


d) Step 4 — Calculate common likelihood factor (CLF). 
Example: 


CLF = W, x S, Likelihood + W, x S, Likelihood 
= 0.6 x 0.7 + 0.4 x 0.4 
= 0.58 


e) Step 5 — Identify risk impacts on the project and 
establish weightage of each impact. 


Example: For such a project, risk impacts and their 
respective weightages may be: 


I,: Project delay 
I,: Project cost overrun 


(W, = 0.6) 
(W, = 0.4) 


f) Step 6 — Identify Impact situations or scenarios 
arising from each risk impact. 


Example: 
I: Project delay 


- Negligible impact; compensated by schedule 
slack time 

- Project delayed (up to 6 months) 

- Project delayed (up to 12 months) 

- Project delayed (more than 12 months) 


I,: Project cost over-run 


Within budget 


Upto 20 percent cost increase 


20 percent — 50 percent cost increase 


Cost increase in excess of 50 percent 


g) Step 7 — Identify impact values due to each Impact 
situation or scenario and select the most probable 
situation as is foreseen for the project. 


Example: 


Impact 


I,: Project delay 


Negligible impact; 
compensated by 
schedule slack time 
Project delayed 

(up to 6 months) 
Project delayed (up to 
12 months) 

Project delayed (more 
than 12 months) 


L: Project cost overrun 


Within budget 

Up to 20 percent cost 
increase 

20 percent — 50 percent 
cost increase 

Cost increase in excess 
of 50 percent 


0.1 (low) 


0.4 (moderate) V 
0.7 (significant) 


0.9 (high) 


0 (low) 
0.4 (moderate) V 


0.7 (significant) 


0.9 (high) 


h) Step 8 — Calculate common impact factor (CIF). 


Example: 
CIF = (W,) x I, Impact + (W,) x I, Impact 


= 0.6 x 0.4 + 0.4 x 0.4 
= 0.40 


j) Step 9 — Calculate risk consequence (RCR). 


Example: 


RCR = CLF + CIF — CLF x CIF 
= 0.58 + 0.40 — 0.58 x 0.40 


= 0.748 


k) Step 10 — Assess that for this particular project, 
Risk consequence of 0.748 signifies high, medium or 
low risk project. 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


ANNEX D 
[Clause 5.3.2.3(b)] 
METHOD OF CALCULATING RISK CONSEQUENCE AS AN EXPECTED VALUE 


D-1 Risk consequence as an expected value can be 
interpreted as the average outcome, if the project was 
repeated a large number of times. It is computed as: 


Risk consequence = (Impact) x (Likelihood) 


Risk consequence may be calculated for each 
individual risk and also at the work breakdown 
structure element level, as illustrated in the following 
examples: 


a) Risk Consequence calculation for an individual 
risk: 


Suppose the likelihood of occurrence of a risk is 0.40 
and if this risk materializes, the project gets delayed 
by 4 months and project cost escalated by an estimated 
< 5 000 000. Thus, expected risk consequences for 
project time and cost are: 


Risk consequence time (RT) = (4 months) x (0.4) 


SI No. WBS Cost Risk 
Element Escalation Likelihood 
T 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) A 20 000 0.2 
ii) B 10 000 0.4 
iii) C 20 000 0.3 
iv) D 35 000 0.4 
v) E 30 000 0.5 
vi) F 20 000 0.6 
vii) G 20 000 0.4 
viii) H 10 000 0.4 
TOTAL 


Assumed data for each of the eight WBS elements 
namely, time over-run due to risk occurrence, risk 


1.6 months 


(< 5 000 000) x (0.4) 
= < 2 000 000 


Risk consequence cost (RC) 


Assume the baseline or targeted Project time and cost 
were 18 months and < 100 000 000 respectively. 


Expected project completion time (ET) =18 + 1.6 
= 19.6 months 


Expected project completion cost (EC) = 
< 100 000 000 + < 2 000 000 = < 102 000 000 


b) Risk consequence calculation at work breakdown 
structure (WBS) element level: 


Let us assume a project has eight work packages and 
for each of these WBS elements’ cost escalation due 
to risk occurrence, risk likelihood, risk consequence 
cost, baseline cost and expected project completion cost 
data is as shown below: 


Risk Consequence Baseline Expected Project 
Cost Cost Completion Cost 
< < < 
(5) (6) (7) 
4 000 1 000 000 1 004 000 
4 000 4 000 000 4 004 000 
6 000 3 000 000 3 006 000 
14 000 5 000 000 5 014 000 
15 000 5 000 000 5 015 000 
12 000 4 000 000 4 012 000 
8 000 3 000 000 3 008 000 
4 000 2 000 000 2 004 000 
67 000 2 7 000 000 2 7 067 000 


likelihood, risk consequence time, baseline time and 
expected project completion time data is as shown 
below: 


SI WBS Time Over- Risk Risk Consequence Baseline Expected Project 
No. Element run Likelihood Time Time Completion Time 
Weeks Weeks Weeks Weeks 

(l) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) A 1 0.2 0.2 3 3.2 
ii) B 1 0.4 0.4 3 3.4 
iii) C 2 0.3 0.6 4 4.6 
iv) D 2 0.4 0.8 5 5.8 
v) E 2 0.5 1.0 6 7.0 
vi) F 2 0.6 1.2 5 6.2 
vii) G 1 0.4 0.4 3 3.4 
viii) H 1 0.4 0.4 2 2.4 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


Baseline time for all WBS elements has not been 
totalled to arrive at the total project time as some WBS 
elements could also be executed simultaneously. From 
above data it can be concluded that if the risks 
associated with the project materialize project cost 


escalation would be by ~ 67 000 and by updating the 
time schedule with ‘expected project completion time’ 
data for each WBS element the time over-run or delay 
for the total project can be calculated. 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Aecom India Private Limited, Noida 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Railway Corporation, New Delhi 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation 
Development Corporation, New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, New Delhi 
Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 
Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 
M.N. Dastur and Company (P) Limited, 
Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 
Army Headquarters, New Delhi 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, New Delhi 
National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Institute of Construction Management and Research, 
Mumbai 


Nirman Vikas Anusandhan Sansthan, Raipur 


17 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KRISHNAN (Chairman) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR 
Suri S. SREEKUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. PasricHa 
Suri SANJAY SONI (Alternate) 


Dr SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 
Suri PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr AcHuAL K. MITTAL 
Suri AJAY CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


Suri B. B. DHAR 
Suri SANJEEV Rastoci (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. SWARUP 
Suri Ravi JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 
CHIEF ENGINEER (HQ) (Alternate) 


SHRI DALJEET SINGH 


SHRI JosE KURIAN 
Suri VIVEK BANSAL (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri R. K. Das 
Suri M. D. DESHPANDE (Alternate) 


Suri D. M. KupTARKAR 
SHRI RAJENDRA SAWHNEY (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN AND MANAGING DIRECTOR 
Suri RAJEEV CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. SRIVASTAVA 
Suri P. S. CHADHA (Alternate) 


ProF B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr K. N. Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. P. NAIDU 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Suri S.K. GUHA 
Kolkata Suri GoBINDA PAL CHoupHury (Alternate) 


Bric Manos KUMAR 
CoL M. K. Prasan (Alternate) 


Dr DEVENDRA VERMA 
Suri R. RAJESH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJENDRA CHAUDHARI 
Suri H. K. DuAwAN (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. N. CHowpHuaRYy (Alternate) 


DR ANIL AGARWAL 


SHRI SANJEEV KASLIWAL 
SHRI AMARJEET SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


Organization 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
SHRI ANIL KAPOOR 
Dr RANJEET MEHTA 
Planning Commission, New Delhi Suri S. S. GANAPATHY 


SHRIMATI LEENA GUPTE SAMANT 
Suri TEJAS Sura (Alternate) 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


SHRI PAWAN CHOUDHARY 
Suri M. D. Josu (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. PAUL 


RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida SHRI MANOJ Kumar MITTAL 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata Lr GEN (RErp) HARI UNIYAL 


SHRI O. P. GoEL (Alternate) 
DR VANITA AHUJA 


Suri R. P. LAHIRI 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C,Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 
In personal capacity (411, Technology Apartments, Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, Patparganj, Suri A. K. SHARMA 


Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Patparganj, Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General Suri J. Roy Cuowpuury, Scientist F & Head (Civil Engg) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretaries 
Shri Sanjay Pant 
Scientist E (Civil Engg), BIS 
and 
Shri S. Arun Kumar 
Scientist C (Civil Engg), BIS 


Panel for Construction Project Management, CED 29/P1 


Organization 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai 

NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 

School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-9, Gaur Green Avenue, Abhay Khand-II, 
Indirapuram, Ghaziabad) 


In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (411, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (608, Technology Apartment, I.P. Extension, 
Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, Patparganj, 
Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220,Ankur Apartments, Patparganj, 


18 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KrisHNAN (Convener) 


Suri B. B. DHAR 
Suri SANJEEV RASToGI (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


Suri JosE KURIAN 
Suri VIVEK BANSAL (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 

Suri S. MUKHERJEE 

Suri M. P. NAIDU 

SHRI SATISH UPADHYAY 

Dr V. K. PAUL 

SHRI MANOJ Kumar MITTAL 


DR VANITA AHUJA 


SHRI IFrIKHAR A. DRABU 


SHRI CHANDRA PAL 


SHRI KRISHNA KANT 


Dr S. N. MANDAL 


Suri A. K. SHARMA 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


IS 15883 (Part 8) : 2015 


Delhi 
Working Group on Risk Management, CED 29/P1/WG7 
Organization Representative(s) 
In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, Dr Vanita Anusa (Convener) 
New Delhi) 
National Institute of Construction Management and Research, Mumbai Dr ANIL AGARWAL 
Planning Commission, New Delhi Suri S. S. GANAPATHY 
Technovate Solutions, New Delhi Suri H. L. CHAWLA 
In personal capacity (A-44, Sector 49, Noida) Ms SANGEETA N. SINHA 


19 


(Continued from second cover) 


Risk management is a rapidly developing discipline and there are many and varied views and descriptions of 
what risk management involves, how it should be conducted and what it is for. Although the practice of risk 
management has been developed over time and within many sectors in order to meet diverse needs, the adoption 
of consistent processes within a comprehensive framework can help to ensure that risk is managed effectively, 
efficiently and coherently across an organization. This standard (Part 8) has, therefore, been formulated with the 
aim to provide guidelines for risk management of construction projects in all stages. Successful planning and 
execution of a project is dependent on effective risk management planning and its implementation. 


This standard (Part 8) has been formulated to cover aspects on risk management as part of construction project 
management and information regarding the applicable tools and techniques. It gives guidelines on risk management 
planning, risk identification, risk assessment, risk response planning and risk monitoring and control as part of 
the risk management process. Users of this standard are encouraged to employ suitable risk management software 
as an aid to implement provisions of this standard. 


The guidelines may be applicable in general to all construction projects. However, for smaller projects, the 
applicability of various provisions may be decided appropriately by the parties concerned. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (7909). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


