Reaffi d 2002 
IS 12970 ("Part 1) : 1990. 


PIER IP ATT (Reaffirmed 2012) 
Ayah afaqat — FATSfAG frq — (Reaffirmed 2018) 
mi ° uua num (Reaffirmed 2021) 


Indian Standard 


SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES — 
INTEGRATED CIRCUITS 


PART 1 GENERAL 


UDC 621°3°049°77 


na! 


O BIS 1990 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG i 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 1990 Price Group 5 


Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee, LTD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 29 January 1990, 
after the draft finalized by the Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 


This standard deals with general conditions ( such as cooling ), preferred voltage and current ratings, 
measurement temperature, format for the presentation of data, etc, as a basis and guide for the 
other standards dealing with specific categories or sub-categories of integrated circuits. 


This standard ( Part 1 ) is one of the series of standards on integrated circuits. Other parts of this 
standard are as follows: 


Part 2 : Digital integrated circuits — Essential ratings and characteristics 
Part 3 : Digital integrated circuits — Measuring methods 

Part 4 : Digital integrated circuits — Acceptance and reliability 

Part 5 : Analogue integrated circuits — Essential ratings and characteristics 
Part 6 : Analogue integrated circuits — Measuring methods 

Part.7 : Analogue integrated circuits — Acceptance and reliability 


This standard is based on IEC Pub 748-1 'Semiconductor devices — Integrated circuits—Part I : 
General', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). 


For the purpose of deciding wheather a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 


IS 12970 ( Part 1 ) : 1990 


Indian Standard 


SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES — 
INTEGRATED CIRCUITS 


PART 1 GENERAL 


1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 1) provides information 
on the general principles or requirements appli- 
cable to digital and analogue integrated circuits. 

2 REFERENCES 


2.1 The following Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard: 


; IS No. Title 
1885 ( Part 7/ Electrotechnical ^ vocabulary: 
Sec 5) : 1971 Part 7 Semiconductor devices, 
Section 5 Integrated circuits and 
micro electronics 
371 Letter symbols for semicon- 
ead 1): 1971 ductor devices: Part 1 General 
aspects 
5000 Series Dimensions of semiconductor 
devices 


3 TERMINOLOGY AND EXPLANATION OF 
TERMS 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the terms 
and definitions given in IS 1885 ( Part 7/Sec 5 ) : 

1971 shall be applicable in addition to the 
following. 


3.2 Basic ‘Rating’ Definitions 


3.2.1 Rating 


The value of any electrical, thermal, mechanical 
or environmental quantity assigned to define the 
operating conditions under which a component, 
machine, apparatus, electronic device, etc, is 
expected to give satisfactory service. 


NOTE — ‘Rating’ is a generic term, but see also 
rating ( limiting value ). 


3.2.2 Rating ( Limiting Value ) 


A rating which established either a limiting 
capability or a limiting condition beyond which 
damage to the device may occur. 


NOTE — Limiting conditions may be either maxima 
or minima, known as maximum ratings and minimum 
ratings respectively. 


3.3 Definitions of Cooling Conditions 
3.3.1 Semiconductor devices should be specified 


either as ambient-rated, case-rated or both 
ambient and case-rated devices. Where devices 


are specified as ambient-rated devices, this infers 
natural air cooling conditions ( air under condi- 
tions of natural covection ) unless otherwise 
stated. 


For the purposes of rating, the following defini- 
tions shall apply: 


a) Ambient rating method 


A method in which the ratings are quoted 
in terms of the ambient cooling conditions. 


b 


— 


Ambient rating devices 


Semiconductor devices for which the 
ratings are quoted in terms of the ambient 
cooling conditions. 


c) Ambient cooling conditions 


The conditions of the surroundings deter- 
mining the manner in which heat is remov- 
ed from the device. These conditions 
concern the cooling fluid and the mounting 
of the device and are specified by some or 
all of the following: 


Fluid Mounting 


Device orientation 
and support to any 
enclosure 


Type 


Temperature at a 
specified point ahead 
of the device in the 
line of flow 


Temperature of the 
terminal connec- 
tions 


Flow (natural con- 
vection at a given 
pressure, or forced 
cooling in terms of 
velocity and inlet 
pressure ) 


Length and thick- 
ness of connecting 
leads. Sorrounding 
surface condition 
and temperature 


For the purpose of standardization, the following 
definition has been adopted for devices where the 
ambient temperature is called for under conditions 
of natural air cooling. 


i) Ambient temperature under conditions of 
natural air cooling 


The temperature measured below a semicon- 
ductor device when it is supported by its 
leads in an enclosure of a substantially 
uniform air temperature having low reflect- 
ance surfaces. The support points for the 
device should not be less than 10 mnl from 
the body of the device, except for devices 
having very short leads, in which case the 


IS 12970 ( Part 1) : 1990 


location of the support points . must be 
specified. The supports shall be at a tem- 
perature no less than that of the ambient 
temperature. The enclosure should be 
constructed so that natural air convection 
is not materially affected. 


— 


ii) Reference-point temperature 

The temperature measured by a specified 
method ata point on the device by the 
device manufacturer. 


iii) Case rating method 
A method in which the ratings are quoted 
in terms of the temperature of a reference 
point on the device. 


iv) Case-rated devices 


— 


Semiconductor devices for which the ratings 
are quoted in terms of the temperature of a 
reference point on the device. 


3.4 Open Circuit 


A circuit should be considered open-circuited if 
a two-to-one decrease in its impedance does not 
produce a change in the measured value of the 
parameter that is greater than the permitted error 
of measurement: 


3.5 Short Circuit 
A circuit should be considered short circuited if 


a two-to-one increase in its impedance does not 
produce a change in the measured value of the 


parameter that is greater than the permitted errorof 


measurement. 
3.6 Small Circuit 


A signal should be considered small-circuited if 
a two-to-one increase in its miagnitude does not 
produce a change in the value of the parameter 
that is greater than the permitted error of 
measurement. 


3.7 Constant Current Source 


Å current source should be considered constant 
if a two-to-one increase in the load impedance 
does not produce a change in the value of the 
parameter that is greater than the permitted error 
of measurement. 


3.8 Constant Voltage Source 


A voltage source should be considered constant 
if a two-to-one decrease in the load impedance 
does not produce a change in the measured value 
of the parameter that is greater than the permitted 
error of measurement. 


3.9 Pulse Measurement 
For measurement using pulse technique, when 


duty factor, pulse duration and repetition 
frequency are not specified, these should be chosen 


2 


that the change, in the measured value of the 
parameter does not exceed the permitted error 
when: 


a) the initial pulse duty factor is doubled, and 


b) the initial pulse duration is doubled or the 
pulse repetition frequency is halved. 


4 LETTER SYMBOLS 


4.1 For the purpose of this standard, the letter 
symbols given in IS 3715 ( Part 1) : 1971 shall 


be applicable. 


S ESSENTIAL RATINGS AND. 
CHARACTERISTICS 


5.1 Introduction 


The standards given in this series generally 
constitute the minimum data to be quoted by a 
manufacturer when describing his product for 
general sale. There are however, products that 
perform well in special circuits without being 
specified for all the characteristics mentioned in 
these standards. Therefore, such products may 
be excluded from these standards. 


When typical values are required in these 
Standards, it should be understood that they are 
intended for engineering guidance and not 
guaranteed values. 


5.2 Standard Format for the Presentation of 
Published Data 


The published data should be preserved in 
accordance with the following list. It is not com- 
puisory to indicate data for all the items in this 
ist: 


a) Type number. 


b) Category of the device according to the 
relevant standard. The semiconductor 
material ( for example, silicon ) and, where 
appropriate, the polarity should be stated. 


€) Information on outline, terminal identifica- 
tion and connections (see Note), case 
material (glass, ceramic, metal plastic, 
etc ) and the finish of leads. 


NOTE — Details of any connection between the 
case and any. of the terminals should be stated. 


d) Ratings (electrieal, thermal and mechani- 
cal ) according to the relevant standard. 


e) Electrical and thermal characteristics and 
associated information according to the 
relevant standard. 


f) Mechanical data, according to the relevant 
standard. 

g) Environmental data, according , to 
relevant standard and/or relíability data. 


h) Curves, for example, graphical represent- 
ation of characteristics. 


the 


5.3 List of Preferred Temperatures 


5.3.1 The temperature used for stating the ratings 
for analogue and digital circuits should be chosen 
from the following list: 
—65%; —55%C; —40°C; —25°C; —10?C; 0°C; 
25°C; 55°C; 70°C; 85°C; 100°C; 125°C; 150°C; 
175°C; 200°C. 
NOTE — The values —65°C, 150°C, 175°C and 200°C 
apply only for storage temperature. 


5.4 List of Preferred Voltages 


5.4.1 List of preferred nominal for 


recommended operating conditions: 


voltages 


a) Digital circuits 
The voltages used for stating the recom- 
mended operating conditions should be, 
wherever possible, chosen from the 
following list: 


— Bipolar circuits : V 5V; 50V; 52V (for 
ECL only ); 12V; 15V. 


NOTE — These values do not concern integrated 
injection logic circuits (IL) for which it is 
difficult to give values at present. 


— MOS circuits : V3V; 1V'5V; 30V; $'0V; 
12V; 15V; 18V; 24V. 


When it is not possible to use a value from 
these lists, it is recommended that value of 
the voltage be chosen, fromt he following list: 
4'0V; 60V; 9'OV; 30V; 48V; 100V. 

NOTE — When new technologies are introduced, 
it isrecommended that values for supply voltage 


be chosen from those given in the above list of 
preferred voltages. 


b) Analogue circuits 


The voltages used for stating the recom- 
mended operating conditions should be 
chosen from the following list: 


L3V; 1'5V; 30V; 40V; SOV; 6'0V; 90V; 
12V; 15V; 18V; 24V; 30V; 36V; «8V; 100V. 


5.4.2. Tolerance on Voltages 


The following values of positive and negative 
tolerances, applicable to all types of integrated 
circuits, are recommended: 


5 percent; 10 percent; 20 percent. 
The tolerances above and below the nominal 
value, that is, the positive and the negative 
tolerance, need not necessarily be the same. 


5.5 Mechanical Ratings, Characteristics and Other 
Data 


5.5.1 Introduction 


The following information on mechanical ratings, 
characteristics and other data applies generally to 


IS 12970 ( Part 1) : 1990 


semiconductor devices of all categories. The 
clauses should be invoked as appropriate to the 
mechanical construction of the device concerned, 
for example, wire ended, stud mounted device, 
etc. 


5.5.2 Mechanical Ratings ( Limiting Values ) 


In the following clauses on mechanical ratings, 
the preferred method of stating the information 
required should be in accordance with the relevant 
standard. Unless otherwise stated, all ratings 
apply at a temperature of 25°C. 


5.5.2.1 Ratings for terminations 
a) Stress ratings 


A statement of any restrictions on the 
stresses which may be applied should be 
given. 


— 


b) Temperature rating 

The maximum temperature of the termina- 
tions at a specified distance from the body 
for a specified time, together with any other 
limiting conditions, should be given as 
appropriate to the intended method(s) of 
attachment (for example, soldering, 
welding, etc ). 


When these ratings are significantly dependent on 
the initial temperature of the device; any infor- 
mation on derating should be given. 


5.5.2.2 Mounting conditions 


Where appropriate, any significant conditions 
and/or any restriction should be stated, for 
example: 


a) horizontal or vertical mounting position; 


b) the minimum distance from the body at 
which a flexible lead may be bent at right 
angles; and 


c) for stud-mounted devices, the maximum 
torque and where appropriate, the 
minimum torque which may be applied 
under specified conditions. 


8.5.2.3 Additional ratings 


Where appropriate, for certain applications, 
additional information may need to be given, for 
example, limiting values for acceleration, shock 
and vibration, environmental conditions, etc. 


5.5.3 Mechanical Characteristics 
5.5.3.1 Type of termination 


The type of termination (for example, wire-ended, 
strip, stud, etc) should be indicated. 


5.5.3.2 Dimensions 


Where applicable, reference to outlines and bases 
specified in IS 5000 series shall be made, other- 
wise outline drawing (and base, base drawing 


IS 12970 ( Part 1) : 1990 


where appropriate) showing dimensions with 
appropriate tolerances shall be given. 


5.5.3.3 Additional characteristics 


Where appropriate for certain applications, 
additional information may need to be given, for 
example, the weight of the device. 


5.5.4 Other Data 
5.5.4.1 Method of attachment 


The manufacturer's intended method(s) of attach- 


ment ( for example, soldering, welding, wrapping ). 


of the termination(s) should be indicated, together 
with guidance on the preferred conditions during 
attachment. 


5.5.4.2. Identification 
a) Type identification 


The method of type identification should be 
indicated, for example, colour coding. 


b) Terminal identification 


Terminal identification should be stated. 
Any electrical connection between an elect- 
rode and the case should also be stated. 


c) Polarity of the terminals 


Where appropriate, the polarity of the 
terminals should be indicated. 


5.5.4.3 Additional data 


Where appropriate, any other significant data 
should be stated. 


Examples are: 


a) Data concerning the use of electrically 
insulating washers; and 


b) Data concerning the means for obtain- 
ing good thermal contact. 


5.6 Production Spread and Compliance 


5.6.1 The statement of maximum and/or minimum 
value(s) implies that the value of the characteristic 
lies at (or between ) the stated limits. 


In commercial dealings involving particular lots 
of semiconductor devices the proportion of devices 
having characteristic values outside the maximum 
and/or minimum limits in the lot sold and the 
methods of verification are a matter for agree- 
ments between the supplier and the purchaser. 


Such methods, based on an agreed statistical 
probability, permit an agreed percentage of 
devices to fall outside the stated limits. 


5.7 Printed Wiring and Printed Circuits 
5.7.1 If, in the cleaning of assemblies which 


include semiconductor devices, the intention is to 
use either ultrasonic methods and/or solvents, 


the semiconductor device manufacturer should be 
consulted as to the possible deleterious effect of 
these methods on the devices concerned. 


6 MEASURING METHODS 
6.1 Basic Requirements 


6.1.1 Introduction 


The measuring methods described in this series, 
outline the principles employed but not the 
detailed techniques for practical application. 
Where tolerances are given, they can only be used 
as guidance for the maximum deviations from 
absolute circuit values that are permissible in 
practical application. Where tolerances associated 
with conditions of measurement are provided, 
they should be used as guidance for the maximum 
deviations from absolute circuit values that are 
permissible in practical measuring systems. 


= Where several methods of measuring one para- 


meter are described, it is implied that each 
method is suitable, although some methods are 
more accurate than others and some are more 
suited to production testing. 


6.1.2 General Precautions 


NOTE — The precautions described in this clause are 
generally valid for discrete devices and integrated 
circuits, Special precautions for particular device 
categories are given together with the measuring 
methods for the relevant categories. 


6.1.2.1 Protection 
equipment 


of devices and measuring 


a) Limiting values 
The test conditions for all measurements 
should be such that the limiting values of 
the device are not exceeded. It is recom- 
mended that devices should not be inserted 
into or removed from a circuit while it is 


energized. 

b) Power supplies 
All power supplies should be clamped to 
protect the device being measured from 
possible damage caused by transient 
phenomena and surges during switching, 
adjustment and measurement. 

c) Measurement instruments 


It is advisable to protect the meters against 
heavy  overloads arising from faulty 
semiconductor devices or incorrect con- 
nection. Diodes may be included in circuits 
in order to protect amplifiers in oscillos- 
copes from unwanted half-cycle pulses. 


6.1.2.2. Accuracy of measurement 


a) Thermal equilibrium conditions 


All electrical tests should be &onducted 
under thermal equilibrium conditions 
unless otherwise specified or unless the 
measurement is performed under pulse 


b 


— 


— 


c 


d 


— 


conditions. When test conditions cause a 
significant change with time of the charac- 
teristic being measured, means of compen- 
sation for such effects should be specified; 
for example, the length of time that the 
device should be maintained at test 
conditions before making a measurement. 


Thermal equilibrium may be considered to 
have been achieved if doubling the time 
between the application of power and the 
measurement causes no change in the 
indicated result within the expected error. 


Power supplies 


Power supplies ripple should not effect the 
desired accuracy of the measuremeat. 


Circuit conditions 


If low currents are measured, suitable 
precautions should be taken to ensure that 
parasitic circuit current or external leakage 
currents are small compared with the 
current being measured. 


Care should be taken to ensure that stray 
capacitance and inductance values have no 
effect on the measurement result within 
the desired accuracy, or alternatively that 
the effects of stray capacitance and induc- 
tance are taken into account in the result. 


Coupling or bypassing capacitors should 
present effective short circuits at the 
measurement frequency. Where of coupling 
is important, the necessary components 
and/or mounting conditions of the device 
should be as specified. 


Care should be taken to minimize spruious 
oscillations or distortions likely to affect 
the accuracy of the measurement. 


Lighting conditions 


When a characteristic is known to be light 
sensitive, the effect of lighting conditions 
should be taken into account. 


IS 12970 ( Part 1) : 1990 


e) Measuring instruments 


For any device carrying large currents, 
separate current-carrying and  voltage- 
measuring contacts should be used. When 
this is not possible, corrections may have 
to be made to the measured values of 
inter-terminal voltages. 


In addition, for  high-current devices, 
residual inductance should be as low as 
possible. 


The input and output waveforms of rectify- 
ing and converting circuits may be 
distorted from sinusoidal. Conventional 
sinusoidal conversion factors are not 
applicable to distorted waveforms for 
example, from average to rms or crest 
values. 


Therefore, allowance should be made in 
the measuring process. Allowances must 
be made for the voltage drop across current 
measuring circuits and for the current 
taken by voltage measuring circuits if these 
are significant. 


6.2 Specific Requirements 


These shall be as specified in subsequent parts of | 
the series. 


6.3 Numbering System for Measuring Methods 


6.3.1 Numbering Principle 


Measuring methods for integrated circuits are 
numbered in the sequence irrespective to the 
type of integrated circuit. 


NOTE — The number of each measuring method is 
reproduced in a 'box', after the title of the relevant 
measuring method. 


6.3.2 Numbering List of Measuring Methods for 
Integrated Circuits 


No. Characteristics to be Measured Reference Standard 
1 Total current drawn from the power supplies under dynamic Part 3 Sec 3 
conditions 
2 Power supplied through the clock line Part 3 Sec 3 
3 Propagation times ( except MOS circuits ) Part 3 Sec 3 
4 Delay times Part 3 Sec 3 
5 Transition times f Part 3 Sec 3 
6 Input and output capacitances for large-signal operation Part 3 Sec 3 
7 Propagation times ( MOS circuits ) Part 3 Sec 3 
8 Set-up time Part 3 Sec 3 
9 Hold times Part 3 Sec 3 


IS 12970 ( Part 1) : 1990 


No. Characteristics to be Measured Reference Standards 
10 Switching frequency Part 3 Sec 3 
11 Equivalent input/output capacitances/resistances Part 3 Sec 3 
12 Input regulation/stabilization coefficients Part 6 Sec 3 
13 Ripple rejection ratio - Part 6 Sec 3 
14 Load regulation/stabilization coefficient Part 6 Sec 3 
15 Output noise voltage Part 6 Sec 3 
16 Temperature coefficient of regulated output voltage Part 6 Sec 3 
17 Stand-by ( quiescent ) current Part 6 Sec 3 
18 Short-circuit current Part 6 Sec 3 
19 Reference voltage Part 6 Sec 3 
20 Transient response to changes of input voltage Part 6 Sec 3 
21 Transient response to changes of load current Part 6 Sec 3 
22 | Power supply currents Part 6 Sec 2 
23 Small-signal input impedance Part 6 Sec 2 
24 | Output impedance Part 6 Sec 2 
25 Input offset voltage Part 6 Sec 2 
26 Bias voltage Part 6 Sec 2 
27 Input offset current Part 6 Sec 2 
28 Input bias current Part 6 Sec 2 
29 Input offset voltage temperature coefficient Part 6 Sec 2 
30 Input offset current temperature coefficient Part 6 Sec 2 
31 Open-loop voltage amplification Part 6 Sec 2 
32 Cut-off frequency ( frequencies ) Part 6 Sec 2 
33 Common-mode rejection ratio Part 6 Sec 2 
34 Supply voltage rejection-ratio Part 6 Sec 2 
35 Output voltage range Part 6 Sec 2 
36 Resolution time Part 3 Sec 3 
37 High-level and low-level output voltage Part 3 Sec 2 
38 High-level and low-level input currents Part 3 Sec 2 
39 Response times ( delay-, slope-, ripple-, total response time ) Part 6 Sec 2 
40 Short-circuit output current ( of a digital circuit ) Part 3 Sec 2 
41 Power supply current under static conditions ( of a digital circuit ) Part 3 Sec 2 
42 Common-mode input voltage range Part 6 Sec 2 
43 Short-circuit output current ( of an operation amplifier ) Part 6 Sec 2 
44 Channel separation, crosstalk attenuation ( for multiple amplifiers ) Part 6 Sec 2 
45 Upper limiting frequency for full output voltage swing Part 6 Sec 2 
9 


IS 12970 ( Part 1) : 1990 


No. Characteristics to be Measured Reference Standards 

46 Maximum rate of change of the output voltage ( slew rate ) Part 6 Sec 2 

47 Input bias current temperature coefficient Part 6 Sec 2 

48 ( Input ) threshold voltage and hysteresis voltage Part 3 Sec 3 

49 Output enable and disable times ( for three-state ) Part 3 Sec 3 

50 Address access time f Part 3 Sec 3 

51 Chip select access time Part 3 Sec 3 

52 Read access time Part 3 Sec 3 

53 Write recovery time Part 3 Sec 3 

54 Minimum write pulse duration ( width:) Part 3 Sec 3 

55 Cut-off frequency, unity-gain frequency Part 6 Sec 2 

56 Static on-state resistance f Part 6 Sec 4 

57 Control feed-through voltage Part 6 Sec 4 

58 Off-state switch isolation Part 6 Sec 4 

59 Harmonic distortion ( under consideration ) Part 6 Sec 4 

60 Cross-talk attenuation Part 6 Sec 4 
7 ACCEPTANCE AND RELIABILITY OF conditions. In some cases, intermittent or 
INTEGRATED CIRCUITS other modes of operation may be necessary 


as supplementary tests. 
7.1 Electrical Endurance Tests i 


b) Mounting conditions 
7.1.1 Purpose and Presentation i) Ambient-rated devices 
Endurance tests as well as the failure-defining 
characteristics and failure criteria are standardized 
for each device category or sub-category of 
integrated circuits. This permits a unique and 
easy comparison of data presented by different 
manufacturers, relative to acceptance testing as 
well as to reliability testing. 


The free lead length between the point 
of emergence of the leads from the case 
and the electrical contacts or support(s) 
should be preferably not less than 5 mm 
for devices having leads of uniform cross- 
section throughout their length. When a 
design feature ( for example, a change in 


For a particular device category or sub-category, lead cross-section or bend) is provided 
these standards are given on the following places: to limit the depth of insertion of the 
device into its mounting, the contact or 

a) 7.1.2, entitled "General requirements" gives support should be placed as close to this 
general standards for the endurance tests, feature as is practical, on the end of the 
that are valid for all integrated circuits. lead away from the device. 

b) 7.1.3, entitled ‘Specific requirements’, Devices with lead length less than 5 mm 
indicates in a general way those require- shall be mounted in accordance with the 
ments that are different for the various manufacturers recommendations. The 

- device categories or sub-categories. contacts or supports shall be at a 
; . temperature not lower than the ambient 
The necessary details on these specific temperature. 
requirements are given in the relevant 
standards. ii) Case-rated devices 


7.1.2 General Requirements The device shall be mounted so that the 


fa . specified case temperature is maintained. 
7.1.2.1 Conditions for electrical tests 


c) Operating temperature 


The operating temperature may be réached 
The device shall be operated under steady- partly by dissipation of the device and 
state (dc, ac or dynamic, as appropriate ) partly by the ambient temperature. 


a) Mode of operation 


IS 12970 ( Part 1) : 1990 


The operating temperature shall be 
maintained within +5°C for ambient rated 
devices. For case-rated devices, the average 
of the temperatures of the cases shall be 
maintained within +5°C and any individual 


case temperature shall be maintained 
within -£10°C of the specified operating 
point. 

d) Operating voltages 


The operating voltage(s) used for electrical 
testing should be stated in tbe relevant 
specification for endurance testing. The 
voltage is applied according to the specified 
test conditions ( see 7.1.3.2 ). 


Initial tolerance and any variation of the 
voltage at the device terminals during 
operation shall be within +5 percent of 
the specified voltage. 


e) Operating currents 


The output current should be specified in 
the relevant standard. 


f) Test circuit 


Test circuits are specified in the relevant 
standards. Where appropriate, steps should 
be taken to prevent oscillations. 


7.1.2.2. Duration of test 


The duration of the test shall be selected from 
the following list: 


+16 


168 jg hours 612-20 hours 2000 hours 


5000 hours 


+16, 
336. ^0 hours 
If intermediate measurements are made, they 
shall also be performed at the time intervals given 
in the list above. 


1.000 3° hours 10000 hours 


7.1.2.3 Failure-defining 
measurements 


characteristics and 


a) Characteristics 


Those characteristics that are of major 
importance for the specified device category 
shall be selected. 


b) Measurement conditions 


All characteristics shall be measured with- 
in 96 hours after removal of the devices 
from the test. 


Measurements shall be made at an ambient 
or reference-point temperature of 25+5°C. 


]n determining failure, measurements may 
be referred to values at 25°C when neces- 
sary. For attributes testing, data may be 
taken by making measurements on a go/ 
no-go basis (measured values are com- 
pared with failure criteria and each device 


is considered to have passed or failed ). 
For variables testing, the devices shall be 
individually identified and the value of 
each specified characteristic of each device 
shall be measured. 


7.1.2.4 Failure criteria 

Each device, which, after test, does not meet the 
limits of one or more of the characteristics 
specified for its device category is considered to 
be a failure. 

7.1.2.5 Precautions 


a) Measurement sequence 


Measurements may be made 
sequence, unless otherwise specified. 


in any 


b) Loss or removal of bias 


Bias voltages and/or currents shall be 
supplied to devices for a total time equal 
to the specified test time ( within the allow- 
ed tolerance). It is preferable that voltage 
bias(es) continue to be applied to devices 
until they have cooled to room temperature 
unless it can be established, for the given 
device type and test conditions, that no 
significant change of characteristics occurs 
when the device is cooled with the bias 
removed. 


7.1.3 Specific Requirements — General 


7.1.3.1 List of endurance tests 


For the device category or sub-categories a choice 
of endurance tests is given in the relevant 
standards. 


7.1.3.2 Conditions for endurance tests 


Test conditions and test circuits, for the device 
category or each of the sub-categories, are given 
in a table. The relevant specification will state 
which test(s) will apply. 


7.1.3.3. Failure-defining characteristics and failure 
criteria for acceptance after endurance tests 


Failure-defining characteristics their failure 
criteria and measurement conditions, for the 
device category or for each of the subcategories, 
are selected and listed in the relevant standards. 


7.1.3.4 Failure defining characteristics and failure 
criteria for reliability 


Under consideration. 


7.1.3.5 Procedure in case of a testing error 


When a device has failed as a result of a testing 
error (such as a test equipment fault or measure- 
ment equipment fault, or an operator error), 
the failure shall be noted in the data record with 
an explanation of the cause. 


8 ELECTROSTATIC — SENSITIVE DEVICES 
8.1 Handling Precautions 


8.1.1 These precautions apply to the storage, 
transport, handling and testing of electrostatic- 
sensitive devices. 


8.1.2 Electrostatic-sensitive ^ devices require 
special handling since the discharge of electro- 
statica energy from, for example, unearthed 
equipment or operators produces voltages that, 
when applied to the terminals, could destroy the 
device, even if the device contain protection 
circuits. The following recommendations should 
be followed. 


8.1.3 General Recommendations 


Electrostatic-sensitive devices without external 
protection should not be allowed to come into 
direct contact with electrostatically chargeable 
materials, for instance, plastic bags, plastic foils, 
expanded polystyrene, etc, unless the exposed 
leads have been temporarily shorted. In par- 
ticular, personnel should avoid touching the 
terminals. 


Electrostatic-sensitive devices should not be 
brought near strong electric fields, even if in a 
protective package. 


Jn the testing and use of electrostatic-sensitive 
devices, suitable precautions should be taken for 
unused inputs, such as connecting them either to 
a supply voltage terminal or to the reference 
terminal. 


8.1.4 Packaging 


Each electrostatic-sensitive device should be 
adequately packed to prevent the build-up of 
static charge on individual leads. This is achieved 
by interconnecting all the leads, for instance by 
wire, springclip, metal foil, metal eyelet, electrosta- 
tically non-chargeable plastic rail, or by mounting 
the device on conductive material. 


A warning label and, if possible, adequate 
instructions should be included in the package so 
that they are encountered before it is possible to 
have access to the device. 


8.1.5 Transport and Storage 


Electrostatic-sensitive devices should be transpor- 
ted and stored in the original packing or a 
package providing equivalent protection. 


8.1.6 Working Area and Handling 


Working areas where electrostatic sensitive 
devices are handled, in any way, should be 
constructed to avoid the build-up of electrostatic 
charges. 


IS 12970 ( Part 1) : 1990 


One method of avoiding the  build-up of 
electrostatic charges is to use conducting material 
and to ensure that the operators, tools and 
equipment are at essentially the same potential as 
the working surface. 


Wherever possible, the relative humidity of the 
air should exceed 50 percent. 


NOTE — In any case, attention must be paid to the 
national regulations on personnel safety. 


8.2 Label and Symbol 


8.2.1 Introduction 


A number of semiconductor devices and integrat- 
ed circuits may be subject to permanent damage 
due to electrostatic potentials encountered in 
routine handling, testing and shipping, unless 
appropriate precautions are observed. 


8.2.2 Purpose 


lt is the purpose of this standard to provide a 
distinctive symbol and label to be used for those 
electrostatic sensitive devices that require special 
handling. The symbolor label should be used 
at the innermost practical level of packaging and 
on the device itself if space permits. It may also 
be used on device data sheets, on storage bins, 
and on special protective wrapping materials. 
The synibol is intended for use where available 
space does not permit the use of a label. 


8.2.3 Symbol 


In Fig. 1, the symbol is shown suitable for 
reproduction. Monochromatic reproduction in 
any colour that contrasts with the background 
may be used. Wherever possible, the colour red 
for the symbol should be avoided as red suggests 
a personal hazard. 


8.2.4 Label 


The label comprises the above symbol with the 
word: ATTENTION — OBSERVE PRECAUT- 
IONS FOR HANDLING — ELECTROSTATIC 
SENSITIVE DEVICES, according to the design 
in Fig. 2. Where practicable, the symbol and 
lettering should be black ona yellow background. 


8.2.5 Device Marking 
If space permits, the device may be marked with 


the simplified. version of ithe symbol specified 
in 8.2.3 at a reduced size as shown in Fig. 1. 


8.3 Test Methods 


Under consideration. 


IS 12970 ( Part 1) 1990 


1A Basic Symbol 


goa. 


1B Simplified Version for Extreme Reduction 


Fic. I Basic AND REDUCED SYMBOLS 


Fic. 2 LABEL SHOWN IN Two SIZES. 


10 


Standard Mark 


The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


